A Golden Chain OF FOUR LINKS To draw poor Souls to their desired Habitation
Or, The Four last Things Briefly discoursed of, viz. Death, which is most
Certain; Judgment, which is most Strict, Hell, which is most Dismal; Heaven,
which is most Delightful.


To which is added Wholesome Instructions both to Young and Old, in order to
prepare themselves for their Latter End, and Avoid all sinful Allurements,
which usually obstructs that great and necessary Work of Salvation.

With some Necessary Directions to Die well, in order to avoid Hell, and obtain
Heaven By Mr. Jos: Stevens.

EDINBURGH, Printed and Sold by James Watson in Craig's Closs, on the North
side of the Cross, 1700.

COnsidering that this Ungratful Age abounds with so much Infidelity, Impiety
and Unbelief, as to make some so obstinate as to affirm, That the Spirit of Man
vanishes with his breath, and that Death is only the end of this Life, and not
the beginning of another; I thought it highly necessary, as well as Proper and
Convenient, in order to awaken the hardened and drowsy Consciences of such, to
give some lively (though brief) touches upon the Four last things, viz. Death,
which is most certain; Judgment, which is most strict: Hell, which is most
dismal; Heaven, which is most delightful: All which I shall particularly and
briefly instance.

I. Of Death.
Psalm 89.4. What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death?


OUt of the Dust was Man formed, and unto the Dust shall Man return: It is
appointed for all Men once to die, Heb. 9.27. Death to the Wicked, is the end
of all Comfort, and the beginning of all Misery, but Death to the Godly is a
happy discharge, and freedom from Sin and Sorrow, and the only inlet to Peace
and Happiness, the Saints Enjoyments shall be incomparable, when the Sinners
Torments shall be intolerable; when a Sinner dies, he carries his bad with him,
and leaves his good behind him. But when a Believer dies, he leaves all his bad
behind him, and carries his good with him: The Sinner goes from Good to Evil;
the Believer from Evil to Good: When a Saint leaves the World, his Flesh turns
to Dust, and his Spirit returns to rest: When a Sinner leaves the World, his
Body goes to Worms to be consumed, and his Soul to Flames to be tormented.

When you come into the World, you do but live to die again, when you go out of
the World you do but die to live again. He that lives well cannot die ill: He
that lives without fear, shall certainly die wthout hope. He that has no grace
in his Life, can have no true peace in his Death This King of Terrors, Death,
levelleth the highest Mountains with the lowest Valies; the Robes of Princes
and the Rags of Beggars are both laid up alike in the wardrobe of the Grave,
which is a bed to rest in, but not a Shop to trade in; therefore go to your
beds, as you were going to your Graves, and so close your Eyes in one World, as
you would open them in another; and remember that God can as easily turn you
into Dust, as he took you thence; to Day is your living day, tomorrow may be
your dying one: In short, the Meditation of Death is the only Motive in order
for a Preparation thereunto.

Therefore, Christian Soul, whosoever thou art consider the shortness of thy
Life; and how uncertain Death is; he may come this Hour before the next. Thou
art not sure when thou go to bed at Night to take thy rest, whether thou
shall ever awake again, though never so well; and if so be thou awake in the
Morning, whether thou shall live till Night: for Death is the great Messenger
of Mortality; and his coming is certain, but when, is uncertain: There is no
resisting of his mighty Power when he comes. He sweeps all before him, both
Rich and poor, Old and Young, it is all one to him for when their Glass is run,
they must stay no longer here, but to change this Life for a better or worse,
according as thou have spent thy time here whether in doing Good or doing Evil.
Therefore dear Soul, put not off thy Repentance until another Day, for thou art
not sure to see an end of this. Provide therefore that thy Bed may rather find
thee fitted for God, than fit thee, and so order thy Estate and thy Soul, in
thy Health, that when Death comes, thou may have nothing to do but to die.
Let not thy Thoughts be how thou shall live here, but how thou shall live
hereafter; mind not the vain pleasures of this World, which is but momentary;
but rather pray to God for his Grace (without which you can do nothing that you
may endure all Hard ships and Crosses here with patience and Comfort, and that
you may do all the Good that in you lies to the Advancement of his Glory, and
your Eternal Welfare

II Of Judgment.
MEditate upon Judgment, which is most strict: We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, they who have been graceless in their Days, will be
speechless in this Day, they who would not come before his Mercy-Seat shall be
forced to come before his Judgment Seat those that would not believe his
promises, shall tremble at his Threatenings; and indeed it must be very Amazing
to see the Earth flaming, the Heavens melting, the Stars falling, the Graves
opening, the Judgment hastening, the Sun and Moon declining, and Christ and his
Angels coming: He that comes to raise the Dead, comes also to judge the Dead.
Oh! this great Day, to great Sinners, will be a terrible and ghastly day, when
they shall behold Christ coming in the Clouds, having the person of a Man, but
the power of God; being crowned with Dignity, and guarded with Angels and
enraged with Anger, and enabled with power to bring forth both High and Low,
Rich and Poor to his Bar, where he will judge them, not by the whiteness of
their Countenance, but by the Blackness of their Consciences; and though he was
guarded to the Cross with a Band of Soldiers, yet here he is guarded with a
glorious Train of Angels, You that make no account of his coming. what account
will you make at his coming: therefore for the Lord's sake, meditate upon
Judgment, for it is the only means to make you Judgment proof. O Christian,
seriously consider this and repent of your Sins before it is too late, and
break those Bands assunder that leads to utter Destruction, for there is no
Repentance after Death, for after Death comes Judgment.

O ye Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Whoremongers, Covetous, and Oppressors of the
Poor, you that do despite to the Spirit of Grace, and will not hearken to the
many loving Calls and invitations of Almighty God by his Spirit and Ministry,
take notice that this Day of God's Wrath will be a Day of Terrors to you, which
will make your Hearts sink within you, your Countenance to change, your Joints
to be loosed, when the Terrors of the Almighty at this time shall seize upon
you; therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11. Knowing the Terrors of the Lord,
we persuade Men. This Day will be a Day of extreme Sorrow and Anguish to the
Wicked, Prove 1.20. When your Fear shall come as desolation, and your
Destruction as a Whirlwind Zeph. 1.15. That Day is the Day of Wrath, a Day of
Trouble and Distress, a Day of Wastness and Desolations. Therefore, whoever you
are, let your daily Practice be in piety, doing good to those that stand in
need of your Help, as far as your Circumstances will let you, being Charitable
and Compassionate, ever striving against the Temptations of the Devil slighting
the foolish pleasures of this World, accounting them, as they are, nothing but
vexation of Spirit, but be always minding those that are Eternal; for if you
expect to be any of those Souls that dwell in those Mansions of Bliss and
Happiness, you must fear God, and keep his Commandments; for that is the whole
Duty of Man.

III. The Torments of hell, and dismal State of the Wicked.
THe third thing necessar, is to meditate upon Hell, which is most dismal and
terrible: Oh a dreadful Place, where the Devil is the Jailer, Hell the prison,
Damnation the punishment, Eternity the Time, Brimstone the Fire, and Men and
infenal Spirits the Fuel; to endure this, will be intolerable; and to avoid
it, will be impossible. Christians, this present Day is the Day of God's
Long-sufferings, but that will be Man's eternally. Oh what Hells there is in
hell, the loss of God, the loss of Christ, the loss of Saints, the loss of
Angels the loss of all Good, and the gain of all endless, caseless, and
remediless Torments: The Smoke of their Torments does ascend for ever. Rev.
4.12 and 20.10. Oh that you would think of this endless and bottomless Lake.

Consider, that if thou but once dropest into Hell thou will be as far from
Coming out at the end of a Thousand Years, as at thy first entrance: So if
that all Men that ever have or shall be created, were, Briarehus like, hundred
handed and should at once take Pens in their hundredhands, and do nothing else
for Ten Hundred Thousand of Millions of Years, but sum up in Figures as many
hundred thousand Millions as they could, yet could they never reduce to a
total, or confine within number, this trisyllable Word [Eternal] or that Word
of Four Syllables [Everlasting

Now let such as forget God, but seriously consider this. It will not be an
Imprisonment during the Kings pleasure, but during the King of King's pleasure.
It is not a Captivity of Seventy Years like that of the Children of Israel in
Babylon; for that had an end; nor like a Captivity of Seventy Millions of
Generations, for that also in time would be expired, But even for ever. The
wicked shall live as long in Hell, as there shall be a Just God in Heaven.

Here we measure Time by Days, months, years; but for Eternity, there is no
Arithmetician can number it, no Geometrician can measure it: For suppose the
World were turned into a Mountain of Sand, and that a little Wren should come
every Thousand Years, and carry away from that heap but one Grain of the Sand
what an infinite number of Years would be spent and expired, before the whole
heap would be fetched away? But admit a Man should stay in Torments so long,
and then have an end of his VVoe, it were some comfort to think that an end
would come: But alas! when he has finished his task a thousand times over, he
shall be as far from an end of his anguish, as ever he was the first hour he
entered into it. Now suppose thou should ly but one Night grievously
afflicted with a raging fit of the stone Stranguary, Toothach, Pangs of Travel,
or the like; though thou had to help and ease thee, a soft bed to ly on,
friends about thee to comfort thee, Physicians to cure thee, all Cordial and
Comfortable things to assuage the pain; yet how tedious and painful would that
one Night seem unto thee? How would thou toss and tumble, and turn from one
side to another? Counting the Clock, esteeming every Minute a Month, and thy
present Misery unsupportable. What then will it be to ly in Flames of Fire? (To
which our Fire is but Air in comparison) Fire and Brimstone keept in the
highest Flame by the unquenchable Wrath of God, World without end; where thou
shall have nothing about thee but Darkness and Horror, Wailing and wringing of
Hands, desperate Yellings and gnashing of Teeth: Thy Old Companions in Vanity
and Sin, to Ban and Curse thee; the Devils insulting over thee with Cruelty and
Sorrow; the never-dying Worm of Conscience to feed upon thy Soul and Flesh for
ever and ever. O everlasting E ernity! an ever-dying Life, and an ever-living
Death

O then be think thy self of this Word Eternal and everlasting, and ponder upon
it; yea do but indeed believe it, and it will be enough to break thine Heart,
and make it to relent and repent, and thereby prevent the Wrath to come; it
will put thee to demur, what have I done? What am I about? Whither will this
Course tend? How will it end? What will become of me if I go on in Chambering
and Wantonness, Sutfeiting and Drunkenness, Strife and Envying, Swearing,
Profaneness and the like? O then break off thy Sins without delay, and let
there be an healing of thine Errors.

The Schools affirm, that the best torture in Hell exceeds the greatest that
can be devised; for should we first burn off one Hand, then another after that,
each Arm, and so all the Parts of the Body, it would be deemed intolerable, and
no Man would endure it for all the Profits and Pleasures this World can afford;
and yet is nothing to the burning of the Body and Soul in Hell: Should we
endure ten thousand years tormen^^ in Hell, it were grievous, but nothing to
Eternity: Shou^^ we suffer one Pain it were miserable enough; but if ever w^^^
come there, out Pains shall be for number and kinds, infinitely varions, as
our pleasures have been here: Every sense and Member, each power and faculty
both of Soul and Body sha^^ have their several Objects of wretchedness, and
that without intermission, or end, or ease, or patience to endure it, Lu^^
12.5. and 16.23. Mat. 3.12. and 5.22, and 22.23. O th^^ Men would strip Sin of
its disguises, and wash off its flatteri^^ Colors, and look into its odious
Nature, and to the cons^quential Evils of it in the next World! O that they
would consider they hang by slender Strings, (a little Breath the expires every
Minute) over the Bottomless pit, and that with in a little while nothing will
remain of the pleasures of Sin but the undying Worm, and the ever-living Flames,

There is a way to keep a Man out of Hell, but no way to get a Man out of Hell:
Though the wheat and the Cha^ grow together, they must not lie together; so in
Hell the^^ shall not be a Saint among those that are tetrified, nor in Heaven a
Sinner among those that are glorified,

The Sea of bitter Damnation shall not be sweetened with the least drop of
Compassion. Oh Christians, will you pity (...) Body that is going to the Block,
and will you not pity a Soul that is going to a Bottomless pit?

What a sad Visitation is that, where the Black Horse of Death goes befo e,
and the Red Horse of wrath followe^^ after: Oh how intolerable must it needs
be, where one Death comes upon the Neck of another.

A Man's condition in this Life may be honorable, and yet his state, as to
another Life may be damnable: It is better to go with poor Lazarus to Heaven,
then go with rich Dives to Hell: Therefore let us strive to go to Heaven by
contemplation, that we may avoid going to Hell by condemnation.

Consider further, and add Extremity to Eternity, and then think of Hell. (as
it truly is) Hell indeed; for if the Ague of a Year, or the Cholick of a Month,
or the Rack of a day, or the burning of an Hour, or the Minutes twitch of a
Tooth be so unsufferable here, what is Millions of Thousands of years, nay
Eternity of unspeakable Torments in Hell; and instead of being abated,
continually aggravated by infernal Fiends, whose Society alone would be
hideously frightfu and amazing.

Now what Heart would not bleed to see Men run headlong to these Torments that
are thus endless and intolerable? Oh that it were allowed to the resolute and
desperate Ruffians of ^hese our days, that Swear and Curse, Drink, Rob, and
Kill, and Blaspheme, to have but a sight of this Hell, how would it Charm their
Mouths, Moderate their Spirits, and astonish their Hearts; nay, if they could
have but the leaft glimpse ^hereof, they would rather choose to be pined to
Death ten thousand times over, than wilfully commit one Sin that would send
them thither.

IV. OF HEAVEN.
THe Fourth necessary thing, is to meditate on Heaven, which is most joyful,
Matthew. 25.30. Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. Oh, who
can reveal the Glorys of Heaven, or what tongue can express the everlasting
pleasures that is there? There Is no Care, nor Sorrow, nor Toil, nor Labor, no
Vexation to disturb your Quiet: There Is all Peace, never ceasing peace: There Is
all the Divine Souls, as Angels, Saints, Prophets, Martyrs, Seraphims and
Cherubims, and all the Celestial Quier, breath forth in their Harmonious
Voices, Eternal Halelujahs and Songs of Praises to the All glorious Almighty,
and Everlasting God blessed for evermore. There every righteous Soul that
departs hence, goes and receives a white Robe and an everlasting Crown of
Glory; and dwells in that Land of Peace. and drinks of the Rivers of pleasures,
and not for time, but for Eternity; an Eternity, I say, that will never have an
end, there they behold the beauty of the blessed God seated upon a Throne of
divine Majesty, with his dearly beloved Son, (our blessed Savior) on his right
hand, and admire the gloriousness thereof, there they themselves outshine the
Sun in brightness; there they continually hear Sounds of harmonious Music;
possessing continual Joy and endless Comfort. There is Mirth without Sadness,
Light without Darkness. Pleasure without Pain, Life without Death, Rest without
Labor, Plenty without Poverty, and Gain without Loss: Who would not but work
for this Glory with the greatest diligence, and wait for it with the greatest
patience. Oh what Glorys are there in Glory, Crowns of Glory, Vessels of Glory,
a Weight of Glory, a Kingdom of Glory. Here Christ puts His Grace upon his
spouse, but there he puts his Glor^ upon her: In this Life the Believers have
some good things but there the best are reserved for thee. Heaven is not only a
Possession promised but a Possession putchased: When our Contemplations are in
Heaven, then we enjoy a Heaven upon Earth. Do we delight in good Company? What
pleasure then shall we enjoy in the Company of Saints and Angels, in whom there
is nothing but Joy, Comfort and delight. Do we desire Riches, Honor, Beauty,
Pleasure, long Life, or whatever else can be named to be delectable, no place
so glorious by Creation, nor so beautiful with delectation, so Rich in
Possession, so Comfortable for Habitation, not so durable for lasting. There
are no Estate but inheritance no inheritance but Kingdoms, no House but
Palaces, no Noise but Music, no Robes but Scepters, no Garments but Robes, no
Seats but Thrones no covering for Head but Crowns, Romans 8.17. Tit. 3.7. Heb.
9.15. Mat. 31.34. 2 Timothy 4.8. Gal. 4.7, 1 Pet. 3.9.10. Mark 10.23.24.25. Rev.
7.3.

There we shall see the blessed Face of God, who is the Glory of all sights,
and the sight of all Glory; yea, our selves shall outshine the Sun in
brightness, Mat. 13 34,

In short our Joy will there be full, and none shall be able to take it from
us, or lessen it; Solomon in all his Glory and Royality to this, was but a
Spark of light in a Chimney to the Sun in the Firmament: Absolom's Beauty to
that is but Deformity: Samson's strength to that is but infirmity: Methusalem's
Age to theirs, is but Minority; yea, how little, how nothing are the poor and
Temporary enjoyments of this Life in comparison to those we shall enjoy in the
next, 1 Cor. 2.9. Nay Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, was but a wilderness
compared with this; and if the Gates be of Pearl, and the Streets of Gold, what
then are the inner Rooms, the Presence Chamber of the great Monarch of Heaven
and Earth? what then may we think of the Maker and Builder thereof, who there
will be all in all unto us, as Meat to taste, Beauty to our Eyes, perfumes to
our Smell, Music to our Ears; and what shall I say more, but as the Psalmist
says, Glorious things are spoken of thee thou City of our God, Psalm. 87.8 Rev.
3.2, 3. and 21.10, to the end. That which makes Heaven so full of Joy is, it is
above all Fear; and that which makes Hell so full of Horror is, that it is
below all Hope. The Vessels of Grace shall swim in the Ocean of Glory, Here all
the Earth is nothing for one Man, but there one Heaven is enough for all Men.

Therefore, Sirs live so, that the word which has brought Salvation unto your
Souls, may bring your Souls to Salvation. We must first shine in Grace, before
we can shine in Glory.

Be willing to want what God is not willing to give. Man is such a Debtor to
God, that he can never pay his due to God; we are so far from paying the utmost
farthing, that at the most we have not a farthing to pay; there is no Man but
has received more good then he deserves, and none more Evil; and therefore
should be contented, tho he enjoy but little good, and not discontented though
he suffer much evil, 1 Timothy 6.8. A Christian is to submit to the Will of God's
disposing, as well as to the Will of God's commanding, A gracious Heart should
be never out of heart; if God be not willing to give thee Riches, O then be
willing to want Riches: If God be not willing to give thee Health, O then be
thou willing to want it.

O Christian submit thy will to Gods Will, that Soul shall have his will of
God, who desires nothing but God's Will. Do you but take care of that which
belongs to God, and God will take care of all that belongs to you.

Now let us consider a little, what signifies these silly foolish Pleasures
here to those that are in Heaven; these pleasures which are but momentary, to
those that are Eternal: What if we suffer a little sorrow here, for thirty or
forty Years; which is but a small while to enjoy an Eternity in Happiness
hereafter, is it not better than to partake of the pleasures of this World, and
to have our fill of our beastly delights, and to be damned in Hell for it
forever after!

Oh consider also how much of your precious time is wasted and spent, and how
little of your great Work is done; has nor your rest stolen away half your
time, and your lust the other? your Work is great, and your time is short; you
have a GOD to honor, a Christ to Believe in, a Soul to save a Race to run, a
Crown to win, a Hell to escape, and a Heaven to make sure of; you have many
Temptations to withstand, and many Afflictious to bear many Mercies to improve,
and many Duties to perform, therefore O Christans redeem the time because the
days are evil, Ephes^ 5.15, O that every step your Souls take, might be toward
Heaven, and that you would make sure of God to day, because to (...) you are
not sure of your selves: Therefore for the Lords sake improve your time and for
your Souls sake redeem your time. The Lawyer will not lose his Term, the
Waterman will not lose his Tide, the Tradesman will not lose his Exchange
time, the Husbandman will not lose his Season, and will you lose your Season?
If you lose your Season, you lose your precious soul. There is but one Heaven,
and if you miss of that you will certainly take up your Lodging in Hell.

I must sum up all with these Exhortations: Let me beseech you who are young
Men and young Women, to remember your Creator in the days of your youth, that
is to serve God, to love God, to Honor God, and to obey God in your youthful
Days; for the Flower of Life is of Christ's setting therefore let it not be of
the Devil's plucking, Oh young People, if you be now sick of the will not, in
Old Age you will die (perhaps) of the cannot; if God's to day will be too soon
for thy Repentance, thy tomorrow will be too late for his Exceptance: Let
nothing be done in this World which cannot be answered in another, nor nothing
undone which may be necessary in another. He that departs this World in Faith
shall be saved, but he that departs from the Faith shall be damned. Therefore I
say unto you all both old and young, with St. Paul 1 Cor. 15, 58. Be steadfast,
unmovable always abounding in the Works of the Lord, for as much as you know
that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

some Holy Directions to die well.
MY Brethren, what does the Lord require of you, but to do Justice, to love
Mercy, and walk humbly with God and to break off with your Sins, and to take no
more pleasure or delight in them, but hate and abhore them for the future, and
uterly cast them behind your backs, and to press forewards to the Mark of the
prize of the high Calling in Christ Jesus our Lord: for time is hastening and
coming on, wherein it shall be said, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still
and he that is filthy let him be filthy still, and he that is righteous let him
be righteous still etc. The infinite Holy and heart searching God watches,
sees, and takes a strict Account of all your Actions, and they will find you
out, and if not truly repented of and pardoned, they willly down with you in
the Grave, and follow. you in another World, and meet you at God's dreadful
Bar, and be open to the view of the whole World. Sin is a bad Bedfellow, and a
worse Grave-fellow.

Therefore whatsoever it is now your duty to do both to God and Man, now set
about and do it with all your might Ecclesiasticus 9, 10. Now before the Decree
comes forth, and the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you,

1, Be very careful and diligent in those means that are appointed for your
Salvation. 2 Pet 1.10. Make your Calling and Election sure, etc. It is our
present work and business to make sure of Eternal Happiness and Blessedness;
for there is no landing at the Shore of Felicity, without sailing in the Back
of Fidelity; till you make sure of Salvation, you will never be free from
Temptations. Strive to enter in at the straight Gate, Luke 13.

2. Therefore pray without ceasing. 1 These, 4, 14. Pray continually though you
be not always at Prayer; our daily wants call for daily Prayers; every Morning
put up your Prayers to the most high God, Maker of Heaven and Earth: let it be
your first Work and your last Work. You that would be Christians indeed, and
not in outward show and Profession only, lock up your hearts with prayer, and
give God the Key, and he will preserve you, and then you may sleep without any
fear of danger. O you will never want a praying time, if you do not want a
praying frame O the strength and virtue of divine Prayer, it will fetch Fire
from Heaven, yea an Angel from Heaven to fetch a Peter out of Prison. They that
pray heartily and in Faith, may be fully assured they shall ^peed happily,
Thirdly take all opportunities and embrace them, for the hearing of the good
Word of God; for faith comes by hearing of the Word preached, 4ly. Live in Love
and Charity toward all Men, your greatest Enemies as well as your best
Friends. 1 John 1.18. My Children let us not live in Word, neither in Tongue,
but in Love and in Truth. Let your Love be real and true, and not selfish, Gal.
5, 14 Love thy Neighbor as thy self: And he that is wanting in this great work
does no^ rightly and truly love himself, ^his Love is called an old
commandment, and a new Commandment it is as old as the Law of Moses, and as new
as the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Natural and Moral Man may
love his Friend, but the true Christian indeed loves his Enemies. A Christian
should wish the best to them that wish the worst to him 5ly. eye humble
Christians, Matthew. 11.29, A Believer is like a Vessel at Sea, the more it fills
the more it sinks; none so humble on Earth, as those that live highest in
Heaven. Where humility is in the Corner stone, there Piety is the Top Stone;
the Cloth of Humility should always be worn upon the Back o^ Christianity, If
you were but to go to the graves of thos^ that are gone before you, you there
would see their bone^ scattered, their Eye wasted, their Flesh consumed, their
mouth corrupted, that it is like were lofty ones. Where be now their ruddy
Lips, their lovely Cheeks, their fluent Tongues their sparkling Eyes? Are they
not all gone and come to nothing? and so will you be e're long; Therefore what
cau^^ have ye to be proud of these things. 6thl If we have go^^ into Gods
favor, let us be sure to labor to keep his favo^^ whilst we live, and then
certainly we shall die in his favor

Oh, whoever you be that happen to read these few Line let me beg of you to
make Religion your main Business hearing, reading, praying and believing

Do nothing in this World but what you can answer in another. For we shall all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and 2 Cor. 5, 10. To Die well is a
long Art which thou have bu^ a short time to learn; they that have long
furnished themselves with all spiritual Means* find work enough to vanquis^ and
overcome all their spiritual Enemies; How then sha^^ thou careless Soul, if
thou will not take hold of this Oppo^tunity, be in hopes to effect it, when the
onset of the Enem^ shall be most strong and prevalent; and thou through pains in
the Body, and perplexities, and distractedness of mind very wea^ and no ways
able to resist; when Impediments shall be mult^plied and helps diminished, thy
distraction great, thy inclination little, and Leisure none; for at the hour of
Death there (...) so many and great things will cause thee to die, that tho^^
shall have neither mind, nor time, nor strength to die we^^

Therefore, as thou desire the everlasting Welfare of the precious and
immortal Soul, let what has been desired of the in this small Piece, be
strictly observed and done without d^lay, that so you may be everlastingly
happy with God a^^ his Holy Angels in the highest Heavens,

FINIS*

