The so much Famed TABLETS.
ONE of which at a time being only chewed or held in the Mouth, rolling it
about with the Tongue, attracts by the Glandules of the Mouth, and evacuates by
moderate and inoffensive Spitting all Defluxions of Rheum or obnoxious Humors
that fall upon the Brain, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Mouth, Teeth, Throat, Lungs, etc.
thereby wonderfully purging the Head and Brain, curing Headachs though never so
violent or of long standing, Vertigoes, or Giddiness or Swimming, Lethargies,
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Palsies, Convulsions, weak Memories, Sore Eyes, Noise
in the Head, Deafness or thickness of Hearing, Red Faces, sore, ulcer'd or
cankered Mouths, sore Throats, etc. being daily used for some time.

They Cure the Toothache in a few Moments, render the Breath exceeding Sweet,
though never so Strong or Stinking, and far beyond any Powder, Mouth-water or
Gargle, make and keep the Teeth white, fast and sound, cleansing and preserving
the Gums from the Scurvy, Soreness and Foulness, etc.

They remove Catarrhs, Tickling, Phthisical or Ashmatical Coughs, whether from
Colds or sharp Humors, which if not timely remedied, fall upon the Lungs and
cause of consumptions.

By a constant using them they attract and evacuate by Spitting, the Morbifick
Cause of Rheumatisms, Gouts, Sciatica's, and other Pains, King's Evil Swellings
or Sores, Scurvies, Dropsies, Vapors, Melancholy, and many other chronick
Distempers.

They exceedingly sweeten the Blood and Juyces, thereby conducing admirably to
the Cure of Cancerous and other Swellings, whether in the Breasts, Mouth or
elsewhere, all running Sores, Ulcers, Fistula's, Itchings, Pimples, Scabs,
Tettars, Leprosies, etc. in any part of the Body, answering all the ends, and
saving the trouble and danger of Salivation, if used for a continuance, and
that with great safety, without the least Pain or Disturbance whatsoever.

They create an Appetite, and strengthen Digestion, beyond all the inward
Medicines known in the World, as will immediately appear by only using one of
them as foresaid for about an hour before eating, and the same after eating,
for they bring off the watery phlegmatic Humors which lodge in the Stomach,
depraving the Appetite, and cause Wind, Crudities and Indigestions.

If one of them be used for about two hours, 'twill attract near a Pint of
Rheum, and by Spitting out at any time the Tablet, the Flux immediately ceases,
and the Mouth and Tongue not left hot, dry and furred, as with Tobacco, but
cleans'd, refreshed, and rendered cool, moist and pleasant, being therefore
excellent to take off the Heat and Dryness of the Mouth, and extinguish Thirst
in Fevers or otherwise.

They vastly exceed the use of Tobacco either smoked or chewed, all your
celebrated Snushes in Vogue, Errhines, Lozenges, or any the like means,
performing in every respect beyond what it is possible for any of them to do,
and that with far more Pleasantness, Safety and Ease.

They are, of Chemical Preparation, a Secret lately found out ^y an Eminent
Physician, being of an exceeding delightful Scent, and most charming Flavor in
the Mouth, and as harmless, tastless and small (only soft and flattish) as
Peace, and may be used without hindrance of Business by the nicest Person, old
or young, at any time of the day, not causing the least Offense or nauseating.

Elderly Persons and others whose Teeth are loose or tender had better hold
them in the Mouth, rolling them about with the Tongue, than chew them so much
as others may whose Teeth are sound, which will draw forth the Rheum as well as
if chewed.

They are to be had only (by the Author's appointment) at Mr. Varenne's a
Bookseller at the Sign of Seneca's Head near Somerset House in the Strand,
London, Price 3 s. 6 d. each Box, containing twenty Tablets.

And since I have this fair opportunity I cannot but make use of it, in taking
notice of the pernicious use of Snush as it is taken nowadays, it being
become so A-la-mode, as that it is used by most without any Reason or
Consideration, notwithstanding many Experiences confirm that Apoplexies (so
Fatal of late) have been induced thereby; but Mankind is so infatuated to
Fashions, and fond of Novelties, that they will not be persuaded off from a
thing, though it be injurious to their Healths, and apparently brings along with
it, its own Danger and Ruin.

It is too true that Apoplexies are now become as it were the Epidemick
Distemper of all Nations where Snuff or Snush is taken, and I am very confident
we have Forty seized with that Disease now, to One that was taken with it Forty
or Fifty Years agone, it having been observed, that there is scarcely one in an
hundred who dye of Apoplexies, that has not been a Snush-taker: And that this
Disease should affect the Snush-takers only, or them chiefly, is apparent,
because by the constant and assiduous use of it, the thinner Juices of the
Recriments of the Brain are continually separated and discharged through the Os
Ethmoides or Strainers, which pass to the Nose and Mouth, leaving the thicker
parts of the same behind, which not afterward being able to pass through,
stays to be increased by continual additions till the Augmentation becomes
considerable; where still remaining and still increasing without probability of
getting out (unless by the use of one particular sort of Snush now and then to
be taken) the quantity at length comes to press upon the Meninges of the Brain,
by which a grand Obstruction being made, an Apoplexy is forthwith induced.

And I think this is evident not only by the Snush-takers of our own Nation who
daily dye of Apoplexies, but also those of Spain where Snush is most of all
taken, and where Apoplexies are more Epidemick than in any other part of the
World: If then the taking of Snush be no essential or real Good, but manifestly
a dangerous and for the most part a Mortal Evil, Why should the use of it be
continued as it is, or Men be so fond of their own Hurt, unless (as I have said
before) because they resolve to be in the Mode, let the Consequence of it be
never so destructive.

But I would not that it should be thought I therefore explode or decry the use
of all sorts of Snush, for there is one sort (and scarcely any more, or at
leastwise none to compare with it, being a Chemical Preparation) that may be
taken with Safety and Success, it being to be taken but sometimes neither, the
Receipt of which none knows but my self, and which I have also appointed to be
Sold by Mr. Varenne aforementioned at One Shilling per Paper, to be taken the
quantity of a small Pea up each Nostril in a Morning, which will be found to
operate pleasantly and acceptably and corroborate the Head, Brain and Nerves,
and bring away much Foulness and thick Humors which obstruct the Passages of
the Brain, causing Sore Eyes, Blindness, Head-achs, Vapors, Wind in the Head,
etc. it being very safe, and working without the least danger of taking Cold,
bringing away congealed or clotted Blood or glutinous Matter, or Imposthumes in
the Head, whether from Blows, Falls, or otherwise, and effectually Cures
Stuffings in the Nostrils, and draws out Mercury lodged in the Head by
irregular Salivations or the use of Mercurial Remedies, and cannot but be the
only Snush in the Universe for Lethargies, Vertigoes, Epilepsies, Apoplexies,
Madness, and the like.

In this Snush there is not the least Grain of either Hellebor, Euphorbium or
Tobacco, which are the chief Ingredients of all your Snushes in vogue, whether
Foreign or Domestic made, and which by causing violent and long Sneezing,
concuss and shake the Brain, thereby inducing the same Diseases, for which this
Snuff of mine is oftentimes a perfect Cure; and as strong Sneezings are
apparently hurtful if not pernicious, (Nature abhorring Violence) such Snushes
ought carefully to be avoided.

But this here recommended makes the stagnated Humors fluxile, and brings away
not only a thin Water through the Nostrils as other Snushes, but also a thick
glutinous Matter, insomuch that when the Faculties or Intellectuals are torpid,
dull and heavy, as in Apoplexies, Lethargies, and other sleepy Diseases, the
excrementitious Humors causing the same, are, as it were, dissolved and made
with ease to pass away through the Nostrils, it working gently for a long time
together, attracting powerfully and bringing away from all parts of the Head
and Brain such a vast quantity of Excrements, that Deafness, though of never so
long standing, as also Cataracts and Suffusions which overspread the Sight and
cause Blindness, may possibly be cured thereby, or at leastwise it will so far
help the Sight and Hearing, as to be found exceeding beneficial and safe when
all other sorts of Snuff have been so far from helping therein, that they have
manifestly been destructive to both the one and the other.

But for those other Head-Diseases before mentioned, and in an especial manner
for Apoplexies, it may possibly do more than any other thing in the World
beside, and that more particularly if it be snuff'd up the Nostrils every
Morning, or upon extraordinary occasions at Nights also for two or three or
four days successively. And if the Tablets also be used daily as in the
following Directions, they may together work such wonderful Effects in those
Diseases, as would be almost incredible to relate, for they will cause such a
total Evacuation and Discharge of the foul excrementitious Humors which cause
most Head-Diseases, as must needs beyond all inward means work far greater and
indeed very surprising Effects.

Directions for using the Tablets.
PUT one of them into your Mouth, and as soon as soft (which will be in a
moments time) chew it or hold it there, rolling it about with your Tongue, for
as long or as short a time as your Distemper may require you should Spit more
or less, always Spitting out the Rheum as it is attracted, which will come
faster after a quarter of an hours time, but never so fast as to be troublesome.

If you would Spit a Quart in a day, use thus one or two of them one after
another for four or five hours at times, and so in proportion more or less as
you have occasion; and if before you are aware you should swallow your Spittle;
or by chance the Tablet, 'twill no ways harm you or disorder your Stomach.

They will not stick to your Mouth or Teeth neither do they dissolve or waste
by using, so that one will last a whole day if you please.

In some Persons the Rheum is harder to be attracted, and may not come so free,
the Glandules of the Mouth and Throat not being so open and relaxed, therefore
such must only use them longer at a time than others, and will receive the same
benefit, which at most is so far from being tiresome, that when you have been
used to them, you will scarcely at all care to be without them in your Mouth,
they being easy and pleasant, refreshing to the Memory and Intellectuals,
giving one the opportunity of thinking with greater Perspicuity and
Apprehension.

FINIS.

