THE MAP OF THE Little WORLD, ILLUMINATED WITH RELIGION Being a Practical
Treatise, directing Man to a Religious Scope, and right Measure, in all the
Periods of his Life; With Devotion suitable.

To which is added an Appendix, containing a GOSPEL MINISTERS Legacy, to his
Flock, in some Sermons, upon 2 Pet. 1. 12, etc.

By PATRICK STRACHAN Minister of the Gospel at St. VIGEANS.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, to be sold by Thomas Brown and John Vallange
their Shops, over against the Parliament-Closs, Anno Dom. M. DC. XCIII.

Unto the Right Honorable, and truly NOBLE JAMES EARL of PANMURE, Lord MAUL,
BREGHIN and NAVAR, etc. My most Generous PATRON.
May it please Your Lordship,
IN Your Goodness to accept of this small Testimony, of my bounded Duty, for
Your Lordships Patrociny, and Singular Kindness to me and mine, in a constant
Course of Favor, which has still issued from Your Noble Ancestors, without
the least Umbrage in your Noble Person, and your most Honorable Lady: Who, tho
the Daughter of a Prince, and One of the greatest Peers of this Ancient
Kingdom^ does add to Her Natural Splendour, the Lusture of a Condescending and
Courteou^ Mean, as if her Ladyship were of a lowe^ Extract. I cannot but
express the Thankful Sentiments, I Entertain of the Favou^ of your Noble
Predecessors, and of you^ Honorable and most Worthy Mother^ Whose approved
Conduct, Prudent, C^vil and Edifying Way, has not only Engaged me, but all who
have had the Honor of her Ladyship's Converse, to loo^ upon her as a Woman
among a Thousan^ But I know your Lordship needs no borrowed Rays, from the
Applauses (...) Men; And therefore I shall not insist; B^ only to Beg your
Favorable Acceptan^ of this small Mite of my Gratitude^ which, tho Weak and
Unworthy; yet presumes to Kiss your Noble Hands, because of its general Design,
to Advance that Glorious Religion, which if it were not opposed by the Lusts of
Men, and if left to its own Innocence and Native Power, would transform the
World from a Chaos of Confusion, to a wondrous Light: So Wishing the Blessings
of the LORD'S Right and Left Hand to your Lordship, and Noble Family; I shall
add no more, but that I am in all sincere Duty,

My LORD, Your Lordships Humble Devoted Servant in CHRIST, Pat: Strachan.
From my Study at St. Vigeans, 14 July, 1693.
TO THE READER
Courteous Read^r,
IF thou shall be pleased to peruse this little Treatise, with the Denvedness
and Charity wherewith I have labored to digest and publish it, I hope it will
meet with little Censure for this is forbidden, Jam: 3. 1. And it is very much
contrary to the Gospel Spirit, and argues too much pride, Self conceit in the
Cen^urer, and a very malevolent humor, that will not allow the offer of a
little Mite, for the building of the LORDs House by another, without Disdain
and contempt, and because self is so natural and ready (like the Ivy) to twist
it self in with the best of our Essays; I here solemnly renounce it, so that
if this weak Work may be any wise useful to the Church and promotive of the
Glory of GOD, I have my End and Reward, It is not calculated to the Luxurient
fancies of Men, nor to any sphere of more sublime Judgments, but only that it
may be helpful to such of lower Capacities, I send it forth without affection,
not with the Excellency of words of Man's wisdom, but in the simplicity of the
Gospel; And therefore I humbly commend it to the Acceptance of GOD, it being
but a small thing to be judged by Man, such as read it let them do it with
Humility, denyedness and simplicity, And I hope they shall not regrate their
pains, and if it can do any good, its better done than undone, and may possibly
drop upon some and afford them a little Oil to their Lamps, to take the blessed
Rod of the Kings High Way to lead them through the Laborinth of Time, and after
all the Wyndings and Traverses of the Stages of our Life, happlly bring us by a
safe Conduct to the Land of Joy and Peace, which that it may contribute to, is
the earnest Wish of

Thy Servant for CHRIST's Sake. P. S.

The Contents The Entrance.
Period 1.
OF our beginning, and bygone life. page 1 The prayer. Ibid Stage 1. 2 Of the
Formation of the Infant. 3 Of the propagation of the Soul. 5 Of Original sin. 7
Of Infant Baptism. 10 Stage 2d. Of the care of Parents. 12 Of Regeneration. 13
Of Confirmation. 16 Stage third, of the evils incident to Children 18 A brief
Reinforcement of the duty of Parents 25 A prayer of parents for their Children.
Ibid A prayer of a Child. 27 Stage 4 which Resumeth the instructions for
Children. 29 The prayer. 36
Period 2.
Stage 1. Which considers the portracture and lineaments of Youth. 37 The
evils incident to Youth. 43 Directions for the recovery of Youth. 49 The
motives. Page 58 The prayer. 60 Stage 2d. Of man's entering into a settled state
with suitable Directions. 63 The necessity of domestic devotion: 72 A morning
prayer to be used in a family 75 The evening Prayer. 77 Suitable prayer for the
bygone stage. 79 Stage 3d. which divides into three courses. 80 Course first,
of the ordering thy person, family, etc. 82 The means and methods to manage
this state of life aright. 85 Which are 1st. Wisdom. Ibid 2ly Prudence. 86 3ly.
Providence. 87 4ly. Government. 88 5ly. Improvement. Ibid Motives to manage
this state of life. 89 The prayer. 113 Course 3d. What fine your labor in
virtue and piety, etc. has come to. Ibid
Period 3.
Of what is to come in the declensians of Nature 119 Stage first, Of a serious
Recollection of thy self, etc. 120 What now remains to be done. 128 A
continuation of this Stage, to the outmost Extent of man's life. 131 The Prayer.
138 Stage 2d. Of the 4 last things. 139 Of Death; ibid Prayer in order to
Death. 148 Of Judgment. 149 The Prayer. 155 Of Hell. 156 The prayer. 159 Of
Heaven. ibid The prayer. 163 A Lamentation for the decay of Religion. 167 The
Prayer. 176 A Vindication of the Forms of Devotion used in this Treati^e. Ibid
Prayers according to the days of the Week 179 Of Psalmodie. 189 Of the
Doxologie. 190 A Vale to the World. 195 Devotion suitable. 204
In the Appendix.
SErmon I. Of the compact Chain of our Holy Religion, etc. page 1. Sermon II.
The duty and diligence of the Apostolic Curate discribed, etc. page 10.
Sermon III. of the expediency and usefulness of the means for the advancement
of practical Religion, etc. page 26. Sermon IV. Of the practical knowledge of
Death and the Information, that the LORD gives some of his favorites thereof,
etc. page 36 Sermon V. Of the endeavors, which faithful Ministers have, to
make their labors useful after their decease, etc. page 45. Sermon VI.
Concerning the truth, and excellency of our Holy Religion, the infallible
proofs thereof, and the duty of such as own it. page 55.
ERRATA.
IN the Entrance. 3. Line^ 6. for Delegate, Read Delicate. Page 9. L. 3. for
Vitotum R: Votitum, P. 22. L. 16. for feed, R. fed. P. 34. L. 5. for Daughter,
R. Daughters. P. 40. L 14 for Restrain, R. Restraint. P. 72. L. 19 for E^au, R.
Isaac. P. 104 L. 16. for When, R. First, Then. P. 176. L. 24. for
Invincable-rable, R: Invincible.

THE MAP OF THE Little WORLD Illuminated with RELIGION
The Entrance.
MAN, the Masterpiece and Model of Nature, and the Mirror of all that is Rare
and Excellent in Nature, is, upon good ground, called (...); the Little World,
being the Abridgement, and curious draught of the Greater World, whom GOD has
stated upon the Frontise piece of the Universe, as the Image of his Maker to
Rule and Act therein as Lord and King under GOD: He (...) such a rare work, as
declares his Author, Psalm. 8 5, 6. and Psalm. 144. 3, For GOD made Man upright.
Ecc. c. 7. 29. And if he were not a little clouded with clay, he had not been a
little lower, but equal with the Angels, Being, as to his Creation, the Son of
GOD, Luke. 3. to the end, fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 13^ 14 Much
higher then other Animals, ar^ above a senseless clod; with an elevated
countenance, (os homini sublime dedit. Ovid.) a Noble Air and M^an, as a King^
Son, much higher then all the rest.

. 2. And if we can with Appelles's dash, lineament this portract; we shall find
it very admirable in its Organ's, and all its parts; with such Vivacity in its
eyes, much more Sprighty and Lucide than the sparks of a Diamond; such a
subtle sense in its Ear, Taste and Smell, which makes its Body, Sp'rituous and
Lively; with a special Ray of Glory above other Creatures, in the faculty of
speech; to communicat^ its mind, and converse with GOD and Man: which is called
the Glory of Man Psalm. 57, 8. and Psalm. 108. 1. With such Agility in its Limbs,
with such strength in its Thigh, with a strange circling of its Blood; and such
an adequate Symmetry, proportion and Contexture of the Whole, that there is no
schism or blemish in the Body; the Breviary of all Philosophy, the Library of
Nature and Pattern of Art.

. 3. But if we will draw nearer and look in to that, which is unseen, except by
its Issue; we shall yet find much greater wonder and glory, carrying Judgment,
Reason and Memory in the head, and affections in the heart: this living Soul in
Man, is not only a Breath, Crasis, or Humor, but an immaterial spirit, and
delegate piece of all the Works of GOD; Capable to reflect upon, and deliberat
with himself; and to know, love, choice and enjoy GOD, with the power of
fancy and inward sense; which, as a forge, suggests matter of Reason and
Council to work upon, and like an intelligence, to stir the universe, as by a
common soul.

. 4. But alas! sin sullied this sublime Creature, and the fall has taken away
his understanding: Man is now either void orc orrupt, in his intellectuals, and
so is like the beast that perish. O quantum mutatus est! how far has he changed
and degenerated! Lucifer by fall turned devil, and Man turned Brute and slave
to the dev^ and being so rare a work is now become the worst through sin: nam
corruption optim^ pessima: The light in him now is darkness, and how great is
that darkness? If we follow sin to its Rise, we will find it of the devil, who
sinned from the beginning, who corrupted the first Man with contagious
infection, and a spreading leprosy, and invenomed the Root, which made ^owre
the Branches: so Man's marred, stripped of his Native beauty, exposed in soul
and bodv, and open to wrath and misery; he now is become homo nihili, worth
nothing, and lighter then Vanity; whereby this little Man is all mangled and
deformed.

. 5. But Religion illuminateth it again, and as the natural Sun makes the
Heavens pleasant, and the Earth fruitful, so the Son of Righteousness, the
second Adam, arises with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. With a Heavenly
pensil draws again more stedy impresses of the Image of God, and makes him to
partake of the Divine Nature, and the Life of GOD: and he now becomes more apt
for a communion with GOD, to be translated from Glory to Glory by the spirit of
GOD; Which the Religion of the Holy JESUS effectuateth, as a lightsome horizon,
to influence him again with Heavenly Rays; by the spirit and word of GOD, to
raise him up for Grace and Glory; and, if well improved, makes the new
Creature's face shine like Moses; it transfigures him with his Savior, Mat.
17. 2. and puts him in Heaven while on Earth, and makes Him to converse in
Heaven Phil. 3, 20. And meet for the Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

6. This new Crature, is not only formed of GOD, but also for GOD; he is GOD's
Workman-ship, and must work for his Life, and work out his Salvation; For
which, he must consider, that he has an (...), a great work ado, and must
therefore imp^ove his Time and Talents for that End. Hoc age, do this, is both
the Voice of Scripture and Providence; A Man without a Calling, both General
and Particular, is but like a Drone in a Hyve; and GOD may say to such, Why
stand ye here all the day Idle? Yet we may get our Wages, if we listen to the
Call after much Loitering, Nam prestat sero sapere quam nunquam; It Is high time
to awake out of sleep* Romans 13. to the end; And since our Life is but a Vapor,
and like a Blob upon the Water, may soon evanish, and our present, Now, goes
away with the thought, and our Interim may soon alter; We shall find Work
enough shaped for us, both by Nature and Religion. To be well Employed in our
Time, we must be active to Recover and Provident (as Apelles drew his Picture)
to work for Eternity; There is no time to be idle (the necessities of Nature
and Moderate Recreation being allowed) and there can be nothing more persuasive
to set us on Work than the uncertainty of time, and that there is no Work in
the Grave, Ecc: 6. 10. Time passes, like a little turning rivolet into the
Ocean, unto an Unchangeable Eternity; Our Lease is not only Annual, but
Diurnal, we are Temporary Tenants in this World, and every hour of the 24, and
every minute of the Hour, may determine our Horoscope. This great dyal of
Nature, Time, passes away, but never stands still, nor goes back, without a
Miracle; Time rides a Career amongst Mortals, and sends its Harbinger, Death,
with his black Rod, where the Sovereign Ruler appoints it; We know not what a
Day may bring forth, and should not boast of to morrow, Prove. 27. 1. It is good
then to watch and be diligent, since we know not the hour.

7 It cann^t then be impertinent, seriously to warn the World, to look to the
Periods of their Life; Which is the great Scope and Design of the following
Treatise, to lead the Christian through the Labyrinth of Life, that he may well
consider how short his time is, with the Psalmist, Psalm: 86. 47. And follow the
Thread of the Word of GOD, to direct him in all the Stages and Periods of his
Life, which is here set before thee, in the following Periods.

Period first, Of our Beginning, and bygone Life, and the Stages thereof.
Period second, Of our present Time, and the State of Our Growing Age, and the
several Stages thereof. Period third, Of the future Age, (or, what is to come
in the Declensions of Nature,) and the Stages thereof. With a Vale to the
WORLD.
Period first, Of our beginning and bygone life, and the Stages thereof.
MAn's Age is but a Span, and but an Instant 'twixt our birth and our death.
Man comes to the World and knows not how, and goes to a World of Eternity and
knows not, when; He lives, he groans, he acts awhile, and dies; And it takes a
great part of the short Span of his time, 'ere he well know where he is, how he
is, and what he has to do. He lives long the life of a Brute, as it were
without reason. It Is fit then, when he begins to reflect, and to act as a
rational Creature; that he consider, what he is, and review the bygone time.
Yesterday can not be brought back, But time may be Redeemed: His life is but a
dream, yet he may gather some good out of it, When he awakes, if he consider;

The Prayer.
ANd Thou, O LORD, who only Remains unchangeable, in all the stages and Changes
of time, and the inexpressible permanence of Eternal ages, World without end.
Fix the heart of unconstant Man upon thee alone; Our Soul is the Daughter of an
high House; Give us Grace with the Psalmist to say unto thee, LORD thou art my
LORD, Psalm. 16. 2. Keep us O GOD in thy Name, and make us pure and clean to be
fit for Thee: Keep our Immortal Soul in life, and still upon wing to Flee to
its Center and repose, for where shall it Flee to be happy but to Thee, thou
only has the words of Eternal Life: O JESV, the Powerful attractive of Hearts,
who makes all Generous Souls sigh after thee, draw us to thee; for this is our
Rest and only repose, which sweetneth all the acerbities of time, and
Bitterness of this World, here will we dwell for ever, and If we Change upon
the Wheel of time, we roll indeed, but in Thee we can not be moved nor Removed.
Amen.

Come I now to consider the stages, and several Tu^ns of the first Period of
our Life.

STAGE First.
The Contents.
OF the Formation and Production of the Infant, of the propagation of the Soul,
and of sin, of Infant Baptism and the right that the Children of Church Members
have unto it: The duty to be extended to Infants, as Care, Provision and Prayer
for them, to study their Nature and Humor, and acting accordingly, Grave
example, and a serious and timeous dedication of them to GOD; which (for more
distinct and clear uptaking thereof) shall be considered by a Particular
account of the purpose, and doctrine of the first Stage, in the first period of
our life.

. 1. Let Naturalists, and Ancient or modern Masters of Medicine, discourse of
the Formation of the Child in the womb, Job and the Royal Psalmist draws this
unseen Embryo best with a Divine Pencil. Job 10. 8. Thy hands have made me and
fashioned me together round about, thou have fashioned me as the Clay; Has thou
not powered me out as Milk, and croudled me as Chees? Thou have Clothed me with
Skin and Flesh, and fenced me with Bones and Sinews. And Psalm. 139. from 13.
Thou have possessed my Reins, thou have covered me in my Mothers Womb. I am
fearfully and wonderfully made and Curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
Earth, and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when yet there was none of them. Man's a wonder before the World see
him, lying in the dark Cells of the womb; and if he consider from what he
Flows, and his little Chamber in the womb and how nourished there; It may
humble him; he flows from Blood, and lives on Blood, and dwells amongst Blood
and Ordurs. Thy very nature may humble thee: For, as it proves the Wisdom and
power of the GOD of Nature, who can extract a quintessence out of Dullest
matters, so does it bid thee look unto thy Original. All the Earth being of one
Blood, Acts 17. 26. And there being no differance 'twixt the Prince and the
Peasent; and that GOD, who teaches Art to extract Rarities, who by nature
brings Silk from a Worm, a Pearl from a Shell, and precious Minerals from Dust
and Rubbish; does make this Raritie; Man, Ex Humo, Eccle. 12 7. For Dust thou
art, and to Dust thou shall return; thou comes from the womb, and goes to thy
long home, the Grave; If thou boast of thy Pedigree: Go to the House of
Rottenness, and look to the worms, that makes thy Flesh to shrink; and learn to
confess with Abraham, that thou art Dust and Ashes, Gen: 17. 28. And with Job,
abhor thy self in Dust and Ashes, Job: 42. 6. And if thou shall consider, that
thou art not only Dust, but fallen in the Dust, and comes forth with a
Contaminate Blood, dying in thy sin, and no Eye pitying thee, Ezekiel: 16. 1. it
may further abase thee, and not suffer thee to be proud when thou lie in the
Dunghill, all besmeared with filth and uncleanness: Consider then thy rise and
thy fall, and learn to be humble, else thou art proud of nothing, or worse than
nothing.

2. Next, As to the Propogation of the Soul, and how the dust body comes to be
animated, not only with vital spirits, but with a rational Soul; I shall leave
the curiousity of this also to Philosophers; For although some will have the Soul
ex traduce, because, if not so, Man does not beget a perfect Man, and commonly
Children Patriscent follow the ill of the Parents, and they are Father-like;
there is not only vitium Gentis and familiae, of the Nation and Family; but
also personae, of the Person: Yet its safest to join with the universal Church,
that the soul is infused, according to that of St. Aug: Creando infunditur and
infundendo Creature; By creation it is infused, and by the infusion of the Soul
it is created. And this common Vote is not infringed by the sentiments of some
Private Men; For although Man begets not a Soul, yet he begets a spiritu^
Organ and Embryo, disposed for the Soul a^ so does he begett Man Virtually.

And the Scripture favors this Infusion, as Solomon says, Dust shall return
to Dust, and the spirit to GOD that gave it: He gave it not as He does many
things; by the use of means, but peculiarly, GOD, no^ man, gave the spirit,
Ecc. 12. 7. And our Savior in proving the Resurrection assert^ that Abraham,
Isack and Jacob, Yet live in a separated state from the Body: and such as
believe the immaterality and immortality of the Soul, (which is the common
belief of, al^ most, the whole World) cannot but acknowledge this; so St. Paul
reasons with Philosophers at Athens, Acts 17. How long it is ere the Embryo
in the Womb receive the soul is something quisquus to determine, tho some of
the Ancients, have been positive as the following distich does declare.

Sep in lacte dies, ter sunt in sanguine terni;
Bis seni carnem, ter seni membra figurant. That is. Seven days in milk, and
n^ne in blood,
Twelve days the flesh, thrice 6 the rest conclude.


. 3. But leaving this to Philosophy, to discuss; as to Religion, since our
spirit or soul is the daughter of an high house, no lower than Heaven, and the
product of the Father of Spirits, it is fit that we labor as much as we may in
the use of the means to deliver her out of the bondage of corruption; she
groans with the load of flesh, 2 Cor: 5, 3, In this Tabernacle we groan being
burdened. And the natural body has an Animal spirit, to lust after sin, as
St. James says, the spirit in us lusts to Envy, Jam. 4. 5. But this spirit
evaporateth in pleasure, and that sore must be mortified, that our soul may be
saved in the day of the LORD, 1 cor: 5. 5. But the rational, tho it be hugely
darkened, and alienated from the life of GOD, Ephesians: 4. 18. Yet has it reason,
tho much mastered by the brutall part; and by that Reason, and the faculty even
of a natural conscience, it cannot but groan under the burden of sin.

. 4. Now that the soul is contaminate, and participant of original sin with the
Body, and how it is propagated and corrupted, are purposes that we should
rather yield to* with humble Faith, then with canvassing Curiosity labor to
comprehend: Since the Scripture is positive in the thing, That the imaginations
of the heart of man are evil, and only evil a pu^^tia, Gen: 6. 5. The thoughts
of his heart (...) only evil continually; And without wre^ing that of Psalm. 51.
3. and 5. Verses. (...) must confess Original Sin; And our Savior, Joh. 3. 6.
says, That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and infers the necessity
of Regeneration from this Disease: If we Compare this then with that of Genesis 6.
3. My spirit shall not strive with Man, for that (...) is flesh; We may easily
perceive that Man in his whole Compositum, is Corrupt and Carnal: And the
Apostle St. Paul Concludes the whole World under sin, And guilty before GOD,
Romans 3. 9. and Romans 7. 23. he descrives unto us a Man, inter Regenerandum,
convinced by the Law, and entering the doors of a new Life, groaning under the
power of sin and death, wretched under that corrupt Body of sin and death till
he be delivered; This is also, the Doctrine of the Orthodox and primeval
Church, and what has been said against it by the Manicheans and Pelagians, is
fully refuted by that great Dr. Aug: concluded against by General Councils, and
the Current of the Catholic Church all along: Yea, the sensible amongst the
Heathens, as Pliny and Tully, have acknowledged this, and found out the Disease
by their own Sentiments Confessing, that, Nitimur in vitetum, etc. Now to Dive
into that deep Gulf, how original sin comes in, (since no sin is of GOD)
whether by the breath of Eve corrupted by the Serpent, or by the poisonous
quality of the Tree of Knowledge, whose fruit, tho sweet, possibly was
Venomous, which GOD forbad Man to eat of under the pain of Death; And GOD may
make poison to be in Nature for good and Holy Ends. Whether by these ways or
any other Way; or by permissive providence, leaving Man under the faculty of
Free Will, to make his own Election, or whether the Soul was infused void of
Original Righteousness? Or by the first Contact with the Body? (as our
Countryman Dr. Baron De prop: pecc: does very pertinently clear) is a business
improper for this Treatise to enlarge upon: Yet it is best for thee, O Man,
humbly to believe and sensibly acknowledge, what thou feel's that thou may
Cleanse thy self from all filthiness of flesh, and spirit, 2 Cor: 7. 1. And
that You may be sanctified throughout Soul, Body and Spirit, as the Apostle
prays for the Church of the These: 1 These 5. 23. And labor by all means to
dig out this root of bitterness from thy Soul and Heart, and make use of the
salutary means, thy Savior has prescribed for this end.

. 5. Now this gets an excellent open Entrance by early Baptism, and bringing
the Children from the Womb to the Font, to be washen in this saving Flood, in
the Laver of Regeneration, from the guilt and filth of sin; Which mercy,
according to the Tenor of the new Covenant, is allowed of GOD, to Infants; For,
as Circumcision in old, which was a seal of the Covenant, Rom: 4, 11. was
conferred on Infants; so Baptism upon that same ground may be thought to belong
to Children of believing Parents; Or, at least, reputed to be so, or if one of
the Parents believe they are federally holy; as St. Paul says, 1 cor 7. 14.
Else were your children unclean, but now they are holy; And St. Peter tells the
Jews, that the promise belongs to them, and their children, Acts, 2, 39: CHRIST
himself took little Children and blessed them, and said, suffer Little Children
to come to me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and he laid his hands on
them, and blessed them; If his blessing belong to such, Why not Baptism? Which
is among the first of his Blessings: And we find from Scripture that GOD has
sanctified some in the Womb, and from the Womb; why may he not than sanctify
His own institution of Baptism to Infants? and the sooner the better, this
Antidote be applied against the poison of the Serpent, it does also much
inhanse this Truth, that it is, and has been the practice of the Universal
Church, in and since the Apostles times. For we read that some have been
baptized and their whole house, of which probably Children were a part, And
although some Sectaries have opposed this, and have denied Infant Baptism, yet
neither is their grounds nor practice to be laid, against the General Vote of
the Church, well instructed by the word of GOD, and it is no small defense and
war^and for Infant Baptism, that it is not now a question in the Church: and it
is so fully asserted and proved, that it were superfluous, and like lighting a
Torch at Noon, to add any thing upon the head, since none but Phanaticks that
follow the fume of their fancy, who deny CHRIST's Offices, Ministers,
Ordinances and Institutions, will be so bold as to contradict it: And therefore
it concerns Parents, Religiously to go about the Baptism of their Children, and
remember the great obligation they stand under, for their pious Education: And
of Children baptized, to reflect upon it when they come to any Knowledge, and
to improve it well by the Instruction of their Parents and Tutors, whose
serious Instructions, grave Example, and earnest Prayer for Young Ones, may
help to instill and drop in such Counsels into their easy and blank minds as
may leave some Relish; as a Vessel may still keep something of the taste and
smell of the first liquor, according to that Ancient observe, quo semel est
imbuta, etc. and this stage of our life may be reckoned to the fourth year of
our Age.

STAGE Second.
The Contents.
Of the particular care of Parents and Governors, as to Children from four
years old to twelve, of studying their nature and genious, and the in^^^ling
and droping in some clear and common principles of Religion; with the
consideration of Regeneration; and when the Children come to be about twelve
years of age, of their solemn Confirmation.

1. As the Children grows so should the care of their Parents increase toward
them; its dangerous to suffer the evil of their Nature to take rooting, for
then it will turn tenacious and obstinate, it is better to take the little Foxes
that hurt their tender Gardens, Cant. 2. 6. and by Religious conduct, use the
best means to Eradicate the corruption of their Nature, and to correct that
(...), and disorder that is naturally in them, by frequent and gradual dropping
of good counsel into their hearts, especially by fixing in them the common
notion of a GOD, and fearing of Him, of honoring their Parents: And withal to
acquaint them with their Baptismal Dedication; and, in as much as is possible,
to open up unto them the m^sterie of their redemption through Jesus Christ, and
that, not only, they know to Repeat the Law, the Creed and Lords Prayer: But
also to make them, according to their capacity, to understand these. Thus
enters Knowledge into their Hearts, as a little Drop by frequent falling
makes a cavity and hollowness in the stone.

: 2. Although the Spirit of GOD, the Author of Regeneration, like the wind,
blows when, where, and how he pleases Joh. 3. v. 8. And calls some sooner,
some later, yet is it not improper to set it down here, for that same LORD that
Blessed Babs, can Sow the Seed of Grace in their Hearts. And of this
Regeneration, I shall only remember Man, of the Necessity, Nature, and Evidence
thereof. First, as to the necessity: Our Savior is very positive. Job. 3. v.
2. and 3. Except a man be Born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD:
and no outward exercise of Religion can avail us without the New Creature, the
Old Man must be Crucified, and the New-man formed and Nurished, ere we can be
fit for the Kingdom of GOD. And 2ly. We cannot better take up the Nature of it
than by considering the Author, and the manner of his Operation in producing
this Work: It is only the Spirit of GOD that does it, so is every one that is
born of the Spirit. John 3. 8. Of His own Will begatt He us, that we should be
a kind of first Fruits of His Creatures. Jam: 1. 18. This New Creature then is
clearly the Product of the Spirit of GOD, Who does this work mediatly, by the
use of means, especially by the Word o^ Truth, and other holy Engines, that he
is pleased to make use of; Yet is not this Work produced of any means, but by
the concurse of the principal Agent; the Word illuminats and perswads, but
there is more then Moral Swasion in this Work; for GOD's promise in the Covenant
is, to put his Laws in our inward parts. Jer: 3. 33. They receive by their
Conversion a heavenly seed, which abides in them that will not suffer them to
sin as the wicked do, John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of GOD does not commit sin
for His seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of GOD. Yet
as to the production of this new Creature, it may be so secret for a time, like
the Infant in the Womb; so clouded and over-powr'd by Temptation and
Corruption, that it does little appear, and it takes a long time ere it become
perfect in degrees, and visibly complete as to parts, although the Child, tho
little and weak, is potentially a perfect man, Parents, then and Governors
should with St. Paul travel in birth, till Christ be formed in their Children.
3ly, As to its Evidence, the Apostle manifests it fully, 2, cor: 5. 17: Behold
all things are become New, The man is wholly renewed in Quality* tho not in
Substance, so that he may very well say, Ego non sum ego. He has a more
generous spirit, with Caleb, a better heart with David, a more shinin^ face
with Moses, and the lips of the Righteous feed many: And tho no man ca^ make
this Change, yet is he exhorted to make him a new heart, Ezekiel. 18 31. Th^^ is,
to use the means, and well to consider that the spirit of GOD begets this ne^
Creature by the word of Truth, Jam: 1 18 That such may be a kind of first
fruits of H^^ Creatures, and for himself to show forth^ His praise, Who has
called them from darkness to Light.

. 3. It is very promotive of Grace also, when Children comes to this state of
Life, that they be Confirmed, after they can give any account of their Creed,
and of their Prayers according to the Blessed Pattern, The LORDS Prayer; For,
we read frequently in the Acts, of Confirming the Disciples after they were
Prose^^ted to the Christian Religion, whereby the new Plantation was fixed, and
by a sort of personal Covenanting with GOD, they were Engaged to His Service by
their Voluntar Consent. This is the practice of the Universal Church; Which, if
simply done, and not elevated unto a Sacrament, is laudable and promotive of
the Ends of Religion. And tho it be quarrelled with, by some in this Nation;
Yet, if it could be got well done, in every particular Parish: Since the Bishop
may not be always Vacant, it may be thought no Disorder, for the Parish
Minister every year as Occasion offers to do this in the presence of the
Parents and famous Witnesses, personally and particularly to join them to the
LORD: And if there were not, alas! too great incuriousness about matters of
Religion, a mean so helpful to the ends thereof, may be put in use. So, to
conclude this Point, I shall Reinforce my earnest Exhortation to Christian
Parents, in behalf of their Children, for this particular instance of their
Care for their Souls; and to remember Gospel Ministers of their duty as to
this. And since through the unsetledness of the Times, it can not be so well
made eflectual, let both Pastors and Parents double their Diligence, in bearing
in the Principles and Practices of Religion, into the tender Hearts of their
Children, by Prayer, and other laudable means, for that Holy End.

STAGE III.
The Contents.
Of the evils incident to Children in this Stage^ their Life; Some Rules for
the Ordering^ their Life; With a Reinforcement of t^ care Incumbent to those
that are over the with suitable Devotion.

. 1. IT is a sad Complaint of the Spi^^ of GOD, Gen 6. 5 That the Im^ginations
of the thoughts of the heart of man (...) evil, and only evil continually, and
that (...) pueritia, from his Childhood; Which, (...) we consider aright, Man
shall find that (...) has all the Dimensions of the Body^^ sin and Death, Rom:
7: to the end. (...) tho, where Grace comes, this Canaani^^ not ejected, tho
dejected, this corrupti^^ has invenomed our whole Nature, (...) has its seat
in our Heart, and never ce^^eth to foam and to boil like the Bottom^^ pit; It
is a deep thing that no Huma^^ Engine can reach, for; The heart is dec^^ful
above all things, Who can know it? Je^^ 17. 9. This disease does alienate us
from t^^ Life of GOD, Ephesians: 4 18. It hardneth ou^ heart, depraveth our will,
perverteth ou^ affections, infecteth our Senses, and inflameth our Appetite
after evll. O man search and dissect this disease, and thou shall find the
Poison of Asps, not only under thy tongue, but in thy heart, Rom: 3. 11. And
the very nature of the Serpent in all thy Faculties. Which, if reflected upon
aright, may through the Grace of GOD begin the Rise, and kindle the first
sparks of Regeneration.

. 2. Although it be hard to Enumerate all the evils of Childhood; Yet to the
help of any considering Man in his Reflection, I shall hint at some Blemishes
thereof: Some have mentioned Vitium naturae gentis, and personae. The common
Vice of Nature, and the more particular evils of the Clime and Person: All have
the common disease, which vents it self in Nations, Families, and Complexions,
in a different manner. So, some Natures are more mild, some more fervide: In
some the Irascible, in others the Concupiscible appetite, does Predomine. This
would be well considered, that man may be the more fitted to correct the
corruption of this inconsiderat time of his Age: But the more particular errors
of this Circumstance, are Ignorance, Idleness, Careleness, Inconsidera^ness and
Falsen^^ whereby Man is Inclined to Lying, Ch^^ing and Stealing; So that this
indisc^^ Fool has some Wisdom to do evil, (...) he be simple to good. As also
Envy, (...) Spirit that is in us, says St. James, lust^^ to Envy, and St.
Augustine after him sai^^ Vidi zelantem puerum, a sort of Emulati^^ and Envy in
Young Ones, together wi^^ evil custom; Especially in speech, whe^^ by a man,
alas! lays aside his Glor^^ and soon learneth to speak the Langua^^ of Hell.
As also, how prone is the Nature of man in this Circumstance to lea^^ and use
sinful Childish Tricks? In thin^^ belonging to Nature, which fair Natu^^ has
put a Vail over, to hid the^^ from the Eyes of Curiosity. And a^^ these are
Nursed by an inconsiderate min^^ and an unactive Conscience: But wha^^ need I
mention these evils? Since th^^ poor Stripling is exposed naked to all evils
under the Sun. So that, Man^^ when he has any power to reflect, is to consider
the mercy of GOD, that ever he has been reduced to any Sense and Judgment.
For,

. 3. If he shall now delineat himself, he shall find the Root, the rise, the
spruteing of these evils in him; Ignorance is the ^^ause of all our wanderings;
he is born blind, and like a whelp, sees not till such a day; ^s long ere the
scales fall off his eyes, and ^s by a merciful miracle of Grace that ^ver he
sees. He Is ignorant of GOD, that rude conceptions and Ideas does his ^ind and
phansy conceive of the Deity? ^ot considering GOD in his Spiritual and ^oly
Nature, and excellent Properties, the Eternal, and first Being, the infinite
Reason, and Light of all the rational World: And so good that, if known, Man
cannot ^ut adore, fear, love, and choice him, ^hen he beholds him in the
mirror of ^is word and works, and in the express i^age of his person, Jesus
Christ. He is also ^gnorant of himself, though (nos^e teipsum) be a common
principle; He knows not whom he represents, being the image of the invisible
GOD; tho much eclipsed by sin, Yet there remains some sparks and scintils of it
in his Rational Nature, Which, if by Grace improved, may reduce this wandering
Creature to the paths of Righteousness. He is also ignorant of the way to
Salvation; and his eyes will be no sooner op^ed, but he will have reason to cry
out, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 20. 37. although he may think at first, the
way to (...) strait, (for so indeed it is, says our Savio^^ Yet shall he see
his corruption to be (...) cause that it is so difficult: and if throu^^ GOD's
blessing he shall consult Grace^^ he shall find the way so straight and pla^^
that a wayfairing Man, tho a fool, shall (...) err therein. Isaiah. 35 8.

. 4. I shall not enlarge upon the oth^^ evils incident to our Nature, Since if
th^^ of Ignorance were Removed, and Co^^scence awaked to any exercise, man
sha^^ find it highly rational to correct the re^^ for, when Light comes in, it
will make (...) ashamed of those things we have taken pleasu^^ in; When we feed
the Brute in Darkne^^ and forgot the Soul, and left it lyin^^ maimed and dying
in its Blood. Th^^ light will easily discover the preferance of love to Envy,
Truth and Honesty to falsehood; And make the man, when he finds himself naked to
hid his eyes from himself, and bestow the more abundant honor upon his more
uncomely parts; this light will discover the Leopards spots, of ill custom,
and turn the man from black to white. It will reduce the straying sheep, and
let him see where he is, what he is, and what he shall do.

. 5. Solomon gives unto such an excel^ent Direction, The fear of the LORD is
the ^eginning of Wisdom: And the LORD's word makes the simple wise, says the
Psalmist: This parents and teachers should mainly ^nculcate upon young and
tender Hearts; And as man has by Education, The advantage of these
Instructions: So he would be also taught to moderate and Govern his passions,
and to Rule his own Spirit, especially to guard against any peculiar and
personal infirmity of his nature, and to strangle the Eruption thereof by
Discretion: And with-all to learn to bow his knee betimes, and seek Grace from
GOD, who gives liberally and upbraideth no man: For which he is to consider
the advantage of Early piety, and to weaken sin, ere it come to an habit.
Isaac had the advantage of good education, but his sons were more pregmatick,
and possibly lost much of his pious instructions, yet doubtless Jacob was well
principled from the beginning, which made him so anxious for the Blessing.
Abijah came only to the Grave in peace, of all the Sons of Jeroboam; Good
Josiah was tender hearted in his Tender Age, Timothy was instructed in the
Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy 3. 15. St. John was a young Disciple, yet much
beloved of his Master. Some get their call^ in the morning, and have much of
their work done ere the heat of the day; and man should receive this Call,
least GOD pursue him with the Rod. Its a sad thing to be Satan's Slave from the
womb: No Creature loves to be fettered, and were no^ man a dull brute, he would
cast off the Chains of Satan. It Is high time to awake out of the sleep of sin,
and by actual care to Restrain the Power of his natural Corruption. This Age,
if it do no^ answer, It Is education will after cry out O mihi Praeteritos, etc.
Because he did no^ obey the voice of his Teachers, Prove. 5. 13. For shall he
let his body Grow, and the Spirit^^ly in a trance? To have nimble Limbs and a
lasy spirit: Man must therefore begin at the heart, where the Root of the evil
lies: for out of the heart com^th all evil, says our Savior: He must
therefore Wash, Watch, Keep, Guard, cleanse, and purify the heart, and seek
the Blessing of the Covenant, Jer. 4. 14. Psalm. 51. 10. Man in this
Circumstance must shun evil Company, and not listen to the black art of Knowing
the tricks of sin. He would have great care that things be right in the first
Region, for if there be an error in the first concoction, the soundness of
Grace will be much Obstructed by our natural diseases: O then present thy soul
and sores to GOD, and seek the Balm of Gilead to heal thy soul, but bewar of
hypocrisy, to pray and sin, and sin and pray, and thus Run thy self into a
Circle, thus to fall into Satan's Labyrinth, from whence the Out-gate is
difficult, as the Ingress is dangerous. Rather beginn thy General Calling as a
Christian, and prepare thy self to Climb up to the Zenith of a more perfect age.

. 6. And the Rudeness of this Inconsiderate age, should of it self enforce the
Duty of Parents and such as are Over Children, to make Conscience of their
Education, Deuteronomy: 1. Compared with Ephesians: 6. to be much in Prayer for them, and to
teach them to be serious. And pray in the Forms following.

The Prayer Of Parents for their Children.
O LORD, who has granted me Children, give the Blessing, and grant them
graciously, as thou did to Jacob: LORD make them thy Children; For, better for
them never to have been born, then not to be born again. It had been better for
me that I had been barren, then that they be not fruitful to Thee. I have cast
them upon Thee from the Womb, an^ dedicate them to Thee; LORD, accept of the^
for his sake who became the Son of Man, an^ in the days of his flesh was very
kind to Litt^^ Ones; heal the Corruption of their Nature^ save them from the
snares of Sin, and Satan^ Open the Eyes of their mind early, that the may know
thee, O GOD; Put something (...) them that may put them up to Thee; Sancti^^
their Education, save them from the unlawf^ tricks of sin, and be Thou their
Tutor an^ Governor, take them, LORD, by the bea^ and by the hand, and lead
them in a plain path^ prosper them in a course of virtue, and never lea^ them
nor forsake them; And LORD gi^ them that blessing that they never forsake The^
least they fall in a ditch, and Ruin: Be thou (...) GOD their Portion in the
Land of the Living^ and make them so happy, and us in them, tha^ thev may be
Inclined to a Lawful Calling, and serve Thee, both in General and Particular.
Sanctify their Baptism, and bless it to them i^ all the Periods of their Life,
that they mav be so devouted to Thee, that they may be amongst the number of
these Little Ones, that shall see Thy Face for ever, Amen.

The Prayer of Children.
O Thou Eternal Creator, Who made me fearfully and wonderfully in the Dark
^ells of the Womb, and have now brought me (...) the light, and stated me upon
the stage of time, (...) act my part: and given me the advantage of ^e light of
the Glorious Gospel, through the ^iety of my Parents, good Education and
In^^uction, Grant me the Grace to do what is ^^ght in Thy sight, and
Religiously answer the ^^ains and Means (...) for my Good, save me ^^om
Idleness, Negligence, and Indiscretion, ^^d all the Evils that follows, and
flow from (...) blind mind; Give me to awake, and seek ^hee in the morning of
my Day; How si^ly has ^^y degenerate Nature made me? How little differ I from
a Brute, and how much obscure I the Light of Reason, by follv, flesh, sense and
sin? LORD give me now as much Light as to see how weak and Vile I have been,
and to know what thou will have me to do; remember not against me the Vanities
of this inconsiderate Age; But shape and sharpen me for Thy self, that I may,
by Thy Grace, leave the darknessess and shadows of my twilight-time, and look
up to Higher Regions, of Reason and Religion, and so begin to be serious in
this indiscreet Period (...) my time, and put away Childish things: (...) me to
feel the motions of the Rational (...) and not to be only acted by the natural
Spi^^ O my Soul, listen now to the Light of (...) LORD, open now all the
windows of thy (...) to the beams of His Light and Life, Aw^^ thou that
sleep, that CHRIST may Give thee Light: LORD loose me (...) my pleasant
fetters of nature, and sin, (...) grant me solid Judgment and pure affect^^
Put too thy hand and lift me up; And then (...) I walk at liberty in the ^ath^
of thy pre^^ Thou have brought me through the weakne^^ a Brittle age, and ^^as!
I have been a cap^^ slave, LORD Redeem me for thy m^^cies sake, and Give me so
much of solid G^^ as may help me to keep my feet, in after tr^^ of following
Periods; And put my soul on w^^ and grant me the Gentle Air of Heavenly bre^^
Now to live in a better and a more Solu^^ element, and breath a more free Air,
for (...) ligion and Virtue. Amen.

. 7. Now are we to look upon Ma^^ as come through the Stage of Infan^^
Childhood, and the pedagogy of sor^^ discipline, and education, and to ha^^
arrived at, or about twelve years of Age; have now learned something of Art,
and ^^tered upon the threshold of Science, and ^ade capable to think, Reflect,
and ex^rcise the faculties of his mind bv specula^^on and study: In which
stage, Parents and Overseers should look well to the Genius ^f Children and
their proper gift, since ^^ery one has his Peculiar gift of GOD, which (...)
should manure with most natural and ^^easant inclinations: For it is hard to act
against tide, invita Minverva, this makes ^ut ^oil and labor to little
purpose, and without proficiency: And although Su^eriors are not fully to be
concluded by ^^e swing of their Children's inclinations, ^et are they carefully
to observe their ^ay in their after Education, and Act ^ccordingly, in the
Observing the methods of the Stage following.

STAGE Fourth. From the 12 to the 18 Year of Man's Age.
The Contents.
Resumeth the Doctrine and Instructions for Children; And further presses home
the special concerns of their life, w^^ the Reinforcement of the Care and Du^^
of Parents and Overseers, with a Tra^^tion from Child hood to Growing A^^ and
entrance upon the Limits of You^^ with some Rules and Motives direct^^ and
pressing this.

. 1. IT is now high time for the^ O Man, to lift up thy Eye^ higher then the
firmament, and (...) mind thy Creator, look well then tha^ thou consider thy
bounden duty (...) GOD, the timous dedication and givin^ up of thy name to Him,
and to po^der thy early engadgement and Baptismal Vow: and as Baptism is the
L^ver of Regeneration, thou art to look, (...) it has any influence upon thee:
and (...) thou finds any thing of the motions of a^ new life within thee: if
Baptism has ha^^ lowed thee: and if thou does seriously consider that thou art
washed that thou mavest begin now to escape the polutious of the World through
lust, and that as new born Babes, thou desire the sincere milk of the word that
thou may grow thereby, and if thou, have learned the Language of Canaan, to
speak with GOD and for GOD, if thou have attained to any discretion to put on
Modesty, humility, and patience? If thou have learned to govern thy humor
propassions, and passions? If thou yet knows any thing of the Vanity and
Deceitfulness of the World and the necessity of renuncing the same? If these
things be in thee, O Child of Man, then thou layest a good foundation against
the time to come, and for thy progress in Piety and Virtue.

. 2. And for Parents and Overseers, Let me in all modesty, enquire of you, if
your heart approves you as to your Duty to your Children and Pupils, in order
to their Religious education: Some are ready to boast of Blood and Kindred,
Friends and Riches, and other worldly privileges: but the great bussiness is,
to look well they be illuminated with the Rays of Grace and the beauties and
properties of Religion: As also if you have used the rod with discretion, for
he that spares the rod hates the Child, says Solomon: Which must be used,
not out of passion, but from good Principles to holy ends; For, this is an
instance of your Tender love of them, since GOD Himself, the Father of us all,
has said, Whom I love I Chastise, that we may be Zealous and Repent, Rev. 3.
21. And ^e chastneth every (...) whom He Receives, Heb: 12. 6. Folly is knit
to the heart of the Child, till the Rod of Correction take it out: And it is
far better for your Children to feel the Lash of your Rod, then to be stricken
and wounded with the effects of their own after miscarriage, when their own
Iniquity find them out.

. 3. And it is an excellent Mean for your Childrens happiness, that you study
their genius and proper Gift (as I before hinted) that so ye may prepare them
to enter such Callings as may make them most useful in their Generation: That
their Calling be laudable and approved, as little liable to snares as possible;
a Calling, that may most naturally dispose them for a course of Virtue; And
therefore they would be instructed to be Industrious, Honest and diligent in
the Exercise thereof: And of whatever Rank they be, it is a greater blemish
then obscure blood, to be idle in their Generation: So that even, the Noble and
Rich, as they have a High and Noble general Caling, So must they act in some
particular Calling and Exercise, in these more Eminent Spheres, GOD has placed
them in. And if ye find your Children's genius so disposed, it may be very
helpful, and behoveful for their Comfort in this Life, and that to come, to
give them to GOD, and separate them for the Holy Tribe, by the Holy and
Honorable Calling of the Gospel Ministry; Wherein, if Men would answer their
Character, they might get Esteem and Respect, and with their Master, Grow in
favor with GOD and Man.

. 4. Neither is the Femal Sex to be neglected as to this Religious Education:
The Daughters are to be directed as well as the Sons; For, as they have
Interest in the Covenant, 2 Cor: 6. to the end. I will be a Father unto you
(says the LORD) and ye shall be unto Me Sons and Daughters: So, when our Sons
are as plants grown up in their Youth, and our Daughters as Corner Stones
polished after the similitude of a Palace, it is a great token of the Happiness
of a People, Psalm: 144. 12. 15. Our Danghters are not born or bred to be idle:
For, beside their General, they have a particular Calling to be Employed in;
For which end, and to illuminate their life, they are to be very careful, and
such as Oversee them, that they be neither like a gadding Dina, nor a painted
Jezebel; or like the Daughter of Midian, who were a stumbling block, by the
counsel of Balaam, to the People of GOD; They must shun the way of the
prostitute Woman in the Prove: and learn to do virtuously after the Copy of the
gravest Matrons: And to attire themselves with modesty, and Vail themselves
with shamefacedness, and learn Humility, which is a foundation Grace, and to
beware of pride and vanity; since this may make them like the daughters of
Zion. Isa* 2. 24. and bring baldness and a Scab upon them in stead of Beauty;
They would labor also to refine and Purify all their Passions by giving
Christ, who is fairer than the So^^ of Men, The first and highest place in
their love; and to Espouse themselves to such a Blessed Husband, ere they think
upon their Nup^ials: That when by the Approved methods of GOD, and their
Parents they begin a conjugal state, they may enter the Marriage bed, White as
Swans, and Purer then the Snow of Lebanon. They would learn also to moderate
all their affections, speech and way, with the Spirit of meekness, for, a meek
and quiet Spirit is the Ornament of a Woman; 1 Pet. 3. 4. And this being
observed, let them be as virtuous as they can, both in a single and married
life; Let reason rather then Romances be their Study, let them Deck their
minds, ere they adorn their Body; Let them consider that they are the Weaker
Vessel, and under subjection, and still think it to be unsuitable to their Sex
and way, to be Imperious, and not to keep within the Sphere, in which GOD has
placed them, least they make Clamor, Noise, and in discretion which does much
blot and Blur their delicacy.

. 5. And now by way of transition, from the bygone time to the present: (For in
this Stage of Man's life; its high time for him to begin to reflect upon bygone,
and to consider where he is, and that he ascends to an higher Horizon) I shall
leave all what I have said in order to the first Period of our life, and the
Stages thereof, and take Man in his ascendant, by the hand, and lead him by
Religion in this second Period of his life, and the Various Circumstances and
Stages thereof.

The Prayer
AND thou O Great Father of the World, who by the wise providence Carries Man
from the Womb to Youth, in the weak beginnings of his life: and darker Rudeness
of unjointed Judgment, who pities his infirmities, and provides for his
healing and help, b^ the expresses of Purest reason. Sanctify this Period of
his life, Principle and ballast this new Vessel well with the sweet Odours of
Religion, that there be not? any thing wrong in the first Region, and no error
and misdiet in the first concoction; that so Man may be shaped and formed for
thy self, and Prepared for Felicity in the lustrous and lightsome Steps of thy
holy Religion. Amen.

Period second, Of our Present time, and the State of our Growing Age.
STAGE I. Which commenceth from the 18 year of Man's age, to twenty two, or
thereabout.
The Contents.
Considers the portraiture and lineaments of Youth, and the evils incident to
that age, with some directions and motives for the Right ordering of this
circumstance of our age; and some hints of particular Directions as to Our
Natural, Spiritual and Moral Capacity, for the help of youth: Now entering
more visible upon the Stage, in the open View of the World. With suitable
Devotion.

. 1. NOw come I to consider, a very turbulent and dangerous part of Man's Age:
Let man now consider what he is now arrived to? almost at the top of the wheel,
and may be a little look back to the darker Region of his Childish years, and
how long he has been buried in Oblivion, without true sense and solidity, his
many Unmanly and Unchristian Infirmities. It has been enquired concerning
Childish follies: See Dr. Tailors Ductor dubitantium, Page: 800. How long they
are excused, as Inevitable Errors, and Invincible Ignorance: But since our
Original sin makes us Culpable and miserable before GOD, I think it best to
reflect with grief upon bygon infirmities; and to labor in our growing Age and
Youth-hood (which I have guessed to begin about the eighteen year of Man's Age)
to correct our selves of bygon infirmities, and prepare to act more wisely and
solidly, in the more grave and settled state of Life.

. 2. Youth now i^ his Morning Rise having the timous season to begin a course
of Virtue and Duty, having put off childish habits and childish things and
being now dissintangled from these triffles, must act like a Man. God does make
some embrace his Yoke from their Youth, and by his Grace makes the motion and
life of the New Creature appear in them and their way; and such a Youth is like
to be useful in his Generation to GOD, the World and himself: and O how happy
is such a (...) whom GOD takes by the heart and by the hand betimes, and
fitteth him with good inclinations, and warm tender Affections, to love GOD and
fear Him. And to remember his Creator in his Youth, Ecc: 12. 1. Whereby much
sin and folly in him is prevented and such corruptions as make the way to Life
difficult, if not impossible, to Man; Thus, many seek to enter in at the strait
gate, and are not found able, and like that young Man in the Gospel, Mat 19 6.
Who probably had some good in him, and came to CHRIST sincerely and not as the
Pharisees did, to tempt him; Yet, Because the Idol of the World was lurking in
his heart, he went away sorrowful from CHRIST: But the Youth that has reminded
his Baptism Vow, is put in a fair way to make progress in Virtue and Duty.

3. But alas! Youth is in a sharp fever with a frenzy, till GOD cool and c^re
him, some are rather Gazers then Discerne^s; a sort of Animal, that but stares
on the World and knows not well what he is doing? Like a Bullock or wild Colt
unacquainted with the easy yoke of duty: He Evaporates in Air and Vanity, like
an imaginary Prince thinks himself None such, and who but he? he towers up int
the Air, there to build a Castle, and propose to get a name through fancy,
without the methods of Fame and Virtue, No considering that he lies like a
silly fool exposed to all temptation.

. 4. The Wisdom of GOD pronunceth that Childhood and Youth are Vanity, Ec^ 11.
10. And the Psalmist praveth tha^ the Errors of his Youth be not Remembered,
Psalm. 25. 7. The most of Youth, without Restrain, are evil; there may be some
better natures and Humors, but all have the Common Corrupt nature, which makes
it is Eruptions, like Aetna, and gives Cause of Regrate all the following
lifetime. Great Augustine, (who of a profligate youth became the Oracle of
Doctors) because of the extravagancie^ of his younger Age, is very full and
particular in his confessions. Youth is wise in it is own conceit, and so the
Greater Fool, he is a little Gay, with warm blood strength and health, so that
he is ready to think himself invincible; and being of uncertain Humor,
concludes himself without a change. But what is thy strength, O Young Man, to
the strength of a horse, Behemoth or Leviathan? A Lion or a beast of Prey may
soon devour thee, a Feverish disease may soon consume thee, and Death, thou so
little thinks upon, may turn thy White and Red Complexion into Black and Pale
Dust. The strength of the horse may fail, but such as trust in the LORD shall
renew their strength, Isa: 40 29. It is good then for Youth to pray for the
Influence of that CALL, that raised Lazarus from the Dead; For, if Grace
interveen not, There is a Law in the Members which rebels against the law of
the mind, which leads the Youth Captive to the power of sin and Death, Rom: 7.
23.

. 4. But I must descend to more minute Particulars concerning Youth; For, this
is, in many, a very unruly part of their Age, very confused in the Rational
Part; And man in this State is altogether lighter then Vanity; Who lives much
by Fancy and Imaginations, and is not so careful to ^ress the Soul, as to
attire the Body. Yet a Ro^e has a greater gloss and beauty than all his
artificial Decorement: O it is sad to be proud of that which hides his
nakedness, and discovers that he is fallen! Let this painted Spectacle appear
in view, he is like a Will^ Ass snuffing up the wind; Some are L^^ quacious,
others Tongue-tyed; Yet, what is wanting in words, is made upon Vaunts and vain
Glory; they look (...) high that they are like to fall in a Ditc^ Some act as
in a dream, and roave as in^ Fever with an unjoynted Judgement^ and a Scopeless
Life, their Tongues are th^^ own (says their way) who is LORD over them? They
think Religion either^ fancy or a Superstitious restraint of their lusts; And
say, Come let us break his Bond^ assunder: And do all they can, to ru^ on
Precepieces, and a fatal fall. Yet some (as has been before observed) are mo^^
tractable: To show that there is an Election, and that GOD has His Jewels amon^
a heap of Stones; Some are taught o^ GOD from their Youth, and are under^ His
Discipline and the Life of Grace^ spruting forth in little buds; Which makes
them serious at their Studies, Pio^^ in their Devotion, solid in their
Conversation, and, in stead of all the Gayet^^ from without; They cloth
themselves with Humility, Charity, and Holiness; and act by the Principles of
Wisdom and Discretion.

. 5. But alas! This Light shines but in few, for the most take pleasure to live
in darker Regions. Now this Particular consideration shall be, 1. To observe the
evils incident to this State of Man's Age. And 2ly. The Directions and Motives
for his Recovery.

. 6. As to the first, I condescend upon

First, The ignorance and prejudice of the Mind of Youth, against all Virtue;
And Inclinations to Vice, carried on with great Inconsideration. Secondly,
Pride and Vanity. Thirdly, Stoutness in sin, with an aptness to follow the ill
customs of the Generation. Fourthly, Idleness, and omissions of Duty and good
Exercise. Fifthly, A sleeping and unexercised Conscience.
. 7 First, The Philosopher as well as the Divine observes Praejudicia
Juventutis: Great prejudice against Virtue: And Experience may teach any Man,
that his imaginations have been evil from the beginning: And if there be any
thing of acquired Knowledge, which is learned in the School: Yet Speculation
without Grace and saving Knowledge is not warm light, and does not nourish the
tender Plants: For, tho the man were as learned as Plato or Aristotle, he is
but rude and dull as to that Knowledge which tends to Salvation: And the fums
that come from the forge of his lusts, darken the heart, and the head; and if
he has the Advantage of the Gospel Light, surely his Ignorance flows from
Supine Negligence or self Conceit and feast thou a man wise in his own Eyes;
there is more hope of a fool than of him GOD gives Grace to the humble, but
youth, for the most, is so swelled with self Conceit and vanity, that he will
n^^ bow himself to learn to wise to Salvation* But it is better for him to learn
of the Royal Psalmist, to ^eek the gift of right Understanding: And at the
wisest of King^ to dig and labor for Wisdom, as the Principal thing, as the
greatest accomplishment, either of Youth or Riper year^ And no Man that looks
to his Instinct, but finds it naturally tending to that which is Evil. Till the
Old Man be Mortified, sin lives and Reigns without control, especially, the
sin that agrees with our present frame; Concupisce not now rides in a hot
Career, sets up the Brute, and puts down the Man: It Corrupts the affections,
and blasts the Plants of Zion with corrupt Breath; It makes the Man Degenerate,
and by giving place to carnal, quenches the Flams of Seraphick and Divine
Love: It makes the Man a brute Who might by Grace be made an Angel. Awake then
out of sleep: For if thou live after the flesh, thou shall die, Rom, 8. 15.

. 8. 2ly. As to Pride and Vanity, much incident to youth, Because he knows not
well where he is, and has such complasancy in his present Circumstances, as
not to consider what mav fall out to a mortal Man; Pride and vanity may soon be
laid with Herod's; And a little time of a Disease, may Make him more feeble
then an Infant: Solomon saw much of this vanity, and saw no cure for it, but by
Religion, and the consideration of our account at Judgment; Pride is devilish,
it turned Lucifer to a Devil; And the higher any towers up the more subject is
he to a vertiginous fall, His (...) as well as his Brains prove Air, but GOD
hates the proud; and Agur prays LORD Remove from me vanity and lies. Prove. 38.
8. Let no man then Glory in Strength, Wisdom, Riches, or Beauty; but let him
that Glories Glory in the LORD. Jer. 9: 23. 24. This vanity makes a man
walkin^ vain show, and act the worst part of the Scene, to play the Fool.

. 9. 3ly. Stoutness in sin, etc. Hear^^ ye stout hearted, says the Prophet,
you must stoup e're GOD look upon you. This is a Natural and contracted hardne^
of heart, that alienates Man from the Life^ GOD, Ephesians: 4 18. His blindness make^
him bold; Yet he has not only an Angel; with Balaam, but the Great GOD for his
Enemy; Consider this thou that forgets GOD, least he tear thee in pieces wh^
there is none to deliver, Psalm: 50: 22. A^^ make your stout heart turn into a
fech^^ Mind, for who can stand against GOD when He is angry? Yet alas! how
lice^tious is this state of Age? And do speak (...) as their tongue were indeed
their own, b^^ GOD will break this fool-hardiness and ma^^ thee either
contreet, or crush thee: Never then be stout in sin, except thou think (...)
master thine Enemy, If thou Kick aga^^ the pricks, CHRIST can cast thee do^^
and turn a stout hearted Saul, into a humble Paul, to cry out LORD What wilt
Th^^ have me to do, Acts 9. 6.

10. 4ly. Idleness and emissions of Duty, (...) Youth's very prone thereunto,
to for^^ GOD (when he should remember his Creator) as he dwelr in a Land of
Forgetfulness; Wherein he passes much of his time ere he consider the great
use thereof; He lets the Night come on him, Wherein no man can work Joh. 9. 4.
And may drop into the Grave, Where no bussiness is. Eccles: 9. 10. His Life is
but a Digression, if he work not while it is called the day, and work not for
Eternity: Our Life is but a Minute and for a Day; O that thou knew in this thy
Day, the things that belongs to thy Peace.

. 11. 5lv, A sleeping and unexercised Conscience, This is a great Disease in
Youth, which occasioneth bad conduct, Youth is subject to Inconsideration,
lays not things to heart as he should do, his Conscience lies under a heap
of humors; And so is void of Action, and neither informed or Employed: He
looks not to the Rule, nor reflects upon his way; whereas he should first
consult the Word, and thereby awaken and inform his Conscience to have his
bosom Monitor, Vigilant; And the Witness within him honest; And judge
impartially, according to the Rule: Man cannot want Conscience, because there
is a GOD; But Conscience may sleep, be bride^ deadned, and to Government,
useless and unactive, (as Tertullian long ago has observed) because it is not
a God, noscc teipsum know thy self: The Heathens Lesson is very fit for a
Christian. The benefit of S^ Acquaintance, tends much to right Discretion and
the Government of our Life^ Which makes many invert that of S^ Paul, I know
nothing by my self, for want of reflection, they can curse, swear^ lie, and
work abomination, and their^ heart never smites them: So they are lef^ to
themselves, and put under the sadd^^ plague, of getting success in sin. Better
(...) have the Way hedged with Thorns, lea^^ thou run to ruin, and labor so
to guid^ thy self that thy Heart condemn thee not, and to exercise thy self
with St. Paul, to have (...) Conscience void of Offense toward GOD and Man.

. 12. Many other things may be aded, as rashness, (...), and following vain
customs; (...) into a calling and course of life (...) with no Deliberation,
but merely from fondness and folly; drive like Jehn, in the pursuit of their
carnal love, and enter into a married sta^e so rashly and indiscreetly, that
thev may have leisure eneugh after, to regrate* and so youth runs himself into
inextricable difficulties: But quod faciendum semel deliberandum diu. And he
should engage in this warefare with good advice: but of the most of these, I
may have occasion to speak to, after this.

. 13. And so I come to the second thing, to wit, The directions and motives for
his recoverie, and the ordering this state of Age.

1. As long as Man climbs to the top of the Wheel, and Ascends to the hight of
his Temporary Horizon, he should take leisure to look back on his bygone life,
and view well that he act contrary Good to these evils forementioned, that he
be Considerate, Knowing, tender*hearted, busy in good Exercise, rhat his
Conscience be awaked, and himself humble, even clothed with humility which
lays a good foundation for the Reception of Grace in his after Age, that he
learn to change Vain thoughts^ into Deliberation; and Passions to rule them by
a quiet Mind, peaceable by patience and Moderation, and the sooner he listens
to the Call of GOD, it will be easier for him, that with great Aug: he be
alarmed with that of the Apostle Rom 13. 11. It is (...) time to awake out of
sleep: Memory may decay in old Age. But Youth must remember, hear Children the
instruction of Wisdom Prove 6. 7. And since some a^^ snatched away in their
younger yea^ some sin away, and some play away their time; Youth should not
think i^ too soon to be serious, since posibly h^ may not live till he think it
time to b^ serious.

. 14. It is Good for youth that is ready to stare upon rarities, to take Wisdom
from the example of such as miscarry least he himself become an Example; and
all sad accidents to others, should make us listen to that of Solomon: Follow
the way of good men: Better to be A monument of mercy than of wrath. He must
impartially correct^ the errors of his bygon life, and not be sparing in his
own case to cry out, with Judah against the Harlot, and yet be the man himself
that is defiled, Genesis 38. 24. He must consider how he has carried in all
relations, what sentiments he had of Religion, what was his Temptation,
inclination, humor and fancy: what was his gift, and what little good he
has done: And if he Consider well, he may acknowledge that he has not obeyed
the voice of his Teachers, and that his Religion has but Come by fi^s, and
that Possibly, he has harbored, and does harbor some predominant sin; and if
he were serious he would find out the Dalilah that has possessed his heart,
and know where the strength of his sin lies, and pray, with the Psalmist, LORD
who knows his errors? Psalm. 19. 12.

. 15 It is high time then to smite thy thigh, and knock thy breast, and to be
humble for thy bygon errors; which thou may know to be a sincere repentance for
them that if thou were placed in the former circumstances, thou would not
react these follies; And that thou do not relish them with wonted affection:
And since they have not ruined thee, show thy zeal and revenge against these
thy former Idols; keep no reserve, least thy Religion be Partial and
Unpleasant; look back with grief, and redeem it with Duty, sell not thy time
for naught, be no more beguild with toys, look back with Repentance, and
before thee with Prudence.

. 19. It is more then time, also to consider thy Baptismal Engagement. Whereby
thou art sworn to GOD, gets his mark and his Cognizance of Christianity; Thou
must renunce sin and Satan GOD can make thy Baptism Effectual but it is by
Faith, Repentance and Obedience, that it works in the Adult; Tho^ must give the
Answer of a good Conscienc^ 1 Pet. 3. 21. to thy Baptism as St. Peter speak^
thou must wash in the Laver of Regeneration, till it produce the new Creature.
An^ draw Virtue, as a living Member from thy Blessed Head.

16. Who is now wise to consider these things? look how the LORD trains thee in
his Providence from Childhood to Youth, GOD may bring thee hom^ with the voice
of the Rod: look the^ what Influence Providence has upon thy Younger heart, if
it be humbled and (...) to receive the Blessings of Religion.

. 17. And yet; more particularly to direct this ingoverned Age, that needs
solidity to keep it from Reeling, (...) the Scripture teaches thee, 1, to
remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth; It is a part and a great part
that lays the foundation of practical principles, Memento (...) vere and
memento Mori: both to remember how to live and how to die. And 2ly. the
Scripture bids thee flee youthful lusts, 2 Timothy: 2, 2, 1 What these lusts are
thou reads not there, but certainly youth has its (...) (...). proper lusts,
the vice of their age, of their nature, person and Nation. Yet if thou look to
the contrary Virtues which the Apostle there commends, as Righteousness, Grace,
Faith, Love etc. Thou shall find, Injustice, Ambition, Animosity, Carnality,
Vnruliness, Facileness, Broils, Tumults, Contests, and Duels that produces
dearfull deaths, all which are against Charity which the Apostle there
commends, bnt thou must follow after Faith, Love, and Peace.

Secondly, Shun idleness and evil Company, beware of the Tavern and Stew, If
sinners entice thee, consent thou not, It is a Token that GOD has called thee,
If thou choice a Right Calling; It is time for thee now to think how to live:
Every minute of our short day has its Work; Consider then well what Work thou,
puts thy Hand to and what Calling, by the Advice of these that are Wiser than
thy self, may through GOD's Blessiing serve thee in this World, and not Impede
thy general Calling as a Christian; Let thy Calling not be insnaring but
approved, propone not so much Gain as Contentedness: And (as I hinted before)
Oeteris paribus, the Holy Calling, of serving under Christ, our great Apostle,
and high Priest, is very desirable; For (...) makes Heaven and the Golden Way
that tends to it, the greatest Study and (...) o^ the Candidate; It gives him a
Prospec^ to view the Embellished Toys of a vain World, and occasion to
Contempl^^ GOD, and see Things invisible: It make^ the Man, if he answer his
Character, (...) Man of GOD, a guide to the Blind^ Strength to the Weak, and,
according to his measure, a Savior; For in so doing, he shall save his own
Soul and them that hears him: And if through the badness of the Soil, he do not
always succeed In his Ministry; Yet tho Israel be not gathered, his Reward is
with his GOD. It Is true, the prejudiced and ignorant World may have other
Sentiments, but it knows not the Use, End and Rewards of this Rank of Men: But
taking pleasure in their own way, they may Ra^e it according to the Relish of
their corrupted pallat; And this should not discourage any Engaging or engaged
in it; since our Blessed LORD was so raited; that the Prophet says, When we
see him, there is no beauty in him, that we should desire him. 4ly. Beware of
passion, that it predomine not, either in the Irascible or Concupiscible
Appetite: Be not too intent upon trifles; but learn to be solid in thy florid
Age, shun rashness and feed not upon wind; Particulary, guarde against Carnal
Love, which has been the great bane of many: Wise Solomon was entangled with
it, tho in the first 7: Chap: of the Prove: he gives sound counsel against this
Delirium and Vanity: If in due time with good advice, thou affect a suitable
Mate carry as the Cherubs, with the Propitiatory in the midst, and like the Sun
and Moon who never meet, but by the disposition of nature and issues such
influences as refresh the earth. 5ly. It is good to season and sweeten thy
Humor betimes with Religion, thy Ghostly Enemy has an evil eye upon thy
Genius, and and if he can prostrate thee to a carnal fancy, he gains his
point; for if passion and fancy predomine, the better part is put low: But I
write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome, (or should overcome) the
wicked one, 1 John 2. 13. And to soil Satan at first, is our great advantage;
Thy thoughts are but indigested till thy heart be established with Grace.
Consider thy Talents and gifts, and the rise of the morning of thy life, that
thou may manure them; and found well that in thy after life thy building totter
not; look back what you have been; you ly a while in the womb, sleeping in a
dark Cell, on the Breasts, the dug was your care, while at School, the ferula
was your fear and the play your pleasure, thc School was to thee a Prison, and
the play house (...) palace, begin therefore well with God, for a careless mind
now, may make thee stupid all thy days. If thou labor to hide thy sins and
thinks to Repent after, thou beguiles thy self, because thou cannot promise to
thy self a day after; and tho that day should come thou art not sure that GOD
will give thee Grace: principle well and act accordingly. guard against the
vice of the time, and of your age and person, be constant and sincere in duty;
and never undertake any business of consequence, without advice: Moderate your
Recreations, and neglect not the Vnum necessarium, the one thing needful.

. 19. And for motives to press this timeous duty of youth; consider. 1. That
Early fruit is a seasonable sacrifice to GOD; It is a good thing to begin with
GOD, and the sooner thou begins, the Work is the more easy, but if sin take
rooting, it is not so soon eradicated; And makes the Sinner, like the
Ethiopian, that can not change his hew: But timous beginning in Grace breeds a
great deal of Facility to serve GOD, and makes Christ's yoke easy: Grace gives
thee a comely Feature, and Joseph thereby was better adorned than his Coat made
him; It makes thee Splendid and Honorable, it breeds a satisfying and solid
Joy to the Soul, it sweetneth all the accrbities and tediousness of Discipline
and other Encumbrances; And tho Youthful lusts may make it at first a little
difficult, yet if thou flee them, and mortify them, and follow after Godliness;
The difficulty will over, and Religion will become thy delight. 2ly* Remember
thy Creator, and consider the examples of Youth that have done so; St. John
writes to Young Men, as well as to Fathers, and Timothy knew the Scriptures
from his Youth; Youth must consider that, tho he bloom and blossom, yet a
little blast may much wrinkle and wither him, as the Flower begins to hing its
head, and loss much of its beauty and smell, till it fall amongst the portion
of weeds: But* early Piety is a savoury sacrifice to GOD, to bring to him thy
first Fruits. To be sanctified from the Womb is extraordinary, and in the Womb
singular, and to be sanctified in Youth, is rare: Ye^ many Young Men and
Virgins gave u^ their lives for Christ; and will thou no^ sacrifice thy sins
for him? O but a ne^ Heart is pleasant in a Young Breast! A^^ a new sprung Rose
sends forth a fragran^^ smell: And in thy Youth thou have th^^ Advantage of
warmer affections; Car^^ and Encumbrances cease upon year^^ but Youth is free
to care for the things of (...) LORD; The Young Disciple had war^^est
affections, and, if thy love be fix^^ for the right Object, it may be a war^^
Season to produce Fruit. Suffer not (...) therefore to prepossess thine heart,
whi^^ may trouble thee all thy days, and mak^^ thee possess the sins of thy
Youth to th^^ sorrow; And with the Psalmist, have reason to pray, Remember not
the errors of my Youth, Psalm: 25. 7.

. 20. And, For the further advancement of the Piety of Youth; Let the rising
Generation consider. 1. The Glory and Dignity of Adoption. 2ly. The Luster and
Fragrancy of Grace. 3ly. The Guidance of the Spirit. 4ly. The Guardianship of
Angels. 5ly. Their Inheritance. (...). Then, the Glory and Dignity of Adoption;
It Is no small matter for to be the Children of GOD, I Will make him my first born
higher than the Kings of the Earth. CHRIST became the Son of Man, that thou
might become the Son of GOD: He was humbled, that rhou might be Exalted,
and except thou Receive him, thou have no tittle to Adoption. Joh. 1. 12. Close
with Christ, and then thou may lift thy heart and head as high as Heaven, and
Glory in thy high descent, tho thou dwell in a house of Clay: be then of a
noble Spirit with Caleb. 2ly. The luster of Grace, which makes thy face to
shine with Moses, and makes thee altogether Lovely; O what excelency, and
virtue is in the new heart! How Beauteous are it is Rays upupon the life! Man
thereby becomes like himself, and Masters all brutal Passions; Grace is a Ray
of GOD, it is all in light, life and love; If it could be seen, it would be
fairer than the Sun. It puts such a principle in thee, that tho sin may infest,
yet it shall not prevail because the Seed of GOD Remains in thee, and makes the
Righteous man more excellent than his Neighbor. Prove. 12 26. 3ly. The guidance
of the Spirit; which is not only the Character, But the Privilege of the
Children of GOD: The wayfairing man has an unerring guide, and tho thou should
not lean to a Phanatick and Enthusiastic Spirit, yet in the use of the means,
thou must Rely upon the gracious conduct of GOD's Spirit; For, If thou be led
by the Spirit, thou art the Son of GOD. Romans 8 14. 4ly. The Guardianship of
Angels. The elder Children guard the younger: If thou walk in GOD's way, they
get charge over thee. Psalm. 91. 11. They rejoice at thy conversion, delight in
thy duty* and keep thee in all thy ways. 5ly. The inheritance, All is yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is GODS; 1 Cor. chap. 3 to the end. Heirs and
Coheirs with CHRIST, and have interest in that inheritance that is
incorruptible, with the Saints in light; which should make the World be little
in thine eye.

The Prayer.
O LORD, I am now in a dangerous Stage of my Life Ready to run Round in a
Circle of sin to my own Ruin! O ancient of Days, take me by the Heart and
hand in the morning of my life, to noon tide, anoint me with Fresh Oyland guide
me by Thy Word and Spirit for Man that understands not is like the beast that
perish: Creat in me a clean heart and let me do nothing unworthy of my Birth
and hopes, give me the faculty to open mine eyes to look up to Thee, and
deliver me from Unbelief and youthful follies; It has pleased Thee to call
some of the worst of Youth; give so much Grace as may illuminate and direct an
inconsiderat mind, water the little and tender plantation of my heart;
infl^ence me with such Heavenly motions, as may awaken me out of my first sleep
wherein I have alas, slumbered too too long, possess Thy own purchase, and let
not Satan or any lust get peaceable residence, where Thy holy fee^ have trod:
Give me to see the Rarities and Glories of the New World of Grace, make me a
miracle and a monument thereof, that I may rejoice that once I was darkness and
now am light in the LORD, restore me to a Right Mind cast out of it all dregs
of sin, and turn it from a den of thives to a Temple for Thee; give me Grace
not only to remember, but serve my Creator and with solid Judgment swear under
thy banner and Vow an inviolable fidelity to thee my LORD and Master, that I
may grow in Grace as in days, that in due time I may be perfected.

Amen.
STAGE second. From the 22 to the 30 Year of our Age.
The Contents.
After some Introduction, the settled life of (...) Christian in this Period, is
considered, particularly as to the Marriage and a lawfu^ Calling; with helps
and directions suteable^ and motives to excite him to duty in this Stag^ of his
life, with some practice of Devotion, especially to the Meaner sort, as to the
hallowing of their House and calling.

. 1. THe Race of Man's life Rolls on a wheel, and the Spoak that is ascendant,
Immediately goes down and declines; thou should therefore run that thou
may obtain, improve well the present, because bygone is past, and thou knows
not what is before thee: But this thou art sure of, that time passes as a
thought, and Eternity can-not be comprehended with thy thoughts; thon spends
thy time here in an Imaginary world: But eterni^^ is solid and cannot alter.

. 2. It will be fit then in this Stage, if thou have come to any solidity. 1.
to look back to thy former ways; 2ly. To consider what frame thou art now in,
as to thy present Circumstances: After which, it being now the ordinary time
that man begins to think upon a settled life: Consider to enter there-into
(especially a married state) with great deliberation, and be careful, that
thou manage and exercise thy particular Calling, by the Rules and measure of
Religion; with means to conduct, and lead you in the Right path, and with
Seasonable Motives to perswad thee into the duties of a foris-familiated Life,
and the Employ of thy Calling: All which are summed up with some serious
Reflection and suitable Devotion.

. 3. First, I thought upon my former ways says the Psalmist, Psalm, 119. 57.
Thou will not get that which is passed, again, nor the Res Gesta, the thing
done, undone: But by Repentance, so the Psalmist prays, Let not the errors of
my Youth be remembered. Look that thou leave not an error in the first Region,
least thy following Life be not so healthful: If thou leave any Intemperat Work
behind, it may turn to A root of Bitterness, Heb. 12. 15. Thou must found well,
and bring up your Work upon a right Base; For, alas some are unhappy for want
of Education a^^ Instruction; some abuse and neglect^^ and improve only as to
Gifts, but not^^ Grace; They learn a profession but (...) Christ: Let thy heart
therefore be ev^^ in the Covenant, thy Faith real, thy Repentance unfeigned,
and thy Engag^ments solid; And then thou may ha^^ some clearness and peace as
to Religio^^ and Virtue.

. 4. 2ly. Look to thy present Ten^^ and Temper; O if thou had known, e^^ thou
in this thy day; Said Christ, wi^^ weeping Eyes to Jerusalem, Luke 19 2^^ To
day if you will hear his Voice, Psalm. 81. (...) the end: It is now high time to
be wis^^ than before; Thou have Work enoug^^ ado both for Time and Eternity:
Bu^^ therefore an A^k to save thee, tho th^^ World mo^k thee, as it did Noah^^
Seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and oth^^ things will be added to thee.
Remembe^^ Hoc opus hoc age, is our Motto, There (...) much to be done, and much
to be undone in Order to Religion: Indulge not sin, Especially guard against a
course of sin: Forecast dangers and be as frugal in duty as possible, which
will help to fasten thee at the Root, which will not be soon shaken with
Temptation.

. 5. And with this premonition thou must act under GOD for thy self, and thou
had never more need of right Conduct than now: This being the ordinary time
that Man sets out to a settled Life, and under GOD, good Example, and the
Conduct of the Holy Word and Spitit, he does begin to think upon a relative and
a conjugal Life; And set up in the Exercise of his particular Calling: It will
be fitting that he be led by the Hand, as to both these, by sound and solid
Direction; And the influence of Motives to excite him to Duty.

. 6. As to the fifst, it will not be amiss to speak a little to these
particulars following. First, That thou lay a solid Foundation by Religion.
2ly. That thou enter into such a serious and lasting state of Life, with the
good Advice of GOD, and under him, of those of Experience. 3ly. That thou
propose the most pheasable means and good Ends for the Comfort and Contentment
of thy Life. 4ly. That thou fall upon the most clear and approved Methods to
attain these Ends. And Lastly, When engaged in this Relation of conjugal Life,
that thou carry well therein, and behave as a solid Christian in thy Family.
First, Except the LORD build the house, they labor in vain that bui^^ it,
Psalm: 127. 1. See that thou marry i^ the Lord, and that thou set him before
thee, that he may be at thy Right-hand^^ and keep thy Heart still in His Hand^
that thy choice may be dexterous an^ fortunate; learn to be a Christian an^
Espouse Christ ere thou be a Husband o^ a wife; for Religion is the bond, the
Ble^^ing, the beauty, and the thrift of thy Relation, and will have a greater
influence upon the peace, and prosperity (...) thy family, and the sweet
converse (...) the married twain Psalm. 128 2. And ma^^ them live together as
Heirs of the grace (...) Life. 1 Pet. 3. 7. 3ly. Thou should no^ enter
rashly unto this Covenant; Consider what thou does: Seek Counsel at Go^ and
good men, especially of thy Parent^^ Let not Pride, have, passion, and
indiscretion, engage thee to make such an adventure, and if the Council of GOD
and good men be wanting, thou may be fond this night, and faint to morrow;
and begin to repent when it is too late, and can propose no Remedy, but that
which is desperate. 3ly. Have a Right design before thee; Marry Rationally and
with discretion, consider the ends for which GOD has appointed Marriage: And
never think to accomplish them, except thou shape out fit means to obtain them;
bewar of Being unequally yoked. Let thy match be suitable, if thou would
have it profita^le: Consider how thou shall live in that Relation, that thou
may live well in It. Bewar of the Snare of Poverty, nor too greedily look after
gain; Keep the middle mean, and that is to propose an honest and unchargeable
way of living; Say with Ag: Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, but what is
convenient for me. Be not too confident, in that thou art, Perhaps, young and
strong to provide for thy self: For thy youth may soon fade, and thy strength
decay; a laudable seeking after a creditable way of living is rhy duty that
thou have some talent and stock; to use well, which may, by the Blessing of
GOD, be improved, and thy Family provided. 4ly. That thou fall upon most clear
and approved methods to attain these ends; Besides what is already hinted, thou
art to engage in this settled state with consent of Parents, if they be living,
for if thou ought to honor or obey thy Parents, as GOD's Word directs. Ephesians.
6. 1. Then thou (...) not be but culpable: If in this thou co^^ contrary to
their will: And if the Sc^^ture gives it as a note of Profane E^^ that by his
Marriage, he was a grie^^ heart to Isaac and Rebekah: Whe^^ Jacob followed his
Fathers Cou^^ thou shall find it most agreeable to foll^^ Jacobs Rod, and if
thy parents should (...) too tyranical and self willed in this, (...) imped
thee for their own ends, or as (...) Apostle to the Hebrews, says in the
(...) of Chastisement, for their own pleasu^^ yet should thou be very
submiss: B^^ they be unreasonably wilful, thou ha^^ fuge in the Church, which
has po^^ to call Parents to an account of their t^^ciousness: But this point
is so fully h^^led by Divines, and determined by (...) Church, that I shall not
enlarge this trea^^ upon it; Only I would commend this ^^siness to be orderly
done, with all th^^ necessarly previous to its consummat^^ and with suitable
solemnities in the (...) of GODs Chnrch, and not after some ^^sual Caruse, nor
done like a thing (...) dares not hold up its face; but does (...) and sneak in
corners, as the persons eng^^ing were ashamed that it shonld be kno^^ (...) the
World; whereas they must give an ^^count of it before GOD, Angels and Men. And
make that suspected to the peo^^e which they should approve themselves (...) to
their own Consciences, and to the re^ular Church; The Blessing whereof is not
(...) be despised by any private Man. 5ly. ^o carry Christianly in this
Relation, that Man or Wife make conscience of ^^eir mutual duties; and the main
thing that concerns the Husband is Religious and Conjugal Love to his Wife,
which the Apostle so fully presses. Ephesians. 5. Gives the Man an excellent Pattern
of the free, sin^ere, full and constant Love of CHRIST to ^he Church: And the
great Specific of ^he Wifes duty is Reverence and Obedi^nce to her Husband as
the head: For this Rational and Religious Love of the Husband, Will last, when
the heats of passion shall expire and evanish; And that Reverence and Obedience
of the Wife to the Husband, as it will Indear his Heart to her more and more,
so shall it make her to be taken among the number of the Godly Women,
especially Sarah, 1 Peter, 3 6. Who reverenced her hnsband, and Called him
LORD. So that these things being observed, they may be freer for a good
Understand^^ among themselves, to govern their Fa^^ly with Discretion, and
their Affairs (...) Frugality and Virtue. 2ly. As to y^^ entrance into the
Exercise of your P^^cular Calling, be well advised that it q^^drate with thy
General Calling, as a Chri^^an; Be as virtuous as thou may, but (...) not thy
Bussiness hinder thee from worki^^ out the Work of thy own Salva^ion: ^^gin and
end the Day with GOD, a^^ seek first the Kingdom of GOD a^^ His Righteousness,
Mat. 6. 20. And ne^^ say that thou have not time, For, if th^^ improve thy time
with Frugality, th^^ will never want leisure to seek and se^^ GOD: It is to be
feared thou wants Wi^^ and there lies the root of the evil. Th^^ would also
take care to Employ thy se^^ well in an approved Calling: Beware (...) the
snares thereof, keep a good Conscience, let the Word of GOD, and no^^ Interest
rule thy Conscience; Be hone^^ in thy Calling, beware of fraud an^^ sneaking
ways, and work not in th^^ Calling to be called a Cheat; Take right^^ Measure,
true Balance, and the same Weights; otherwise thy Tricks are an Abomination
to the LORD. Consult the most approved Proportions for thy gain: and if thou be
engaged in the laborious Work of the Husbandman, let Grace ^uide thy
Georgicks; And consider that in (...) beginning, such a Calling paid Fruits ^o
GOD, Gen: 4. 3. He makes the ground ^^st up to thee, and brutish Animals ^eed
thee, Cloth thee and serve thee: The LORD brings food out of the Earth, Psalm:
104. 14. And makes the senseless Clod and Tur^ produce Corn and Grain; And all
thy Labor without His Blessing will not profit thee; Thou can therefore have
no excuse to neglect Religion in thy most busy Employment. It will be good
also that thou be a keeper at home, and be not like a Bird that wanders from
his Nest. Let no sinful diversion, (especially the Tavern) take thee away from
thy Trade: And (if thou enclines to Religion) follow not the guise of the
Times, be not carried about with every wind of Doctrine: Rather follow the
Faith of the Orderly Church, For, it is very dangerous, for love to a Sect, to
cut the Church, and break the Staves of Beauty: For, as long as thou reels
with this giddy humor, thou can not well fix in a solid course of Religion.
And Lastly, Beware of Discord and Division, in thy family; For, (...) consumes
the Substance thereof, mak^^ many careless and desperate, is an En^^my to all
th^i^t; For, A house divi^^ cannot stand.

. 7. And for the management, b^^ of thy conjugal Relation, and calling^^ must
here in the beginning of thy sett^^ment, Recommend unto thee, dom^^tick
devotion and ^amily worship; a du^^ that none of the seed of Jacob should
^^cline, it being their Fathers practice, wh^^ house was a Bethel to GOD, a
little Te^^ple for the LORD of Glory; who h^^ this duty brought down to him
from (...) famous Grandfather, Faithful Abrah^^ who is commended for the
Religious G^^vernment of his Family, whose steps (...) sau treased a man much
of Contemp^^tion at home: And tho Jacob h^^ Greater encumbrance, and a more
nu^^erous family; Yet his house, as well (...) person, was consecrated to GOD.
a^^ not only the Jews, but also Christia^^ should follow the Steps of these
Vener^^ Patriarchs to be lively portractures of th^^ virtues, as Images of
their nature. A^^ this duty is so proper to the family, th^^ before the Church
was enlarged, (...) Master or Father of the House was ^^iest, and did officiate
in the daily S^^^ifice at home: And when the Church (...) made more ample, it
is constitute of ^amilies, which, if Heterogenius to the ^ody, they are but
useless and corrupt ^embers: Whereas the Families of the Faithful are blessed
of GOD: And His ^rath power'd out upon such families as all not upon His Name,
Jer: 10. 25. Joshua, that great Cap^ain of the LORDS ^ost; did not suffer his
military Affairs (...) hinder him, and his House to serve GOD, tho all Israel
should neglect it; David after him, in the midst of a Bloom^^g State, under the
burden of a Crown and Country: Yet walked Righteously in his House; And every
Tribe and Family is called to pray and mourn a part, Zech: 12. 13. And the
Gospel has set up this Duty clearly, Christ has promised to be among the
midst of two or three conveened in his Name; And we read of the Church being in
particular Houses, and the Centurion feared GOD with all his House, Acts 10 2.
And Christ has made (...) a Royal Priesthood, and a Holy Generation. And this
does rather prepare for, than invade, a settled order of a Priesthood; Private
and Public duty does not interfere and Clash; Thou must not only pray for thy
Family, but pray in thy Family. Is the LORD the GOD of all the Familys of the
Earth, and not of thine? Shall thou wish GOD a Catholic service, and cut of
thy Family by schism This were to join thy House to another GOD, or else to
have none at all. Let all Houses then that Smoke, Smoke with Sacrifices to GOD,
for the House of the Godly is under a special Protection, his Eyes are open to
their Prayers; GOD is a Shadow and Covert over the Roof of such Families: It Is
good To declare his Faithfulness every night, and his Loving Kindness every
morning, Psalm: 92. 2. Let the People praise Thee, O LORD let all the People
praise Thee. And Lastly, This Duty of Family Devotion may be called Ezekiels
Sign and Mark, that saves from the destroying Angel, and if any trouble fall
out, GOD knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations. This Family
worship, is the great Characteristick of a Christian, it makes thy House thy
Home, and gives thee Repose in thy Perigrination, it makes thy house a Dutyful
Tenement to the Great Landlord, it pays due Rent to GOD, it is the Bond and
Beauty of thy House, and makes thy Family, like Jerusalem, compact together.

. 8. Let every Christian then Regard Domestic duty, which is so necessary and
useful to guide the family, and to consecrate and cover thy house, which if
thou Rule well with discretion and good Government, thou shall find some
leisure, if it were but as long as to take thy Brakefast, thou may conveen thy
family, and join together and seek GOD, it would never hinder thy business, but
rather advance it; if thou pretend thy ignorance, it is much to be imputed to
thy own fault, and the neglect of thy Soul: And if you say it is not, the
custom of many of your Rank: Alas! You are ready to follow an evil custom, but
to imitate what is good you have neither heart nor hand: yet I am loath to
leave thee in such neglect, and therefore for meaner Capacities, I shall
subjoyn the Practice of Domestic Devotion, and family Worship.

The Morning Prayer.
O Eternal and ever blessed GOD, our blessed Creator, Preserver, and Redeemer,
the fountain of Life, and the Father of Lights, the Keeper of Israel, who never
sleeps nor slumbers, this poor family falls down before Thee this Morning, and
with all humble Devotion praises thy exalted Name, for all thy mercies to
Mankind and to us, and that Thou has protected and refreshed us the night
bygon, and raise^ us up this morning in any health and hope, Glory to Thee, who
have given us time to rcpent, LORD give us Grace to repcnt, and to work o^ the
work of our own Salvation: LORD heal o^^ corrupt nature, sweeten our humor,
and seas^^ our heart with Grace, slay our corruptions an^ give our heart a
right set with Thy healing ha^^ perfect our Faith, and guide us by Thy Spirit:
Uphold us with Thy Arm; Refine and ^^our hearts and passions, set a Watch at
the d^^ of our lips be at our right hand and we shall nev^^ be moved, give us to
set Thee always before (...) and while its called the day that we harden (...)
our hearts, but hear thy Word and Voice, th^^ we may spend the rest of our
days in Thy (...) and sincere Obedi^nce, save us from sin and Satan, the
deceits of the World, and all danger^ of Soul and Body: LORD bless our Fami^^
with Grace, Peace, Comfort and Contentmen^^ Heal the Church, rule the public
Governme^^ of Chureh and State: Bless the Parish with^^ Gospel Blessing,
strengthen our Pastor, prepa^^ us for Death and Judgment, guide us all our
days by Thy Council, in Thy fear, grant us a blessed and happy End, and
hereafter receive us unto Thy Glory, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD, in whose
Name and Words (...) pray; Our Father. etc.

And in the evening again, labor to Recollect your selves, and ere you give
slumber to your eye lids, seek out a habitation for the mighty GOD of Jacob,
that he may dwell in your heart and house. And Pray after this manner.

The Evening Prayer.
O Most Gracious GOD, and Father of mercies, we thy unworthy servants, come
this Night before the Throne of thy Grace to present our Evening oblation,
through the perfect sacrifice of thy Son our Savior, once offered, and still
effectual through his containued Intercession, in presenting that meritorious
blood on our behalf: We adore thee Our Good and Gracious GOD, and gives Glory
to thy name confessing our sinfulness, Original and actual, and our escapes in
thought, word and deed. We have sinned: Alace! we have sinned against thy
mercies, and the warnings of thy word and Rod; In the sight of an all-seeing
GOD: LORD give us Repentance and Remission, and from henceforth guide us in the
paths of Righteousness for thy Name sake. LORD watch over us this night, that
we may be Refreshed under the Cloud of thy covert, and have matter of rejoicing
in thee, in the morning: prepare us for all duty, and all trials, and our last
trial: Be with us to the end, and in the end of our life, and hereafter receive
us into thy Glory. Lord let thy Kingdom come, have mercy on the World, heal
the Christian Church, and in this Nation; power out a spirit of Grace, truth,
peace and charity upon it, be with all our friends, and all that fear thee,
give us Charity to give and forgive as thou requires: We commit our selves and
all ours, to thy keeping through Jesus Christ our LORD. The grace of our LORD
JESUS, The love of GOD the Father, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with
us for now and ever. Amen.

. 9. If thou can read, or if there be some few to sing a Psalm, GOD's Word and
Praise may help to Hallow your House, if not, fail not to make use of these
Prayers till thou get better, and be more dex^^rous in Devotion: and wait on
GOD in the way of Duty; Shun Idleness and Sin, and wandering from your house,
which will obstruct this work, and consider that it is good to begin well, and
to bring forth fruit in this Season: Use makes perfection, and ye can not
breath a free Air till you dwell in the Wholesome Regions of Religion. Make
progress under the Gale of the Spirit; Stir up the faculties of reason to be
holy and happy in the flower of your age, and you shall find that Dimidium
facti qui been cepit, habet: that a Good beginning is a great progress, for
true Wisdom hews her Pillars and builds her house. Prove. 9. 1.

The Prayer.
O LORD, through thy providence, I am now come to some consi^^ence of age, I
thank thee for the happy opportunities I have Enjoyed of the light of thy word,
teaching me to be wise, sober, solid, Just and honest: And had I improved well,
I had been an expert soldier of CHRIST; Pardon my F^^lours wherein I have been
shaken by temptation; I desire now to stand under the Guard of the whole Armor
of GOD. LORD thou has led me by thy invisible hand through a labyrinth of
Childhood and Indigested youth. It is a mercy I have not spleeted upon Rocks,
and ruined; but by Grace I stand. LORD unite my heart to fear (...) Name, I
know that difficulties attend me, (...) the credit of my course, the assistance
of my C^^tain, the honor of my engagement; and (...) comfort of my Reward, do
animat me, (...) to faint; for in due time I shall Reap, thro^^ JESUS CHRIST.

Amen.
STAGE Third. Which commenceth from the 30 to the (...) year of our age, or
there about: which being a very material part of our Life, I shall, for
clearness sake, consider in three courses.
1. Of the Ordering thy person, Famil^^ and walking in the paths of Vert^^ and
Religion.

2. A Discourse to several Ranks of peopl^^ with all seriousness and modesty.

3. What fine your labor in Virtue, Piety, Good Government of your lif^^ and
family, and the progress of your Religion, the ordering of your House, and the
setting forth of your Children^ to Laudable and Lawful callings and
settlement, has come to?

COURSE first.
The Contents.
Of the Right methods of Religion and Virtue, for the Ordering of our person,
our Families, And General and particular calling, in this long and serious
course of our life, with means and motives for the furthering of these ends;
and suitable Devotion.

1. HAving led thee hitherto, to some digested and settled Course of Life; and
helped thee by the Light and guidance of Religion, out of the darker cells of
Minority, to clearer Air: And from the beginning of thy Majority (a very
difficult scene of thy Life) to the consistence of thirty Years of thy Age,
wherein, if ever thou look to be Virtuous, thou will make some ground of Hope
bud f^rth: This is a time wherein thou must either appear to be a man and a
Christian; Or a Mushrome and a Grape of unsavory fruit; ^ook, first then, to
thy bygone way, if thy work be begun and carried on hitherto, or yet any solid
Work of Grace, very imperfect and scarce well founded: For, experience, an^^
perhaps thine own senses, if exercise^^ will make thee feel thy pronness to
(...) off, and delay: Make ^ound work therefore, and follow the straight Line
of Religion and Morality. Redeem misspe^^ time, cleave to the LORD with full
purpose of Heart, and because thy Heart (...) inconstant, say with the
Psalmist, Un^^ my Heart O LORD to fear Thy Nam^^ Psalm: 36. 12 Serve thy
Generation; an^ carry worthily in it. 2ly. After this Reflection, see what form
thou now are it^ If thy Heart be Right and steadfast in the Covenant, if thou be
free of visible Blemishes, Deuteronomy: 32. 5. Which are no^ the spots of GODS
Children: If thy lif^ and family begin to blink with an^ luster, If thou be
thriving in Virtue an^ piety, if thou carry Creditably, and be reputed to have
an Honest and Religio^^ family, and Grace and Peace beautify the same 3ly. If
thou grow in Grace? For, Grace being a principle of new life, i^ may ly hid in
the Root for some Seasons, as a Plant or a Tree in Winter, after which verdent
greenness does appear: So is it with Grace, it may lurk in the Heart, and then
come forth with greater Life and Fruit: And this will distinguish betwixt a
Real and Counterfit Christian, his Light, Life and Fruit, will declare that the
Seed of GOD remains in him; And this you may perceive by the decay of sin, and
the greater vigor of Virtue in thee; And it is with thee as it was with the
House of Saul and David; The House of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, The House
of David Stronger and Stronger; Thou must be as Joseph, a fruitful Bough, both
in thy General and Paricular Calling; Water thy Garden every Morning, for the
refreshing of thy tender Plants, Learn the Art of Mortification; For, If ye
live after the flesh ye shall die: But if through the Spirit, ye mortify the
deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Rom: 8. 13. And if thou seek a proof of this
Growth; thy strength the show of thy Countenance, thy Diligence and a constant
use of the Means will discover it. It will also serve much to thy good
carriage, to suit the dispensation of the Wise Providence of GOD: For every
Dispensation has a Voice, and the Rod is teaching; and no affliction springs
out of the Dust: Carry even in prosperity, and steadfast in Adversity, let
Humility guide the first, and Patience the second. Know with St. Paul, how to
(...) exalted, and how to be abased, bewa^^ of tumor and leanness, behold the
em^^tiness of the Creature, and the Satisfaction of Grace, follow thy Savior
as we^^ to Calvary a^ to Mount Tabor, and keep closs with Him in searching
Winter, (...) well as in pleasant Summer. 4ly. L^^ well that thou have not a
name only of Religio^^ but that thou be fixed well in a Course of Pie^^ For,
Inconstancy is not only Un-christian^ but Unmanly: Yet, it is feigned by some^
that it being banished from Heaven sought a place of Residence in some lower
Regions, and could not find any, No^ not in the very mutable Planet of the
Moon* because it orderly keeps its Cour^^ of Chang and Height: Then it seeks
(...) place in the Earth, but can find none, for the Seasons have their
Periods, and the very Beasts have their appointed times: But at length it
invades the Heart of Man: So some change their GOD, change their Religion,
change their Calling, and become, in short time, so unlike themselves that thou
may think they had come from another Soil, and transfused into themselves the
nature of a Camelion, to change with every Color. But it is very unsuitable to
Religion, and below Humane Nature, to be a Weathercock: It is for want of
Ballast and good Government, that Shipwreck is made either of Faith or good
Conscience. But learn, O Man, to be solid in thy Generation, and say with the
Psalmist, My Heart is fixed, my Heart is fixed, Psalm, 108. 1. Be constant in
the Exercise of thy general and particular Calling, manure thy Talent, least
thou spleet upon the snares of Poverty, which the Prophet Agur deprecateth,
Prove: 30. 8.

. 2. This being a very pregnant Stage of thy Life, thou shall therefore make
use of all approved Means and Motives, to manage it well; And as to the Means,
they may be Reduced to these heads following. First, Wisdom. 2ly, Prudence.
3ly, Providence. 4ly, Government. 5ly, Improvement.

First, WISDOM.
3. This will prove an Excellent Mean, to guide our Heart and Life; It is the
Mistress of our Mind, and the Eye of our Life. Wisdom is the principal thing,
therefore, with all Getting* get Wisdom: Dig for it as for a Treasure, it will
Illuminate and Enrich thy Life, i^ has right Taste of Things. Sapientia a
sapore^ is the great gust of our Reason and ^^ligion, it makes a Man take right
m^^sures, and cast right Account, and nu^^ber well; Whereof Solomon gives a h^^
in taking his measures of Men and W^^men, Ecc: 7. to the end. If thou we^^ so
wise as to reckon every day, it wou^^ give great Light to thy Life, It is (...)
Gift of GOD, to be sought of Him, (...) the chief Blessing, as Solomon did; And
(...) thou listen to His Counsel, it is the ^^ginning of Wisdom to fear GOD,
and (...) depart from iniquity, Job. 28. to the (...) It makes thee walk
accurately and (...) lowsly as a fool, it makes thee wise (...) Salvation, it
gives thee a s^ore of Oyl^^ thy Lamps with the wise Virgins; (...) makes thee
simple to do evll, and (...) to do Good, it is the straight Line of (...) Life,
and the excellent guide of thy (...) Who then is a wise Man? let him sh^^ it
forth in a good Conversation, wi^^ Meekness and Wisdom.

Secondly PRUDENCE.
. 4. And Prudence is the Product a^^ Practice of Wisdom, it lets not thy W^^dom
lurk and sweem in Speculation, But (...) puts it to action, it makes the Man
pro^ident and frugal, it gives him a holy ^ubtility to foresee and forecast
dangers, and choice the proper means to accomplish his ends: it makes him know
when to scatter and when to gather; and in fine, to order his affairs with
Discretion.

Thirdly PROVIDENCE.
. 5 Providence is near of kin^ to Prudence, and the very exercise of it; the
only Wise GOD shows his Wisdom in His Providence, and orders the World with
excellent Judgment: so should every wise Man learn to order the little World,
which is himself; and this Providence consists well with thy Trust in the Care
of thy Heavenly Father, it makes the Man a good Stewart of his time and
Talents, it makes thee better than an Infidel, to provide for thy family, and
elevates thee above the Brute, to care for thy Soul, and provide for Eternity:
It gives thee some setlement in an uncertain World; It makes thee to be
careful for nothing, but by Prayer to make thy Request known to GOD, Phil: 4:
6.

Fourthly GOVERNMENT
6. This yet helps thee to a more active life, without which thou art like*
City without Senators and Walls. Wa^^ of Government puts people in a tumu^^ but
the Government of t^y prince, mak^^ thee peaceful and steady, it makes thee
rule thy heart, thy passions and thy lips, by the purest policy, and thy family
by the best Economy, it so orders the house, that such as go by or come in
may not call it the house of a sluggard. For here GOD gets his Rent, every
member therein gets its due, and the head (...) not to the hand or foot, I have
no need of thee, and every Organ keeps its place; So every one in his Calling
abides with GOD.

Fifthly IMPROVEMENT.
7. This is the right use of the talent (...) is it laid up in a napkin, nor
God thought to be a hard Master, but a GOD that love and prospers the diligent,
it makes thee improve thy time and occasions, that thou may have something
to render to GOD, and something to render to others, and to keep for thy self.

. 8. And if thou carry on all these with Humility and Gratitude, thou does
well, and it will help to put thee amongst the LORDS Jewels: For, To him that
orders his Conversation aright, I will show the Salvation of GOD, Psalm: 50.
23.

Secondly, The MOTIVES.
. 9. And to press this more home, in this pregnant Stage of thy Life; 1.
Frugality and Virtue, and a Course of Religion in thy settled State and Calling,
does so much approve it self and thee, that sober Men, cannot but commend thee.
For, let us fancy two sort of Men upon the Stage, and there behold their Mean
and Air, and hear the legend of their Life: One looks very demurr but very bare
like, and perhaps you shall hear him talk of his pedigree and his Relation to
Families of good Accounr; And talk much of his Labors and losses; When
possibly he has either hid his Talent in idleness, or profusly spent it in
superfluities: Not, but that a virtuous Man may come to misfortnne, but many
misguide their Fortune, and make themselves unfortunate; Which ordinarily is
attended, with want of the Exercise of Religion; And such a Man, whatever be
his pretenses, in (...) evil sense, he cares not for to Mor^^ what ever be his
descent, he carries (...) Character of one, useless in his generati^^ that has
not made Right use of M^^mon, to fit him to serve GOD, nor co^^fortable to
himself, and useful to his ^^neration. But the other who has walk^^ in a solid
way, as to Religion, and frug^^ly in his Calling; he is known in (...) Streets
as a virtuous and honest Man, (...) poor Bless him: He is a Boaz or a Jo^ (...)
his Generation; His Children hono^^ him, his house shines; and all the Co^^trey
about him, respect him. 2. Th^^ the proper time of your labor and di^^gence:
and if thou do well now, thou sh^^ have more ease, and eat the fruit of t^^
labor hereafter; and as it will prove t^^ solid engagment with GOD, and that
t^^ work is both well founded, and th^^ virtue advanced hitherto. So if th^^
miscarry in this Period; it is to (...) feared thou will not do well hereafter*
Except thou vainly think to recover thy loss by late Repentance; and do thy
work when thou cannot do any* Leave not thy bussiness to a peradventure, (...)
upon the Rock which cannot be moved, make sure your interest Spiritual and
^ecular, not by Dreams, but by virtue; since this is the high time for your
bussiness, and thou may be shortly put Ab agendo: And as the well doer now eats
the Fruit of his labor, has his family in a right frame and his Children
round about his table. Psalm. 28. 3. So has he a nearer Prospect of Heaven; and
if he has any thing of the generous Spirit of Caleb and Joshua, he may get a
taste of the first fruits of the promised land, and a Viaticum to carry him
through his declining age, and shall find one grape of Ephraim better than the
vintage of Abiezer; and by experience Know that Religion and virtue, as it has
praise in the work, so gives joy in the end.

The Prayer.
LORD there is much of my course run out, tho it be not finished, and when I
look back, I find that I have lived under the shadow of death, I have sleeped
too long in the morning and slumbered in the Noon of my Age, and even have been
lasie in the afternoon; I desire to awake. CHRIST be my life and light, I have
been dreaming through the dullness of my flesh and sense: Alas! this clod of
flesh has almost smuthred me and made me slugish: But in Thee O LORD I can
only thrive, LORD give me Grace to do my best in time and wait till The loose
my fetters, not that I, through Dispondenc^ would go out of the World, but wait
thy leisu^^ and be kept from the evil of the World and (...) as well as I can
for Eternity.

Amen.
COURSE Second.
The Contents.
An Application to Persons of Higher and Me^^ Stations, with an declaration
what the pr^^ duties of each of these are, beside the com^^ instances of
Religion; with means and moti^^ s^^retly twisted in with the several discour^^

. 1. ALthough this Treatise hath^^ yet had the Utterance to ^^ress Persons, but
only to mention and p^^pose the evils, and the duties of the by^^ Stages of our
Life, leaving it to Men all Ranks (if they shall peruse (...) to make
application themselves. Yet hope it shall not be judged impertin^^ (ere I leave
this pregnant stage of our liin all humility to adress four ranks ^ Men. 1. The
Nobility and persons of Quali^^ 2ly. The Gentry. 3ly. The Clergy. 4ly (...)
Commons.

First, The Nobility.
. 2. If it may be pertinent to interrupt ^our honors, I would adventure to
speak in behalf of GOD and your splendor, to show you in this Map how Religion
does illuminate your Sphere, to make you (as St. Luke calls Theophilus,) Most
excellent, for it is not unknown to you, that you are under a higher Elevation
than a great many about you, And that it is so with you by the disposition of
Providence, who might have infused your Soul in an Embrio of your meanest
vassels and Tennants. But the LORD has brought you to this Earth with more
splendour, and made you personages of honor, and quality to get respect and
deference from others, yet there is no respect of persons with God, and your
high places puts you in a greater Arreer, and makes you liable to the searching
Eye of the Almighty, and the more you have received from GOD above others, you
have the more to account for to Him, and your Coronet will be rather a blemish,
than a Ray of honor, if your eminency be nor fixed on the Rock, and your life
set your place, and tho your elevated s^tion has put you above many for did
a^^ sore Employes, yet are ye the more o^ noxious to snares and Temptations,
for ye guide not well, your hearts will s^^^ with pride and ambition: and your
he^^ plod your ruin, and your hands beco^^ heavy to oppress; although that you be
put (...) a higher Sphere, yet your difficulties to (...) truly Religious may
be stronger, for (...) many mighty not many noble are called. saye^^ St. Paul,
1 Gor. 1, 26. Which is (...) written to seclude you, but to make yo^
circumspect, and that according to (...) Prophet, You be taught not to glory
(...) your power; seeing that the subtle ene^^ that assailed the first Man and
King (...) Mankind, will not ^ease to pursue yo^ over whom by reason of your
fallen N^^ ture, he has greater advantage, that (...) the frogs in Egypt
entered Pharaohs Chamber, the serpent may slily slide into your^ and defile
your well garnished Room, and craul into your decked bed, and di^ vide 'twixt
you and your honorable Co^^ sort; and put your family out of Frame.

. 3. With this Advertisement, Re^ member that as GOD has made you great, He
expects great things from you^ ^d ye will felicifie your high place by ^inning
with Rays of Religion, which shall further particular ^i^e in a fourfold
^espect. First, Your personal Capacity. ^y, Your Domestic demeanure. 3ly. How
(...) behave in your Religion, as to the Ministers ^d Institutions of Christ.
4ly. As to the Coun^ey and Common Wealth, whereof you are Peers ^d Patriots..

First, Your Persenal Capacity.
. 4. Beside ^ll unquestionable Duties ^ncumbent to Christians of all Ranks, it
(...) particularly required of you, to be emi^ent in some peculiar personal
Properties; Abraham shined in his Faith and Obedi^nce, Isaac in his
Contemplations, Jacob ^n his Power with GOD, Moses in his Meekness, Joseph in
his Chastity, Job in ^is Righteousness and Honesty, Joshuah in his Courage,
Caleh in his Generous and Noble Spirit, David in his Faith, and Chearefulness,
being the sweet Psalmist in Israel; And all GODS Worthies have had their own
Feats and Glorious Adventures: But let your Noble Persons observe these
Properties. 1. Humility. 2. Generosity, 3. Affability and Condescendance.
First, Humility, For GOD resists the proud, and gives Grace to the Humble, and
Sa(...) temptation to Adam smelled much (...) Pride, ye shall be as Gods: But
the mo^^ Humble you are in your high place, yo^^ are the liker GOD, who, tho he
be the hi^^ and Holy One that Inhabiteth Eternity, y^^ He dwells with the
Humble Spirit, and your Savior shinned in this Virtue signally, and left you
an example to follo^ His Steps, which if you do, GOD will^ exalt you with Him,
and increase you^ fame; As He gave him a name above every name, Phil: 2. 8. And
the greater ye are, ye have received the greater Recepts from GOD, and
therefore ye should be humble because ye have nothing but what (...) given you;
And GOD may take it from you, and you from it: Let the pride of Pharaoh who
said, who is the LORD, and Nebuchadnezars Ostentation; Is not this great Babel
which I have built for the glory of my name? Be^shezar in the fervor of a
Feast, Herod, under applauses, as to a GOD; let these warn you: For, tho (...)
be Gods, and all of you Children of the Most High, yet ye shall die like Men:
Ye are eminent because of your place and Authority, yet ye are mortal Men, and
tho we worship you with Civil Honor, ye^ your Glory may be Eclip^ed, if ye
guide it not with Humility, to the Glory of GOD. 2ly, Generosity, Who should be
generons but the Noble Man; this makes you truly Noble: And as a favorable
Constellation, to refresh the Country aabout you; This breeds you Respect and
Followers: And what is more, it chears and dilates your own Spirits, if it be
guided with frugality; It makes you both Good and Great, it suits your
Character, and gives you more Glory than your Fortune; And the Sun as soon
loses its Light as you, thus qualified, can loss your Honor and Respect;
For, the liberal Soul devises liberal things, and is liberally rewarded says
the Prophet. 3ly, Affability, Your Wisdom conducts your Character betwixt the
Luminous Lines of Humility and Generosity, and to know when to appear and when
to be Private; And the discretion of such as adress you, should teach them to
keep their distance, since familiarity sometimes breeds contempt: Yet your
Courtesy oblidgeth you to a serene aspect, a Noble Air and Mean in your way,
and rather win Men with Condescendance than turn Sullen like Saturn: And such
as are truly great, they delight to diffuse themselves, tho they be not
profuse: The great GOD allows us to come boldly to the Throne of Gra^^
(providing we come as we ought) an^ with a pleasant Countenance, he behold ^eth
the upright. Follow GOD then, and ^how your selves ready to receive other^^
who, perhaps, adress you, because provi^ dence has made them to have need o^
you.

Secondly, As to your domestic Capacity.
. 5. Look not upon it as presump^io^ in one that honors your house, an^ wishes
a Blessing to it, humbly to ment^^ on the mean that can obtain the Bles^in^ and
that is to have your House qualified to entertain GOD: And although your quality
requires a Retinue of many servants, yet Government that rules Kingdoms should
guide your families, and that which is most essential for this end, is Piety
and Devotion, and courteous Hospitality for the entertainment of Human
Sosciety. The daily sacrifice must be offered for the sanctifying your house;
The most private family indeed may have its hindrances, and you^s much more;
But as Abraham Governed A numerous family and David walked with a perfect heart
in his house at home; So if you Rule your house with authority, It may be as
easy and usual therein as to manage and settle the Oeconomie thereof: And
since GOD in his providence makes so many bring in your revenues: It is very
agreeable, you should pay your Rent to GOD, in having a qualified person set a
part for that end, and then you may upon good grounds say with Mi^ah, Judge. 17.
1. Now I know that the LORD will Bless me, since I have a Levit, and an Altar
for Devotion in my House. And tho some of that Rank has mscatried, yet it
should not hinder the Constant course of your good Carriage to GOD, since
CHRIST himself had a Traitor in his family. And also it very much Suits that
Generosity which provides your house for the Entertainment of humane Sosciety,
that frugally you be Hospital, which as it conciliats Respect to you, (for,
honor est in honorante, says the Philosopher,) So will it serve to banish
penuriousness and Churlish Nabal-like humor out of the hearts of those who see
your Noble deportment, and so help to advance mutual kindness amongst
Neighbors; and the country made serene as a new Region, wherein the life, not
only of humanity, but of Christianity may appear.

Thirdly. As to the Demeanor of the Noblemen toward the Institutions of
CHRIST and His Ministers.
. 6. I Make only my humble adress here to such Persons of Quality, who have
espoused the interest of that glorious Cause of Reformed Religion^ Wishing also
that such as ly under the bondage of Rome, may awake that CHRIST may give them
Light, and i^ they were not Biased by their Education and misinformed by the
corrupt principles of the vain pretenses of Rome, and strangley tenacious of
the Traditions of their Fathers, as the Pharisees before them; they could not
but open their Eyes to the Light of pure and primitive Christianity: But as to
you, my Lords, who are under a more favorable Constellation of
Scripture Light, pray, consider what freedom you are under! In being delivered
from the Onerous loads of nu^^erous Ceremonies, peevish Abstinences, and the
necessity of Auricular Confession; Beside the great Ignoranc this way would
keep you in, and the straitning of the Spirit of Liberty, in serving GOD in
Spirit and Truth. And since ye have united your selves to Catholic Truth,
propagated by Christ and His Apostles, be sure you labor even after the
Periods, almost of, 17 Ages, to show your Z^al and Respect to the Ordinances
and Ministers of Christ. As to the first, Although they be accounted by many, as
in old, to be foolishness; for The Jews sought after a sign, and the Greeks
after Wisdom, 1 Cor: 1-22. And now adays Men despise the Ordinances; And
Athenian-like, long after some new thing: Yet there is a secret Virtue in these
Institutions, which only the simple and humble feel and perceive; And GOD by
the foolishness of Preaching may save Souls, and the Gospel is the Power of GOD
unto Salvation, to such as believe: For, GOD is in His Ordinances and Day, tho
perhaps many know it not: How strange was that Stratagem of a Rude and
Illiterate Man at the first Council of Nice? In convincing and clearing of a
Philosopher, by a bare recital of the Creed, When Learned Men could not gain
gro^ of him: Listen not then to the Wisdom the world but seek after that humble
(...) dom that m^keth your face to shine: B^^ your selves and honor your place
by (...) mility in kissing the holy Jesus, who not power nor by might, but by
his Sp^^ thtough weak means and mean Inst^^ ments, brings to pass, great
effects: Lo^^ To King David in old, and to C^nst an^^ that prime Gentleman of
Christiani^^ Theodosius and others: And let yo^^ Worldly honor give place to
(...) mean things of Christ, which are (...) busked with the Glittering
splendors (...) vain World, and let the power (...) Crucified Savior, humble,
inde^^ and heal your hearts. 2ly. As to the (...) nisters of Christ, who although
they may^^ but mean men, yet behold their Ma^^ in and with them, i^ they do not
disp^^ rage their Character by miscarriage, (...) Respect them for their works
sake. Possib^^ they have not that well bread mean, (...) address that becomes
you. Their bre^^ ing not having been at Court, but in (...) College and
Cloister; And perhaps they halt as to wordly policy and prudence yet if they
Carry well in their Holy caling, it is your honor to Countenanc^ and
encourage them in assisting their Discipline, and thus shall ye Rank your
selves in that Glorious Sphere in helping the LORD in his Servants, against the
Powers of Darkness.

Fourthly: As to your Carriage as Peers, and Patriots in the Nation.
. 9. As it is much becoming your place to shine in your Orb, with a public
Spirit; So will it much advance your honor to keep your selves within the line
of Loyalty, and warm the Country by your befriending it in the higher courts,
to shun biguitry, and to labor to advance a solid Religion and Government, and
consider well what has been the constant course and Polity of the universal
Church: That men of yesterday be not flattered in that fancy, that they will
reform the World, and that doubtless they are the People, and Wisdom does dwell
with them. I shall detain your Honors no longer, but pray GOD to bless your
Persons and Families, with the Blessings of His Right Hand, that as you may be
useful in your Generation, so you may leave unto your Noble Off-^prin^ the best
Inheritance of excellent Examp^ and Eminent Virtue,

Amen.
Secondly, To the Gentry.
. 10. Religion is so necessary to the H^^ nour of your House, that it is
essential (...) make you truly Gentlemen; GOD ha^^ taken you from the common
Toils of th^^ World, and has given you proper Orbs (...) shine in, which are
only made lumino^^ by Religion and Virtue; It Is great H^ nour to fear GOD, and
makes you tr^^ ly Generous, with Caleb; And as Stars (...) shine in your Orbs:
For GOD will not fail (...) Honor them that Honors Him, 1 Samuel: (...) 30. when
I shall speak to those of more A^^ cient. And 2ly, Those of a more Rece^^ Rise.
Let the first consider the Providence of GOD, that has Entailed a^^
Inheritance upon them; Ye should then be thankful and shine in Religion and
Virtue, and walk worthily in your Generation; Which tends so much to the Honor
of your House, that the neglects of it may provoke GOD to shake its
Foundations, and to Cause it vomit you out; For this end, you must walk within
the paths of Equity and Frugality, which ^an be best measured, and promoted by
Re^igion. For first, Justice is such an even ^ine* that it will justify you in
all the Tra^ersing turns of your life: beware of all ^igid and rigorous
Courses; defraud not, give every man his due, oppress none. and let your
Generous virtue mitigate the Rigours of the law, since in some cases Summum Jus
may be Summa injuria, look well whether Recognitions and other Subtle Tricks
of Law, will weigh well in the balance of Equity. 2ly. Follow frugality, GOD
having put a fortune and opurtunity in your hands; Beware that ye provoke not
an Exterminating Angel to enter your doors: and if you build your house with
stones, unpolished by Virtue, it will not stand, and as it is a disgrace to
loose that which your Progenitors have put in your hand, so will it be a
greater imputation to your person, if your family fall by sin and wickedness:
And so that which Copstons all, is, to manifest the exercise ^f Undefiled
Religion in your house and life. Beware therefore of Sensuality, pride,
passion, and ommission of du^y, and learn to respect the Ordinances and
Ministers of Christ, for your Souls Good; For, I know not by what unlucky fa^^
some Gentlemen are readier to take up (...) pikue at Christ's Ministers than at
a^^ Rank of People in the World; So th^^ the Lord and Minister stands seldom
i^ even Terms. I shall not absolutely purg^ some of my Tribe from want of that
Prudence and conduct that becomes their Character: Yet tho he be an Angel, as
to h^^ Office, he is subject to passion in the Body, and therefore he should be
looked upon, because of his holy Office, under the protection of GOD, with a
Noli me tangere, and touch not mine Anointed; and do my Prophets (...) harm,
P^al: 105. 15. And it has been found a stain and loss to some Honorable
Families, to encroach upon the Ministers. And for you of the other seize,
consider by whose Hand ye are put into this Capacity, and ponder by what means
ye have Creept up a little higher tha^ your Fathers in coming from the Camp,
the Ship, the Shoap, the Trade, and the Plough, etc. To be ranked in among the
rolls o^ Lairds and Heritors: For, tho such are to be respected, who improve
their Talent well, and advance by Virtue; Yet, consider that your House ^e
laid on a good Foundation, since an ^heritance got hastily, and by, perhaps,
^^accountable means is like to run the ^^e of Jonah's Gourd, to spring up and
^ther in less than a day. It is good then ^r you, to be well poised in an even
^allance, to look to yesterday, and what (...) Morrow may bring forth, And if
^ou be proud, because under a greater ^ad of Earth, GOD, who raised you ^om the
Dust, can Reduce you thither a^ain, so that what ever you think of your ^lves,
see that you carry not by pride and ostentation, to conciliat Respect from ^^e
world, for it is by virtue and humility, that man rises to the favor of God
and Man.

Thirdly, To the Clergy.
It is Not to Reflect upon any of that Character: For in that I would ^ave many
Copartners in this evil and wanton age; Neither is it to inform my Brethren,
Desiring rather to be taught my self from the mouth of GOD by you. It is only
to Remember you, that your Office Oblidgeth you to a Retired and abstracted
life: and tho I should not desire you to Retire from your duty, for Action is
the life of your Calling, yet I would warn you to shun avocations from, and
Impediments of your duty, for no converse (except It be with the gravest) can
have such influence upon your heart as to leav^ the World and Contemplat God.
where by, in all the tempests of this life, yo^ may by faith and devotion sweem
Cal^ ly, as a fish in troubled waters: and wh^^ you make GOD your study, you
c^^ the better read the state and case of me^ and I assure you, by your
conversing (...) Heaven, you will be fitter to come do^^ from the Mount, with
the will of GO^ in your mouth, and the Tables of the La^ in your hand, with
Moses; and when (...) are at the greatest distance from the World by this
habitual contemplatio^ of GOD, and things spiritual and E^ternal; you may be
the more capable (...) serve the ^^terest of him that is invisibl^ and the
happiness of the Immortal Soul 2ly. What ye speak to People must be (...) the
Oracles of GOD and the word o^ Faith which you preach; from the knowledge of
the Scriptures, make CHRIST near to your people; and there shall y^ find the
mind and will of the Eternal GOD, for the directing of their Faith, Worship and
manners; And if you conclude ^ell from the Scriptures, you may say ^ith St.
Paul, we have the mind of Christ. and thus be a voice with the Baptist, and
monitor with St. Paul, to warn every man (...) all Wisdom, that you may present
them per^ct in Christ. Col. 1. 28. 3ly. Because ^ou have fallen in bad times:
Arm your ^elves with patience and courage; Endure ^ardness as the Soldiers of
CHRIST. 2 Timothy (...) 3. For if ye be reproached for the ^ame and Ministry of
CHRIST: Happy ^re ye. Make the Cavils of this World ^our Crown, consider what
indignities and reproaches your Blessed Master met with: that now when his
Religion is out of request, you may comport with your ^lights and strive the
more to avouch his way, because abandoned by so many; wrap your selves up in
your Calling, where ye shall be secure, as in a Sanctuary, From the strife of
Tongues; and whatsoever men do, to deminish and cry down your Character, yet
labor ye to magnify your office, with St Paul, for it is both holy and
Honorable, and at length the Reprover in the Gate, shall be thought more wise
and happy, than him That perishes in the way.

Fourthly, To the Commons of all sorts.
As you are to be careful of all the common concerns of your Religion, an^
particular duties of your Calling and Rel^^ tions, in approving your selves in
yo^ sphere, both to God and man; so particular^ I would Recommend to you 1st.
More honesty. 2ly. Civility and discretion L^b^ur then first to be morally
honest, an^ think not that ye can be Religious, b^ external duties, public or
private; you neglect m^rality: for GOD sees a^ your ways, and has showed
unto thee, (...) man what is good. Study then honesty i^ your principles, your
ends, your words^ your bargains; Buying and Selling. A^^ with Conscience;
beware of Covetousne^ and deceit, knowing that such a^ turn aside to crooked
ways, GOD will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. Psalm. 115. 5. And
may put a secret Moath into your hidden things of dishonesty. 2ly, Learn to be
discreet and Civil, for both Morality and Religion teaches this Lesson: And is
the best discipline in the World, to guide you in your Carriage to GOD and Man.
The Heathens by the light of Nature, did polish and Civilize themselves, how
much more thou in following the even Line of Righteousness? Which teaches us,
that Whatever things are Just and Honest, and of good Report; and to cast away
that barbarous Rudness that has so much, through sloth and carelessness,
debased the life of the most. Learn good Manners in the right Government of thy
Tongue and passions, by the patience and precepts of the Prince of Peace, And
tho perhaps, thou can not be so accurate, as those that have the best
Education, Yet must thou have as much Religion, as can not only Sanctify, but
Calm thee, and fit thee for those sweet and serene Regions, where there is
nothing of boisterous passion, and licentious talk. And in thy passage thither,
there be two Rocks, that you are Carefully to guard against. First, The sin of
rash swearing and cursing. 2ly, The sordidness of sensuality and drunkenness.
First, What can thou propose unto thy self by Rash Swearing? except it be,
that thy corrupt nature Glorys to be wicked^ and swagered out in profanity,
till thou fall into the borders of blasphemy: By this thou makes thy self to be
looked upon as an ingoverned and an indiscreet person, and a son of Belial in
thy Generation And by your Cursing you discover mu^^ of the Nature and Venom of
the Sepr^^ much contrary to that sweetness and ge^tleness that becomes thy
Religion: Th^^ proves hereby an Execrable Execution^^ and involves thy self in
the sad curse, d^^nunced by the Prophet; As he loved cursi^^ so let it come
upon him, Psalm: 110. 17. And tho it may please thy vendictive humou^ for the
time, yet thy curses, like a stingless Wasp to others, recoils and return^ with
malignant venom, upon thine ow^ pate. 2ly, As to Sordid Sensuality, Although,
alas! there be too much cause of complaint of this in persons that should be
better bred, yet there are many that show this shame without shame; And they
are so prone to this upon Occasion, that even Charity almost does not hinder
others to think, with regrate, that their bell^ is the^ God, and their shame
their Glory; And that your filthy Vomits, re^ling Staggerings, and distracted
Deliriums makes you, not only like the Eliots in La^edemon, that were exposed
to public view, as spectacles, to make the younger abhor the Vice; But puts a
note upon you (if ye do not repent) of a dismal fate, that you shall not inherti
the Kingdom o^ GOD, 1 ^or: 6. 10. Learn then to temper your Life with
Temperance, knowing that fair Nature is soon satisfied; And Religion teaches
thee, Not to be drunk to excess, but filled with the Spirit, Ephesians, 5. 18.

The Prayer.
AND Thou O LORD, the sovereign Judge of all the Earth, and the Great Master of
all Lords ^ennants, and Tenements: therein, follow this humble Application to
all Ranks of Men, with Thy Majestic Power, that tho many may be ready rather
to redicule than read these lines; yet O GOD of Wisdom give them to have their
second thoughts; that they may through Thy Grace shun the dreadful Handwriting
of Mean Tekel against them, and be by the power of Thy Spirit made Citizens of
Zion.

Amen.
COURSE Third
The Contents.
What fine your labor in Virtue, Piety, good government of your life and
Family, and the progress of your Religion, the ordering of your house and the
setting forth of your Children to ^audable and lawful Callings and Setlement,
has come to?

1. I Hope I have not need much to insist here, since as to the settling of
your Family and the Education of yo^ Children, I have already discoursed; (...)
that now it remains principally, that y^^ be instructed in your present duty.
A^^ for this there be these things worthy (...) your enquiry and observation.
First, W^ Product and fine your work is come to, both as your general and
particular Calling. 2ly. W^^ course ye are upon, as to the setting forth, and
(...) religious and rational settlement of the Childr^ that God has given you?
3ly, If you have religion disposed of all your spiritual and secular Con^^n to
good and holy Ends.

. 2. First, In this Course of thy lif^ its time to stand and pause, look about
yo^ behind you and before you; its high ti^ now to know where ye are, and what
y^^ are, and if ^e have gathered any Stock Grace and Virtue; and in fine, what
the Product of your general and particula^ Calling?

. 3. And for the Resolution of the first Q^ere, thou must look what thou has
done: since every one must give an account of himself to GOD, and thou knows
not how soon; Yea, tho thou should neglect, GOD has a Register, Let conscience
therefore read the legend of thy life, and seriously digest the scenes and acts
thereof, that so thou may attain to some clearness as to thy state and case;
and be the Better prepared for following duties and trials. To think on thy
former ways. Psal^ 119. 59. Re^apitulate and Recognize thy former doings, that
thou may take a more serious account of thy errors, failours and ^ollies,
that you May retract what is amiss, and it is high time now seriously and
un^eignedly to Repent and to correct what has been wrong, and to put your self
in a better dress for your following Life, and for Death and Judgment, which
are to follow that; And if thou has been so happy, by Grace to do any Good, you
are to keep warm the Nursery of your Virtues: Take the little. Foxes that hurt
the Vineyard and seek to serve GOD with full purpose of Heart, and a settled
and solid Course of Duty. And if thou lean upon GODS Direction, and not to
thine own Understanding: The LO^^ has fully showed thee what (...) good, Mic:
6. 8. And here it will be very pertinent for thee to regrate thy former
^^rayings, and sad omissions, O(...)rmer life is but like a Dream. Learn
therefore O man, to be sober and Vigilant, and build suitable Work; Work out
your Salvation, and by the diligent use of the means, and practice of Virtue,
Make your Calling and Election sure: Look to the frame of thine Heart, the
state of thine Affairs, and the Case of your Family, and particular Calling;
And do not satisfy thy self so, as not to acknowledge that thou might have
done more than thou has done, and to take that Check from the Apostle, that
Whereas ye might have been teachers of others, ye had need to be taught the
first principles of the Oracles of GOD, Heb: 5. 12. If a Man now be scrious, he
will easily see great blanks in his Life; And great emptiness in what he has
done, particularly as to Devotion and Charity; Which our LORD declares will be
a great Charge against the World in that day he will Judge it. And if thou will
be convinced, thou shall find that thou has much ado, and that the most part
does less than they should do, for there is much Work behind thee to undo; To
put away all superfluety of naughtiness, as St. James says, Jam: 1. 21. we
cannot indeed get Yesterday again, nor undo sin once done, but there is yet
time for thee to take such wise measures, as to undo thy sins by Repentance,
and make up thy failoures through Faith in the perfect satisfaction of Christ,
who says himself, I have done the work which Thou gave me to do Joh: 17, 5.

. 4. 3ly, Look how thou have ordered thy family, the economy whereof if it be
guided by Grace and Peace, does very much advance Religion and Humane society:
for if Families were walking in the clear Orb of Religion, it would lay the
foundation of Righteousness in a Nation, if the Husband were dutiefull to the
Wife of his bosom, and the Wife respectfull to the Husband of her Youth, if the
Children were obedient to their Parents, and the Parents careful for the
spiritual and secular concerns of their Children, if the servants were
dutiefull to their Masters, and the Masters gave what is just and right to
them, then would a golden Age revive, and the Land shine as a lamp, and
especially if the Parents labor to ripen their Children to Religion and
Virtue, and to settle them in a course of life that may tend to contentment,
and by all means labor to promote love, peace and comely order of the^r
station, and of the Church of GOD, that from their house, as a Bethel^ they go
up to the Temple, and there receive instruction and offer sacrifice, and return
home with the b^^ssing of the Gospel of peace, and that it be the great care of
younger and elder to shun idleness and unnecessary digressions, ill company,
divisive and destructive Employments, having such a great work ado, as to
commend Religion by their ways, and walk worthily in their Generation.

The Prayer
LORD, who knows his errors? cleanse thou me from secret and known sins. I know
enough of my self to humb^e me: But thy Eyes, which are as flames of fire, sees
more in me than I can observe: Accept, Good LORD, the humble designs I have
had, to do well, and pity my faint performance; make up my wants through him
who is perf^ct, in whom thou aquiesces, and I repose. I find great
dissatisfaction in any thing in me that has been contrary to thy Eternal will
and holy word: LORD, now I aim no lower than to center my soul in thee, I have
been but too slow, give me the wings, and alacrity of an Angel, to do thy will:
I can never be well till I be at thee, O help me GOD.

Amen.
Period third,
Of the future Age, or what is to come in the Declensions of Nature. And the
Stages thereof.

MAN is now to be looked upon, as enterring his declining Age; For, as he
rises in his Youth, and makes progress in the Augment of his Life from the 30
year thereof, to the 50: So has he much ado when he begins to hang his Head,
and to decline, from the 50 year of his Age, to the End. His gloss and
sprightful Feature, is now much failed, and he looks out with the aspect of
old Age, And gray hairs are here and there upon him, Hos: 7. 9. And except some
be swelled with a load of Flesh, and have a Ruddy Tincture from the Cup; and
there are others that do Remain longer undecayed, through a more vigorous
Constitution, yet shall they begin to find some declining in all the Organs,
and therefore from what we have seen in our by gone time, and what we see in
our selves, and others: We may learn to know our frailty and not look upon our
selves, as Impregnable Forts: O Then labor now to be solidly serious to do thy
duty, and encounter the defficulties of this Period of thy life. And for your
help I shall take up this remanent part of it, in some following stages.

STAGE First.
The Contents
Of a serious recollecttion of thy self, after a^ impartial trial of thy former
life^ And. 2ly. what now is to be done, the excrcise and duty of man,
particularly suitable to this Period from 50 to 70, and from that to the end of
his life.

1. EVery man should know himself, and every Good man is intent upon this
study; he should now be so solid as to recollect himself, and to draw his life
as in a little Map, and that so impartially, that the Blemishes as well as any
virtue may appear. Thou has an impartial and penetrating Eye, to see thee, a
perfect Rule to direct thee, which if thou follow, thou have a well informed
conscience (...) admonish thee, and the Wisdom of GOD to make thee Cast a Right
account of thy life; for which thou art with a pious curiosity to enquire into
these particulars following. 1. If thou have unfeignedly repented of all thy
former Sins? 2ly. If there be yet any Residive humor of folly in thee? 3ly If
thou find any thing of true grace and Divine Nature in thee? 4ly. If thy
heart do not condemn thee? As St Paul says. 1. Cor. 3. 4. I know nothing by my
self, yet am I not hereby justified. 5ly. How thou art resolved to encounter
the Trials of this Stage. 6ly, If thou has defeated all delays and finds thy
thy self now intent upon the one thing necessary. 7ly. What Is the product of thy
particular and General calling.

First, If thou have unfeignedly repented of all thy former fins?
. 2. There is a Repentance to be repented of, which comes by fits like
Pharaob's; when Judgments are upon the patient; but when the paroxisme is
over, he falls into a Relapse, and so (as some Divines have observed) The life
of such a one is but the riding of a round, to sin and repent, and repent and
sin: and thus run into a Circle, and ruin. But true Repentance fixes such a
remorse and sense of the evil of sin in the heart, as to make the Pe^tent cry,
woe unto me that I have sinned; (...) beholds it to be a bitter and evil th^^ to
offend GOD; It is wrought by Go^ Sorrow, and carried on with reven^ against
sin, to abhore that which he lo^ although he were stated in the same cir^^
stances: It humbles the Soul and ^^eth it cry with Jeremiah, Oh that (...)
head were a well of Water, and my (...) fountains of Tears, which if they be
^^ing makes the penitent express his (...) with Groans unutterable; It reforms
th^ner and makes him Cauti^us there^^ and labor with the greatest sincerity,
act the opposite Virtues, 1 Cor. 1. 7.

Secondly, If there remain an^ Resid^^ Humor of folly in thee.
. 3 The Serpent is not soon slain, (...) the body of sin easily mortified, the
(...) of bitterness is hard to be eradicated, (...) rooting out the sin of thy
nature, (...) son, and inclinations; requires the (...) ask^^ful Surgeon, or to
cut off thy (...) Hand, or pluck out thy right Eye, if (...) offend thee; And
if thou be since^^ Christ will learn thee the holy A^ Mortification: Thou must
not com^with flesh and blood, nor relish any carnal guit: For, To be carnally
minded is death, and if thou live after the flesh thou shall die: but if
through the Spirit, thou mortify the deeds of the body, thou shall live, Romans
8. 13: Thou must cleanse, from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor:
7. 1. And wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved, Jer: 4. 14.

Thirdly, If thou partake of the Divine Nature.
. 4. That this is a property of the Godly, is asserted by St. Peter, 2 Pet: 1.
4. For, although no man can partake of the infinite Essence of GOD, which cannot
be divided, nor communicated to any Creature; Yet do Believers partake of
Heavenly Qualities, which makes them, in some measure, like their Heavenly
Father: And frees them from the Disposition, Fashion and Estate, wherein
unregenerate men live and perish: And the free and absolute promises of GOD,
such as, That we shall be Sons and Daughters to him, and GOD will take away the
Stony heart, and give a Heart of Flesh; have a great influence upon the
Renewing of our Nature, and the Sanctifying and Glorifying of our ritrit, and
making it GOD-Like, in its measure and Capacity. And to resemble him in Heaven
ly Wisdom, Holiness and Uprightness, especially in Humility and Charity toward
miserable Sinners, with a Zeal for the LORDS Honor, and such eminent
Perfections as were transcend^ antly and without measure in the Man^ Christ.
Thus the Life of GOD is begun in the Heart of Man by Regeneration, and advanced
by the Operation of Grace and Virtue: And the impure lump is Illuminated, and
made Perfect and Holy as our Heavenly FATHER is Holy and Perfect; And the Love
of GOD shade abroad in the Heart, does wonderfully cheer and warm that new
Life, and makes it grow and come to Perfection: So that we deserve not the name
of Religion, nor have we warrant to expect to see GOD, and to be with Him for
ever in Glory, if we do not be like GOD in the Operation of His Grace, and
Goodness, in the Land^ of the Living. Heaven certainly must be begun in us, ere
we be possessed Citizens thereof, Phil: 3. 20. Our Conversation must be above,
till we come to a more intimate Communion with GOD for ever.

Fourthly, If thy Heart do not condemn thee.
. 5. If our Heart Condemn us, GOD is greater than the heart, and knows all
things, John, 3. 20. By the Heart here, is meant the sound and solid
reflections of the Spirit, upon our Life and Way, by the exercise of
Conscience; which the Apostle calls Heart, to distinguish it from humor,
Misperswasion, and melancholy apprehensions, when the Conscience is once
awakened. And still there is a difference betwixt Gravamen spiritus and
dietamen Conscientiae: But it is the Heart and well informed Mind of a
Christian, that makes him either Conscious or Cordial, according to the Frame
of his Life: If thou would then be approved at the Bar of this Deputy of
GOD, you must act according to his Word, and after serious search, correct what
is amiss; till you attain unto serenity and clearness of mind: Yet I would not
have you to seek satisfaction so much in your self, a^ in the Goodness of GOD,
and the Merit of Christ; acquies^e in his Salvation by a humble beleiving, and
penitent^ Heart; and lean not to your own Understanding. If thou be not
satisfied as yet, consult a knowing Guide, whose Office it is, a^^ thy full
information, to give thee Ease (...) clearness: For, The Priest's lips should
prese^^ Knowledge, Mal: 2. 7.

Fifthly, How thou art Resolved to encount^^ the Tr^als of this Period.
. 6. The longer man lives, he is (...) more subject, to infirmities, and
beca^^^ of our rudeness and many Indisposi^io^ we are subject to the Rod, and
Discipli^^ of the Holy JESUS: Man in the beginni^^ of his Life, is much
inconcerned, in (...) Youth like a Bullock, unacquainted wi^^ the Yoke; and in
his after life he ha^^ need to be keept under, by Fatherly Chastilement; and so
is subject to personal, domestic and public Trials: B^^ he has this for an
Antidote, that the Spirit of GOD, in the Word, represent^ these Trials very
favorably, as instances of Fatherly Love and Mercy, Heb: 12. 6 Whom I love I
chastise, says the LORD Kev: 3. 19. And count it all Jo^ when ye fall into
diverse temp^ations, says St. James, Jam: 1. 2. It is the great Concern then
of a Christian, to hear the voice of the Rod, To let patience have its perfect
Work, Jam: 1. 4. To be of a contented ^ind, to guard against Melancholy^
Des^ondency; to kiss the Rod, to humble under the Mighty Hand of GOD, and to
^mprove the Rod as well as the Word, ^or the purpoles of Religion (...) But now
in ^is declining Age, he enters into broken ^aters, and therefore should have a
well ^uilt Ark, and Cast his Anchor within ^he Vail; Which, in all the T^ssings
and Troubles of this Period, remains sure and steadfast, Heb: 5. 4. He must arm
with pa^ience, and have his Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, Ephesians: 6. 15. that so through Faith and patience he then, may inherit the
promises, Heb: 6. 12.

Sixthly, If all Delays be defeated, and thou be now intent on thy Work.
. 7. It Is dangerous to delay till now, yet the Nature of Man is prone to
pro(...) and put off till to morrow; but if thy Work be undone; th^^ will be
undone for ever. There are many wants and defects indeed, for which thou have
an All sufficient Help to recover thee; yet must thou be dilligent in the ^use
of the Means, and GOD that prevents with free Grace, can cure it, to His Glory.

Seventhly, What is thy Stock and Store, in Grace and Virtue.
. 8. A Virtuous Man brings his Work to some fine, and thou should have
provision against evil days; found well upon a Rock, that will stand out the
storm; Labor to be Rich in Faith and good Works, and to have fresh Oil for thy
Lamps, and the Weddlng Garment neatly wrought: Thy Heart and House in order,
that Trials and Death do not surprise thee, and the cry be at midnight, Matthew:
25. 6. when thou art Sleeping; and sudden destruction come, when thou says,
Peace. And after this serious Recollection, thou must ponder aright,

Secondly, What now remains to be done?
. 1. EVEN the Work that GOD has given thee to do. Look then to thy great
bussiness, Proficiency; and wherein thou are short, double thy diligence. See
that thou has First, The methods of thy Life ordered unto Salvation. 2ly. Thy
Progress and middle Work betwixt Youth and declining Age: And then how you are
prepared to enter the Vltima or the last things. It is clear then, thou should
be now serious and seek first the Kingdom of GOD with all Seeking, and
persevering Constancy: Be faithful unto Death, and the LORD will give thee the
Crown of Life.

2. But particularly, there are three things ought to be done. 1st. That thy
house and Affairs be in as good Order as possible. 2ly that you may work out
the work of your own salvation. And 3ly, that you Give all diligence to make
sure your Calling and Election.

3. First, that thy house and affairs be in as good order, as possible: To
manage thy Earthly concern with Discretion that thou may leave to thy Issue a
good example, and a (...) the portion, which GOD has (...) thee; with a
Blessing: Least through thy Neglect thou render those behind thee destitute and
despicable, without a settled calling and course of virtue; And if through
incident accidents, thou has been hurt in thy Estate, GOD can make any remnant,
be like the Widows Cruse, for thee and thine; If thou improve dispensations to
the best: And to all that desire to thrive, I cannot but Recommend a discreet
Charity; The merciful man disperseth and gives to the poor, lends to GOD; And
his seed shall be well behind him, as in Psalm. 37. and 112 But thy great work
is; 2ly. to work out the work of thy own salvation. Phil: 2. 1. That thou put
on the copstone, as well as lay the foundation, that thou perfect thy Faith and
Repentance, Charity and other Graces, to have thy soul ^rim'd with the Wedding
Garment, and thy Lamps full of Oil, till the cry come, Behold the Bride Groom
comes: That thou fight that fight of Faith; that so upon good Ground thou may
expect the Crown of Righteousness, that will be given all those who love
Christ's appearing. 3ly. That thou give all diligence to make thy Callling and
Election sure: which is not obtained by listening to humor and instinct, but
by that diligence that becomes a Christian, in the exercise of faith And good
works; for it is not by the Revolving the leaves of destiny, but by a diligent
search of the Book of GOD, and by a life suitable thereunto, that thou can
secure thy peace and thy soul; for, there is no peace lays my GOD to the
wicked.

A Continuation of this STAGE. From 50 to 70. and to the uttermost extent of
Man's Life.
. 1. Although many fall ere they arrive to this stage of Life, Yet since GOD has
given it, and does give it, to some to teach the length; thou art seriously to
consider thy Duty, and how thou may improve it to the best, which through Grace
may be done; If 1. thou labor to arrive at any pitch of Wisdom 2. If thou be
well resolved to encounter and endure incident personal afflictions; 3ly. What
account thou can give of thy self to GOD and Man. 4. If through CHRIST helping
thee thou labors to perfection. 5. If thou be running thy Race in the good
fight of Faith. 6ly. If thou be bu^ie now in ripening thy self for Heaven, 7ly.
If thou daily prepare for Death, and have thy. Soul fixed upon wing to flee to
yonder Regions, where CHRIST is? And last of all, to consider the means and
motives to advance these.

. (...). First, If now thou have arrived ^o any pitch of Wisdom. The Apostle
James Gives a full direction as to this, Who is a wise Man among you? let him
show forth by a good Conversation with Meekness Wisdom. For as the Fear of GOD
is beginning of Wi^dom, so it compleats Wisdom forseeth and is provident,
F^^rageth with vain confidence; Wisd^^ makes thee a wise Virgin to provide
(...) in thy Lamps; it directs and clear^ your affairs, it puts thy house and
Soul order, and it keeps a clear account by good conscience, since GOD is the
J^d^ and knows all things: And now its h^^ time that thy Wisdom appear to
ma^^ thee wise unto Salvation, otherwise i^ but, worldly wit, For true Wisdom
is Si^plicity, heavenly sincerity and accurate walkin^ which as it makes thee
useful in thy Ge^^ration^ So makes it thy face to shine, a^elevates thee to a
clearer orb, there to R^main as a fixed Star.

. 3. 2ly. What resolutions thou^ h^^ to encounter incident personal afflictio^^
Afflictions spring not out of the dust, bu^ they attend dust and ashes; they
flow from many causes: And now in thy declining age, thou art to encounter with
the decay of a frail Body, occasioned By obstructions, Rehums, distillations,
and manifold distempers, which requires a great deal of fortitude and firmitie
of mind, to ^^dure and improve; together with all inci^ent trials from without,
that are appoint^d for thee, which thou should sweeten by ^^e consideration of
Christ's sufferings. ^rm thy self with patience, and poise thy ^elf with
Christian Contentment, in all ^he counterbu^s of trial, know with the A^ostle,
How to be abased, and how to be ex^lted, through Christ strengthening thee.
Phil. 4. 12.

. 4ly. What account thou can give of thy self to GOD and man. Every one must
give account of himself to GOD: enquire then if thou have any register of thy
diurnal and Annual accounts; if thy conscience does report to thee, that thou
art serious in Religion, and dissintangled from any affection to sin, and false
way; which if thou find, as it will afford great peace, so will it commend thee
to Men, especially to such as deserve the name of Men, and thou shall, by such
accuracy, deservedly get the name of a good, wise and honest man, and go off
the Stage of time, with a Euge and an applause, well done good and faithful
servant, enter into thy Masters joy. Matt. 28. 21.

. 5. 4ly. If thou through CHRIST helping thee, labors to perfection. It is t^^
nature of Grace still to grow, and such (...) are planted in the LORDS house,
by (...) hand off GOD, bring forth fruit in the old age, there is no time for
sloth, (...) Man be now as to his outwardframe, mu^^ ab^agendo, yet the Spirit
is loosing and nearer Heaven, and has more of Heav^^ and so the inner Man is
renewed day (...) day, and thou can do all things throu^^ CHRIST strenghning
thee; if thy dut^ be lame, and thy graces weak, thou m^strive to make them up,
and labor (...) square thy self by Religion, for that (...) which lies four
square; let no part (...) thee be without its policy, that thou maattain unto
that perfection that can (...) reached here.

. 6. 5ly. If thou be running thy Ra^ in the good fight of Faith? Thou must no^
stop till thou come to the end, and obtain the prize, and tho thy limbs be no^
weak, thy faith should be strong, an^ thy Soul vigorous, to take Heaven (...)
Violence.

. 7. 6ly. If thou be busy now in ripening thy self for Heaven; As thy Soul
should be purified, so should it be ready and all in white, with the holy
Vesture of the Wedding Garment, that thus adorned thou may meet the
Bridegroom; The world now may clog thee, but it should be little in thy Eye,
for it is empty, and nothing can satisfy thy Soul but GOD, and thy thus
continuated Grace must take fire with the sparks of Divine Love, till it be
consummate in Glory, and thou attain to the Regions of Love, Life, Peace, and
Joy.

. 8. 7ly If thou daily prepare for death, and have thy Soul upon readiness.
Thou must now wait the Gail of Grace, with a Calm and comfortable Air, to
conduct thee to thy fathers house: death has already entered thy windows,
ceased upon thy faculties and loosed thy Tabernacle, and there remains but
little of animal and Vital Spirit in thy ^ead and heart; Thou should now have
thy Loins girt up, and be ready to shake of thy fetters when thy Master calls,
that thou may resolutely render up thy Soul into the hands of a Faithful
Creator. And,

. 9. 8ly, Come I now, to consider the Means and Motives to advance this. Beside
all that has been said, the great ^ean now to be used, consists in
Consideration, Action, and Devotion: To con^ider well where ye are, and whither
ye tend; If every thing relating to Eternity, be well ordered (...) disposed;
If Faith and Repentance (...) had their perfect Work; And if n^^ thou be
disposing thy ^elf by Heaven Mindedness, that with thy Eyes clo^ upon the
World, thy faith; as a prosp^ beholds in the Heavenly Visions of so^ and
serious Contemplation, the Glori^^ thy Fathers House. To which thou m^ add
sincere Devotion, and by a consta^ Course of lively Prayer, labor to atta^
unto the Land of Praise. For which (...) thing can be added by way of Moti^
more useful, than the consideration (...) thy Heavenly Aid, to help and assist
th^^ in duty; with the proposal of that great Recompense of Reward, that is
laid u^ for thee in Heaven; with all that Lov^ the appearing of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

. 10. And although in this stage of thy Li^^ (to which few attai^n) thou must make
use of thy stock, and live upon it as a Be^ does in Winter upon honey; and tho
through the Infirmity of Old Age the outward Organs be much weakened, and the
inward faculties not as before, yet must thou bring forth fruit in old age
Psalm: 92. 14. and as much as possible Guard against that which is called
Dottleness; by dissentangling thy self from the cares and affairs of the World,
and labor, by wisdom and wariness, to keep thy self from the weakness of a
Crazy Brain, and a fible mind; that thou do not much affect converse, except
that with GOD, who is the Ancient of days, that thou lean not to thy memory;
but learn of St. James To be swift to hear and slow to speak; and that through
the direction of GOD, Thou follow the Patriarchs in old, and the Primitive
Fathers under the new dispensation, as Polycarp, St. John's disciple, who
Vigorously Endured his Trial in the 86 year of his Age Eus: Hist: li^. 5. Cap.
15.
: and to seek in to the GOD of Wisdom, that thy Judgment and intellectuals be
clear, which is a mercy that should be much sought after by all: that thus, the
strength of thy mind may be fresh after the toils of thy life, and that thou
esteem the mercy of GOD, that has lengthned thy days on earth, against long
and everlasting Eternity; And that tho GOD for Holy ends may remove some, who
are hopeful in the very Bud, and Alas! Tho many hasten their own fate, and
shorten their days, by misdiet, Passion and foll^ Yet if thou persevere in the
way of right^ ousnses, thou shall have the advantag^ of great experi^nces, and
have a fre^ and nearer prospect of the promised land every hour looking for
Eternity, an^ with old Simeon, waiting the LORD's pas^ and not only Dye with
Christ in thy arm^ but in thy heart.

The Prayer.
LORD Help thy servant, and all such (...) thou art pleased to bless with a
long life, (...) attain unto that pitch of purity and preparati^^ as may make
us ripe Fruit to GOD: that (...) may come to the Grave in Good old age, a^^
Shock of Corn in full maturity: give us by t^^ Grace under the Burden of old
age, that (...) may be unburdened of the body of sin and dea^^ that after all
the travels of our life; We may r^^ our Ark under the Pavilion of Thy Etern^^
Majesty.

Amen.
STAGE Second OF The Quatuor Norissima, or feur Last things: and how Man is to
improve himself in the Consideration of th^se.
. 1. IT is a great Mercy while we last and endu^e, that the last things be
minded: For the longest Day will come to an Even; and these last things are so
new that they never change, except that the last Enemy, Death will be
destro^ed, 1 Cor: 15. 26. It suits well then with a Christian, to be well
settled as to these. Tria sunt omnia, said some of the Philosophers, but four
things are necessary, says the Scripture, and it is the Vnum N^^ssarium, The
one thing needful to know the^e practically: for what more certain than Death?
What mo^e searching than Judgment? W^a^ more dreadful than Hell? And what
m^re comfortable than Heaven? Take then a View of them, for thy Christian
pr^fi^.

Of Death.
. 2. All the World sp^ak of Death, but I know not by what a pleasant, yet a^e
unhappy Charm, few seriously lay it to heart. Betwixt our Birth and our Dea^^
there is but a thought or an instant, it (...) happy then to awake, and go to
the House^ mourning, and see the end of all things, Ecc. 7. (...) All things
dye, Empires and Kingdom decay, the four Monarchies are out of D^^ The whole
Creation groaneth, Rom: 8. 22. T^^ Universe is but an Universal hospital, (...)
Grave a common Mother, where the gre^^est Potentats lay down their power a^^
crowns, and all Mankind put of their gl^ry; for, Dust we are and to Dust must
we ret^^^* All have sinned, all must dye.

ss. 3. I shall only mention this comm^^ Theme, (that it may be practically
i^proved) by a short discourse of Dea^^ an^ a right preparation for it.

ss. 4. First, in discoursing of Dea^^ thou art to consider, what it is. 2ly.
(...) it is, 3ly. How it is, 4ly. When it is. (...) Its sting and strength.
6ly. The victory ^ver

ss. 5. What it is. Although there be nothi^^ more obvious than Death, yet would
(...) require one from the dead, to inform t^^ World of it, but Abel yet
speaks, a^^ CHRIST cries by his Word and Spirit that Death is the Term of thy
Tempora^ ^ife, the dissolution of thy earthly Ta^ernacle, and a separation of
the Soul ^om the Body; It is a long sleep, it makes strange Change upon Man, it
turns the (...) House to Rubbish, it sets thee off ^e Stage of time, to the
darker Regions ^f the dead, it lays strength, Beauty, ^ortune, and all the
commodities of life ^n the dust, it destroys Nature, and tho its Conquest be
but over Dust, yet this King ^f Terrors Reigns till the Resurrection.

. 6. 2ly. Why it is? All have sinned all ^ust die. In the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall ^urely die. By one Man sin entered into the World, and Death
by sin. The Vltimus Conatus, and ^last effort of Death is, to dissolve nature;
Soul and Body must sunder, The Body sleep and be Refined in the Dust till the
last Trump.

. 7. 3ly. How it is. The way and manner of Death is dark, it comes either by
nature or by accident: It hovers over our heads like an Eagle in the Air; It is
like a ship in the Sea, whose footsteps are not known. It lurks as a Serpent
under the Herb, And the more hidden. the more dangerous; it kills us as a
Basalisk, when we see it not; It kills many with pleasure, as it has been
observed Plures pereunt G^^ qvam Gladio: It besets us before and behi^^ so that
it is good to have our Wits^ bout us.

. 8. 4ly. When it is. In the beginning^ progress and end of our Race. When
(...) ver thou begins to Live thou Dies, an^ thy Breath is within thy Nostirles
And Death has smitten the Cedar an^ the Grass, the Good and Bad, the Rid^ and
Poor; in diverse manners, and very un^ expectedly to many: it comes as a Thi^^
by Night and takes our earthly house by surprise, and although in gene^al. the
Term of our Life be d^t^rmin'd by GOD Job: 7. 1 Yet are there so many incident
Trials and exercises, that Man being ^eft to the freedom of his own will, by
unlu^kie adventures makes his own Diet of Dying, tho so sore against his will
when it comes: so the wicked is said to die before their time, and in the midst
of their days.

. 9 5ly. The strength and sting of Death. Death has a great strength, for no
man can see it and live, and that which imbi^ters it, is sin. If thou therefore
inortifie sin, thou plays upon the hole of the A^p, and needs not fea^ the
Sting of the S^^pent; It is only sin that makes Death dreadful, for it poisons
its dart and makes it bitter to the U^sanctified; But Christ's Death sweetens
all its Acerbities to the Godly, and makes them say with Our Savior, The Cup
that is given us of GOD, shall we not Drink?

10. 6ly, The victory over it. There is no Cure of Death, But in the Prince of
Life, if we ^ie with Him we shall Live with him; We live in our Head, and it is
he that can say, O Death I^e be thy Death; There is no Herb on Earth that can
cure Death, but there is a Tree of Life in Heaven, and to such as apply this
arig^t, Death is but a passage to Life, and because Christ Lives, such shall
Live also.

Secondly, THE CONSIDERATION OF DEATH REDVCED TO PRACTICE.
. 11. It is Excelently well observed by Dr. Tailor, that the Scripture
acquaints us with one only Way to Die well, which is to Live well; Which
generally holds of all them that have the Use of Reason, and of the Means of
Grace; so that Instance of the Convert Theif, does rather extol the wonderful
Love and Merit of our Dying Lord, than give any exception against the general
Rule; For, al^ though such as have lived bad lives may dye with a sort of
Peace, Yet, t^^ is no peace, says my GOD, to the wicked, a^^ it is only the
Upright and the Perfect Man Whose latter end is Peace. But, This new Life^ not
to be measured by daily Excursio^ of Temptation, but from an habitu^^ Course of
sincere Obedience: Since righ^ preparation for death consists in a Hol^ Life,
and a daily dying to sin, and (...) Life being but a Vapor (as St. James
says) It is sad to let it Evaporate in sin and folly^ It is good then to keep
Memento mori in the Vade-mecum of our Mind, that we may be ready to render up
our Soul, unto the Hands of a Faithful Creator.

ss. 12. 2ly. Thou must be willing to die Death is indeed Irksome to Nature,
bu^ when thou considerest it as a passage to thy Fathers house, it is pleasant,
thou must be so willing as to submit to GOD, and resign thy Life to His Will,
for GODS Will is still Good, and g^ided with excellent ^udgment, and whether
thou Nill or Will, thy times are in His band: Consult not therefore Flesh and
Blood, but Faith; and cheerfully drink of that Cup, that all before us have
tasted; which is sweetened by the death of Christ; and better to die willingly,
than to live in ^pposition to GODS Will; say therefore with old Eli, the Will
of the LORD be done: And if it be well principled, thy willingness will come up
the length of a desire to die, not of a pievish discontent, with Jo^^h; But
with an Apostollick and Heavenly Spirit, to desire to depart and be with
Christ, which is best of all. Let not therefore the dreadour of death hinder
thy desire, since GOD is with thee, to give thee a safe passage; Death simply
cannot case thee, but it is dying in the LORD, that makes thee Blesse^: It is
goo^ then to have a well dected Mind and Soul; For, there are such attractives
in the Recompense of Reward, the Crown of Righteousness, and of being ever with
the LORD; As may make thee desire to be uncloathed, that mortality may be
swallowed up in Life, 2 Cor: 5. 4. I ^issintangle therefore thy self of Worldly
Letts, that thy Soul may as naturally tend to Heaven as the sparks flee upward.

ss. 13. 3l^: M^ke Death familiar to thee; for many put off the Evil Day; and
leave the thoughts of Death to ^ick and Dying Persons: but thou should be more
prudent and walk every day as it were thy Last Day; and frequent thoughts of it
will make it to be no strange nor sad thing to die. Fr^quent use makes the
habit Easy, and (...) well prepared Christian will say. my he^^ s fixed.

. 14 4ly. If any doubts and fears arise, whi^^ may be incident to Christians,
when ^he^ come seriously to look upon Eternity and (...) dark passage of death,
leading thereunt^ thy death can make thee d^ubt of nothin^ but what state it
will put thee into; but Giv^ no place to doubt, since it is certain, (...) thou
Rely on Christ, thou art secur^ Thou must not consult the disorders (...) thy
life, but the well ordered covenan^ Are thy sins many? GOD has a multitude of
mercies: are they great? he ca^^ pardon them, because they are great have thou
Backslidings? He can hea^ thy Backsliding: Have thou d^fficulties? Light can
clear thee: art thou tempted? He can Succor thee: Art thou dijected? He can
comfort thee. So whatever by thy case, if thou come to Him upon the terms of
the Gospel, thou may be Satisfied in his love. I^ death be the King of
terrors. CHRIST is the King of comforts, Thou needs not fear, in f^tifaucibus
in the jaws of Death, If (...) be i^ Gremio Dei in the B^some of GOD: let the
dart of Death ^trick, the shield of Faith will resist its force. All Mortals
before you have suffered ^eath, even Children and the Weaker Sex, and it is a
silly thing to dread that which is conquered and can do nothing to a Christian
but loose him from Bondage. There is nothing dreadful in Death but to fall
into the hands of an Angry GOD, and if your pasillanimous Mind makes thee flee
Death it follows thee. Get thy Heart and conscience in a right frame then, and
then thou has nothing to do but to ly d^wn and sl^ep: ^et thy faith and hope on
work, and By a heavenly Spirit, lahour with Samson, to destroy GODS Enemies:
Colect thy powers, to render up thy Soul with comfort; and that same GOD who
has made Martyrs Rejoice in their tortoures, may make th^e sing as a Swan in
death, and Triumph with St. Paul; O Death where is thy Sting? 1 Cor. 15. 55.

15 6ly. To pray for a happy death. Labor to die well, and i^ it be the LORD's
will, deprecate any thing extraordinary in thy Death, except an extraordinary
Repentance, and a heavenly frame of Spirit: Thou should submit to the time
and mann^r of thy Death, but with all beg a comfortable demission to depart in
peace; and since there are thousand accidents incident to thy lif^ and many
have been taken off the Stag^ by surprise, and in the act of sin; tho^ art to
pray for a happy Death, and composed mind in dying; and think it n^ unsuitable
to Deprecate a sudden Death; tak^ Sanctuary in GOD, that in the uncertanties of
this World, thou may be secure. Labor to Kill this Pasisisk, with the Ey^
of Faith. Daily die to sin; and cleay to Christ: pay the debt of nature with
pleasure; Lay down thy Body to a Grave, perfumed with CHRIST's Burial, and
commit thy soul to a faithful Creator, and Blessed Redeemer.

Prayer in order to Death.
O LORD G^D of Life and Death; Tho^ only have the empire over Death, O Prince
of Life who was once dead, and art now alive, Give me to live for Thee, and in
Thee; and I shall not die, but sleep, Thy Love ca^ keep my Soul warm in the
dark Valley of Death, save me from the bondage of the fear of Death, and the
sting of it, and then I may harmlesly like a Child play on the hole of the Asp:
Fill me with Light and Spiritual Life, and deliver me from ^^y thing that may
make Death irksom, that I may lay up store in my best circumstances against the
power of it. Save me from procuring my Death by the ill Government of my Life,
save me from all Misdemeanour that may procure a violent Death. Deliver me from
sudden Death, if it be Thy Holy Will, and let me not he surprised by my last
Enemy: Into Thy Hands I commend my spirit, perfect Thy Grace in me, that I may
attain to the end of the Upright, and perfect Man, to die in Peace;

Amen.
The Second last Thing JUDGEMEMT.
. 1. AFter Death the Judgment. The belief of a Judgment is an Article of our
^reed, and a great principle of our Religion, Death and Judgment are both
decreed, Heathens have believed it, and Nill they Will they, Conscience asserts
it, and the worst of Men in Crosses and about their dying, have had
apprehensions of Judgment, and such as have stiffled convictions, have now
within them fatal and fearful Convulsions; for as GOD is, so is He just, and
will bring all things to Judgment, and tho Sentence be not pr^sently execute
here, Yet there remains (...) Judgment: Concerning which let^ it (...)first
enquired, as to the Truth of it, (...) The time of its Commencement. 3ly. The
Judge. 4ly. the Process. And 5ly, The Sentence.

: 2. First, That there is a Judgment to come, is the Faith of the Church, the
hope of the Just, the comfort of the aflicted, and the great Crise and Result
of of mortal Life; Which will determine all the Intriges of Providence, and
destribute Rewards and Punishments according to their Works: The^e is a
princip^e and faculty in every Man, which makes him accountable to GOD. This,
as it is an Article of our Creed, so the Scripture fully determines it, Ecc. 12
14. Matt: 25. Acts: 17. 30. 2 Cor: 5. 10. GOD will be publicly manifested in
His H^liness and Justice, the Equity and Reasonableness of His Laws, and
severity against sin; Who will not acquit thy guilty; And the monuments of
Grace will s^e their Demerit, had not the Merit of Christ prevented the
pun^shment: Fix then this Truth in thine heart, and constantly apprehend ^^th
an Ancient Father, that thou hear (...) S^u^d^ngs of the last Trump, with
^he Voice of GOD; Arise Dead and come te Judgment:

. 3. 2ly, That this Judgment in a part commenceth immediately after Death, is
ass^rted by the Apostle, Heb: 9. 27. The Saints of old have ^nherited the
Promises. The Convert Thief immediately after, was judged, and entered
Paradise, and the rich Glutton got his Doom, and after his death, was set to
the place of Torment. But the open, visible and general Assize of the whole
World, is delayed to the time of the Restitution of all things; When and where,
Soul and Body, Good and bad, Young and Old, without Law and under Law, will be
judged According to their Works, and tho in the Apostles times, some were
^hanatick and said that the Resurrection was past, some Atheitical scoffers (as
St. Peter says) Impio^sly Rag^ing and ^corning, where is the promiss of his
coming, not knowing, that God works hitherto, and has great patience; in
whose Eternal View a Thousand years are but as one day: yet when his works is
done, all the World will be judged, which day and Hour GOD has keept secret in
his Eternal Council; (...)good and holy ends: And there somethings yet
unaccomplished before (...) end, to wit, the full conversion of the Je^ Romans
11. 26 and the discovery of (...)declension of the Christian Church;
(...)exposing of that man of sin, and son Perdition; The pure Gospel become
(...) divive, and the Christian Church be mu^ liberated from the great
Corruption, (...) manners and worship, according to (...) Primitive Pattern.
When these shall come^ pass, and not till then, shall the end (...) In the mean
time let us p^ssess our sel^ with the Belief of This truth, that all (...)
nerations shall be judged before the T^^bunal of the Sovereign Judge.

ss. 4. 3ly. The Judge; GOD has committed all Judgment to the Son; A^^ has
appointed a day in which he will Judge (...) world in Righteousness by him.
Acts. 17. 3^ We must all appear before the judgment sea^ (...) CHRIST, 2 ^or.
5. 10. When the Son (...) Man shall appear in his Glory: Matt. 25. 3^^ And in
this he Exercises his medi^torial Kingdom, which will continue t^^ the last
Enemy be distroyed, which (...) Death. He declined to be a Judge on ^arth, but
came to be Judged, and it is ^ighly reasonable that he who was un^ustly judged,
should judge the World in Righteousness; Then shall they who have ^earced him,
by their sins, mourn and ^owl; But His afflicted people shall lift up their
head, and say, This is the Day that ^he LORD has made, Blessed is He who
com^th to save us: For, our LORD and King^o whom the Godly have submited in
their time, whose Scepter and Cross they wil^ingly have born, is now come to
deliver them; He that bore our sins on His own Body, on the Tree. He that is a
Compa^sionate High Priest, He that is the King of Peace, is now come to Judge
them, according to the Gospel of Peace, and His easy Yoke, which they did take
upon them, and walked under: What then shall such expect, but Love and Peace and
Pity, from their LORD, King and Brother? Who is much Meeker than Moses, more
Loving than David, and more Merciful than Man can be: Whereas, it shall be a
great dreadour to the wicked, to behold this Meek LAMB, roa^ like a Lion
against them.

. 5. 4ly, The Process, We cannot coneeive how soon, and yet how exactly
thisshall be done; since every ones Conscience is in the place of a Thousand
Witnesses, and the Judge needs no Information nor farther probation: Every
one then will be Judged according to that Law which was Given them to walk by;
And such as are under the Gospel shall be Judged by the Law of liberty, Jam:
1. 25. And the Issue will be, whether they have obeyed or disobeyed the Gospel?
and walked suitably thereunto, and answered the opurtunities they have enjoyed
above o^ there is, to make them Christians indeed; And fit for the Kingdom of GOD.

ss. 6. 5ly. The Sentence, will be accord. to thy works, tho thou be justified
by Faith, and saved by Grace. yet the LORD will reward according to thy works:
For, to the true Christian, there is a wonderful mitigation of the Rigor of the
Law, by the easy terms of the Gospel, and such shall receive sentence according
to that Infinite Love revealed therein; then shall the great sheepherd appear in
Glory, yet probably with the Honorable marks of the Cross, that all who have
gloried in Hi^ Cross may rejoice, and such as have stumbled at ^t, hang their
heads; The Sentence shall decide in favors of Believers, and all who have
Closed with the conditions of the Gospel, and Obe^ed the Faith. 1. 5. Which is
the great specific of Christanity: Such may appear before him with his marks
upon them, of Faith, Mortification, and Self-denial. etc. And that in their
time they have born Testimony against a sinful Generation, they shall receive
that favorable sentence, Come ye Blessed, etc.

The Prayer.
O Sovereign Judge, prepare me for Death and Judgment; It is much my comfort
that thou art Judge, Competent and Compassionate, Thou will not acquit the
Guilty, yet Thou delights in mercy, and there is forgiveness with Thee that
Thou may be feared, LORD give me my discharge in time, for, Who can condemn?
CHRIST has dyed. I make my humble application to the Mercies of Thy Infinite
Bowels, the Merit of Thy Death, the worth of thy Blood, and the Power of Thy
Intercession: I have many Accusers. and am convict, But LORD say to me that
thou will not condemn me. Thou knows all the Intrigs of my Soul, What I cannot
clear, LORD do Thou cancel. I make Mercy my claim Thy Merit my Trust, and Thy
Righteousnes^ my Justification, Give me the White stone to refresh my Soul,
till Thou grant me the Crown o^ Righteousness at Thy Appearing.

Amen.
The Third Last Thing HELL.
1. TO treat of Hell is a sad Subject Tophet should have a Beaco^ set over it
that Passangers may be aware. Let us then consider, 1, The Certainty of a
future punishment of the Wicked, in another World, and the equity thereof, 2ly.
The Nature of it, particularly as expressed by fire. 3ly: How to evite it.

. 2. First, Even the Heathen World, as they had their Elysium, so had they some
thoughts of their Tartara and dark Cells for their wicked: and the most wicked
have been postest with a dread of future rewards and punishments. Snares, fire
and Brimstone, shall be the portion of the W^ckeds Cup. And this is so clearly
revealed in the Word, and even to natural Conscience, that no Man except he be
a Dull Brute can deny it: GOD has not set up Tophet to boggel us, and fill us
with Pannick fears, but that ye may fear Him, Who can cast your Soul and Body
into Hell, and in so far as sin is in thee, it kindles this fi^e which shall
burn to the lowest hell, and a sinful Nature is devilish and makes hell:
regard this Truth then to purifi^ thy affections, and make th^e flee from the
w^ath to come, for verily, it shall be ill with the Wicked.

. 3. 2ly. As to the nature of it; If the wrath of GOD and his fiery Indigna^ion
against sin, Be more Terrible than a River of Brimstone; then it is needless to
be Curious into the nature of Hell; and it is one of the most sad and
unfortunate sciences, that mortals can Experiment: for tho sometimes It
signifies Affliction as Jonah 2. 2. And the Psalmist Calls his trouble a
horrible Pit. And also, tho Hell do sometimes express the Grave; yet Our
Savior still mentions it as the punishment of the Wi^ked: It was never
questioned in the Apostolic times, whether it is fire was material or not: Our
LORD is positive. Matt. 25. 41. Depart ye Wicked into ^verlasting fire. And St.
Paul. Romans 2. 1: Calls it fiery indignation. And the Apostle Jude, the
Vengeance of Eternal Fire; It is best for us to believe according to the
Scripture, and such an apprehension of it may be very useful to the Godly, to
s^ir up in them a holy Fear. Some of the Schoolmen have labored to prove a
material fire for the spirit of the Wicked: By the Sympathy of Body, and
Spirit; and that Contact that is still betwixt them. Some have called it Light,
Because of the clear manifestation, the wicked have of the wrath of GOD there:
Some have called i^ hidden, because it is much hidden from mortals, at least
the most part will not consider of it. But it is safest to keep by the
Scriptures, and well to apprehend the sentiments of men; their spirit feeling
in time the Troubles of the Body, so may it in Eternity.

4. It is therefore, Thirdly, best to leave Curiosity, and labor how to escape
the wrath of GOD, by abandoning sin, and possessing our Hearts with a Religious
fear to ^ffend him, knowing that it is a fearful thing to fall in the hands of
the living GOD; For, our GOD is a consuming fire.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who has the Re^es of Hell, free me from the bands of sin; expel all
the fuel of Hell from my heart and nature: And grant me such knowledge, from
thy word, of the evil of sin, and it is merit, that I never experimentally feel
H^ll: LORD, where thou art not there is Hell: Thy Face makes Heaven, and Thy
Fury makes Hell; Expel, O LORD the Wildfire of sin, and all the longings
after the forbidden Fruit; Save me, that I walk not in darkness of sin, that I
may escape these dark Regions, where thou art not; Grant me such a Godly sorrow
for sin, that all my Hell may be a Penitent Remorse on Earth, that I may be
delivered from that Gnawing Worm, that never dies; Grant me that Holy revenge
of sin by Repentance that I may escape the vengeance of GOD in the place of
torment, where there is Weeping and Gn^shing of teeth. Give me to believe Hell,
that I live not a dying life in it. Amen.

The fourth last thing, HEAVEN.
THOU can not vigorously strive to enter in, except thou have some foretaste
and foresight of it; Grace is the beginning of Heaven in thee, the Holy Man is
a^^ Heavenly Man. To discourse of Heaven aright, requires great Light and
Insight i^ the Things of God, and to help the^ Christ came from Heaven to
Reveal it. His word is the pathway to it, and the Holy Spirit the Blessed
Guide of the Church: And tho thou attain not to Raptures with St. John, Rev:
2ly Yet true Faith gives us a view of it, so as that we may have our
Conversation there, Phil: 3. 20. And therefore let us consider. 1st The Vam^ie
of this World. 2ly. That Heaven upon Ear^^ to which the Saints should aspire.
3ly, The full Satisfaction and Joy, which is to be the Porti^ of the Saints in
Glory.

ss. 2. First, The World is an empty thing, but a Phantasm and shadow; It
cannot satisfy, it has not substance, men are eager in the pursuit of it, as
a Fish after a rotten Worm, and when it is caught, it proves unsavory; Let us
therefore set our Affections on things Above.

. 3. 2lie Set up Heaven in our hearts by setting up Christ therein: For, where
His Image is stamped, it makes us all in Glory; keep a closs Communion with God
and you are in a Heaven upon Earth, for thus are ye carried on from Grace to
Glory, and from Glory to Glory by the Spirit of God.

. But 3ly. The full Enjoyment of Heaven, is so sublimc and incommunicable that
Eye has not seen nor Ear heard what good things He has laid up for them that
love Him. And tho this too Radient Object, in a manner hurts our weak ^piritual
Senses, yet must we look upon it, tho not directly, yet by Reflection, and View
it in the Glories of of the Word, For Glorious Things are speken ^f the City ^f
GOD. The Crown of Gl^ry i^ the Gift of GOD, the purchase of CHRIST, and the
Transcendant Pertection of the Saints, there is enough revealed to attract our
Hearts, to refine our Natures, and to ripen ^ur Graces for Glory, and to repose
us in our proper Center Which is GOD Himself, and this being such a precious
Pearl, let us be Vigorous in pursuit after it, and lobour by Faith and Patience
and a constant course of Virtue, to find the accomplishment of the Promises.
The Apostle had His Plerophory. Rom: 8, end. And such as follow him as he
followed CHRIST, may attain to a well grounded Hope, for it is a pregnant and
approved Proposition, that such as believe in CHRIST shall not perish; but h^
everlasting Life, (to wit, with a Lively, perative and Obediential Faith, shall
undoubtedly saved: But the Second Pr^position is of our selves, to wit, I
belie^ which is not so certain as the first; that De side, This being only, de
nobis, T^ Conclusion halts therefore, except we g^^ All diligence to make sure
our Calling and E^tion, so that we can say, I do unfienged close with CHRIST,
and the Terms His Covenant, and I resolve whatev^^ Temptation occure, to stand
to my P^^ in His strengh, I count all things loss (...) Him, Who is my LORD, My
Love a^ my Choice, I believe, LORD help (...) Unbelief, I renunce all affection
to S^^ and the Life which I now live is by Fa^^ in the Son of GOD, I choice the
way (...) Righteousness which produces peace an^ Assurance for ever. This
builds our hou^ upon the Rock, when we can say with St. Paul, I know in Whom I
have trusted, that he (...) able to keep that I have committed to His trust. A
diligent and constant endurance is faire^^ for the full assurance. GOD is sure,
CHRIST is fixed, the Covenant is steady and duty the plain way to serenity and
peace; labor then to ensure unto your selves this inneffable Joy, which is
calcu^ed to the highest aspiration of our im^^rtal Souls.

The Prayer.
O Exalted King, who dwells in the Emperial Heaven, I long to be happy with
thee: ^ake my Soul humble, sia^ere and contrite, to a spiritual Throne to the
High and exalted ^e, Purify and clarify my Heart and Nature ^at I may be
fitted to feed on these pleasures at ^hy Right Hand for ever, set up Heaven in
me, ^at I may be ripe for Heaven, give me to feel the ^wer of the other World,
and to be an overjoyed ^itizen of Zion, and be the LORDs free Man ^or ever,

Amen.
STAGE Third. Treats of such things as the serious Consideration of Eternity
should suggest.
ss. 1. The best way to conceive Eternity is to read the WORD that endures for
ever; and to improve our short time, and well digest in our mind; What will be
for ever more; it is impossible in this mortal state to have full conceptions
of Eternity, for we Roll in a course of time; O^ thoughts are measured by days
a^ years. We should not therefore too mu^^ by speculation, pore upon this Vast
E^pansion, least instead of clear conceptio^ we turn confused. Rest therefore
(...) mind in these modest considerations. I. the Eternity is the O^b of the
Eternal GO^ and as by searching, we cannot find out the Almighty (for no man
can see GOD a^^ live) so we cannot conceive of Eterni^^ It is only Faith that
gets satisfaction (...) this matter, while Curiosity lies in the dark. Eternity
is much hidden from M^^ tals, therefore we should not enquire (...) it, since
it is hidden: Look well then (...) thy duty in order to Eternity, and lea^^ the
uptaking, till thou be more capacita^^ by the Beatifick vision; delay till tho^
come to Eternity, and then thou shall be satisfied; be very busy here, because
tho^^ works for Eternity.

ss. 2. 2ly. After this life we shall be like the Angels, of nimble conception,
but no^ such knowledge is too high for us, it (...) supra nos, in the instant
of our life, and the^^ fore as to speculation, Non ad nos, in th^^ ^nterim of
time; We can scarcely con^^eive of time, much less of Eternity: our ^^ith
promp^s us to Prepare for Eternal life ^^t not to stand, and pore in the Sun,
^^ast we dazel our Eyes and fall in the ^^itch. It is our Wisdom then to number
^^wr days in time, because we cannot number the Ages of Eternity: these two
words Never and Ever have great emphasis; O sad! To be never happy and ever
miserable! O Bles^ed thing, to be ever happ^ and never miserable; Sow then, the
good seed for Eternity, and fix thy house so in time as to bring thee through
all the storms of life; to have a house with GOD Eternal in the Heavens, lay up
treasure ^o^ your self in heaven, which may mantain you World without end, work
with intense projects for Eternity; every seed we sow in our finite life tends
to infinity, and let a sinner be still stated in his formercirum^ stances, he
would sin in infinitum, and never cease to be evil: And this is the reason that
some of the School men give for the Eternal punishment of sin; For a sinner, as
a sinner, would live in a perp^tual emnit^ against GOD, but the seed sown by
the Godly, has a great virtue, to spring in time, and last to Eternity where
Grace is crowned with Glor^ We should therefore, like Noah, build a^ Ark to
carry us through the storms of Lif^ and make us ar^ive on a mountain, mu^^ more
fixed than Ararat; there to dwell (...) Eternal Splendors; for Mount ^ion (...)
not be removed. Ex^rcise then your Gra^ aright, that your Faith may end, in se^
ing your hope in Fruition, and your labor in Rest.

The Prayer.
LORD GOD of Eternal Perfection, (...) Glory, before the World was, shined, and
^^dures to Eternity; fix my wavering mind, to center and rep^se in thee, and
let never the Transitory Pleasures of this Life, hinder me from a vigorous
pursuit of these pleasures, at (...) Right Hand, which are for evermore: Gi^^
me to be a person of a large Heart, and high desig^s, above the World; that I
may work for Eternity, and through Thy Grace be so happy as to enjo^ Thee, O
Eternal GOD, World without End,

Amen.
STAGE Last,
The Contents.
A Lamentation for the sad decay of Religion, and Apology for the Devotion
used in this Treatise, with a Vale to the World. And all sweetened with
suitable Devotion.

ss. 1. I Should thus concluded; were not, that I cannot well ommit to vent my
Lamentation, for the great neglect, and decay of practical Religion; and speak
something concerning the Devotion used in this Treatise.

ss. 2. And First, Of that Pathetick threne and regrate for the great
Declension of Christian piety and practice, which has been well handled by an
unknown Author and others some years ago: But alas time has still produced
great Causes of Regrate: For, such is the Impiety, Irreligion, and immoralit^
of the most part of men under the Christian Name; that the first Propogators of
this excellent Religion, so perfective of humane Nature, would now misken the
Christian Chutch, and see nothing but a Rudera and Confusion, in stead of the
well compact beauty of Zion: For even they that pretend to be the true Church,
and would inhance the whole Prerogatives thereof, to their own Romis^ Sect:
What errors of Doctrine? What corruption of Worship? What Iameness of Morals is
among them, I leave it to any such serious men as travels into these places:
What darkness and ignorance? What prophanity? What leaudness and abomination is
there, is but too Visible to all the World; Moreover, that Church that carries
that Glorious Name of Protestant, and Reformed, is much deformed and degenerate
in manners from the practice of the purest primitive times: And GODS Laws are
violated by a p^ophane age, Christ's Gospel, Offices, in stitutious and
Ministers are all vilified, contemned, dissowened, and almost utterly rejected
by our licentious Age, and wicked Generation. O What boldness of Men!
affrontedly in the f^ce of the Sun, to incroatch and invade all things Sacred:
what swearing for swearing, what profanity, what pe^jur^; does the great part
of the Christ tian World manifest, that not like Moses in a ^i^t of Z^al breaks
both Tables; but in a course of i^pious madness, they say, Come let us break
the bonds of the Lord and His Anointed assunder, They have said in their hearts
that there is no GOD: and as to the Universal decay of Religion it may be now
said comparatively, There is none that does good, no not one; And they act the
worst of crimes habitually, and with freedom; they deny GOD by their works,
and so live as if they had a new Creed, and espoused the Anathema of another
Gospel, to believe and so live as if GOD had forsaken the Earth, Ezekiel: 9. 9.
and that he, Whose Eyes see, and his E^e-lids try the Children of Men, did
indulge and allow them to lick up the Vomit, that the Heathen has cast our,
and to be much more wicked than their Fathers. Follow the most of men, even to
that piece of Formality, which is all their Religion, in coming to the Church,
ye may hear some of them, cursing, swearing, laughing, raging, as men intoxicat
with Mammon and Sensuality; Behold them in the Church, ^ou shall see them as
dull as the seats they sit upon; And follow them from the Church, ye shall find
some of them haunting the Tavern, and others wandering and erri^g, as if they
had not a GOD to fear, nor a Soul to save; And amongst many, as little Religion
in their Family, as among their Oxen, Isa^ 1. 3. Is not this then a
Lamentation, and for a Lamentation? Is not the LORDS Wrath to be feared, that
he will be avenged on such a Nation (...) ^bis; The World now in the last times
is secure as the old world, before the Deluge, and that which aggravates all,
^ew or none lay it to heart.

. 3. It will not he amiss then, modestly to enquire into the Case, The Cause,
and the Cure or Remedy, of this sad declension o^ the Church.

. 4. First, The Case, is both sad and singular, against such Grace, such Light,
and such wondrous Demonstration of the Love of GOD, to Man; to sin against
Love, Light and Mercy, and all the Endearments of Heaven; to sin against the
Coming of the LORD JESUS His Word, His spirit, His Blood and Powerful
Intercession: The sin of the old World had it^ own aggravation, that it was
Epidemick, that all flesh had corrupted its way, and against the Pathetick
Preaching of Noab, before the Deluge: The sin of the Jews was also very great,
against the Indulgence, and the peculiar Instances of Mercy to that people,
that GOD in a manner in the ordinary strains of reclaiming people, Could not
done more Isa: 5. 5. and it was their great gratitude that makes the LORD by
His Prophet complain, That he had nourished and brought up people that had
rebelled against Him; which is such an amazing transgr^ssion, that it man be
very well, with the Prophet expostulated, Be astonished O ye Heavens, etc: Isa.
1. 2. For my people has committed two evils, they have forsaken Me the
Fountain of Living Waters, and dug to themselves broken Cisterns, that can
hold no water: And although GOD did punish them with the Assyrian and Babylonish
Rod. after which, upon their Repentance, H^ restored them; yet, when the cup of
their sin, came to the brim, as that of the Ammonites before them, He did with
great Indignation, destroy that City, and People, and abandoned them to
perpetual Exile: Yet, after all this, there was some hope of Outgate, a new
dispensation to follow; And the Son of GOD came in the flesh to save both Jews
and Gentiles: But good LORD! Where shall the corrupt Christian appear? that
has rejected Christ, and the Glotious ^eams of His Light: For, if they escaped
not who despised Moses Law, Of how much sorer punishment shall the^ be
accounted werthy, who have trampled under foot, the blood of the Covenant? What
can they now forsee, but look for a fiery Indignation! and have nothing to stand
in the gap, against the wrath of an angry God: And if this Gospe^ be not a
powerful enough engine to cu^^ and heal them, they cannot expect another, nor
other Terms, nor another He^venly Messenger, to come down to sav^ them: What
remains then? but Desperation and dismal dread our, of that wrath which shall
burn in great fervor, upon that Miserable Victim; that exposed miscrea^ that
has no Sacrifice nor Propitiatory, to present, but himself, to be a miserable
Vi^tim to eternal fire; and that which make^ this Case yet the more sad, is the
consideration of that inavoidable Judgment, that cannot but fall upon such
that have slighted the opportunities of Grace, and sinned against the whole
Series of GODS Love, and infinite Mercies.

. 5. 2ly. As to the cause of this sad Case, it lies in the corrupt Nature of
Man, which tho it may be closed up for a time, when the Church is in Vigor,
yet as a sluse of Water that is restrained for a while to run; it comes out
with the greater force when it gets any liberty, and makes the man like a
Brute, without Fetters; to run at random, and so they cast off the ties of
Religion, and turn either brutal or devilish, and take pleasure to greatifie
their Lusts in the Expressions of the Irrascible or Concupiscible appetite; and
in Regard this Excellent Religion of Christianity, Puts a stop to their
Carrier; If they were not deaf and unreasonable, they Reject it while they grow
worse and worse, and sin without fear, and keep their Delilahs in their bosom,
notwithstanding of the dreadful Threatenings of the wrath of GOD: So that having
their Eves darkened, and being alienated from the life of GOD, they run to all
excess of Riot, and work wickedness with greediness, in which continuing, in
the frequency of use, they habitually sin against GOD, and cannot more change
their customs, than the Ethtopian can change his hew, and being thus separated
from GOD, they are turned into brutal savagness, with Nebuchadnezar, and so
provoke GOD to give them up to a Judicial stroke, and leave them (...) the GOD
of this World, to blind their (...), least the Light of the Glorious Gospel
should Shine upon them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Tha^ as their opportunities of Light and
Grace, were the more ample, being under the dispensation of the Blessed Gospel,
their Judgment and dreadful Declension from the way of GOD, is the more
dreadful and criminal; That as St. Peter says it had been better for them not
to have known the way of Righteousness, than after they had known it, to turn
from the Holy Commandment; And being thus Stricken of GOD, they are glad of
licentious times, and an armless Church, that every one may do according to the
Imagination of his wicked heart.

. 6. 3ly. We may easily then perceive what will be the proper cure of this. And
that is, that the Gospel of CHRIST and the Economy of His House be received
and punctually observ^d, for in effect the Gospel of it self is such a powerful
Engine, even the Power of GOD unto Salvation Rom: 7. 16. that if it were not
opposed by the petty power of Men, (and GOD may suffer this for good and holy
ends) it would certainly make a sensible change in the Christian World. This
Gospel not only pressing and propounding a pure Faith and also good manners,
and impartially distributing to every Rank their Duty, It cannot be suffered in
this Luxurient and Wanto^ Age, when the lusts of Men, not the Gol^ pel carries
the sway; And further, if the methods of Christ's Economy, for the government,
and the Education of His Disciples, were not despised, and not considered; all
would be observant of their Station and Relation: But alas! Baptism and
Baptisma^ Engagements, are very little headed by Parents or Children, and
Confirmation is either not in use, or not in force; And the Keys both of
Doctrine and Discipline, are cunningly thrusted out of the Churches hands: and
the great Men of the World will have it so, and the most of Men hate restraint,
and therefore love to have it so: but let the Godly humble and mourn for all
this, and pray that the Gospel may yet have its Native Power, and the
Sacraments and the Discipline of CHRIST have their Genuine force, that the
Church may be yet Patronised and become fair as the Moon, beautiful as the Sun,
and terrible as an Army with Banners; Cant. 3. 6. Then would Religion shine in
its glory, then would differences be healed, and good and bad be discovered;
then People would return to the LORD with their faces thitherwa^d; then would
GODS Day, ^rdinances and Ministers Be punctually looked to, and respected, then
would GOD be set up in the Houses and Hearts, profession and practices of Men,
and a golden Age would be Restored, that all the Godly might cry, grace to the
work, and Glory to the Worke^.

The Prayer.
LORD heal a sinful World and a sadly corrupted Church, and open the Eyes of
the powers and of all people, more to mind the things o^ Jesus Christ: Heal the
Backslidings of this s^^ful Generation, and bring us out to the Light, the we
may see thy Righteousness; let the time, even the set time to favor Zion come^
and regard tho^ O LORD, the Prayer of the destitute, who loves Zion even in the
Dust. Revive the pregnant P^^rity of Primitive Christianity, after the dierfull
declensions of many generations; come LORD down upon mount Zion, O Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, and roar with terror, that all the wicked of the Earth may
tremble; And display (...) banner for all that long and wait for thy Salvation.
Amen.

. 7. 2ly. As to any Form of Devotio^ used in this Treatise; I need not
apologize much, since this has been impressed upon the Rational World, by
invincable rabble Arguments; Only as to my Mite and Measure; I shall desire you
to consider; First, That by the Commandment of GOD himself, Forms were used in
the Jewish Church, And not only the Matter but the Words, were put in Moses's
mouth, by the LORD, Number: 6: from 22. to the end. And at the resting of the Camp
of Israel. And by the Prophet Hosea returning Israel, is bid take with him
words, Hosea 14. 2. And say, Take away all iniquity: And the whole of the
Jewish worship and Sacrifices, was directed by GOD in a constant form of
Incence and Oblations: And in the times of the new Test: John the Baptist
taught his Disciples the form of Prayer, and Christ's Disciples crave of Him the
same direction; who said unto them; when ^e pray, say, Our Father, etc. Which
Prayer was still in use amongst the Disciples of Christ, as it is probably
inferred from that of St. Peter, If ye call on the Father, etc. 1 Pet: 1. 17.
Where probably, the Apostle Judges it to be the constant custom of Christians
to say the LORDS Prayer: And the Primitive Church had it is Liturgies, which
has been the practice of the best of Churches: It were therefore Good that a
novice sect of men, that are so much against forms, should not so
superciliously imagine that doubtless they are the People, and that Wisdom
dwells with them, And that they are only competent to Reform the Christian
World in it is practice of Devotion, for 16 Ages; since they themselves use a
form of Benediction and dimission of the people according to the Appostolick
practice, T^^ Grace of our Lord Jesus, etc. And 2ly. If it be considered
impartially, this does not restrict Men, especially Gospel Ministers, to a
Form, but are allowed without doubt to express their mind to GOD, in the method
of their own conceptions, providing it be done with gravity, knowledge, and
great deliberation; But it would be adverted that Forms do not stint the
expressions of Men's Gifts, and the Spirit of Prayer does not soly assist in
these extemporary Gifts, but also does Act in the Calm Element of an approved
form, since it is not the matter only, but the heart guided by the Spirit, that
helps to a Right way of Devotion; and it may be in Charity Judged that the
devout, pra^ing The LORDS Prayer; may do it with as much, if not more of the
Spirit than by an extemporarie Gift, and I am confident. The experiences of
many de^ vour persons will say no less: So that it seems a Stupendous conceit
in men, to deny the constant use of that Divine Prayer, uttered by the heart
and lips of him^ that was full of the HOLY GHOST. And for my self, I would
Shrink to lay aside the use of these venerable and comprehensive words which
are ^o be looked upon as the season and incense of all our Oblations. And
therefore I hope It shall not be thought impertinent to Sum up the matter of
this treatise, in all it is Periods and Stages, into some particular Suitable
forms, which for clearness sake, I shall ser down according to the six days of
the Week, and the LORDS Day.

The Prayer to be used upon Monday, for Childhood.
OCreatour, and Preserver of Man, Thou made us and not we our selves, Psalm:
100. And I was cast upon thee from the Womb, Psalm: 22. 9. Thou made me hope
with an implicit Dependence, while I was upon the Breasts; O what a Blessing
is it to be sanctified in the Womb, and from the Womb! This is a singular Grace
indeed, and all that are under the Rays of the Gospel, have the nearest access
thereunto, especially, when by the happiness of Education, it is early
transmitted unto the Mind: O LORD, there have been myriads and millions of
people before me; And thou have brought me forth in the last days, and I am
nothing but an empty Vessel without Thee; I am lately sprung out of nothing,
and am nothing, and have nothing; and better had it been for me, to have been
nothing, than want Thy Incorruptible Grace: O LORD prevent me in the morning of
my short day, and Instill some Tincture, in this new Vessel, which may give it
a lasting Relish; Season my Heart with the Salt of Grace, and make me to grow
in Grace; Imprint, O LORD, upon the Table of my Heart, the A, B, C, of
Christianity; teach me to know, Love, Fear, Choice and Obey Thee; give me to
savor something of Reason and Religion in my ruder Age, that I may mind my
moment, and not trifle my time away about things of no moment; Pardon and heal
the corruption of my nature, and the Vices of my person; give me the new Heart
in my younger days, take away all Impediments and prejudices at Virtue and
Religion: And so shape, sharpen and Sanctify me, that I may become an
Instrument of Thy Glory and be prepared for Duty, in the following Periods of
the Life that thou shall grant me;

Amen.
Devotion in order to Youth, to be Exercised on Tuesday.
NOw Blessed GOD, thou have enlarged me from the bondage of None-Age, and the
yoke of Discipline: Keep me under thy Discipline, For, thy yoke is easy, and
thy commands are not grievous; I am now lifted up to the Prime of my Age, LORD
make me steady by Thy Grace, that I do not turn giddy and stagger; When I look
back, I find I have been Childish in mind, as well as body: What dark
conceptions have I had of thee? And any little spark of Grace was smuthered
with a Mass of corruption, and the Brute in me much mastered it: How raw and
rude were my Notions of Religion? And how contracted and deadned was my
Conscience? I was almost in all evil and knew it not, and much under the
Senses, and sensitive Appetite: The root of all evil was in me, and I was
content with my pleasant Fetters, and were not Thy Mercy, Thou had fully cast
me off the Stage, as a miscreant unworthy to live: Yet LORD thou have brought
through all this dark trance of Childhood, 1 Kings, 18. 26. Save me from
youthful lusts, and grant mewith Obadiab, that I may fear thee from my youth,
purge me from the Dregs of Nature, Let them not fix in my Bones least in fuller
years I ^e made to possess the sins of my Youth. Jo^^ 20. 11. Make me vigorous
to engage under the Banner of CHRIST, to fight against the infernal Trinity,
the devil, the world and the Flesh, and own the Holy TRINITY Blessed for ever:
Give me to offer the first fruits of my Life to Thee LORD make me to relish the
sweetnes^ of Virtue above all the pleasures of the World, and pardon the Errors
of my Youth, Psalm. 25, 11. and so ballast and establish me with Grace, that I
may lanch out unto a longer Life, and not make shipwreck of Faith, and good
Conscience; but have Thy Word for my Pilote. Thy Spirit for my Star, Humility
for my Ballast, the Gail of Grace to fill the Soul of my Affections, Thy Glory
for my End, and Eternal Life for my Harbor, Through JESUS CHRIST My LORD,

Amen.
3ly. Devotion. As to our Entrance to a ^alling and Relation; to be exercised
on Wednesday.
O GOD of Love, the Father of all sweet Harmony and Peace; and the great
Proveditor of Man; Thou have made him a Sociable Creature, and have united
Mankind in a Society, as Members of one Body, Thou have ordained him to live by
his own Industry, in the use of the Means, which by Thy Blessing tends to his
Provision. As Nature abhores Vacuity, so Thou O LORD abhores Idleness; and has
given a particular Vocation to Man for Virtue: LORD make me religious in my
general Calling as a Christian, and frugall in my particular Calling, grant me
the composed Wisdom to make choice of a Helper like unto Me, let neither
Lightness, ^ondness, nor carnal fancy be the principle and measures of my
Affection and choice, let the Advice and council of those, whom I ought to
follow be consulted; and bless me with such purity in my Design, that if by Thy
Allowance I enter into a conjugal State; I may ascend that bed with Innocence
and Whiteness, without the very knowledge of the carnal Tricks of Sin, and
Satan: And when entered^ to entertain a constant Conjugal Affection, to the
wife (or Husband) of my Youth; and if ever I have escaped in the least, wash me
thoroughly, and Cement our Relation, with the Endearments of the best Bond; that
our Family may be a Bet^el to Thee. Make our Calling Honest and Creditable, and
wherein we may be useful to Thee, and if Thy Providence has brought us to
Fortunes, give us to consider that Thou will only honor them that honor Thee,
make us useful in our Generation, in the Stations Thou have put us, and may we
with all Descretion pursue the Ends of our General and particular Calling, to
Thy Glory, and our Comfort.

Amen.
Fourthly, Devotion for our Riper years, to be exercised on Thursday.
O Eternal Life and Action, who dwells in a perpetual Repose, grant me in all
my Actions to aim Thee, and repose in Thee; and since now I must resolve with
Action, having not only the charge of my self, but of a Family, grant me to be
active to what is accountable and agreeable, for the increase of my Talents and
the Improvement, of the opportunities of my Time and Station; Save me from
vexing cares and doubtful a^xiety, but grant me rational and providential Ca^e,
in the diligent Use of the Means: Help me to Cast all my Care upon Thee, 1 Pet:
5 7. And as to dist^ust; to be careful for nothing: Save me from all
impertinent and destructive digresions, and let me never be worse than an
Infidel, in not providing for my Family, and grant me O LORD Thy Blessing,
without which my ^arly and late Endeavors, will not profit us: Save me from
all wrong measures, in the Improvement of my Stock, knowing that A little that
the Righteous Man has, is better th^n the Treasures of the wicked: For, thou
can turn my Mite into Talents. Give me to seek the Kingd^m of GOD, and mind the
one Thing necessary without which all bussiness is but trouble, give me to win
my Soul and do Good, in my place and time, that when I cease from my labors I
may enter into the Repose of everlasting Rest, Through JESUS CHRIST my LORD,

Amen.
3ly, Devotion, For our Declining Age, on Friday.
O Uncha^geable GOD, the same to Day, Yesterday and for ever; the whole
Creation has been, is, and will be under a Decay until the Deliverance of the
Children of GOD. Our Life is but a vapor and a shadow, the World so weights
us, that man begins to Decline ere he well consider that he lives: Help, O
LORD, my bowing and declining age, give me to ^loath my self against the
Winter, and fill me well against a troubled Sea; LORD give me to superstruct
well, upon solid Foundations, to build my House upon a Rock: It Is time for me
now to be wise, since I have seen and done so much folly, I will not choice the
World for my portion, it is Thee O LORD, and Thee only as the Cen^er and Repose
of my Soul: I choice thy Statutes as my Heritage, in the Land of my pilgrimage,
and Thy Salvation as my Inheritance for ever: Give me victory over the World,
by Faith, and grant me Peace, Patience, and Perseverance to the End,

Amen.
Sixthly. Devotion for Old Age, on Saturday.
O Ancient of Days, who remains still in that prime of purest Light and Glory,
look upon me, whom Thou have preserved in all the periods of life in great
mercy, Visit me in this my groaning stage, with Thy Salvation; Let all the
errors of my Youth, and by gone Age be done away, that I may have no burden,
from my former life, and now support me when old age has overtaken me, Blessed
be God that I have escaped sad Accidents, and the hurtful effects of any
miss-government of my Life: Grant I may now be taken up with Heavenly Exercise
and contemplations, that I may Receive Dimission with Christ, not only in my
Arms but in my Heart: Renew my inner-man day by day, that tho my Limbs be weak,
my Faith, Hope and Charity may be strong; And grant me a house with Thee 2 Cor.
5. 1. When my Earthly House shall fall. I entered into the World with a groan,
and nature of necessity must groan, being Burdened: But Lord exhilera^e my
Spirit, that I may leave the World with great Joy, that the day of my
Redemption draws near, and may be Refreshed in the Suburbs of Heaven, with
the Joyful Music of the Saints, that so I may sing in Death, and triumph over
the Grave, through JESUS CHRIST the Prince of life, my LORD and life, my
strength and Redeemer

Amen.
Devotion, in order to the Eternal Sabbath; On Sunday, or the Christians LORDS
Day.
O Lord of Sabbath, I Bless thee that has brought me out of the toils of the
World to rest with thy self; Lord take me up to some mount to ^ee thy Glory,
where I may erect a Tabernacle not for Earth but Heaven: Quicken me with the
Life of CHRIST, to seek those things above; and if I look back to the World, it
is not for love to it, but to see it is vanity. I admire the works of Creation
and providence, and the portract of the little World, to show the praise of
GOD; But I cannot get words nor thoughts to expatiat tiat on the work of our
Redemption, by Thy Son, Nor capacity to Comprehend the height, deepth, breadth
and length of thy love in him; But I desire so love him with all my heart, and
above all the World: I behold him now Rising from a Sea of Blood* with the
Glory of all his conquest: LORD put me in the Spirit on this day to Relish the
sweet influences of the Holy Ghost that I may be fitted for the Eternal
Sabbath, where all duties and longing, shall be turned into rewards and
enjoyments, and thy Name be Celebrated with Everlasting wonder, Hymns and
Hallelujahs, World without end. Amen.

AND in Regard, that Evangelical work of Praise and Singing of Psalms is a
special Part of Devotion, cease not in thy Pilgrimage and Solitudes, to Sing:
And if you restrict your selves to David's Psalms; For your Birth and
Childhood, Sing Psalm, 51. From the Beginning, and the 71. Psalm, from Verse
5. For your Youth, Psalm, 25. And Psalm 109 from Verse 9. For your ^iper Years,
and your Family, the 101 Psalm: and Psalm: 144, at the End. For your Old Age,
Psalm. 71, 9, and 18, Verses, and if the Church thought fit, ye may also make
use in your Devotion other Scripture Psalms, The Song of Israel on the Banks of
the Red Sea, ^he Song of Simeon, Zacharias and the Blessed Virgin, and the
Songs in the 1, 5. and 7. Chapters of the Revelation: And particularly the
Doxologie, which has been of constant use in the Christian Church, and is no
other but an ascribing of sempeternal Praise, to the Ever Blessed Trinity;
Which tho the Leprous Church of Rome use, yet is it Clean to the Pure, and it
is very sad that it should be controverted in the Militant Church, since it
will be sung for ever in the Triumphant: And since the Mysterious but Salutary
Doctrine of the Trinity was contradicted by the Arians in Old, and some of that
same Gang under another Name of Late, there is still occasion for the using of
it: And to distinguish the Modest and Regular Christian from such as in. vade
it by Opposition, for to commend their Beloved Sect, it is not amiss to rise up
in token of a more immediate Address, and closing with the custom of the Church,
wherein we should not be contentious.

And if ^ou please in your Private Devotion to Sing after this manner:
1.
MY heart is fixed, my ^eart is fixed,
now will I sing and praise,
I Will praise the Lord with songs unmixed,
and still Thy Glory raise.
2.
Now Ha^elujah's shall extol
the Lord God of my praise,
And still in praises Thee enroll,
and laud, and never cease.
3.
My little Harp is tuned to laud
my Lord, my God, my Love,
With Heavenly Queer Thy Name applaud,
Thy Glories all approve.
4.
All Songs below ^ad not the Clief,
to raise Thee thus in ault;
They were sincere, but not the chief;
as those which GOD exalt.
Second Hymn.
1.
I Wear the Crown, Christ still renown,
I reign, and He Is Supreme,
I am extolled to praise my King,
and glory in His Name.
2.
I am as well as heart can wish,
m^ Soul is all in bless,
With Joy and Peace Rests, and Relish,
the sweets I now express.
3.
I see my God, my Christ, my joy,
all mysteries are gone,
Nothing now but Love I know,
and melody Divine.
4.
The Tree of Life ma^tains my life,
never to die again;
O Death! in time, thou art so rife,
but here thy strength is vain.
5.
I live, I love, I much delight,
I ^raise and never cease,
I see and fee^ with Soul and Sp'ri^,
I*m all in Light and Bless.
6*
What can I ^ake? For I have all,
my God is here with me;
And I with him perpetual,
my Christ and God to see.
7.
Here without doubt I Will glory give,
to Father, Son, and Spirit,
I Will praise my God, and not deprive,
from his just Right and Merit.
8.
From the first Minute, to Ages all,
I will ^ssert ^^y Golre,
In melodies sempiternal,
to Tri^e Vne evermore.
Third Hymn.
1.
O Sp'rit of Light, tune now my sp'rit,
with Heaven fill my heart,
And give me sense of that great Light,
that I may act my part.
2.
With all the Host and Heav'nlie Queer,
that never ceass to cry,
Thrice holy Lord, and Thee admire;
in Peace and Rest and Joy.
3
My Soul, my Heart, my Sp'rit, my Powers,
all join to Praise Thy Name,
My GOD, my Life, my Hope, my Help,
I Will praise Thy Mercies Fame.
4
Thy Help in need, has made me Glad,
Thy Grace was still my claim,
And fresh Supply has me releiv'd,
I magnify Thy Name.
5.
I Will Praise, I Will ^ing, I Will Hope and Joy,
in Thy great Grace so Good,
I Will still advance and mend my pase
in every Period.
6
A monument I was, and am
of Grace, and still remain,
I Will Bless and Laud and never cease
with Praise, to say, Amen.
A VALE to the WORLD.
1. Farewell to all the flattering hopes of Happiness upon Earth; All that have
been in pursuit of this Shad^w, have been frustrated: For, all is Vanit^ and
Vexation of Spirit, there is no satisfaction in the World, separated from GOD:
And what portion we have of it from Him, we must use it as the Means but not as
the End. Give me LORD, the V^ctory over the World by Faith, that I use it well
and never abuse it, Let me never over value it, least it undo me, and make me
a miserable wretch of no Value.

ss 2. Away with all the follies of Childhood, and all the prejudices of that
imperf^ct age, against what is Solid and Serious. Away with all the indigested
notions that flow from the simple Brain of such as have not yet well formed
Reason and Religion.

. 3. Away with all the promising Notions, which our Ruder Fantasies ^^rm in
this State, with all the follies tha^ ^^ow in this Age, with all Glorying in
Strength, Beauty, Feature, and Fawning Fortune* with all ostentive Boasting of
Gifts and Parts, and even of Grace, as it were ou^ own, since we have nothing
but what we have received: together with all Garnal fancy, Fondness, Folly,
and amorous conceits, since Wisdom is the principal Thing, it being only Solid
and Permanent.

4 Away with all eggar desire after the World, and all Covetous Court-ship of
that Idol-god, let it fall like Dagon before the ARK, with all petted and
fretting humor, the Unruliness of Passion and all the Distempers of Youthful
Age, and all discontents and disorders, and anxious fears for our Provision,
with all carking Care anent the World, let us study Honesty, for falsehood has
no feet, and he that walks Uprightly, walks surely.

. 5. Away with all Immaturities of Growing Age, let us labor well, get Good
Seed, and wait the Season of the Grace of GOD, beware of the deceitful World
which is not faithful in its Promises; it is but a Cheat, we should not
believe it when it speaks favorably, for all that is in the World; is but
the lust of the flesh, of the eye, and pride of Life, and is Enmit^ against
GOD, we should not love GODs enemy tho it pretend friendship.

. 6. Away with all impertinencies of our former Life, for alas we have been
foolish and dissobedient, and too much taken up with vain customs of the World,
Ah, how many acts the fool upon this Stage, and do pass their time in a Comedy
til their end be tra^ical.

. 7. Away with all that discomposeth our reason, that we may well conduct our
Mind and Life, and not to expose our selves to the floating billows of the
Storms of this Life: Learn rather to be Catholic and Uniform in thy Course,
and pray GOD to bring in our st^aying hearts and unite them to fear His Name.

. 8 Away with all debates and contradictions among Relations, and let us be
Careful to keep our Soul and house in order, to guide our Spirit and Passion
with moderation and patience, even Under Provocations, and not to trouble our
selves much with the extravagancies of others, and learn to quench incident
heats in converse and families, let us submit one to another, and comport with
i^firmities, and co(...)mit our cause to GOD, least such fre(...)ing and
discontents, imbitter our ne(...)est Relations, listen not to an^ lust th(...)
may feed the flame, and still keep Religion and reason on your side: Put awa^
therefore all Clamor, ill speaking and Bitterness* Kindly loving one another,
forgiving one another as GOD, for CHRIST'S sake has forgiven (...).

. 9. Away with all ^^i^kie policy to Circumvee^ our Neighbou^s, with all
hastiness to be Rich and to compass the World, for it is very uncertain, and
takes Wings and flees away; and let ou^ pursuits of it be with the conduct of
Religion, within the lines of equity and honesty, otherwise we man find all
it is Product to turn as a M^shr^m or Jonah's Gourd, let us be Anxiously ^areful
for nothing, and seek first the Kingdom of GOD and his Righteousness. Matt. 6
33. And other things that are good for us, will be added: Let us never Glory
but in GOD, and be humble in our best Circumstances. Let not the World go above
it is Sphere least it take fire and Consume it self and us; Study the Art of
contentment, How can any men complain that have GOD for their Portion? and if
we secure our intrest (...) Christ, then all is ours. Solace thy self (...)
GOD, delight in him and he will Give thee the desire of thine heart. Psalm. 37.
4. and if thy Crosses be bitter and heavy they are the liker Christ's; if your
troubles pinch you and put you in a manner, to your wits end, come out of your
self and stay upon the name of God, for he can give strength to bear the
Temptation and a Gracious out gate; and say, with Jehosaphat I wet not what to
do, but my Eyes are toward thee.

. 11. Away with all murmurs under the burdens and infirmities of declining Age,
as pains of Body, dimness of Sight, dullness of Hearing, Rehums and
Rehumatisms, difficulties of Breathing, weakness of Stomach, Obstructons,
Gravel, Gut, Feebleness, and other incident Infirmities; Let the GOD of Hope
and Patience be your Hope and Strength, and learn to exercise thy patience.

. 12. Away with all too Carnal Love to any thing of the World, and if we have
known any after the flesh, Henceforth know we them no more.

. 13. Away with all doubts of GODS Mercy and fears of death, providing we be
unitted to CHRIST, Rom: 8* to the end. When we cannot act much, let u^ take up
our selves with Contemplation^ and by Faith take a View of that Glory which is
to be revealed, that unspeakable Glory that is Yonder, above in our* Fathers
House: Let us draw Water out of the Well of Salvation, in the Conduit^ which
GOD has made to entertain a Communion betwixt HEAVEN and Earth: Doubt not of
any difficulty about the Intrigs of Providence, for tho some of the Godly have
been shaken with the prosperity of the wicked; as David, Psalm: 73. and Jeremiah
chap: 12. Yet settle your self, that GOD can bring Light out of darkness, and
can make all things work together for the Good of them that love Him; and that
there is a day of Retribution, and Restitution of all things when the Sovereign
Judge will destribute Rewards, according to these two Attributes, of Justice
and Mercy.

. 14. Away with all debates, Divisions and contests in the Christian Church,
for now we pass to the Land o^ peace to be joined in the Harmony of love and
concord; where we hope the East and west Church in the beginning of
Christianity; it contests anent the feast of Easter is now fully made up in the
perpetual festival, which they shall enjoy in their Fathers house; where we
hope Luther and Calvin, and their biguit adherents: Having keept the main of
Religion are now agreed: And all the debates about Modus Rei, the manner of our
LORDS presence in the Eucharist are now settled and sa^i^fied in the Celestial
Communion; Where all debates anent the outward policy of the Church shall
evanish, When we come to a continual Doxologie of the Trine-Une GOD an^ a^tain
unto the General Assemly of the firstborn: where also we hope that Papists who
have walked suitably to fundamentals of Religion, yet through the Unhappiness
of their Birth and Education, have been under a sort of invincible Ignorance,
shall join with the Protestant. Where also we do charitably h^pe, that many who
are without, and have answered their Light in Morality, and have implicitly
closed with the Mercy of GOD, which takes in all the methods of its
communication, may come to share of the deepth of that Mercy, which is the very
Nature of GOD* And that Tremendous Justice which rendereth to every man
according to his Works, and impartia^^ Judges such as are under, and such as
a^^ without Law: And particulary, we ho^^ that all the private Contests among
Fam(...)lys and Relations, which have flowe^^ from humor, weakness,
temptations, and incumberances of the World, shall all be gone, when the warm
Flame of the infinite Love of GOD shall fill their Hearts.

15. Away with all biguit adherance, to a Sect or Party, since neither Papis^
nor Protestanism, Parity nor Prelacy will save us if we be not real Christians;
We ought indeed to search all things, and hold what is best, but withal, we
should not so much lean to our own understanding, but follow after Charity,
that Ephraim, no more vex Israel, but all be joined in one faith to the LORD.

. 16. Away with all fears of the frowns of providence, for there is a wise
disposer; Away with all vexation about the troubles of Revolutions, since we
hope to be Citizens of a Continuing City, that has a Foundation. Let us labor
to vanquish the World by Faith, and be still doing good, and we need not fear
what man can do.

ss. 17. Adi^w all Relatives and Acquaintances; We leave you to the ^race and
Guidance of God: Farewell Sun and M^on and that gl^ri^us Canopy of ^he
Firmament, bespangled with divid^d Lights: For we hope to Live above ^he
Clouds, in our Fathers House, where there is no need of the Sun, because the
Son of Righteo^sness is there, we leave all the flowers and pleasures of an
earthly paradise to feed upon the Tree of Life.

And last of all; farewell beloved Body, the Spirit and Voice of our Beloved,
says come, we must gird up the loins of our Mind, we leave thee to the dust,
but we hope to return-again, for tho thou have been corrupted by sin, yet now
sanctified by the Blessed Body of CHRIST, we lay thee down as precious dust, to
be refined in the bowels of the Earth, Our Souls can not be fully perfect
without Thee, therefore go to thy Dormitory, and sleeping house, till the last
Trump sound, and then shall we be made perfect in Soul and Body, and be ever
with the LORD.

The Devotion Suitable.
ANd now what clogs and fetters thee O my Soul? thou sees what sin and the
world can do, linger not but arise for this^^ not thy Rest, look to the
recompense of reward with Moses, think upon the calmn^^ of a better life, in
the t^mpests of this, fight the Good fight of Faith, and GOD will give thee the
Crown of Life; Prepare for Judg^m^nt and Eternity, for the Judge is a^ the Door.

The Prayer
LORD make up my wants* and Remove what is superfluous in me; adorn me with the
We^ing Garment, and deck my soul that through thy Grace I may be able to enter
in. Courage, Courage O my Soul for CHRIST'S mercy and Grace i^ before thee; let
not Death be Irksome to thee, but LORD grant me the Wish that I have long
breathed for to Die in peace and lay down my Tabernacle with joy, and render up
my Soul to GOD with delight. I have seen an end of all perfection in the short
span of my life, I have seen the Glory of the World pass away like a Scroll,
there is nothing certain but in Thee, all flesh is Grass, but thy word endures
for ever. I have seen Riches flee away with the Wings of the morning, and
strength and vigor turn to weakness, but Thou O LORD art the only sure portion
of thy People. I count all things loss for thee, and I have none in Heaven but
thee, and none is there on Earth that I desire beside Thee; I aquiesce in thee
as my Repose for ever; Thou art all my bless and happiness for ever.

Amen.
The End
AN APPENDIX The Pastoral legacy, and latter will of a Gospel Minister to his
flock, in some Sermous upon 2 Pet: Chap. 1. from v 12. to the middle of 16.
Preached from the 2 Sunday of April, to the 4th. Sunday of June, 1693.
To the Reader
Courtious Reader.
COnsidering the weakness and uncertainty of my life, being under often
Infirmities some years bygon; to which I humbly submit, and kisses the hand
that smites me: considering also the uncertainty of the times, not knowing how
soon I may be turned out; I did resolve to leave this Valedictarie behind me,
for the good of my flock, and of any that shall pursue it, which I dedicat^ to
the glory of GOD, and the Edification of the Church, and to my Reverend
Brethren of the Ministry.

Moses took hie leave of Israel, and left directions after him, Deuteronomy. 1. 32. So
did Solomon, Eccl. 12. 8. And He that is greater than Solomon our Blessed Lord
had his farewell Sermon, John chap* 14, 15, 16* Saint Paul, Acts 20, 29. And.
St. Peter here; So I desire to leave my Flock with some Advertisement and
monument of my care for them.

Sermon I.
Containing the Compact Chain of our Holy Religion, exactlie knitting the
Privileges and Properties of a Christian together in one link, in the particle
(...) Wherefore.

I Shall leave it to such as write upon the whole Epistle to vendicate it from
the false Aspersion of some who denied it to be Canonical, of whom Eus: speaks
in his Church history, 3, Book 25. Chap, Which indeed was very unjust since the
Epistle savo^rs of its Author, and the genious of Christianity. So that its
like whoever they were that refused it to be Canonick could not b^^ be among
the number of those false Prophers mentioned by this Apostle, Chap: 2d, Verse,
1. Or of ^hese scoffers of whom he writes Chap: 3d: Verse, 1.

Neither shall I insist upon the design and scope of this Epistle, since it is
so clearly manifest to any that ^eads it, mentioning the great privileges and
properties of a Christian, and a preserv ^ive against false Prophers and
Scoff^rs at Religion.

So I come to the Text in th^se vereses, which contain a^ Application of the
preceding Doctri^e, conecting the Privilidges and Properties of a Christian,
in the particle Six Wherefore, Quamobrem, upon which account, etc. 2ly, The
Apostles care to inculcat the Truth upon the people to whom he writes. 3ly The
Sense, the Apostle has of improving the Opportunity; in doing so, as long as
he is in this Tabernacle. 4ly; The practical Knowledge of Death, and Resolution
with it. 5ly. His provident and frugal care to store his people with the
Knowledge of the Gospel, which they may improve after his decease, so the
Spiritual Pa^^^tlayes up for his Children against the time to com^, When he is
gone. 6ly, The ba^e and sure Foundation of Gospel Truth, Verse, 16.

The First, Clearly discovers to us this Truth, that the Christian who and
twist together the Christian privileges and properties, Our Crown and Our
Claim. Profession and Practice, Promise and Precept, Justification and
Sanctification, Glory and Duty, The Race and the Prize; and Labor and Rest.
The Gospel Net must be well knit, and we must follow the line and thread of
Duty. Ou^ Salvation is linked in a Chain, there is a Corner Stone that knits
the Building from the Foundation to the Top, Rom: 8, 26. There must be the
Prima, Media and Vltima. We must begin, proceed, and perfect our Work, for non
progredi est Regredi. To stand in our Religion hinders our Race, We must add to
our Faith, Virtue, for Faith without Works is Dead.

This is not only the Doctrine of St. Peter here, and formerly Chap. 1. 5. 6.
7. But of St. James Chap. 2. And they both writing to the Jews had need to
press this, for that People spleeted upon the Rock of their Privileges, to
whom St. Paul gives a Check, Romans 2 1. He is not a Jew that is one outwardly,
but he is a Jew that is one inwardly. For a great part of the visible Church,
tests much here, and are ready to say, LORD, LORD, when they do not the works
that he Commands them: And so become partial in their Religion, and leave the
half of it unpractised, they can take Christ for a Savior, but not a
Sancti^er: And follow Him for L^avs but not for duty and labor, they can cry
The Temple of the LORD. Jer. 7. 4. But study not the new Creature; They may
keep the ordinances, but not observe their design, and can be hired to help to
build an A^k, but not to enter it.

2ly. All desire to be happy, but all take not the R^ght way to happiness; they
leap after the and, but stand in the way, and neglect the means, that promove
the end: whereas true blessedness comes only to the Vndefilea in the way, Psalm.
119. 1. And the Psalmist, J^^ns justification and Sanctification together, in
order to Blessedness, Psalm. 32. 1. Sin cannot enter Heaven, no more a sinner,
but we must ascend the Mount and carry nothing with us that is defiled: We must
be meet for the inheritance, for without holiness none shall see GOD: Elijah's
Chario^ could not carry a wicked Ahab to Glory; And the best must be with
Elijah, Purged by fire, ere they enter the splendors of Glory: GOD has a
Furnace to purge us, a plummat to square us, we must be pure and Refined ere we
can dwell with everlasting burnings; and tho we be not Justified by works Romans
4. 6 4. Ye^ must we be Judged according to our works; For, tho GOD justifies
the ung^dly, Yet he only saves the Right(...).

3ly Wherefore let us observe the scope of this Dying Apostle, and learn App:
to make our Holy Religion practical: for by so doing we shall not only make
ou^ Calling and Election sure; But hereby an entrance shall be made unto us,
unto the Kingdom of our LORD JE^US Christ. And that we may be Glad to make
this improvement the more Cheerfully, let us consider that this tends most,

1. To the Glory of GOD. 2ly. The Reputation of Religion. 3ly. To our own Good
and the benefit of others. 4ly. It assures our interest in Glory, much more
than all the instincts, Enthusiasms and Raptures men can be affected with.
1. This tends most to the Glory of GOD: Our good works should be ^o solid and
visible, that they may show forth the Glory of GOD, the light of Grace shines
more and more unto the perfect day, till it be more Radi^nt in Glory. GOD's
Glory i^ the great end of our Religion, and a Right conversation Glorifies him,
and tends to our salvation, Psalm. 50. 23. Holiness p^oclaims the Honor of the
thrice, Holy, Holy, Holy GOD; And GOD delights more in it than in Hecatombs of
sacrifices: We need not say, with Moses. LORD show me thy Glory, for Holiness
i^ the very Ray and Beam of the Glory of GOD, and the Divine Emana^ion of that
Light and life that is in GOD: The Holy Person is the only Fruit bearing Tree
and a holy Life giv^s GOD the Glory, discovers Heaven and perfects the
Beleiver, For, without Holiness no ^^^an can see GOD.

2ly. As Nothing disparageth Our Religion more than Hypocrisy, so nothing
advances its Reputation more than a well Qualified Christian, for if once
Practical Religion, did exert its Native Power and Quality, it would commend
it self as the product of GOD, it would appear a Wonder, it would make the so^s
of Men say with Pharaoh's Magicians. This is the finger of GOD, it would give
us a more noble Spirit than the World, I^ would make us the first born of GOD,
and pattake of the Divine Nature, it would make the Men of the World, as St.
Paul says, in another case, fall upon their face and say, GOD is in it of a
Truth it would appear no phantasm or contrivance, to ammuse the World, And
would make the Truly Godly Religion as their bage and Cognizance, and make Men
say that this is the Work of GOD, it would make us like CHRIST to be pure as He
is pure, it would appear to be no Superstition flowing from fear, but it would
appear a Lively, Amiable, and lovely Thing, and attract Men's hearts, it would
make the Hypocrisy cast off his Mask, the pr^fane put off shame, and the
Formalist seck after substance, and the Power of Godliness, it would make Men
Saints, and turn Angels, and be so excellent as to delight others, Psalm: 16, 2
And in fine make them elect and precious, as their faith is.

3ly, This will also afford ^olid meat, and the Kernal of Religion to refresh
us, it will be to us a Tree of Life and hidden Manna, and more refreshing than
the Nectaer and Ambrosia of the heathen Gods, and when Christ is formed in us,
then have we Light Life, and Comfort, Then shall we eat the Kernal of Religion,
when the shell is br^ken, and Strangers shall not meddle with our J^ye^; nor
the Impure eat the Childrens food, This shall confute all such as decry
Religion and comfort all that have the Real Life of it, and make them say with
St. Paul, The Life we now live is by Faith in the Son of GOD.

4ly. This will open a door and Entrance to the Kingdom of O^r LORD JESUS
CHRIST and will prove a more solid way to make us Draw near to GOD, with full
assurance of faith? and be a more sure ground to us than all the heats and
heights of Religion, which are but transient, and perhaps, flow from humor and
Complexion; but this makes the spirit of G^ory dwell in us. Gives us a clean
conscience washed with pure water, Heb 10. end; to draw near to GOD: So that a
trembling, humble Gh^istian, that with St. Paul, cries ^ut; O wretched man that
I am Romans 7. end May be nearer the Joy of the Lord than the other. So that
whoever seek a proof of Christ sn us, We shall prove it best by Works and
Fruits, and the New Creature is the most infallible mark of being in Christ, 2,
Cor, 5, 17. and True si^^cere Obedience is the great specific and genuine
property of true Christianism.

And further to clear you in all this let us confront the privilidges and
properties of the Christi^n, if any separate them he is like a Man catching the
Crown with out the Conquest, but the true Christian reaches one hand in the
Crown and wi^h the other holds his W^apon, to fight for the Prize that through
^aith and p^tience and unwearied W^ll ^^ing, he may inheri^ the Promises: What
more excellent then the precious Promis^p^ut we must add Virtue to our faith
(...) th^se Promises; the Christians Claim is ind^ed great for all are yours
says (...) But such as are Christ's, says he, have crucified the flesh with
its lusts and effections.

But to come nearer the con^^xt, from 2. ver. to this 12 the Apostl^ speaks of
beleivers attaining like precious faith with the Apostlesfor, their is but one
faith; (which the Apostles Believed. and pr^pagated) once delivered to the Sa
(...) as (...) J^de says; and this faith Acts 15. 9. purifi^th the heart and
life. And having that same faith of the Apostles, we should live, according to
our measures, as the Apostles, then should the Pure and Primitive Church
revive; But alas! Were St. Paul now at Rome, he should find it much more
Heathen than in his time, and very unlike these whose faith was spoken of
through the World. O then if people would walk suitably to that noble Gift of
Faith, which is given us.

2ly. The full Instructions, the Christians have. All things, says the
Apostle, that pertain to Life and Godliness, Glory and Veri^e: We want nothing
to furnish us for every good Work; The whole Council of GOD, Acts, 20. 27. All
things to make us Godly and Glorious, we have the Word of GOD to make us wise
to Salvation, and the Spirit of GOD to lead us into all Truth. Improve then
your privileges For, if ve know these things, happy are ye if ve do them.

3ly, We have the great Gift of the Promises, as the Apostle says here; But
yet having these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all silthiness of
flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. and take head least (a promise being made thus
of entering into his Rest) we fall short: But if Piety be joined with the
Promises, then we partake of the Divine Nature, and have another Spirit, a new
Heart, Lif^ and new Affections; and thus the Sai^^ are, in their measure,
Divinized and sp^ritualsed, and Created after GOD, (...) Righteousness and true
Holmess.

And so to conclude this truth, (...) would warn you, not ha^ilv to catch a^
the Promises, but labor to lay hold on them by a lively Faith and Well-doin^
Be not too ^aring, least ye presume; prove your title, first, And then glory in
your privileges; make your selves meet for the Inheritance, and then you are
sure of it; and let the glory of that great Claim indeer your Hearts to Duty,
to jo^n your selves in a perpetual Covenant with the LORD, never to be forgot,
Jer. 50.

Sermon II.
The Duty and Diligence of the Apostolic C^rate, or Gospel Minister,
described: With the Matter and manner of his Preaching, and the Quality of
Christians in the time of the prime of Christianity. Upon Verse, 12.

THe Apostle falls now to a closs Application of the Doctrine, formerly
mentioned in this Chapter, wherein he relates the Duty of the Minister, that he
should not be negligent, but busy in the exercise of his holy Office. 2ly, The
great Subject of his Doctrine, these Things. 3ly, The way of his I^culcating
the said Doctrine upon the Hearts of People. And 4ly, The Qualification of
People in these Times.

I begin with the First, b^th negatively and positively described, That a
Gospel Minister, should be very intent upon his great and weighty Work; This St
Peter declares of himself, and St. Paul also frequently mentions his great
business; These two Pillars, of the Church, the Apostles of the C^rcumcision
and Uncircumcision follow the the great Luminary, their Blessed Master, and
stand as eminent Examples to all the Officers of the Church of Christ: And this
Apostle describes his Duty.

1st. In his care for the Good of Souls to whom he wrote. 2ly. That he was not
negligent, but Diligent in his Employment.
First, His great care for the Church, and the good of Souls; The care of Souls
is worthy to ^e fined from the most intensive affections of the Heart, It is
such (...) Pious and Divine Affection, that GOD Himself describs His ea^nest
Compassion^ to His People, thereby: As our Saviout sh^ws us, in His Sermon upon
the Mount, Upon which account, St. Paul bids us be careful for nothing, but by
Prayer and Supplication make our request known to GOD: And St. Peter so exhorts
also, casting all your ca^es upon GOD who cares for you.

It was our Savior's care for Souls, that brought Him from Heaven to us, and
when on Earth, made Him so diligent to Preach, Pray, and Weep for his Church.
This care of Souls went nearer St. Paul's Heart, than all his troubles; for,
beside all things that are without (said he) that which comes upon me daily,
the care for all the Churches: The true natural Father has a great care for
his Children, and the Spiritual Parent no less, for I have no greater Joy
(says St. John) than to see my Children walking in the Truth.

F^r, such is the subtility and labor of the evil one, ^o seduce and corrupt
our Flock: And alas! such is the carelessness and incuriousness of the most, as
to Spiritnol Matters, (like Gallio careing for none of these things) and such
are the many encumbrances anent the World. and what is worst of all, even a
careful Contrivnance of many, to prosecute their sinful ends; that a faithful
Minister shall find great Reason of serious care, and even to (...) out with
St. Paul. Who is sufficient for these things? For his trust is great, his
Charge we^ght^ and his Opposition strong, and his people for the most, running
s^riously in pursuit of their lusts: That upon all these Considerations, he may
be a most faithful Watchman, and give ^meous, Loud, seasonable and impartial
warning to all; that he may be free of their blood; This care will make him
spend, and be spent for the interest of their Souls. The worth of a Soul is
unspeakable, and the winning of a Soul is greater than the winning of a strong
City; And such as know the worth of a Soul, which GOD made after His own Image;
And Christ shed His Blood for, will think they cann^t be enough serious in
doing their Duty in order to its Salvation: this care. as it cannot but take
up the man, so is it very essential to the Holy Office, and may serve to take
off the hearts of such as are employed, from Worldly cares and vanities, and to
set us about out Work with all care and seriousness, knowing that as the w^rk
i^ great, so ^he Reward is gloriou^, and such as turn many to righteousness
shall shine as the firmament. Dan. 12. 3.

And this care will certainly not suffer any serious Man, to be negligent in
his Office, but very diligent and dutieful: For, No Man that knows the great
compassion of the High Priest, and his inspection over all, with searching eyes
like flames of fire, and that knows the natural eflects of Sloth and
negligence, especially in concerns of greatest consequence; and considers the
account of his Stewartship, and the great Glory of being faithful in his
Generation; will fold his hands, to sl^ep in sloth and negligence: And in
Regard that this n^gligence, is so unbecoming a Man in Holy Orders, it ^ will
be found to be one of the greatest defects of a Gospel Minister: Ah! to be
negligent when Satan is vigilant, and when others are busy about their secular
Callings; to s^^ep in the time of Harvest, and to stand idle when the Vineyard
has need of dressing, to be negligent in the concern of Souls, and Salvation
argues a great security and unwor^hiness.

And that thou be not negligent, Thou must mind the concerns and ends of ^^y
holy Calling, that thou shun unnecessary dive^sions, and leave not thy Flock,
least the Wolf come, and thou expose thy self to sin, and disrepute, and thy
people like a Corn-field, to be overgrown with Weeds: Thou have work enough at
H^m^, to read, pray, contemplat GOD, search the Sc^tptures, and like a good
Phys^^ian study the Case of thy People, that thou mavest apply suitable cures,
and have the flock in order, and such a face of Religion in it, that thou have
the Applause of Man, and the Approbation of GOD and receive that Euge, Well
done, Good and Faithful Servant.

And ^or the positive part, to be diligent is no less necessary, for to rise in
the morning and be idle all the day, is no Advantage to the common Interest:
No, No, our Work is worthy of our While; and our Calling of our Cair and
bussiness: Let our diligence therefore appear first in our Willing Going about
our Work as St. Paul speaks, If I do this willingly: Which Alac^ity, was so in
him that he protests Woe unte me if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor: 9. 1. and
St. Peter press^th this Willingness, (...) Pet. 5 1. diligence imports a
delight, we should no^serve God as the Israelites under the Task Masters of
Egypt, we are anointed we should ^un g^^^ly.

2ly, This D^^igence in a Gospel Mini^ter carries in it the Use of all the
Means, that may serve to reach the ends of the Gospel, as faithful preaching,
seasonable dispensation of the Sacraments, painful instruction of People,
impartial Discipline and sincere, earnest and constant Devotion, which now I
shall not enlarge upon, since it is ad Cler^m.

And 3ly, A firm and steady resolution to endure hardness, and never to
complain of our Calling; because of the difficulties in this World that attend
it: so that in fine, if the business of our Calling be our Work, our Cair, our
Duty, and Delight; we hope we shall not be accounted negligent and incurious,
but Concerned and Diligent, by our Great Master; for it is a small thing to be
judged by Man, there is One that judges, and that is the LORD.

Yet as the Ministers of the Gospel are Angels by their Commission, they are
but Angels in the Body, and have the Treasure of the Gospel in Earthen Vessels;
So that People must look upon them not a^ all spirit, the they be laboring to
walk after the spirit, and receive their word, not as the word of Man, but as
indeed it is the word of GOD: and as the best of men will not refuse ^o confess
their in^^^mities, especialy for such a holy Work; so should not people,
because of their infirmites, Refuse the word, but labor to be the more
diligent themselves; especially in being Serious, solicitous and diligent in
the matters of Religion, and their Soul: And when I consider, how busy men are
about the World, and nimble in pursuit of their lusts, the little care they
have of their Soul, and the concerns of their Salvation; how negligent they are
in duty and attending of Ordinances, what little attention goes along with
their hearing, and so small Meditation after it; I fear we may conclude that the
great fault lies at your own door: Therefore; Good people, look to your Selves,
bestir your selves more in the affairs of Religion; and this will make your
Pastors Sprighty, and animate them to be lively in praying for you, and
Preaching to you: For dull people very much deadens and discourages a Gospel
Minister, and it is very sad to be gathering good purpose every week for a
careless people, that will scarce gather to hea^ him, and if they come, they
too much discover the Bias of their heart, which they have left behind them.

I come now to the (...) to wit^ the subject matter of the A^^stle's writing
(...) Brench
and preaching, to wit(...) concerning these things, which are the things of
CHRIST, the things of Salvation, the great Concern of Souls, and the things of
duty and the Kingdom of GOD; which things our LORD mentions. John 13. 17. If ^e
know these things, etc. The Gospel and the great things thereof, mostly
contradicted by the World.

So that it is clearly observable, that the holy Appostles in their writings
and Preaching keepe^ close to the Gospel; and this is the Theme that all our
Sermons should aim at, to Preach CHRIST, and the Glad things through him; It is
a subject of so great light, that i^ it be well pursued, it will di^sipate all
the Clouds of error, ignorance, sin and unbelief; it is the life and Soul of
our Religion; and it argues a great decay when Circumstances are p^essed with
so much violence, and the substance of faith and holiness, so much neglected:
The Pharisees in old turned superficial in their Religion, by their Z^al for
their traditions; and it is to be feared that Christianity is much exanimated,
by such a cry, for the outward part, with too great neglect of Charity, and the
holiest of all; where only we can find the propiratory.

And to be more particular, these things that we are mainly to insist upon, may
be taken up in these particulars following.

1. The necessaria, or things absoluty needful to Sa^vation. 2ly The
Prosecution of the great design of the Gospel. 3ly. The Right informing of what
we have been, what we are, and what we shall be. 4ly. The consideration of the
last things, so useful for the salvation of our souls, and so clearly
manifested in the Gospel.
First, the things absolutely necessary for salvation; as the true Knowledge of
GOD, and the Mediator, and the operations of the Holy Ghost, in the
illumination and sanctification of our hearts; These are the Revelation of that
mystery, that was hid from ages, which refresh the Soul in the true knowledge
of GOD, and directs our Spirit to worship him in spirit, and in tr^th; and to
love, fear, ^bey and ch^ose him, as our Portion, ^^^e and hereafter; which
overaweth the ^^ul with a reverential fear of his name and sha^tech abroad
Divine love in our hear^s, whereby we are ve^^y much Ref^^sh^d with the Bread
of Angels and Saint: And ^hen we look upon GOD, in the Mediator, we take him up
aright: And by our applying of, and employing CHRIST in his Mediatorial office,
we come to get Victory o^ ver Hell and Death; and by the commiting our selves
to the Guidance of the Spirit, it makes a spirit of Glory Rest upon us: It
fills our hearts with a wondrous Jubilation and joy, and fi^^s us t^ have our
Conversation in Heaven, from whence we look for the Savior. Phil. 3. 20.

2ly, The prosecution of the great design of the Gospel; We are taught by the
A^p^a^ance of the Grace of GOD, to deny all ungodliness and Worldly lusts, and
to live Godly, Righteous^^, and Soberly in this present World, Ti^ 2. 11. This
is the right management o^ our Knowledge and Christian Calling, whereby we are
directed and assisted, to put in Practice our holy Religion.

3ly, And it is very behoovful in our Christian Course, well to consider, what
we have been, that we may be humbled; To consider what we are, that we may be
Cautious, and Circumspect; And Iabour to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge to
our LORD JESUS CHRIST; To answer our Gospel Education in all tke Relations and
Turns, and Exigents of our Life: And what we shall be, is best known by,

4ly, The consideration of the Novissima, or Last Things; That we entertain
frequent Meditations of Death, that so we may be ready when GOD's time comes;
To be wise to consider our latter End, and wisely to number up our Days; To
Judge our selves that we be not condemned at the Last Judgment; To consi^er
H^ll, that we may put a Beacon over Tophet, to flee from it. And to recreat our
selves with the Prospect of Heaven to encourrage us, To make meet for that
Inheritance, with the Saints in Light.

N^w that all these things may be laid to Heart, entertained and improved in
our Christian Life, I shall subjoyn these Reasons following,

1st. The Orignal of these things. 2ly, These things contain our Right and
Title to Glorv. And 3ly, They contain our Portion and Patrimon^ in HE^VEN.
First, There Original, They are ^ (...), from above, They are wholly Div^ne,
the Et^rnal Truth of the Eternal GOD; They are neither Humane Inventions, nor
Traditions, but the ^^ictates of Eternal Reason; so Pure, so Excel^ent so True,
and so Just, that they discover the Fountain from whence they flow: The Gospel
then is a Divine Thing, every Truth thereof is a Ray of Eternal Light; and the
Preaching of the ^ross of CHRIST, tho to the blinded World, of no account,
being to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; Yet is it
to be Gloried in, by true Beleivers, as the Issue of Eternal Love, and the
great product of Heavenly Council and Covenant; It Is wholly composed of
Glories, discovers unto us the everlasting Love, Precious CHRIST, and Precious
Promises, great Rewards, and an Eternal Crown.

2ly, These Things contain our Title to Glory; Our Charter of Inheritance with
the Saints, in Light; Which Composed according to the Terms of the Covenant of
Grace; That GOD is our GOD, and we His People; Which Charter w^ should
understand, as being sealed with the Word and Oath of GOD: And upon our part,
oug^t to be sealed with persevering Fidelity, so that we need not run to turn
the leaves of our destiny, in the secret Council of GOD, but search the
revealed Will, that our names, by Well doing, may app^ar to us, to be written
in the Book of Life

3ly, These things contain our Portion and Heavenly Patrimony; For, 1 Cor: 3.
End, If we be CHRIST^, all is ours. If Genuine Christians; Then are we Sons,
Heirs and Coheirs with CHRIST. Gal: 4. 7. The Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST are
Thine: We should then oft^n read our Charter, rejoice in our high Descent,
improve our Privileges, as the Children of GOD, and labor to comprehend with
all Saints, the dimensi^ns of the Love of GOD, seek to have a heart to these
things for they contain a great prize, if not put in the hand of a fool: These
Things are the Light of a Christian and the Conscience of them, the Conduct of
a Believer, and the Belief of these Things, his ^rown.

And as to the manner of the Apostle's bearing in these Things upon People, is
by way of Remembrance; Gospel Ministe^^ are subordinate Mediators, betwixt GOD
and people. They are the LORD's R^^ memb^ances, Isa: 62. 6. 7. For the Peoples
Good, and Peoples Remembrances of their Duty to GOD, they must warn, admonish,
Remember and inculcate Truth upon Peoples hearts, by frequent Admonition and
Repetition, Phil: 3. 3^ But this Remembering being so much mentioned, by the
Apostle here, I shall refer to a particular discourse ere I conclude this
subject, and so I come to the last part ticular.

Which contains the Knowledge and Establishment of Christians, in the prime
of Christianity, and clearly informs us of the exact Instruction and
stability of Primitive Christians, in the (...) 3d.
Faith. The Prophets foretold this Light, that the People should be all taught
of GOD. Which is clearly fulfilled under the Gospel, as you may see by
comparing 2 Chap: of st. John. with 2, Chap of the Acts For in effect Ignorance
is the greatest impediment of the Comfort and Duty of Religion, and a great
Prognostic of a fatal and judicial stroke, it hinders the Action of
Religion, and the Pleasures of it, and puts People in an Element, where Satan
the prince of darkness, works, and hinders them from the Light and Liberty of
the Children of GOD.

Sermon III.
The Expediency and Usefulness of the Means, for the Advancement of Practical
Religion: And the short while that Gospel Ministers, ca^ be useful to the
Church.

I think i^ meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to remember you of these
Things, Verse. 13.

THIS Serious and Experienced Apostle, does in this Verse vent unto us, the
result of his Maturest thoughts, that he judged it expedient to use all
laudable Means, for the serving of the Ends of the Gospel; And declares his
fixed Resolution, to the Term of his Lives End; As long as he is in h^s
Tabernacle so to do: Which affords to us these following Observes.

1st. The Expediency, Usefulness and Convenience of all laudable and approved
Means, for the Propagation of the Gospel. 2ly, That the best of Men cannot more
be useful to the Church, but during their Abode in this Tabernacle of the Body.
As to the First, Ministers should Preach nothing but what is Expedient, Useful
and tending to Edification; they may search out fit and acceptable Words, Ecc:
12. 9. all things are lawful to me (says St. Paul) but all things are not
expedient: Every thing is good in its season, and every Pastor should learn of
Christ to speak a word in season to souls: But I shall insist most upon the
expediency of the use of means, for the Good of souls; For, GOD that has
ordained the end, has appointed the means whereby to attain it.

Now The great mean to know GOD and the Mediator, is by dropping in wholesome
Doctrine into the Ears and hearts of People, yea, also all the subservient
means for that end are to be observed, as the conviction of sin, the discovery
of the evil of sin, the beauty of Grace and holiness sound and solid direcions
for the Government of our life, and the discovery of that Glory that is to be
Revealed, to animate Christians to a strict and Religious life: And to be more
particular, I shall comprehend this, in these following heads.

1. The necessity, of PREACHING
2ly. The expediency, 3ly. What things are not convenient to be insisted upon.
4ly what things are most useful and expedient for the Good of souls.
First, the necessity of Preaching the Gospel; How can they believe without a
Preac^er? And it pleased GOD by the Foolishness of Preaching to save Souls. I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST (says the Apostle) Rom: 4, 18, For it
is the Power of GOD unto Salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew
first and also to the Greek. GOD can indeed work without means, and above them,
because he is absolute Master of the hearts of men, but he has chosen this
way, has sanctified it by his spirit in the Prophets, by his Son while in the
Flesh and by his Appostles after CHRIST, which has been that approved and
wonderful engine, to convert the World, and to edify and build up the Church,
whose Officers, since the Apostles, stand under an Apostolic precept, 2 Timothy 4.
2: to preach the Word; so that they must be very self-conceited, proud and
presumptuous that think it below them to hear the Word; For, although Men speak
it, yet it is the Dictate of GOD Himself: Although they may use other means, as
Reading and Conference, yet GOD has commanded us not to forsake the assembling
of our selves together, and many have found it experimentally true, that there
is some latent Energie and Force in the Word preached, to which GOD has
promised his blessing.

2ly. The expediency of Preaching. Some things are lawful but not expedient,
but things that are necessary are always expedient, especially in Things that
are absosolutely necessary to our Salvation, and the Expediency, Pheasableness,
Convenience and Usefulness of Gospel Preaching, as it was the practice of
CHRIST and His Apostles, so has it been the constant Course of the Church in
all Ages, from Moses to CHRIST the Word of the LORD did drop by Preaching, and
from the 1st. to the 2d: Advent of CHRIST it shall be so: For the Consideration
of the Divine Special Presence in Church Assemblies, the Influence that an
auditory may have upon the Preacher: and the sweet and gentle Voice in the
Gospel, with all other Circumstances, makes it out to be very pheasable, and
expedient to have the Gospel not only Read, but Explained and Applied every
Lords day; this except people be obdurate, sends in light to the Soul, warmeth
the Heart with cheerful Affections, and produces so much good, as to be a bond
of Religion, so that we fear, if the Church doors be shu^, that the Expediencie
and necessity of Preaching would too soon appear, and the peoples carriage
would but too sadly answer the Apostles Question, How should they believe
without a Preacher? Then perhaps some who contemned the Church and public
Preaching, may wander from one sea bank to another, to seek the Word of the
LORD, and not find it. Amos 8. 12.

3ly. What things are not convenient to be insisted upon in Preaching: And
first, I humbly conceive, that it is not very fit to be too daring in our
Doctrine anent the Council and Decrees of GOD, especially to conclude from them
any thing that may encroatch upon the goodness and mercy of our Good and
Gracious GOD, it is better with humble modesty to cry out, wih St. Paul, O the
depth, etc. 2ly, It is not very needful to insist much upon Circumstances, for
such are but Time-purposes, and the least of Policy in order to Religion: And
it had been well for this Church, if these had been much more mi^igat^^ and
mutilated, and true Gospel Truth, and Doctrine according to Godliness, had been
more pursued. Neither 3ly, ^^ it fit to cry out publicly against (...), except
there has been lawful previous Admonition, for reflections may exasperate and
imbitter the heart, whereas the Gospel Spirit, is Tender, Me^k, Kindly, and
Gentle; and it is much more desirable to be, a Barnabas, a son of Consolation,
than Boanerges, Sons of Thunder. It is true, to cry aloud and not spare, may be
sometimes seasonable, but a calm voice has GOD in it, and may be much more
profitable. 4ly. It Is not very safe to be too perempt^ry, about marks, l^st we
mistake the marks; The Spirit of GOD indeed gives marks in Scripture^,
particularly, in the First Epistle of Saint John, but the Spirit of Man is
fallible, as to the application.

4ly. What we are to insist on; and that is to preach the whole Council of GOD,
Acts 20. 29. Jude 20. etc. 2ly. To build up people in their holy Faith. 3ly. To
wa^^ every man in all Wisdom. 4ly. To preach up morality, whatever things are
Just, Honest, and of good Report, Col. 1. 28 P^il. 4. 8. etc. to persuade
people to these.

2ly. I observe that the best of Men have their great Work Church, while they
are in this Tabernacle; Here Is the time of plowing and sowing, in order to our
great harvest, We must work while it is called the day, for the night comes
wherein no man works, John 9. 11. What ever our hand finds to do, we must
do it with our might, for there is no knowledge nor work in the grave, Ecl. 10.
9. The present time is the season of preaching, ^o day if he will hear his
Voice, Ere long the Pastor's Mouth will be closed, as well as your Ears, GOD
uses not to send a Seminary from the Dead, to preach the Gospel, the Living
shall praise Him, and act for Him, for in this short Life all our Bussiness
must be done in order to Eternity, the LORD does not cause preach to the Dead,
for, in the state of Separation our Bodily Organs are consumed, and the Soul is
under its everlasting Sentence, its therefore absolutely necessary that we plye
our Work in time, with all Alacrity and Diligence.

But this must be more particularly unfolded, by the consideration of these
following heads. 1. The great care that serious men should have to make use of
the Season. 2ly. Their great Diligence that they should manifest in their
weighty Work. 3ly. The Frailty and Brittleness of our mortal Life, our Soul is
in a Tent or Tabernacle. 4ly. The Reinforcement of the Remembrance upon this
account.


1. The great Care that Serious Men should have to make use of the Season. This
is not the Work of Yesterday, for that is past and cannot be recalled, nor of
to Morrow, for we know not what then may be Prove. 27: 1. Therefore we should
not bost of it, for we know not what a Day may bring forth. But it is the Work
of the Present (...) or Instant, which passes as a Thought and will not abide
Delays, and as we know not, if we shall preach another Day, so people know not
how long the Voice may be behind them, saying This is the Way. But this they
may know that it is the Voice of GOD, that callet^ them, and they know not how
soon i^ it may be silent, and the Heavenly Oracl^ give no more Response.

2ly, The great diligence that Serio^^ Men should manifest in their Weighty
Work: Their Work is a Harvest, the Laborers should be busy, and tho GOD does
not allow, that with too fast driving we put our selves out of Breath, yet
since the Work tho very weighty is so pleasant and so necessary, and the
exercise of the greatest Charity of the World, to do good to Souls; and since
we have anointing Oil and the Aid of the Spirit to enable us, we should not be
idle nor taken up with Triffles and vain things, and especially shun all
worldly and sinful Distractions, that we may be well excercised in so good and
necessary a Work.

3ly. The frailty and Brittleness of our mortal life; Our life is both short
and uncertain, we are Pilgrims on Earth and sojurn as all our Fathers have
done, our Soul is in a tent, and our life is but Transient, ambulatory, and
transitory, we are Pilgrims, Soldiers, strangers, and not at home, we have no
continuing abode here; the Tabernacle and Tent may soon be lowsed and our
passing house fall about our ears: Which as it should prevent our taking our
Rest on Earth, so should it make us busy, while we are in this Tabernacle and
animate us in all our travels on earth, with our privilege that we shall come
to a Temple, and have a House with GOD, Eternal in the Heavens.

4ly. The Reinforcement of the Remembrance upon this account; the Apostle makes
much use of this Word, for Ministers are GOD's mouth, they should admonish and
incite People to duty; People should be warned; for they are secure, and become
tuchy, when they are awakened, they are ready to say, Peace Peace, before
sudden destruction Come. We should therefore seek supply to our Lamps in time,
and to have our Wedding Garment in hand against the Bridegroom come; there be
many things to give us Memento, and Ministers should never forget to give this
warning, but labor to keep people on foot to Run their Race unto the End.

Sermon IV.
Of the Practical Knowledge of Death, and the Information and Warning that the
LORD gives some of His Favorites thereof.

Knowing that shortly I must put off this Tabernacle, Verse, 14.

ALTHOUGH (no doubt) this Holy and Reverend Father, had his Soul still upon
readiness to render it up on his Master's Call, with all Cheerfulness; And tho
he was animated to Duty by an extraordinary Help of the Spirit; Yet the
Knowledge, he was shortly to put off his Tabernacle, did serve as a motive in
him, to excite him in his holy Work: As his Master before him, John, 9. 4. 2
Wherein we may Consider. 1st, His Resolution, and Practical Knowledge of his
approaching dissolution. 2ly, His favorable Representation of Death, a putting
off this Tabernacle, and giving the Soul more room to commerce with GOD. 3ly,
His more than ordinary Information of this his Deseace.

As to the First, we may observe, that the Practical Knowledge of Death serves
much to make serious Men well Employed: All men know they must die, but few
consider and improve it: Which makes Moses in the Name of the LORD so
pathetically, cry out, O that they were wise to consider their latter End,
Deuteronomy. 32. 26. And Jeremiah so sadly to lament, That Jerusalem was taken away,
because she knew not her last end: The best of Men have laid this to Heart, I
have run, says St. Paul. Cor: 9. 26. For,

Death puts a Period to all Business, Eccles: 9. 10. Death puts us, ab agendis,
a Judgment immediately follows, where account must be given of our Stewartship:
Who is then that faithful Servant, that when the LORD comes shall find so
doing? and busy about his work: Do not say, the LORD delayeth his coming, let
not GOD's Patience make thee procrastinate, but be the more busy, that thou
have a day to labor in. 2ly. If thy Work be imperfect and not done, it will
remain undone for ever, and except Christ stand for thee, thou will enter
imperfect to ternity. It is dangerous to sleep our time, or triffle it, but
rather if thou have loitered, double thy diligence.

This practical knowledge of Death concerns all Men; Omnes Tangit, from the
Court to the Country, from the Palace to the Cottage; Death has an Universal
Empire over all Ranks, Sexes and Ages; Goodness, Greatness, Riches, and the
Greatest power and strength cannot prevent it, bribe it, nor oppose it: It is
the Messenger of the Great King. It cannot be deforced: disce mori, learn to
die, is a great lesson, it is a great principle in Practical Religion, as nosce
teipsum, to know thy self is necessary: Death comes upon many with a surprise
and unaware, it creeps on, Gray hares are here and there on us ere we advert:
There are some inconsiderate, and lays it not to heart; Some are dead and
drowned in interest, and sing a Requiem, while perhaps immediately their Soul
may be taken from them: Some put off the day of Death, and many run to another
extreme, and hasten their Death by sensuality, and look upon it as fatality,
and so grow careless. Some are so swelled with the World, that they can not
here mement^ fili; but the old World, Sodom, Belshazer, the Rich Glutton, Her^^
Annanias and Saphira, and others are Beaco^ to thee, to guard against
precipices, a^^ learn thee to be considerate, practically t^ think upon thy
latter End.

And yet further this practical knowledge of Death is very useful to advance
practical Religion.

1st. Guarding against security, and surprise: 2ly. Stirring up men to plie
their work in time well. 3ly. To dissarm of its Sting and dreadour. 4ly. To
prepare us for our decease.
Fitst, This practical knowledge of Death, saves us from the greatest of evils,
and that is security and surprise, in a matter of such a consequence, as
passing to our final Doom; Security is the great Temptation: And it produces
most dierful effects, as the Old World, and Wordly men, set forth by Christ in
the case of Dives, does declare: It lays the hold open to the enemy, and takes
the man off the Stage of time, ere he has done any good in it. Sudden
destruction follows such as cry Peace; It has made tall Cedars fall: But to be
awake and to be armed, let (...) not fix our Repose upon Earth when it cannot
be had, for the Voice (...) GOD says, Arise, this is not thy R^^ And to be
thus prepared, delivers us from the dreadour of Death: For, how dreadful is
Death to the Man at ease? said the son of Sirah.

2ly, The practical knowledge of Death, cannot but make any Serious Man to plye
his Work in time; it will not suffer him to delay and put off; Our Life is but
a Vapor and very uncertain, and therefore, we should do our Work now or never,
we should neither boast of to morrow, nor putt of till to morrow; but do the
Work of the Day: Accidents and Incident troubles and diseases may soon lay us
by, by the blast of the Wrath of GOD; For, all men are but Grass, etc. Isa. 40.
6.

3ly, To dissarm Death of its sting and dreadour; the most of men live under
the bondage of the fear of Death, the most of their time: And certainly, to
have the practical knowledge of it, would make the consideration of Death, to
be easy and familiar to us; When we can say, with Job, I know that thou will
bring me to death. And Death gathers a great and venomous sting, if we labor
not to re^ move sin, and interest our selves in the Death of Christ, and then
we may triumph with St. Paul, O death where is thy ^ting?

4ly, This practical Knowledge, serves to prepare us for our death and to make
us ready to render up our Soul, that we may expire in the Arms of Christ, and
with old Simeon, have Christ in our Arms, and therefore desire to depart in
Peace: And this practical Knowledge, serves much to make us lead a good Life,
which is the only way to a happy Death.

Let this then learn all Christians, (especially Gospel Ministers) to study
this practical Knowledge of Death, App:
which made St. Chrysostom say, Offeramus DEO voluntary quod ^ro debito
debemur reddere, give that freely to GOD which we owe in Debt, to Him:
Ministers of the Gospel should be mortified, their Life should preach
Mortification, they have a great account to make at Death, and therefore by
their Well doing should undo it. There are no men who have more need of Wisdom
than they, and it is the greatest Wisdom to consider our Latter End.

2ly, The favorable Representations the Apostle here gives of Death; a putti^^
off or laying down this Tabernacle, Where observe, That Death is not dreadful
to the Godly; Natu^^ Isa: 26. 20. In which state of Separation, we have no more
sense to feel than the Dust we ly amongst, the irksomeness is only in our
Apprehension: It is the common fate of all Mortals. We cannot tell how we did
grow in the Womb, much less how we shall rot in the Grave: The Body was an
Instrument of sin, it must be corrupted, and in a manner refined in the Grave,
to rise incorruptible at the Resurrection.

Let us then pay the debt of nature freely; willingly, and with a sort of Holy
Faith concur with GOD, and lay down our Tabernacle with Joy, and render up our
Soul with Delight, that having our Work done and our Loi^s girt up, we may
mo^nt Nebo with Moses, and flee to Heaven with Elijah.

3dly. Come I now to consider, how the Lord did show this Apostle of his Death:
Some makes this refer to the time of his Death, some to the manner of it, as
John 21. 16. Thou shall follow me hereafter, etc. says Christ to him: I shall
not be very positive in determining, providing that this one general be
observed, that the Term of our Life is uncertain; we know we must die, but
when, how, or where, is only known to God; there is no Oracle but that of God
which can clear us; and Horoscops, as they are too daring; in meddling with the
secret things of God, and as they are dangerous, so are they frequently ^a^al,
and leaves the Curious Enquirer as Wise as he was:

Yet it may be observed, That some Favorites have much more of We find Moses
and A^r^n, and the famous (...) the^^ Pass from their Master, and did ly down
and die; and the Sons of the Prophets knew, and said to Elisha, Know thou
not that God will take away thy Master this day? And God does wonderfully
insin^ate his Will in this by Dreams and Visions in the Night.

O then labor to do thy work, and then thou has no more ado but to die Die
daily and this will fit thee for thy da^^ and since thou knows not the hour,
wat^^ till thou get thy dying Call.

Sermon V.
Of the Endeavors Faithful Ministers have to make their Labors useful to
People, after their Decease, and to fix such Monuments as may serve after.
Generations^ Ver. 15. Moreover, etc.

O Fall the Offices and Works in the World, the Work of the Ministry is most
for Eternity, it is all Divine, it came from Heaven, and tends thither; so that
a Gospel Minister, according to his Measure, may say with St. Paul, I received
it not from Man. It Is the Eternal Word which they Preach; the Sonls to whom
they Preach are Immortal, and the Result of it, tends to Eternal Life. The
Painter Appelles placed an imaginary fame in a curious Draught; and many for
the Apprehension of a Fame make themselves infamous; as Alexander was called
Totius Orbis Praedo: But the Word of the Lord endures for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 25.
which by the Gospel is Preached unto you.

Many m^ns Reputation dies here, their Names ^ot: Bu^ ^aithful Preaching never
dies, God has a Register of it, it'^ received in the Heavens, impressed upon
the Hearts of Converts, thereby is a living Monument erected, in the Lives of
Men. Ye are our Epistle (says St. Paul) to the Corninthians; and though
Faithful Ministers do not succeed; yet their Reward is with their GOD, and
their Euge waits them in Heaven, Well done thou good and Faithful Servant.

More particularly, let us consider the parts of this Text in these
particulars, 1. The Endeavors of this Faithful Minister. 2. The extent of his
Endeavors, even after his Decease. 3. The Inculcating the Things of the
Gospel, so as they may take Impression by way of Remembrance upon the Hearts of
Men in all Ages.


First, The Endeavors of this faithful Minister: And it teache^h us of this
sacred employment, to follow this Copy, to contribute our best Endeavems for
the good of Souls: This is all that man can do, Paul can but Plant and Apollo
water, but GOD gives the increass: And tho our endeavors be frustrate, yet if
we do our duty, our judgment is with the LORD: We are but dispensers of the
means of Grace. It is the LORD that gives Grace, and we should be earnest with
people, not to receive the Grace of GOD in vain, or that dispensation, wherein
the Grace of God is given, that is, the Preaching the Gospel of CHRIST.

We should contribute our outm^st endeavors; for the work is great, the
opposition strong: And since we have Received this Ministry, let us not faint
our Blessed Savior in his Ministerial Office was frustrate, How often would I
have gathered thee, says he to Jerusalem, and ^e would not? ^et us do our
duty then, and commit the Event to GOD.

2ly. The Extent of his Endeavors even after his Decease: A Faithful
Mininister has Ministerial Affections for the Glory of GOD, and the good of the
Church they cannot consine their wishes to the little compass of a short time,
they expatiate in their desires, and if it were possible, they could tarry
while CHRIST come (as it was groundlessly supposed by the Beloved Disciple.)
They would be glad to improve the opportunity.

But to consider more particularly the import of this his endeavor, it is
certain, as he does not here intend in a Ghostly way to preach to them after
his decease, for GOD uses not to send to the Living from the Dead, the
dispensation of the Gospel is now, to Day if ye will hear his Voice; so is it
to be understood of his Actions in time, as Abel tho dead yet speaks, Moses
his Word yet judges, and the Hand Writings of Ordinances yet stand, while they
be canceled: Thus CHRIST's Word shall Judge Men at the Great Day, and good
Works shall have their Approbation then; And the Woman's anointing of our
Savior speaks to every Generation, Mat: 25, 42, 43, Wherever This Gospel is
preached; and the whole Cloud of Witnesses, have Monuments erected for them in
the Word of GOD: And for this Apostle, besides his writing of some part of
Canonick Scripture, which endures for ever, he was an extraordinary person in
his Call, in his Calling, in his miracles, in his Actions, and in his
sufferings for CHRIST; all which serve to preach after his decease; which
others in their measure also do.

So that hence it may be observed, that Faithful Ministers of the Gospel, by
their Life and labors remains famous living Monuments after their Decease.
Their works follow them, and also they leave impression behind them, it is a
glory to do well in our Office, and die a faithful Stewart of the Mystery of
GOD; to save our own Souls and them that hear us, to make after Generations
bless us, Fame indeed should not be our design, for that may savor of Pride
and Vanity; But the work, if good, will praise thee in the gate.

O then let us act for Eternity, Preach as we shall give an Application.
account: labor to do well, and it shall not be forgotten; For to win a Soul
is a great prize, and to help Peoples Faith and to follow them with wholesome
Doctrine, that they may follow after Peace and Holiness, is a great duty; All
true Holiness is from GOD, and he has said, honorantes me honorabo; I^le
honor them, that honor Me, 1 Samuel 4. 5. And the mercy of doing good, in our
time, and in the Church, as it shall meet us in another World, so may it
sweeten all the difficuldifficulties we meet with in the way of our duty in
this.

But the third thing, to wit, the inculcating the things of the Gospel, so as
they may take impression, by way of Remem^ brance upon the hearts of men in all
Ages, will more clearly unfold this duty of a Gospel Minister, to help people
to a well improved Remembrance: The Apostle much insists upon the word
Remembrance, and every faithful Minister, and Particularly one who desires to
be found faithful, shall labor to bring these things to peoples Remembrance,
both in this life, and after it, and so to leave his Flock, the most lasting
legacy.

It is clearly then observable, that it is a great part of Gospel Ministers
duty to help peoples minds to retain and improve Gospel truths for their
Salvation. To Preach these things, Phil: 4. 9. over and over again, to show
them how much a sanctified memory of these things tends to their faith and
happiness. For the mind of man is the Spirit within him, that is, the Candle of
the LORD; The great Repository of holy truth: And makes Religious actings flow
from a solid understanding, which influenceth the will freely to work and
enlarges the affections to run with delight in the ways of GOD.

Now to be more particular in this, I shall desire you to consider.

1st. Facultas Retinens, the mind Retaining. 2ly Res retenta, the thing
remembered. 3ly. The help a faithful Minister gives to this Holy art of
Remembering. 4ly. Peoples improvement by right remembering.
First, Facultas Retinens, the mind retaining. It may be considered that there
is first a natural memory whereby some have said Nescio quid sit oblivisci, I
know not what it is to forget: which is most fresh in youth, and turns Crazy in
old age: others again are so dull in their mind, or rather careless, that their
memory is like a Sive which lets Clean Water pass through but Retains
Dregs, of such it may be said, that they wot not what it is to Remember. 2ly.
There is an artificial memory much helped by Reading, and frequent study and
Meditation. 3ly. There is a Religious memory wrought by the Spirit of GOD, who
brings these things to Ou^ Remembrance; The labor of faithful Ministers, the
short and clear digest of our Holy Faith, and Gospel design as to good works,
frequent Prayer for a Blessing upon our pains, and to digest these things well
in our mind, so that they may take impression never to be obliterated.

2ly. Res Retenta, the thing Remembered; which is the things of GOD, of CHRIST,
and the Truths of the Gospel, the concerns of the Soul, and what is conducive
to advance them.

The first and second relates to the principles of our Religion; The third and
fourth concerns people as to their practice of these things: First, then let
it be your care to know GOD and the Gospel, which if thou have had any ear to
hear, and heart to understand, thou may be a great proficient: But, alas! that
may be said to many for which the Apostle reproves the Hebrews, Heb. 5. 12.
And secondly, If people would walk according to the Light they have, they might
attain to the end of their Faith, which is the Salvation of their Souls: And
this Practice would give them the more facility, to do the thing they know.

3ly. The help of the Remembrances which consists in his Prayers, and patience
that he weary not in his work, that he in^ struct and warn every man, that he
preach sound Doctrine, and observe the form of sound words, that he press and
propagate the Essence of Religion, and do not please himself much with
circumstances, and time debates; and that which the most of our people are not
concerned in, And never a white the better, tho they be: but the necessary
things are our great instructions, from our Great Master, and to press these
Qui populariter docet optime docet.
so popularly, as Luther said most profitably: And we must be intent upon our
work; and press people to cooperate with GOD and us, and be busy themselves,
attend the ordinances, and using the means; let Ministers also Rule well their
own Life, that it may correspond with their Doctrine, and follow the steps of
Holy Men, whose ashes seem yet to exhale from their Tombs, a sweet Savor;
which makes their memory for ever Blessed, And if we put the Brethren in mind,
of these things we shall be good Ministers.

4ly, Peoples improvement by right Remembering. Memoria excolendo augetur.
Culture and Industry will make a barren ground Fertile; Improve well the many
Remembrances thou gets from the Word, and that Monument Christ built for
Himself by the Sacrament, remember the novissima, the last things, the prima,
media and ultima, to wit, thy Conversion, Progress, and Perfection therein;
Consider what thou have been, what thou art, and what thou shall be; Be not a
forgetful hearer, consider the Beacon set up in the Scripture a^ against sin:
Remember Lots Wife, Jam: 1. 22. And the Encouragement of Virtue in the practice
of Holy Men and Women; keep a Diary as to thy time, have thy Memorandum, and
labor still, by remembering, to practice and do.

Sermon VI.
Concerning the Truth and Excellency of our Holy Religion, and the infallible
Proofs thereof, with the Duty of such as own it.

For we have no^ followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known upto you
the Power and Coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, etc. Verse, 16.

THIS is the Base and Found of all Religion; Which as it Convinces Men to
Embrace it, so does it invite them to the Practice of it: And as this Apostle
was very Competent to give his Sentiments of the Truth and Power of this Holy
Religion, being called by Power, enlightened by Knowledge, and having seen a
Demonstration of it in the Oracles and Miracles of his Master: So does he
direct Gospel Ministers to Inculcate upon their People, the Truth and Power of
the Christian Religion, that every faithful Pastor may have the Occasion to
attract People to the Obedience o^ the Faith, and in their measure to say unto
them, We preach not unto you vain and frivolous things, but the Magnalia
Veritatis, the great Things of Truth: And it cannot but be great Satisfaction
to a Gospel Minister, that he can refresh his mind, as well as satisfy the
People, that he has Preached nothing to them, but the Truth of GOD. For, when
the account of the Stewartship is called for, it will afford but small Peace to
the Pastor, to reflect, that he has been taken up with ventilations of
Controversy, Circumstances and External Polity of the Church; that he has
been biguit about his beloved Sect, that he has Pharisaically insisted upon
Gerimonies, and much neglected the Life and Power of the Truth of GOD.

Now more particularly, to take up the Scope and Parts of this Text, I shall
reduce it to these Points following,

1. That the Doctrine of the Gospel is not a eunningly devised Fable, but the
Infallible Truth of God. 2. That though Christ and the Gospel came to the Eye
of the World in Weakness, yet to a Right Discerner His coming was with Great
Power and Majesty. 3. As the coming of Christ is very evident by many
infallible Proofs, so is it banded down to us, and confirmed by Eyewitnesses.
First, That the Doctrine of the Gospel is not a cunningly devised Fable, but
the infallible Truth of GOD. It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance, 2 Tin: 2. 1^. Nor a cunning fable and a subtle contrivance, to
impose upon and deceive the World, No, ^ut let GOD be True, and all men liars.

First, Then, It is no cunningly devised fable, (as the Apostle says here) but
it is the Contrivance of the Wise Council of GOD, transacted in Heaven and
given to Men as their Guide and Comfort, it is the Emanation of the Love and
Good, Will of GOD to Man, through a Mediator, Have I not written unto thee,
Things excellent, that thou may know the Words of Truth? Says GOD by
Solomon. It is as true as CHRIST Himself, and He is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life. If He Himself was really upon Earth, which is evident as a Demonstration,
and the most verified Matter of Fact that ever was in the World, not done in a
Corner or Clancularly, but in the View of the sun and the sight of friends and
foes. For He did more Miracles for the Confirmation of His Doctrine, and the
discovering of His Person than ever was d^ne before Him; miracles of Mercy so
great and stupendous, that had not the Ancient People, been prejudged at his
Doctrine, and the Humility of His Person, and the fear of the Rulers; All Jury
had gone after him. And further, the influence of his Doctrine had upon the
Hearts of Men, and the great Demonstration of his being the Messiah, and the
Son of GOD, by His Resurrection from the Dead, And the wonderful effects that
the Preaching of the Cross of Christ, had upon Jew and Gentile: All these write
the Verity of our Religion with a Beam of the Sun, that the Gospel c^nnot be
hid but to such as are lost. Moreover, If we consider the exact Impletion of
the Prophesies concerning him, even unto the least circumstance of his
Incarnation, Con^^^tion, Birth, Breeding, Life, Death and Resurrection; We have
an Accumulation of Proofs, for the Verity of the Christian Religion, and the
Founder of it: for if we consider its Original, the Purity of its Precepts, the
Glory of its design, the Comfort of its promises; and the Divinity of its
Proposals; We may acquiesce here, and confess its Truth and Verity: And if we
shall confront it with other Religions, of the Jews, which was but temporary of
the Heathens, which was but Vanity, of the Mabumitants which is a devilish
delusion, made up of lies and impossibilities; We shall find that the Spirit of
Christianity remains in the bosom of Glory, always Holy, Victorious, and
Triumphant over impiety, and confirmed by a cloud of Witnesses, sealed by the
blood of millions of Martyls, approved by General Councils, and the Universal
Consent of the Catholic Church, and clearly demonstrated to be of GOD and for
GOD; that a Christian may upon good Ground say, sit anima mea cum Christiani^,
Let my Soul be with the Christians.

But there is so much said to this purpose, that I cannot add, but to resume
the Doctrine of the Apostle, That Christianity is not fabulous, but infallible
Truth.

And because there are so many Pretenders to True and Holy Religion, and the
different Sentiments of the Papal and Protestant Church: And even Differences
among themselves, I hope I shall not di gress from the Paths of T^u^, to assert
that, True Protestanis^n in true Christianity; It being the very Doctrine of
Christ and his Apost^es, and the purest and p^imitive times of the Church: And
having made Sucession from the Spurious Doctrine of the degenerate Church of
Rome: And it may be safely said that the Trash of its impure Doctrine, its
lying Wonders and Legends, does expose that Church to the Impious and
Blasphemous Exp^ession of one of its Popes, who said, Quantum nob^^ prodest
haec fabula Christi? What avail is that Fable of Christ to us?

And as the Truth of Christianity is fully demonstrated, so in the next place
are we to consider The Power wherewith the coming of Christ was attended: It
would seem from Isaiah 53. That he came in weakness; and so did the Jewish and
Heathen World look upon him: But they took that measures from outward
Appearance, and did not consider the Virtue that was in him, as God, and God
man; which made his Manger, more glorious to the Eye of Faith, than a Palace or
Bed of State; he was Crucified through Weakness, yet conceals His Power, for
Who might abide the Day of his first coming, Mal. 3. 2. He was Glorious in his
Abaseours, Honorable in his Humiliation, and was the King of Glo^ie's Son, in
his Pilgrimage; He was a Lamb in his Meekness, but a Lion in his Power: He came
to dash the dark Kingdom, to destroy the W^rks of the Devil, and to bring Life
and Immortality to Light, by his Gospel; and to cast down the Prince of this
World, to deliver his People from Bondage, and to lead Captivity Captive, to
tread Satan under our Feet, to discover the Evil of Sin, and the Beauty of
Holiness: And this he did by a Seraphick and Angelical Purity, yet in a
wondrous Condescension and Familiarity, attended with such Glorious Mi^acles,
famous Monuments, and powerful Doctrine; With Authority, and not as the
Scribes; That we shall see his Glories Conspicuous under the Vail of flesh; and
all the Umbrage of his Life served to raise his Glory to a higher pitch^ as the
Sun is more conspicuous after a cloud. So that it is very evident and
observable, That Christ's first coming was with Power, and the Doctrine he
propagate is the Power of God to Salvat^on: Let his People therefore be willing
in the day of his Power. And learn to be swayed with the right Scepter of this
Kingdom. If a Foelix tremble before a Prisoner in a Chain! if King Agrippa be
almost persuaded to be a Christian^ Let us learn to give our Necks to his
Powerful, though Easy yoke: Least he dash us i^ pieces, when there is none to
deliver: Let us not stumble with the Jew, nor count it foolish^ess, with the
Greek, but believe it, and we shall behold Christ the Power of God^ and the Arm
of God.

Although there be no need of further Witnesses, yet the more to confirm us of
the Truth and Power of the Gospel. We have this Apostle and others with him is,
Oculati Testes of CHRIST's Maj^stie, famous and unanimous in their Testimony,
who could say, vincit Veritas, Vidi, Scivi and audivi. Truth prevails, and has
the Testimony of GOD, and Man, of Angels and Saints, Prophets and Apostles,
Martyrs and Confessors; And every One that has received this Testimony, has
put t^o their Seal that GOD is True.

The great improvement that Improv:
I shall make of this whole purpose, is, that the Character of our life
ccrrespond with the truth and Realitie of our Religion; that is, that we be
Ethically of true and morally true in the practice of our holy Profession; that
we be not paint ed formal and false, as to a real way; bus suitable to the
excellent principles of our holy faith: if ye abide in my word (says CHRIST)
ye are my Disciples indeed, Joh. 8 3. It is not a name of a Christian, but the
truth of Christianity, that approves us to GOD. Many have a name, not only
general, as Christians, but as more eminent professors, I say, a name, that
they are living, when dead: Rev: 3. 1. many flatter themselves in a Profession,
and Church Privilege, even into the end, and will say, have we not eaten and
drunken in thy presence? have thou not taught in our streets? To whom CHRIST
will say, depart from me, etc. I never owned nor approved you as mine. Many
have CHRIST in their mouth, and can say, LORD, LORD, but do not the works that
he bids them: This was a sad disease in the Ancient Church, for the
Circumcised, l ived as the uncircumcised; Moab, Ammon, and Amalek were
uncircumcised, and the house of Israel uncircumcised in their heart. This the
Prophets cried out against, reproving people that boasted of the Temple. Jer:
8. And yet lived in villainy: But GOD and his Temple are no sanctu arie to
prophanity; and such boastings are so fan from excusing, that they aggravate
Peoples faults; and in effect GOD says to the Wicked, what have thou to do, to
declare my statues? It was so in the times of our Savior, and the Apostles;
and in the beginning of Christianity, the filthy Gnostics were great boasters
of knowledge^ and privileges; and prophanity came to such a hight, that
Irreligion became to be patronised by false Prophets; As the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, Jezeb^l and others; and this Spirit of lies was justly poured out
upon many, for not suitable to their holy principles, and by their life^
denying obedience to the faith. And alas! If we descend to the dregs of time.
we shall find many named Christians, Unchristian and Antichristian in their way:
For such is now the contempt of the Gospel, the unsuitable walking to it, the
despising of Holy things, as the LORDS Ministers Ordinances and day: such is
the neglect of all thing that looks like duty to GOD, such is the
heathenishness of families, for want of calling on the name of GOD, and such
horrid immoralities among these, called Christians; that we may without breach
of Charity, now say that a great part of the Christian World has as to their
practice, repea^ed that Blasphemous saying, that GOD has now forsaken the
Earth. Ez: 9. 9.

Its now then very worthy of our while to consider better of the Character of a
true Christian, that people be not fostered in their folly in boasting of a
name, without the true life of Religion.

This has been much declamed against by Pens and Pulpits, but alas! People
delight themselves in their delusions, and for all that is said and done,
content themselves to be nominal, not real christians. I am told that there is
a little piece done by a foreign Divine in Latin, (Arnd: de vero
Christianismo) which gives great clearness as to this and which perhaps, if I
had seen, might have saved my labor, as to any thing that I can say on this
purpose: But the sad times, and the corrupt manners of men stir me up to
contribute my little mite, to hold in, the almost expiring life of practical
Religion; and this shall be done in considering these purposes following;

1st, That the Christian walk suitably to the discovery of the Principles of
his Religion. 2ly. That he walk suitably to the full digest of the rule, GOD
has given him to guide his life by. 3ly, That he answer the Gospel Spirit and
Design. 4ly, That he knit his Life suitably to the whole Chain of Graces,
Virtues and Duties. 5ly, That he answer the Means and Institutions of GOD, in
his Word and Sacraments. 6ly, That he advance to Perfection, in the Heavenly
Exercise of a higher Pitch of Grace. 7ly, That he suit that great Hope set
before him of the Crown of Glory. And 8ly, That he be well prepared for a
Dimission, from Time to Eternity.
And to clear the plain path of these, to a Christian, in all the Stages of his
Life: It would be considered. First, That the Seed and Habits of Grace, are
infused in our first Conversion. 2ly, That Grace proceeds gradually. 3ly,
That Grace grows and goes along with the conscionable use of the Means.

First, That the Seed and Herbs of Grace are infused together as our first
Conversion; which is called by St. John, the Seed of GOD remaining in us, and
by St. Paul, the Life of GOD, Gal: 2. 20. Or the Divine Nature, whereof
Believers do partake; as St. Peter says, 2 Pet: 1. 4. For, a new born Child,
if it want Life, cannot be capable of the Operations thereof: No more can a new
Convert, exercise Grace without the principle of Life. Now, this new principle
of Life in such as are born again, consists not of one, but of all Graces, and
the power and faculty of gracious Operations flows from that Life, that animats
all the faculties of the Soul: So that certainly there is more than the
influence of an external Swasion, from the Word, in regard it is but a dead
Letter, till it be animated with the Spirit of Life. And 2ly, It is no l^^s
clear, That Grace proceeds by degrees, from Childhood to Manhood, thus we are
exhorted to grow in Grace and Knowledge. 3ly, That Grace grows, and goes
along with the Conscionable use of the Means; For if our Vineyard be not
dressed and well manured, it will grow wild and full of weeds: It is to be
confessed, that carelessness and the power of temptation may produce bad fruit,
even in a Believer for a time; But be that is born and begotten of GOD, si^^eth
not finally, but keeps himself, and the wicked one touches him not, Joh: 5.
4.

Having now premi^ed these things for clearing, I proceed to handle the several
Ranks of Christians, in the 8 forementioned Particulars. First then. That the
Christian walk suitably to the discovery of the Principles of his Religion:
Which is so clearly manifested in the Gospel Dispensation, especially in these
four particulars following,

1 st. The Knowledge of our selves, and our sinful misery by nature: Which
calls for Humility, Reformation, and a new Life. 2ly, As to the Revelation of
GOD, whose Essence indeed is incomprehensible by mortals, yet is so clearly
discovered, by Christ who dwells in the bosom of the Father, and has
revealled Him unto us, that beside His incommunicable Attributes, of
Immensitle, Omniscience, Omnipotence, and Omnipresence, be is discovered to be
so amiable in His Purity, Holiness, Goodness, Mercy and Truth, etc. that the
Rational Soul cannot but love, choice, and embrace Him. 3ly. As to the
discovery of the Mediator. And 4ly, The clear Path Wa^ to Happiness, so fully
discovered by Jesus Christ, which calls for Faith and Obedience, and the
embracing of Christ in His threefold Office.
Secondly, That be walk suitably to the full D^gest of the Rule which GOD has
given him, to guide his Life: The Law of the LORD is Perfect and so fully
cleared from the false glosses of the Pharisees, by Christ in His Sermon upon
the Mount; That now in the times of this Light, no man can pretend ignorance of
the Rule, but either he that is negligent or prejudged at it: It Is true, the
best cannot reach it in its Spirituality and Extent; But yet, a sincere
Christian may and should come the length of Having a respect to all the
Commandments, Psalm: 119. 29. and the hatred of every false way

3ly. That he answer the Gospel Spirit and Design. This is a great property of
a Christian, to know what Spirit he is of, and that he close with the Gospel,
in its Holy Design, not only to seek Salvation by Christ, but Sanctification;
and to walk in the Way, that leads to Salvation: And this calls for Sincerity,
Humility, Patience, and self denial, etc. And such a temper of spirit as suits
its Design, and the heavenliness of its Author.

4ly, That he knit his Life suitably to the whole Chain of Graces, Virtues and
Duties: To be a Christian is a great Character, and requires a perfect
exactness, not to live after the flesh but after the Spirit, Rom: 8. 1. Not to
work the works of the flesh, but to Crucify it, with the lusts and affections
thereof: and to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal: 5. 18. Which calls
for the exercise of Graces, as we are called and related.

5ly. That be answer the Means and Institutions of GOD, in His Word and
Sacraments: He is a too high towering Christian, that neglects: the Means and
Ordinances, Since the LORD did institute them, for excellent Ends, to propagate
and perfect practical Religion. This calls for a meek Submission to the LORDS
appointment, especially in the right improvement of the Word and sacraments,
answering our cognizance, and having, with the Apostles, A fellowship with the
Father and the Son.

6ly, That he advance to perfection, in the (...) exercise of a higher Pitch of
Grace. Grace is of a growing nature; all means and ordinances are for the
advancement thereof; true life cannot lurk, but will send forth emanations and
exercises: And although we should not co^nt our selves to have apprehended, Phil.
3. 13. Yet should we follow fast toward the prize of the high Calling. And
this is very much evidenced in our self denyat^ mottification victory over the
World by says, and our affections more sublime, than ^^put sue after the
things of this world; Col. 3. 3. For the conversation of (...) is in Heaven
Phil. 3. 2. The true Christian then after many labors, tenrations, ^cli^ses,
and difficulty comes to be expe^^en^ed, and now, as a proficient, and an
expert Soul^^^, ri^teth to a higher (...) of Grace, and Virtue: And this calls
for a Heavenly elevated mind and a faith that will make us steady and faithful
unto Death.

7ly. That be suite that Great hope set before him of the Grown of Glory. This
^^^^tily anima^s a Christian, and carried him through difficulties, it fixes
him in ^^^pests, as an Anchor upon the Rock, i^ sanctifies and saves the
Christian; We are saved by hope, Rom 8. 24. (said St. Paul it helps us much in
the way to Salvation. and whoever has this hope in him ^^^fies him self as
CHRIST i^ pure, this calls for courage Resolution, confidence and patience, and
through the Blessing of GOD expels that dreadful disease of (...)dence and
despair.

8ly. That he be well prepared for a dimission from time to Eternity: It Is
happy for us, that GOD find us at our work, that the Lions, of our Mind be gir^
up, that we be waiting our (...) call shall our accounts be cleared, and our
Soul and our Heart in a humble way, be full of Joy and Peace, with a
^lerophorv: or a full assurance of faith, that our eyes be closed upon the
World and open to Heaven; That we have CHRIST in our hearts, and then we may
say ^une dimittas, now: let thy servant dep^^ in peace: This calls for a fixed
preparation for Death, Judgment, and (...) clear Conscience, a Willingness,
and with submission and entire Resignation, A desire to be with CHRIST, which
is best of all.

I shall conclude then in lotting you know that the great Mean, to state you a
true Christian, is Action, and the exercise of your Religion. I could have
enlarged and added many other things, but that deserves a particular Treatise.
And as for motive to persuade thee to be a true Christian, I shall add no more,
but that you improve your Faith, look to your Claim, and by the Eyes of Faith,
look to the splendour of that Crown, prepared for a true Christian, which ye
shall wear with CHRIST, World without End. AMEN.

The End.

