A SERMON PREACHED IN S. George's Church SOVTHWARK, AT THE FUNERAL OF THAT
Pious and Worthy Gentlewoman, Mrs FRANCES FENN.

By R. SPARK of NEWINGTON, M. A.

(...).
(...).
LONDON, Printed by T. James, for Joseph Collyer, and are to be Sold at his
Shop at the Angel on London Bridge, a little below the Gate, 1679.

Imprimatur

C. ALSTON.
Novem. 30. 1678.
TO THE Right Worshipful AND His Honored Friend, JOHN TREGONWELL, Esquire; And his
Virtuous LADY.
UPon Request I have assumed the Confidence to Expose this following Sermon to
Public View; and if it meet with a kind Reception and a candid Interpretation
(which I question not) from your Self, and your worthy Family, it is all I beg:
As for Others, if they be truly Learned, they will be Civil; If Critical and
Captious, I say to them in the words of Catullus, (Non vident id manticae quod
in tergo est.) Let it be sheltred under your Protection, it is enough, and the
greatest Ambition the Author aims at. I am happy it has so Noble a Patron: I
shall not trouble you with a prolix or tedious Discourse of this nature. And
therefore desiring the Great God to Shadow You, your Pious Lady, and invaluable
Stems, under his Almighty Power, and establish You and Yours, not only on
Earth, but in the highest Heavens; is the Prayer of

Your most Obliged Servant ROBERT SPARK.

A Funeral Sermon.
The Text is in GENESIS the XXIII. the first Clause of the 2. Verse; Then Sarah
died.


THat silent Witness of Mortality presents the sad Occasion of our Assembly, to
Celebrate the Funeral of Mrs. Frances Fenn; and for a Mournful Meeting, what
more convenient and necessary than Psalms, Sighs and Tears of Sorrow and
Lamentation. Discourse with Matter, Matter with Action, Action with Affection,
Affection with Opportunity, Opportunity with Occasion, should concur, and
concord together. Suitable for which occasion I have elected and chosen out
this Text which speaks of Death, a sad and doleful Messenger, and end of all:
And whilst I apply to this sad Spectacle, apply your Hearts to Sorrow, your
Eyes to Tears, and your Selves to Mourning; If not for her that is dead and
gone, for she is happy, and acquiesceth from her Labors, and her good Works
shall follow her, yet for your own sins; which will cause you, Volens nolens,
will you, nill you, the Lord knows how soon, to follow her. But to my Text;
Then Sarah died. Was Sarah the first that ever died! Was not Grandmother Eve,
with many more, dead long before? If dead, why not recorded in Sacred Writ?
What was eminent, what was admirable? What was remarkable or singular in her,
or in her death, that she above all her Sex, above Eve her self, should merit
the first Memorial? Then Sarah died. Certainly I know no other reason can be
rendered, but this, That as Abraham was the Father, so Sarah was the Mother of
the Faithful; and therefore the Holy Ghost, confers that upon her, which he
denies to other Women, even a Noble and Honorable mention, both of her Age,
how long she lived, and of the time of her death, when she died. When Sarah was
127 years old, so long she lived; Then Sarah died. Sarah though the Mother of
the Faithful, though a holy and religious Matron, though a Saint and dear Child
of God, yet Sarah died: Whence observe,

Obs. The General and Universal condition of all Mankind, and that which the
holy Apostle has many hundred years since abundantly confirmed. Statutum est
omnibus semel mori, It is appointed for all men once to die: Appointed and
decreed it is, and that by Elohim, the Mighty God, who has the disposing,
ordering and appointing of all things, and whose Decrees and Appointments are
like those of the Medes and Persians, they shall not, they cannot be altered or
changed: All must drink of Sarahs Cup, the Cup is full of one and the same
Liquor, the Liquors drawn from one and the same Spring; now the Spring it self
is poisoned, and if the Spring be corrupted the streams will be disturbed too,
if the Root be cankered the branches will wither and die, and if the Head be
out of order, the whole Body will be indisposed also. Now the head and the
root, as of Sarah, so of all Mankind, was Father Adam. But Adam disobeying his
Creator and transgressing the Law of his God, sinned not only in his own
person, but in his humane nature, and so incurred the wrath and displeasure of
his good and gracious God, and purchased the punishment of sin (which is death)
not only unto himself, unto his own person, but also to all his Posterity. To
this I may add that of the Apostle, Romans 5.12. By one Man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin entered also. By one Adam, one Eve, two in Sex but one
in Nature, one in offending, one in disobedience, the Woman seduced by the
Serpent, the Man induced by the Woman, sin entered into the World, and Death by
sin entered also; so death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. Adam
at first might have lived freely, fully, happily, and plenteously, eating of
all the Trees in Paradise except one: Now having tasted of that one, a
necessity is laid upon him, and he must die. The cause of his death was the
breach of diet, God forbad him the fruit of one Tree; this he hungreth for, and
taste it he will, though it cost him his life. S. Augustine brings in our
first Parents thus disputing in a Dialogue, concerning that fruit; If this
Fruit be good, why may I not eat of it? If it be not good, why grows it in
Paradise? Demine dedisti hortum and negasta pomum, Lord have thou given us the
Garden and denied us the Apple. Therefore, says he, God has given thee the
fruition and benefit of Paradise, that thou may know his beneficence, his
bounty and goodness toward thee; but has denied this one fruit, that he may
find thy Obedience and Duty to him. This Duty and Obedience, neglected by our
Grandfather Adam, Death the Lodge of every man's life comes with insensible
degrees upon the Children of Men.

So that now as soon as Man begins to live, he begins a continual Voyage unto
death, and there is none but is nearer death at the years end than at the
beginning, to morrow than to day, to day than yesterday; by and by, than just
now; and now, then a little before; each part of time, if time may be said to
have part, that we may divide it, divides and cuts off so much of our life; and
the remainder still decreaseth. Veniente pueritia (says S. Aug. in Psalm.
127.) moritur infantia, veniente adolescentia moritur pueritia, veniente
juventute moritur adolescentia, veniente senectute moritur juventus, veniente
morte moritur omnis aetas: When childhood approaches or comes on, infancy
dies, when adolescence comes childhood dies, when youth comes adolescence
dies, when old age comes youth dies; but when Death the King of Terrors
comes, all and every age dies. Look how many degrees of ages we covet to
live, so many degrees of death we desire to die.

After an Old man, where is his Infancy, where is his Childhood, where is his
Adolescence, where is his Youth? Shall he not truly speak, if he answers, All
these are dead and gone? What speak I of ages, every year, month, day and hour
of our lives, that we have lived in this vale of misery, is dead to us; and we
are dead with them. What therefore is our life, but a gradation unto death?
What is every minute thereof but a motion to our graves? Quotidie morimur
(says Seneca) Lib. 3. Epist. 24. We die daily every day, we lose somewhat of
our life, and the more it increases, the more it dedecreaseth; the more it is
lengthened the more it is shortened, and the longer we live, the nearer we
approach unto death. Excellent to our purpose is that of Job, Job. 30.27. I
know assuredly thou will bring me unto death; which is appointed for all the
living as a Harbor or Haven for all Shipping. It may be when a Ship comes
within sight of land or near its harbor, a sudden and violent gust or blast of
wind may repel and drive it back again into the vast Ocean; but thither, after
it has been tossed with boistrous waves, it will arrive at last: So must we
(after many trials, crosses, and afflictions) at the gates of death. Omnes una
manet mors and calcanda semelvia lethi. Says a worthy Author. Death is the end
of all, and once the way of Death is to be trod of all. As a River that rises
in the Forest, passes by many Rocks, runs and tumbleth, and makes a
noise, yet in the end enters into the Sea, so fares it with man's life: He
comes into the world with pain, and begins his course with pitiful cries,
and is daily molested with sickness, and never cease running till in the end
he falls into the Sea of Death. As every man has his Genesis, so he must have
his Exodus; and as we are born to live, so we are born to die; and our dying on
earth is but the taking our journey to Heaven. Why are we unwilling to lose
that which cannot be kept? The good Pilot sits at the Stern to guide his Ship,
and a good Christian to direct his life, must think on Death: Death is the door
whereby we go out of Bondage, and Christ is the door of Liberty. Therefore, as
he that is in Prison takes great comfort to sit upon the Threshold, that when
the door is opened, he may the sooner get out; so we must always have our
hearts and minds fixed upon death, for die we must. We are all traveling unto
one home, the habitation or house of death; which the Prophet in a proverbial
manner calls the way of all the earth; Josh. 23.14. Thus as death is certain,
so it is as certain our life is short; which daily experience fully
demonstrates. It is compared to a shadow, Psalm. 102.11. My days are like a
shadow that fades, and I am withered like grass; and Hosea the 13.3. it is
likened to smoke that vanishes; to a bubble that is dissolved; to a Weavers
shuttle for swiftness; Job the 7.6. My days are swifter than a weavers shuttle,
and they are spent without hope; and this he speaks in respect of the brevity
of man's life, which passes without hope of returning: in consideration whereof
he desires God to have compassion on him. To a spiders web, which is soon
swept away; To a cloud that goes away; Job 7.9. As the Cloud vanishes and
goes away, so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more; that is
shall no more enjoy this mortal life: To a vapor, that is soon dispersed,
James 4.14. Ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow, for what is you life? It is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away.
Remember my life is but a wind; says Job. 7.7. No wonder, if when the wind
blows, the Leaf falls; if when death comes, the day ends. Is our life so
uncertain, so full of inconstancy, and of so short a being upon earth? better
than is it to die than to live, and the day of death better than the day
wherein one is born; Eccles. 7.3. The day of death is not a perishing, but a
parting, the soul is not lost to the body, but only sent before it unto joy. If
the soul be carefully and painfully laid off, it is joyfully and happily laid
up. Per nativitatem ad stadium per mortem ad praemium pervenimus: Through our
nativity we come to the race, through death to the reward; through birth to a
sea of sorrow, through death to the Heaven of Comfort; through birth to the
Combat, through death to the victory; through birth to labor, through death
to rest; by birth to mourning, by death to rejoicing; by birth to a life which
is full of misery, by death to a life eternal, free from all sorrows. Death is
rather the flight of sin, than the detriment of man dying; because to the
Righteous death is not the end of nature, but of sin: As a father says, To
leave this world and inherit a better should seem nothing; Death is a passage
from sin and corruption to glory and immortality; from this Earth to Heaven;
from the company of Sinners, to the company of Saints; from sorrow to solace,
from pain to peace, from sickness to safety, from persecution to triumph, from
the bondage and slavery of Pharaoh, to the liberty and freedom of the children
of God. When we are born we are mortal, but when we shall rise again we shall
be immortal. We are alive in the Womb to die in the World, but dead in the
Grave to live in Heaven. Our life is not compared to any thing that is
permanent, but to those things that are momentary and of no long continuance.
The date of our life is threescore years and ten, Psalm. 90.10. and if by reason
of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow;
for it is soon cut off and we flee away. The Kingly Prophet could say it was
but a span long. Moses and Solomon called it a life days. But what need we
these Memento's or Remembrances, seeing we can turn our selves no way, but
something there is which may put us in mind of our mortality? Can you look upon
your Watch, and not consider that as the hour passes, so does your life? Can
you sit in the chairs by the fire side, and see a great quantity of wood or
coals converted into smoke and ashes, and not consider with the Poet, Sic in
non hominem vertitutur omnis homo: So man no man will suddenly become? Can you
walk forth into the pleasant fields, and see how some grass is coming, some
already withered, and some quite sprung up; Esaias. 40.6. and not consider with
the Prophet, All flesh is grass, and all the beauty and glory thereof as the
Flower in the field? Can you feel the Air move and the Wind beat in your faces,
and not consider the breath of man is in his nostrils? The strongest tenure of
his life is but a puff of wind. Can you shoot in the fields, and not consider,
as the arrow flies in the air, so swiftly does your life pass away: As Jonah's
Gourd was soon come, and soon vanished, Jon. 4.6. so man is soon born, and soon
dead. This World is as a Stage, Man as an Actor, when he has played his part,
he is gone. Our lives shorten, as if the Book of our Days was by the penknife
of Gods Judgments cut less. Our sins call for new plagues. We may observe that
neither the planets above, nor the plants below, yield us expected comfort. God
for our impieties does cause the Heaven to be Brass, and the Earth Iron, and
the Air with the Winds, to be tempestuous; Deuteronomy. 28. So almost every thing
which was erected for man's use is become his enemy; and all because we
unthankfully turn all things to Vices corruption, which out of mercy were given
for Natures protection: And therefore what we have diverted to wickedness, God
has reverted to our revenge. We are sick of sin, and the world is sick of us;
how soon does the Sand run down the Hourglass? how quickly does the Sun set?
So speedily does our time pass away. Future things are always beginning,
present things always ending, and things past are dead and gone. While we live
we die, and then we leave dying when we leave living; better is it therefore to
die to life, than to live to death: because our mortal life is nothing but a
living death, and life continually flies from us, and cannot be withheld; and
death hourly comes upon us, and cannot be withstood: No wisdom shall appease
it, no policy prevent it, no riches bribe it. If all perils spare our life, yet
time and age in the end will consume and annihilate it: S. August. (speaking
upon those words of St. Paul) Romans 8.2. Christ has made me free from the Law
of sin and death; says thus, Lex peccati est ut quicunque peccarit morietur,
Lex mortis terra est and in terram reverteris. The Law of sin is, whosoever
offends, shall die; the Law of death is, dust thou art, and unto dust thou
shall return We are all going to our long and last home, to the house of
eternity, Eccles. 12.5. Man goes to his long home. How does he go? He goes
swiftly, always in motion, night and day, sleeping or waking, laboring or
loytering, this Post hastens; time and tide stays not.

Again, He goes insensibly, he does not discern or perceive how his precious
time does fly from him; the shadow on the Dial passes from one hour or figure
to another, from the Suns rising to its setting; though its speedy transcendent
motion is not observed or considered. So man passes from one year to another,
till he come to old Age and the Grave, and we take little or no notice of it;
so insensibly does our time pass away. There was never Orator so learned or
eloquent, that could persuade Death to spare him or prolong his days; never
Hector so valiant or Monarch so mighty, that could resist him. We must all
submit and fall down at Deaths feet; if he commands we must obey, if he calls
we must away; no tears, no entreaties, no threatenings will serve the turn or
release us at that time; so strong, so stubborn, so implacable, and inexorable
is Death. No man nor ways, no means, can oppose it; no not length of years, nor
wisdom, nor riches, nor honors, nor beauty, nor strength; no nor that
excellent grace and gift of Holiness and Piety. (Nay, if age) if virtue, if
pity, if innocence, charity, or godliness, could work any relent or compassion
in Death, from embrewing his cruel hands in mortal blood. See where age, where
virtue, where pity, where charity, where innocence and godliness lies entombed;
wholly defaced, clouded, eclipsed and over-shadowed with death. Oh Death how
ir-relentful is thy heart, how bloody are thy hands, how impartial thy stroke,
how general is thy arrest! The Ancient Fathers and Patriarchs before the Deluge
lived to vast years, to a great and miraculous age, some 700, some 800, some
900 years and more; yet at length, of all and every one it is said, he died.
Sampson was endowed with extraordinary and wonderful strength; at one time he
slew 1000 with the Jawbone of an Ass, and yet he died: Judge. 16.3. Solomon was
a wise King, the wisest that ever was, he knew the nature and the virtue of all
Simples, from the meanest Herb to the biggest Cedar; therefore if any, surely
he above others, might have preserved and kept himself from Death; and yet of
him in the end it is said, he also died; 1 Kings 11.43. Abraham the Father of
the Faithful, Noah a Preacher of Righteousness, David a man after Gods own
heart, and many more, dear and precious in the sight of God, of whom the
Scripture says, They died. The Prophets were endowed with a greater measure of
sanctification than their brethren, yet the Prophet Zechary joyneth them
altogether in one condition; Zech. 1.5. Your Fathers, Where are they? and do
the Prophets live for ever? But what speak I of the Prophets, Patriarchs, or
Ancient Fathers, Christ Jesus our Holy and Blessed Savior, the Son of God, his
only Son, in whom he was well pleased; more Wise than Solomon, more Mighty than
Sampson, and more Righteous than Noah and all the Prophets; who did no wrong,
who knew no sin in himself, yet assuming and taking the burden of our sins
upon him, became subject to the same doom of mortality with us; and he died
also: Nay, Sarah in my Text, though she lived 127 years, and was Wise, Chaste,
Beautiful, and Innocent, yet neither he Wisdom, Chastity, Beauty, or Innocence,
could defend her in this case; for says the Text, Then Sarah died. There have
been, and there are, ways and means discovered and found out to subdue and make
gentle the most cruel and savage Creature; to break and mollify the hard
Flint, yea, the hardest thing in the world; but not any thing to assuage and
mitigate Deaths fury; Resistitur ignibus, resistitur nudis, resistitur ferno,
resistitur regibus, resistitur reguis, and imperiis, venit una mors and quis ci
resistat. Fire, Water, and the Sword, may be resisted; Kings, Kingdoms, and the
greatest Empires may be resisted; but when Death comes, that is invincible; and
who can resist it. Non miseretur inopum. Death pittieth not the Poor, respects
not the Rich, fears not the Mighty, spares not any. Man goes irresistably;
neither Men nor Angels, Physic or Physicians, can keep him here; for here he
has no abiding place: it stands him in hand therefore to look for one to come.
It is as easy to obstruct the Course of Nature, or to hinder Gods Covenant of
day and night. Man may as well restrain the Sun from rising, the Sea from
flowing and ebbing, and the Wind from blowing, as keep Man from dying and going
to the place appointed for all living; for this condition, as the wise man
says, is the condition of all times and continues still; thou shall die the
Death: for this is an universal truth of all men to be received and believed,
and duly and truly pondered. It is appointed unto men that they shall once die.

Now having cleared and proved the Doctrinal part, That Death is the general
condition of all men, let us consider how nearly it does concern us to bethink
our selves of this, and to fit our selves for Death; to take care for another
Life, a more glorious and eternal Life; and seeing we must die, therefore let
me persuade you to take three or four considerations with you, which may serve
as incentives to encourage and stir you up to the execution and performance of
this Duty

1. Be moved to consider, That when you come to die, all earthly and worldly
things will fail you and forsake you for ever; All your terrestrial and natural
Endowments, external and outward Enjoyments, your excellent Parts, great
Parentage, noble Birth and Breeding, your ingenious Wit, wonderful Wealth,
stately Crowns, vast Kingdoms, invaluable Pearls, costly Diamonds, magnificent
Houses, fruitful Lands, dear Wives, loving Parents, sweet Children, and
precious Friends; when Death comes all these are gone: Prove. 27.24. Riches are
not for ever, neither does a Crown endure to all Generations. The glittering
Sun of all earthly glory and pomp, will certainly set; which your own
experience and Scripture evidence does sufficiently evince ( Prove. 23.5.)
Riches have wings and they fly away; 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. The fashion of this
world passes away; 1 Timothy 6.7. We brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we shall carry nothing out. What was there that the World was able to
afford to delight the heart of man, which Solomon wanted? Surely nothing. He
had stately and glorious Buildings, fruitful and pleasant Vineyards, Orchards,
Gardens, and what not; all manner of excellent Trees, rare Fruits, variety of
Servants, a vast Exchequer, ravishing Music, Men and Women Singers, and
whatsoever his Eyes desired: yet when he had taken a serious view of all
things, his conclusion is, All is vanity; Eccl. 2.11. It is strange to see how
men here toil themselves, beat their Brains, tire their Spirits, break their
Sleep, perplex their Thoughts, rack their Consciences, ingulf and drown
themselves in Cares and Troubles, hazard their Souls, thinking to eternize
their Names and Mansions; and when they have done all, like the poor silly
Silkworm, die in their Work. Therefore let not Riches and Honors lift up your
hearts and prompt you to Pride, which is too too common; and if Riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them, for they are mutable and uncertain,
and cannot satisfy the capacious soul of man, nor profit him in the day of
trial; but will perish and that for ever. O then think of your precious souls
and dying bodies, and provide in time for death, for die you must; and what
will it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul.

2. Seeing if to die is the general condition of all men, consider with your
selves whether you are going to Heaven or to Hell. O beloved, I do heartily
wish, that all that hear me at this time, would truly ponder this, and
effectually apply it to their own souls; That there is one place for the Just,
another for the Unjust; one place for Believers, another for Unbelievers; one
place for Saints, another for impenitent Sinners; one place for the Sheep,
another for the Goats: A dreadful Night or a glorious Day; endless Torments or
endless Pleasures; a perpetual Happiness, or a perpetual Infelicity; an eternal
Life, or an eternal Death, a glorious Heaven, or a dreadful Hell. Now my dear
friends stop here, and consider unto which you do belong.

Have you any certainty of a blessed and glorious Estate, that Heaven and not
Hell will be your place and inheritance? A man that knows he must resign his
habitation in a short time, is very unwise and unprovident, if he takes no care
or order for another: So will it be with us, that inhabit these Houses of Clay;
Job 4. We are sure we shall leave them, how soon we know not; perhaps to
morrow, peradventure to day, it may be presently; we are therefore silly and
imprudent if we take no care for the future. What said Saint Bernard (de
Eccles) to his Soul, Adhuc domum quidem habes (O anima) sed certum est, quoniam
in brevi casura est domus tua, nisi tu provideris aliam, eris pluviae, vento,
and frigori exponenda. O my Soul, thou have yet a House to dwell in, but be
assured thy House will shortly fall and moulder away to dust, and unless thou
provide thee beforehand of some other place of abode, captive, forlorn, and
naked, shall thou be exposed unto the wind, the rain, and the cold. Alas, Who
can stand in this stormy tempest? Happy therefore, thrice happy, and for ever
happy, shall thou be my soul, if then thy conscience tell thee, thou can say
unto thy self in faith and full assurance, Egredere anima mea, Egredere, Go
forth my soul, go forth, I know, that if my earthly house of this tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a building of God; 2 Cor. 5.1. That is, an house not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

Let us therefore look about us, and make it our business to search and try our
selves, prove our own hearts, examine our selves whether we are in the Faith;
for whatsoever we sow we shall undoubtedly reap; and in the place where the
tree falls there it shall lie; Eccles. 11.13. If it falls to the West, it
lies to the West; if it falls to the East, It lies to the East; if you live
and die toward Heaven Heaven, will be your place and habitation; but if you
live and die toward Hell, Hell will be your place and home: for according to
your works and actions in this world will be your sentence and portion in the
world to come; 2 Cor. 5.10. And is it not sad and dreadful to believe that you
have precious and immortal souls, and do not know nor consider whether they
shall be saved or damned; stand or fall, live or die everlastingly: yet this is
the case of millions of men and women in this terrestrial Globe, that are
making post-haste to Hell, and think and hope they are in the way to Heaven.
Let us therefore believe, and repent and amend our lives, that Heaven that
glorious place, and not Hell the place of terrors, may be our Country and
Inheritance.

3. Consider when Death comes to strike the fatal blow, your conditions are
stated, your places of abode are determined without mutation to all eternity;
then your immaterial souls are for everlasting joy or endless sorrow; for an
everliving life, or a never dying death; for eternal glory, or eternal ignomy.
Oh therefore, all ye that are careless and remiss, know and call to mind in
time, that if ye be found without faith and repentance, and holiness, but a
moment after death, ye are miserable and undone for ever; for Ab infernis nulla
redemptio. After death all ways, all means, all hopes and helps fail: there is
no wisdom, no work or device in the grave; Eccl. 9. God will then be implacable
and irreconcilable, thy self unpardonable, heaven not attainable, and your
souls lost irrecoverably. There is no repenting in the Grave, nor working out
of Salvation with a filial fear and trembling; no Prayers, no Sermons, no
Ministers there: It is in the time of Life that you are to labor and make
preparation for Death; and know that delays breed danger. Take heed, it is a
fearful thing to neglect the offers of Grace, and the sweet invitations of
Divine Love and Mercy. Remember profane Esau, who for one morsel of Meat sold
his Birthright, but afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, he
was rejected, for he found no place of Repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears ( Heb. 12.17.) So the foolish Virgins; through their
procrastination lost their admission into the Bridechamber, and fruition of the
Bridegroom; when the door was shut then they knocked, crying, Lord, Lord, open
unto us; but it was too late, for said the Bridegroom, I know you not; Mat.
25.12. It was procrastination that did undo them.

Delay is the Rock, the Shipwreck, the Destruction of many Souls. No doubt but
there are many in Hell which had a meaning in their life time to receive
Christ, to believe in him, and to honor him as their Savior; but God in his
justice has cut them short, and deprived them of that, which when they might
they refused to accept of. It is reported of the Prophet, concerning the People
that neglected the re-edifying of the Temple; Hag. 1.2. The People say, that
the time is not come, that the Lords House shall be builded. So many think it
is not yet time for them to look Heavenward: youth must have its course; the
covetous bag must be filled, the pleasures of the flesh must be fully tasted,
ambition must come to its height; then it will be time to retire, then it will
be time to look toward Heaven, to repent of sin, and to prepare for death; Nam
mora damnosa est. Deferring is dangerous. Qui non est hodie cras minus aptus
enit. He that is unfit to day, makes himself the more unfit to do it on the
morrow, by his procrastination. The more the Sun declines to the West, the less
we feel the heat of it; for as the Sun sets, the Air cools: So the nearer an
Unbeliever draws to his Grave, the more his heart freezeth, and the beams of
Grace have less power and force upon his Soul. Oh therefore, that we would be
wise to take our time, and not neglect those blessed opportunities which God
affords us. There is a time coming, and we do not know how near it is, in which
many shall seek to enter into the Kingdom of God, and shall not be able. Oh
what woeful yelling, what pitiful crying, and earnest knocking, there will be
then at the Gates of Heaven, with Lord, Lord, open unto us; when that heavy
doom, Depart from me, I know you not, shall be their portion. Behold now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation; 2 Cor. 6.2. Say not therefore anon,
anon, or to morrow we will repent and believe; why not to day, why not even
now, seeing now is the appointed time. Let me desire you to be up and be doing,
while it is day. The night will come when no man can work; Joh. 9.4. Then to
your Christian task with all speed, industry, and dilgience; work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, while your Candle is burning, your Sun
shining: Will you loiter and see your Glass running, your selves dying, and
your souls perishing? Are you resolved to seek and secure the Kingdom, whilst
ye have time; or will you bestow nothing but the infirmities and imperfections
of decayed old age upon God, and your immortal souls? Oh that ye were careful
in this your day, to know the things that belong unto your peace, before they
be hid from your eyes.

4. The fourth and last consideration (to move us to prepare for death, seeing
it is the general condition of all men) is to consider, that it is the most
dreadful astonishing spectacle on this side Hell, to see a graceless wretch, an
unbelieving and profane worlding breathing out his last. There are many
lamentable and sad sights in the world; as to see a man starving and
languishing for want of food, or in violent pains for want of a Physician or
Surgeon; or drowning for lack of a Boat, or some other help to receive him;
or to see a dead carcass, a body without a soul. Ah, but how sad unutterrable
and amazing sight is it, to behold a wicked non-repenting sinner in his cold
sweats and dying groans, with his precious and invaluable soul, standing on his
pale, cold and trembling lips. O miserable case, when suddenly the senses fail,
the body languisheth; when thou shall feel the sting of thy sins tormenting thy
soul, and see the flames of Hell flashing in thy face, thy heartstrings ready
to burst asunder, and the ghastly apprehensions of speedy and hellish horror
shall dog thy conscience; Death at thy elbow to prey upon thee, and the
infernal Lake wide open and ready to swallow thee up: Who in this estate would
not value a minute of repentance, to a Monarchy of wealth!

O woeful condition of those godless men and women, whose belly is their god,
whose Heaven is their pleasure, whose cursed jollity is but a feeding up to an
eternal slaughter: The day is coming, wherein every minute of their sinful
unsatisfying joys shall be repayed with a Thousand thousand Millions of years
frying in that unquenchable fire, and when the damned Ghosts shall forth of
their incessant flames see the celestial and glorious reward and remuneration
of the penitent and pensive Souls, which they have despised and unworthily
abused; then shall they gnash their teeth, and tear themselves, and horridly
utter that too too late recantation, We fools thought their lives madness, and
their end without honor; but now they are accounted among the Children of God,
and have their portion amongst the Saints; but we with demoniacal and hellish
spirits. Let me therefore beg of you all to exempt your selves from all supine
and carnal security: And seeing you must die, and your time short, and that a
thousand chances may every day bereave you of your lives, make such conscience
of all your ways, words and works, as if you were presently to give up your
accounts to him that lives for ever: Qui consider at qualiter erit in morte
pavidus and providus erit in operatione; He that considers always of dying,
will be cautious and circumspect in his doing: And not like those careless
souls, who spend their days, their months, their years, nay their whole time
in sin and wickedness; not considering what will befall them in the end.

Now let me fasten two Reasons upon you (why you should consider that you must
die) and to confirm you in the truth delivered: First, if men seriously did
consider, that they are mortal and must die, and shortly appear before the
Tribunal of the just and great Judge; it would prove an absolute and sovereign
antidote, to expel the greatest evil, sin, and the dreadful consequences of it;
and a means to avoid the greatest loss the loss of our immaterial Spirits,
those excellent beings; and the way to procure the greatest good, Heaven and
eternal blessedness. What is the reason and cause of that inundation of
profaneness and wickedness, and those prodigious sins; as Treasons, Murders,
Uncleaness, Rebellion, that are now in the world, and in this Kingdom, and in
all places, in most families, and persons of all qualities and degrees; but
this their not duly and effectually considering, that they are mortal and must
die and come to Judgment. This is the reason, if not one main ground of sin,
and of the neglect and omission of all sacred duties. For did they believe, and
remember they must die and come to Judgment; and that their naked Souls and
their naked crimes and sins, must shortly be manifested, and stand before the
dreadful Bar of the most tremendous Judge of all mankind (who will render unto
every man according as his work shall be) no doubt it would impede and hinder
their constant and desperate course of sinning. But alas it is the foolishness
and unhappiness of most, that they defer and put of the consideration of death,
till they feel and find they can no longer live.

Secondly, Did ye believe that ye must die, and answer for all ye have done in
the body, whether good or evil; this if any thing, would make you serious,
diligent, zealous, and constant in the worship of God, and to work while it is
day, before the night comes wherein no man can work: For this world is for
duty, the other for glory; this for repentance, the other for recompense; Hic
locus luctae, ille coronae, This is the place of combating, that of crowning;
this of working that of rewarding; this for thy mourning, that for thy
consolating. The Apostle exhorts us to consider one another, to provoke to love
and good works, Heb. 10.24, 25. And so much the more as we see the day
approaching. Our work is great and weighty, Diversions are various and many,
Adversaries potent and subtle; thy strength is weak and small; thy time is
short and uncertain; thy account is large and great; death and judgment are at
the door; therefore be sluggish and loiter no longer, but be active and
vigilant, now or never. Surely, did you in the depth of your serious thoughts
cogitate of your apparent and inevitable danger, that would incite and stir you
up to duty, To seek the Lord while he may be found; Esa. 55.6. to call upon him
while he is near. While God gives you life, opportunity, peace, strength, and
liberty, to seek him; before the gate of life be shut, God withdrawn, and
mercy quite gone for ever. Were profane sinners truly sensible of their peril,
they would pray more ardently, more deeply, more affectionately, more
effectually; than ever they have done.

This Consideration of Mortaliry put holy Job upon Prayer; Job 7.21. Why do
thou not pardon my transgression, and take away mine iniquity, for now shall I
sleep in the dust? Chap. 14.13. O that thou would hide me in the grave, until
thy wrath and indignation be past; that thou would appoint me a set time,
and remember me. David, when the sorrows of Death compassed him, and the pains
of Hell gat hold upon him; Then, said he, Psalm. 116. I called upon the Lord, O
Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. I might also give you the example of
Hezekiah, Jonah, Paul, and Silas, with many others; but I hasten to the Uses
and Application: yet let me tell you a through affecting Meditation of your
Dissolution and Change would make you speedy in prosecuting your known
necessary and religious duties, which God requires at your hands. Therefore let
me beg of you, before the Decree bring forth; Eccles. 9.10. before the day pass
as the chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, prepare for
Death; for how shall ye escape, if ye neglect so great salvation?

Now let me improve and apply it in a threefold Use; the first is for
Exhortation, the second for Reprehension, the third for Consolation. Is it so,
that Life is short, and Death certain? both which have been sufficiently
cleared and proved. This then calls and cries aloud unto all those, that have
made no provision for Death and Judgment, to admire at the unwearied patience,
the matchless and amazing mercies of the infinitely good and gracious God. Be
exhorted therefore to stand upon your guard, and watch, and be in a prepared
readiness; Luke 12.40. For the Son of Man will come at an hour when ye think
not. All Estates are exhorted to prepare and be furnished, Old and Young, Male
and Female, Rich, and Poor, Noble and Ignoble, for the danger is great, if men
be found unprovided: As Death leaves them, so Judgment will find them. If it
leave them in a state of Damnation, it will find them in a state of Damnation:
So if it leaves them in a state of Salvation, it finds them in a state of
Salvation. As Ishbosheth, being found asleep; 2 Samuel 4.7. was killed by Rechab
and Baanah; so if we be sound asleep in Sin, and unprepared for the Lord, we
shall be killed by Satan, that roaring Lion, that goes about seeking whom he
may devour. Because the Man that was not prepared, came to the Wedding, Matthew.
22.13. he was cast into outer darkness. As he is left behind, that is
unprovided when the wind serves, and the Ship under sail; even so he is left
in Damnation, that is not prepa ed for Christ when Death comes. Many Men make
all the provision they can for this Life, which is uncertain, and forget Death,
which is certain.

The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, 2 Pet. 3.10. in which
the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the Works that are therein shall be
burnt up. The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night. A Thief, as
well for stealing on us, as stealing from us, he comes in the dark, when no
body sees; watches an hour which no body knows. It may be he will come when
thou art revelling or banqueting, as on the Old World; Luke 17.27. or when thou
art drunk; as on Belshazzar; Dan. 5.25. or when thou art lying, as on Ananias;
or when thou art committing uncleanness, as on the Israelitish Man and
Moabitish Woman; Number. 25.8. Or when thou art coveting, as on the Rich Man in
the Gospel; Luke 12.20. O Fool, this night will they fetch away thy Soul from
thee, then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? Which with so
much wrack of Conscience, so much breach of Charity, so much wrong to Humane
Society, thou have scrapt together. No Thunder now can beat into them a dread
or fear of that, which then no power shall ease them of. We know Christ will
come, let us prepare for his welcome. You are yet, through mercy, on this side
the Grave, and not gone down into that place of Torment. You enjoy many
gracious opportunities for your spiritual advantages, and are daily exhorted to
relinquish and to leave your sins, and turn to God; to accept of Christ, to
think on Death and Hell; that you may never see it, nor feel it: for there is
much more in the Pains of Hell and Wrath of God, than ever you heard, or is
possible for you to imagine. Be therefore persuaded to redeem the precious time
which you have lost, in the well managing that little time, which through the
Grace and Goodness of God you may enjoy. Seeing our time draws nigh, and that
Death will be the portion of us all; What manner of Persons ought we to be in
all holy and godly Conversation? How careful should we be in fitting our selves
for our Change? How vigilantly to stand upon our Guards, and Watch, that we may
not be unprovided, when Death comes to summon us to appear before our Creator.

Secondly, This reprehends all those that slight and neglect this great and
saving Duty, that do not prepare themselves for Death; knowing that they are
mortal: As the audacious Atheist and impenitent Sinner, who put the evil day
far from them; saying, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. They
will satisfy their lusts, walk in the ways and imaginations of their own
hearts; but hereby they make the breach wider, and themselves sevenfold more
the Children of Satan, and at last sit down in everlasting woe and sorrow; for
did they believe that they must die and be judged, and that they must appear in
a very little time before the dreadful God, who will in no wise clear the
guilty; surely they would quickly change their courses. Nevertheless these
Vipers, these Devils Incarnate, these Monsters in the shape of Men, trisle away
their time, and think that they are wise, when indeed they have no
understanding. Wise they are, Jer. 4.22. but it is to do evil, to cavil and
spurn against the truth; dispute against Religion and a Life of Piety: but to
do good they have no knowledge. Is it not lamentable, to consider, how that
Men, that know they must die and leave all behind them, should be so
lethargical and mad, as not to mind Death in many days, it may be in many
months together; yea scarcely to entertain a serious cogitation of Death or of
Judgment at a House of Mourning; but in the very sight of the Dead they can
laugh and quaff, and be vain, drink, feast, and discourse of Profane and idle
Stories? It may be some may seem more religious than their Brethren, but as
soon as the Dead Corpse is removed, and the Grave and Coffin out of sight, Death
is no more remembered. Oh! how sad is it to think, how quickly the thoughts of
Mortality do pass away, notwithstanding Death is at your very heels and before
your eyes. Whither can you direct your eyes, and not behold that which
preaches or represents Death? All the Winter Death is on the Trees, in your
Gardens, on every Flower, at your Tables every day: You feed on the Flesh of
dead Creatures, to tell you that you must die: And is not Death in your Beds
every night? What is Sleep but the picture and image of cold Death? and your
Beds are the representations of your dark Graves, and yet for all this the
greatest part of the World foolishly and unadvisedly spend their precious time,
not considering that they shall die. This is a sin, not only that the profane
World are guilty of, but some, too many that profess the Name of God, and covet
to be called Christians. They conclude upon a fitness and preparedness for
Death, upon every slender and unwarrantable ground: They have a name to live;
as it is said of the Church of Sardis, but it is to be feared that they are
dead; therefore in this great Soulbusiness, let none be so foolhardy as to
trust without examination; But let every man (as the Apostle says) Gal. 6.4,
5. prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and
not in another; for every man shall bear his own burden. And so I pass to the
third and last Use, and I have done.

Thirdly, If it be so, that to die is the general condition of all men, this
must needs consolate and comfort those that are prepared for it; for Revel.
14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. They are blessed in three
respects: I. In respect of the Place. II. In respect of their Society. III. In
respect of their Condition. All which must needs comfort them.


First, In respect of the Place, which is Heaven. For if we rightly consider
the World, wherein we live, it is a Vale of Misery, a Prison, or place of
Ignominy, Vexation, Afflictions and Trouble; as the Apostle says, Romans 8.22.
We know that every Creature groaneth and travelleth in pain together, until
this present time; but Heaven is a place of Joy, of Rest, of Comfort. This
World is of short and no continuance, but Heaven is a place of continuance; it
is permanent and everlasting. It is a glorious Place, the Holy Word of God
admirably demonstrates it, by those excellent things to which it is compared,
or by which it is called 1. It is called, Regnum, a Kingdom; for there such as
are prepared for Death and die in the Lord, shall enjoy great Liberty, Honor,
Power, Pleasure, and all good Things whatsoever. 2. It is called, Regnum Dei
and Christi; Ephesians. 5.5. The Kingdom of God and of Christ, because that Jesus
Christ having overcome Death, Hell, and Damnation, together with all the
Enemies that did oppose us in the way to Heaven, does there govern his Church
Triumphant, with heavenly peace and everlasting tranquillity. 3. It is called by
the name of Paradisus; Luke 23. in respect of the plenty of all good and
delighful things, which such as die in the Lord, I mean the Just, can either
wish or possibly desire. 4. It is called by the name of Coelum tertium, The
third Heaven; 2 Cor. 12. Which is called Coelum empyreum, id est, igneum: Not
in respect of Fire, but in respect of the glorious Light that shines therein;
for as one says, it is, Situ altissimum, quantitate maximum, natura
purissimum, Luce plenissimum, and capacitate amplissimum. High in situation,
great in quantity, pure in nature, full of light, and exceeding large, able to
receive Ten thousand times more Persons than there are drops of Water in the
Sea, or Sands lying on the Seashore. 5. It is called, Sancta Civitas, The Holy
City, built with most precious Pearls, because the company that dwell therein
are holy and pure, shining in Holiness, and glistering in Purity and
Righteousness. 6. It is called, Summa Beatitudo, Inestimable Blessedness,
because the Saints enjoy the full and glorious presence of the Blessed Trinity,
wherein true Blessedness consists. 7. And lastly, It is called, Vita Eterna,
Life Eternal, because there shall be no more Death nor Lamentation, no more
Weeping nor Sorrow, but the prepared for Death shall enjoy these blessed Joys,
so long as God shall be God, which is everlasting. This is the reward promised
to all that die in the Lord; a large reward, and no man knows it, but he that
enjoys it: Adeo magna est quod nequit numerari, adeo pretiosa quod nequit
comparari, adeo diutina quod nequit terminari. So great as it cannot be
numbered, so precious that it cannot be valued, so lasting as it is everlasting;
so great, so precious, so lasting, is the Reward promised and prepared for them
that die in him.


Secondly, In respect of the Society; for here we live amongst profane,
wicked, and sinful men, but there we shall have the happy fruition of
innumerable Angels; Heb. 12.22. and have the Society of Saints, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and the rest; and we shall enjoy their
Fellowship after an undefiled manner; with all purity, amity, and everlasting
concord: Where also we shall enjoy God our Creator, a God of so wonderful
Might, Majesty, Excellency, Beauty, Glory, Love, as cannot be imagined; and
Christ his only and dear Son, and our dear and precious Savior. If a man had
the enjoyment of all other things, yet without this all would be but misery and
accursedness. This will be the Society of those that are called from Earth to
Heaven.

Thirdly, In respect of their Condition, They are Blessed; for they rest from
all their Labors: For they which are prepared for Death, die in the Lord; and
they that die in the Lord are with the Lord: says St. Paul, Phil. 1.23. My
Soul desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Death considered in Christ
and joined with a holy Conversation, to Believers is an advantage; says the
Apostle; Phil. 1.21. Christ is to me both in life and death an advantage. Death
is nothing else but a Bridge over this Tempestuous Sea, the World, to Heaven;
Gods Grace and Mcrcy made it so, not by making Death in it self good, but an
instrument of good to the Godly. Death cannot separate them from God that live
a pious life, but makes them draw near to God; for then do we approach near to
God and your heavenly Place, that excellent Society, and shall enjoy that
Blessed Condition, to rest from our Labors, and to have our good Works follow
us in glorious Recompenses, when we die in the Lord. And now the great and
glorious God direct and enable us all, so to live and so die (that when the
Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead shall be raised, and we shall be changed) we
may with joy and rejoicing (and to our unspeakable consolation) hear that
soul-ravishing Saying: Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom, etc.

And now, Beloved, give me leave before I dismiss you, to speak something by
way of an Encomium upon our Worthy Patroness deceased, the Relict of Mr. Robert
Fenn, formerly Alderman of London. Should I be altogether silent, I should
undoubtedly be prodigiously unjust to her who merited more than I am able to
express. Now what came you forth to see or Hear? Of a Reed shaken with the
wind, of one clothed in rich and glorious Apparel! Behold a Pillar in the
Temple of our God, to whom it is given to shine in white and glorious linen,
which is the rightousness of the Saints.

Altogether superfluous it were to strew Rhetorical Flowers upon that Hearse,
which covers an enclosed Garden: In regard of her Candor, Innocence,
Goodness, and Integrity: She was a Lilly among the valleys: Though amongst
Thorns, yet was a Cedar in Libanus. That House of Darkness, the Grave, is to
receive the Earthen Vessel of an Heavenly Treasure till time shall be no
longer. Her blessed Soul possesses the Inheritance of the Saints; but this
House of God must be filled with the Savor of her good Name, which is a
precious Ointment now to be powered forth; and most deservedly in this place:
For here she was built up to be an Holy Temple to the Lord. Her heart and her
joy was here fixed. She Loved (Lord) the habitation of thine House, and the
Place where thine Honor dwells.

She was desended of a very good Family, and her Education was every way
answerable to one of such a Quality. But I shall omit this, being (as I humbly
conceive) more proper for a Herald than a Minister to give an account of.

For my Discourse must take notice of her from her Second Birth, by which she
became a Child of the Most High; and rejoiced thather Name was Written in
Heaven; not by way of Ostentation, but as a ground of her Consolation: She was
holy, just, and good; holy in her life, just in her ways, good and courteous to
all. Her Life was a Looking-glass, wherein all Ladies and Gentlewomen might see
to dress themselves and attire their Conversation. This Pious and Religious
Matron was exceeding charitable, and made it her business, in imitation of her
blessed Savior, in the time of her life (so long as strength would permit) to
go about doing good.

Her House was an Eleemosinary, or (if you will) an Apothecaries Shop, where
the Wounded and Diseased Poor might have Therapeuticks, Sanatives; Healing and
Curing Medicines, without Price or Money.

She was a second Dorcas, who delighted in Clothing the Naked, feeding the
Hungry, relieving the Oppressed, visiting the Sick; and in administering to the
necessities of the Saints.

Her Ambition was terminated in the bounds of Moderation, that being good to
the Poor, she might be rich in good Works: Discretion the Virtue of Virtues,
waited on her; and that Grace, by which she so much undervalued her self, in
that she most shined.

The Vassal of all other Graces, Humility: for you might behold in her, when
living, the most beautiful condescension in the bosom of magnitude, and make
of her Manners a Censure of Vices; and of her Life Examples of Piety. But these
are external signs of inward holiness. Her Heart panted after God; the Seal of
Wisdom was upon her Lips, and she washed her Feet in Innocence: She turned away
her Eyes from beholding Vanity; she considered her own ways, and turned her
feet to Gods Testimonies.

That so now, they who will prepare Statues or Monuments for Virtue, may boldly
plant the Basis in her Footsteps, which you shall imprint or erect. Many
lament her, many desire her, but all do miss her. She trampled the World under
her Feet, where Inconstancy is everlasting, and Glory but momentary; where Men
live by Opinion, sin by Precepts, and amend not through impotency of offending;
and as it were, never die but by sudden surprizal. She was a Directory in her
Family, directing them in the fear of God and in the ways of his Commandments.
Virtue is a rare thing, and so is a Virtuous Woman a rare Jewel, hard to be
found; yet not so rare but may be found: for (lo) here is one; and therefore
She may challenge the Character of the Wiseman, Her price is far above Rubies.

The World was not worthy of her. Let not any envy at Gods Grace upon her. Many
Daughters have done well, but thou exceedest them all. She was zealous for the
Lord, the Zeal of Gods House, did even eat her up. She was fervent in Prayer,
fervent in Reading. She followed the exhortation of St. Paul, not in putting on
of Hair and Broidered Apparel, and the insolent impiety of these times; but in
putting off of Apparel. The Ornament she had was in the hidden man of the
heart, a meek and quiet Spirit.

She was no scornful and curious Dame, but of a gentle, humble, and affable
Disposition; and one that powered out her heart unto the Lord. She lived a
Saint, she died a Saint, and precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of
Saints. Her works shall praise her in the Gates, and shall follow her with
happy rewards.

In a word, She has fought the good Fight, She has run her Christian Race
with a good Conscience; She has wrought out her Salvation with a filial fear
and trembling: Therefore no doubt but her Soul is translated or metamorphosed
into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God and her Heavenly Creator: and
her Body, at the Great and General Resurrection, shall be reunited to her
Soul, and shine like the Sun in the Firmament; nay it shall be made like unto
the Glorious Body of Christ, which in glory exceeds and excels all. And if
her Body shall be so glorious, how glorious shall her Soul be, it is altogether
impossible to imagine. But I must be silent, and put a period to my Discourse,
for I want words to express her Worth.

FINIS.

