To the Inhabitants of the whole Earth, I Thus write in the Name, and power,
and dread of the Lord God.
OH all ye Sons and Daughters of Men,
come down, come down to the Witness of God in your hearts, even that which
reproves you in secret, and cease from all things else, as ever you would know
the way, the path of peace and blessedness, and be delivered from eter^ ^ery,
sorrow, vexation, torment and desolation. Oh cease, cease all ye (...) guides,
to mislead the Sons and Daughters of Men, by perverting the (...) spotless,
innocent, certain, sure, safe, (though narrow) way of God; (...) ^^e way is but
one, and the way is near, is brought near to every one, and (...) ^^e little
seed of Righteousness, the Word near and in the heart. Oh (...) ^e soarers, ye
comprehenders, ye towrers, ye fathomers, ye stretchers, (...) ^merers, ye
toolers, ye gravers, ye makers of Images, ye ^urderers in (...) ^arkned minds
and imaginations therein, cease from all the works of (...) ^wn hands, and come
down, come down to the witness, the lowly lit^ ^d of Righteousness near and in
each of your hearts. Oh cease ye lust^ ^ellious ones, who are pursuing a
shadow, and miserable disappointed (...) all, who lust to have, and the more
you have the more you want: Come (...) come down to the witness of God in you,
near and in your (...) that sometimes brings you to judgment, and lets you see
the end of (...) ^se things is death and misery. Oh ye painted Harlots, who are
gone (...) ^o deceive the Inhabitants of the Earth, come down, come down to
(...) ^itness and give up, and confess that there is a lie in your right hand,
for ^y of the Lord God does discover you all, and hid you can no longer (...)
the birth is born that cannot be deceived, and a swift witness the Lord ^s, and
will yet more abundantly be against all unrighteousness and de^ and whosoever,
whatsoever will not bow to this day of his appearance, (...) ^e brought forth
with the workers of iniquity, and slain in and by his ^ce and brightness of his
Coming, before which, no flesh nor nothing ^of can stand or live. Oh the
dreadful, terrible astonishing day of God (...) at hand, to be revealed against
all unrighteousness, all manner of un^ousness and deeds of darkness. Therefore
come down all ye Sons and (...) ^f what degree, quality or condition soever ye
be, (for (...) God is no respect of persons) come to the Witness of God near
and (...) your hearts, and be not stout or rebellious against his Word, his
Light, his Witness near and in your hearts; come down I say to this, and give
up the ^ransgressor, even all that the light of Christ near and in your hearts
witnesses against, else misery, desolation and torment shall be your portion
in the lake that burns for ever.

The 8th. of the 10th. Month, 1665. J. Swinton.

FRIENDS,
ALL you that think and say and maintain it as your Principle, that you must be
sinners for term of life, so as you cannot cease from sining, do (...) not with
open face proclaim that you are in unbelief, ignorant of the ^^mb of God that
takes away the sins of the World, and of his blood that ^^^anseth from all sin,
and of the truth that sets free indeed, is not this the ^octrine of Devils that
saves the Devils head and Kingdom, and makes pro^^ssion for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof, so as to make the Covenant with Hell and Death
strong, so as even to be at agreement with Hell and Death; is not he that is
and was in the Saints, stronger then he that was in the World and is not the
strong Man to be cast out? Oh Friends, you have erred in Council, you have
stumbled in Judgment, you have perverted and do, the right, upright, spotless,
perfect way of God, and have brought it down to your carnal fleshly
imaginations, to save the enemies head, the Devils Kingdom in you. And I am a
Witness for God against you all, that his way is perfect; and all that come in
the least measure of truth to witness it; shall witness it to be a perfect way
(and they know nothing of the way of God, who are afraid of perfection, or
that can be satisfied to sit down below it) waiting in simplicity and fear to
be perfectly redeemed, afraid to fall short of it, or to sit down by the way,
or turn aside from it, returning to the puddle or vomit, and where he comes to
rule whose right it is, he puts an end to sin and sinings, and brings in
everlasting Righteousness, in which there is no sin; but breaks the Covenant
with Hell and Death, and makes strait steps, and spares not one hoof, makes
more then Conquerors; so as the enemy comes to be sought for and cannot be
found, and gives perfect peace, rest, his Enemies being made his footstool,
every thought and imagination and desire reduced, perfectly reduced into the
obedience of truth. But you are all ignorant of this, and cannot be otherways,
all you whose minds are wandered, erred, gone from the measure of the truth,
the Light of Christ each in your selves not only with evil deeds and practices,
burdening the same, having slain the just in you, but also with open face
opposing, denying, gainsaying, the in-being thereof, being past all feeling, or
if there-through ye have any gripings or stings, and checks or reproofs, so as
sometimes to be brought under condemnation thereby, you (through the help of
your blind guides) call a natural insufficient thing, notwithstanding your
experience, and the plain clear testimony for it in the Scriptures of truth. Oh
Friends, you cannot know perfection but in and through this, even as you come
to the measure of truth in your own particulars, this is the perfect way, and
leads out of imperfection, out of the sin and blot in the root and branches
thereof all that come to it, so as to love it and give up to it, so as to abide
in it, so as not to go out from it, makes free indeed, perfectly redeems, even
to be without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, makes the Conscience free and
clear, and void of offense toward God and all men, and whatever has been
comes to be cast behind into a Land of forgetfulness, never more to be
remembered, so as the perfect peace comes to be witnessed, and the perfect peace
cannon (...) witnessed, where the perfect freedom from sining is not witnessed,
but all (...) that are erred from the measure of the true Light that lights
each of you in your particulars, and are opposing, gainsaying and blaspheming
this Light of Christ, near and in your heart, calling it Natural and
insufficient; you are afraid of perfection, freedom from sining, and do not,
will not come to the Light because your deeds are evil, and the Covenant with
Hell and Death is so strong, even so strong, as you love your bonds, and love
death more then life, Sin more then Righteousness; therefore are you cut off
from the Light and Land of the Living, even that which is the Possession, the
Inherit^ of the Saints, the sanctified ones, the Children of the Light in this
hour therefore shall ye die in your sins, being driven into darkness, wallowing
in the mire, the servants of Corruption in the midst of all your swelling wo^ds
and imaginations, and profession out from the Light, the measure of truth, the
Spirit given to every one to profit with all, though you have no profit by it
through your gainsaying and opposing, in the love of iniquity and sensuality.
But the day of the Lord is over you all, and you are seen and cannot be hid,
and the testimony of truth is against you all, in your way and spirit, and
fruit, and whole conversation as being out of the Covenant of Light and truth
in thoughts and imaginations wandering in the darkness of your minds, your
bonds made strong through gainsaying and opposition to the testimony of this
hour wherein your healing and redemption and recovery lies, and God has
followed you long, and his long suffering has been greatly exercised toward
this Generation; but they harden their hearts against the day of slaughter,
notwithstanding of all that he has done to recover them, and render them
without excuse, so that God is clear of you all, you that with a Brazen face,
and wilful, headstrong mind (in the ignorance and confusion thereof,) oppose
and reject your own mercy, the light of Christ his word near and in your hearts
that reveals the darkness and deeds thereof. I say your recovery out of the
filth, out of the death, out of the condemnation, out of the bonds and fetters
of brass, out of sorrow and misery, and vexation, and disappointment, is in and
through it, and in nothing else, and as you come to know it and its leadings,
so as to love it and give up to it, you will know (what ever imaginations ye
have hitherto had) that the leadings thereof are perfect leadings, and
perfection, freedom indeed ye shall come to know, as you come to know what it
is thereby to be renewed in the Spirit of your minds, that slain that is saved
alive, while your minds are abroad out from the measure of the light, the truth
in your own particular vessel, wandering abroad, but hither you must come and
return if ever ye come to know the way of perfect peace so as to possess and
dwell in it.

J. S.


