Navigation Improved: Or, the ART of Rowing SHIPS Of all Rates, in CALMS, With
a more easy, swift, and steady Motion, than OARS can.

ALSO, A Description of the ENGINE that performs it; And the Author's ANSWER to
all Mr. Dummer's OBJECTIONS that have been made against it.

Magna est Veritas and Praevalebit.

By Tho. Savery, Gent.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by James Moxon, at the Atlas in Warwick Lane, School.

THE DEDICATION To all the Masters of the Art OF NAVIGATION
Gentlemen,
THE chief Strength and Security of the Nation as well as the Wealth and Riches
of it, depending under God, and our good King, on your Integrity, Courage and
Conduct; I have no reason to suspect Men of your Honesty and Bravery, will
suffer your Judgments to be biased or prejudiced against me, in favor of my
Adversaries, who I think, without much ground, opposed the making my ENGINE
useful to the NAVY of ENGLAND, as I designed it; for no other reason that I
know of, than that it is not their own Contrivance: And therefore, as an
English Man, and a Lover of my Country, I humbly submit the Justice of my
Cause, and what I here say in my Defense, to your Judgment and Candor; and am

Your humble Servant, T. S.

TO THE READER.
KInd Reader, if you give your self the trouble to look into this small
Treatise, pray read it through, and you will find my Reputation being
concerned, (a thing upon which my Welfare does depend;) I am necessitated to
write it. For after I had troubled my Thoughts and racked my Brains, to find
out that which a great many have spent several years in vain in the pursuit of,
when I had brought it to a Draught on Paper, and found it approved by those
commonly reputed Ingenious, and receiving Applause, with promises of great
Reward from Court, if the thing would answer the end for which I proposed it:
after I had with great Charge and several Experiments, brought it to do beyond
what I ever promised or expected my self, at last one Man's Humor, and no more
than a Humor, totally obstructed the use of my ENGINE, to the great Disservice
of both King and Country, and my no small loss. But it is the nature of some Men
to decry all Inventions, how serviceable soever to the Public, that are not
the Product of their own Brains. I hope therefore you will think me excusable,
if I endeavor to satisfy the World, that I do understand something of the
Business I pretend to; and if by the means of it Mankind receives any
Advantage, I shall think my self very happy, for the promoting the common good
of every body, has always been my chief Delight; and certainly, nothing
contributes more to it than the Improvements made by the Mechanics: for that
Noble Machine called a SHIP, is no more than a Mechanic ENGINE; which from the
time of its first Invention, has admitted of such Improvements, that its use is
now prodigious. It Is Ships are our best Defense against our Enemies, and it is
Ships bring us in the Wealth of our Friends. The Grist-Mill which finds us
Bread, is a Mechanic Engine also.

The Spinning-Wheel, Loomb, and Fulling-Mill, which cloth us: The Paper Mill
and Printing Press, which have their Uses too; with some others that I could
name, are all the Products of the Mechanics. And indeed, there are few
Benefits we enjoy, if reasonably considered, but are the Product of Project, or
the Invention of the Industrious, whom the Ancients Adored, and Deified, as the
Authors of their Happiness, when they contrived any thing that was for the
public good. Thus Ceres was made a Goddess, for teaching the People the way to
Plough and make Bread; and Bacchus was made a God, for informing the World how
to make Wine. History is full of instances of this kind, and of the various
Honors they did their Benefactors; but this alas! at present, is so much
neglected and despised in our Country, and so little encouragement given to the
Ingenious, that it is to be feared, Arts will decay, and be quite lost in time,
in England; which will as certainly bring Poverty, as Clouds and dark Weather
bring Rain. For all Countries, as they have either lost their Arts, which many
have done, or those Countries which have been always ignorant, at this day
remain poor and impotent through the whole Universe. It Is a great deal of pity
that this should be our case; and I believe, for so small a space and tract of
Land as our Island contains, no Country in the World abounds with Men of more
ingenious Spirits than we do: But I am sorroy to say it of so Heroic a People,
That in some things they are very effeminate; there being Jew to be found that
will any more speak well or approve of what another has done, though never so
deserving, than any Female will allow another of her Sex to pass for a Beauty;
because it is not in the nature of Women to see, or acknowledge good Features in
any bodies Face but their own. And this on my conscience, is my case; for I can
never persuade my self, that any Man, though but of common Understanding, can
satisfy himself with such weak Objections, as you will find entered against my
ENGINE; and more than suspect, there is something of this sordid barbarous
temper in it. But after all, Courteous Reader, I shall court you to no
Partiality on my side, but leave you at your liberty, to judge of me and my
performance, as in justice you shall think fit, or as you would have another
judge of you, or any Invention of yours, or if it were your own case; for my
part, all that I desire, is, That the World would act Honestly, and upon the
Square with me; and that the Gentleman with whom I am concerned, would give me
some better Arguments to overthrow the Use of my ENGINE, than hitherto have
been produced. It Is not my fondness of own Bratt, only makes me think so, but
the Opinion of several very judicious Persons here in Town, confirm me in my
Notion, That the Objections are really no Objections at all; and it is the
judgment of others more than any conceit of my own, which encouraged me to
stand a Public Trial, which nothing else could have given me confidence enough
to do.

Navigation Improvd, etc.
ABOUT March 94. I considering with my self how much it was every Man's Duty to
assist his King and Country, to the utmost of his Power, according to his
Genius, especially in a time of War. I grew very uneasy, till such time as
Providence had directed me in this Matter. After I had employed my Thoughts
some time, I concluded that the chief Strength of England lay in the Fleet, and
that could we make any Improvement on Shipping, so as to give them Motion, when
the Enemy could give theirs none; as in Calms, which generally happen in
Fights, and at other times very often in the Summer, if such Discovery could be
made before the Enemy, the use of it would be very Extraordinary. Upon which I
nicely considered the Nature of Oars, after which I contrived an Engine more
useful, and applicable to Ships. Which Engine and Oar, are thus compared to
each other.

The Figure of an Oar for a Ship.


Now suppose the Oar at A on the side of the Ship B being in a Man's Hand, and
C to take hold of the Water: From B to A is but half as long as from A to C; so
that when the Oar is moved at B, it moves twice as far at C at the same time;
though but with half the Strength: for one Man at C would pull as much as two at
B, so that the Oar is nothing more than the Leaver reversed. Which is an
Instrument used by all manner of People, for the Removing great Weights, and is
a very pretty Instrument for weighing; for with one Pound you may weigh ten,
twenty, or hundred, as you may see good, as by the following Draught.



Which is a thing so commonly used by all sorts of Traders, who buy and sell by
Weight, that it needs no farther Explanation, than that A is the Center of
Gravity, and from thence to A B is 20 times as long as from A to C; so that
although D be 20 times as heavy as B, yet they hang even; for should they incline
one way or the other, B must move 20 times the space of D, as in this Figure.



Where you find that B is removed twenty times the space of the C in the
Leaver, and in the Oar B is removed twice as far as C, by which means B goes
twice as fast, and takes more hold of the Water than otherwise it would; and
were it longer from A to B, it would still have a greater Sweep; and provided
you have Force enough at C, 'twould still be more useful. But the reason why
Oars for Ships are not made four times as long without Board as within, is that
then their Bigness would make them unhandy: And you could not apply Force
enough at C to work them, without some Help more than barely Men's Hands. This
is plainly seen by our Wherryes, whose Oars are four times as long without
Board as within; and very few are ignorant of the Swiftness of their Motion:
and I hope to prove very plainly, That the ENGINE I have contrived is exactly
the Proportion of Wherry's Oars, both in Force, and Swiftness, and more useful
than Oars of that Proportion, were they practicable, and could be applied to a
Ship. For every body that ever saw Rowing, knows that there is as much time and
labor spent in taking their Stroke with an Oar, which is no help to the
Vessel's Motion, as in making that Stroke, which is the Occasion of the Motion;
whereas the Work of this Engine is one continued Stroke, with the same Purchase
or Power in the Water, as Oars have, that are four times the Length without
Boards as within; so that of Course the Motion of the Ship (moved by this
Engine) must, with the same number of Men, be much swifter than with Oars; and,
I hope to prove, near twice as swift, when Under-way: But first it will be
convenient to give you a Draught of the Engine.

Now the Bars in the Capstand moving one foot, the Paddles move four, which is
exact in Proportion to the Oars of Wherryes; for as much as the Blade of such
an Oar moves four foot for the Oar's moving one: and one pound weight on the
Blade shall weigh four on the Loom. So that one pound on the End of the
Paddles, will weigh four on the Capstand Bars, and no more: and a Man at D,
stepping three foot, makes L go twelve; as does a Man at the Loom of a Wherry's
Oar, moving three foot, makes the Blade go twelve. So that all you have to do,
is to make Paddles proportionably large to the number of Men you can bring to
work at your Capstand, so as the Men do not tire themselves by working too
fast, or too slow.

Now suppose thirty Men at work with Wherry's Oars, each Stroke being three
foot long within Board, and twelve without: I hope one Step of thirty Men at
our Capstand Bars, must need do the A Scale, of 32 Feet. DISCRIPTIONS A. The
line the Ship makes. B. The Water line. C. The Decks. D. The Capstand bars. E.
The Capstand. F. a Wheel on the Drum head of the Capstand. G. a Trundle head on
the Wheel. H. an Iron Bar, going through the Trundle head, and through the
Sides of the Ship. I. a Drum heads, like those on the Capstand K. Padles. of
which 6 or 8 on each Side the Ship are with ease Fixed, and unfixed, into the
said Drum heads. L. a pice of Iron, to which a luff Takle may be Fixed, to
lift those that are to Heavey for men's Strength, round each of Which by taking
half turns with a Cord they make a Complete wheel on each Side the Vessel.

same thing; and while they recover their Oars, thirty Men at the Bars make
another Step with the same fuccess; whereas the Oars in the mean time, do
nothing but what rather hinders than farthers the motion of the Ship, Gally,
etc. I mean recovering the Stroke. So that I think it is very plain, That we
have two Strokes to one, with the same Purchase, Strength, Force, and
Swiftness; by which the Ship or Gally, must of consequence make much fresher
way, than by any Oars, or any thing else, but sails, and a Gale of Wind that
can be used. And it is common by Long-Boats, etc. to Tow Ships, even of the
greatest Burden: Now the Gentlemen that were on the Breast Expedition with My
Lord Carmarthen, must know how useful this Engine would have been: for had they
had them on Board each Ship, they might have rowed themselves where they had
pleased; and if occasion had required it, they might in each Ship have employed
above a hundred and twenty Men, in rowing at the Capstand, which must needs
have given the Ships better way, than by Towing with six Boats a Head, which do
all by Jerks: for when the Hawser, by which the Tow is made, is extended, it
gives a sudden Pull to the Ship, which not only deadens the Boat's Way, but by
that time the Boat or Boats have gotten fresh Way again, the Ship has almost
lost her Motion, and so gives another Tug, which common Experience shows to be
but of small use in Water, and next a kin to a Blow on Water; which the harder
it is struck, the less the thing that strikes it penetrates; which is plainly
seen by a Cannon Ball, which being easily let fall into the Water, sinks; but
being shot into it with great Violence, rebounds as from a Mountain of Brass:
By which it is plain, That a solid, steady Motion, and such as shall give the
Particles of the Water time to shift places, and make room for what is to pass
through it, is the only agreeable Motion to Water; and in this we excel Oars in
Boats very much, for their very Work goes by Ticks: Nay, in short, even Sailing
it self is not so steady a Motion, as that which is made by this Engine, except
it be in a very steady Gale indeed: But the impelling Force of a Gale of Wind,
being generally so far superior to Men's Strength, I dare make no Comparison;
but only where the impelling Force by Men, and that by a very easy Gale is
equal; though this Engine would be a great Help to a small Breeze, and will in
Still Weather force a Ship either backward, or forward at pleasure, without
Towing the Ship, Steering as well one way, as the other; which is of great use
to get out of a Harbor, narrow Channel, or River: so that the usefulness of
this Engine for Packet-Boats, Bomb-Vessels, by Night or Day, or such other
Ships. as it is applicable to, seems very considerable; which made me get a
Friend to give Mr. Secretary Trenchard an Account of it, which he desired in
Writing, and I gave him as follows.

A short Account of the Use of the Engine, given to Secretary Trenchard.
THE Engine is so contrived, that being fixed to any Ship, Boat, or Bark, etc.
in a Calm, it will occasion the Ship to make fresher way than Oars, and near as
fast, as an ordinary Gale, when all the Sails can be used, which will be very
useful to the Royal Navy. For, First, The Charge is but small. Secondly, It
does not lie in the Sailer's way in any sort of Business, either in handing
their Sails, Guns, or otherwise; but takes up much less room than Oars, and is
easily stowed so, as no way to incommode the Vessel in a Storm, or the like.
Thirdly, The work of this Engine, is as Natural to the Sailers, as any other
part of their Business. Fourthly, Whereas Oars take up that space on each side
the Vessel, that they require some twenty, thirty or forty foot of each side,
to pass between other Ships; now this does not take up above two, three, or
four foot of a side. Fifthly, This Engine must be very useful in Yachts,
Bomb-Boats, Sloops, etc. and of extraordinary use in Fights, to tow off
disabled Ships. Sixthly, It is so contrived, that nothing but a Chance Shot can
prejudice it; the Rolling of a common Sea not being able to annoy it.


A few Days after, the Secretary told me, that the King had seen my Proposals,
and that I need not fear, for that the King had promised me a very considerable
Reward; and that I must go to the Lords of the Admiralty, to put it in
Practice: But that first I must make a Model of it in a Wherry; which I did,
and found it to answer my Expectations. Then I showed a Draught of it to the
Lords of the Admiralty, who all seemed to like it; and one amongst them was
pleased to say, That it was the best Proposal of its kind he ever saw: So I was
referred from them to the Commissioners of the Navy, who all seemed to like it;
but told me, that the Model must be surveyed by Mr. D.... the Surveyor of the
Navy; whose Opinion I asked, but he was very reserved, and said, That a Wherry
was too small a thing to show it in, there being no working at a Capstand in a
Wherry; but he told me, it was a thing of Moment, and required some time to
consider on: For should I, said he, give a rash Judgment against it, I should
injure you; or for it, the charge of putting it in Practice must prove a loss
to the King, and endanger my Employ; but if you will (says he) give me a
Draught of the several sizes of the Engine, I will give you a Draught of the
half breadths of the several Rates, to proportion them by.

The Week following, one Mr. Fuser Under-Surveyor of the Navy, came to me from
him, with Draughts of the several half Breadths, which I immediately returned
with Draughts of the size of each Engine: after which Mr. D... would never
discourse me, or let me know one word of his Opinion; but four Months
afterward sent a Report of it to the Lords of the Admiralty, which I was
prepared to answer as follow, but was refused by their Lordships.

Mr. D... 's Objections answered; which I desire the Reader to take particular
Notice of.

Object. the first. That it is the same sort of Engine that was used in the
year 1682. at Chatham, for the Towing of Ships, the charge of which proved a
loss to the Crown.

Ans. I have heard that an Engine with two Wheels in the Water, on each side
the Vessel, was used for the Towing of Ships: But to show, with Submission,
that every Like is not the Same, I humbly beg Your. Lordships to consider, That
this Engine was not to be taken in Pieces on all occasions, as Mine is; neither
was the Capstand, or what was used, as I would the Capstand of a Ship, fit for
any other use. Whereas by my Contrivance, the Capstand loses no part of its
other Qualities; and I am informed by very Ingenious Men, That this differs
from that in all its Parts.

Object. the second. I am said to overlook former Experiments, and not to give
one solid Argument.

Answ. I don't see how it was possible for me to offer a solid Argument to Mr.
D... who never would hear me, though I desired him for near four Months, that I
might know what he had to object: Or if he met with any Difficulties, I did not
question but to make them easy; which he still denied me, telling me, That he
was thoroughly Master of the Thing.

Object. the third. That I assert it useful for Ships from two to twenty two
foot Draught of Water; whereas the Tow Vessel in 82, drew but four and a half
Water the Outside.

Ans. It is true: But I never said, That it was as easy to force a Ship of
twenty two foot Draught of Water, through the Water, as one of two. But I know
very well, that if two foot can by a small force be moved through the Water,
that twenty two may. with a proportionable Strength be also moved; but if you
cannot bring so great a Strength proportionable to a Ship's Capstand of twenty
two foot, the Motion will be only so much the slower. And though the Tow Vessel
in 82, drew but four foot and a half Water, they towed the greatest Ships by
the help of four, six or eight Horses. Be pleased to note, That an ordinary
Horse is not found to have the Strength of six common Sailers; so that forty
six Men will do the work of eight Horses, whereas I can bring a hundred forty
six Men to work on this Engine, which is not to Tow by Jerks, but move the Ship
with a steady and strong Motion, more agreeing to that Element, than any other
Motion whatsover.

Object. the fourth. The Work by resistance is too great for Horse or Man.

Answ. If the Objection be true, it is the first thing of its kind that could
not be wrought by Man or Horse, and I believe no man of Experience will be of
Mr. D... 's Mind in this Matter.

Object. the fifth. That I have not considered the Moving equal Bodies
gradatim, from two to twenty two foot, besides accidents in Elements, which I
should have considered by proper Calculations, and not light and frivolous
Instances.

Answ. This in my Second Answer is sufficiently spoken of; and I hope the
Judicious Reader is fatisfy'd to the contrary of this Objection.

Object. the sixth. Every Body that has gravity is not to be removed locally,
but by like Body, which is superior in weight, or by some Body, with addition
of purchase artificially placed, as Leaver, Pullies, Capstand, etc. answerable
to the Body to be removed.

Answ. How two Bodies alike in gravity, can be one heavier than the other, I am
a stranger, and should I have said -- but to what is said of Purchase
artifically placed, as Leaver, Pulley, Capstand, etc. answerable to the Body to
be removed, I am ready by Mathematical Demonstration to, to justify this Engine
to be no more than Leaver, and as much also artificially placed, with full
Power and Purchase.

Object. the seventh. Whereas the superincombency of Water is always equal in
weight to the Body subsiding in it: for nothing lighter will sink, nor heavier
swim, but being equal, subsides by a just decision of Nature: This weight in
the whole Body of a Ship whatever it be, is to be removed; but its real and
abstracted weight, I confess is much abated in communion with that Element, and
may make the true weight, which must lie on the Purchase or Force of such like
Engine, somewhat difficult to be punctually known; but in the room thereof, we
may venture to say, That the weight of Air gently filling all the Sails, and
making the Body move a space a little more than is just perceivable, is
superior, and not to be removed by this Engine, occupied by all Men sailing in
the said Ship.

Answ. That the superincombency of Water is equal in weight to the Body
subsiding in it, is undeniable, and of use to be known, for the sinking of
mighty hollow Bodies in the Water: Or by large hollow Bodies to bouge up any
thing sunk; for if you know their weight, you may the better by this means
proportion your Work. But I cannot perceive what relation this has to Rowing. I
have seen one Horse pull an hundred Tuns through the Water, the length of three
Miles, in an hour. But by the Art of Man this Horse could not have made the
Ship sink, or rise three foot in the time: Now it is said, That this Weight,
what ever it be, must be removed; which a Man's Hand will do in a wet Dock, by
the largest Ship that ever was built, provided the Water in the Dock, nor the
Air above it have no perceivable Motion, and the Hausers loose enough to give
the Ship leave to move; and this Motion shall be perceivable, though I own very
slow. But 146 Men having 146 times the Strength, will make the Motion increase
to a far greater Swiftness, having continued Purchase, which all Wheels of this
Engine have. But it is affirmed positively, That if there is as much Wind as
will but just occasion a perceivable Motion in the Ship, it will be too strong
for all the Men in the Ship to resist. Now certainly a Ship in still Water has
been found, by all that have made their Remarks, to be as inclinable to go a
Head as a Stern, and that the strength of one Man (as I said before) can
occasion it either way; and I think it absolutely impossible, that a Ships Crew
of as many Men as are but in the smallest Rates, should not have more strength
than one man. I am satisfied, that none but madmen ever attempted to Row
against the Wind with all their Sails spread, if there were a possibility of
furling them. And though it be difficult to know exactly what way a Vessel will
make in a Tides way, yet a little experience will teach us, that without all
doubt, as exactly as Sailing, or the present way of Rowing a Barge, or the like.

Object. the eighth. Nevertheless, when Abatements shall be made for infinite
Accidents by Winds, Tides, Roughness of the Sea, Misunderstandings in the
Working part, Unevenness and Uncertainty of Men's Strenth, Dislocation,
Frictions, and other unfortunate Encumbrances; such Clock-work under the weight
of Ships in the Sea, will ever be liable to: This Proposition, in our Opinion,
can never, by any known Sailor, or other intelligent Man, be thought
practicable at Sea.

Answ. In Winds and Rough Seas there is no occasion for this ENGINE, for the
Sails will occasion motion enough. Misunderstanding in the VVorking Part may
happen, if a Horse in a Mill can go out this way, but not else. Unevenness and
uncertainty in Men's Strength, may as well obstruct all the work the Sailers
have to do. Dislocations, etc. my Workman stall prevent, or have nothing for
his Labor. And I never offered that this Mill-work (which is called
Clock-work) should support the weight of Ships in the Sea. For since I began
this Design, I have shown the Draught to several Sailers, as well as other
Intelligent Gentlemen, which I am sure in number are above two hundred, but
have not met with any one that could make any reasonable Objection, but what I
soon gave them full Satisfaction about. Now I humbly offer, That if my
Affirmatives can be esteemed in balance with these Contradictions; That this
ENGINE may be put in Practice but on one Ship, the charge of which will not
exceed 70 l. the hazard of which sum is very inconsiderable, weighed against
the Advantage this Engine may be to the KING's Service.

When I sound the Lords of the Admiralty so much altered, that from commending
the Thing, they would not hear one word in its defense; I made bold to ask the
Opinion of the greatest Engineer in the Christian World, viz. Sir Martin
Beckman, who told me, That the thing was good, and would answer my Proposal;
and withal said, that His Majesty understood those things as well as any
Engineer in the World. Upon which I made my humble Request to a most Noble
Lord, who showed a Draught of it to the King; who being at that time very busy,
ordered me again to the Almiralty, who never ordered me in before them, but
after waiting 2 or 3 Days, the Doorkeeper told me, that my Business lay before
the Navy. Upon which, the next Day I desired a Friend of mine to go with me to
the Navy Office; that he being a Man of Exttaordinary Judgment, and no less
Reputation, might be an Evidence of what Discourse might happen: But coming to
the Navy Office, we found the Board was rose. However, in the Hall I found Mr.
D.... I as'd him, Whether any thing was come before the Board concerning my
Business? No, said he, not since the Objections sent to the Lords of the
Admiralty; on which, he could not but fall into an Argument.

I asked him some Questions in relation to his Objections; and in a very little
time, we had a great puther about superambient Air and Water. I found that my
Sailer run himself fast aground, as Men commonly do when out of their
Knowledge. This indeed made me pity him again, although I was willing to come to
the plain truth of the matter; and asked him, Whether or no he could not bring
150 Men to work at this ENGINE? He answered, Yes. Then said I, Will they not
have as much power to give a Ship motion, as 150 Men would have on Shore at a
Hawser, fastened to the Ship? This he likewise answered in the affirmative:
Then said I, it will do more than Oars, or any thing but a Gale of Wind, and
fully answer my Proposals. Well, said he, with a Smile, and putting off his
Hat, as taking leave, we are all Submission to the Lords of the Admiralty; and
so went off. Not long after, a Friend of mine met a Commissioner of the Navy;
and my Friend being perfectly acquainted with my Contrivance, asked the
Commissioner, Why it was not put in use by them? The Gentleman offered several
Objections; which were by sound reason, so fully answered by my Friend, that he
had only this hole to creep out at: Sir, said he, have we not a parcel of
Ingenious Gentlemen at the Board? Yes, said my Friend, I hope so, or 500 l. per
Annum is paid them to a fine purpose. Is not Mr. D.... (says the Commissioner)
one of them, and an ingenious Man? I hope so, continued my Friend. Then, said
he, What have interloping People, that have no concern with us, to do, to
pretend, to contrive or invent things for us?

So Reader, here you may see what to trust to, though you have found out an
Improvement as great to Shipping, as turning to Windward or the Compass; unless
you can sit round the Green-Table in Crutched-Friars, your Invention is damned
of course: and yet some of these People did own to me in private, That it was
pity this ENGINE was not put in practice, for that it would be of singular use;
but I find, there are a sort of People in the World, that will rather disserve
King and Country, than disoblige, or run counter to one another, in things of
great and small importance. I know not how Mr. D... will clear his Objections,
and make them appear truth to the World; though I am satisfied, that he will not
want for those that will assist him, though never so contrary to reason; and at
present, I think it behooves them so to do, or honestly to recant. I hope none
that read this, but will find Mr. D.... 's Arguments very weak to obstruct for
so many Years together, a thing of that Use and Service to the Nation, that
this would have been; and truly, unless Mr. D.... do publish better Reasons
than he has yet done, I shall think, and question not, but some hundreds more
will be of my opimon, that had he lived in the time that the Compass was found
out, if he could not have laid Claim to that unparralel Discovery, he would
have obstructed its use to the utmost of his power.

The last year I made sufficient demonstration of the use of my ENGINE on the
THAMES, of which thousands were Eyewitnesses, and all People seemed to like
it; the Public News Papers speaking very largely of it, yet all to no purpose.
I can bring Men of undoubted Reputation, to justify, that with a small Yatcht
that I fixed it to, I once below Bridge made better way; or out went a Ketch in
a Gale of Wind, who had all her Sails spread, viz. Main Sail, Main Top-Sail,
Main Top-Gallant Sail, Fore-Sail, Gib-Stay Sails, and Mizon; and we had the
help of nothing but eight Sailors working at this ENGINE, and yet the Vessel I
used this ENGINE in, was far more improper for it than any Vessel in the King's
Service; and would my circumstances have afforded it, I would have fitted out a
large Vessel my self, it being chiefly proper for such; but I thought that
occular Demonstration would do, though in never so small a Model, which made me
begin with a Wherry; and by that time I had solicited up and down, and made an
ENGINE fit for a Yatcht, I found the Expense too great for me, and was forced
to desist: for although the ENGINE did not cost much, yet the continual charge of
going with the Yacht, was considerable; insomuch, that that my endeavor to
serve my Country, has cost me above 200 pounds. Yet the charge of this ENGINE
in such a Vessel as the Royal Transport, will not exceed 50 pound; and though I
have a Patent for it, yet the first Captain of a Frigot that desires it, I will
assist in the making of it, aboard his Ship gratis; and that he may be certain,
that I will not impose upon him, he shall have liberty to use his own Workmen: but
this I will only do by the first comer, and I doubt not, but when the Ice is
once broke, I shall at least receive thanks for my past Labor and Expense.

I have, besides the ENGINE beforementioned, made several useful Discoveries;
of which I will give some account, it not being altogether out of its place;
which is a method whereby I will fight any Ship, using Charge and Discharge as
often as six or eight do now, and to as much purpose, without any manner of
incommodation more than by the common way: so that one half of the Men need not
be exposed that now are, and the rest may be kept as a reserve for Boarding,
etc. the benefit of this I leave to the ingenious Sailor; besides which, I have
invented a Gin of 14 inches square, portable by one Man, by which one Man may
lift the largest Cannon or Mortar into her Carriadge. But I will never discover
one title of either of these, till I find justice done me on account of my
Rowing ENGINE, I mean that it is put in Practice, and I am Rewarded; or else,
that it is proved useless by an Argument, or Experiment; not by such Objections
as Mr. D.... who talks of the weight of Ships in the Sea lying on this
Clockwork; by which I believe, neither he himself, nor any one else, knows what
he means: for this ENGINE is not to be under Ships in the Sea, nor to lift
Ships out of the Water, but to occasion Motion; which, as I showed before, that
even the smallest Force will do; and the greater the Force is, the better or
swifter the Motion will be: but to avoid trouble to any, who shall think fit to
write against it, I shall give an account of some other Objections that have
been raised against it, which I have met with.

Object. the First. It is liable to be shot. Object. the Second. It will lie in
the way. Object. the Third. That the Wheel and Trundle may be out of order, and
is not to be mended by a Ship Carpenter.
Answ. the First. A Captain may be shot, and a good and brave Man's Life lost,
will you not therefore have good Captains? A Yard by a Shot, sometimes from the
Topmast Head, descends to the men's Heads on the Deck, will you therefore have
no Sails? But this ENGINE is the least liable to be injured by a Shot of any
thing: for though it break some of the Paddles, you suffer no inconvenience, as I
have tried by taking some out. Should a Shot take all the Paddles off of one
side, the Vessel will make near as good a way as before, and stear nigh as
well: and truly I think, it must be a very odd Shot that can totally disable
this ENGINE, so as a small time will not repair it. And I think the Rudder in
ten times more danger; yet a man would deservedly be thought mad, that would
have no Rudder to a Ship. But, suppose at any time, that this ENGINE is
disabled, the Ship is still in as good order as any Ship now is, if she has no
other harm; and it will be ill luck indeed, if there are three or four Ships
together, and all are disabled at the same time.

Answ. the Second. For its being in the Way, I know of nothing about it that
can be thought to be so, but the Bar, or the Paddles for the Bar. Now I desire
the Sailors to stoop a little when they go under it, and when they do not use
the Paddles, to stow them on the Boom under the Longboat, their Shape making
them very proper for that place.

Answ. the Third. For a Shipwright's not understanding, or not being able to
mend the Wheel and Trundle, it is next to impossible; for without Flattery, the
men of that Profession, of all the Brothers of the Broad-Ax, are the most
general Workmen; and it is hard to find a Shipwright, but either is, or with
little trouble will be, on occasion, House-Carpenter, Joyner, VVheel-wright,
Mill-wright, Cooper, or what you please of that kind.

All that I have now to add, is, That whoever is angry with Truth, for
appearing in mean Language, may as well be angry with a wise and honest man for
his plain Habit: for indeed, it is as common for Lies and Nonsense to be
disguised by a jingle of Words, as for a Block-head to be hid by abundance of
Peruke.

I have had my Patent for this Engine, about Two years, and am sorry it was not
put in practice in time of War, because of the use it might have been of
Aboard His Majesty's Navy; however, Men of sense will see, it may be put in
practice with good Advantage in time of Peace; and I hope, its Novelty will not
hinder an Experiment of it.

Wherefore, fly no Invention, 'cause it is New,
But strictly search; and after careful View
Reject if false, embrace it if it is True.
Creech's Lucretius. FINIS.
Books Printed, and Sold by James Moxon at the Atlas in Warwick Lane.
A Tutor to Astronmy and Geography, orthe Use of both the GLOBES, Celestial and
Terrestrial; by Joseph Moxon, A member of the Royal Society, and Hydrographer
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, price 5 s.

The use of the Copernican Spheres, Teaching to solve the Phenomenon By them,
as easily as by the Ptolomaick Spheres, by Joseph Moxon, etc, price 4 s.

Wright's Correction of Errors in the Art of Navigation, price 8 s.

An exact Survey of the Microcosm, being an Anatomy of the Bodies of Man and
Woman, wherein the Skin, Veins, Nerves, Muscles, Bones, Sinews, and Ligaments
are accurately delineated. Engraven on large Copper plates, printed and
curiously pasted together, so as at first sight you may behold all the parts of
Man and Woman; and by turning up of several Dissections of the papers, take a
view of all their Inwards; with Alphabetical References to the Names of every
Member and part of the Body. Set forth in Latin by Remelinus and Michael Spaher
of Tyrol; and Corrected by Clopton Havers, M. D. and Fellow of the Royal
Society, plain 15 s. Colored 30 s.

Vignola, or the Complete Architect; showing in a plain and easy way, the
Rules of the five Orders in Architecture, viz. Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick,
Corinthian, and Composite; whereby any that can but read and understand
English, may readily learn the proportions that all Members in a Building have
to one another: Set forth by Mr. James Barrozzio of Vignola, and Translated
into English by Joseph Moxon, etc. price 3 s. 6 d.

Compendium Euclidis Curiosi: Or, Ceometrical Operations. showing how with one
single opening of the Compasses, and a straight Ruler, all the Propositions of
Euclid's first five Books are performed. Translated out of Dutch into English.
By Joseph Moxon, etc. Price 1 s.

An Introduction to the Art of Species. By Sir Jonas Moor, price 6 d.

Christiologia, or a brief but true Account of the certain Year Month, Day, and
Minute of the Birth of Jesus Christ. By J. Butler, B. D. and Chaplain to his
Grace James Duke of Ormond, etc. and Rector of Lichborough in the Diocese of
Peter-borough, price 3 s. 6 d.

A Tutor to Astrology, or Astrology made easy; being a plain Introduction to
the whole Art of Astrology; whereby the meanest Apprehension may learn to Erect
a Figure, and by the same to give a determinate Judgment upon any Question or
Nativity whatsoever. Also new Tables of Houses, calculated for the Latitude of
51 degr. 32 minutes. Also Tables of Right and Oblique Ascensions to 6 degr. of
Latitude. Whereunto is added an Ephemeris for three years; with all other
necessary. Tables that belong to the Art of Astrology. Also to Erect a Figure
the Rational way, by the Tables of Triangles, more methodically than has yet
been published, digested into a small Pocket Volume, for the convenience of
those that erect Figures abroad. By W. Eland, price 2 s.

The Use of a Mathematical Instrument called a Quadrant, showing very plainly
and easily to know the exact Height and Distance of any Steeple, Tree or
House, etc. Also to know the Hour of the Day by it; the height of the Sun,
Moon, or Stars; and to know the time of the Sunrising, and the length of every
day in the year, the place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, the Azimuth, Right
Ascension, and Declination of the Sun: with many other necessary and delightful
Conclusions: performed very readily. Also the Use of the Nocturnal, whereby you
may learn to know the Stars in Heaven and the Hour of the Night by them; with
many other delightful Operations, price 6 d.

A brief Discourse of a Passage by the North Pole, to Japan, China, etc.
pleaded by three Experiments and Answers to all Objections that can be urged
against a Passage that way: As 1. By a Navigation into the North Pole, and two
Degrees beyond it. 2. By a Navigation from Japan toward the North Pole. 3. By
an Experiment made by the Czar of Muscovy, whereby it appears, that to the
Northward of Nova Zembla is a free and open Sea as far as Japan, China, etc.
With a Map of all the discovered Land nearest to the Pole. By Joseph Moxon,
etc. price 6 d.


