A THIRD PROCLAMATION, By His Grace FREDERICK Duke of Schonberg, General of
Their Majesty's Forces in IRELAND.
Published at DVNDALK, September 14. 1689.
Licensed October 11. 1689. J. F.

WHereas We are fully satisfied, That there has been great Invasion made upon
the Properties of the Protestant Subjects, and ancient Charters of the
respective Corporations in this Kingdom, and that several Protestant Justices
of the Peace, that have been removed from their Places of Trust, whereby great
Disorders, such as Burglaries, Robberies, Fellonies and Outrages have been
committed in this Kingdom: And We being desirous to redress the said
Grievances, Do hereby think fit to Publish and Declare, That the said
Protestant Subjects be, and hereby are, Restored to their former Properties,
and the respective Corporations to their ancient Charters, and the several
Protestant Justices to their ancient Trusts. Hereby Impowering them, to do and
execute all, and every Act, Matter, and Thing, as they could, or might do, by
virtue of their respective Charters, or any Commission of the Peace formerly
granted, during Their Majesty's Pleasure. The said Justices of the Peace, in
their respective Stations, are hereby required to take care, that no Landlord
exact on any Tennant, not being able to pay his Rent presently, or on demand,
they taking it into their consideration, that it is a Year of Wars and
Devastations; but that when the Law is open, to take their Course by Law.

Given at our Headquarters at Dundalk, the 14th of September, 1689. In the
First Year of Their Majesty's Reign. Schonberge.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


