A COPY of Archbishop TILLOTSON's LETTER to His FRIEND.
SIR,
I Am sorry to understand by Mr. Janeways Letter to my Son, that your Distemper
grows upon you, and that you seem to decline so fast. I am very sensible how
much eaiser it is to give Advice against trouble in the case of another, then
to take it in our own. It has pleased God to Exercise me of late with a very
sore Trial in the loss of my Dear and Only Child, in which I do perfectly
submit to his good Pleasure, firmly believing that he does always what is best;
and yet though Reason be satisfied, our Passion is not so soon Appeased; and when
Nature has received a Wound, time must be allowed for the Healing of it. Since
that God has thought fit to give me a nearer Summons and a closer of my
Mortality in the danger of an Apoplexy, which yet I thank God has occasioned
no very Melancholy Reflections, but this perhaps is more owing to natural
Temper than to Philosophy and wise Considerations; Your Case I know is very
different, who are of a Temper naturally Melancholy, and under a Distemper apt
to increase it; for both which, great Allowances are to be made. And yet
methinks both Reason and Religion do offer to us Considerations of that
Solidity and Strength, as may very well support our Spirits under all the
Infirmities and Frailties of the Flesh, such as these; that God is perfect Love
and Goodness, that we are not only his Creatures, but his Children, and as dear
to him, as to our selves, that he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the
Children of Men; and that all Evils and Afflictions which shall befall us, are
intended for the Cure and Preventions of greater Evils, of Sin and Punishment:
And therefore we ought not only to submit to them with Patience, as being
deserved by us, but to receive them with thankfulness, as being designed by
him, to do us that good, and to bring us to that sense of him, and our selves,
which perhaps nothing else would have done; that the Sufferings of this present
time are but short and slight, with that extreme and endless Misery which we
have deserved; and with that exceeding and eternal weight of Glory which we
hope for in the other World: That if we be careful to make the best Preparation
we can for Death and Eternity, whatever brings us nearer to our End, brings us
nearer to Happiness; and how rugged soever the Way be, the Comfort is that it
leads to our Fathers House, where we shall want nothing that we can wish. When
we labor under a Distemper, that threatens our Life, what would we not be
content to bear in order to a perfect Recovery? could we but be assured of it:
And should we not be willing to endure much more, in order to Happiness, and
that Eternal Life which God that cannot Lie has promised. Nature I know is
fond of Life, and apt to be still Lingering after a longer Continuance here;
and yet a long Life with the usual Burdens and Infirmities of it, is seldom
desirable; it is but the same thing over again or worse. So many more Days and
Nights, Summers and Winters, a repetition of the same Pleasure, but with less
Pleasure and Relish, every day a return of the same, or greater Painsor
Trouble, but with less Patience and Strength to bear them.

These and the like Considerations I use to Entertain my self withal, not only
with Contentment, but with Comfort, though with great inequality of Temper at
several times, and with much mixture of Humane Frailty, which will always stick
to us while we are in this World. However by these kind of Thoughts, Death
becomes more familiar with us, and we shall be able by Degrees to bring our
minds close up to it, without starting at it. The greatest tenderness I find
with my self, is with regard to some near Relations, especially the dear and
constant Companions of my Life, which I must confess does very sensibly touch
me, but then I consider, and so I hope will they also, that this Separation
will be but for a little while, and that though I leave them in a bad World,
yet under the care of a good God. who can be more and better to them then all
other Relations, and will certainly be so to those that Love him, and Hope in
his Mercy. I shall not need to advise you what to do, and what use to make of
this time of your Visitation, I have reason to believe that you have been
careful in the time of your Health to prepare for this Evil Day, and have been
conversant in those Books, which give the best Directions to this purpose, and
have not, as too many do, put of the great Work of your Life to the End of it:
And then you have nothing now to do, but as well as you can under your present
Weakness and Pains, to renew your Repentance for all the Errors and
Miscarriages of your Life, and^ses of God, and the Hope of tha^ Happiness which
you are ready to enter into, and in the mean time to Exercise Faith and
Patience for a little while, be of good Courage since you see Land the Storm
you are in will quickly be over, and then it will be as if it had never been,
or rather the Remembrance of it will be a Pleasure. I do not use to write such
long Letters, but I do heartily Compassionate your Case, and should be glad if
I could suggest any thing that might help to mitigate your Troubles, and make
that sharp and rough Way, through which you are to pass into a better World,
more smooth and easy. I Pray God, fit us both for that great Change which we
must once undergo, and if we be but in any good Measure fit for it, sooner or
later makes no great difference. I commend you to the Father of Mercies, and
the God of all Consolation, beseeching him to increase your Faith and Patience,
and to stand by you in the last and great Conflict, that when you walk through
the Valley of the Shadow of Death, you may fear no Evil, and when your Heart
fails, and Strength fails, you may find him the Strength of your Heart and your
Portion for ever. Farwell my good Friend, and while we are here let us Pray for
one another, that We may have a Joyful meeting in another World. I rest

Your truly Affectionate Friend and Servant, JOHN TlLLOTSON.


