I Allow this to be Printed.

Rob. Atkyns.

ss. To (...) being by us approved and appointed Collectors for the (...)
within the (...) of the Moneys payable to Their Majesty's by virtue of an Act
of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for a Grant to Their Majesty's of
an Aid of Twelve Pence in the Pound for one Year for the necessary Defense of
Their Realms.
THese are in Their Majesty's Name to Will and Require you, That you Collect
and Levy of the several and respective Person and Persons in the Estreat or
Assessment hereunto annexed mentioned, the several and respective Sum and Sums
of Money on them respectively Rated or Assessed; And to that end you are by the
said Act required to make demand thereof of the Parties themselves within six
days after the Receipt hereof; And if any Person or Persons shall neglect or
refuse to pay, upon your demand, the several Rates and Assessments wherewith he
is Charged by the said Act for or in respect of his Goods, Chattels, Personal
Estate, Offices, or Employments, and which he ought to pay; Or if the Pound
Rate, or any Payment thereof charged upon any Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and Premises, shall be neglected or refused to be
paid, you are hereby Authorized and Required to Distrein the Person or Persons
so refusing or neglecting to pay, by his or their Goods or Chattels, or to
distrein in and upon the Message, Lands, and Tenements so Charged, and the
Goods and Chattels then and there found, and the Distress so taken to keep by
the space of four days at the cost and charges of the Owner thereof, and if the
Owner do not pay the same within the said four days, the said Distress is
hereby directed to be appraized by three or two of the Inhabitants where the
Distress is taken, and there by you to be sold for payment of the said Money,
and the Overplus coming by the said Sale, (if any be) (over and above the
Charges of taking and keeping the said Distress) you are immediately to restore
to the Owner thereof: And the better to enable you to Levy the Money Assessed
by such Distress and Sale, it is by the said Act declared lawful to break open
in the day time any House, and by virtue of this our Warrant, any Trunk, Chest,
Box, or other things wherein any such Offenders Goods are, calling to your
assistance therein the Constables, Tythingmen, and Headboroughs within your
(...) where any refusal, neglect or resistance shall be made, as by the said
Act of Parliament is directed, and they and every of them are hereby required
to be aiding and assisting unto you in the Premises; And where no sufficient
Distress is to be found, you are to make and deliver to the Head-Collector a
perfect Schedule fairly written in Parchment under your Hands and Seals, to be
allowed by two or more of us (or other) Their Majesty's Commissioners for the
said (...) containing the Names, Sirnames, and places of abode of every person
within your Collection who shall make default of Payment, and of the Sum and
Sums charged on every such Person, to the end the same may be returned into
Their Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and the person so making default of payment
may be charged by Process of the said Court; And in case any Lands or Houses
within your Collection shall be unoccupied, and no Distress can be had for the
same, nor the true Owner found, by reason whereof the Rates and Assessments
upon such unoccupied Lands cannot be levied, you are to make complaint thereof
to us, to the end the same may be by us Certified into Their Majesty's said
Court of Exchequer, and the Persons made Debtors to Their Majesty's, and
Processes issued out against the Body, Goods, and all other Lands of such
Debtor, until the same be fully paid; And where any Person or persons
chargeable with any Rates or Assessments by the said Act imposed, shall be
under the age of 21 years, in every such case their Parents, Guardians or
Tutors respectively, upon default of payment by such Infant, are made liable
and chargeable with the payment which such Infants ought to have made, and upon
neglect or refusal may be proceeded against in like manner as against other
Persons making default of payment as aforesaid. And the several and respective
Tenants of all and every the Messuages, Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and Premises, which by virtue of the said Act shall be charged
with any Pound Rate, are hereby required to pay such Sums of Money as shall be
rated upon the same, and to deduct out of the Rent so much thereof as in
respect of the Rents the Landlord ought to bear; But the Tax or Assessment
which shall be made or imposed in respect of any House or Tenement which any
Ambassador, Resident, Agent, or other Public Minister of any Foreign Prince or
State, does or shall Inhabit or Occupy, is to be paid by the Landlord or Owner
respectively; And the Tax or Assessment made or imposed upon the Shares or
Interest in the New-River or Thames, Hide-Park, or Maribone-water-works, or on
the Stock or Stocks of all Companies of Merchants in London, charged by the
said Act, and on the Stock and Shares for Printing, are to be paid by the
Governors and Treasurers of the said Companies, and Treasurers of the said
Waterworks, and Stock for Printing; And the Assessment laid upon our selves or
any other Their Majesty's Commissioners for putting the said Act in Execution,
you are to levy and gather as it should or ought to have been, if we or they
had not been Commissioners; And you are further Required to take such speedy
and effectua Order and Care in the Premises, that you fail not to levy and pay
into the Head-Collector of the said (...) the total Sum of (...) (Being tne
(...) Payment (or one moiety) of the Moneys charged upon your said (...) by
virtue of the said Act) at such place as shall be appointed you within ten
miles of your said (...) on or before the (...) day of (...) now next coming:
Hereof you are not to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost
Peril.

Given under our Hands and Seals the (...) day of (...) in the First Year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady William and Mary, by the Grace of God,
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King and Queen, Defenders of the
Faith, etc. Annoque Dom. 1689.

