To all RULERS, MAGISTRATES, PRIESTS, and PEOPLE, WHO Profess the Scriptures to
be their Rule Throughout the Nation of ENGLAND, BUT More Particularly to the
Magistrates, Priests, and People of this County of Sussex, who have had any
hand in oppressing and persecuting of them whom God has sent as Strangers
amongst them (in tender love and pity to their souls) to turn them to
righteousness, through which they may see how far they are from the Practice
and Command of the true Christian, mentioned in the Scriptures of Truth.
THroughout all Ages and Generations, he that was born after the Flesh
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit; even so it is now, as this last
Age ot ours has fully manifested, which has brought forth much cruelty and
Persecution, which has been insticted upon many for the answer of a good
Conscience; but more especially upon them whom the Lord has called from their
own Country, to bear witness unto his Truth and Righteousness in the earth; for
which Testimony alone they have undergone a great sight of affliction from the
chief Priests and Rulers, throughout most Counties of this Nation, as hundreds
can witness.

But now I shall unfold the proceedings and dealings of the Priests and Rulers
of this County of Sussex toward me, who came as a stranger amongst them, not
wronging any man of any thing, nor eating any man's bread for naught, but freely
declaring the Message of the everlasting Gospel amongst them, according to the
Word and Command of God unto me, when he led me from my own Country and Fathers
house above seven years ago, much contrary to my own Will: In which Testimony
the Lord promised to be with me in all my trials and sufferings, though never
so many and great, charging me to take no thought beforehand what I should say
when I was brought before Rulers and Governors for his Name and Gospel, for he
would direct me in that hour, and give me a mouth and wisdom to answer all my
Adversaries; whose Promise and Word (I set to my Seal) he has fully performed
and confirmed to this very hour; for he never yet suffered the Devil to draw me
before any Rulers, nor to cast me into Prison, but his Presence has been with
me, and his right hand has upheld me, to the confusion of all my Adversaries;
Glory, Honor, and living Praises and Thanksgiving, be unto him for evermore;
in whose Name I perfectly trust, and I hope shall unto the end, whereby I have
been, and am kept safe from the fear of evil.

I shall fully demonstrate unto all sober People who has but the least measure
of Christianity lest in them, how far contrary to the Scriptures of truth the
Rulers and Priests of this County, has dealt with me for obedience to the
above said Word and Command of God; in obedience to which, I came amongst them
as a stranger, according to the practice of the true Ministers of Christ
throughout the Scripture, who vexed and oppressed me contrary to the Word and
Command of God, Exodus 22. 21. who said to the Rulers of Israel, Thou (halt
neither vex a stranger nor oppress him, for ye were strangers in the Land of
Egypt. For their disobedience to which, the wrath of God arose against his
people, till there was no remedy, even because they mocked his Messengers, and
despised his Words, and misused his Prophets whom he sent unto them in
compassion, as he has done at this day, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. And again the
Lord warned them not to vex a stranger, saying, If a stranger sojourn in your
Land, ye shall not vex him, but the stranger that dwells with you, shall be
as one born amongst you, and thou shall love him as thyself, Levir. 19. 34. And
Moses said, The Lord does executre Judgment of the Fatherless and Widow, and
loves the stranger, in giving him food and raiment. And said, Love ye
therefore the stranger, for ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 10.
18, 19. And The Lord preserves the strangers, and releeveth the fatherless
and widow, but the way of the wicked he turns upside down, Psalm. 146. 9. And
Christ said to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world; for I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye look me in, who answered, when saw we thee an hungry, and fed
thee? or naked, and clothed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? or a
stranger, and took thee i^? who said, Inasmuch as you have done it unto the
least of these my Brethren, you have done it unto me, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36, 37;
38, 39, 40. But to the wicked he said, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for I was an hungered,
and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, I was a
Stranger, and ye took me not in; verse. 41, 42, 43. who answered, When saw we
thee an hungered, or sick, or naked, or a stranger, or in prison, and did not
nunister unto thee? but Christ said, Inasmuch as ye have not done it to the
least of these, ye did it not to me; and they shall go into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into everlasting life, verse. 44, 45. Now it they
was to go into everlasting fire, who had not clothed, nor fed, nor victed in
prison, the least of the brethren of Christ, what shall become of such as
Leonard Letchsord of Hurst; and George Vinter of Coveold, metamorphosed
Ministers in Sussex, who instead of taking in of his Brethren when they were
strangers, and feeding and clothing of them, has stirred up the Rulers and
Magistrates through their lies and false reports, to send such to prison, as
they have done against me? for the aforesaid George Vinter did raise a report
that Ambrose Rigge did run away from his Wife and Children out of Lincolnshire,
and lest them to the Parish, which was as false as the Devil, as was afterward
proved by many Witnesses; yet by this he incensed the Rulers against me, being
here a stranger; in which false aspersion Leo: Letchford of Hurst Picrpoint,
did join which him, and stirred up Nisel Rivers, Walter Burrell, and Rich:
Bridges, to send for me by Warrant the 28. day of the 3. Month called May, in
the year 1662. out of my peaceable habitation at Hurst, who forthwith committed
me to Prison, which more of my Friends for the exercise of our Consciences
toward God, where they kept us prisoners till the Assizes. And then the
aforesaid Leo: Letchford appeared against us, and incensed the Judge; insomuch
that he sined all my Friends, for being met together in the worship of God; and
then said to the Judge, One word more to aggravate the matter against Ambrose
Rigge, for which the Judge reproved him, but yet he knowing that I could not
swear at all, and being incensed against me, did cause the Oath of Allegiance
to be tendered me in the Court; and because I could not swear at all (in
obedience to Christ and the Apostles Words and Commands, Mat, 5. James 5.)
Judge Brown did forthwith Judge me to lose all my Lands and Tenements, during
my life, and all my Goods and Chattels for ever, and to be out of the Kings
Protection, and to be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure; and afterward sent
for the Jailer, and gave him a strict charge to keep me close, in which
condition I have continued for the most part this seaventeen Months, and my
Friends who were fined as above, some of which has continued Prisoners to this
day with me, in much patience, in many hardships, which has add affliction to
our bonds; but in all, the secret hand of God has upheld us to this day,
Glory, Honor, and Praises be unto Him for evermore, whose hard is not shortened
to them who trust in his name, but makes them as Mount Zion that cannot be
moved.

In which long imprisonment Leonard Letchford has often threatened me with the
Gallowsin word and writing; and one time some of my Friends coming to visit me,
did ask Leo. Letchford, if he would come to visit me? to which be answered, If
I were to be hanged, he would come to see it done. And now of late he has
said, If it come to cutting of Throats, he would cut Thomas Luxford's Throat
and mine: By which, all people fearing God may Judge, whether this man be not a
Murderer, who would act it himself, when he cannot get others to do it for
him. This is the entertainment that Leonard Letchford gives to strangers, and
the love that he has to his Neighbor. But Paul, who was a Minister of Christ,
said, Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, for thereby some have
entertained Angels unawares, Heb. 13. 2, But instead of entertaining of
strangers, Leo. Letchford and George Vintor persecutes them as Vagrants; by
which the impartial Reader will clearly see, how far they act contrary to the
Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testaments; and they may judge whether they
are Ministers of Christ, or of Antichrist.

From us who are present Sufferers under the Cruelty of men in the County Goal
in Horsham, whose Names are Ambrose Rigge, Richard Webb. Ambrofe Galloway,
James Matthew.


