EDINBURGH, the 8. day of January, 1653.
THe Commissioners for Administration of Justice to the People in Scotland,
Considering the great prejudice and damnage sustained by the Heirs and
Executors of the defunct Creditors, and consequently of Relicts and Minors, in
being necessitated to raise and prosequute tedious and longsome Actions against
the Defuncts Debitors, upon Decreets obtained against the Debitors, or Bands
granted by them to the Defunct, and registrat against them in his lifetime;
And finding it necessary to remedy this in time coming, Have therefore after
mature deliberation, Enacted and Ordained, and hereby Enact and Ordain, That in
all time hereafter where the Debitors of such Defunct Creditors are living,
Letters of Horning shall be directed against them at the instance of the Heirs
or Executors of the said Defunct, for payment of the sums whereunto they are
liable by their Obligations and Decreets against them, upon the sight of the
said registrat Obligation or Decreets, and of the Retours of the said Heirs,
bearing them to be served Heirs to the Defunct, or of the Defuncts confirmed
Testament, bearing the said Executors to be confirmed Executors to them, and
containing the said sums confirmed therein; So that the said Heirs and
Executors shall have no necessity to pursue for Decreets of transferring, or
other Decreets thereupon, and that notwithstanding of any Laws or practice of
this Nation to the contrary. And hereby Ordains and Commands all Clerks,
Keepers of the Signet, and VVrit^ thereto, and other persons who may be
concerned herein, to take notice hereof, and observe the same accordingly. And
also these presents to be insert in the said Commissioners their
Sederunt-Books, and to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and
Printed, that none may pretend ignorance.

Craighall. Geo. Smyth. Ed. Mosley.


Printed at Leith, in the year 1653.


