Unto his Grace his Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Honorable Estates of
Parliament, The PETITION of The Earl of Southerland
Humbly Shows,
THat where I having in a Former Petition, Represented to your Grace, and the
Honorable Estates of Parliament the Circumstances of my Grand children, the
present Viscount of Arbuthnet, and his Brothers and Sisters, upon the reading
thereof Knox being out of Town) there was a long day allowed to him to see and
answer: But he being now returned, it is hoped that your Grace and Lordships
will ordain him to answer the said Petition, and what farther is represented in
this, against Friday nixt peremp^orie: But because in the former Petition, I do
condescend upon a competent number of Friends on the Fathers side, and the like
number upon the Mothers side, whom I crave to be appointed Administrators to my
Grand Children; I shall endeavor to clear what I did design by the foresaid
Proposal, and I am confident, upon due consideration, it will be found both
just and necessary. And 1mo The said Children are both Fatherless and
Motherless, and destitute of all Tutors, for as I formerly represented, the
Lords of Session, have most justly reduced the Testament, and Nomination of
Tutors therein contained, as being imposed upon the late Viscount, the same
never having been read to him: And it was also evidently Instructed, that the
Persons who are nominat to be Tutors did malverse, by intrometting summarly
with the Writs, and as there are now no Tutors Testamentars, so Knox can never
be served Tutor of Law; Because, besides that without Reflection, it may be
said that he is not fit for managing Affairs of such Weight and Importance as
the present Viscounts are: So there are likewise competent Objections against
him: viz. That he being sensible of his own unsufficiency, did interdict
himself, in so far as concerned the Administration of the Tutory to Sir Thomas
Burnet of Lies, and some others of the present Viscounts Relations on the
Father side, and this Objection being proponed, when he endeavored to expede
his Service before the Macers and Lords of Session, the same was sustained, and
he was ordained to depone, if there is, or ever was any such Agreement betwixt
him and the said Relations. And albeit he does depon that there is no such
Agreement, yet neither he, nor Sir Thomas Burnet can deny, but that there was
such an Agreement drawn up, albeit the same be not now extant, and that if the
Service go on, he will be no more but a nominal Tutor, and the Administration
will be in the hands of the other Relations: And this Objection can very soon
be determined by your Grace and Lordships, and if I prevail, it will then
follow of Course, that in Justice a competent number of Friends be appointed as
Tutors Dative, and that either by your Grace and Lordships Appointment, or upon
your Recommendation, by the appointment of the Lords of the Exchequer. But 2do.
If Knox and the Viscounts Relations on the Fathers side do prevail, it will
endanger both the Viscounts Estate, and his Brothers and Sisters Education, for
they will necessarily fall under the management of these Friends who have
already malversed, and whose Nomination and Right of Tutory is reduced by the
Lords of Session. And it can never be expected, that they will give better
Advice in the management of the present Viscounts Affairs, than they gave in
the late Viscounts time: And what they did then advise, did almost tend to his
ruin. For 1mo. They got the late Viscount persuaded to enter into an Agreement
with Glenbervy Sir Thomas Burnets Uncle, most disadvantagious upon the
Viscounts part, and so unequal, that the same being quarrelled by me and some
of my Friends, it was passed from, and no person had the confidence to mantain
the justice of it. 2do. I finding that the said Viscount had been thus imposed
upon I persuaded him to farm his Estate to Knox and Findowrie, whereby he would
have paid yearly to the late Viscountess Dowager then alive, her Annuity, his
whole Anualrents, and near ten Thousand merks of Principal Sum: and besides, he
reserved a competent Subsistence to himself and Family. But his Relations in my
absence quickly overturned this Settlement; and then they engaged him in a
Contract with Alexander Innes, whereby he was constitute Factor, and Sir Thomas
Burnet became bound as Cautioner for him, since which time there has been no
part of the Principal Sums paid, albeit the said Viscountess her Annuity did
fall, by reason of her death to the late Viscount. And for preventing all
Objections that may be made or insinuate against my Daughter, that she had some
hand in the unfortunate Management of the late Viscounts Affairs, it shall be
made appear that she restricted herself for these many years past to 800 works
yearly, with which small Sum, and what money and others she got from her Mother
and me, she mantained herself and her whole Children in Clothes, and paid her
own, and their Servants Fies. So that the mismanagement can only be ascribed to
the said Viscounts Relations, who both imposed upon him in making the Agreement
with Alexander Innes, and in stating of the Accounts with him. 3tio. Since the
Viscounts death, and the time that he was on Death bed, its well known how
anxious they have been to inhaunce the management of the present Viscounts
Affairs, by imposing on him when in a Raging Fever, a Testament which they
induced him to Subscribe as said is, by Intrometting with his Writs breve manu;
and after they were turned out by the Decree of the Lords, and Mr. Mungo
Carnegy was appointed Factor by the Lords of Privy Council, who had secured a
part of the Viscounts Victual in a Lock-fast house, they or some persons by
their Order, did enter into the said house, and took out the Victual and
disposed of it, and as is informed, at a Price far below what the Factor had
sold it for. And all this being premised, it is left to your Grace and
Lordships, to Determine if it be not more consonant to Justice, that the Estate
should be managed by an equal number of Friends, of both Father side and
Mother-side, and that their Interest should be confirmed by appointing them
Tutors Dative in manner foresaid, than that persons that have so mis-managed
formerly, should still be allowed to continue their managemement, and to
exclude all my Daughters Relations from the same. And now in the Intervall and
Vacation of the Session, there can be no Remeid but by the Sentence of this
Honorable Court: and the Viscount and his Brothers and Sisters, their Case can
admit of no delay, for year and day is now near run, since the time of their
Fathers decease; and thereafter the Viscount will be Harrassed with multitudes
of Processes at the Instance of his Fathers Creditors, when he will have none
to look after him, or defend him. And lastly as to to the younger Children, and
who are destitute of Provisions, being six in number, one Son and five
Daughters: I humbly conceive they can be Educat no where so well, as in my
Family, or in such other places as I shall appoint them, my Wife and I being
their only Parents now alive. And it is Remitted to your Grace and Lordships,
to modifie and appoint what Sum you think fit for their Aliment. As also I
conceive, that your Grace and Lordships will think it just, that I have the
Custody of the Viscount, for none will more tenderly care for him and his
Brother and Sisters, not only upon the account of my Relation to them, but also
in respect I have Substitute them in the Tailzie of my Estate, failzieing the
Heirs of my Son Strathnaver.

It is therefore humbly Craved, that your Grace and Lordships will consider the
Premises, and in respect thereof, find that Knox cannot be served Tutor of Law
for the Reasons above mentioned. And that therefore You may appoint the persons
contained in my former Petition, to be Administrators, and Recommend them to
the Lords of Exchequer for a Gift of Tutory: And also to give to me the Custody
of the Children, and to appoint such Aliments to them, as your Grade and
Lordships shall think fit, they being destitute of Provisipns.

And Your Grace and Lordships Petitioner shall ever pray.


