The DECLARATION of Charles Duke of Sconberg, Lieutenant General to His Majesty
of Great Britain, and Colonel of His First Regiment of English Guards; to the
Inhabitants of Dauphine.
AS the Violences which France has exercised upon all its Neighbors, ought to
make the Subjects of that Kingdom fear, that if the Allies should enter into
his Estates, they would take a Vengeance proportionable to the Wrongs which
they have suffered from him: We think it is our duty to inform them of the good
Intentions of the King our Master toward them.

The World knows, that he has been forced to take Arms, because his Estates in
Burgundy were unjustly seized by the King of France, His Principality of Orange
was sacked, and all his Subjects oppressed: These Injuries have also been
attended with the most base and unworthy Circumstances, that the Fury of his
Enemies could suggest: endeavoring to out him of all that was due to him by
Birth or Succession, for the present, or in times to come: For this cause he
was forced to take Arms to recover what was his own, and he intends to employ
them for the preservation of all men, in the possession of their Estates and
Rights.

This is the end for which he has sent me into France; and his only intention
is, to establish the Nobility, Parliaments, and People, in their Ancient
Luster, and the Towns and Provinces in their Privileges. He knows, that the
Nobility has been trodden under foot, that the Parliaments have no Authority,
that the People have been ruined, by Taxes; But now if the Nobility, the
Parliaments, and the People, do not abandon their own Interest, and neglect
this Opportunity, the King, my Master, will see the General Estates of France
established; the Gentry secured in the enjoyment of those Privileges which
belong unto their Birth; and will restore unto their Parliaments their Ancient
Luster and Authority; and deliver the Oppressed People from their Devouring
Taxes.

The King, my Master, having taken Arms for no other end, but to maintain the
Rights of others, as well as his own, there is no reason for his Enemies to
pretend, That this is a War of Religion; which is designed for no other end,
but to kindle in the People a false Zeal, the laying of a snare for their
Credulity, that they may be enabled to make them spend the last drop of their
Blood in this Quarrel. The Clergy, however, are not to be taken by such gross
Impostures; the Causes and True Authors of this War being well known unto them.
But, however, I declare unto the Clergy, of what Dignity soever they be, that
the King, my Master, will take them all into his Protection; and that their
Privileges and Estates shall be exactly preserved; That he will exemplarily
punish all those which shall do them any Injury; and that there shall not be
any Change brought upon them, with respect to the Roman Catholic Religion. Yet
forasmuch as the Kings of England are Guarantees for the Edict of Nants, the
Peace of Montpelier, and many other Treaties of that Nature, the King, my
Master, believes himself to be obliged to maintain that Guaranty, and to cause
the said Edict to be Established. All good French men ought to Aid Him in this,
because that Edict was the Great Work of Henry the Fourth, whose Wisdom and
Memory is so dear unto them. The Roman Catholics who have had the Generosity
to look with Compassion upon the Sufferings of the Protestants, will without
doubt, take pleasure to see them Re-established. It is also hoped, that the
Gentlemen of the Clergy, having now made serious Reflections thereupon, will be
well content therewith; and by a Wise and Christian Conduct, testify, That
they had no part in the Violation of the said Edict, and all the Cruelties
which have followed upon it.

And all those which shall Join with us, shall receive those Recompenses and
Marks of Distinction, as their Services shall Deserve, and which we shall be
able to give them.

But on the contrary, All those which shall be so far from Aiding us, as to
Join with the Oppressors of their Country, can expect nothing but the
Severities of a Military Execution. And we declare to all those that will live
in Peace at Home, That they shall have no Injury done them as to their Lives or
Fortunes.

At Am^run, Aug. 29. 1692.
Licensed,

EDMUND BOHVN.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year 1692.


