BY THE COMMISSIONERS For the GOVERNMENT of SCOTLAND, And the ISLES thereunto
belonging.
THe PARLIAMENT of England taking into serious consideration the VVel-being of
the Nation of Scotland, did empower the Council of State to appoint
Commissioners for the Government and Management of all Affairs in Scotland, and
the Isles thereunto belonging; and in prosecution of that Power and Trust
reposed in them, They have constituted and appointed us Commissioners for that
^urpose, which we think fit hereby to make known unto the good People of
Scotland, to ^^e end, that the Administration of Justice, so long discontinued,
may be effectually Admini^ed unto them; We therefore, in pursuance of our
Trust, do Authorize and Continue in ^ll Power, all Justices of the Peace,
Sheriffs, and Commissaries, and their inferior Officers, ^o were last
entrusted with these Public Employments on the fourth day of April, 1659. to
^t as heretofore within their several Jurisdictions, until such time as they
shall receive fur^^er Orders and Instructions from the Parliament of England,
the Council of State, or Our ^ves: And we do hereby require and enjoin all
persons of whatsoever condition and qua^^^y, to take notice of the tenor of
these Presents, and yield obedience thereunto; strictly ^ommanding them not to
act any thing to the contrary thereof, upon the pains and penalties that may
thereupon ensue. And that none may pretend ignorance hereof, We have commanded
these Presents to be Printed, and Proclaimed at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
and ^he other Burghs within Scotland, where Proclamations have usually been
made.

Given under our Hands at Holy-rood-house this Eleventh day of May, in the year
of our lord, One thousand six hundred and sixty. Tho. Morgan, Ph. Twisleton,
William Daniell, M. Disney.


Friday the Eleventh of MAY, 1660.

By the Commissioners for the Government of SCOTLAND, and the Isles thereunto
belonging.

ORdered, That this PROCLAMATION be forthwith Printed, Proclaimed, and
Published.

Silas Tailor, Clerk to the Commissioners.

^^INBURGH, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, 1660.


