TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
The most humble Petition of your most faithful Servants and Subjects, the
Justices and Gentlemen assembled at the general Sessions for the County of
Devon.
Shows.
THat your Petitioners pressed by the earnest complaints herewith humbly
presented, and well experienced in your Princely Clemency and Justice, are
thereby heartned to tender into your Royal hands both their and our most lowly
and loyal desires.

It is not (Dread Sovereigne) the fear of Poverty that does only or chiefly
afflict us, though if things continue but a while in the present State, we see
it coming unresistably as an armed man, nor yet of death if our lives might be
spent in your Majesty's service. But your Petitioners beholding Popery in
Ireland prevayling (that merciless Religion where it does prevail) and in
England too much countenanced. For our own Consciences sake, and for the
salvation of our infant Childrens souls, we humbly beg your Majesty upon our
knees to look into the cause. Distractions in your Parliament. How can it be
otherwise? When Popish Lords are admitted to vote in your principal Affairs,
and your chief Prelates appear in a malevolent conjunction with them against
the best proceedings. Oh! that the King of Kings would be pleased to put it
into your Majesty's Royal heart to sequester the different in Religion, to
privacy, and your Bishops to their spiritual Callings, your Majesty would soon
find (as your Petitioners confidently believe) an effectual benefit and a
present correspondencie. Had your Church Governors been cordial and
substantial in their duties, those swarms of Papists in Ireland and England
too, had (probably) been prevented.

If in your House of Commons any be suspected of ill affections, it is far from
your Petitioners to desire their impunity, only your Petitioners implore, their
fair trial according to the Privilege of their Parliamentary places, wherein
your Petitioners and their Posterity have an interest. To which we undervalue
all things, but our Religion and loyalty.

In the name of God let them there receive the fruit of their demerits. This
Justice as it will be a perpetual comfort to your Majesty in your soul, so
shall it be a real and complete satisfaction to your Petitioners, who as they
are in all duty bound, will for ever pray for your Majesty's temporal and
eternal happiness.

London, Printed for Lawrence Blaikelocke, 1642.


