To His Grace, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the
Estates of Parliament. THE PETITION Of the Principal and Masters of the
Marishal College of Aberdeen.
Humbly Shows
THat where the Petitioners having represented to this Parliament, That they in
consideration that their College was exceedingly decayed had adventured to
erect and join a new Building thereto, without any other Fond; But the
Charitable Assistance of Noblemen, Gentlemen and others both at home and
Abroad, and the Contribution being expended, and the Work uncompleat; It
pleased his Majesty's High Commissioner, and Honorable Estates of Parliament,
to allow the Petitioners the Vacant Stipends of such Churches whereof the Earl
Marishal and Earl of Kintore were Patrons, but the Act was restricted only to
endure till this Session of Parliament; And seeing few of these Churches have
Vaicked, and the Stipend of those that are Vacant, being near; Exhausted, by
the twenty Merks paid, to such as Preach at the several parish Churches our
new building lies still uncompleat, and it will take a Considerable sum to
finish the said Work, And the Royal Burrows in Consideration thereof, were
pleased at their last General Convention at Aherdeen to bestow upon us a
Generous Assistance, and it being his Majesty and Royal Predecessors, their
Constant Care to provide for Universities and Colleges, and to allow them
Supplies for repairing and upholding their Fabrics: The Petitioners have
presumed to make this new Address to his Grace and Honorable Estates of
Parliament, Humbly craving, That not only the former Act, allowing the
Petitioners the Vacant Stipends of the Churches of Foverain, New Deer, Saint
Brides alias Dunnottar, Fetteresso, Old Deer, Auchredie, Langside, Peterhead,
Saint Fergus, King Edward, and any other whereof the Earl Marishal and Earl of
Kintore are undoubted Patrons, may be allowed and continued for such a
competent time, as His Grace and Estates of Parliament shall think sit. But
also in consideration of the necessity. That the Old Fabric lies under to be
repaired, and the New Work to be completed; Your Grace and Honorable Estates
of Parliament, would be pleased to allow the Petitioners some part of the
Bishops Rents, or some other more certain and sure Fond then the Casual Vacant
Stipends, for the use and ends asoresaid; And the rather because the Honorable
Members of the last Visitation of Colleges, in consideration of the Premises,
by their Act in August 1696. Recommended the Petitioners to the Lords of
Thesaury, that they might bestow upon them any Fond, that might be most
Effectual for the Uses foresaid.

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.

