To the King's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble ADDRESS OF THE CITIZENS and
INHABITANTS That are of the Presbyterian Persuasion in the City of Edinburgh
and Cannongate.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
WE cannot find suitable Expressions to evidence our most humble and grateful
Acknowledgments for Your Majesty's late Gracious Declaration, by which we are
happily delivered of many sad and grievous Burdens we have long groaned under;
and (all Restraints, to our great Joy, being taken off) are allowed the free
and peaceable public Exercise of our Religion, a Mercy which is dearer to us
than our Lives and Fortunes.

Could we open our Hearts, Your Majesty would undoubtedly see what deep Sense
and true Zeal for Your Service, so surprising and signal a Favor has
imprinted on our Spirits; for which, we reckon our selves highly obliged
(throwing our selves at Your Majesty's Feet) to return Your most Excellent
Majesty our most humble, dutiful and hearty Thanks: And we desire humbly to
assure Your Majesty, That as the Principles of the Protestant Religion, which
according to our Confession of Faith we profess obliges us all the days of our
Lives to that entire Loyalty and Duty to Your Majesty's Person and Government,
that no difference of Religion can dissolve; so we hope, and through Gods
Assistance, shall still endeavor to demean ourselves is our Practice, in such
manner, as shall evidence to the World the Truth and Sincerity of our Loyalty
and Gratitude, and make it appear, that there is no inconsist ency betwixt true
Loyalty and Presbyterian Principles.

Great SIR! We humbly offer our Dutiful and Faithful Assurances, that as we
have not been hitherto wanting in that great Duty, which our Consciences bind
upon us to pray for Your Majesty; so this late refreshing and unexpected Favor
will much more engage us in great Sincerity, to continue still to offer up our
desires to the God of Heaven, by whom Kings Reign and Princes decree Justice,
to Bless Your Royal Majesty's Person and Government; and after a happy and
comfortable Reign on Earth, to Crown You with an incorruptible Crown of Glory
in Heaven, which is most ardently prayed for, by,

Most Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's most humble, most Loyal, most Dutiful,
and most Obedient Subjects. Subscribed in our own Names, and by order of the
Citizens and Inhabitants of the Presbyterian Persuasion within Your City of
Edinburgh and Connongate.

London, Printed by T. N. and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, City and College: 1687.


