TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of many of the Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the County of Kent, and the Cities of Canterbury and Rochester,
and County of Canterbury, with the Cinque Ports, and their members, and other
Corporations within the said County,
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners, or many of them have heretofore exhibited to both
Houses of Parliament a Petition concurring with those of the renowned City of
London, and other several Counties of this Kingdom, expressing their true
zeal to true Religion in the pure worship of God, and their loving affections
to the Kings most excellent Majesty, both Houses, and the Kingdoms: That your
poor Petitioners do with all humility return their utmost thanks unto this
Honorable Assembly, for your favorable and gentle acceptance of their
Petition, your great care and vigilance, and uncessant labors for the
advancement of the true reformed Religion, the Honor and welfare of his
Majesty, and his Kingdoms, and for your continued endeavors for a right
understanding between his Majesty, and his Parliament; for your instant
address to his Majesty, to dissuade him from his personal Expedition for
Ireland, and especially for that to us so welcome Declaration of Lords and
Commons, April 9. 1642. concerning your pious intentions for a necessary
Reformation, which renewes our hopes, and we hope will further your account in
the day or the Lord, who are come up as Saviors on Mount Sion, and that your
Petitioners; do most heartily rejoice to behold the happy union of both Houses
of Parliament, and the mutual concurrence of them and the whole Kingdom,
wherein under his Majesty, the safety of all the three Kingdoms do consist.

Yet your Petitioners cannot but plainly express with what sad hearts they
think on the many evil occurrents which interrupt your unparalelled pains,
and intercept the fruit of your faithful Counsels, from us among which this is
not the least ( viz.) a Petition (as we conceive) of dangerous consequence, and
published at the last general Assizes holden for this County at Maidstone, and
then (yea, yet) advanced for subscribers, intended to be exhibited to this
Honorable House, as the Petition of the whole body of this County, to cause
the whole Kingdom to believe that Petition to be the act of the whole County of
Kent (or the major part thereof) whereby a great blemish and scandal is
brought upon this loyal and peaceable County, being styled the Kentish
Petition, which we know is not the act of the body of the County, as it seems
to speak, for as much as it was disavowed by many of the then grand Jury, and
Justices on the Bench, and by all us your Petitioners, whose names are
underwritten.

1. Wherefore our humble prayer is, that your Honors would be pleased first to
accept this our Vindication of our selves and this County, who utterly
disclaim the said Petition, humbly leaving it to the Wisdom, Justice and
Clemency of this Honorable Assembly, to difference between the active
contrivers and promoters, and unadvised subscribers thereof.

2. To lift up your hearts above all discouragements in the ways of the Lord,
according to that your so religious resolutions for Reformation in the Church,
for a Consultation with godly and learned Divines, and for the establishing of
a Preaching Ministry throughout the whole Kingdom: And we your Petitioners
being sensible, that to oppose or flight his Majesty's Parliament, and the
orders thereof, were to hazard the safety of his Majesty's Royal person, and
all his Kingdoms, and to further the designs of our enemies, who hope by
causing our division, to triumph in our confusion.

And we your Petitioners are unanimously resolved to maintain and defend, as
far as lawfully we may, with our lives, power and estates, his Majesty's Royal
person and dignities, as also the power and privileges of his Parliament,
according to our Protestation.

And shall daily pray that your hands may be sufficient for you to accomplish
every good work.

This Petition was delivered, and read in the House of Commons the fifth of
May, 1642. with 8000. hands thereto.

London printed for William Larnar. 1642.


