To His Grace, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and to the Right Honorable,
The Estates of Parliament, The humble Address of the Presbyterian Ministers,
and Professors of the Church of SCOTLAND,
Shows,
THat as we cannot but acknowledge and adore the holy and righteous
Dispensation of the Lord, in all the great and long continued afflictions,
wherewith he has afflicted us for our sins; So we are not a little filled with
admiration at the great and wonderful Providence of our most gracious God, who
alone does great wonders, for his mercy endures for ever; That at such a time,
when our strength was gone, and there was none to deliver, He mercifully
stirred up that Pious and Magnanimous Prince William, then Prince of Orange,
now, by the good Hand of God, our Gracious Sovereign, to Espouse the Interest
of the Protestant Religion, and of the afflicted Ministers and Professors
thereof in these Kingdoms, and has blessed him in so Heroic and Noble an
undertaking with agreeable success: As also, has raised up your Lordships, our
most Noble and Honorable Patriots, to join heartily with His Majesty, in
appearing zealously for securing of the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom,
and for what may tend to the better establishment thereof in all its concerns;
And in evidencing your just Indignation against the corruptions of Church and
State in your Lordships Claim of Right: And particularly, by freeing us of the
Yoke of Prelacy, and of the undue Power, and ^^^lesiastical Supremacy in
Church Matters, formerly established in the Supreme Magistrate. ^^d as these
your Lordships zealous beginnings of appearing for the interest of the
Pro^^^^ant Religion, and Professors thereof, have been, and are great matter of
joy to our Hearts, and of blessing and magnifying our Lord and Master in your
Lordships behalf; So they are a Door of Hope to us, and to all that love the
true reformed Protestant Religion in this Land; That His Grace, His Majesty's
High Commissioner, and this Honorable Court of Parliament, will in your
Station, go on zealously in your begun Work of purging this poor oppressed
Church, from all Corruptions brought into it, by Ambitious and Covetous
Churchmen, who sought their own things, but not the things of Jesus Christ;
And from all the sad Consequences, which have followed upon the Erecting of
Prelacy; Such as were, the driving several hundreds of Ministers, all at one
time, out of their Churches, without either Accusation or Citation, and the
filling of their places with Ignorant and Scandalous Persons (which His Majesty
is graciously pleased to notice in His Declaration for Scotland, as an occasion
of all this poor Churches miseries, and from which insupportable Sufferings, He
declared His resolution to relieve and rescue us): And we may add, with many
also Erroneous, and unsound in the Faith, enemies to the Reformation, and who
have now appeared disaffected to the present Civil Government; As also the
framing of a numerous Train of severe Laws, severely executed both on Ministers
and People of all Degrees, so far, that even while we were counted and treated
as sheep for the slaughter, we might not Petition nor Complain, without
rendering our selves highly Criminal by the Laws and Acts then made. All which,
we hope, The Commissioner His Grace, and your Lordships in this present
Parliament, will take to your serious Consideration, and will free this poor
Oppressed Church from such Oppressors and Oppressions, and settle it again upon
the right Foundations of Government and Discipline, agreeable to the Word of
God, and established in this Church by Law, near an hundred years ago. Which
settlement, we are confident, will prove the best Remedy of all our otherways
incurable Distractions, and the mean of quieting and uniting the whole
Country, in a joint and firm opposition against all His Majesty's, and your
Lordships Enemies.

We, therefore His Majesty's most-Loyal Subjects, and your Lordships most
humble ^^d dutiful Servants in Christ, Humbly beseech, The Commissioner his
Grace, and the ^onourable Estates of Parliament, Seeing The King's Majesty has
Declared, and your ^ordships with him, have Zealously Appeared for the
Protestant Religion, You ^ould be Graciously pleased, by your Civil Sanction,
to Establish and Ratify the late ^onfession of Faith, with the Larger and
Shorter Catechisms (which contain the ^mm and Substance of the Doctrine of the
Reformed Churches) The Directory of Worship, and Presbyterial Church Government
and Discipline, all agreeable to the Word of GOD, and formerly Received by the
General Consent of this Nation. And ^ing Prelacy, and all who have entered
under Prelacy, have been Imposed upon the church, without her Consent, in any
of her Free General Assemblies, and that Pres^yterian Government, cannot be
Secure in the Hands of them, who are of Contrary ^rinciples; Therefore we
humbly Petition, That the Church Government may be ^stablished in the Hands of
such only, who, by their former Carriage, and Sufferings, ^ave evidenced, that
they are known sound Presbyterians, and well affected to His Ma^esties
Government; or who, hereafter shall be found to be such, (which we are
hope^ull, by the Grace of God, shall be managed with such Christian Prudence,
Moderation and Tenderness, (as shall leave no Just Matter of Complaint to any)
And that not only these Ministers yet alive, who were Unjustly thrust from
their Churches, may be Restored thereto, and these Parishes, and Flocks, at
that time, no less violently Im^osed upon, may be freed from Intruders; But
also, all other Presbyterian Ministers, who either are already, or may be, by
respective Flocks orderly called hereafter, day have access to be settled in
Churches, after the Presbyterian way, as they shall be Ecclesiastically
approved and Appointed, And may have your Lordships Civil Sanction added
thereunto.

And we also Request, that the Church thus Established, may be allowed by your
Lordships Civil Sanction, to Appoint Visitations for Purging out Insufficient,
Negligent, Scandalous, and Erroneous Ministers. And seeing Patronages, which had
their Rise in the most Corrupt and Latter Times of Antichristianism, have
always been a great Grievance to this Church, as the Source and Fountain of a
Corrupt Ministry, That these may be Abolished; And that the Church may be
Established upon its former Good Foundations, Confirmed by many Acts of
Parliaments, since the year one thousand five hundred and sixty. And that all
Acts contrair to this Government, that Ratify Ceremonies, and Impose
Punishments on Presbyterians, for Nonconformity, and for Worshipping GOD
according to their Principles, may be Abrogat. And as a good and necessary
Mean, for preserving the Purity of the Church, your Lordships take Care, that
Learned, Sound, and Godly Men be put in Universities, and Seminaries of
Learning (humbly submitting to your Lordships Wisdom, the Method of
Considering, and Effectuating these our desires) Thus all things being done for
the House of the God of Heaven, according to the Commandment of the God of
Heaven, by your Lordships pious and wise managing these Affairs of the Church
of Christ, This Poor long oppressed and tossed Church, may at length, through
Gods Blessing, Arrive at a safe and quiet Harbor, And the True Honor and
Happiness of His Majesty, and your Lordships, as the signal Nursing Fathers of
the Church of Christ in this Land, may be advanced, and continued to future
Generations; And so the Blessing of the Church that was ready to perish, may
remain still upon His Majesty, and your Lordships.

And your Lordships Petitioners shall ever pray, that God may bless and protect
the Persons of their Majesty's KING WILLIAM, and QUEEN MARY, long to Rule, and
Govern this Nation, and your LORDSHIPS under them.

