Hereford. May it please Your most Sacred Majesty.
SInce we are very sensible that no Age has ever yet produced any Prince that
has with more Justice, Goodness and Mercy, swaid the Scepters of the three
Kingdoms (Blessings which our Forefathers never had in a more eminent degree of
Perfection, and all other Nations never yet knew) We conceive it our Duty to
manifest to Your Majesty and all the World, our just value and grateful
apprehensions of the happiness we enjoy under the best of Kings, and most
upright of Governments: And however some ill Men to accomplish their black
designs by attempting to subvert the Government, slily insituate to the
credulous People, causeless Fears and false Jealousies of Arbitrary Power
growing upon us, yet the public Manifestations Your Majesty has at all times
given to your People of Your Governing by the Laws of the Land, and by no other
Method (which we find Your Majesty holds to inviolably, and and maintains as
Sacred) keep us as safe from such mean apprehensions, as we are secure from the
dismal Effects of such a way of Government, which we have no cause to suspect,
unless it be from those that suggest it, nor from them neither, till they have
subverted a well tempered Monarchy, and introduced their beloved Tyranical
Republic. We cannot but with all humble duty, Loyal Gratitude, and excess of
Joy, observe Your Majesty's constant Endeavors to give satisfaction and Ease
to the Minds of Your Majesty's Subjects, not only in Your strict Adherence to,
and Favor of the true Protestant Religion, but more especially in Your late
Declaration, which cannot but stop the Mouths of the Seditious and Factious,
preserve from Apostasy the doubtful, and confirm the Loyalty of Your best
settled Subjects; And that Your Majesty may see that we are not poisoned, or
likely to be so by any Seditious and Factious Designers, we do unanimously and
heartily assure Your Sacred Majesty, that we will stand by Your Majesty in the
preservation of Your Person, Your Heirs and lawful Successors, and the
Government in Church and State, as it is now by Law established, with the last
drop of our Blood, and penny of our Fortunes; And shall be ready on
alloccasions cheerfully to give You such large Assistances as (joined with the
proportionable Supplies of other Your Majesty's Loyal Subjects) may make Your
Government great and easy to Your Self at home, and valued and feared by all
Your Allies and Neighbors abroad. We humbly beg Your Sacred Majesty to give a
gracious acceptance to the steady resolutions of us Your most obedient and
loyal Subjects, which no time, no treachery, no power, no fraud or faction,
shall ever make us decline or alter.

Your Majesty's most Humble, Loyal, and Obedient Subjects and Servants.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. address the City of Glouchester
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
WE Your Majesty's most humble, Loyal, and Obedient Subjects, out of a deep
Sense of Your most Princely tenderness and transcendent Care for us, and all
Your good Subjects, as well in respect of our Religious as Civil Concerns, do
make this our most Humble and Faithful Address, returning all possible
Gratitude for Your Majesty's most Gracious late Declaration, which has like a
Flood of Goodness, Issued from Your Royal Heart toward all Your Subjects,
whereby all Men that have not wilfully blinded their Intellects, may be
abundantly satisfied of Your Majesty's Fatherly Love to us all.

We cannot but remember by What Frauds and Machinations the Subjects of this
Your Majesty's Realm in the late times were beguiled, and under pretext of
Religion (and particularly this City, of which there was a most deserved Infamy
brought upon us by Men of seditious Principles, the dregs of which still remain
always watching to disturb our Peace) cheated into a Rebellion, the
consequences whereof was a sad Devastation of all, and the loss of the best of
Kings. And we have reason to believe the same deadly poison was again
preparing, and had certainly been given, had not God put it into Your Majesty's
Heart timely, and most prudently to prevent it,

As therefore we are bound to Glorify God for His Mercy, so we make our most
humble and grateful acknowledgement to Your Majesty for Your most intent
Vigilance to save us from so portentous a Storm; and do therefore with all
Humility and Faithfulness Prostrate our selves at Your Majesty's Feet, solemnly
vowing before God and the whole World, That we are and will be ready, to the
last drop of our Blood, and Mite of our Estates, to stand by and defend Your
most Sacred Person, your lawful Successors, and the just Laws by which you
govern both in Church and State.

The God of Heaven and Earth, by whom Kings Reign, Bless you with length of
Days, Health, and all affluence of Wealth; Establish Your Sacred Person in the
hearts of your People. Dissipate your Enemies, and Confound their Devices; and
let the Scepter of Great Britain be Swayed by you and your Lawful Successors to
the end ot Time.

Several other Addresses have been presented to His Majesty, as from Bristol,
Lyn-Regis, etc which there is not room to Publish here.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by John Swintoun, one of His Majesty's Printers: Anno
DOM. 1681.


