Tarrugo Unmasked, OR An Answer to a late Pamphlet Entitled, Apollo
Mathematicus BY GEORGE HEPBURN, M. D, AND Member of the College of Phisicians
at Edinburgh.

-- Tarrugus ducitur unco
Spectandus. --
To which is added by DOCTOR PITCAIRNE. The Theory of the Internal Diseases of
the Eye Demonstrated Mathematically.

EDINBVRGH, Printed in the Year, M, DC, XCV.

TO THE READER,
IT will not, I hope, seem strange that I have undertaken to Answer a
scurrilous Pamphlet lately set forth to defame Dr Pitcairne, and all true
methods that are, or can be proposed to advance the certainty of Medicine.
Having defended these methods and Writings when I was abroad, I thought my self
more concerned to defend them at Home. Abroad I was put to defend them against
the Reasonings of Ingenuous Persons, who were seeking the truth, and trying
every thing that tended to any such end. But here I find, instead of Gentlemany
and Philosophical Language, a Rapsody of Lies, Calumnies, Scurrilous talk, in a
word, a discourse savouring of the Dunghill that gave the Origin and
Nurishment to the insect which brought forth the Pamphlet.

The Fellow has concealed his name, but we must speak with him, and therefore a
name he shall have: and he has himself helped us For having told what a Spanish
gravity and constancy attends those who admire what is Old, to which party he
inclines, he cannot take it ill if we give him a spanish name; and if we can in
the Author of this Pamphlet discover the ways and Language, and other qualities
which are proper to any Spaniard or Portugese whose Character is known in this
place, that Person's name must we bestow on the Author of the Pamphlet. No
spanish name is better known in this place than Tarrugo's. The farce that was
some years ago acted under that name in the Cannongate, makes the Rogue well
enough known: And the Character of Cheating, Lying, Burlesquing, Coining
prophesies for sybilla (see page 24 of the Farce, and page 20 of the Pamphlet)
calling Mathematicians Mad and Lunatic (see page 23 of the farce, and pages 45
and 47 etc. of the Pamphlet) which are the chief Ornaments of Tarrugo's Comedy,
are also the chief Ornaments of Tarrugo's Pamphlet: For thus we will henceforth
call it.

There are two humors, or fits rather, that our Tarrugo is often observed to
fall in. Tho he has to deal with Persons who are no ways Mad or Lunatic, nor
guilty of drinking Brandy, yet without any occasion given, he either falls a
railing against Mad men, Crackt-brain'd, and Mercurial Nodles, Lunaticks, etc.
Or against Brandy-drinkers. May we enquire into the reason of this behavior?
since those he has to deal with are not tourly free of both those
qualifications, it is plain, that he could not entertain any hopes of fixing
such a Character upon them, unless he were really Mad, or wrote his Pamphlet
over a Bowl of Punsh. We have therefore no other thing left us to suspect for
the cause of Tarrugo's fits, but some Calamit as Domestica. Now because he is
unknown to me as well as his whole Family, it is not possible to define, if
both the qualifications he so often complains of, belong to any one in it, or
are divided. Yet this seems probable, that Tarrugo is the Lunatic, for he
speaks like one; and that the Moon has no influence on any other in his Family
except when she is in the Cow-gate. This Domestic evil then that so easily
besets him, must be the Cause of his Paroxysms.

But the strangest thing in Tarruge's Pamphlet is, That the Fellow having
published it on purpose to defame his Neighbors, and for that end filled it
with notorious Lies, and villainous calumnies, yet he has the supererogating
Impudence and Hypocrisy to complain of Atheism and contempt of Religion; while
one of the great motives he had to rail at Doctor Pitcairn's writtings was,
because the Doctor in them has given a demonstration of the Deity's existence,
the belief of which is so inconsistent with Tarrugo's practice. Yet there is
one thing that to some may seem as strange; Whoever Tarrugo be, yet it is known
That the papers which I call Tarrugo's were revised, corrected, and approven by
one who twice in one year changed his Religion, upon how honest and religious
principles I do not determine: Now it may seem strange, that this Gentleman
has not struck out those passages about Atheism and Irreligion, both for his
own, and for his Author's sake

Tarrugo has subjoined an appendix about Certainty which gives us a farther
proof of his ignorance in Mathematics, and of his want of Common sense too.
There he undertakes to prove, That the matters of fact that are told by
travelers and seamen about the Towns in China, are as evidently true and
certain, as it is evident that two and two make four: That he who saw a thing
done is not so certain of its being done, as an other is who saw it not, but
heard it only by the hundredth hand perhaps. Which are thoughts so widely
different from those of sober persons, that to entertain them seriously must be
the highest degree of madness. But the paper de Inventoribus was not published
for the use of such mean capacities as Tarrugo's. It was designed as a rule for
deciding controversies about Inventions in Medicine and Mathematics, as
appears from the paper it self. And in it are cautions delivered to hinder any
ignorant or Malicious person from stretching or wresting what is there taugh;
for in the last page of it the Doctor has these words. Eadem de causa, si
Aristotelem vel Hippocratem concedatur fuisse infallibiles, certiores esse
poterimus de us quae illi tradidere, quam de aliis quae aliorum Historicorum
fidei acceptum referimus. By which it is evident that the Doctor treats only of
Historians or Observators that are not inspired; and that in the Doctor's
judgment, we have more than an Historical certainty of what is taught in the
sacred Scriptures: But this kind of certainly was not the subject of that paper
de Invento ribus. and so I think that paper may be left to defend it self.

I come then to consider those parts of Tarrugo's Pamphlet where he pretends to
be serious, and would seem Learned. The subject (as Tarrugo pretends) of the
Debate is this. Dr. Pitcairne wishing to have Medicine brought a greater length
toward certainty and perfection than hitherto it has been, proposed to take
the help to Mathematics, a very certain science; He told what affinity the two
sciences have, and he encouraged his hearers to embrace the proposal, by
letting them see how many hard problems in Medicine hall been already solved by
only two Mathematicians, Borelli and Bellini. But to this proposal Tarrugo
refuses to consent, and very often says, but never proves, That Mathematics
cannot be of use in Medicine; and withal owns himself Ignorant of
Mathematics. From this assertion of Tarrugo's we may infer how Ignorant he is
of Medicine, since he knows nothing of these many and noble purposes belonging
to it, which Borelli and Bellini have Mathematically demonstrated: For how can
we suppose him to know such things who will nor allow any use of Mathematics
in Medicine? From this also we may judge, How fit Tarrugo is to discourse
concerning the use of Mathematics in Philosophy and Medicine; he who by his
own confession is, and by his way of writing proves himself to be entirely
Ignorant of all Mathematics, and consequently of all the uses and purposes
they can be aply'd to. Can One who does not understand the 47 prop. of the
first of Euclid, be a fit judge indetermining where it can be of use, and where
it can not? And can he pretend to understand the first Elements of
Mathematics, who thinks (see page 85 of Tarrugo's Pamphlet) That there are or
can be bodies and particles triangular or square.

But these matters are more fully treated of in the following papers, in which
the Reader is desired not to take it ill, If Hippocrate and Galen be treated
without any respect to their pretended Infallibility (allowed them by Tarrugo)
for I thought it always of ill consequence to a scribe Infallibility to Persons
who knew much indeed in respect of their times, but were ignorant of what our
times have discovered, especially since the lare discoveries are far more
valuable and useful than the former. And tho our Art be very highly obliged to
those two, and many other Old boys, yet Hippocrate and Galen's fault was great
in Introducing the sectarian philosophy into Medicine; and our Art had been
much more beholden to them, if such Idiots as Tarrugo had not made Idols of
them, and endeavored to make their false Aphorisms pass for infallible
conclusions.

ANSWER TO A late Pamphlet Entitled Appolo Mathematicus
THe Mathematical Science is the Art of finding out the properties of all
figures which can happen to any Body, and of all the motions and effects of
them; That is, the Art of finding out all that Bodies can do one with another;
for there is nothing done or happens in nature, but by Bulk, Figure or
Motion: and therefore a perfect Knowledge of Mathematics is what no Man can
pretnd to, for it would amount to a perfect knowledge of all natural things.
This does not binder but that many excellent persons have given themselves to
the Study of that Science; for though they knew well that they could not arrive
to a perfection, yet they found that by following the steps and method of the
preceding Mathematicians, they could grow wiser than their Masters, and
surmount difficulties insuperable to those who are ignorant of Mathematics.
There is nothing in Natural Philosophy (of which Medicin is a part) that
deferves to be taken notice of, except what is invented and demonstated by the
Mathematicians; and this is the cause of Philosophie's being so long in so low
estate The Mathematicians were so intent upon the Geometrical Foundation and
the Abstract Speculation of Figutes that they had no leisure to look abroad,
and to draw those Conclusions which are useful to the Philosophers: But now
that the Temple of Geometry is built, the Mathematicians have both Leisure and
Inclinations to assist their Neighbors, and to lend them Propositions and
Truths useful in bringing their Works to a greater perfection. Mr. Newton has
effectually helped the Philosophers; and Borrelli, but above all Bellini has
given great light in Medicipal matters, only by the help of Mathematics: And
it is noways strange that the Knowledge of Mathematics should be so useful in
the Theory of Medicine, since Mathematics are the Theory of the effects
produced in Nature by the means of Figure, Bulk, and Motion, which effects and
events comprehend those also which appear to us as Diseases and the Actions of
Remedies; And theresore, though it is not expected that Medicine by the help of
Mathematics should be brought to its absolute and uttermost perfection, (for
that is not expected in Natural Philosophy) Yet it is evident from what has
been here explained, and from what some Men have done as Bellini) that we
should have brought Medicine to an incredible perfection, if Mathematical
methods had been used, at least a far greater perfection than can be had by any
other methods. For it is most manifest, that if Medicine can be brought to any
degree of perfection, it must be brought to it by the help of that Science,
which teaches what are the effects of such and such motions in Bodies Solid and
Liquid of such and such Bulks, Consistences, Figures, and velocities combined
in all manner of proportions: for the Actions, Diseases, and Cures that hapen
and are done in our Bodies, are effects which result from those Figures,
Motions, quantities and proportions treated of and demonstrated in the
Mathematics; and theresore, it we can have any clear knowledge of Diseases
etc. We muft be beholden for it to Euclide, Apollonius, Archimedes, Newton, and
to Borrelli and Bellini, with others who have made use of Euclide to advance
the knowledge of Medicine. And it serves to no purpose to say, that the Fabric
of our Body is intricate, and many things in it fall not under our Senses for
the more intricate it is, the mote need is there and Reason to use the most
general and comprehensive methods for finding the mysteries of that structure:
And since the Mathematical methods are these only which can serve us in this
design, they ought to be tried. And we have this motive to encourage us, to
wit, that several things which passed for Truths in Medicine while the Writers
of it neglected the assistance of Mathematics, have been found to be gross
Errors when viewed by a Mathematician; And many things that could not be
understood not determined by Physicians when they did not consult with the
Mathemeticians, are now by the help of Mathemaricks fully explained and
understood. And of this you have subjoined an Instance. It is a Mathematical
explication of the moft considerable diseases of the Eyes, never before
understood by any Writers of Medicine, and that only because they did not use
the Mathematics to help them in an enquiry of this Nature. From that
explication it appears how ridiculous the Writers of Medecin have been both in
the Theory and practice of the diseases incident to the Eyes, and how naturally
the true method of Cure is found out from the true and Mathematical Theory of
the Disease. If some persons have quibled and railed against this Invention, it
is only because they are Ignorant and ill natured, for the Doctors Thoery in
this affair is pure Demonstration.

But the Doctor has given another instance of the use of Geometry in Medicine.
There arose a question, If purging be the best cure for Fever? neither they who
affirmed it to be, nor they who denied it could give any sufficient reason for
their opinion, but quibled and adduc'd arguments too mean to be used by
Schoolboys when they dispute about Ens Rationis, or if Logic be ane art, etc.
(for what learn'der are men disputing without the help of Mathematics, about
natural things, than schoolboys? They have both learned their Logicks and
Metaphysics and instead of Natural Philosophy mathematically handled, they
have learned either from Aristorle and Hippocrate, that the World consists of
four Eliments, or from Descartes, that it is made up of three; both equally
false and useless: So that no more can be expected of solid Theory from the one
than from the other. Atlast Docter Pitcairne applied his Mathematics to the
question, and had solved it by a method not to be imitated by those Puny
Quiblers.

If the greatest part of Physic be not Mathematically cultivated, it is
because few Physicians have used Mathematical reasons, and one man or two cna
not go through with so great a work.

How little then is Medicine and Mankind obliged to a Cabal of ignorant Block
heads, who do not only not use any Mathematical reasoning in Medicine, but cry
out upon Mathematical methods as useless, yea hurtful when applied to
Physic! But the best is, These men who cry out upon the use of Mathematics.
What a noble discourse then can we expect about the use of that Science and
it is reach from them? Certainly no better than from School boys.

The difference will be only here. That if some of this Anti mathematick Cabal
have been Comedians, and earned some money by writting copies of Samuel Colvins
poem against the Whigs betor it was printed, or if others have been Readers and
School. masters in a country-parish, Then we shall have a book full of scraps
taken from poets and Rymers, Baudy-house language etc: and then when nothing
prevails, we shall be attaqued by a Mr Precentor with a Text of Scripture,
which (now having lost the privilege of reading in the Kirk) he throws instead
of a stone or some heavy argument against his Nighbour, and makes that an
instrument of strife which was brought into the World as comprehending the best
and most persuasive inducements to peace. Now, we can expect none of these
things from Schoolboys who likewise will show a Bashfulness where there men
are Impudence it selt: But the serious parr will be the same as if it were writ
by Schoolboys, To whom the Mathematics have yet done no good; Except one
should think that those may have forgot much of what they once knew after the
manner of School boys, and so speak nonsense even in the sense of the Latter,
and appear low and mean to the very capacity of Children. Of this I shall give
perpetual instances in Tarrugo's pamphlet, where he speaks of any thing after a
serious manner, no Schoolboy being capable of so mean Nonsense as he then
contents himsels with. Every man brings to do his work the Talents he has, if
the work be urgent, and give no delay; Tarrugo with his Comerads have no
Mathamaticks, yet they would gladly be thought advancers and improvers of
Medecin: They have then brought Rhymes, Scraps of School-Authors and Farces,
Stage-talk, Buffoonrie, Dialogues with Boys; and then to please both you and
the Boys, they present you with skillful Rope-dancers, and immediately after,
fall a playing Jugler tricks with Screw-nails. And thus they advance Medicine
many ways; whereas their Antagonist, who cares for none of those things, has
only the Mathematics, and nothing else to trust unto.

The design of the Drs discourse, being to advice the Writers and practicers of
Medecin, to abstain from drawing consequences therein from the position or
principles of any Sect of Philosophy. (a thing every day done both abroad and
at home) he thought fit to show them the right way, or put them in company of
those who are in it, and to advice them to follow their Example: Therefore
considering, that Medicine is so far like to Astronomy, that before a
Conclusion can be framed in eirber, there must be a sufficient number of
observations made; and that the observations made in either of them preceed any
Knowledge Men have of the nature of the things anent which they have these
observations; He choose to persuade Physicians to make observations with as
great care, and in as great a number, in regard of the Medical Art, as the
Astronomers (who have already succeeded in heir design) had done in theirs; and
to rely as much on observation, and as little on any Sect of Philosophy as the
others do, since the principles of these Sects are entirely uncertain, and
since they have not built their positions concerning the natures of things upon
observation, but upon precarious and ill Reasonings. The Doctor had too good
cause for taking some pains to inculcat this for the knew that Hippocrat has
built most of his Doctrine upon the idle and groundless belief, of all things
being made and done by Heat and Cold, moist and dry, upon which he builds all
his Medicinal art, (and for which Aristotle is so laughed at) whom in this
nevertheless, Galen followed and extolled, and all the Writters of Medicine
(except a very few) till this time. And these two, Hippocrat and Galen, are by
the Author of the Pamphlet ser up, see page 32. l. 13. etc. as our guides in
Medicine, tho they have built and made a Systeme of it upon that rotten
Foundation of the 4 Elements and the four first qualities, see page 96, where
he says, Medicine can only be advanced by Hippocrat's method, which they would
not have done, had they made Sufficient observation. And that the Doctor has
reason, appears from the Pamphleteer, who is so addicted to Hippo-crat's sect
and philosophy, that what Hippocrate has delivered not from observation, but
from his principles of philosophy, this Author admits for truth, and so could
not forbear to tell us, page 46. That Hippocrat's aphorisms are so many
conclusions draw'n from along tract of observations you see he believes his
aphorisms all for unths, whereas most of them are false, and contrary to every
man's observation; and consequently have never been built on, and draw'n from a
long tract of experiences, but on Hippocrat's idle Philosophy witness the 31
sect. 5. which has cost so many women theit lives, only because they are
treated by Physicians like to our Pamphleteer, and of the same principles with
him.

But that which is as considerable in this affair, is; That by imitating the
Astronomers, we should have made our observations in medicine, distinct and
well circumstantiated, and consequently such as an useful consequence could be
draw'n from them: whereas Hippocrate very often in observations of the grearest
moment has altogether neglected the material conditions and circumstances of
the observation, and then gives us aphorisms useless in the hands of men of
sense, but pernicious when laid hold on by such as our Pampheleteer Witness the
9 aph. sect. 3 and the said 31 sect. 5. witness all his aphorisms (which are
very many) concerning the Crises or Cools of Fevers, which he has draw'n
either from the principles of his philosophical sect, and not from observation,
or from observation so ill circumstanciated, that they oftener fail than hold
true; and are pernicious as often as the patient is traited by one who thinks,
that Hippocrat's aphorisms are conclusions draw'n from a long tract of
observations.

Now Sir, there is one thing to be yet remarked. Some Astronomers before they
had made a sufficient number of exact observations, have attempted to make a
Systeme, as they called it, and to draw too large consequences, and such as
required more observations. These ert'd, by quitting the method and way they
were in. Others, after there had been made a sufficient number of observations,
for want of Geometry, that is, Reason sufficient and judgment how to use and
compare the observations, have ert'd and draw'n wrong consequences. These
errings do not make the right way wrong. For we see that Mr. Newton has
perfited the Systeme by bringing sufficient strength of Geometry, or right
reason to be applied to the sufficient observations, whereof the most
considerable was made by the Kepler.

It the Physicians would make a number of observations as sufficient and exact
in their Trade, as the Astronomers have done in theirs, we should be able to
promise as much in the events of Diseases as they can do in the events of the
motions of the Planets. Till such observations, and so many on each Disease and
Cure be made, the Doctor in his Oration desires the Physicians to refrain from
making Systemes, or drawing consequences, that is, from making Aphorisms.
Likewise, if it shall be found that a sufficient number of exact observations
is made in any Disease, yet the Doctor had cause to advise that Physician to
abstain from building a Systeme on them, or drawing consequences and
conclusions from them, who had not enough of Judgment and Art to compare them
aright. And because this Art is not acquired but by use. (for it is more likely
that a Man shall judge aright in an affair who has been used to weigh
circumstances, and consider things calmely, and look well on every side, than
another of no greater Spirit, who never applied him self to be serious in any
thing) Therefore the Doctor recommended the study of Geometry and Mathematics
to Physicians, that they may learn to reason justly, and compare things
observed in Physic as exactly (as far at least as the nature of the
observations can admit) as they had been used to do in Mathematics. And
therefore this Pamphleteer ought not to meddle with drawing conclusions in
Medicine, since he is one of those (see page 22.) To whom the Mathematics have
never done good.

And the Doctor was the more pressing to this, Because all the actions of our
Body, and the Bodies that act upon ours, as Medicaments, etc. are the motions
of some fluid or solid things, and that these all observe the Laws of motion
treated of and demonstrated in the Mechanics. And for this reason, did the
Doctor recommend the study of Mathematics to his Hearers.

Now how bravely is all this refuted, by our Pamphleteers saying, That all wise
men know, that Medicine is of a quite other nature than Astronomy? What if it
be? Are we therefore not to be exact in our observations, or are we not to
follow a Medicine built on observations, because the Astronomers build on them?
But says our Pamphleteer, the observations made by Physicians in sundry
places, agree, and those made by Physicians in sundry places, as France,
Egypt, Rome, do not agree; and therefore different methods must be used in
different places, and the the whole Art of Physic must still be conjectural in
respect of Astronomy, page 46. and 47.

Here is a new confirmation of the necessity of imitating the Astronomers in
the exact way of making Observations. Hippocrate, Gallen, and many others in
different Countries have made different observations concerning the same thing.
because they did not consider what influence the Climate and Diet had upon the
observations; which if they had considered, the observations in sundry places
made upon the same things had been found to be the same. But the Astronomers,
tho in making their observations in different places, they often found the same
Star at the same time, not in appearance in the same place; yet they wisely
considered the different degree of Refraction that is in different places, the
different altititude. etc. And this being accounted for, they found their
observations agreeing, because they made them with more exactness than these
made with, which our Pamphleteer would have us to embrace. And it seems to me
that all the cause of this outcry against the Doctor is this. That the
Pamphleteer being very desirous to be esteemed a learned Physician, he finds
himself not qualified enough to make exact observations; and thefore he will set
up with Hippocrat's, and cry down all better ones, or any design of making
better ones, and then he knows he cannot be far outdone, if we'll follow his
Example. But the Doctor designing to put Men in a way of bringing Medicine to a
greater perfeceion, (a design not very criminal) advised to make more, and more
perfect observations; And that the Hearers might understand what exactness and
perfection in these is required, he desired them to take model of that from the
Astronomers. This was precife, and so not very liable to be mis-understood.

But our Pamphleteer wonders page, 48. That Physicians should be desired to
imitate the Astronomer, who are divided into Sects. For my part I know no Sect
among them. If any of them too rashly built a Systeme on observations, exact
indeed, but not numerous enough, (as they could not be numerous enough before
the use of Telescopes, by which many things are observed that were not observed
at all by the Ancients) what is that to us, who have ways of making more
observations, and who see Astronomy founded now upon exact, and sufficiently
numerous observation, without any dissension? Because some Men went out of the
right way? and others who went not out of it have succeeded to admiration, must
we therefore defert the right way? And yet this is our Pamphleteers way of
reasoning. If any of the Astronomets of late went wrong, it was not in making
wrong observations, but in trusting to Aphorisms set sorth by a Pope, and
Cardinals, as our Pamphleteer trusts to Hippacrats; that is, in taking them for
conclusions draw'n from a long tract of observations: for infallibility
isequivalent to all this.

The Doctor thought fit to desire Physicians to imitat the Astronomers in
building their Art and Theory upon observations, because the greater part had
built upon the principles of the Sects that set up for Philosophy, and these
principles being more uncertain than observations, it was no wonder if their
Medicine was very uncertain. And for this the Doctor desired Physicians to
abstain from the Investigation of Physical causes, that is, the absolute and
intimat nature of things; For since these Causes are assigned different by the
different Sects, and and none them has any foundation for that they assert as
the Doctor proves in the II page of his Oration, what help can such precarious
causes bring to a physician? It is the principle of a great Sect in philosophy:
That all things are made up of a Meteria, a forma Substantialis from which
issued forth the four first qualities, Heat, Cold, Moist and dry. The
Physicians generally em, braced this opinion because it was almost conform to
Hippocrat's, who taught that all consisted of the four Elements whose natures
were Hot. Cold, Moist and Dry. Now these Philosophical Physicians without any
sincere and exact observations laid it down as a Maxim that Opium is Cold, and
this according to them was the nature of Opium and the physical cause of all
its Actions and effects on our Bodies: For by telling it was Cold, they by
their principles pretended to have told its nature. This being believed they
were sure to use Opium only in Hot Diseases (for they as rashly determined
about the nature of Diseases and distinguished them into Hot, Cold, etc.) and
becauss a Fever, a Phrenzy etc. were reckoned Hot, therefore in these Opium
was used to very bad purpose. And because some Tumors were by them reckoned
Cold, therefore the Cicuta (which they reckoned Cold without sincere and exact
observation too) was condemned, as to its external use in such Tumors, tho it
be singularly useful in healing them. This is all the advantagee Medicine has
from investigating and determining the physical causes, embracing a
phylosophical Sect and neglecting to intimat the Astronomers. Because Hippocrat
had without any ground or Knowledge of Anatomy taught that our Life consisted
in a calidum in, natum, and that this was our nature and the physical cause of
all our acrions and had observed that a certain quantity of Opium had killed
any Animal, he and his followers inferred that the nature of Opium consisted in
Cold; And is it not fit to warn physicians of the insufficiency and hurtfulness
of such a method? For tho the humor of building Medicine on the Hypothesis of
Hot and Cold etc. be not every where predominant amongst the physicians as it
was some years ago yet the inclination and disposition to build on the
uncertain and precarious principles of a sect instead of making exact
observations is predominant: So that those who reject Aristotle's philosophy as
useless, hurtful to Medicine, admit Hippocrat's or Des. Carter's that is
equally prejudical and uncertain. Now that the Doctor is not the only person of
this opinion is apparent from Mr. Newton's preface to his Book entitled The
Mathematical principles of Natural philosophy, where he has these words. Multa
me movent ut nonnihil suspi. cer omnia naturae phenomenon ex viribus quibusdam
pen dear quibus corporum particuloe per causas nondum cogni. tas vel in se
mutuo impelluntur and secundum figuras regu. lares cohaerent, vel ab in invicem
fugantur and recedunt: quibus viribus ignotis Philosophi hactenus naturam
frustra tentarunt. You see Mr. Newton thinks that physical causes are yet
unknown, and are like to remain unknown till we use a Mathematical method for
finding them. This is evident from what he say in the end of the 11 Section.
lib, 1. Princip In Mathesi investigandoe sunt virium quantitates and rations
illae, quae ex conditionthus quibuscunque positis consequentur: deinde uhi in
physicam descenditur confer endie sunt hae rations cum phaenomenis, ut
innotescat quaenam virium conditiones singulis corporum generibus competant. Et
tuns demum de virium speciebus, causis and rationibus physicis tutius disputare
licebit.

The Dr, then had reason and authority for him when he advised the Phisicians
in their reasonings to abstain from the Sectarian. Philosophy and lay aside the
Investigation of Physical Causes after the mannet hitherto used by the Sects:
Since these are altogethet unknown, and are not to be fond till we first find
out the virium rations et quantitates, which if we could find (and we can
only find them by the help of Mathamaticks) we should have Medicine made
perfect before any Physical cause were known. That which makes this Scribles so
much concerned for Physical Causes is because he has learned a little of
Aristotle's Philosophey, which is no, thing but a Metaphyfical discourse, that
is, a quibling and speaking nonsense about physical Causes, and this he would
have pass for good reasoning in Medicine. The difference then betwixt the
Doctor and him is this, The Dr when he applied himself to Medecin perceived
that many things in it were handled a very unsatisfactory Method, and
therefore-resolved to try a method that he had learned in reading Mathamatical
Writers, this he found successul, and coming to read Borelli and Bellini he
found they had used that same method in medicinal affairs but with agreat deal
of more success, in as much as they are fat greater Mathamaticians than he is.
This our Scribler Tarrugo perceiving resolved that he also would make a Noise
amongst the learned, tho it were no better nor more melodious than that of a
Culross gridiron or girdle amongst fine Violins. He had no Mathematics to
carry him through but he had learned Logicks and Metaphysics, had a Natural
stock of impudence, and an acquired one of Stage Buffoonry (as his Book shows)
and thus accontred he resolves to burlesque and rail at any thing he understood
not, and throw scraps of Logicks and Metaphysic's before his Reader, which
beingrealand downright Nonsense, are harder to be understood than the
Mathematics, and so Tarrugo must appear the profoundest Scholar of the two.
Thus you see every man for improving his Art brings the Talents he is endowed
with. And if by so doing he has any hopes of bringing himself into Reputation,
he will hide none of his qualities: For the Dr, has vented his Mathematics and
has inculcated the necessity of them in a professor of Medecin very often,
well knowing he had some knowledge of them. Tarrugo on the other hand being no
less greedy of reputation and employment, but ignorant of Mathamaticks,
pretends there is no use of that science in Medicine, and in a Book of 12
sheets proves that Metaphysical Nonsense, Impudence, Lying and Calumniating,
Nestie and Scurrilous Ribaldry can do as well: Forby these Arts he has seen a
Physician brough to Reputation. It Is true some Mathematical blades will not
esteem him, but these are Few. But yee'l ask me perhaps if any man be so mad as
to think Medicine will be bettered by lying and Buffoonry. for that is the
question, and improved more that way than by just and Mathematically exact
reasoning. Yes Tarrugo thinks it, for he having seen some persons by such
artifices brought to some reputation did by a very Metaphysical inference
conclude that the method which betters and is advantageous to the Artist is
also advantageous to the Art. Here is the depth of Logicks and Metaphisicks,
and because it is very great, I leave in to the Dr himself to fathom. The worst
that can be faid is that Tarrugo had no mind to better and improve Medicine,
but enlarge his own employment by this method, which he has found to agree with
a practical Art more than does the speculative science of Mathematics.

But to return to our Pamphleteer who is certainly much disobliged by this
proposal the of Doctors, for he rails at him most unmercifully; he at last,
page 49 gravely tells, that nothing can be of more dangerous consequence, than
to set up a Practical Art and a speculative science upon the same foot. Here we
have an instance given us by our unthinking Pamphleteer, of the folly of
meddling with the design to improve Medicine by the help of the common
Philosophy taken from a Sect, and without the help of Mathematics.

The Dr in his discourse desired us to consider, that Medicine was of more use
and moment than Astronomy (page, 18, Orat. Inaug, Aequum enim non est, ut vitae
Humanae quam curiositati minus consulatur) and therefore we ought to be at
least as exact in making observations anent Diseases, etc. as the others are in
making theirs anent the motions or irregularities of the Celestial Bodies.
This, is it not sufficiently refuted by telling us, that it is dangerous to set
up a practical Art, and a speculative Science upon the same foot? That is to
say, it is very dangerous to make exact observations in Medicine (the practical
Art) since that is the very thing which those speculative men the Astronomers
do, and succeed so well by. What improvement can Medicine expect from one that
reasons thus?

This reasoning is a demonstration at least of the hurtfulness of vain
Philosophy. Our Author had said indeed he had never got either good or hurt
from the Mathematics: But here he lets us see, that he has got hurt enough
from his Philosophy. He had heard at School, a distinction made between a
practical and speculative knowledge; he had heard it said by Philosophers, who
were no Physicians, that medicine is a practical one, and Mathematics is a
speculative; he had since often read it in Hippocrat and Galen, who spend many
words in telling us stories (very useless and false) anent Medicin's being a
practical, and not a speculative knowledge: This he swallowed down greedily,
because it was like to save him the pains of thinking and studying. And so
great influence has this Jargon of practical and speculative on him, that it
hinders him from seeing that Medicine is to be built on accurate Observations,
after he was told that a knowledge (which he was taught to call speculative) is
founded upon them. But perhaps it will be charity to Inform him better. All
that a good Physician does, is, that he makes observations on plants, minerals,
and diverse Bodies about us; also on diseases and the Bodies subject to them;
and lastly, advises the sick man to make use of some of those Plants, etc. if
he would be in health. The Astronomer observes likewise, the motions and
properties of some Stars in respect of one another, and foertels, in what time
and place they will be in Conjunction, or Opposition, and such like events. Now
what is it in Medicine that makes it more a practical Art than Astronomy? But
our Tarrugo knows not what Astronomy is for, he confesses, he never got good or
hurt from the Mathematics, that is, he never learned any part of them: And
consequently, is not capable to judge, whether they be useful for a Physician,
and if Physicians should imitate them and follow their methods: and by this it
is manifest, that he has meddled with an affair which he understands not.

But it is not amiss to consider a litile more this Metaphysical reason of our
Tarrugo. It is of dangerous consequence, says he, to set up a practical art and
a speculative Science upon the same foot; and therefore Astronomical and
Mathematical methods are dangerous and useless at the best in Medicine. Now
Sir, every body knows that Navigation cannot be practiced to any purpose and
with safety or assurrance without the knowledge of Trigonometry (a part of
Geometry or Mathematics, and as speculative as the Astronomy) yea without
making observations like the Astronomers. Must Navigators leave off this course
and method of guiding their voyages, because Navigation is a practical Art (as
practical indeed as Medicine) and Geometry or Astronomy are speculative
Sciences?

Why but the Astronomers are divided into Sects, says Tarrugo. And therefore
Navigators must not follow their example nor imitat their observations, as to
their exactness. Now I never before heard of different Sects in regard of
observations amongst the Astronomers, for this is the affair. But Tarrugo
hearing the word Sect, found he must make some use of it: And therefore to
hinder us from being as exact in seeing and hearing or observing as the
Astronomers are, warnes us that they are of different Sects, That is, they see
and hear after different manners. Now Sir tho I have had the occasion to
converse with some Astronomers, of whom some though the Earth is the Center,
and others thought the place belonged to the Sun rather, yet they observed
after one and the same manner, and saw and heard like one another. They were
all alike exact in remarking the circumstances and conditions of their
observations, and of what they saw or heard. And it is this exactness that the
Navigators successfully imitat, and Physicians ought to imitat if they also
would be successful.

But Tarrugo will tell us that Astronomy or the Mathematical Science is of
quite another nature than Navigation, even as much as it is of another nature
than Medicine: And therefore Navigarors are not to borrow from or imitat either
the Astronomers, or other Mathematicians, And therefore your ships are to be
guided as of old in the days of Hippocrat: they are to creep along the Shore
(for there is no trusting to Astronomical observations quoth Tarrugo) where
often on a Rock it will be found that Ars longa est, vita brevis, the only
Aphorism of Hippocrat drawn from exact observation, but not of Physicians more
than of Seamen.

If the Seamen of Europe can be persuaded to lay aside the use of Astronomy and
Mathematics upon the reasons given by Tarrugo, I Will engage for the Physicians,
that they shall imitate the Navigators. And therefore if Tarrugo would deseat
Doctor Pitcairn's design he must address himself to the Navigators first. But I
know not by what ill fate Huggens and some French Mathematiciens have written
of late about Navigation and I cannot guess how Tarrugo will behave before such
severe fell. lows.

In the page 56, he is very angry with the Doctor for saying that, Corpus omne
in alterius cujuscunque generis corpus transformari potest. This, be says, is
very false, unless he mean, page 57. That the thing implies no contradiction,
from which, says he, nothing at all can be concluded. Now, the Doctor said
only, that the thing is possible; and our Pamphleteer, after many fine sayings
or Aphorisms to the contrary, concluds that indeed the thing is not impossible,
but of no consequence. Now Sir, the Dr took this saying from Mr Neuton. who at
the entry of his third Book Princip, Mathematic: setts down the same thing in
the very same words as certainly true, for he had made it his third Hypothesis,
by which he means there a Postulatum, for Hypothesis assumed by Mathematicians
is a Postulatum, or Propositio veritats notae. And accordingly Mr Newton makes
use of it to prove a very material point in the 6, prop, lib, 3. But, says
Tarugo, nothing can be concluded from it. Has not the Doctor concluded from it,
That the parts of all Earthly Bodies are subject to the same rules of motion,
or Mechanics? And Mr Neuton uses the same proposition to the very same
purpose, when the deduces from it, that the Ether or Materia subtiles must
have weight proportional to the quantity of it is matter and consequently comes
under the same Laws to which the Earth in it is motion, or any part of it is
subjected. I do easily believe, Mr Newton never saw the Materia subtilis, yet
he adventured to prove that it has this property, (if any such matter be) by
virtue whereof it is to be treated Mathematically. Where is then the absurdity,
that the Doctor without seeing the Liquidum Nervorum (much grosser than the
Fluidum subtle of Mr Descartes) has affirmed the same thing to hold in that
Liquor, since Mr Newton has demonstrated the thing so universally, that his
proof reaches further than the Animal Spirits? Here again we have a proof of
our Pamphleteers Ignorance in Mathematical matters, when (page, 59.) He bid's
the Doctor let us see the animal Spirits, as if that were necessary for
demonstrating their properties by which they Act in our Bodies. Did ever any
Mathematician see the Diameter of any Body or a Mathematical right line, and
yet how many properties do these men demonstrate anent those things! We see
and find the effects of the Animal Spirits; and from such effects, and from the
general Laws of motion common to all Bodies we can demonstrate many things
anent them without seeing them. But this is a lesson he should have learned at
the School. In a word, the Doctor affirms, that any body (under whatsomever
form) has weight, and obeys the Laws demonstrated by the the Mathematicians, or
Mechanic Writers, propertionally to the matter it contains: And he concludes
from this that as the Astronomers have gone a great length in applying these
rules and propositions anent motion, etc. to the Stars and Bodies on this Earth
both solid and liquid, so Physicians may come a greater length than they have
yet come, if they apply the same, or like propositions for determining the
motions of the Liquors that run through our Bodies, after that they have made
proportionally as many observations in their Trade, and as exact, as the
Astronomers have made.

But before I leave this subject, I must examine a passage in Tarrugo's
Pamphlet which he thinks no body can prosperously attaque, and which
nevertheless exposes his weakness, and ignorance most shamefully.

It is the 17 P pamphlet, where after having rehearsed a few rude and silly
observations, (for he hates all a curat ones because Mathematicians love them)
upon which he says Medicine depends, he at last tells us, Something, was still
a wanting (to wit after the observations had been made) to finish the picture
or art of Physic and this was reason etc. without any Mathematics. Now this
is just such a Ridiculous piece of Nonsense, as if one should desire the Master
of ship to use his reason without his Mathematics or what he had learned by
their help) to find the latitude and longitude etc. for would it not be a very
easy and profitable thing to lay aside his quadrants, compass and pendulum
Clocks, and instead of them have recourse to the Quakers spirit or reason? If a
Man would use his reason to good purpose, he must inform and fortify it with
the knowledge of these Truths which belong to the matter he would reason about,
and therefore since Medicine is a part of natural Philosophy and must be
cultivated with it not after the method of the Sectarians but of the
Mathematiciens, it is evident that a physician who would reason to purpose,
must have strengthened his mind or reason with the Mathematical truths that can
be applied to Medicine: for without this what an insigunificant thing is this
reason? If a Myops and Presbyta: (or one who sees ill at a distance, and
another who sees ill what is at hand) came to ask Tarrugo, what are the best
means of helping the defects of their sights: are they not like to be mightily
helped by his altogether unassisted reason? but we shall so far help him as to
tell him that such people can only be helped by the use of Glases, and now I
desire him to tell by this reason without the help of (not his own, for he has
none, but of other people's) Mathe, maticks what glass is fit for the Myops and
what for the Presbyta: And that he would give directions for making each of
them. This would perhaps bring naked reason (for reason not assisted either by
Law, Divinity, or Mathematics is the reason of Children before they come to
have any knowledge of things that are solid) into some reputation: For I assure
you Doctor Gregory the Savilian Professor Astronomy thinks it no small matter
to have taught in his Element a Optica, lentem fabricare date oculo
inservientem, that is to make a Glass fit for any proposed eye, and that with
the help of much Mathemmaticks.

If a person whose sight or eyes looked clear and free of any outward or
visible blemish, but were disturbed by the images and appearance of Midges or
other small dark objects, shall ask Tarrugo's advice, and withal tell him that
a giddiness sometimes accompanied that symptom, troublesome even on the high
Street, especially afterdrinking too much Brandy, what think ye will be his
advice? certainly he must use his most defecat reason here, for for it may be
the case of his dearest -- for ought I know Well, he has in print told us his
advice built on the observations of his Ancients and finished by his own single
and precise reason or spirit in the hat. He tells us without Mathematics
indeed (for it is plainly against observation and Mathematical reason) that the
Disease is a cataract beginning, and therefore refers the patient to the Cure
applied by the vulgar Writers ot eh Cataract. But this will not do, for it is
Mathematically certain that it is a Disease quite different from a Cataract
which the patient complains off. And for this reason I fancy the patient
finding no effect of his advice, may continue in the old trade and distemper too

When we speak then of using reason to finish or find out right conclusions in
any science, we must understand by that reason, a mind or faculty endued and
instructed with sundry propositions of truth anent the subject of the Art or
Science we treat of. And since Medicine is a part of Natural Philosophy, and
Natural Philosophy is not right handled by Reason not assisted by Mathematics
as experience tells us daily, it is evident that Medicine requires that same
help. It is true Philosophy has been handled by reason unassisted with
Mathematics, but this is the Philosophy of the Sects, Nonsense and falsehoods
joined together, and the very metod Tarrugo handles Medicine. I would sain know
a reason (separat from and not armed with Mathematics or Mathematical
Philosophy) that Tarrugo can give for his indications (as he speaks) which any
old wife shall not give as well? And this is Turrugo's way of emproving
Medicine. In a word, when a person has made observations and would know what
use he is to make of them and would be instructed in the surest method of
drawing useful consequences from what he has observed, To tell him only that he
is to follow Reason, Is as ridiculous and useless, as it would be silly and
impertinently pedantic for one that is asked, Who he is, To answer he is a Man.

But he gives a most subtle Reason why Mathematics are not to be used in
Medicine: The Machine says he of our body is of a quite different nature from
artificial ones, which can be taken down and set up again at ones pleasure.
There could be nothing said in fewer words so entirely opposite to common sense.
Do we not open and dissect and view the parts of humane Bodies, by doing which
we learn their Fabric, use and actions of their parts, and what hurt they can
or use to sustain from the operations of other Bodies? Now these other Bodies
such as Druggs, Air, etc. in their actings on our Machines do not consider that
they can not be set up again (tho I hope they shall) nor do the parts and
liquors of our Machines consider any such matter, but both the one and the
other act according to the Laws of motion found out and demonstrated by the
Mathematiciens, and is not then the Mathematical Knowledge useful for
understanding the properties. Symptoms good or bad and Diseases of our Bodies,
since these are the actions or their effects of other Bodies upon out Machines
or of the Liquors etc, in our Machines acting according to the Laws of Motion
and Mechanics: for tho the man may be a Rope-dancer or Stage Player, yet the
parts of our Bodies are void of that cunning. But we must consider a little,
What Tarrugo says that Mathematics are useless in unfolding the Mysteries of
our Machines, because, says he, our Machines cannot be taken down and set up
again as artificial ones. Now one of the most noble parts of our Machine, or
rather one of the noblest Machines that compose our Body is the Eye, which
cannot be set up again after its taken down, no more than our Bodies can. Yet
this Eye is so well known as to its structure, action and use, that it is the
subject of a most considerable part of the Mathematics or Mathematical
Philosophy: and so great a length have the Mathematiciens come in explaining
the sight and desects of it and their remedies. That if Physicians would apply
Mathematics as discreetly to the other parts of our Bodies, we should have a
Medicine incredibly improven. Yet the Eye cannot be set up again after being
taken down, a thing that the Writers of Optics have not found any hindrance
from in their Mathematical atchevements. So that tho a Machine cannot be easily
set up again it ceases not to be subject to the Laws of Mechanics and
consequently to Mathematical reasoning. But this Tarrugo was loath should be
true because he understands not Mathematics.

There is yet one advantage that the use of Mathematics brings ot Medicine,
which we have not mentioned, but it is a very great one, and serves to abridge
and facilirat that redious work of making observations. The Physicians have
made very many observations, but few good ones. I do not now call most of them
so, because they are not exact; but taking them all to be exact, yet very sew
of them are of use or serve to any good purpose: And it is very hard for a man
that has no Mathematics to perceive which are those few that can be made use
of in building a right Theory or advancing the practice of Medicine. If once we
can by a Mathematical Eye discern what observation is necessary to draw such a
conclusion from (for it were needless to warn you that the Mathematiciens must
be most skilful in drawing right conclusions since they are most used to it)
then we shall abstain from making or taking notice of the greatest part of
observations that we read or see others heap up to no purpose. And this would
abridge wonderfully the work of observing. That you may understand this a
little better, be pleased to take notice of what Tarrugo says page 16. When in
Fevers, or violent Head aches etc. the Nose fell a Bleeding, the Fever abated
and the pain evanished. And thence they (the Ancients) learned the use of
Blooding. Now this is the very fault in Medicine and defect which Doctor
Pitcairne would have mended and supplied, and which Mathematics only can
supply. We see by our Pamphleteers confession, That the use of Blooding was
first introduced because they observed that the loss of Blood was sometimes
followed with recovery out of the Disease. To make us then able to order
Blooding seasonably and to purpose, we must have made many observations on
peoples Blooding in all Diseases, cases and times of them, in all climats and
in all the different circumstances and conditions in which it is possible for
men's Bodies to be. Now this is not, nor ever shall or can be done; and
therefore by this method of observing without Mathamatical discretion, Medicine
shall be always a base mean conjectural Trade, fit only to be followed by such
Juglers as Tarugo and Kerkringius (this Kerkringius cannot read Latin, but his
wife who is a School masters Daughter writes and copies for him, for the Fool
will be in print) and by them called arsproestantissima and the noble Art, I
suppose they mean of guessing and cheating, for it is no other as they practice
it.

But the Doctor has in his Oration and elsswhere proposed methods, by which
Medicine shall or may be brought from the low and abject state of conjecture to
a degree of certainty which can justly bear the Title of useful and therefore
noble. Instead of thanking the Doctor for his proposal and for the progress he
has made in the method proposed, Taruge tells us, page, 18. That nothing can be
more extravagant than to imagine that a speculative Science that goes all by
demonstration can be of use in a practical Art founded on experience; and in
which there are no infallible conclusions: but I tell him and the thing is
evident, that we should have abundance of infallible conclusions in Medicine as
to Cures as well as theorie if Mathematics be used. For Tarugo's discourss
implies no more than this. All that I Tarugo understand about Medicine is
conjectural and I cannot make use of Mathematics, therefore they are not of
use to me. But this does not hinder a speculative Science which goes by
demonstration that is a Science that carries certainty with it, from being of
use to bring a conjectural uncertain Art (as Tarugo and such like handle it) to
a state of certainty, as we see the Mathematicians have done by Astronomy,
Navigation. etc. and parts of Medicine that treat on the Eye, motion of the
Members, motion of the Heart: And the cure of diseases by blooding. For tho
there neither are nor can be sufficient numbers of good Observations made, for
ordering blooding. after the manner it was first introduced and which Tarugo
contents himself with, yet a good Mathematician has discerned one good and
exact observation (unknown to Tarugo's ancients, and indeed useless to Tarugo
tho he knew it, since he has not Mathematics enough to make the right use of
it) from which he accuratly has deduced all that can be learned from any
infinite number of such observations as Tarugo builds the Doctrine of blooding
upon, and much more than Tarugo can understand. It is Laurentius Bellini who
assumes no other Observation, nor any postulatum except the circulation of the
blood, for to use his own words, doctrina mittendi sanguinem pendet ex toto a
naturali ejus fluxu seu circuitu intra corpus. From the circulation observed by
Dr William Harvey has Bellini taught when, where, and in what case or disease
blood is to be let, and how much of it at a time, and what are the effects and
consequences of letting blood. And all this he performs demonstratively, that
is, he forms infallible conclusions in a practical Art and anent cures and
diseases, by help of a speculative, that is, a certain and Mathematical one.
And by this Bellini explains and confirms what Mr Newton in his preface says
thus. Omnis Philosophiae (add etiam Medicinae quae Philosophiae pars est)
difficuitas in eo versari videtur, ut a Phaens menis motuum investigemus vires
naturae, deinde ab his viribus demonstremus Phenomenon reliqua. For Bellini has
made use of the Phaenomina of the Bloods motion, to find what force and laws it
had or observed, and having found these he investigats and deduces its effects
when its passage is made free in one place than in another, that is, the
Phenomenon of Blooding in any case or disease. And yet this Block head Tarugo
has the face to say there are no infallible conclusions in Medicine. But he
means it is like, Medicine as he understands and practices it.

I come now to the page, 65. Where our Pamphleteer, to his own cost, teaches
the World how absurd it is and foolish, to write anent matters that one
understands not. He shows there (and over all his Pamphlet) that he comes to
diswade men from using in their trades as right methods as the Mathematicians
have done, and in the mean time proves himself altogether ignorant of all
Mathematics, or methods fit to be used for improving Medicine. The Doctor had
in his first discourse explained aright the Nature (so to speak) or ratio of
some diseases of the Eye that are of the greatest consequence, hitherto unknown
to all the writers of Physic; and upon good ground had affirmed, that bodies
swiming within the Cornea made no image on the Retina; (this he could have
demonstrated, but it would have seemed, perhaps, very odd in an Inaugural
Oration to propose Geometrical Arguments) Now, says our Pamphleteer, I Tarugo
affirm the contrary. He may as well looking on any proposition demoustrated by
Euclide or Archimedes, say, I affirm the contrary; for he will. understand the
demonstration of what the Doctor affirms, (and which is set down in a paper
subjoined to this) as little as he does Arcihmedes Works, or Dr Gregory's
method of Quadratures.

But it is perhaps pleasant to consider, what a noise he makes that he may be
thought learned. He cries out on the Doctor, for not telling him what are the
Laws of Refraction he speaks of and is very glad to be free of them; for it
they had been set down, he would not have known what to have said of them. This
is just such a shift as it would be to deny the truth of a proportion plainly
flowing from the 47 of the first of Euclia, because the Demonstrator had not
told what that 47 prop, contains, and so had not prom ulgated it. The universal
Law of refraction is as well known as any proposition in Euclid, amongst
Mathematicians; and since all the Science about the Eye is built upon this Law,
what an able man in the Optics and in discovery of the defects in Vision is
our Pamphleteer like to prove, while he is so grossly ignorant of it? He
adventur's to say, page 66. That, of things on, or in the Cornea there is an
Image made in the Retina if he tried it not, he is too bold to impose his bad
Philosophy and vain conjecture on men of Sense; and if he tried it, he lies
most abominably. For, besides experience, the demonstration after this set
down, puts it out of question. That in the Retina or bottom of the Eye there is
no image painted of any thing that is not without the Cornea, and consequently
we have no Image of (that is, we do not see) these things that swim within the
Cornea.

Now let us see what a mavelous reasoner this Fellow is, that without skill
in Mathematics is so bold as to meddle in them. He tells us, that if what is
here demonstrated be true, then a man may see perfectly well through his Eye
lids, or through a Mil-stone applied to the Cornea as the lids can he. For,
says he ( page, 66.) according to the Doctor, a thing so near the Cornea will
make no impression on the Eye, and so no ways obstruct the sight: But the
Doctor said and demonstrated, that a thing sufficiently nigh, or within the
Cornea, makes no Image on the bottom of the Eye and is not seen. This fellow,
by his foolish philosophy infers, O then it will not obstruct the sight. It
will certainly if applied over all the Cornea, for by its opacity it hinders
the rays to pass from other Bodies. But this he knew not, to wit, that the
rays of the Sun do not easily pass through Milstones. Then he infers, that if
what the Doctor says be true. Persons who have a Cataract growing in their
Eyes, would not see Midges, as it were, that is, the Images of the little
Bodies which float within the Cornea, and joining make up the Cataract. Here is
a great instance of our Pamphleteers prying Judgment. The Doctor to show that
in a Cataract there are no muscae obvolitantes and obver santes oculis, arising
from the Images made on the Retina by Corpusculs floating within the Cornea,
Taught, that Corpusculs so plac' d would imprint no Image: O then, says the
Fool, there would be no Images of Midges before the Eyes of those in whom a
Cataract is growing. It is indeed so, there are none; and Experience as well as
Demonstration prove it to be as the Doctor affirmed long ago. Ye see how
fundamentally he refures the Doctor: For, says he, if what the Doctor says (and
demonstrates) be true, then the contrary is false. And who can help it?

However, he makes a wonderful shift in the pages 67 and 68. to make a silly
Reader believe he (the Pamphleteer) understood the matter he is treating of: for
he very impudently comes off with laughing at an Axiom, the Doctor had adduced
from the Optics. Let him laugh so long as he will, it is an Axiom, and
admitted for such by all the Writers of Optics, and confirmed by constant
experience; That from every point of a visible object (that is, an object
illustrated and at a due distance from the eye) Rays of light come to all the
parts of the Cornea. And therefore (said the Doctor) tho some parts of the
Cornea were covered with Opacous Bodies, the eye would see all the parts of the
object. Now this I can let any person see, by putting Bodies not transparent on
the Cornea of an eye, or by looking on the opack marks which some persons have
on their Cornea; For they will not hinder you from seeing the whole object, except
the whole Cornea be covered with them. But says our Pamphleteer, If Rays fall
on these opack Bodies laid to the Cornea, or on the Opack Corpusculs within it,
will not these hinder the passage of those Rays? Yes certainly But in the mean
time, other Rays from the same point of the object fall on all the other points
(and some are not covered, but give a free passage) of the Cornea, or Aqueous
humor; and by help of such Rays we see that point of the Object, as experience
does teach us. And this also shows us the truth of the Optic maxim adduc'd by
Doctor Pitcairne. But this fellow is impregnable against common sense.

The pages 72 and 73, are taken up in letting us see; That he understands not
one sentence of what the Doctor had said, nor of what can be said in this
point; which he needed not have been at the pains to do, having so effectually
done it before. And he very rightfully concludes, That the Doctor's Oration is
stark Non sense; for indeed the Doctor is a Barbarian to our Pamphleteer, and
not to be understood by a Fellow of so mean understanding.

We come now to the page 76. Where our Pamphleteer falls a defying of
Archimedes, who said, that if he were placed near the earth (not sustained by
it) on a firm point, he could move the earth. This our Champion was not
concerned in; but it seems, he would needs make himself famous by having defied
Archimedes. Yet he shall be foiled by a lesser one than he. For it is
demonstrated by the Writers of Mechanics, that any body howsoever great can be
moved from its place or way, by any other tho never so small, and never so
slowly or weakly making impression on it, In medio minime resistente vel
uniformi; and Mr Newton has demonstrated, that the earth and the rest of the
planets are in such a Medium, and Archimedes knew the medium to be such.
Archimedes then had reason, which our Pamphleteer should have learned of him,
or of Mathematicians who are like him.

We advance then to his page 77. where he says, that the Doctors principal
design in the discourse, de circulatione per vasa minima, was to explain how
Secretion is made in men's Bodies: Which is false. For his great design there
was to refute two opinions anent that affair, which are very much talked of
where he then was; But this he could not do without explaining Secretion as to
some of its properties: for neither he, nor any man else has yet explained all
of them publicly. But let us see what he says, page 79, and 80. There he very
bravely affirms, that some bodies, tho every way less than the hole they are
offered to, yet will not pass through that hole. Which is a further testimony
of his impudent stupidity: He had before told us of Two screw-nails equal, but
contrary ways turned, which will not enter the one where the other does. This
Blockhead does not understand what the Doctor had taught, to wit, that these
two Nails are not figurae similiter positae, and that as the one is offered, it
is not of an equal Diameter with the other as it is proposed to the passage. I
am convinced now, that this Fellow knows not what a Diameter is: else he would
not, I think, with all his impudence deny, that a body whose sides every way
are nearer to one another, than are to one another the sides of a certain hole,
may enter that hole; or, that a body whose greatest extent is lest than the
least extent of a hole, may enter and past through it: for thus I have worded
the Doctors proposition, that I might not terrify our Pamphleteer with
Diameters that he understands so little; for it is plain, that what is less than
the least Diameter of an orifice can be contained in it, since the Diameter is
contained in it, and so I leave him to speak nonsense about his Screws, while
I in a few words deliver the substance of what the Doctor alleges; and then I
shall leave it to the Reader to judge if he had reason on his side. All the
Secretions that are made in our bodies are liquid, and liquors; and all liquors
can accomodate themselves to the figure of any vessel; whatsoever be the figure
of the parts of the fluid or liquors, yet the liquor it self yields to the
figure of its vessel. And if any liquor by reason of its viscousnes does not
readily enter a small orifice, when the force impelling it is not able to
divide it into smaller portions, that liquor is excluded, not by reason of its
figure, but because it is too great a portion of parts, (in respect of the
impelling force) cohaerent. Now this is a demonstration of the usefulness of
the diversity of Figures in pores or Secretory vessels; and no more was needful
to convince men of their error in this affair. But this is past over by our
Champion, because it was too plain, and gave him no room to play with his
Screws.

Therefore we must follow him to the page 84. The Doctor had demonstrated, that
a solid carried in a liquor, and driven by its current to an orifice, (not
circular) if its Diameter be every way smaller than the smallest of the
orifice, then it would enter and pass tho it were of never so different a
figure from the orifice: But if it be otherways, the Doctor did demonstrat that
there would be an infinite number of turns and times in which it could not
pass, for one in which it might, that is to say, (for I see our Pamphleteer has
aspight at any way of expression which forces him to understand what he reads)
in all eternity it would pass at most but once. To this our Champion Answers; O
then it may pass, and that is enough to spoil the demonstration. And indeed it
was enough for him to make this Answer to a demonstration he understood nothing
of. He falls (after this shortand substantious Answer) upon a Rope-dancer, and
compares him with a corpuscule carried by the current: And because the Rope
dancer can balance himself and do many things as the lists, he wisely
concluds, that an inanimat particle carried down by an unthinking liquor, can
do the like, and balance itself so as to be in the wished for situation, just
when it is at theentry of a canal. This might have past when Trees spoke. But I
must here againt put you in mind of the necessity and usefulness of that advice
the Doctor gave, to beware of the Sects of Philosophy. Our Pamphleteer needed
this advice more than any man alive: For his whole Pamphlet (except where he
plays the Comedian) is an insignificant discourse buil on the silly opinions
and falsehoods taught by some sects of Philosophy. And in this place he manfully
attempts to spoil a Demonstration, by supposing, forsooth, that every part of
our Blood is a rational and thinking Rope-dancer, he should have added, and a
Comedian too.

Let us go on to his 88 page. The Doctor had concluded, that either there
would be no Secretion, or entry of small-bodies into the secretory vessels, or,
the particles must change the orifice to a circular figure, since no other
figure could give them entry more than once in an infinite time. Now let us
here what answer our Champion makes. There is not (says he)the least shadow of
probability, that pores will become circular by corpusculs of different figures
striving to enter, and forcing their way: for a Cube applying it self to a
square orifice will never make the orifice round, for it cannot enter, and will
somer be made round than the pore The Doctor ahd demonstrated first, that the
corpusculs of different figures, and not having all their Diameters less than
the least one of the orifice, would not enter. And there our Champion very
gravely (but without reason) pronounce, that they might enter, notwithstanding
of what was said. In the next place; The Doctor told, that if they should
enter, then they would make the Orifice round. Hold, says the Champion, they
cannot enter at all. And indeed, he is in the right on it, for they will not enter
in ones lifetime, and what then becomes of Secretion managed by diversity of
Pores? It is strange tho, to see the dice so much at this fellow's command,
that they are in what humor he pleases of entering or not entering.

But it is very pleasant to see, how gingerly he passes over the Doctor's
Demonstration of the Orifices of all our Vessels being Circular. The
Demonstration is shortly this. All Liquors running through a Canal whose sides
are membranous, and easily yield (tho at first the Orifice of it be not
circular-ways disposed) do equally on all sides tend from the Center to the
Circumference, and consequently extend the containing Membrane equally on all
sides; and so its Orifice becomes Circular, since a Circle is nothing else but
a figure, whose sides every where are equally distant from a point within them,
which we call the Center. What do you think is his answer? Forsooth, Sir, it is
a question. How comes it then to pass, says he, page 90, That the Valvuls at
the Heart, and the Uvula are not worn away? And why has not the Air made our
Nostrils round ere now? I cannot guess, what propose it serves for to speak of
the Valvuls and Vvula's being not worn away, unless it be to prove that he will
always have something to say, tho never so little to the purpose; for here the
Doctor is speaking only of extending thin membranous Orifices: And it is very
plain that the Valvuls by the force of the entering Blood are applied to the
sides of tha Arteries ex. gr. and consequently become circular, as every
section of the Artery is. As to our Nostrils; Our Pamphleteer for the favor I
have done him in answering his first question, is to prove that our Nostrils
are thin and very yiedling Membranes, just as the capillary Vessels are; Yea as
thin and yiedling in respect of of the Air, as the capillary Vessels are in
respect of the Blood; and here we have prescinded from the impetus that the
Blood has from the Heart, the like whereof the Air has not.

Our Champion finding, that in spite of his Answers and questions, too the
diversity of Pores would fall; is resolved (page 92) to comply, but is not able
to overcome that great difficulty, (great to Block heads and Dunces) How it
comes, that either Urine does not pass with the Bile, if the passage for the
Bile be greater than that for the Urine, or that the Bile does not go along
with the Urine, if the passage for this be widest? Now this is answered already
by the Doctor int he 18 paragraph of his discourse de circulatione per
vasaminima: But this man understood it not, tho the account of the Phenomenon
there given be very plain. Yet to please him, I Will let him make the passage for
the Bile wider than that for the Urine, (tho it he make it narrower, it will
not avail him) O then, says he, All the Urine will go through the Liver to the
Intestines. Youare hugely in the wrong, Sir, with your Metaphysics. For, to
tell you in plain Scotch, what you could not understand when the Doctor told it
in plain Lain; There is no sincere and homogeneous Secretion in the Body of
Man: And the Bile when it is secern'd in the Liver, has driven along with it
some parts of Urine, and some parts like those secern'd in many other places.
For when the Blood comes at the same time by different portions to the Liver
and Kidneys, it is plain, that there will pass through the Kidneys all that can
pass, (in which company there will be a little Bile, if the passage there be
narrower than in the Liver) and in the Liver at the same time, out o fthe blood
that comes thither will be secern'd whatever is loose and receavalbe by the
passage of the Bile: and here we'll find some part of Urine (which, because the
Bile flows slowly, and for the most part stagnats in its secretory vessels,
unites by time with the fat like parts of the Bile) and other excretions too;
all which joined together make what commonly is called Bile. Now, there is no
fear that all the Urine come this way, for the Bile must come this way (since
to please our Pamphleteer, we have made the passage in the Kidneys too narrow
for the Bile) and the Urine has sufficient passage in the Kidneys to transmit
the greatest part of it; the passges through the Liver being too few for both.
But there are other reasons that can be brought, were it not a folly to cast a
Pearl before such a beast as this is, that understands nothing except to kick.
For it was not the Doctors design to explain every Secretion in the Body, but
only secretion in general, that is, some properties common to all Secretions;
such as, that all secretion is done without any Ferment, and all secretion is
performed in pores of a circular figure. But the particular secretions depend
upon something besides, better known to Doctor Pitciarne than to Tarugo.

It is time now to follow him to the page 97, 98, and 99, where he is Angry (or
not pleased) with the Doctor, for saying, that Mercury (the Doctor is speaking
of common quick silver) acts in our Bodies by its weight C, then, says the
Pamphleteer, Gold would raise a Salivation, and cure the French. Pox better
than Mercury; which, says he, the meanest Surgeon knows to be salfe. Here is a
mighty instance of the ignorance of this Fellow. The Doctor had said, that if
Gold were as fluid as Mercuty, it would do greater Feats. And this is the same
as to have said, that Mercury would do greater fears than it now does, if it
were heavier or as heavy as gold Now, which the Surgeons that are the
Pamphleteers friends has told him, that Gold reduced to a state of fluidity,
like Mercury, would not cure the French Pox; I cannot tell this I know, it
would be kindly done in a Surgion to tell him how to write a Receipt or bill for
his patient, but he has yet a quarrel with the Doctor, for saying, that baths
wrought only by their weight on our bodies. He adduces Bellini's authority to
prove that they work otherways than by their weight, since Bellini thinks it
probable that they penetrat through the Skin to the liquors, etc. But pray good
Tarugo does Bellini says that they penetrate by any other force than their
weight? It is their weight that produces the effects attributed to them, and it
is the outward pressure that (as an effect of weight) is the most certain
operation of Baths. The effects that may be produced by penetrating, are not so
certain; the penetration being more dubious thatn the pressure tho both are the
effect of weight. But these things are too clear.

And I therefore pass to the page 102: which, and to the page 110, he spends,
as he would have one think. In refuting what the Doctor advances in a Discourse
about Respiration. But he touches not, nor medles with any thing said
thereanent. Only in the page 105. He leaps to another Discourse, in which the
Doctor en passant had Answered an Objection made against his Opinion about
Respiration, some time after it had been printed. The Objection was How it
comes to pass, That if a Whelp ex. gr. once breath, and then be stopped from
breathing before the old Canals (through which much of the blood past before
breathing) be stopped, yet will dye in a little time. The Doctor gives two
answers to it. The first made it plain (from what he had proven in his de
Respiratione) that the expanded Air stopped the passage of the Lungs, which had
never been stopped before, the whole Blood never having past through the old Canals
without touching at the Lungs: And so the Whelp must in a little time dye; a
part of the Blood being stopped in the right Ventricle of the Heart. Here our
Champion first makes a great noise, by calling this a lame Demonstration
whereas the Block head might have seen that it is an answer to an Objection.
But he had been so harrasied with Demonstrations, and put by them to such
pitiful shifts, that the Terror of them was not gone; and therefore when he
fell into a place where the Doctor was giving out his Answers, he took them for
Demonstrations too. Next, he cry's out that a Clown may laugh at the Doctor who
says, That tho the old Canals be open, yet the Blood will not all go that way,
because it never all went that way. Now this Fellow lye's. For the Dotor had
said, That the Blood could not all go through the old Canals; and this, I think,
is a reason for its not going all through them. The old Canals are not capacious
enough to give passage to the whole Blood, so as to mautain the necessary
Circulation, and Life depending on it. That this Fellow lies on the Doctor it
appears both from what he translates out of the Doctors Answer, in the
beginning of the the page 105, and from what he acknowledges in the two last
lines, page 106, and the two first of page 107. But he was necessitated to make
a Lie, for else he had nothing at all to say. Yet after he has acknowledged
himself to have ly'd, and that the Doctor had told plainly, That the Blood
could not all pass through the old Canals, but some of it at every Systole Cordis
would be left in the right Ventricle of the Heart; he very Magisterially says,
Let it even step on slowly, and take the more time, and it will come to its
journey's end before night. This Fellow's business here was to prove, That all
the Blood could pass through the old Canals. Instead of doing this, he gives in
his word for it, that it will all pass, but slowly. But he Lies so often, that
I am not resolved to take any thing upon his bare Authority. In the mean time,
I Will advertise him, that in a very few Systoles the right Ventricle of the
Heart will be so filled with Blood (which should have past through the Lungs, and
cannot yet pass through the old Canals timeously) that no more Blood can be
receiv'dd into that Ventricle; And so the Circulation ceases at the Fountain.
But after our Champion had acknowledged that he had ly'd, finding no advantage
against the Doctor by being ingenuous, he Repents himsef, and falls back into
his former Lie, and through almost two pages makes a fine Dialogue with a
Child, (It would seem to have been his Trade) founded on nothing but his own
Lie.

He comes next page 111, To cavil at the account given by the Doctor of one
Thunder-stroke some years ago, whose Lungs were clapped together in an
extraordinary manner and degree: This is matter of fact. Here our Champion
cry's out against the Doctor for having faid, That the Lungs too much blown up
with Air, hinder the Circulation throw themselves; And yet now, says he, he
makes their not being blown at all to stop that same Circulation. If he had any
sense or ingenuity he would see both to be true. If the Lungs be too much blown,
the Blood-vessells are too much straightened: If they are entirely flaccid, there
wants the weight of the Air, and elasticity to squeese the blood by turns into
the left Ventricle of the Heart, and so it cannot pass sufficiently in One
(whose old Canals are stopped) to entertain Life: Now, it when One is putting
forth the Air out of his Lungs it shall happen (as it happened to the Person
killed by the Thunder) that the Air is ratified, and so made much and suddenly
lighter, It will come to pass That first, a small part of that mass of Air
which he put forth will return to the Lungs, because a small part now takes up
the room of the whole; And therefore, there will be wanting that weight which
the whole mass before exerted for continuing the Circulation through the Lungs:
And Secondly, The Man must dye, if the Air continue in this state of rare
fraction made by the Lightning, longer than he can live without Air, as the
event sheu'd it had done in this Man's case And here we have a new proof of the
hurt that Metaphysics do in Reasoning; For our Champion by virtue of them has
found out, That in Liquors the parts by rare fraction grow less than before;
Whereas, says he, they might indeed grow larger, if they were like the parts
of brass or malleable matter. Now every body knows that the portions of Air are
Elastick, and that when they are liberated rated from compression, they like
wool (for to this they are by Mr. Royl and others likned) exolve and expand
themselves without having their parts made Lesser, but only by having some of
them removed farther from some others than before, and so acquire a greater
superfice, or volume. But out Champion must be excused for his mistake; for the
Metaphisicks make no mention of Elastick Fluids. Before I leave him, I must
take notice how he wrests and mangles the Doctors words. The Doctor had said,
That (in the case of him that was killed with Thunder) The air being suddenly
and much expanded (the air which environed the Man) could not blow up the
Lungs, its weight being diminished, neither could it enter, its superfice being
enlarged. And this fellow makes the Doctor say. That the particles of the Air
become larger and lighter. Now his Metaphysics would not have furnished him
with any quible against the Airs growing lighter and more expanded; but he had
a quible about parts growing lesser, which I leave him to pursue: Only, since
the Air may be expanded, and any portion of it fill a larger space; I would
know, if then its parts do not proportionally grow larger? For, Totum faciunt
parts I come now to his page. 117.

In this and some following pages he makes all the use he can of his Art
Metaphisical, which seems to be the same with Lullius's, that is, the Art of
raving and prattling of things he knows nothing of at all.

The Doctor in a discourse had made it manifest, That no ferment in the Stomach
dissolves our meats. This was his main design; and his reason was, that the
same Ferment would dissolve our Stomachs and Guts. In place of this Ferment he
substituted the attrition that the meat suffers in the stomach, by the which
its parts are separated, after that by the heat of the Invironing parts and
moisture, it is made tender and easy to be divided into small particles He
rejected therefore Doctor Listers Opinion, not as false, but in so far as he
attributed too much to Putrification; and because it is plain, that the
efficient cause (which is mainly required) is the stomach (helped by other
parts) by its motion. But because the Doctor knew it would be objected, that
the same attrition might wear off parts of the stomach, he thought fit to
furnish his Reader with an Answer to it, taken out of many that could be made,
and it is this; that the same parts and sides of a bit of meat are exposed to
the action of the stomach, whereas this action is not performed by the same
parts of the stomach, but by diverse parts of it applied one after another.
This Answer the Pamphleteer takes no notice off; for he had nothing to say
against it. Now, it is plain, that the serment is applied always to the same
part of the stomach, especially it being derived from the blood in Glanduls
which contain it, and furnish the stomach with it: For I make use of the word
Glandule, to please and comply with the Adversaries.

We are then to consider what the Pamphleter says page 124. There he is very
angry at the Doctor for saying, That the Circulation of the Blood is the ground
and foundation of all Medicine. For besides that One might infer from it. That
a good friend of the Pamphleters knew nothing of Medicine, because when he was
examined, he told very gravely, as one who believes what he says, That the
blood went out by the Veins from the Heart, and returned to it by Arteries from
all parts of the Body; I say, besides this, it spoils his pretenses of being a
learned Physician by reading scraps of Hippocrate and Galen, who were ignorant
of it; as the Doctor has proved beyond any possibility of being refuted. But
there is great reason of suspecting that the Pamphleteer himself does not
understand the Circulation, and then he had but reason to be angry with the
Doctor for extolling it so far. In the same page the Pamphleteer endeavors to
show that the Circulation is not the ground of Medicine, since after its
invention Physicians practice after the old method, by Derivations, Revulsions,
and Bloodings at different parts of the Body. Where he means (else he speaks
arrant nonsense) that Derivations etc. are inconsistant with the Circulation;
Which proves him ignorant of the Circulation altogether, for these agree
exactly,

Let him to this purpose read the sixth prop of Bellini de Missione Sanguinis.
But since he understands not Mathematics, he will not understand the
demonstration of that proposition.

In the page 125. He shows himself a notable Disputant. For the Doctor had
taught, That if any obstruction should happen in the Conduits, it would,
ceteris paribus, more readily happen in the Arteries than in the Veins, etc
because the blood, which carries the causes of obstructions, runs from the
wider toward the narrower part of the Artery; so that the sides of the
Arteries do oppose the motion of the blood, the contrary whereof happens in
the Veins: And the thing that could make an Obstruction in a Vein, must make it
first an Artery; for it must first by the law of the Circulation come to the
smallest part of the Artery and pass it, before it can come to stop in the
Vein. Now, the Artery being as small (or smallet) as the Vein, if it could
obstruct the last, it must obstruct the first. The Pamphleteer finds here a
brave way to escape, and raise, as he thought, a great disput. The sides, says
he, of the Arteries are yielding, and so cannot support the ends or Arches, as
it were, of the obstructing Body. But are not the sides of the Arteries as
stiff as the sides of the Veins, etc. But it is to be remarked, that
obstructions happen in the places where the motion of the Blood is slowest, and
where there is very little dilatation of the Arteries; so that all our
Pamphleteer's quibles serve to no purpose, unless to prove, That the is no
obstruction at all: For the Doctor in the 22 paragraph of that Discourse shows,
That the Obstructing of Viscous sticking matter is to be found rather in the
Arteriae Evanescentes than in the Veins: Now, the Arteriae Evanescentes retain
nothing of an Artery. save the figure. This was told by the Doctor in that
paragraph in mathematical terms, that the thing might be less subject to
ambiguity, and the more comprehensively expressed. AEqualis est velocitas in
evanescente Arteria and nascente Vena, said the Doctor; and therefore no more
motion in the One than in the Other. This is manifest, by the Vein's being a
continued conduit with the Artery, as the Doctor proved, and Microscopes let us
see. And thus our Quibler's pitiful shifts are discovered; which depend upon
gross ignorance of Anatomy and Mathematics, and every thing that is accurately
expressed, that is, put in a Mathematical form of words.

Let us now come up to his page 129. The Doctor had taught that Willis and
Sylvius, and a great many others were in the wrong to place the cause of
Apoplexies, etc, In the Nerves, since by what is said in that discourse de
Circulatione in Genitis and non Genitis, the said cause must principally be
found in the Arteries. And because the Doctor knew it was the common doctrine
of the place he then was in, That Apoplexies were produced sometimes by a
Coagulation of the Blood, in which case they reckoned that Rupturs and
Extravasations followed; and sometimes (this was the opinion of Syllvius a man
famous there) by a kind of Coagulation of the spirits, by the force or
infection of Opium or other bodies having the like quality. Now in this case
they reckoned no extravasations of Blood, since the fault is in the Spirits and
not in the Blood. The Doctor made no doubt of the truth of what is alleged in
the first place; since observations teach, that Apoplexies often fall out by
the Coagulation of the Blood in the Arteries, and consequently its
extravasation: And therefore he speaks nothing of it, but in general that
whatever it be, it must make the first obstruction in the Arteries. And then he
falls to examine the second opinion, anent Apoplexie's being produced by the
immobility and Coagulation of the Animal Spirits; which Willis tollowed too. To
do this aright, he explains the way of Opiums working; which is not by killing
or coagulating the Spirits: But by rarifying the blood, which compresses the
Nerves in the head where there is least resistance. Now, this is so manifest,
that there is no rarifier of the blood of any force, that is, no efficacious
sudorifick, that does not bring sleep on the Person that is put a sweating.
Here our Pamphleteer objects; that then, Spirit of Hart-horn etc: And such like
rarifiers of the Blood, would bring men into Apoplexies, which nevertheless
cure that disease. This fellow has never seen an Apoplexy that talks of curing
it by the rarifying force of Spirit of Hart-horn and the like. The Volatile
Salts and Spirits given in good quantities to Apoplectick persons, work neither
by their rarifying quality, nor by their coagulating one, but by their
stimulating and irritating force (as the Doctor taught us when he treated about
Apoplexy) or the force and power they have of raising pain: For it is plain,
that the foame of Vinegar from a red hot-iron has as much virtue to recover one
from an Apoplectick fit, as the spirit of Hart-horn, tho Vinegar be no great
rarifier of the blood. As for giving the spirit of Hart-horn or volatile Salts
inwardly, (a thing not to be done in the fit of an Apoplexy) If they be given
in a good and sufficient quantity, they will bring ease of pain, and sleep, just
as does Opium, which I desire our Pamphleteer to learn, But it is not possible
to see such effects of the Volatile Spirit or Salts, if they be given by one
gutt or grain for a Dose, as he and his learned friend do order them. Now I
leave it to a discreet Reader to judge, what an excellent argument this of the
Pamphleteer is against the Doctor. If (says the Pamphleteer page 130) Wine or
any thing that rarifies the Blood bring a fit of an Apoplexy, then another Dose
of the same will cure you of the fit. I leave this cure to his Friend and
Comatade. But I proceed.

The Doctor teaches; That every thing which rarifies the blood so much, that
the Arteries in the Brain containing it, are dilated to a degree sufficient for
compressing the Nerves there, and so hindering the Efflux of Spirits, will
bring Sleep; and perhaps a fit of sleepy Disease. Now this is evident.

O but, says our Pamphleteer, Then all Sudorisicks etc. will make us sleep. And
I tell him, they will certainly do so, when either their quantity or force is
such as to produce a dilatation of the Arteries sufficient to compress the
Nerves in the Brain.

What he says farther in this affair, is arrant nonsense; as is what he talks
about the Heart's having an Antagonist Muscle, than which nothing could have
been said so contrary to Anatomy, and so proper to make our Pamphleteer's gross
Ignorance appear to the meanest Apprentice. The Doctor had taught, That the
reason of the Heart's motion not ceasing was, that the Heart had not an
opposite Muscle: For at all times all the Muscles have an equal quantity of
Spirits flowing to them, and keeping them in Aequilibrio; else one Muscle would
move the Member, while the other being destitute of Spirits to blow it and
contract it, remained idle and useless. Now if Muscles for bowing the Arm ex
gr. prevail, it is because they have, over and above the quantity of Spirits
and Blood which they got to keep them in balance with those Muscles which
serve to hindet it from bowing, a new quantity sent to cast the balance, and
to make the contraction stronger on their side. Now, the Heart having no Muscle
to act against it, or to how a Member to the contrary side, needs fewer Spirits
and Nerves less free from compression; and so can be in motion when other
Muscles are not, which require a quantity of Spirits to overcome the quantity
of their opposite Muscles, over and above what is requisite to keep them in
Aequilibrio, Whereas the Heart requires no more than what would keep in
Aequilibrio with its opposite, if it had any; and much less. To this our
Pamphleteer Answers, That tho the Heart has not an opposite or Antagonist
Muscle, yet it has first, the Motus Restitutionis to surmount; and so have all
Muscles, Sir, (and this is our Pamphleteers depth of Anatomy) as much as the
Heart. Next, says he, it has the Blood to squirt out, and no small force is
requisite to that. And, Sir, other Muscles have a heavy bone to lift up, a Leg
or Arm; and no small force is requisite to this; Yea over and above, they have
the force of a contrary and equal Muscle to overcome, which the Heart is not
incumbered with. And this is the shallowness of our Pamphleteer, who has all
along spoke nonsense, because he did not understand what it is to have or want
an opposite or Antagonist Muscle Yet he would needs quible about it, that he
might seem to understand it. He has had the like impudence over all the
Pamphlet in meddling with Mathematics of which he is most grossly Ignorant; so
monstruously Ignorant, that he ( page 85) brings in Bodies, some Triangular,
some Square, etc. All which are Impossibilities, but Demonstrations of the
Fellows intolerable Ignorance in an affair in which he pretended to give
Judgment. I refer him therefore to his Studies, and to the
Mathematick-Professor, who can teach him (if teachable) as much Geometry as
will serve to let him see that the Muscles which dilate the Breast are stronger
than these which constrict it; And that the Muscles which he has mustered up as
constrictors of it perform a very different office, whatever Galen has said to
the contrary:

FINIS.

