To the Right Honorable The KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BURGESSES Assembled in
PARLIAMEMT. The Humble Petition of the Captains, Commanders, and Owners of
English Shipping, and other Seafaring Men of this Nation.
Shows,
THat when your Petitioners first saw that Act of Parliament made in Anno 1651.
Entitled An Act for increase of Shipping; and encouragement of the Navigation
of this Nation, They had ^opes that their then languishing condition should
have bin thereby restored; But having found by continued sad experience, that
notwithstanding the good intendments ot that Act, The Navigation, and Trading
Ships of this Nation, and consequently the employment of your Petitioners have
daily declined, and are now almost quite extinct;

Your Petitioners thought it high time to adress themselves to this Honorable
House, and do beg leave to lay open before you, the occasions by which the
Parliaments good intentions, and your Petitioners good hopes have bin
frustrated.

First, That Act leaving the Trade of Europe open, to be Navigated by any Ships
belonging to the Subjects of this Commonwealth, without any restriction of the
Nation, or quality of persons by whom the said Ships should be Sailed, has
since the War with Spain put all foreign built Ships belonging to this Nation
into the hands of Dutch Masters and Mariners: Because the Merchants who employ
the said Ships, supposed their Trade during this War could not be otherwise
secured.

Secondly, That Opinion of the Merchants has occasioned from time to time
their employment of a multitude of Holland Ships, under pretended and
fraudulent Bills of Sale.

Thirdly, The Act of Parliament leaving the power of Seizure of Ships and
Goods, (which by virtue of that Act were seizable) to any persons whatsoever;
the Proprietors of the said Ships and Goods, have appointed Confidents of their
own, to make the first Seizure of them: And by not Prosecuting such Seizure,
have made null the good intention of the Law.

By means whereof,

First, Your Petitioners and their Families are sadly impoverished for want of
employment.

Secondly, The most part of the good serviceable Ships of this Nation are
decayed, and Men are totally discouraged from building others.

Thirdly, The educating of Seamen (to provide a succession of them, both for
the service of the State, and Trade) is necessarily neglected.

Fourthly, Vast sums of money are drayned from the Stock of this Nation, by the
Freights of those Holland Ships on which the Trade is driven.

For the Prevention of which inconveniences, your Petitioners do most humbly
pray, that it may please this Honorable House to be a means, that it may be
Enacted,

First, That no Ships may be deemed to belong to the Subjects of this
Commonwealth as Owners, but such as are failed both out and home by a Master,
and at least three quarters parts of the Mariners who are Natives, Subjects of
some of the Dominions thereof.

Secondly, That the Statutes of the 5th year of King Richard the 2d. and the 3d
Chap. and of the 4th of Henry the 7th and the 10th Chap. for the preservation
of the Navigation of this Nation, may be revived, and reinforced.

Thirdly, That no Fish whatsoever taken by the Subjects of this Commonwealth,
either at home or abroad, may be permitted to be transported to any foreign
Market, upon any foreign Ships whatsoever.

Fourthly, That a perfect Register may presently be taken of all foreign
Bottomes which do now really belong to the Subjects of this Commonwealth; and
a severe Prohibition be made, that no more may be bought for the future.

Fifthly, That the Clause of the Act of the year 1651. For condemning the Ship,
Gunns, Tackle, and Apparel, for the sake of any prohibited goods that may be
found in her, may be moderated and limited so as the Owners and Masters of
Ships belonging to the Subjects of this Commonwealth, may not suffer for
offenses committed contrary to their knowledge and will.

Sixthly, That those provisions and remedies may by your wisdoms be so
effectually penned, with such severe penalties and executions, as may either
totally discourage former transgressors from attempting the like, or punish the
new, according to their merrits.

And then your Petitioners doubt not, but by the blessing of God, you shall in
a short time see this Nation to abound again in the number of Trading-Ships,
and Seamen: To the restoring of the Glory, Strength, and Wealth of the Nation.

And your Petitioners, and their present distressed Families, shall ever pray,
etc.

