To the most Honorable, Honorable and Worthy Members of both Houses of
Parliament, more especially those who have Interest in Mines in any part of
this Kingdom.
The Humble Representation and Address of the Petitioners for the Bill for
preventing multiplicity of Vexatious Suits, and for Settling and Ascertaining a
certain Ancient and Customary Tyth in the County of Derby, according to the
Tenor, Equity and Establishment of diverse Decrees in Chancery, grounded on
solemn Trials at Common Law.
Most Humbly shows:
THAT whereas there is now humbly offered to the Consideration of the two most
Honorable Houses, a certain Private Bill, Entitled as is above mentioned: The
intent and purpose of which Bill is no other, but to settle Peace, and to
prevent a multiplicity of Suits, and to re-instate the Petitioners (who are
Clergymen) in the ancient, just, and often acknowledged Right of their
Churches, by the general Establishment of a certain Customary Tyth, or Tenth of
Lead-Oar, peculiar to the County of Derby only.

Which said Ancient Tyth was for many Ages past (even till of late Years) paid
and answered to the Petitioners Predecessors without contradiction, and the
Petitioners and their Predecessors have, and do constantly at this day pay
First Fruits and Tenths to the King expressly for the same; And the Petitioners
Right, as well as the general Right of all the Proprietors in the said County
has formerly been examined, proved, and confirmed by solemn Verdicts at
Common Law, and declared and approved by diverse Orders and Decrees of all the
Courts of Law or Equity in England, and by the King's most Honorable Privy
Council, and in a good measure also, by former Votes and Debates of the
Honorable House of Commons it self. And the said Right of all Proprietors
throughout the said County of Derby, to the said Tyth has been universally
confessed and acknowledged and entered on Record, and pleaded in defense of the
Privileges, Laws, and Customs, and other Advantages which all those Persons
use and enjoy at this day, who are concerned in Mines in the said County of
Derby, and who ought to pay the same.

And the said Tyth of Lead-Oar is at this day enjoyed and received by many
Noblemen, Gentlemen; and Clergymen, the Petitioners Neighbors in the said
County, all of them having the same general and acknowledged Right, which the
Petitioners have to the same Tyth.

Notwithstanding all which, the Petitioners are most unjustly denied and kept
out of their said ancient Right, and some of their Predecessors were almost
ruined and undone by long, chargeable, and vexatious Suits concerning the same.
The Opponents of this Right having caused the expense of more than Ten Thousand
Pounds, upon a moderate computation, in Suits at Law concerning this Tyth
within Fourscore Years last past: And the Petitioners by the present
withholding of it, being deprived of a great part of the Maintenance of their
several Churches: And being daily more and more injured and impoverished in
their other Tyths, by the general and universal Liberty allowed by the Ancient
and known Laws and Customs of the said Lead-Mines in the said County of Derby,
for all Persons whatever who are Subjects of England (though no Inhabitants or
Parishioners) to dig and search for Lead-Oar in most Mineral Parishes and
Places in the said County, without the Land-holders leave. And the Petitioners,
by the sad Experiences of the great loss and expenses of their Predecessors in
Suits at Law against a multitude, and by diverse other means (set forth in their
Petition, and former printed Cases and Appendix thereto) being wholly
discouraged, disabled and rendered incapable of following and pursuing this
their Right at Law, are therefore necessitated, and hope it will be thought
reasonable for them to apply themselves to His Majesty, and the two most
Honorable Houses of Parliament, for Redress of this their grievance, and for
preventing Multiplicity of Suits, and for settling and ascertaining to them and
their Successors, as well as other Proprietors, a more easy way of Recovery of
the said Tyth.

And whereas the numerous Opponents of this Tyth, notwithstanding all the vast
Expenses by them formerly caused in opposing it, are yet ready and prepared to
cause more Expenses, and they, or some of them (as the Petitioners have been
credibly informed) have threatened, and given out in Speeches, that they will
spend many Hundred Pounds, but that they will prevent the settling of the
Petitioners Right in Parliament (though by what means they will do so, the
Petitioners cannot imagine.) And to that end, by false insinuations and
pretenses, do endeavor to misrepresent the said Petitioners, and their said
Bill, (Entitled as above said) to diverse Honorable and Worthy Members of
Parliament, who are interested in Mines in diverse parts of this Kingdom, as if
the said Bill did, or might someways affect them or their Rights, or might be
at least, a dangerous precedent to establish the like Tyth from their Mines. In
all humility therefore, the Petitioners for the said Bill aforesaid, crave
leave to represent to the said Honorable and Worthy Persons, That the passing
this their Bill, does not, nor cannot possibly concern, or affect any Mine, or
Mines what ever, but only the Lead-Mines in Derby-shire, the Establishment
being only desired for that County where the said Right of this Tyth has been
abundantly acknowledged as aforesaid, and is in most places of it paid at this
Day. And the Petitioners for the said Bill, do not found their Claim and
Pretenses to this Tyth, as if the same were a new thing, or as if Mines were
ordinarily Tythable of common Right (as their Opponents may, to their
prejudice, insinuate); but the Petitioners only desire to be re-instated in the
Ancient Right of their poor Churches, which depends upon such Laws, Customs,
Privileges, Acknowledgments of this Tyth, and Payments for it to the King,
aforesaid, as are peculiar to themselves and their own County of Derby, and
therefore cannot injure nor give just umbrage of any dangerous precedent to
others.

And therefore the Petitioners hope, that with all humble confidence, they may
refer themselves and their Case, to the Honor, Integrity, and Impartiality of
all Honorable and Worthy Persons, and to the Wisdom and Justice of His
MAJESTY, and the Two most Honorable Houses of Parliament, the only Potent and
Effectual Redressors of otherwise-unremedyable grievances, and the common
Patrons and Refuge of all injured Persons, and poor despoiled Churches.

And the Petitioners shall, and do, ever Pray, etc.
Note, That there has been Expended in Suits at Law, concerning the said Tyth
of Lead-Oar, above Twelve Thousand Pounds upon a moderate Computation, within
Eighty Years last past. A certain Attorney at Law, who knows the general Right
aforesaid, in the said County, and has defended the same, having been concerned
in Suits both for and against the said Tyth, (according as the Quality,
Interest or Purses of his Clients did differently engage him) is now become a
Zealous Solicitor against the foresaid Bill. Has he not great Reason so to do?




