portrait of a man Carolus Secundus Rex etc.
JSF.

E Cooper Ex



THE TRIAL OF WILLIAM STAYLEY, Goldsmith; For speaking Treasonable Words
Against his Most Sacred MAJESTY: And upon full Evidence found Guilty of HIGH
TREASON And received Sentence accordingly, on Thursday November the 21th 1678.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet, 1678.

November 20. 1678.
I Do appoint Robert Pawlet to Print the Trial of William Stayley: and that no
other presume to Print the same.

WILLIAM SCROGGS.

THE TRIAL OF WILLIAM STAYLEY, Goldsmith; For Treasonable Word's. Upon which he
was Condemned for High Treason, Nov. 21 1678.
MR. Stayley being accused of High Treason, was on the 20th day of November
1678. brought from Newgate, and arraigned at the King's Bench Bar, and the next
Day was brought to the same place to receive his Trial; where being come and
the Jury Impannelled, the Court told the Prisoner, that if he would Challenge
any of the Jury, he must speak unto them as they came to the Book to be sworn,
and before they were sworn; the Prisoner challenging none, the Jury were sworn,
viz.

JURY.
Sir Phillip Matthews. Sir Reginald Foster. Sir John Kirk. Sir John Cutler.
Sir Richard Blake. John Bifield, Esquire. Simon Middleton, Esquire. Thomas
Cross, Esquire. Henry Johnson, Esquire. Charles Umfrevile, Esquire. Thomas
Eaglesfield, Esquire. William Bohee, Esquire.
The Indictment Read. You stand Indicted by the name of William Stayley, etc.

Crier. If any can give Evidence on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King,
against William Stayley, let him come forth and he shall be heard.


Sir Creswel Levings. The Prisoner stands Indicted as not having the fear of
God before his Eyes, being led by the Instigation of the Devil, not minding his
Allegiance, but Traitorously endeavoring the Death and Destruction of our
Sovereign Lord the King, he did on November the 14th, in the thirtieth year of
the King, falsely, wickedly, and traitorously Compass, imagine, Devise and
invent the Killing the King; that he did maliciously contrive (I say) the Death
of our Lord, the King of England.

To this he has pleaded Not guilty. You are to try whether he be guilty or not.


Kings Sergeant, Maynard. The Offense is as great as can be, and will be proved
as clear as can be. Call the Witnesses to prove the Offense.


Attorn. Genesis It would be fitting before we enter upon the Evidence, to give
some account, why (among so many Offenders, some of them of greater quality
than William Stayley) we chose first to bring this man to Trial. It is not
unknown to any man that lives in England, what Discoveries there have been of
horrid and damnable Designs against the King's Person, and the Protestant
Religion. There are a sort of men in the World, that endeavor what they can to
cry down this Discovery, as that it was altogether Supposititious. and a Fable.
It is true, some are so charitable as to think the Roman Catholics in England
do promote the Roman Catholic Religion, but the Design against the Kings
Person is a Fiction. But they shall do well to take warning by the Trial of
this man, and Imprisonment of so many Offenders, as that even since this
Discovery made, some have had this Treasonable mind, and Traiterous attempt
against the King, and said those words for which in the Indictment he is
charged with. This Prisoner by Religion is a Roman Catholic, he calls himself
so; in plain English he is a Papist; and finding that since this Plot was
discovered, his trading decayed, (being one that dealt in Moneys) he was one of
their Party, he grew enraged their money was called so fast for, being in the
company of one Fromonte, Foreigner, at a Cook's shop, and were considering of
matters of Trade, this man was complaining his money was so fast called in for.
Taking notice of the discovery of the Plot, (being a very great well-wisher to
it) entered into a great Passion, and spoke these words of the King: That he was
the greatest Heretic in the World, that he was a great Rogue; for his part,
holding up his hand, clapped it then upon his heart, and said, I will with this
hand kill him. These words were heard by the Gentlemen that were present, but
spoken in French.


William Casters, a Witness. Attorn. Genesis Acquaint the Court and Jury what you
know of any words spoken by the Prisoner about killing the King.


Witness. So far as I know or can give an account, it was about Eleven of the
clock in the day, on the fourteenth day of this month; he called for a pot of
Ale, and a slice of Roast Beef, which when it was called for, his Landlord said
it should be brought him; there was another Frenchman with Stayley, a stranger
to me: they discoursed together in French, and Stayley then said twice over,
The King was a grand Heretic, making this Demonstration with his hand upon his
Breast, and stamped five or six times with his Foot in great Fury. The old man
Fromonte his Friend, said, That the King of England was a Tormentor of the
People of God, and he answered again in a great Fury, He is a great Heretic,
and the greatest Rogue in the World; there is the Heart and here is the Hand that
would kill him, and the King and Parliament think all is over, but the Rogues
are mistaken.


L. Chief Just. Did you know Stayley?


Witness. No my Lord, I had never seen him before.


L. Chief Just. What did you do upon this?


Witness. I did not know what to do, being ignorant of the Laws of the Country,
I thought it was a great matter, and being sensible that Stayley was gone out,
I caused one to attend him, and came to his Fathers Shop, and looked up and
down, and the next day I apprehended him.


L. Chief Just. Are you sure (looking upon the Prisoner) that was the man?


Witness. Yes.


L. Chief Just. Did you see him when he spoke the words?


Witness. Yes, I saw him, there was no more distance betwixt the two doors, but
just as far as that Gentleman and me; his face was strait toward us.


L. Chief Just. Were you in the same Room?


Witness. No, but just over against it; the doors were open.


L. C. Just. How near were you to him?


Witness. Seven or eight foot from the place where I was and where he was. He
was standing at one door, and I at the other. In French the words were spoken,
he making a demonstration, stamping with his foor, I would kill him my self,
(which the Prisoner would have evaded) but saying, the words signify, I would
kill my self. The Prisoner farther said, that the King and Parliament thought
all was over, but the Rogues were beguiled and deceived.


Alexander Southerland Witness. Mr. Southerland. Tell what you heard the
Prisoner at the Bar say, were you there?


Witness. Yes.


L. C. Just. Which was nearest him, he or you?


Witness. He was nearest to him, and I just by the Gentleman. He said
afterward when a word or two past betwixt them, The Rogues are deceived, they
think the Business is done, but they are deceived. The old man said, that the
King of England was a Tormentor of the People of God, the Prisoner answered,
the King of England is the greatest Heretic, and the greatest Rogue in the
World, and the King and Parliament thinks their business is done, but the
Rogues are mistaken.


Prisoner. I said (replied the Prisoner) I would kill my self.


L. Chief Just. Would you kill your self because you said the King was a
Heretic? You acknowledge your self to be a Roman Catholic.


Pris. And in that Faith I intend to die.


Attorn. Genesis Here the Prisoner does not deny but he said, the King of England
was a great Heretic; and can we imagine him to be in such a passion that he
would kill himself? whether that be a natural conclusion from the premises, I
must submit to --


L. C. Just. Did you see Mr. Stayley perfectly, was the Door open?


Witness. I saw him perfectly.


L. C. Just. Did you know him before?


Witness. I never saw his Face before.


L. C. Just. Did you write the words presently?


Witness. I wrote them down presently, as God shall be my Witness.


L. Chief Just. Look upon the writing, is it your hand?


Witness. It is; and it was written the 14th of November 1678. About eleven a
clock they came to the Black Lion in Kings Street, and called for a Quart of
Ale and Slice of Roast Beef, and it was answered, it should presently be had.
William Stayley said, having struck on his Breast, and stamping with his Foot
five or six times, I my self would do it.


L. Chief Just. Did you write all that is in the Paper at that time?


Witness. I writ the words in French as I heard them from him, then formed it
as to the Person and Time afterward when I was gone.


L. Chief Just. Who told you it was Stayley the Goldsmith?


Witness. We asked the Man of the House; and we found he went to his Fathers
House in Covent Garden; we asked his Fathers Name and his Name; and that is the
very man.


L. Chief Just. He confesses he was in this place at that time with the old
man. He acknowledged that he spoke some words, but denied he spoke those: That
he was the man, he does not deny.


Attorn. Genesis The third man is a Gentleman that does not understand the French
Tongue, he was in the company of these two men at that time; we do not call him
to prove the words, because he does not understand the Language.


L. Chief Just. There is no mistake of the Person, the Prisoner does not deny
he was there. Call the third person to know what he has to say.


Philip Garret third Witness. Wit. All that I can say is this; My Captain
William Castars came to me in great passion and said, I cannot suffer this, I
will run upon him, I cannot be quiet.


L. Chief Just. What are those words he charged upon (...)


Witness. That he would kill the King himself: it is (...) suffer it, I will
run out for a Constable presently, this cannot (...) offered. I went to enquire
for his name; the answer was, he was a Goldsmith, and that his name was
Stayley. That Is the very man (looking upon him) I saw there, and heard him
speak.


L. Chief Just. What were the first Words?


Witness. The French Words were spoken twice in English thus; The King was a
grand Heretic (French again) Here Is the Hand, here is the Heart, I would kill
him my self.


L. Chief Just. What can you say to this?


Prisoner. My Lord, the matter of Fact happened thus: This Gentleman Mr.
Southerland, comes over to me in the morning when I was in the shop, and said,
Sir, I would have a red Button like this, I said I had none of that nature, you
had better go to the Exchange. I would have one of a true Stone; You must (I
replied) go to the Jewellers, I have none of these. Upon that I dismissed him; he
went over, and presently comes in a quarter of an hour after, and tells me,
that an Honorable Person would speak with me: I went over; this Gentleman
makes a great many Ceremonies to me, and reads me this Paper; he tells me, you
see what the Gentleman reads, I would advise you to look to it, then taking me
aside by the Window, I said, I do not understand you, I am innocent, you must
not put any bubble upon me: with that the Captain runs out in a Fury, and
fetches a Constable, and carries me to the Gate House. I was in my Shop the
day before, which very day I did intend to go out with a Friend into the
Country, and prepared my self accordingly; and Mr. Fromonte, the old man that
was the Friend of mine, comes, saying to me, the Constable would have
something, I know not what it is, come and assist me; I went to the place, the
Constable told me, that I was to appear by ten of the Clock; with that comes
the old man out. I owed him a little money, I went and paid him the money which
I owed him. I came back and face down by the window out of sight, the old man
sat at the right hand, so we sat and discoursed as innocently, as I thought,
and (before God) as ever I spoke in my life.


L. Chief Just. What discourse had you?


Prisoner. Our chief discourse was about the materials of our business, and it
was about the King of France his Usurpation over his Subjects, and the
happiness of our little People, the Commonalty of England, that was indeed
usually our discourse when we met together.


L. Chief Just. Did you say you would kill the King of France? and that he was
a great Heretic? Do you believe the King of France is an Heretic?


Prisoner. I know not what his opinion is, that is to his own Conscience.


L. C. Just. Did you name the word Heretic?


Prisoner. Not to my knowledge upon my Soul, not of the King of England; we
might have discoursed of the happiness and of the difference of their
Governments. I have been thought a Person of some Intelligence, and of some
Understanding in the World, and not to expose my self to speak in a public
large room, the door being open, with so high a voice that these Gentlemen
being in the next room should hear me in French, and in a Street where almost
all are Frenchmen, to speak these blasphemous words, words that I abhor I have
been a great Admirer of my Prince.


Court. Read the Statute of Decimo tertio, etc.


L. Chief Just. Speak the words in English about killing the King, speak them
all.


Witness. That the Prisoners Companion did say, The King was a Tormentor and
Prosecutor of the People of God. The Prisoners words were again, The King of
England is the greatest Heretic, and the greatest Rogue in the World; here is
the heart, and there is the hand that would kill him; I myself.


Prisoner. Here Is the Hand, and here is the Heart which would kill my self: not
would kill Him my self.


L. C. Just. What Jesuit taught you this trick? It is like one of them, it is
the Art and Interest of a Jesuit so to do.


The Statute Read. L. Chief Just. Have you any thing more to say for your self
than what you have already said?


Court. Sir John Kirk, do you understand French?


One of the Jury. I do my Lord; the words have been interpreted all right.


L. Chief Just. Let me ask you one Question; When you said the King was a great
Heretic and a Rogue, and here is the heart, and here is the arm that would kill
him my self; was it not the King you would kill?


Prisoner. I have this to say in Justification of my self, and Allegiance to my
Prince and King, that I never thought, nor imagined, or contrived any way, but
have been a true Subject to the King upon all occasions; I am sorry it proves
so, Gods will be done, my Soul depends upon it; I am a dying man by the
Statute, never with Intention, or any thought or ill will, spoke I any word
about this matter,


L. Chief Just. Out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, the Statute
has been read, which has made it criminal.

Call a witness for the Prisoner.


Witness for the Prisoner, One Anselm Spoke. They came to my house, where I
live, at the Cross-keys in Covent Garden, about eight a clock in the morning,
these two Gentlemen, the day they took him away, was the day after these words
were spoke, and he was kept prisoner from eight till eleven of the Clock
without any Constable, they had five Bottles of Wine, and bespake meat, but
they did not stay to eat the meat.


L. Chief Just. How came you to stay so long?


Witness. I was two hours in looking for a Constable, they would not come with
me without a warrant from a Justice of Peace.


L. Chief Just: Who told you you had best take it up?


Prisoner. The middlemost man, the first witness.


Witness. We were about three long hours, I sent out this Gentleman for a
Constable, in the mean time the Prisoners Father sent his Maid for him to come
home, I told him he should not go, if he desired to eat we would eat there. I
sent to White Hall and desired a guard, the Officer of the guard told the
messenger it was the Constables part.


Court. Call another Witness for the Prisoner.


Witness for the Prisoner. I have heard him often declare as much Loyalty to
his Prince as any person. One day we fell into a discourse of these affairs,
the business of the Jesuits, which are a people he did as much condemn as any;
for in Padua he saw so many cheats, that he forsook the Jesuitical Religion,
and if he knew any of the persons concerned in this plot, he would be the
Executioner himself, and whoever comes to reign afterward, they shall never
enjoy so much peace as now; and I heard him often say he would lose his blood
for the King, and heard him speak as Loyally as I ever heard any man speak in
my life.


L. Chief Just. That is when he spoke to a Protestant.


Court. Have you any thing else to say for your self, or have you any more
Witnesses, that you would have examined on your behalf?


Prisoner. No.


Lord Chief Justice his Speech. THe Statute has been read, which was made
since the King came in, for the preservation of his person, and during his
life: the Parliament thought it reasonable, even to make desperate words to be
Treason, although there was no other thing but words, that is, such words, as
if the thing had been done would be Treason, the speaking it is Treason. When
we come to observe the manner of this speaking, methinks there is no great
difficulty to satisfy the Jury that they were spoke advisedly and maliciously.
They were in a public house, and by accident heard: they concealed them not a
moment, and not from the man that did not understand French. To hear a man say
in a great passion, that his King was a Heretic, and the greatest Rogue in the
World, and that he would kill him, to write down the words presently, they
slept not upon it, they found out who he was, the next day they came to attach
him: they kept him, for what? till they could get a Constable. So that here is
nothing doubtful either in the circumstance or substance of his Case: so that
you cannot have a plainer proof in the World then there is in this. For my own
part, when it is in the Case of a man's life, I would not have any compliance
with the rumors or disorder of times, that should be an evidence against him,
but would have a verdict depend upon the Witnesses, that swear the fact down
right upon him. You and we all are sensible of the great difficulties and
hazards that is now both against the Kings person, and against all Protestants,
and our Religion too, which will hardly maintain it is self, when they have
destroyed the men; but let 'em know, that many thousands will lose their
Religion with their lives, for we will not be Papists, let the Jesuits press
what they will (who are the foundations of all this mischief) in making
proselites, by telling them, do what wickedness you will it is no sin, but we
can save you, and if you omit what we Command we can damn you. This they will
not own when it comes to be an objection and penal upon them, but they will
never get the Pope of Rome to declare he has not a power to Excommunicate what
he calls a heretic King, and if he does, that the Subject is not discharged
from his obedience, they would do great service to their Papist friends, if
they could obtain such an Edict. They print, preach, dispute, and maintain
otherwise, and thereby lead people to their own destruction and the
destructions of others. Excuse me if I am a little warm, when perils are so
many, their Murders so secret, that we cannot discover the murder of that
Gentleman, whom we all knew so well, when things are transacted so closly, and
our King in so great danger, and Religion at stake. It Is better to be warm here
than in Smithfield. But that the man might have justice done him, he has had
his Witnesses, and might have had this old Man, if he had named him to Mr.
Richardson: and to show what fair play he has had, Mr. Attorney tells you the
old Man has been examined upon Oath, and offers him the Copy of his
Examination to use, but he thinks not fit to use it for his defense, therefore
nothing is smothered. The Offense you have heard in words plain enough, unless
the sense is preverted by Jesuitical cunning and equivocation, the best part of
their learning and honesty. They swear it expressly, That the King was a
Heretic, and the greatest Rogue in the World, and here is the heart and hand,
that he would kill him himself; and has and can have no other signification.
The Statute says Aavisedly and Maliciously. The manner of speaking, and the
words spoke, prove both: When a Papist once has made a Man a Heretic, there
is no scruple to murder him. Whoever is not of their Persuasion are Heretics,
and who ever are Heretics may be murdered, if the Pope commands it, for which
they may become Saints in Heaven; this is that they have practiced. If there
had been nothing of this in this Kingdom, or other parts of the World, it
would be a hard thing to impose it upon them, but they ought not to complain,
when so many instances are against them. Therefore discharge your Consciences
as you ought to do; if guilty let him take the reward of his Crime, and you
shall do well to begin with this man, for perchance it may be a terror to the
rest. Unless they think they can be saved by dying in the Roman Faith, tho with
such pernicious and traitorous words and designs as these are; let such go to
Heaven by themselves, I hope, I shall never go to that Heaven, where Men are
made Saints for killing Kings.

William Stayley, hold up your hand.


Court. Is William Stayley guilty of the High Treason whereof he has been
Indicted.


Jury Guilty.


Court. What Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements?


Pris. None.


L. Chief Just. Now you may die a Roman Catholic, and when you come to die, I
doubt you will be found a Priest too.


Kings Council. I pray Judgment according to the Verdict.


Court. You have been indicted of high Treason, you have put your self upon
your Country, which Country have found you guilty, what have you to say for
your self, wherefore the Court should not proceed to Judgment against you?


Prisoner. I have nothing to say.


L. Chief Justice. I pronounce Judgment upon you. You are here found guilty by
the Jury of high Treason, for saying you would kill the King, with other
irreverent words; but the matter which makes you a Traitor is proved upon you
by most apparent evidence. The matter, manner, and all the circumstances of it
make it plain, you may harden your heart as much as you will, and lift up your
eyes, but you seem instead of being sorrowful, to be obstinate, between God and
your Conscience be it, I have nothing to do with it, my duty is to pronounce
Judgment upon you according to Law, which is this,


The Sentence.
You shall return to the Prison, from thence shall be drawn to the place of
Execution, where you shall be hanged by the Neck, cut down alive, your Quarters
shall be severed and disposed of as the King shall think fit, and your Bowels
burnt, and so the Lord have mercy upon your Soul.

FINIS.

