A TRUE COPY OF THE PAPERS Delivered by Mr. Robert Chernock, Mr. Edward King,
Mr. Thomas Key, TO THE ^heriffs of London and Middlesex, at Tyburn, the Place
of Execution, March 18th. 1696.
Published by Authority.

Mr. CHARNOCKE'S Paper.
THAT I might avoid distractions, and be Composed as much as possible at the
time of my Execution, I thought it much more proper to Communicate This to the
Sheriffs, than to give my self the uneasiness of speaking, leaving it to them
to publish (if they should think convenient) for the satisfaction of the World;
and in what I have to say, I have taken as much care as I could to be short,
that I might not lose time in my greatest Concern.

As concerning an Invasion intended by King James upon England, and that there
was certain Intelligence of it from Abroad, I presume every body was satisfied;
and to the facilitating of which, I own that my self and some others did agree
upon the Undertaking, To Attack the Prince of Orange and his Guards, for which
I am now to Suffer; but I think my self obliged by all the Ties imaginable,
both of Conscience and Honor, to declare, That as for any Order or Commission
of King James's for Assassinating the Prince of Orange, I neither saw, nor knew
of any; but have had frequent Assurances of his having rejected such Proposals
when they have been Offered.

I confess I did hear that there was a Commission arrived for Levying of War,
and which was natural to believe, if the King was in such a readiness to come
over as was reported; but if there was any such Authority as that, I declare I
never saw it.

As to what regards the Body of the Roman Catholics, I must do them this
Justice, and which I dare be positive in, That they had no manner of Knowledge
of this Design, nor do I believe it was Communicated to any other Party of such
as are reputed the King's Friends, but carried on merely by a small number,
without the Advice, Consent or Privity of any Parties whatsoever.

I ask forgiveness of all the World for what Offenses or Injuries I have (...)
to them; and I am ( I bless Almighty God) in perfect Charity with Mankind.

Robert Cherno^^

Mr. KING'S Paper.
I Am now within a few Moments of Eternity, brought to this place by the (...)
Hand of God in Punishment of all my Crimes; but particularly of that, which I
have been lately Arraigned, and for which I stand here Condemned; bu^ hope,
that Goodness of God, which has given me a Sense of my Wickedne^^ will accept
my Repentance, and show Mercy on me; which I hope to obtain throu^^ the Passion
and Merits of my Redeemer, upon whom I entirely cast my self.

And that I may find his Mercy, I think my self obliged to do Justice to my
Neighbor, that so none may suffer wrongfully on my account; and therefore as I
am so^ to answer the truth of what I say before the Tribunal of God.

I First declare, that I never saw any Oorder or Commission of King James's
promoting the Assassination for which I am Condemned: Neither do I know of any
such Order or Commission.

Secondly, That the Design was not undertaken with any General Knowledge or
Approbation of any Body of Men, either Catholic or Protestant.

Lastly, That I did not engage in it on Presumption of any King-killing
Principles that could justify such an Undertaking, but was drawn into it by my
own Rashness and Passion, for which and all other Sins I heartily beseech God
to forgive m^

And I hope that such who think the Misfortune of their Imprisonment or Troubl^
is derived from my having been engaged in this Enterprise; or such to whom it
h^^ any ways given Scandal, that they will admit me to their Pardon, as I
freely a^^ heartily forgive all Mankind. In this Disposition and sincere
Repentance and true Charity, I commend my Soul into the hands of God, and hope
to find Mercy from him. And for this I beg all your Prayers.

Ed. King

Mr. KEY's Paper.
I AM now going to appear before the Living God; I trust in his Mercy that he
will forgive all my Sins committed to this last moment of my Life God is just
in all his Judgments, and I accept of this Death as the Punishment of my
Iniquities: I forgive all my Enemies, and hope through a hearty Repentance, and
the Merits of my Savior, to obtain Mercy.

Have mercy on me, O Father of Mercy, and through thy only Son forgive me all
my Sins.

Thomas Key.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer
to His Most Excellent Majesty, 1696.


