A DISCOURSE OF WATERS.

Showing the Particular Natures, various Uses, and wonderful Operations both in
FOOD and PHYSIC, The All-wise Creator has Endued this Cleansing Element with.

I. Of Rainwater.

II. River or Running-Water.

III. Spring or Fountain Water.

IV. Well or Pump-Water.

V. Pond or Standing-Water, with something Concerning Purging-Waters. Published
for the Benefit of Mankind.

By THOMAS TRYON.

Author of the Good House-Wife Made a Doctor, Country-Mans Companion, Monthly
Observations for Health, etc.

London: Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in White-Hart
Court in Gracious-street. 1696.

A DISCOURSE OF WATERS.
Showing the particular Natures, various Uses, and wonderful Operations both in
Food and Physic, the All-wise Creator has Endued this Cleansing Element with.

Published for the Benefit of Mankind.

I. Of Rainwater. II. River or Running-Water. III. Spring or Fountain Water.
IV. Well or Pump-Water. V. Pond or Standing-Water.
THE Element of Water is not inferior to any other of the Elements, neither is
Nature wanting to work wonderfully thereby; there is so great Necessity of
Water, that without it no Animal can live, nor any Herb or Plant bring forth;
for in it is the Seminary Virtue of all things, especially of Animals, whose
Seed is manifestly Watrish. The Seeds also of all Herbs and Plants, although
they are Earthy, must notwithstanding be rooted in moisture before they can be
fruitful. The great and illuminated Prophet Moses tells us, that before the
Creation, when the Earth was without Form, the Spirit of the Lord moved on the
Face of the Waters; and in another place, that the Plants did not grow, because
God had not caused it to Rain upon the Earth. Nay, so great is the Efficacy of
this cleansing Element, that the spiritual Regeneration cannot be performed
without it, as our Savior Christ himself testified to Nicomedus; and very
great have the Virtues of it been in Religious Worship in former Ages, among
the Prophets and Wise Men in Expiations and Purifications. Innumerable are the
Benefits, and so various the Uses thereof, both in the Generation, Nourishment
and Increase of things, that some of the Wise Men have concluded, that Water
was the beginning of all things, and first of all Elements, and the most
Potent, because it has the mastery over all the rest, for it swalloweth up the
Earth, extinguishes Flames, ascends on high, and by a most wonderful Divine
Hand, and the stretching forth of the Clouds, challenges the Heavens for its
Throne, whence falling down in gentle Showers and refreshing Dews, as from
Natures choicest Limbeck, impregnated with Celestial Virtues, it becomes the
cause of all things that grow in the Earth.

Nor is there scarce any part of Nature more full of Wonders than these liquid
Regions. Josephus tells us of a River near Sina, which runs with a full
Channel all the Sabbath Day, and then on a sudden it cease, as if the Spring
were stopped, and all the six days you may pass over it dry-shod; but again on
the seventh-day (no Man knowing the reason of it) the Waters return in
abundance as before; wherefore the Inhabitants thereabouts call it the Sabbath
days River. The Gospel testifies of a Sheep-Pool, into which whosoever stopped
first, after the Waters were troubled by the Angel, was made whole of
whatsoever Disease he had.

Many secret and admirable Virtues the Creator has endued this Element with,
as in all Ages has been manifested; for it being pure and clear in its own
Nature, it is the only and alone thing by which all external things are
purified, purged and cleansed: But if it be adulterated or incorporated with
any other Liquor or Juice, then it becomes less pure, and will not so well
perform its Office, yet it may make them better and more useful. Though it be a
vulgar Proverb -- As weak as Water: Yet I must tell you, Water is more strong
and sublime that most imagine, for it contains a most ravishing and excellent
Spirituous Balsamic Virtue, whence proceeds that pure sweet refreshing
Quality, whereby it has Power by its innate Virtue to digest and purify all
sorts of Food: Also, in all Preparations it is so Innocent and Friendly that it
dissipates the gross phlegmy Bodies, and preserves the more essential Parts and
Virtues, and keeps the Spirituous Parts living.

It is not only the most plentiful and truly pleasant of all Drinks, but it
supplies Nature with its friendly Moisture, and relieves Thirst beyond all
other Liquors or Juices: It is so Simple, and endued with such Equality, that
it insinuates its Virtue into all parts of the Body in an insensible way; it
makes no Noise, nor causes any Tumults in the Brain, nor awakens any Inequality
in the Body, but imparts its meek Life as it were in silence.

And as Bread has the first place of all Food, and may justly be called
Concord, or a thing which God and his Handmaid Nature, has befriended with all
the united good Virtues both of the Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms, and
therefore no sort of Food is comparable thereunto, nor will gratify Nature to
the degree as it ought, without the help and mixture of Bread; though yet it is
not the strongest of all Foods, nor has the greatest Nourishment, but it is
the most equal in its parts, and stands nearest the Unity, for which cause it
is so much desired, and justly esteemed the Staff of Life; and we are taught to
Pray for all outward Accommodations needful for our Bodies under that
significant denomination of Our daily Bread, it being, besides its own
nutritive faculty, a proper Ingredient to qualify the Inequality ofmost other
sorts of Food, and is the Foundation to all good Nourishment: The like is to be
understood of Water, that being the Radix of all moist Nourishment, which mixed
or incorporated with any kind of Juices, renders them fit and profitable for
Mankind.

Nay, (if we may fly our Contemplations to an higher pitch) there is a
Sympathetical agreement, or some Analogy between this External Water and that
Internal, of which our Savior Christ told the Woman of Samaria, that if she
did drink, she should never thirst: This Internal Super-essential Water
sustaineth every Being, and is the Radix and Life of the outward Water, which
contains some Shadows of the secret Influences of the Water Internal; for which
reason the Prophets and good Men of old have frequently compared the one with
the other, and expressed the one by the other, and also have made use of Water
in Religious Mysteries as a sign of Cleansing and Purifying the Soul from Sins,
and for curing Diseases, etc. as the Scriptures* do testify.

Thus much I thought fit to say of Water in general, to stir up men to praise
and admire the Goodness and Wisdom of the All Creator, for the manifold Uses,
Virtues and Benefits wherewith he has endued this Element. But now let us
consider the several sorts of Water.

Of Rainwater and its Nature.
I name this Water first, because for several Reasons it is the best of all, if
not defiled by Accidents, as by Tiles of Houses, or the Vessels it is kept in.
For,

1st. It is a light pure thin Water.

2dly. It is drawn up into the Clouds by the power and virtue of the sweet
Influences of the Sun Beams.

3dly. Being carried to and fro with the Clouds by Gods Divine Power, it has
thereby had the greater benefit of Motion.

4thly. It Is endued with wonderful Virtue from the Element of Air, and the
sweet Influences of the Celestial Bodies, whereby it is made more Spirituous
than other Waters, and of a fat unctious Quality, of a light friendly mild
Nature and Operation: Thus it mollifies the harsh Earth, making it light and
tender, and causes all Plants to multiply and grow far better than any
Artificial Watrings can do; Rain Water being (among its other Virtues) like a
Ferment or Leaven, that makes the hard compacted Earth more spirituous and
penetrable, giving Life and Motion to all the Vegetable Kingdom.

5thly. Rainwater is not only exhaled by the Beams of Heaven from the most
clear and subtle Fountains, and impregnated with the Celestial Influences, but
also is, as it were, strained with the Airy Motions and Winds, which fill it
with a Saline and Balsamic Virtue, when it descends (like the Tears of a
repenting Sinner) in gentle reviving Showers, that give Virtue and Power to all
Vegetables, and restore the gasping parched Earth and languishing Nature to the
briskness of the Spring and Joys of Autumn.

6thly. This is the lightest of all Waters, it cools and heats quickly; it
oppresses not the Stomach, or any other part of the Body, but passes suddenly
into the Vreters, having neither in Color, Smell nor Taste any manifest
Quality; it binds not the Belly as some other Waters do, and is the best to
be used in all Physical Operations, if it be well received, and afterward kept
from defilement.

7thly. It is to be preferred before all other Waters in House-wifery, for it
Boyls all sorts of Meats better and sooner, and makes them easier of
Concoction; as likewise it Brews and Washes to greater advantage than others.

Rainwater has likewise various other Uses and excellent Virtues, viz.
It is a good remedy for all sorts of sore Eyes, they being washed often with
it; or if a little white Bread be put into the Water with a small quantity of
white Sugar, and then made boiling hot, being stirred all the time, then
applied in the manner and form of a Pultess every two or three hours.

This Water is also good to wash all sorts of Wounds and Sores, and if it be
done often, it mightily forwards the Cure.

The best Seasons to receive this Water in, are March, April, May, June, and
July, it being put into Glass Bottles; let them stand in the Windows of airy
Rooms, or without Doors open, that the Air may have its free Influence on them,
which will preserve and keep the fine thin spirituous Qualities living; which
if they are stopped, will in a short time become stagnated.

This Water does likewise make an excellent Pultess against the Gout, Pains in
the Sides and other Infirmities of the like Nature.

Take one Quart of this Water, half a Pint of Ale, a little Balm, Parsley and
Mint, of each an equal quantity cut small, and as much good Bread as will make
it thick; then add to this two Ounces of the best Sugar, mix them well, then
make it boiling hot, stirring it all the time it is on the Fire; then it is
done, spread this Pultess indifferent thick on a Linen Cloth as warm as Milk
from the Cow, apply it every two or three hours, for one, two, or three Days,
as we have treated more largely in the Good House-Wife made a Doctor.

Of River-Water.
This is next in Goodness, whose Original is Fountain or Spring Water, and yet
there is rarely any Spring Water so good for common and general use at the
Fountainhead as in the River. For,

1st. Rivers or running Waters have great advantages by passing through various
Soils and sorts of Earth, from whence it drains or sucks in a certain Unctious
Virtue, or Saline Fatness, which the surface of the Earth does plentifully
contain, and from which Vegetation does chiefly proceed.

2dly. This sort of Water has the benefit of Motion, with the benevolent
Influences of the Sun, and the Element of the Air, which purge it from its
harsh earthy Qualities, and as it were open its Body, enduing it with a pure
Spirituous, Airy and Balsamic Virtue, of a warming friendly Nature and
Operation: This is the chief reason why River-Water is of a softer milder
Nature, and will perform all Preparations in House-wifery to more advantages
than Spring Water taken from the Fountainhead; for there most Waters retain a
Saturnine earthy Quality, which the Influences of the Sun and Air, with the
help of Motion, do destroy.

3dly. The New-River that supplies London, is some of the best Water in England
(except Thames Water) it being a cut or made River that runs on the Surface of
the Earth for above twenty Miles, and is not sed or increased by hungry
Springs, as many other Rivers are that run through Valleys, which is their own
Natural way, but Land-Floods sometimes fall into it, which augment its Virtue
and Goodness, for they are the richest of Waters, draining and sucking into
themselves the fat Saline Virtue of the Earth: For this reason most Valleys
that lie between the Hills are so fruitful; for the Waters that run off the
Hills do wash or carry away the Salintral Virtue into them, and there it
centers; and thus Hills come not to be so fruitful as Valleys or Plains, by
reason of such disadvantages: Whereas on the contrary, do not Land Floods, and
the overflowing of Rivers, make Meadows fruitful from the same causes? For when
the Waters retire and sink away, they leave behind them the Saline or Spiritual
Quality, that does Muck such Ground, as though it had been overspread with
substantial Dung. And indeed the very same is to be understood when a Man dungs
his Land, it is not altogether the gross substance or matter that enricheth the
Land, but it is the beforementioned fat Saline Quality, which the moisture of
the Earth receives, and the Rains wash out of the Dung; for if you lay a load
of Dung in a heap, and let it lie a Week, two or three, and then remove it
clean away from that place, and spread it thick in another place, yet that spot
which the Dung lay on two or three Weeks, will be more enriched than where the
gross substance is spread; for the Earth, with the help of the Rains and Dews,
sucked into it self the Salintral Virtue of the Dung. Therefore in most Fields,
where such heaps of Dung do lie for a while before they are spread, both the
Grass and Corn is not only greener, but also much stronger, and more in
quantity than in other places of the Field.

4thly. River-Water, for the Reasons aforesaid, is better for Men and Beasts to
drink of, than Springs or Pump-Water; it boyls all sorts of Herbs, Fish and
Flesh better, and makes better and wholsomer Pottages; it brews Beer and Ale to
more Advantage, both in Quality and Quantity, and washes all sorts of Linen
and Woollen with less Pains, Charge and Damage to the things. This Water seems
to be pretty equal in its parts, having no manifest 'Taste, but a certain
friendly mild sweetness predominates; and there is as much difference between
the Nature and Operation of River-Water and Pump or Well-Water, as there is
between Beer and Ale; and the Excellency of the latter above the former, I
shall demonstrate in its proper place.

Of Spring or Fountain Water.
There are various sorts of this Water, some Better, some Worse, according to
the Nature of the Earth it passes through: If Springs or Fountains proceed from
a Chalky Earth or some sorts of hot Sands, or run near the surface of the
Earth, they are thereby endued with a meek soft friendly nature and operation,
without any manifest harshness; but those that run in the deep Bowels of the
Earth, and through cold hungry stony places, are more hard and Saturnine;
neither so wholesome for Man or Beast to drink, nor to be used in Housewifery.
But though it be thus at the Fountainhead, yet if the same run long afterward
through various soils in the open Air, etc. It may become very good for all
uses, as aforesaid.

And Note: Whereas some River-Water will look of a wheyish whitish Color,
caused either by its long running without being fed by Plenty of Springs, or
else by Landfloods, yet in either case it is not the worse to be liked, but
rather the better; for all such Water is of great virtue, of a very mild fat
opening Quality, caused by the saline virtue; which People not understanding,
do often refuse either to drink or use in Housewifery, calling it dirty muddy
Water; whereas the whiter any Waters look, the better they are for most uses,
especially when Land-floods shall be the occasion of it, as appears by the
Instances of Valleys and Meadows thereby enricht, which I mentioned but now.

Of Pump or Well-Water.
These likewise are capable of several degrees, better or worse, according to
the nature of the Earth from whence they arise; but they are generally of a
cold hungry hard nature, nothing so good as the former; and such Springs as lie
deepest in the Bowels of the Earth, are of a lean Saturnine Quality, in
comparison of that Water which runs near the surface, being deprived of that
saline Nature which irritates Vegetation; for most Earths, after you come two
or three yards deep, are of a hard cold hungry Quality, and if a quantity of
such Earth be exposed to the open Elements, and laid two or three foot thick,
there will hardly any sort of Vegetable grow on it, until the Sun and
Celestial Influences have endued it with a Salnitral Virtue; and as the Earth
is, so is the Water, viz. of the same Nature, Gold and Hungry.

2. Such Waters want the Celestial Influences and Air, nor have the benefit of
Motion, or but in a very small degree; hence they are more unwholesome than the
others before treated of, and generally bind the Body, and are subject to
obstruct Nature, neither will they perform the like good Offices in Housewifery.

The like is to be understood of most or all Purging Waters, which of late have
been so mightily cried up for their Purgative Virtues. Now those Waters in
general are Cold, Harsh, and Earthy, of a lean hungry Quality; being as it were
wholly destitute of that Saline Nature, and Celestial Virtue, that other
Waters are impregnated with, that run on the surface of the Earth, as is
beforementioned.

Therefore the Purgative Qualities in these Waters do chiefly proceed from
Coldness, Weight, and the not being accustomed to the drinking of Water, for
when Nature is overcharged either with Drink or Food, she uses all possible
Means and Methods, to discharge her self of those burdens; for this cause the
common drinking of such Quantities of these Waters do prove dangerous, and many
hundreds have found the remedy worse then the Disease by a full Experience.

The first Finders and Drinkers of these Waters, did live and use them more
regular and temperately, which by degrees most have degenerated from all sober
Methods, into the highest Degrees of all kinds of Debauchery.

Now as this Noble Element is the Original Foundation, and Springhead of all
moist Nourishment; therefore it is not to be doubted, but that it is the only
drink ordained both for Man and Beast, all other Liquors being not only
Inferior, but as it were unnatural and disagreeing; the common Use and Drinking
of all fermented Drinks, do generate the Stone, Gout, all Obstructions of the
Ureters, Fevers, and a thousand Evils, which are not known in those Countries
where the Natives Drink Water; and if English People would be so wise to Drink
Water more, especially the Women, great numbers would certainly find the
Benefit thereof; by being cured of various Diseases both of the Body and Mind.

This Liquid Region is the Menstrum of the great World, which does impregnate
all things with Virtue, Power, and Strength, and it is the only Moisture that
is most agreeable to that digesting Liquor of Man's Sromack called the
Menstrum, whose Office it is to temper and digest our Foods, and as Water has
no manifest taste or predominate Quality, viz. it is neither Astringent, Salt,
Bitter, Sharp, nor Sweet; and therefore it bows and assimilates it self to all
things, even as the Menstrum of Man's Stomach to all Foods, for this cause
Water being drank after Sweet, Bitter, Salt, or Sharp Food, it still retains
its entire natural Taste.

The like is to be understood in Sickness, when the Palate has lost or
forfeited its Taste as to all made Drinks, but still Water is the same as in
Health; the Reason is plain, good Water has in it no extreme Qualities, so
that it bedues the Body with its mild and friendly Moisture, giving Life and
Power by Virtue of the fine, spirituous, thin, sweet, Vapors of the Air, which
are the refreshing Zephirus of Nature, and keeps the Elements of the Bodies
free from heat and disorders; which renders the Body full of Spirits, brisk,
vigorous and sprightly, which pleasant Condition is seldom or never felt by
them, that give themselves to the drinking of Strong Liquors; therefore the
common use of them are Friends to Vitiousness, and Mortal Enemies to Virtue,
and there is nothing does deprave Mankind, and separate him from God and all
goodness more, then the continu-Gormandizing of unclean gross Food, and
Guzzelling down Strong Drink into their foolish Hogs-heads.

Strong Drink does render the Drinkers thereof liable to all kind of Evil, but
Water keeps the Body in due temper, and the Mind Sedate, and fortifying a Man
Sedate, and fortifying a Man against many Evils, and makes the Body pleasant,
healthful, and fit to discharge all the Functions both of the Body and Mind,
for it is the Meats and Drinks that are simple and natural, that renders the
Spirits many in Quantity, and fine in Quality, from whence arises lightsomeness
to the Body, and Vigor to the Mind.

Of Ponds or Standing-Waters.
Such standing-Waters as are in a kind of springy Grounds are the best, but
still much inferior to running-Waters, because they have not the benefit of
Motion, nor the like advantage of passing through various Soils. Such Pools or
Waters as are chiefly maintained by Rain or Landfloods are better or worse,
according as the season is wet or dry; for in dry seasons they not only become
thick and slimy, but awaken a gross fulsome Saturnine Quality in the muddy
Earth, that suffocates the pure thin spirituous parts; so that such Waters
become of a strong gross Earthy taste and smell, which is altogether contrary
to the Nature of Water, and such Waters are not wholesome for Men nor Beasts.
Some Husbandmen do suppose these Waters to be very good for Cattle to drink,
having no other reason but that they will rather drink them than others; which
is no reason at all; for this came through Custom and Use; which makes any sort
of Water familiar to Nature; and those Cattle that are used to drink
Pond-Water, will refuss better Water for that, for two Reasons; First, Because
their Stomachs and Pallates are adulterated, and made familiar to it, so that
they cannot distinguish the evil taste from the good, Secondly, Because such
Pond-Waters are of an hotter and warmer Nature than others, and Cattle used to
them will for that very cause refuse others, just as men that accustom
themselves to warm Beer cannot drink cold without some trouble to the Mouth and
Teeth, though cold Beer and Ale is warmer in Operation, and will more cheer the
Stomach, and make the Spirits more brisk than the hot, because no fermented
Liquors, whether they be Beer Ale, Cider or Wine, will admit of the heat of
fires, without violence to the pure spirituous parts; they are so volatile,
that they will presently evaparate; therefore warm Beer or Ale will sooner
become flat than that which has not been warmed; for when the spirituous parts
are evaporated or suffocated, the sweet brisk Balsamic Virtue dies.

But this hot sulpherous Quality in Pond-Water, which through custom most
Cattle like, is of an evil Nature and Operation, because the spirituous vapors
of the Air cannot so easily penetrate through its gross thickness, whence it
dulls the edge of the Appetite and Stomach, breeds gross thick Blood, often is
the occasion of many Diseases, and very injurious to the Milk of Cows. Besides,
do not Pools and standing-Waters generate various sorts of Vermin and Insects,
which is caused through the Contraction of gross thick fulsom Matter for want
of Motion, all which running Waters are not subject to.

But although Water be Natures common drink for Man as well as Beasts, yet
since now a days Men generally betake themselves to other Liquors, we shall
briefly treat of them likewise.

The Excellent Virtues and Uses of Cold Water Gruel made as follows, viz.
Take one Quart of Water, two small Spoonfuls of New Ground or beaten Oatmeal,
stir or brew it well together, then it is done; -- This is not only a brave
noble exhilerating Drink for general Use, and most agreeable to all Persons, to
allay all droughty, hot, feverish Indispositions; but the constant Use
thereof, does not only preserve Mankind from the following Diseases, but Cures
them too, when they have already invaded the Body; this cleansing Liquor
fortifies the Stomach, fines the Blood, gives it a free Circulation, generates
brisk lively Spirits, being a good Remedy against Fumes and Vapors; likewise
purges powerfully by Urine, prevents and Cures the Gravel, Stone, Gout, and
all sorts of Obstructions of the Ureters; and more especially this is an
excellent Liquor for Women and Children to make their constant drink, and for
such as gives Suck, frees their Milk from heat, Windiness and other Crudities;
I could produce many living Testimonies of its success, but it is needless,
since every one's Experience that tries it, will soon confirm the Truth of what
is here delivered. It is the Consideration of the Public Good it may do to
many thousands that languish under miserable Circumstances as to their Health,
that prompts me to Publish the excellent Virtues of this Cleansing Gruel, but
whether you will practice or observe these Methods or not, I have done my Duty
in offering my Talents that God has given me, and therefore am satisfied.

THE END.
Books Printed by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Biilet in Holy well-Lane, in
Shoreditch.
1. THe Ethiopoians Complaints: Or a Dialogue between an Indian Sophy and a
Europian Philosopher, wherein the most material points of the Christian
Religion are Theosophically unfolded. With a brief Treatise of the principal
Fruits and Herbs that grow in the East and West Indies, giving account of their
Respective Virtues, both for Food and Physic, what Planet and Sign they are
under. Together with Directions, and a particular Method how every one may
preserve their Healths in hot Climates: Published for the Benefit of
Travelers, Merchants and Seamen.

2. The Way to make all People Rich, or, Wisdom's Call to Temperance and
Frugality, in a Dialogue between Sophronio and Guloso, one a Lover of Sobriety,
the other addicted to Gluttony and Excess.

3. The Country-Man's Companion: Or a New Method of ordering Horses and Sheep,
so as to preserve them both from Diseases and Causaulties, or to Recover them
if fallen ill, and also to render them much more Serviceable and Useful to
their Owners, than has yet been discovered, known or practiced. And
particularly to preserve Sheep from that Monsterous, Mortifying Distemper, The
Rot.

4. There is now in the Press, the second Edition, The Good Houswife made a
Doctor, or Health's choice and sure Friend: Being a Plain Way of Nature's own
prescribing, to Prevent and Cure most Diseases incident to Men, Women and
Children, by Diet and Kitchin-Physick only. With some Remarks on the Practice
of Physic and Chemistry.

All four by Tho. Tyron, Studient in Physic; and Author of the Way to Health,
Long Life and Happiness.

5. A New Treatise of Artificial Wines, or a Bacchean Magazine, in three parts.
The first Plain and Useful Directions, in the Doctrine of Fermentation, by
which variety of Artificial Wines are made from various growths, giving an
account of their respective Virtues and Medicinal Office, both as Physic and
Drink Part 2. Containing short, but effectual directions for making Low Wines
into Proof-Spirits, with their several Uses, in a Way never so plainly
published before. Part 3. Some useful Curiosities and Medicinal Observations;
written on purpose to answer the request of those that desire to be satisfied
in things of this Nature. By W. Y. a Spagyrical Physician and Philosopher by
Fire.

6. A Disconrse about Trade, Wherein the Reduction of Interest of Money to 4 l.
per Centum, is Recommended. Methods for the Employment and Maintenance of the
Poor are proposed. Several weighty Points relating to Companies of Merchants.
The Act of Navigation. Naturalization of Strangers. Our Wollen-Mannfactures.
The balance of Trade. And the Nature of Plantations, and their Consequences in
relation to the Kingdom are seriously Discussed. And some Arguments for
erecting a Court of Merchants for determining Controversies relating to
Maritime affairs, and for a Law for transferrance of Bills of Debts, are humbly
Offered.


