A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Behavior, Confession, AND EXECUTION OF William Charley
and Ann Scot, Who Received Sentence of Death on the 27th. of August last, at
JUSTICE-HALL in the OLD-BAYLY, and were Executed at TYBURN On Friday the 4th.
of this Instant September 1685.
As also a Brief Account of the Seven other persons, who received Sentence of
Death with them, but before Execution found mercy in a Gracious Reprieve, viz.
John Thompson, Thomas Draper. Thomas Glanister, Cathrine Baucer, Cassandra
Widows, Ellenor Steel, and Elizabeth Hacker.
STill it appears, notwithstanding the many precedent Examples Justice has made
of Offenders, that diverse are besotted to that degree, or deluded by the wiles
and Temptations of the Enemy of mankind; that regardless of their Safety,
Lives, or Reputations, they will rashly run themselves to Ruin and Disgrace,
neither fear of Shame nor Severity being of force sufficient to keep them
within the Bounds of Honesty and civil Behavior, nor to make them look back
and consider the danger they are in, till it is too late to Retrive the sad
disaster, then, and but then, they are content to open their Eyes, and inform
themselves how they have been enticed and drawn away how easily they have
consented to the persuasions of wicked persons, whom Satan has laid as snares
in their way to undo them, as will more evidently appear in the following
Relation, in which is contained; more especially the Crimes, Manner of
Behavior and Confession of two Persons cut off by the Hand of Justice, in the
prime and strength of their days, as it was observed and taken from themselves
in Newgate, etc.

William Charley, Tried the precedent Sessions, holden at Justice-Hall in the
Old-Bayly upon an Indictment of Felony and Burglary, Committed on and in the
Ware House of one Mr. William Loveday, Situate in the Parish of St. Michaels
London: It appeared that Cloth had been stolen thence to the value 120 l. and
that upon search, part of it was found in Crouders-Well-Alley in Jeven street;
and upon further inquiry it was proved to be brought thither by Charley and
others, as likewise other percels of Cloth, that had been carried out and
disposed of, and he having been formerly burnt in the hand, no person appearing
to give testimony on his behal^, he was found Guilty; when upon his Conviction
he became exceeding sad, imagining as he since confessed no mercy would be
allowed him, since he had refused to take warning by his former punishment. The
day following, being the 27th. of August last, he with Eight other Offenders
received Sentence of Death, and was returned to Newgate in order to prepare
himself for another World, his offenses having rendered him incapable of a much
longer continuance in this; where (upon his first arrival) he betook himself to
his Devotion, imploring the God of mercys, to have mercy upon his Soul; and
that in compassion thereto, he would be pleased to give him a heart to repent:
After these and such like expressions, he proceeded to declare he had been a
great sinner, though but a young man not exceeding 25. Years of Age: Being asked
what his former business was, and how he spent his time before he fell to such
unlawful courses; he said he was born of honest Parents in Coventry, who used
their faithful endeavors to qualify him by learning and what else was
convenient for business that might render him credible, and enable him to live
in the World; and that as soon as he was of Years capable for Employment, put
him Apprentice to one Mr. Hix, a Callender in the City of London, and furnished
him with all convenient necessaries; but he, after he had a while faithfully
served the said Mr. Hix, finding opportunity to ramble abroad sorted himself
with bad Company, which by degrees drew him to neglect his business and in the
end to steal, the better to support and maintain his Extravagance: Being asked
what was his first Fact in that Nature, he replied, stealing a considerable
quantity of Blew Cloth which he was entrusted with by his Master, or at least
had the opportunity of taking it, he being at that time a Porter to a Drapers
Shop, which Cloth he disposed of at a small value, but the Theft being found
out and proved against him; He was about Four Years since burnt in the Hand for
that Felony, and Cashired from his Service, after which; rambling up and down
he fell in Love with a Servant Maid, and to manage Gentilely his Courtship
(being destitute of any Lawful Employ, whereby he could support himself as he
desired) he said he betook himself to unlawful courses stealing (as opportunity
gave leave) Goods at sundry times from diverse persons, spending the small value
he had sold them at (being for the most part under hand) upon the Woman he so
earnestly desired; being asked how he found himself as to another State, he
replied, he was very sensible of his Latter End, desiring nothing more than
that he might live long enough to make his peace with God, whom he had offended
in so high a Nature, and whose Mercys and opportunities of Grace he had
slighted and rejected, for which he was heartily sorry, hoping that it was not
too late to repent him of the Evil of his ways, desiring such as came to visit
him, that they would in Christian Charity pray for him, that God might give him
a true Repentance, earnestly desiring that his misfortune might be of Efficacy
to prevail upon others not to give way to deceivers and deluding persons, to
entice them under any specious pretense whatsoever, to give up their mind to
Idleness and Vanity; but above all, he desired that all young men Apprentices
would seriously weigh his condition, and consider by what degrees he was
brought to be an Object of Misery, which he said he well hoped would be a means
to continue and retain them within the Bounds of Apprentices, viz. in minding
the business they were entrusted with, in pleasing their Masters, and giving
themselves to sobriety and moderation, but especially to avoid evil company,
for that had ruined him, and is indeed the Root of wickedness, shame and
disgrace.

To those that came to visit him he was very respectful, giving great attention
to such advice as was given him, relating to a preparation for Death, and so
continued very sensible and penitent during his being in Newgate.

Ann Scot, Convicted the same Sessions with the former, and receiving Sentence
of Death, upon Evidence that she had Feloniously taken a Flowered Mantua-Gown,
a Sattin-Petticoat and other Goods, out of the House of James Marmion, Situate
in the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West, and not being capable of saying any
thing material for her self; she upon her return to Newgate became sad as the
former, being frequently observed to wring her Hands and Sigh, saying, she was
the unhappiest Woman alive wishing she had never been Born, rather than to have
fallen into so unhappy a Condition: As for the place of her Birth, she said it
was in the County of Down in Ireland being brought up there to work diverse
curious Works with the Needle, but leaving her Parents, and coming over upon a
slight occasion, the chiefest Motive being to see this Country, and she after a
while brought to some necessity betook her self to Imbrodering, and found a
considerable Employment, living as a single Woman, in White's- Alley in
Chancery Lane, working there very hard, but that sort of business failing, she
fell into loose and idle Company, who encouraged her in Leudness, and
altogether took her off from her Employment to follow unlawful Courses, as well
Debauchery, and Prostitution, as plfering and many other Matters tending to
Defraud and Injustice, which by degrees had imboldened her to the height of
Wickedness in which she was overtaken: She said about a year since she was
Tried for a Cravat valued at 3 s. 6 d. which was stole, but there being no
other Evidence than that she had paun'd it upon the account of another, she was
acquitted, yet was not so wise as to lay that narrow escape to her Heart, nor
to take up, and rest her self satisfied therewith, wherefore what had since
befallen her, she said was just, and therefore if she must dye she would bear
it patiently, though it happened untimely; she not being above 34. Years of Age,
yet the greatest part of that time she had misimployed in sining against her
maker; few known sins that she was capable of Acting, Murder excepted, she
having been a stranger to her, yet she hoped God would not lay them to her
Charge in her last extremity, but out of the multitude of his Mercys, accept
her imperfect Repentance, being asked whether she found her self disposed to
embrace the penalty of the Law, punishing with Death such has had offended in
the like Nature as she had done, her reply was, that if she might live she
hoped she should employ her time for the future to a better advantage, but if
not, God's Will be done; and so continued in often Prayer to her self, seeming
very attentive to good and wholesome advice relating to her immortal welfare,
expressing her desire to be instructed therein, as much as Convenience and
Opportunity would permit, and in that State of Penitence during the Respit in
Newgate she was very diligent.

Seven other Persons lay likewise under the same Condemnation, as Catharine
Baucer, Cassandra Widows, for being concerned with Ann Scot, in Robbing Mr.
Marmion.

Thomas Draper, for stealing a Gelding, valued at 6 l. from one William Watson,
of the Parish of St. Sepulchers, on the 14th of August last.

John Thompson, for breaking the House of Thomas Temple of the Parish of St.
Michaels Wood-street on the 21th. of August last, and stealing thence 7.
Napkins value 4 s. 2 Handkerchiefs value 1 s. and other Linen.

Thomas Glanister, for breaking open the House of John Clark, in the Parish of
St. Andrews Holborn on the 2 d. of August last, and stealing 3 Stuff-Coats,
value 12 s. 2 pair of Breeches value 5 s. and other Goods of value.

Elizabeth Hacker, for stealing a Chamblet Cloak value 6 l. out of the Chamber
of one Alexander Hulston of the Parsh of St. Andrews Holbourn, on the 27th. of
July.

But these, in hopes of their amendment and being reclaimed, found the Royal
Mercy and Princely Compassion in a Gracious Reprieve for a longer Life, having
before expressed their Sorrowful sense of their sad Condition to which they had
brought themselves, by breaking the known Laws, and forfeiting their Lives to
Justice.

On Friday the 4th. of August, William Charley and Ann Scot were put in a Cart,
and conveyed to Tyburn, the place of Execution where they were Executed as the
Law in such Cases requires.

This may be Printd, R. L. S. September the 4th. 1685.
LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet in Black-Horse-Alley in Fleet Street, near
Fleet-Bridge, 1685.


