A True RELATION Of the late Action and Victory against the Rebels in England,
near Bridgewater, on Monday the 6. of July, 1685, From several Hands.
THE Rebels having exact Notice how the Kings Army was Encamped, did on Monday
6th. Instant, about 2 a clock in the Morning, with an extraordinary Silence,
march toward it, with a Design to fall upon the Right Wing, where the five
Companies of the Kings Royal Regiment of Foot, under the Earl of Dumbartoun's
Command, were posted, and were so near, that the Companies had scarce time to
form their Battallion, when they were charged very briskly by three of the
Enemies Battallions, whose Fire they received very patiently, till they were
advanced within 30 Paces of them; then the Scots Fired upon them so Vigorously,
that they made them reel; but by the Instigation of their Commanders Rallied
again. The Rebels had two pieces of Cannon playing with small Shot on the Camp
all this while, which continued a large half hour, during which time, the five
Companies maintained the Fight against all the Efforts of the Enemies, with the
loss of a considerable number of men on both sides: At last the Dragoons came
up to the Companies with one piece of Cannon, and the General on the Head of
them, encouraging and desiring them to Charge the Rebels, which they performed
so vigorously, that they beat them into the middle of the plain Field, where
the Horse Guards and Oxford's Regiment of Horse charged their Cavalry. The
Scots pursued the Rebels over a great many Ditches, killed a considerable
number of them, took 300 Prisoners, the 2 piece of Cannon and 5 Colors for
their own share, one of which is the Grand Rebels own Colors, with Motto in
Gold Letters, Fear nothing but GOD, the first he Landed with in England, taken
as it is reported, by Captain Robert Hacket. The Dragoons, and some of the
Kings Battallions of Foot, took several other Colors, and a great many
Prisoners. The Account of the Killed and Wounded follows.

Cap. Moncrief Wounded. Liev. Griffon Mortally Wounded. Leiv. Law Wounded.
Liev. Bruce Wounded. Liev Stirling Wounded. Liev Dury Wounded Ensign Mowat
Mortally Wounded. En. Lindsey Mortally Wounded. En. Macculloch Wounded. En.
Lundy Killed. Soldiers Killed 29. Wounded 67. whereof many Mortally Wounded.
It is believed they Killed and Wounded more than all the Army besides. The
Gentlemen and the other General Officers gave them thanks for the Victory of
the Day.

London, July 14.
A Yaught is ordered from hence for Edinburgh, to fetch Sir John Cochran and
Aleife hither, who its said will make a full Discovery of the Plot, Conspiracy,
and Rebellion.

James Scot late Duke of Monmouth, Ford late Lord Gray, and one Baicon a
Dutchman were brought yesterday by Guard of about 1500: Horse, from Frankholm
Castle, where they lay on Sunday Night, to Floxhall, to which place they came
about One a Clock, where they were met with the Kings Barges, double Manned
with my Lord Dartmouths Fusiers, they carried them from Floxhall to Reluthall,
where they stayed from that time till after Seven half an Hour, and Supt at Mr.
Cluffens Lodging: Monmouth before he came to this Town, wrote Letters to His
Majesty very submissively, and to the Queen Dowager, and Lord Thesaurer; in
that to His Majesty, he humbly desired he would permit him to see His Face; His
Majesty granted his desire, and while he was at Whitehall Yesterday half an
Hour, no Body being present but the two Principal Secretaries of State. As soon
as it was Flood, they were put on Board the Barges, and carried through Bridge,
and so into the Tower, through Traitors Gate.

From Rotterdam they write, That an English Ship is arrived there with above
150 English on Board, who are to inhabit on these parts.

This day the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex were at the Tower, to acquaint
James Scot late Duke of Monmouth, that he must prepare for Death, he being to
suffer to Morrow between the Hours of Nine and Twelve, on the Tower Hill: To
which the Scaffold is making ready, being in the same place where the Lord
Stafford, and Colonel Sidney died.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


