A True and Faithful Account of the seizing Thirty seven suspected Persons, and
amongst them some known Papists, who were Caballing against the Government in a
Tavern, with the manner of their Apprehension.
Licensed September. 6. 1689.

THe last Week some Designing Persons, as mentioned in the Gazette, took the
boldness to Seize both the Scots and Irish Mails, carrying away the King's
Pacquets from each; which as it is a matter of that high Concern, so it
Demonstrably bespeaks, that the Romish Party, who have a natural Propensity to
practice Mischief against the Government, design to have some extraordinary
Project put in Execution: But, as praised be God, none of their Contrivances
have hitherto met with Success, so the merit of the Cause, as well as the
indefatigable care of the Government is such, as to defeat the Designs of the
Disaffected and Grumbletonian Incendiaries, a more notable Instance has not
been extant.

The Mails aforesaid being seized, and thereby the King's Advice discovered,
extraordinary Diligence was used, to find out the Authors of this mischievous
Proceeding; and considering that not the Gaols, but rather some Taverns ought
to be inspected, a double Diligence and Scrutiny was made into several places,
where, under the Notion of meeting and drinking purely with a Friend there,
Complotting and Caballing was the Intent, and as the Sequel demonstrates, the
Cause. So the Government having got Information, that a more than ordinary
Number of Gentlement, etc. held a Rendezvous at one Brooks's, who keeps the New
Cock and Bottle in the Strand near Charing Cross. Two Messengers were appointed
on Thursday Evening to beat up their Quarters, who, considering the Number of
the Enemy they were like to Encounter with, prudently repaired to the Captain
of the Guard at Whitehall, and he forthwith sent a Lieutenant with one File of
Granadiers, and four of Muskets, to assist them in the Action; Command being
first given to load with Ball, and not to speak a word one to another in their
passage; which was performed with that Precaution and Diligence, that they
arrived at the aforesaid Tavern without the least Mistrust or Preknowledge, who
boldly entering the House, without staying for the Drawer to show them a Room,
they found out one themselves, but the Door being shut, took the liberty to
force an Entrance, where meeting with a great Number of Papists, they, like the
true Irish, were so bashful at their sight, that some hid themselves in the
Chimney, behind the Curtains, etc. and would have disposed of their Papers, but
were forced to surrender themselves with their Weapons, and what they had about
them that might be mischievous. The like diligence was used in other parts of
the House, where was scarce a place but they found some, and others escaping on
the Tops of the Houses; but being brought all into a Room, and commanded to sit
down, there was found to be Thirty seven of them, besides a Woman, there being
little Mischief done where one of their Sex is not concerned.

The Lieutenant, and Messengers took the Names of them Seriatim, and found
diverse Papists, several Officers and other Soldiers, some whereof had formerly
rid in the Lord Dover's Troop of Guards, under the Late King James: And some of
the Grumbletonian Gang, who finding the Late King's Interest in all the Three
Kingdoms to be near Expiring, would like a Candle give the greater Blast at
going out. And there was such Cause found against the Master of the House, tho
he pleaded he never saw them before, as to keep him a Prisoner with them. For
most part of the Night they continued in the Tavern, but afterward 21 of them
were sent to a Messengers in St. Martin's-lane, and 16 to another, where they
are kept Prisoners, while their Papers can be perused, and they Examined.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


