A. The Mary Rose B. The Hambererough Frigatt a Merchant C. The Roe Keleh D. a
Scotch Merchant bound for Cadiz E. a (...) which came with us from Tangier
bound for Sal^^^ F. The Half Moon an Algier Man of Ware the charging (...) had
^^ Gunns and 400 men G. Orange tree being the (...) ^^a^all 30 Gunns ^^^ Men H.
Seven Stars 30 Gunns 300 Men I. Whi^ (...) 30 Gunns 240 Men K. The Har^ 28
Gunns 260 Men L. Golden (...) the Turks Admiral he had ^^ Gunns 300 Men M. The
(...) ^ell (...) the Pri^^ N. The P^^^^ O. French Merchant


A
depiction of sailing ship

B
depiction of sailing ship

C
depiction of sailing ship

D
depiction of sailing ship

E
depiction of sailing ship

F
depiction of sailing ship

G
depiction of sailing ship

H
depiction of sailing ship

I
depiction of sailing ship

K
depiction of sailing ship

L
depiction of sailing ship

M
depiction of sailing ship

N
depiction of sailing ship

O
depiction of sailing ship

W. Holler delineauit et sculpsit


A True Relation of Capt Kempthorn's Engagement, in the Mary-Rose; with seven
Algier Man of War.
ANue 1669, in the beginning of December, His Excellency the Lord Ambassador
Hanry Howard, having obtained from the Emperor ot Barbary, Tassaleta, a Letter
of Security, to his content, had resolved to prosecute his Journey to the
Court; to which end, he ordered his Baggage, and most of his Retinue, to be
Embarked in the Mary Rose, which had Transported him from England; and
purposed himself, with some few of his Gentlemen and Servants, to the number of
fifteen or sixteen, to go by Land, and the Ship by Sea to Salee; resolving, as
soon as we were under Sail, to begin his Journey also.

Thus accordingly we set Sail on Wednesday the eighth of the said Month, at two
a clock in the morning, with the Wind at North-East, along the Shore of
Barbary; and having past Arzila that Evening, aster Midnight, we overtook a
great Flyboat of 300 Tuns; and finding her to be an English Vessel, fraighted
with Deal, Masts, Salt, and Tobacco, coming from New England, or those Parts,
and taken by the Algier Men of War off of the Cape St. Vincent, being bound for
Cadiz, we took, and made Prize of her; and having found 22 Turks aboard her,
and three christians, one a Russian, and two Englishmen, we transported them
aboard us, and sent other Men aboard her; and having examined the Principal of
them, found them to belong to a Squadron of Algier Men of War, who were
Cruising in those Seas: But the Prize being heavy loaders, and a bad Sailer
(insomuch that we were forced to tow her) did much prolong our Voyage, as that
we could not arrive till Saturday at Noon before Salee: Yet that flowness did
us a Courtesy for that time, though a Discourtefie afterward; for having for
the most part of the Forenoon taken notice of a Barque keeping betwixt us and
the Shore, and thinking her to be otherwise than she proved afterward, Captain
Kempthorn sent his Ketch to speak with her In the mean time we arrived before
Salee; and having handsomely trimmed our Ship with Pendants and other Ornaments,
and cast Anchor, we Saluted the Town with 11 Guns, and received for Answer,
silence. However, we made ready for Landing; and first the Steward only, in a
Pinace with another Gentleman, rowed toward the Shore; and while that was
doing, we saw at a distance, that our Ketch had overtaken the Barque, and after
a l^ttle time of Conference let her go with discharging ot a Gun; which Barque
made with full Sails toward us, to our great admiration; till coming nearer,
we pereceiv'd that she bore the King of Englands Colors, and discharged two
Guns; Then we concluded, that it was some extraordinary Message from his
Excellency; therefore the Captain commanded to discharge a Gun, and to make a
Waft for those who were roving toward the Shore, who seeing that, turned back
again, and came aboard. And the Vessel, being a Brigantine belonging to
Tangier, having aboard her a Gentleman of Quality, and a Captain, with 40
Soldie^, and 6 Brass Guns, did also approach, and delivered his Message, which
was, That we should not Land, but rather get aboard, if we could, ill those who
were ashore before, with the Goods also, matters at Tangier since our departure
being much altered; and had we not been retarded by the forementioned Prize,
this Message would have come too late

However, we stayed there till Monday, and seeing there could nothing be
effected, in getting those People aboard (because they were deram'd) and a
Storm being at hand forcing us from the Shore, we took the Sea; and having
fastened the said Brigantine at our Stern, we Cruisel that night and the day
following, in a Storm, far in the Sea, all the Men (...) the Brigantine being
aboard her, and suffered much. This evening we sa^ two Turks Men of War afar
off; and at night was a very great Storm, so that we were forced to take all
the Men of the Brigantine aboard us, and suffer her to be cast away. Next day,
the 15. the Weather continued: Toward evening we saw again a Turks Man of War,
chacing a Spanish Vessl but having pereciv'd us making toward him, he fled: By
and by we saw Land, it being La Rotta on the Spanish Coast; which we could not
reach, the Storm blowing out of the Levant, but were forced to keep at Sea
further off, and there to be tossed all that night and the day after. The 7
came to us a French Canary Man, bound for Cadiz; by and by, a Scotchman, from
the same place; We saw also two Turks Men of War; therefore those two Ships
came to us for Protection. Next morning at break of day we discovered seven
Turks Mer of War; and because their Course was toward us, therefore all
possible Preparation was made aboard us for the Fight, and all that might be
hurtful, or hinder us, removed, and thrown overboard, and our aforesaid Prize
forsaken, the Men taken aboard into the Mary Rose, and the Ship let drive
before the Wind. The same day before noon the Turks passed by us; but neither
Party attempted any thing; yet our Preparation went on to the utmost of our
power.

In the mean time, one of the Turks Ships, being a slow Sailer, and full of Men
(being the Half Moon) lagg'd about an English Mile behind the rest; so that
they were forced to stay for her, and to send out two Boars Manned to tow her.
Our Captain seeing that, who was near betwixt them both, sent also a Boat with
Men to intercept theirs, which caused a small Skirmish among them; but when we
saw that the Turks put out another Boat strongly provided, our Captain
commanded to make a Waft for our Man to come back again: After that, we saw
them to stand close together, no doubt, to consult what was to be done; and we
still preparing; still about three a clock they began to charge, whereupon
ensued a (...) Service, and much harm done on both sides; but the night being
at hand, they retired a little way, and there stayed till day, observing our
Motion; and because they should not think that we would run away in the dark,
Captain Kempthorn commanded Lights to be set out, that they might see where we
were; and so having taken some rest the same night, early in the morning we
were alarmed again; and having performed Solemn Prayers, immediately every one
repaired to his Station, for they were coming: And all things being well
ordered, especially that every other Gun should be fired at every Ship, to
preserve the rest for the second; by which means, every one of the Turks Men of
War received a sufficient opposition. We had also, besides our ordinary Ships
Crew, about 70 Land-Soldiers of Tangier, and about 4.0 of his Excellencies
Retinue; in all about 250 Men.

Thus began the Fight with a great courage; and they coming in a Line from the
Somh-East Quarter, the Half Moon was the foremost; and having come within
Pistol-shot, gave us his Small-shot, and his Broadside, and received as much
from us, and then having passed, bore off a little toward the Starboard,
North-East; the same order kept all the rest, the Golden-Lion, or Admiral
being, in the Rere, with intention to board us: After we had received these
five Broad-sides, even as he was coming up, with more Sails spread than the
rest, he received a Shot betwixt Wind and Water, and another which tore his
Main-Sail from end to end, and being thus disabled, stood off: His Companions
seeing that, tacked about, and compassing him round, went away fore the Wind
with all speed, which put an end to the Fight, God be thanked. The seventh Ship
all that while was pursuing our Prize, by which means we had one Enemy the
less. Thus we followed our Course, having lost thac day in the time of the
Fight our French Ship Companion, and the following night, the Scotchman and the
Pink; which Pink having aboard a number of Jews, Armenians, and the like
Companions, having during the Fight revolted against the Master of the Vessel,
endeavored to comply with the Turks, and having given some Signal, bore
towatds them: they mistrusting it to be a Fire-ship, began to avoid; but our
Captains providence hindered that Design. There were killed aboard us 11
Persons, 17 wounded, and the Ship; much dammag'd. The next day in the evening
we arrived in the Bay of Cadiz, being December 30. S. V. 1669.


