Unto His Grace, the Marquess of Tweeddale, His MAJESTY'S High Commissioner,
and the Remanent Honorable Estates of Parliament.
The SUPPLICATION of The Brewers in Edinburgh, Leith and Suburbs of the samen,
and Sheriffdom of Mid-Lothian
Humbly shows,
THat there being by the late Act of Parliament an Additional Imposition of
three pennies Scots, Imposed upon each Pynt of Ale and Beer brown and vented
within the Kingdom, and two shilling Scots upon each Pynt of strong Waters, by
and attour two Merks of each Boll of Malt formerly payable to his Majrsty, and
two pennies upon each Pynt of Ale, payable to the Town of Edinburgh, and which
Imposition was appointed to endure and continue until the first of May 1695
Years; Albeit your Petitioners were at that time very sensible that the
foresaid additional Imposition would be very grievous and heavy upon them, yet
being very confident that his Sacred Majesty, and the Honorable Estates of
Parliament would not allow the same to be continued upon them, beyond the time
prescribed by the foresaid Act: We did, with all duty and submission hitherto,
and during that time, make punctual payment of the same, albeit thereby several
Brewers have been utterly ruined and broken, and many others of us in hazard of
falling under the same Misfortune, by the great prejudice we have sustained by
the said additional Impossition this twenty three months bypast; And as we do
humbly and confidently expect to be liberat from the like Imposition for the
future, so we do humbly beg leave to represent to your Grace, and the
Honorable Estates of Parliament these following Grounds, for clearing what
great Prejudice we have already sustained thereby: And convincing your Grace,
and the High and Honorable Court of Parliament, that it is simply impossible
for us to undergo such an heavy and untollerable burden for the future, without
inevitable Ruin to our selves and Families, in case we should continue to
exercise our Trade and Employment of brewing as formerly. The Barley Beer
having been for some years bygone, and presently being sold at or about ten
merks, and the Impositions paid by the Brewers their twenty three Months
bypast, amounting to six merks: each boll of Barley Beer stands sixteen merks,
besides which there is to be added, House, Barn, Kill and Brewhouse-rent, the
expenses of Coal and Candle, mantaining of Horses, Slaids and other Necessars,
and the great Charge of many Servants, brewing Looms etc. who are absolutely
necessary for carrying on an Brewarie. The Multure paid for Malt, besides a
great many inconveniences which attend the grinding of Malt, and the having of
many Servants; So that it may be truly said, that every Boll of Malt costs
eighteen merks or thereby: And yet all that can be drawn or got of sufficient
two shilling Ale, such as the Retailers or Vintners will take of their hand
(considering the greatness of the Measure the Ventners do receive) is at most
sixteen Gallons of each Boll, the price whereof no Brewer can account more than
sixteen shillings starl. considering that we give allowance of a Barrel to the
score, and of Drink-money, and all this is over and above the great hazard of
insolvent Debitors, and at the best of long out-lying of our Money, and of
spoiled and returned Ale, which very often falls out, especially in hot
weather, even without any fault of the Brewers, either by reason of Thunder, or
the malice and evil will of the Tapster.

Secundo, We humbly crave Liberty to mind your Grace and Lordships, that as the
foresaid Imposition has been most prejudicial to your Petitioners, so likewise
to all Heritors, and such who sold Beer: For this must needs follow, that the
Nobility and Gentry and others who uses to sell Beer cannot expect such a price
as we would be encouraged to give for Beer, in case we were free of the
foresaid Imposition, for such Brewers as shall think fit to continue will in
buying of Beer have some regard to, and consideration of their own Advantage,
as far as possible, and of the preventing their own ruin. And further, if the
Brewers, who are the Chief, if not the only Buyers do break (as by what is
above represented, it is clear they must) then the Nobility and Gentry cannot
expect good payment, but must suffer loss with them.

Tertio, As it is the interest of the Heritors upon the forsaid account, That
the forsaid Imposition be not Renewed, so likewise upon the following, viz.
That thereby there will be less consumption of Beer, for such Brewers who shall
think fit to continue must needs make their Ale smaller.

Quarto, We humbly crave Liberty to represent, that it seems very hard that We
or the Beer should be the great Fond of all Impositions, and that others and
other Commodities less favorable, and more able than Beer go free, seeing it is
conceived that as all persons do share proportionally in his Majesty's bounty
and benign Government, So likewise should they bear a proportional part of the
burden; Whereas, as said is, there are a great many Fonds, and Persons much
richer than your Petitioners, who have gone free this while by past, and if
other Fonds and Persons be stented proportionally, to what your Petitioners and
the Beer is, there might be a very considerable Supply granted to his Majesty.

Quinto. Your Petitioners humbly crave Liberty to represent, that it likewise
would prove very prejudicial to His Majesty to continue the said Imposition,
seeing, as said is the Brewers will thereby inevitably be ruined, or give over
their brewing, 'in either of which cases the Supply intended to be granted to
His Majesty will not prove effectual: for if they break, as bygone experience
has demonstrat, they daily do, they will brake with part to the King, and if
they forbear, then the Excise will not amount to what is expected.

Sexto, Seeing that many of us have at great Charge erected Stells for making of
Waters of our Dregg, and spoiled and returned Ale, for lessening our Losses in
some measure, and that we have paid for our Dregg and spoiled and returned
Ale, three Impositions, it seemed very hard that we should have been obliged to
pay for any Waters made of our Dregg or returned Ale, seeing thereby we were
made liable for a fourth Imposition altogether intolerable, and it is hoped
that it was not the meaning of the Parliament that any such thing should have
been formerly exacted, far less ought to be continued.

And lest it should be objected against us, that Experience has taught that the
foresaid Imposition has proven a good and effectual Fond and Method for raising
of Money, the samen having been very readily and pleasantly paid, and that the
Brewers do continue in alse good case as ever, and the Ale as strong as
formerly, and that the Heritors were never sensible of any difference of the
price of Bear, by reason of the foresaid Imposition, and that the Brewers may
if they please; raise the price of their Ale, or that the foresaid Imposition
may be imposed upon the Retailers with advantage, both to the King and Brewers.
We humbly crave Liberty to Represent; That (as said is) sad Experience proves
that the foresaid Imposition has not only obliged several Brewers to quite
their Employments, but even occasioned their ruin and braking: And albeit some
whose Stock or Credit was more considerable, did continue to brew, by reason of
the severity of the Certification in case they left off, and that being
surprised with such an Act, they had more than a years fore-hand Beer on their
Hand, for which their Credit stood engaged, so that they were necessitat to
Brew at any rate for keeping their Credit, and that they believed that the
foresaid Imposition would be no older than twenty three Months, yet by what is
before represented, it is hoped it is to a Demonstration clear, that all along
during the Existance of that Imposition we did brew with a Loss, and if it
continue, we must all either Ruin or leave off our Employment, to the
prejudice both of His Majesty and the Nobility and Gentry, etc. And however,
the great Export of Beer which was the former year, might have occasioned the
keeping up of the Price of Beer, yet the Experiance of many this year, and
Reason may teach any thinking Person, that in case of any subsequent plentiful
Year, the Heretors must suffer an great Abatement as to the Price of the Beer,
or otherwise be obliged to keep the same upon their own hands, to their great
loss and detriment; Neither has it hitherto been possible for the Brewers,
(notwithstanding of an express Act of Council in their favors, of the date the
7th of September 1693, allowing them to highten the Price of Ale,) to get any
greater price for their Ale than what they got formerly, notwithstanding of
great Endeavors used by them for making the said Act effectual, and that by
reason Ale is a very perishing Commodity, and that there are too many different
Brewers in different Circumstances, and that our Country People are very poor,
and that the Workmen and poorest of the People, and not the Gentry, are these
who make the greatest Consumption of Ale, and albeit some have brewed als good
Ale as formerly, yet that was occasioned by the Retailers their refusing to
retail any smaller Ale, and that the Ale as said is, is a perishing Commodity,
admitting of no delay in retailing, and that they expected the foresaid
Imposition would be but of small endurance, and therefore brewed upon their own
Stocks with loss, in hopes that after elapsing of the twenty three Months they
would be free, and that as said is, the Brewers were obliged to dispatch the
Victual they had in their hands at any Rate, for keeping their Credit; And if
the Imposition should be laid upon the Ventners and Retailers, it would neither
prove profitable to His Majesty, nor easy to the Brewers, but will have the
quite contrair Effect: For if the Brewers should be thereby ruined, then it
cannot be but acknowledged that His Majesty will be a Loser, seeing if the
Brewing be the Fond of the Imposition, and the Brewers break, the Imposition
must fail in consequence, and that the Brewers will be ruined thereby, is clear
from this, that the samen tho laid upon the Retailers, will affect the Brewers,
seeing the Ventners and the Retailers will buy Ale with respect to the said
Imposition, in the same manner as the Brewers do buy from the Heretors, besides
that the Methods for making that way effectual, would be such as would
altogether ruin Brewers, considering that as said is, Ale is a perishing
Commodity, and cannot admit of any delay, especially in Summer weather, and
seeing that it is hoped, that by what is before and above represented, it is
clear, that your Petitioners standing and falling depends upon the continuing
or not continuing of the said Imposition, and that we have been already at a
very considerable Loss. And that as the Land-rent is already liable to the
payment of the greatest part of all public Burdens and Impositions, and the
great Impositions upon Beer and Malt, being an unanswerable Reason for lessning
the Price of the Beer, the same is by Consequence an additional Imposition upon
the Land-rent; and so the Heretors and your Petitioners, are in a manner the
Chief, if not only the persons burdened hitherto with the payment of Supplies:
And which clears a greater inequality, these Heretors whose Rents are payable
in Beer, and Barley do bear the great Burden of this additional Imposition,
whereas other Heretors whose Rents are payable in Meal or Money, are liable
allennarly to an ordinary Proportion effeiring to the Land-rent, and to no part
of the Impositions imposed upon Beer or Barley, which lies so heavy upon other
Heretors.

It is humbly craved, your Grace and Lordships would be pleased to take the
Premises and your Petitioners Case to your Consideration, and would be pleased
to lay such Supplies as shall be found necessar to be granted to His Majesty
for carrying on the War, in which he is so justly engaged, upon other Fonds
which are more able to bear them than Beer, and to fall upon some Method for
making up your Petitioners Loss sustained by the Brewing this 23 Months
bypast, and to free us from any such Additional Impositions for the future.


