Two Great Victories.

I.

One obtained by Colonel FLEETVVOOD at Shaftsbury on Sunday, August the 3.
1545.

51 Of the Kings Commissioners taken Prisoners as they sat in Council, with a
perfect List of all their Names.

II.

Another Victory obtained by Lieutenant General CRVMWELL, against the Clubmen
at Hambleton-Hill.

2500 Routed. 300 Taken Prisoners.

2000 Arms taken. 12 Slain upon the place.

Many wounded.

Also all their Colors, and Drums taken, and all the rest of their Baggage.

Commanded to be Printed, and is published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET. 1645.

The whole relation of the taking of all the Kings Commissioners, as they sat
in Counsel at Shaftsbury, and were brought Prisoners to Sherburne, by Colonel
FLEETVVOOD, on the Lords day, August, 3. 1645.
SIR;
COncerning the surprising of the Kings Commissioners at Shaftsbury, it was
briefly thus:

The General being marched from the Leaguer Westward, upon some intended
designs that way; left Sherburne still sufficiently besiedged. And the Enemy
seeing their friends straightened in the Castle? Used means for some addresses to
be made to the King, for some course to be taken for their relief, and
procured a Letter from the King to that purpose, which was sent to his Agents
of the Club-men to gather strength, for the raising of the siedge, upon Sir
Thomas Fairefaxes advance.

The leaders of the Clubmen, receiving these Letters from the King, met at
Shaftsbury on Saturday the 2 of August, 1645, to consult what course to take,
for the effecting thereof; and having their instructions ready, some
observations were made, that they were not full enough for the carrying of of
this design, and that therefore three more might be debated on to be added.

But the mean while Sir Thomas Fairefax hearing of the proceedings of the
Club-men; doubted that if they should go on, it might impede the proceedings
of those he had left before Sherburne, for the taking thereof; where were in
the Leaguer, Colonel Pickering with a Brigade of 2000 foot, and Colonel
Walleyes Regiment of Horse; to whom the General returned the same day (being
Saturday) to Sherburne, where he himself come, and took up his head quarters;
and from whence he immediately sent Colonel Fleetwood with his own, and
Colonels Walleyes Regiments of Horse, to go to Shaftsbury to oppose the Kings
Commissioners Jesuitical design.

With those two Regiments Colonel Fleetwood marched to Shaftsbury, and so
divided his Forces, that when he came before the Town, he set one part to
surround the Town, whilst the rest marched into Sherburne, where the
Commissioners were then sitting and surprised them all, not one of them
escaping him; And they were all brought in Prisoners this day to the General
to Sherburne, where they were all examined one by one; I have sent you the List
of all their names many of them are malignant Priests, and all of them notable
sticklers for the enemy in these parts.

The General con^uted them all one by one: the Clergy by Scripture and their
Adv^cate Yorg by Law; showing them plainly how themselves acted contrary to
their own Principles and pretenses,

Dated at the Leaguer before She^burne, August 3, 1645.
A List of the Country Gentlemen called the Leaders of the Club men for Wilts,
Dorset, and Somerset, brought Prisoners to Sherbourne on the Lords day Aug. 3.
1645. taken at Shaftsbury.
MAster John Saintlo. Mr. Richard Buckridge. Mr. William Smith. Mr. Thomas
Iervis. Mr. John Lovell. Mr. John Estmond. Mr. Francis Craddocke. Mr. Ed.
Davis. Mr. Henry Hayward. Mr. Laurence Hide. Mr. Thomas Bonnet. Mr. John Pope.
Mr. Thomas Rose. Mr. Henry Gouge. Mr. John Enery. Mr. John Bennet. Mr. John
Carry. Mr. Edward Boon. Mr. Nicholas Bingham. Mr. Thomas Roet. Mr. Robert
Squire. Mr. Richard Alborne. Mr. Charles Simmes. Mr. Frances Abbot. Mr. Robert
Sapit. Mr. Thomas Marvel. Mr. Robert Hollis. Mr. Samuel Forward. Mr. William
Fireall. Mr. Charles Studley. Mr. Thomas Brook. Mr. John King. Mr. Edmond
Clarke. Mr. Martin Marble. Mr. Thomas Bunce. Mr. William Sanders. Mr. William
Blunt. Mr. John May. Mr. John Corbet. Mr. Richard Craddocke. Mr. John Pill. Mr.
Robert Ieffery. Mr. William Ford. Mr. Matthew Martin. Mr. William Laning. Mr.
Henry Goodwyn. Mr. Rock. Mr. Win. Mr. Hollis. Mr. Young. Mr. Joll^ffe.
Many of these are malignant Ministers.

A Relation of the routing and dispersing of 2500 Club-men, by Leiutenant
General Cromwell, that were gathered in a Body in Batalia upon Hambleton-Hill
near Blanford.
SIR,
FOR my last, it was but in part of what (God be thanked) is since perfected;
For since the bringing in of the Commissioners I then gave you an account of,
which were the Malignant heads of the Club-men; we have now broken and routed
the body also, the manner thus;

The Club-men sent (on the Lords day at night) to have their Leaders delivered
to them, and caused their Bells to be rung in all places, and Alarms to be
given in their usual way of rising, and this morning about 2500. instantly met
at Hambleton-Hill with their Colors which were all White, (for they had got
white silken Colors) and their Drums, and several Weapons, Muskets, Pikes,
Pisto's, Birdingpeeces, Bills, Halberts, and many several Weapons and had
drawn themselves into a body.

Leiutenant General Cromwell with 500. Dragoones, and 500. more in a reserve
to march after them, marched out from the Leaguer toward the Club-men, and
facing them, they drew into Batalia and stood in a great and ancient Roman
work which is upon those hills, and admitted a Parley.

Lieutenant General Crumwell demanded of them the reason of their rising, they
answered to redeem their heads, requiring the Commissioners to be delivered to
them, and then they said, they would return, home, but without their Leaders
they would not disband.

Lieut: Gen: Cromwell returned answer, that they had them Prisoners: and that
they were to answer for what they had done; and that they were at Sherburne
with the General, and made a very full and worthy speech to them, to persuade
them to be wise and return home in peace; showing them how they have been
misled by a company of Malignants: and declaring what care the General had
taken to secure their estates, and settle peace amongst them and what comfort
they found, that submitted thereunto.

But the Club-men were very unruly; vapouring, and protesting, pounctually to
rescue, and redeem their Leaders, (and indeed, they are the very notorious
ringleaders of the Malignants of these parts) but the moderate party
(especially about Sommersetshire) do much deride their folly.

Lievttenant General Cromwell took great pains to appease them without
shedding of blood, but nothing would satisfy them, but to have (their Leaders)
their Heads, delivered to them.

Whereupon, the Club-men being in Battalia, Leivtenant General Cromwell drew up
his Forces and charged them with the 500. Dragoons, and slew some 12 of them,
wounded many, took some 2 or 300 Prisoners, of the most notorious of them, and
routed and dispersed the rest, who fled all home, leaving their Colors, and
their Arms behind them. And we hope that now they will no more trouble us so
again.

Sherburne, August 4th, 1645.
A List of what was taken from the Club-men in the fight between them and
Lieutenant General Cromwell at Hambleton-hill on Monday the 4th of August 1645.
Two thousand five hundred routed. Three hundred taken Prisoners. Twelve slain
upon the place. Many wounded. Two thousand Arms of all sorts viz. Muskets,
Pikes, Pistolls, Halberts, Birding pieces. etc. All their Cullers, and Drums,
and other Baggage. On our side we lost only three men and some wounded.
FINIS.

