TERMS of Depositation of the Disposition by Mochrum to Greenock.
AT Edinburgh the fifteenth Day of December One thousand six hundred and eighty
seven Years, THE WHILK Day there was subscrived be Mrs. Isabel Nicolson, one of
the three Heirs Portioners served and retoured in special to the deceast Thomas
Lord Napier, sometime designed Sir Thomas Nicolson of Carnock, Spouse to James
Dunbar of Mochrum, with Consent of her said Husband, and he for himself, and as
taking Burden upon him for his said Spouse, and be them both with an mutual
Advise, Consent and Assent, an Disposition of the said Mrs. Isabel her third
Part of the Lands and Barony of Carnock and Plain, and others contained in the
said Disposition in Favors of (...) and of his Heirs therein mentioned, and
which Disposition is depositate be the said Mrs. Isabel and her said Husband in
the Hands of Mr. Hew Dalrymple Advocate, upon the Terms and Conditions
underwritten, viz. That whereas the Disposition is granted to the said blank
Person, it is communed and agreed upon, that the foresaid blank Disposition is
to the Behoof of Sir John Schaw of Greenock, and is to be delivered to the said
Sir John, upon his Payment of the Price, or giving Security for the same in
Manner underwritten, viz. at the Rate of eighteen Years Purchase for the Stock
of the said Lands, both Victual and Money-rent, accompting the Victual ninety
Pounds the Chalder Over-head, conform to a Rental subscrived by the Disponers,
and likewise depositate: And if it appear, that any Thing is stated in that
Rental which is not due, or presently payable be the Tenants of the said Lands,
the same is to be deduced from the Price, or if any Thing be omitted out of the
Rental which is due, and payable out of the Lands disponed, the Receiver of the
Disposition is to pay for the same at the Rate foresaid, declaring, That albeit
the Measure of the Barony be greater than that of the Shire of Stirling, yet
there is no Addition to be made to the Rental on that Account, nor are the
Poultry or Kain valued by the Communing. AND in Regard, it is yet unclear, what
Right the said Disponers have to the Teinds of the Lands disponed, whether the
same be heritable, long or short Tacks; therefore it is declared, That the
Price of the said Teinds shall be according to the Disponer's Right thereto,
and the samen to be determined by Mr. William Hamiltoun and Mr. Hew Dalrymple
Advocates, and in Case of Variance betwixt them be Sir John Dalrymple his
Majesty's Advocate as Oversman, to whom the Disponers do absolutely submit, and
refer themselves after the Consideration of the Rights. AS LIKEWISE the said
Sir John Schaw, by accepting, receiving or using of the foresaid Disposition,
obliges him to obtemper and fulfill the same, and subscrive a Double of their
present Terms of Depositation, and is to pay or grant Security for the^foresaid
Price, betwixt and the first Day of March next to come, otherwise the foresaid
Disposition is hereby declared null. AND the said Mrs. Isabel Nicolson and her
said Husband receiving the said Security, the said Disposition is to be
delivered up to the said Sir John with the Rental, and Terms of Depositation,
to be be him used at his Pleasure, which Terms of Depositation are to be
cancelled be the said Sir John; DECLARING likewise, that the Subjects set to
the Lord Elphingstoun is not to be counted a Part of the Rental, according to
the present Tack-duty, but the true intrinsic Worth thereof, as it may be set
to other Tenants, is to be determined be his Majesty's Advocate, or otherwise
the Sellers are to except the same out of their Bargain in their Option. In
Witness whereof, written by William Wilson, Servitor to James Hamilton Writer
to his Majesty's Signet, the said James Dunbar of Mochrum, and the said Mr. Hew
Dalrymple, have subscrived their Presents with their Hands, Day and Place
above-written, before these Witnesses, the said James Hamilton and William
Wilson his Servant. AND it is hereby declared, that the said Mrs. Isabel
Nicolson has not yet subscrived the said Disposition, but only the said James
Dunbar. Sic subt. Ja. Dunbar, Hew Dalrymple; Ja. Hamilton Witness, Wm. Wilson
Witness.

Follows the Copy of the Prorogation of the said Terms of Depositation signed
by Mochrum and his Lady.
AT Mochrum the fifth Day of April One thousand six hundred and eighty eight
Years, conform to the Terms of Depositation in the Hands of Mr. William
Hamilton and Mr. Hew Dalrymple, of Date the fifteenth December One thousand six
hundred and eighty seven, and the Prorogation granted by Mr. Hew Dalrymple the
twenty fifth February One thousand six hundred and eighty eight, I James Dunbar
of Mochrum do by their Presents prorogue and continue the foresaid Terms to the
fifteenth Day of June next, in all Articles and Clauses contained in the
foresaid Depositation, as Witness this my Hand, Day, Year and Place foresaid,
written and subscrived by me, before their Witnesses, John Stewart of
Livingstoun younger, and Thomas Stewart of Finteloch.

JA. DUNBAR. JO. STEWART Wit. J. STEWART Wit.

I consent to the above-written Prorogation and Articles J. NICOLSON.


