Twelve Serious Queries, proposed to the conscientious deliberate consideration
of all Electors of Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses for the next intended
Assembly at Westminster, touching Members to be now Elected by them to serve
therein.
1. WHether any Novices or young raw Gentlemen or Burgesses, unacquainted with
or not versed in Parliamentary, or State Affairs?

2. Whether any active Contrivers, Imposers, Collectors; Treasurers, Sharers,
Continuers of their late and present heavy uncessant Taxes, Excises, Imposts,
Contributions?

3. Whether any open Infringers, Subverters, Impugners of their Hereditary
Fundamental Laws, Liberties, Freedoms, by illegal Imprisonments, Confinements,
Sequestrations, Disseisins, Seisures of their Estates, Goods, Persons,
Writings, forcible ransacking of their Houses, Closets, Cabinets, by Soldiers,
or otherwise?

4. Whether any High Court of Justice-men, who have condemned or executed any
English Freemen without a Legal Indictment, or Trial by a lawful Jury of their
Peers, against the Great Charters and Fundamental Laws of the Land, and the
opinion of the very present Judges themselves, or any who have had a vote in
erecting such Judicatories or countenanced them in any kind?

5. Whether those who have been instrumental in subverting the Rights,
Privileges, Free.+dome, Constitution of Parliaments themselves, and in
securing, secluding, imprisoning the Members thereof for the faithful discharge
of their duties?

6. Whether any who have had a vote in depriving most Freeholders, Burgesses of
their Voices, Rights and Freedoms in Elections, both in Countries, Cities,
Buroughs, and lately secluded many ancient Buroughs from electing any
Burgesses?

7. Whether any who had a hand in introducing Scottish and Irish Knights,
Citixens, Burgesses into the Parliaments of England against the very
constitution, Privilege, Honor of our English Parliaments and Nation, who have
no votes in Scottish or Irish Parliaments, though subordinate to England and its
Parliaments?

8. Whether any who have enriched themselves by the unjust plunder and spoil of
any private Person, or of the public Lands and Revenues of the Nation, which
should defray the Ordinary Expenses of the Government, and ought to be resumed
for that end to ease the people in and from their Taxes?

9. Whether any Military Officers in present Command, who impose live upon,
levy, share the former, present Public Taxes, Exercises and are likely to
share and dispose of all the future, and have been the chief Instruments of our
late Bondage, Oppressions, Burdens, and make a gainful endless; trade of
War?

10. Whether any timorous, Cowardly, faint-hearted Persons, who will neither
speak nor act for the public Laws, Liberties, Ease, or welfare of the Nation,
or very coldly, and will do any thing to secure their own private Interests,
though the Public suffer Shipwreck by it?

11. Whether any who eagerly canvas for places, Voices, by Letters from Great
men in present power, Bribes, promised favors or rewards, Menaces, or any
indirect mean, Or Persons of no publik Eminency, Integrity, or Estate, who are
more apt to seek their own private interests, and theirs who recommend them,
then the public ease, welfare, settlement of the Nation?

12. Whether any ambitious or covetous selfseeking Temporizers, who aim only
at their own private preferments by complying with ay prevailing party; or such
who seek to be chosen to exempt themselves from arrests, or payments of their
Debts?

Whether all or any of these, at any time, but especially at this season, in
reason, prudence, policy, justice, conscience, may or ought to be elected
Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, in any County, City, or Borough whatsoever?
And whether the choice of any such, (...) any place, at this instant time, will
not be a breach of the Electors trust, an injury to the who^^ Nation, and a
forfeiture of their right of Electing any Members for the future, if not a
(...) betraying of their own as well as the whole English Nations, and
Parliaments Rights and Liberties, beyond possibility of any future restitution,
if Elections of any or many such should now be made through improvidence,
favor, or flatery of Great men? Consider and declare your judgments herein, by
your prudent and careful Elections.

FINIS.

