Unto the Right Honorable The Lords of Council and Session The REPORT,
REPRESENTATION, and PETITION, of the Committee of ADVOCATS, appointed by your
Lordships to meet with the Stent-Masters of Edinburgh:
SHOWS
THAT in pursuance of the privileges found by Decree of your Lordships in
February 1687 to belong to the Members of the College of Justice and in
obedience to your Lordships appointment whereby we were authorized and
appointed by your Lordships to go through with the Stent-Masters of Edinburgh
and to do all things necessar in order to the seeing of the Towns proportion of
the public burdens, Justly and equally said on etc. We did meet with the
Moderator of the Stent and remanent Stent-Masters and ^id concert with them,
that the going through in order to the Survey, should Commence the 2d of January
last; And that we might make survey Books of our own, In such manner as we
should think fit, in regaird they would not allow us the use of their Survey
Books of the former year for our Information. And because as they pretended, it
would be eight or ten days work they desired we might be punctual in observing
the diets, which we agreed to Because they pretended they were oblidged to
enclose in order to the proportioning of the Stent upon the to day of January
thereafter, which we also were satisfied with, that so the business might have
^een completed before the commencement of the Session.

Conform to this Concert, we did begin the Survey upon the 2d of January, and
continued so to do for some diets very punctually. But at length the Stent
Masters perceiving that we did more seriously apply in this than in any former
years for attaining to the full knowledge (...) that affair, by making scrolls
of the survey in the terms as we had concerted with the Stent Masters of
before. They became most uneasy and shifted the going through, albeit we were
always ^eady. For a specious pretext to those delays, some pretended one
excuse and some an other ^^us perceiveing that their design could be no other
but to weary us out of it or to run us upon the Session, when we could not so
conveniently attend. We did commission at some of our Number to signify to the
Moderator of the Towns Stent-Masters, That we were observing unpresiden^^d and
extraordinary delays in their making up the survey, with which we would
acquaint our Lordships unless they would rectify that abuse for the future,
and having received no sa^^^factory answer, we did require them under form of
Instrument to go through de die in diem ^^d Protested in the terms of our
Instruments herewith produced. Notwithstanding whereof al^eit some of them did
thereafter go for some diets, yet they did it with such reluct^ancie, that ^ll
of them never went at once, and kept us still in suspense, with such sham and
Dilatory an^wers as this, that they knew not ^hether they could go or not.
Whereupon we resolved amongst our selves, not only ^o be ready to attend them
daily until the Session should sit down ^^at we might have redress. But also
that we might now and then require those Stent-masters (...) our particular
districts, to go about the survey, with us at the ordinary diets, and which all
(...) us did observe, as appears by several Instruments likewise herewith
produced, but all to no ^urpose, none of us having had opportunity to go through
out whole bounds, and some not one half and others not a third thereof; through
the Stent-Masters their not concurring to attend the ^ets. By all which it is
very presumeable that there is some Latent Mystery in that affair, To ^^e
knowledge whereof they do not incline the College of Justice should attain,
Especialy seeing ^s is certain that before the Revolution, when Eight months
Cess was imposed, the proportions of the Heritors was only about Eight per Cent
of the valued rent, and now in these latter years it has been for the most part
15 or 16 or 17 per cent and some times more, for the like Number of Months. And
seeing there is no apparent Method of discovering what occasions this
difference, unless we be present at the whole survey, and so have before us the
Total rent of the Town, and Likeways be present at proportioning the Stent,
both upon Land and Trade, ^^d that now they absolutely refuse to go through,
unless we would engage to make no scrolls (...) write, of the Survey, and which
if veilded to, might render the design altogether Elusory: and ^^t to Evidence
the desire we had of contributing our endeavors, to procure a lasting
Friend^^ip betwixt the College of Justice and the good Town, we did so far
comply with the de^^re of some of the Magistrates and Moderator of the Stent
that after several meetings and communings wherein they represented (tho
without ground) that our making up of Scrolls (...) the valuation might give
umbrage to the neighbourhead we agreed to superceed the perfecting (...) these
Scrolls upon their going into such proposalls as might tend to give us the
^erfect knowledge and information of the way and manner of imposing and
^ollecting their Stent, upon Land and Trade, which we gave in unto them (...)
the terms hereto subjoyned and to which proposalls though they pretended to
acquiesce* yet when we came to require some proper Security for the
performance, viz. Th^^ the Moderator of the Stent and the Praeses of our
Committee, for their respective Brethren (...) the Proposals, in token of their
being agreed to by both parties, the same was positively refused to us: from
which it is very plain, that the design from the beginning has been, and sti^^
continues, to deprive us of all proper means, whereby to come to the knowledge
of any suc^ particulars, as your Lordships Decree and Act of Sederunt, and
privileges of the College of Justice thereby confirmed, intitles us to: And
seeing our demanding some security on the part of the good Town and these
Stent-masters for performance of so modest and equal Proposals as we tend^^ to
them, was both equal, and absolutely necessary; since otherwise, without some
Document of their Consent in writing, they would no doubt have resiled in the
same manner from the^^ as they did from the first Concert solemnly agreed to
betwixt the Stent masters and us at a g^^^ral Meeting, whereby at their own
desire, and by their consent we were to make up Valuati^^ Books of our own, in
regard they refused us the benefit of their old Scrol-books for sa^ that
labor: And ye^ after we had all undergone a great Fatigue, in going through
and carry^^^ on our Books a considerable length, they all broke off the
Concert, and refused to go through any more with us, unless we would lay aside
making up of Books any further. Therefore (...) is humbly craved, that your
Lordships may apply some effectual Remedy for preventing the Abuse committed
against the Members of the College of Justice, and particularly (att^^ any
other proper Expedient that can be fallen upon) to ordain the Town Council of
Edinburg^ and the present Stent Masters to produce the former years Books, both
of the Surveys (...) subscribed Stent Books of Land and Trade (the inspection
of which subscribed Books by (...) Act of Parl, is allowed to every Neighbor
to demand) and that in order to the making upon this years Survey, they may be
ordained to go throw at such Diets, as we who are appointed (...) your
Lordships to at end the same, may conveniently be present, for perfecting the
Scrolls whe^^in we are already advanced as far as we have surveyed; that so
your Lordships Authority m^^ be salved; and our Privileges vindicated in the
terms, and conform to your Lordships Act of ^^derunt and Decree above
mentioned.

Here follows the Articles agreed to, betwixt the Moderator (...) Stent-Masters
of Edinburgh, with concourse of Baillie Nai^ and Dean of Gild Neilson, on
behalf of the Magistracy (...) Council of Edinburgh, and the Committee of
Advocats a^pointed by the Faculty, and authorized by the Lords of S^^sion.
1mo, THAT the eight Advocats appointed by the Faculty of Advocats, and
authorized by (...) Lords of Session, shall not only go along with the Stent
Masters, at their taking (...) the several Surveys, but also make their
respective private Remarks apart, and at (...) close of each Diet, that the
haill Books, wherein the Valuations are contained and set down (...) the
Stent-Masters, be marked by the Advocats present: for preventing the
Substitution of ot^ in their place.

2do, That the said haill Scroll Books shall be seen when finished, and
perused by the ^^vocats themselves at their own Meetings, and remain with them
for a competent space, not (...) than 48 hours before enclosing.

3tio, That they shall see the Books containing the Total of the Stent, both
upon Land (...) Trade, made up from the respective Scroll Books, as likeways
the Collectors Book made (...) from the whole, which is the Rule of the
upli^^ing; that they may peruse them amongst th^^selves for a competent space,
not less than 48 hours, and compare the one with the other, ^^ter the said
Books are made up by the Stent-Masters, and that both before and after sig^
thereof, and that the Moderator may be present with the Advocats, at the
perusing the s^^^ Books.

4to, That the Diets for completing the Survey, and for proportioning the
Stent, a^^ enclosing, shall be concerted and a ^ju^ed, to the respective
Advocats of the Committee (...) Conven^entle.

5to, That Mr. Walter Stuart continue to make up his Scroll Book for the third
Bo^ in conjunction with the Stent Masters of the said Bounds, till they come
within four P^ of the old Scroll-Book, that so he may bring his Book equally up
with others of the Co^mittee of Advocats, which he has (...) as yet gotten
done, throw those Stent-Masters, appointed for his bounds, being the (...) who
broke off the Survey.


