TERENCE's COMEDIES: Made ENGLISH.

WITH HIS LIFE; AND SOME REMARKS at the End.

By Several HANDS.

The Second Edition Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Swalle at the Unicorn in Paternoster Row. 1699.

THE PREFACE.
SInce long Prefaces are lately much in Fashion upon this and the like
Occasions, why may not we be allowed some tolerable Liberty in this kind;
provided we keep close to our Author, and our own Translation of him. As for
our Author, wherever Learning, Wit and Judgment have flourished, this Poet
has always had an extraordinary Repuration. To mention all his Excellencies and
Perfections were a Task too difficult for us, and perhaps for the greatest
Critics alive; so very few there are that perfectly understand all of 'em; yet
we shall venture at some of the most Remarkable.

To begin with him in general, he was certainly the most Exact, the most
Elabora^e, and withal the most Natural of all Dramatick Poets; His Style so
neat and pure, his Characters so true and perfect, his Plots so regular and
probable, and ^^ most every thing so absolutely just and agreea^le, that he may
well seem to merit that Praise which several have given him, That he was the
most correct Author in the World. To compare him with Plautus the other great
Latin Comedian, we may observe that Plautus had mere Wit and Spirit, but
Terence more Sense and Judgment; the former's Style was rich and glaring, the
latter's more close and even: Plautus had the most dazeling outside and the
most lively Colors, but Terence drew the finest Figures and Postures, and had
the best Design; the one pleased the Vulgar, b^t our Author the Better sort of
People, the former would usually set his Spectators into a loud Laughter, but
the latter steal 'em into a sweet Smile, that should continue from the
beginning to the end of the Representation; in short, Plautus was more lively
and vigorous, and so fitter for Action; and Terence more grave and serious, and
so fitter for Reading. Tho Plautus's Beauties were very extraordinary, yet he
had his Faults and Indecorums very frequent, but Terence's Excellencies (tho
possibly inferior to some of the others) were more general, better dispersed,
and closer continued; and his Faults so inconsiderable, and so very few, that
Scaliger said, There were not three to be found through out the Six Plays. So that
cur Author seems to want nothing to make him absolutely complete, but only that
same Vis Comica that Caesar wishes he had, and which Plautus was Master of in
such a high degree. We shall determine nothing between 'em, but leave them good
Friends as we found 'em.

This may be sufficient for our Authors Excellencies in general; for his
particular ones, we shall begin with his Style, a thing he has been admired for
in all Ages, and truly he deserves it; for certainly no one was ever more
accurate, natural, and clear in his Expressions than he. But to be a little
more particular in this Matter, we shall give you some few of our Authors
Excellencies in this kind under three or four different Heads.

And first, We may observe of his Words, that they are generally nicely chosen,
extremely proper and significant; and many of 'em carry so much Life and Force
in 'em, that they can hardly be expressed in any other Language without great
disadvantage to the Original. To instance in these following. Qui cum ingeniis
conflictatur ejusmodi. Ut animus in spe atque in timore usque ante haec
attentus fuit. Nisi me lactasses amantem, and falsa spe produceres. Pam. Mi
Pater. Si. Quid mi Pater? Quasi tu hujus indigeas Patris. Tandem ego non illa
caream, si sit opus, vel totum triduum. Par. Hui? Universum triduum. Quam
elegans formarum Spectator siem. Hunc comedendum and deridendum vobis propino.

We shall next take notice of one or two Instances of the Shortness and
Clearness of his Narrations; as that which Tully mentions. Funus interim
procedit sequimur, ad Sepulchrum venimus, in ignem posita est, Fletur. Another
may be that in Phormio. Persuasum est homini, factum est, ventum est, vincimur,
duxit.

Another remarkable Beauty of his Style appears in his Climaxes; where every
Word is Emphatical, heightens the Sense, and adds considerably to what went
before. As, Haec verba Mehercule una falsa Lachrymula, quam oculos terendo
misere (...) more remarkable yet, one single Scene shall please a whole day
together; a Secret which few or no other Poet ever found out.

And as we have scarce found one Man in the World that equals him in his
Characters, so we find but very few that could come up to him in the Management
(we mean his Art and Contrivance) of his Plots. We are sensible that many have
been so foolish as to count his Plays a bare bundle of Dialogues dressed up in
a neat Style, and there all his Excellency to consist, or at least that they
are very ordinary and mean; but such senseless Suppositions will soon vanish
upon giving an Account of the Nature and Perfection of 'em. He well understood
the Rules of the Stage, or rather those of Nature; was perfectly Regular,
wonderful exact and careful in ordering each Protafis, or Entrance, Epitasis,
or working up, Catastasis, or height, and Catastrophe, or unravelling the
Plot; which last he was famous for making it spring necessarily from the
Incidents, and neatly and dexterously untying the Knot, whilst others of a
grosser make, would either tear, or cut it in pieces. In short (setting aside
some few things which we shall mention by and by) Terence may serve for the
best and most perfect Model for our Dramatick Poets to imitate, provided they
exactly observe the different Customs and Manners of the Roman and English
People; and upon the same account we beg leave to be a little more particular
in this Matter, which disposed us very much to this Translation.

The Nature of his Plots was for the most part grave and solid and sometimes
possionate a little, resembling our Modern Tragy-Comedies; only the Comical
parts were seldom so merry; the Thinness and clearness of 'em somewhat
resembling our Modern Tragedies, only more perfect in the latter, and not
crowded with too many Incidents. They were all double except the Hecyra, or
Mother-in-Law, yet so contrived that one was always an Under. Plot to the
other: So that he still kept perfectly to the first great Rule of the Stage,
the Unity of Action As for the second great Rule, the Unity of Time (that is
for the whole Action to be performed in the compass of a day) he was as exact
in that as possible, for the longest Action of any of his Plays reaches not
Eleven Hours. He was no less careful in the third Rule, The Unity of Place, for
it is plain be never shifts his Scene in any one of his Plays, but keeps
constantly to the same place from the beginning to the end. Then for the
Continuance in the Actions, he never fails in any one place, but every
Instrument is perpetually at work in carrying on their ^^^^ral Designs, and in
them the design of the whole; so that the stage never grows cold till all is
finished: And to do this the more handsomely and dexterously, he scarce ever
brings an Actor upon the Stage, but you presently know his Name and Quality,
what part of the Intreague he is to promote, why he came there, from whence he
came, why just at that time, why he goes off, where he is a going, and also
what he is or ought to be doing or contriving all the time he is away. His
Scenes are always unbroken, so that the Stage is never perfectly clear but
between the Acts; but are continually joined by one of the four Unions. Which
according to Mon. Hedelin are these; Presence, Seeking, Noise, or Time; and
when the Action cease that is, upon the Stage) and the Stage is cleared, an
Act is then finished. Then for Incidents, and the due Preparation of them,
Terence was admirable: And the true and exact Management of these is one of the
most difficult parts of Dramatick Poetry. He contrives every thing in such a
manner so as to fall out most probably and naturally, and when they are over
they seem almost necessary; yet by his excellent Skill he so cunningly conceals
the Events of things from his Audience, till due time that they can never
foresee '^m; by this means they are so amused with the Actors Designs, that the
Poet's is unknown to them, till at last, being all along in the dark, they are
surprised most agreeably by some. thing they never looked for: And this is the
most taking and the most delightful part of a Play. We might insist much more
largely upon each of these Particulars: and upon several others, but at present
we shall content our selves with saying that these Plots are all so very clear,
and natural, that they might very well go for a Representation of a thing that
had really happened; and not the mere Invention of the Poet.

There are two or three remarkable Objections against our Author, which we
cannot but take notice of. First, it is said, That he has not kept to the Unity
of Time in his Heautontimo^ eumenos, or Self-Tormenter; which contains the
space of two days. Then, between the second and third Acts, there is an absolute
failure of the Continuance of the Action. These are generally believed by
several Men, and such as are famous too; and some to vindicate Terence the
better, have added another Mistake, that the Play was always acted two several
times, the two first Acts one, and the three last another. But it is plain from
all Circumstances, that the Action began very late in the Evening, and ended
betimes in the Morning (of which we have said something in our Remarks at the
end) so that the whole could not contain about Eleven hours; but as for that of
the Cessation of the Action, it is answered two ways, either by the necessity of
Sleep at that Interval, and consequently no Cessation, or (which is more
probable) by the Persons being busy at the Treat at Chremess House, that being
a necessary part of the main Action The two following are Mr. Dryden's
Exceptions; where first he lays an Error to our Authors Charge in matter of
Time. In the Eunuch (say he) when Laches enters Thais's House by mistake,
between his Exit and the Entrance of Pythias, who comes to give ample Relation
of the Disorder he has raised within, Parmeno, who is left upon the Stage, has
not above five Lines to speak. In answer to this, Pythias makes no such amp
Relation, but rather t^lls him what Disorders such a foolish Act of his was
like to rai^e; and in truth it is not probable she should stay above five or
six Lines speaking, since after she saw her Cheat had taken, she could not keep
her Countenance within Doors, and was so eager to revenge her self by laughing
at the Fool without; besides here is an excellent Artifice of the Poets, for
had she tarried longer, Parmeno might have been gone, and her Mirth qualified
when she saw the good Fortune Chaerea had met withal. His other Exception is,
that our Authors Scenes are several times broken. He instances in the same
Play, That Antipho enters singly in the midst of the third Act, after Chremes
and Pythias were gone off. As for this, it is to be considered that Scenes are
united by Time as well as Presence; and this is a perfect Union of Time,
apparent to all who understand the Art of the Stage. A little farther he says,
That Dorias begins the fourth Act alone; -- She quits the Stage, and Phedria
enters next. Here Dorias does not quit the Stage till three Scenes after, as
appears by Pythias, bidding her carry in such things as she had brought with
her from the Captains Entertainment; but if she did, there would be an Union of
Time nevertheless, as there is in all other places, where the Scenes seem
broken. Some make this Objection; that in the beginning of many Scenes, two
Actors enter upon the Stage, and talk to themselves a considerable time before
they see or know one another; Which (they say) is neither probable nor natural.
Those that object this don't consider the great Difference between our little
scanty Stage, and the large magnificent Roman Theaters. Their Stage was sixty
Yards wide in the Front, their Scenes so many Streets meeting together, with
all By Lanes, Rows and Alleys; so two Actors coming down two different Streets
or Lanes, could not be seen by each other, though the Spectators might see both,
and sometimes if they did see each other they could not well distinguish Faces
at sixty Yards distance. Besides upon several accounts it might well be
supposed when an Actor enters upon the Stage out of some House, he might take a
turn or two under the Portico's, Cloisters, or the like (that were usual at
that time) about his Door, and take no notice of an Actors being on the other
side of the Stage.

But since we propose our Master as the best Model for Dramatick Poets to
follow, we ought in Justice to mention such things wherein he was any ways
faulty, or at least where he ought not to be imitated. The first is, He makes
his Actors in some places speak directly, and immediately to the Audience (of
which that Monologue of Mysis in the first Act of the first Play is an
instance) which is contrary to the rules of Dramatick Poetry, or rather indeed
of Nature; and this is the only real Fault that Terence was guilty of as his
want of Vis Comica was the only real Defect. His Plots were not always the best
for Story, the for Contrivance, and wanted somewhat of Length and Variety,
fully and completely to satisfy an Aud^^^ Take 'em all together, they were too
much (...) have always their deserved Effect of surprising; which also gave a
mighty Limitation to the Variety of his Characters; a great pity for a Man that
had such an admirable Knack of drawing them to the Life. It were also to be
wished that his Monologues or Discourses by single Persons were less frequent,
and sometimes shorter 100; for tho they are all of 'em full of excellent Sense,
sound Reasoning, ingenious Deliberations, and served truly to carry on the main
Design; yet several parts of em, especially all Narrations, would ha been more
natural as well as Artificial, if told by Persons of the Drama to one another.
Then his Aparts or Asides (that is when one Actor speaks something which
another that is present is supposed not to hear, tho the Audience do) are
sometimes too long to be perfectly natural. Whether he has not sometimes too
much Elevation of Passion, or Borders too nigh upon Tragedy for such inferior
Persons, we leave to others. These are the main things to be taken notice of by
all that make use of him for a Model, besides all such as bel^ng purely to the
various Customs of Countries, and to the difference of Theaters; but those are
obvious enough to all.

But there is still one great Objection against these Plays in general; that is,
If Terence's Plays are so good as is pretended, why does not some Poet or other
translate one or more of 'em for the Stage, so save himself the trouble of
racking his Brain for new Matter. We own they would not take upon our Stage; but
to clear all, we shall give these two Reasons: First, The Difference between
the Romans and our selves in Customs, Humors, Manners and Theaters is such,
that it is impossible to adapt their Plays to our Stages. The Roman Plots were
often founded upon the exp^sing of Children, and their unexpected Delivery, of
buying of Misses and Musick-Girls; they were chiefly pleased to see a covetous
old Father neatly bubbled by his Slave of a round Sum of Money, to find the
young Spark his Son (miserably in want of Cash) join with the Slave in the
Intrigue, that he may get somewhat to stop his Mistress's Mouth, whom he ^eeps
unknown to his Father; to see a bragging Coxcomb wheadled and abused by some
cunning Parasite; to hear a Glutton to talk of nothing but his Belly, and the
like. Our Plots go chiefly upon variety of Love Intrigues, Ladies Cuckolding
their Husbands most dexterously, Gallants danger upon the same account, with
their escape either by witty Fetches, or hiding themselves in dark Holes,
Closets, Beds, etc. We are all for Humor, Gallantry, Conversation, and
Courtship, and shou'dn't endure the chief Lady in the Play a Mute, or to say
very little, as 'twas agreeable to them: Our amorous Sparks love to hear the
pretty Rogues prate, snap up their Gallants, and Repartee upon 'em on all
sides. We shou'dn't like to have a Lady married without knowing whether she
gives her consent or no, (a Custem among the Romans) but would be for hearing
all the Courtship, all the rare and fine things that Lovers can say to each
other. The second reason of their not taking upon our Stage is this, tho
Terence's Plays are for more exact, natutal, regular, and clear than ours, and
his Persons speak more like themselves than generally ours do; yet (to speak
impartially) our Plays do plainly excel his in some Particul^rs. (...) the
great Vari^ty of the (...) and (...) our Plots; the Intrigues thick^^ and
fi^^^; the Stories better, longer, and (...) curicus (...) most part than his:
And tho there is (...) buddle and precipitation in the general^^y of (...); yet
the great variety and number of Incid^^ts. tho ill managed (...) have several
Charms, and be mighty diverting ^specially to a vulgar Audience, like the Sight
of a large ^ity at a distance, where there is little of Regularity o^
Uniformity to be discerned just by. Next, we do much excel Terence in that
which we call Humor, that is in our Comical Characters in which we have shown
and exposed the several Humors, Dispositions Natures, Inclinations, Fancies,
Irregularities, Maggots, Passions, Whims, Follies Extravagancies, etc. of Men
under all sorts of Circumstances, of all sorts of Ranks and Qualities, of all
Professions and Trades, and of all Nations and Countries, so admirably, and so
lively, that in this no Nation among the Ancients or Moderns were ever
comparable to us. Lastly, our Comedies excel his in some Delicacies of
Conversation; particularly in the Refinedness of our Railery and Satyr, and
above (...) Repartee. Some of these things (especially wh^^ mixed with Humor)
have made many an ord^^^ry Pl^t take and come off well, and without a ^retty
q^antity of some of 'em, our Plays would go downvery heavily.

Since we are accidentally fallen into the Excellencies of our Comedies, we
hope it may be pardonable if we mention also some principal Faults in 'em,
which ^^^m to need a Regulation. And first, our Poets seldom or never observe
any of the three great U^^ties of Action; Time and Place, which are great
Errors, for what breeds more Confusion th^^ to have five or six main Plots in a
Play, when the Audience can never attend to 'em? What more extravagant than to
fancy the Actions of Weeks, Months, and Years represented in the Space of three
or four Hours? Or what more unnatural than for the Spectators to suppose
themselves now in a Street, then a Garden, by and by in a Chamber, immediately
in the Fields, then in a Street again, and never move out of their place;
Would Not one swear there was Conjuration in the Case; that the Theaters were a
sort of Fairy Land where all is Enchantment, Juggle and Delusion? Next, our
Plays are too often overpowered with Incidents and Under-Plots, and our Stage
as much crowded with such Actors, as there is little or no occasion for;
especially at one time. Then the Matter, and Discourse of our Plays is very
often incoherent and impertinent as to the main Design: nothing being more
common than to meet with two or three whole Scenes in a Play, which would have
fitted any other part of the Play even as well as that; and perhaps any Play
else. Thus some appear to swear out a Scene or two, others to talk Bawdy a
little, without any manner of dependence upon the rest of the Action. But
besides this (which is another great Error) when the Matter and Discourse do
serve to carry on the main Design, commonly Persons are brought on to the Stage
without any sort of Art, Probability, Reason or Necessity for their coming
there; and when they have no such Business as one that comes to give you a Song
or a Jigg. They come there to serve the Poets Design a little, then off they go
with as little Reason as they came on; and that only to make way for other
Actors, who (as they did) come only to tell the Audience something the Poet has
a mind to have 'em know; and that is all their business: And truly that is little
enough. This we see frequently in the chief Actor of the Play, who comes on and
goes off, and the Spectaters all the time stand staring and wondering at they
know not what. Another great Fault common to many of our Plays is, that an
Actor's Name, Quality, or Business is scarce ever known till a good while after
his appearance; which must needs make the Audience at a great Loss, and the
Play hard to be understood, forcing 'em to carry Books with 'em to the Play
house, to know who comes in, and who goes out.

The Ancients were guilty of none of these Absurdities, and more especially our
Author; and indeed the Non observance of Rules has occasioned the great
Miscarriages of many excellent Genius's of ours, particulary that of the
immortal Shakespeare. Since these are such apparent Faults and Absurdities, and
still our Beauties are so admirable as to cover, and almost to outweigh our
Errors (else our Plays were not to be endured) undoubtedly our Dramatick Poets,
by the Observance of this Author's Ways and Rules, might out do all the
Ancients and Moderns too, both at Tragedy and at Comedy; for no Nation ever had
greater Genius's than ours for Dramatick Poetry. These have been but little
observed as yet, so that all our sine Imitations of Nature may often be called
Lucky hits, and more by Accident than by Art. We very much need a Reformation
in this Case, and our Plays can never arrive to any great Perfection without
it; therefore the nigher they come up to this Standard, the more they will be
admired and loved by all Judicious Persons, provided they still keep to those
Excellencies before mentioned Besides, these are as easily practicable upon
ours as upon the Greek and Roman Theaters; and by a strict Observance of the
Unity of Place, the Stage may be made far more handsome and magnificent with
less Charge; and by that of the Unity of Action (especially by the help of an
Underplot or so) the Story may be made far more fine and clear with less
trouble.

But our Nation by long Custom, and the Success of Irregular Pieces, seems
naturally averse to all Rules; and take it very ill to have their Thoughts
confined and shackled, and tied to the Observance of such Niceties: Therefore
in the first place they tell us, That Poets of all Men in the World are
perfectly freely, and by no means ought to confine their Noble Fancies to dull
pedantick Rules: For this (say they) is like taking of Bees, cutting off their
Wings, and laying such Flowers before 'em to make Honey of as they please. A
Poet indeed should be free, and unconfined as Air, as to his Thought, Fancy and
Contrivance, but then his Poetica Licentia shou'dn't transport him to Madness
and Extravagancy, making him phrensically trangress the Rules of Reason and
Nature, as well as Poetry. These that we mention are not any Man's Arbitary
Rules, but pure Nature only Methodiz'd: They never hamper a Poet's Fancy or
clip his Wings, but adorn their Thoughts, and regulate their Flights, so as to
give 'em a clearer insight into Nature, Probability and Decency, without
something of which it is impossible to please. And these are no more a
Confinement to a Poet's Fancy, than the true Proportion of Pillars, the
Regularity and Uniformity of Windows are to an Architect; or the exact
Imitation of Nature to a Painter: As if there could be half so much Beauty in
Grotesque and irregular Whims, as in the due Observation of the Rules of
Prospect, Shadows and Proportion.

Another Objection is, That, our Nation will never bear Rules, but are much
better pleased with the ways now in practice. It Is true several of our most
irregu^ar Plays have come off with a great deal of Applaule, but certainly
never the more for their Irregularity; but because most of the Audience knew no
better, being often dazzled by the Greatness of the Author's Genius, and the
Actors Performances; and those that did, were willing topardon the Faults for
the sake of some choice Master-stroaks they had; and upon the same account a
couple of good Scenes have many times carried off a very indifferent Play: It Is
plain that want of Use and Knowledge have been the only Cause of these ways
seeming so unpracticable; and if the middle sort of Persons were once truly
brought to a Sight of the Excellencies of this, and the Deformities of the
other way, (as the well reading of these Plays would in a great measure do,
being chiefly designed for them) they would esteem of it far more than now; and
certainly they coud never pardon those many Indecencies, Improbabilities,
Absurdities that are so frequent in our Plays. It Is true, there has been a
considerable Regulation among many of 'em since the Days of Shakespeare, but not
to bring things half to perfection. And thus Regulation has made hope for a
further, as the Age will be brought to bear it.

The last Objection is more particular: They say, That the Unities of Action,
Time and Place must needs take off from the great Variety of the Plot, and a
fine Story by this means will be quite murdered. It Is true, all Stories
whatsoever are not fit for a Dramatick Poem; yet there may be an excellent Plot
without crowaing together Intrigues (little depending upon one another) of half
a dozen couple, suppose, in one Play; without hurrying over the business of
three Months in three Hours time, or perhaps without skipping from Gardens to
Mountains, from thence to Groves, and then to Town in an Act or two: But our
prying curious Sparks cannot rest here, but must be for peeping into Chambers,
Closets, and Withdrawing-Rooms, ay, and into Beds too (sometimes with the
Ladies in 'em) and have all things brought openly upon the Stage. tho never so
improper, and indecent. But this Objection may yet better be answered by
Instances; and first for the Unity of Time, we may mention the Play called, The
Adventures of Five Hours, the whole Action lasting no longer (much less a day,
the extent allowed for a Dramatick Poem) yet this is one of the pleasantest
Stories that ever appeared upon our Stage, and has as much Variety of Plots and
Intrigues, without any thing being precipitated, improbable or unnatural as to
the main Action; so by this it appears that this Rule is no Spoiler or Murderer
of a finer Story. Then for the Unity of Time and Action too, Ben. Johnson's
Silent Woman is a remarkable Instance: an excellent Comedy indeed, where the
Action is perfectly single, and the utmost extent of the Time exceeds not three
Hours and a half, (the shortest we ever find) yet still the Plot, Intrigues,
and above all the Incidents are very fine; and no ways unnatural. Lastly, For
all three Unities, Mr. Dryden's All for Love (tho a Tragedy, and somewhat
foreign to our business) is worthy to be taken notice of, that being perfectly
Regular according to the Rules of the Stage, the Scenes unbroken, the Incidents
exactly and duly prepared, and all things noble and beautiful, just and
proportionable. This we reckon one of the best Tragedies of our Nation. Now can
any Man justly think that these Plays we new mentioned were ever the worse for
that Regularity they had; or indeed have we many better in the Nation for Plot;
or many that have better pleased the generality of Persons that these; If so,
this sufficiently shows the Truth of what we offered; and withal commends our
Master's great Judgment in this Point: Who in our Opinion (besides the
Excellency of his Characters) plainly deserves a greater Name for his Plots,
than he does for his Language.

Come we next then to our own Vindication, in which we shall briefly show the
Reasons why we did it, and likewise what our Performances have been in this
Version.

The main Reasons why we undertook it were these. First, For the Excellency and
Usefulness of this Author in general: And consequently for the benefit (as we
shall show by and by) of most sorts of People, but especially for the Service
it may do our Dramatick Poets. Next, for the Honor of own Language, into which
all good Bocks ought to be Translated, since it is now become so Elegant, Sweet
and Copious: And indeed nothing refines, or gives Foreigners a greater Opinion
of any Language than its number of good Translations; of which the French is a
great Instance. Thirdly, Because most of our Neighbors have got it into their
Language, particularly the French, who have done it with good Success; and we
have no reason for being outdone by any of our Neighbors, since we have a
Language we dare set against any in the World. Lastly, Since the Author is so
excellent, we undertook it because no other Persons would. It Is strange that
none of our great Wits would undertake it before, but let us Persons of
Obscurity, take their Works out of their Hands; when we can perceive by our
liitle Performances that our Language will do it to a very high degree,
undoubtedly better than the French.

The most considerable Objections that have been made against our Translation
are these. First, What real Use or Advantage can this Translation be to the
Public? As for Schoolboys and Learners, Bernard's and Hool's Translations,
the great number of Notes, a Schoolmaster, or their own Industry will well
enough teach 'em to construe it. Men of Sense and Learning, they read it wholly
for the Latin sake; therefore a Translation is of no use to them. Lastly, they
will not fit our Stage; and consequently they are impertinent at best. To these we
answer; First, As to Schoolboys and Learners! Bernard's and Hool's
Translations are very often false, mostly so obsolete, flat and unpleasant,
that a Man can scarce read half a Page without sleeping; the latter is full of
Latinisms, and both are often more obscure than the Original. The Notes
sometimes don't express the Author; Sense; and often very obscurely: In some
things they are too short, in others too long and tedious: And most of them
have the slight of running very nimbly over those Places which they are afraid
they should stick in. Schoolmasters often want Time, and now then and Judgment
and Learning to explain things as they ought; then to leave Boys by themselves
to pick out the Sense of such a difficult Author as this, is very inconvenient
which, besides the Discouragement sometimes of not being able to do it, will
often lead 'em into such Errors and Mistakes, as perhaps they will never g^t
clear of. So that this will be of great use even ^o Schoolboys and Learners:
Beside the great A^vantage of teaching 'em, perhaps not the worst English; and
something of the Idiom of our Tongue.

As for the second part of the Objection, That Men of Sense and Learning read
it only for the Latin sake; This is or ought to be looked upon as a great
Mistake: Since Terence has other and greater Excellencies than his Style, as we
have before shown. But however ingenious Persons must needs receive some
pleasure in seeing such excellent fine Latin now speak tolerable good English:
and likewise in seeing somewhat of the Conversation, Humor and Customs of the
old Greeks and Romans put into a modern Dress; and perhaps not quite out of the
Fashion. Besides, since many of these do sometimes upon an occasion make use of
Notes, 'twill be of equal use (in that respect) to them as to all Learners. And
that they have often need of such, will appear from the several difficult
places (especially as to the Plot) and some obscure dubious Passages in this
Author, which the utmost Skill in the Latin Tongue will not teach to explain;
since there is as great a necessity for the understanding of the Roman Customs
and Theaters in this Case, and of the Art of the Stage, as of the Latin Tongue.
How extraordinary useful a Translation can be in perfectly clearing an Author,
Roscommon's Translation of Horace's Art of Poetry is an apparent Instance;
which shows the Sense, Meaning, Design, etc. of Horace better and easier than
all the Paraphrases and Notes in the World.

Thirdly, Tho our Translation will never fit our Stage, yet it may be of
considerable use to some of the Dramatick Poets; which we had some respect to
when we did it; they will serve 'em (as was said before) for Models; and tho
many of our Poets do very well understand the Original, yet it is plain that
some of 'em do not understand it overmuch. But however, it may not be wholly
useless to those that do, and more proper for their business, being ready
explained to their hands: And upon some accounts to be read with less trouble
than the Original: For that is in many places very-obscure by reason of
corrupted Copies, wrong Points, false Division of whole Acts as well as Scenes,
and the like: Further, if these Plays come to be frequently read by the more
ordinary sort of People, they will by little and little grow more in love with,
and more clearly see the true Excellencies of these Rules, and these lively
Imitations of Nature, which will be the greatest Encouragement our Poets can
have to follow 'em. And besides, the common People by these Plays may plainly
perceive that Obscenities, and Debaucheries are no ways necessary to make a
good Comedy; and the Poets themselves will be the more ready to blush when they
see Heathens so plainly out-ao us Christians in their Morals; for their
principal Vices in their Plays were chiefly from the Ignorance of the Times,
but we have no such pretense. This alone might have been a sufficient reason for
our undertaking this Design.

But to come now to what we have done; it is not to be expected we should wholly
reach the Air of the Original; that being so peculiar, and the Language so
different; We have imitated our Author as well and as nigh as the English
Tongue as our small Abilities would permit; each of us joining and consulting
about every Line, not only for the doing of it better, but also for the making
of it all of a piece. We followed no one Latin Copy by it self, because of the
great disagreements among 'em, but have taken any that seemed truest. We lookld
over all the Notes, sometimes they would help us a little, and often not; some
hints we had from the French, but not very many; besides we had considerable
helps from other Persons far above our selves, for whose Care and Pains we
shall ever acknowledge our Gratitude. A mere Verbal Translation is not to be
expected, that would sound so horribly, and be more obscure than the Original;
but we have been faithful Observers of his Sense, and even of his Words too,
not slipping any of consequence without something to answer it; nay further,
where two Words seem to be much the same, and perhaps not intended to be very
different by the Author, we were commonly so nice as to do them too; such as
Segnitia and Socordia, Scire and Noscere, and the like, which is more exact
than most, if not all, our modern Versions. We could not have kept closer
(especially in this Author, which several ingenious Persons told us, Is the
hardest in the World to translate) without too much treading upon the Authors
Heels, and destroying our Design of giving it an easy, Comic Style, most
agreeable to our present Times. If we have been guilty of any Fault of this
nature, it seems to be that of keeping too close.

But still to be more particular; we did all we could to prevent any of the
Meaning and Grace of the best Words to be lost; so that we were often forced to
search and study some time for those most proper, and oftentimes to express 'em
by two, and some times by a Circumlocution: Which Madam Dacier her self, as
accurate as she is accounted, has often neglected; and thereby has wholly lost
the Force and Beauty of many Emphatical Words. Terence had some words taken in
a great many several Senses, such as Contumelia and Injuria, Odiosus, Tristis,
etc. these we have been very careful about; but where he plays upon words (tho
never so prettily) he ought not in some places to be imitated at all, because
the Fineness is more lost that way, than the other; yet we tried at several
when they were Natural and tolerable in English. As for his Allusions and the
like, many of them perhaps are quite lost to us. However they are commonly lost
in our Language. On such places (as well as some others) we made Remarks or
Notes at the latter end; some of which we are obliged to the French Lady for;
these serving to show our Author's fine Strokes, as well as to vindicate our
Translation. For his Sense and Meaning, we have taken more than ordinary care
about, and weighed all Circumstances before we six'd. Several of the Passages
are done contrary to the general Opinion, and some few differently from all,
both as to the Person that speaks as well as the Meaning, but not without good
Grounds: and if any be so ni^e in censuring, we desire that Person to show us
three Terences that exactly agree with one another, either in Points or Words,
for two ^cts together Of those Passages that were absolutely doubtful we always
took the best, and that which seem d to us the most probable Way and Meaning:
and all such as were difficult, knotty or obscure in the Original, we made as
plain and clear as we could: and we presume to fancy there are very few
Passages in ours, unintelligible to the meanest Capacity. In his Jests and
Repartees (except they were Allusions or the like) we hope that the force of em
is seldom lost. For making every Person speak so exactly like themselves (a
thing that our Author was so famous for) is much more difficult it English by
reason of its greater variety of Idioms and Phrases than in the Latin; and to
suit these always right, requires a greater Genius than we can pretend to.
Terence, tho reckoned very genteel in his Days seems in some place, to have a
sort of familiarity and bluntness in his Discourse not so agreeable with the
Manners and Gallantry of our Times: which we have mollify'd as well as we
could, still making the Servants saucy enough upon occasion. In some places we
have had somewhat more of Humor than the Original, to make it still more
agreeable to our Age; but all the while have kept so nigh our Authors Sense and
Design, that we hope it can never be justly call d a fault. We cannot certainly
tell whether William the Conqueror, the Grand Seignior (and the like) may pass
with some: They may possibly take 'em for Blunders in time; which are now
become Proverbial Expression; the first signifying only a great while ago, and
t other a great Man.

As for the Division of the Acts and Scenes, all the common Terences are most
notoriously false: The Acts are often wrong, but the Scences oftener; and these
have bred some obscurity in our Author's Rules Madam Decier has been more exact
in this than all others before her; yet, still she is once mistaken in her Acts,
and very often in her Scenes. We have followed her as to her Acts, except one
in the Phormio; but we have not divided the Scenes at all by Figures, because
they are of no such use; only the Reader may take notice that whenever any
particular Actor enters upon the Stage, or goes off, that makes a different
Scene; for the Ancients never had any other that we know of. The Prologues, by
the Advice of several Judicious Persons are left out, as being the Meanest, the
fullest of Quibbles, and the least Intelligible of any thing he wrote: They
relating chiefly to private Squabbles between our Author and the Poets of his
time: The Particulars of which it is impossible for us to understand now, and we
need not be much concerned that we don't. Besides, in the main, they are so
much beneath the Author, that it is much questioned whether they are his or no,
especially the Third. The Arguments are certainly none of his, and so far from
being useful, that they only serve to forestal the Plots, and take away the
Pleasure of surprising.

Lastly, That there might be nothing wanting that might make this Translation
as entire and clear as possible, weve all the way intermixed Notes of
Explanation, such as, Enter, Exit, Asides, and all other things of Action,
necessary to be known, and constantly practiced among our Modern Dramatick
Poets. These serve extremely to the clearing of the Plots which would be
obscure without em; especially since their Theaters were so different from
ours. And as this sort of Notes are the shortest, that are generally used, so
they are most complete, useful and clear, by the help of which any Child almost
may apprehend every thing. Perhaps we might have omitted some of them, but we had
better offend this way than the other

Thus have we said as much as we thought requisite in Vindication of our
Master's Honor, and of our own Undertaking. And if we had said ten times as
much; and nere so much to the purpose, People will think, and talk what they
please, and we cannot help it.

THE Life of TERENCE.
I Vblius Terentius had his Birth at the famous City of Carthage, in Africa, in
the Year of Rome 559, Seven Years after the second Punick War, and 192 before
Christ His Parentage was Mean no doubt; so little known, that his true Name is
not remembered: for that of Terence he took from his Patron Terentius Lucanus,
the Roman Senator. As for his Person, he was of a middle Stature, very slender,
and somewhat of a tawny Complexion.

When he was very young, and not past his Childhood, he was made Captive, as
it is generally supposed, by the Numidians, who sent him immediately to Rome;
and there he happened on the forementioned Terentius Lucanus. This Master had
so great an Esteem for his good Mien and Excellent Parts, that he did only give
him a most tender and genteel Education, but his Freedom too; and what is more,
when he was very young; a Favor not very usual in those Days.

After this, he more closely applied himself to Learning; and his observations
and Studies of Men and Manners, seemed to be his chief Employment. His exact
Remarks upon Men's natural Dispositions; and his Genuis, led him wholly to
Dramatick Poetry, particularly Comedy; wherein all the Humors and Passions of
Men are so nicely observed and expressed; that we can no where find a truer and
more lively Representation of Humane Nature. His comely Personage, and his
accurate Writings, brought him into a great Esteem, not only with the People in
general, but likewise with the greatest and noblest of (...); but he
wasmoreespecialy beloved and cherished (...) the famous Scipio Africa^us and
Lelius. With these two inseparable Friends and Companions, he had gained more
than ordinary Familiarity; passing away many a fair Hour in Pleasures and
Delights, at their Country House at Mount Alba.

He made himself Master of the Greek Tongue, from which he borrowed much in his
Plays; of which we have six remaining. When he had finished his first Play, and
brought it to the Edils; they would needs have him read it before Cecelius, as
the most approved Judge. Cecelius was then at Supper. Terence's Garb, it seems,
was none of the best at that time, therefore he was seated in an ordinary
by-place, and there ordered to begin. But a few of his fine Verses so well made
amends for the Meanness of his Habit, that he was immediately desired to sit
down and take part of what he found at the Table; being placed next to Cecelius
himself. After Supper, he read over the rest of his Play to Cecelius's
wonderful Delight. The Name of it, we find not; it could not be the Andrian,
for that was made two Years after Cecelius was dead.

In the 28th Year of his Age, he made his Andrian; the first Comedy that we
know of, which he took a great part from Menander the Greek Poet. The Year
following he made his Hocyra, or Mother-in-Law, which he took chiefly from
Apollodorus the Greek Poet. This Play was the first time unsuccessful, and is
the only one whose Plot is perfectly Single. Two Years after, he made his
Heautontimorumenos, or Self Tormentor, which he borrowed mostly from Menander.
Two Years after that, his Phormio, taken chiefly from Apollodorus's
Epidicazomenos. The same Year, he made his Eunuch; of which he borrowed a great
part from Menander: This by many is reckoned his best; however it came off with
far greatest Applause. The Year following, in the 34th Year of his Age he made
his last Comedy called Adelphi, or the Brothers, and that too was mostly taken
from Menander; which Varro, as to the beginning of it, prefers to the beginning
of Menander himself.

These Comedies were in great Reputation among the Romans, and generally
succeeded very well; tho Plautus had sometimes better Luck on the Stage. But
never a one of his took like the Eunuch, for which Terence had 8000 Sesterces;
a reward (tho not exceeding Sixty Pounds of our Money) greater in those days
then ever Poet had. Besides, it was acted twice in one day; the more strange,
because Plays than were never made but to be acted two or three times in all.
All six were almost equally esteemed by his Countrymen; and most of them had
their peculiar Beauties. It Is observed that the Andrian, and the Brothers, excel
in their Characters and Manners; the Eunuch and Phormio, in the Vigor and
Liveliness of their Intrigues; and the Self-tormentor, and Mother-in-Law, in
their Thoughts, Passions, and Purity of Style.

Upon the account of his intimate Acquaintance with Scipio and Lelius, it was,
and is still generally believed that they had a great, if not a principal
Share, in the making of his Plays: And this Conjecture is grounded not only
upon the extraordinary Familiarity between them; but also the Accuracy,
Propriety, Purity and Politeness of the Style, which do indeed seem above a
poor Africans Abilities. But these are but mere Conjectures, intermixed with a
Spice of Malice; tho indeed redounding much to his Honor, as he himself
intimates in the Prologue to his Brothers. The extraordinary Familiarity
between them, was probably caused by his Eminent Deserts. The Accuracy and
Propriety of his Style, proceeded, perhaps, from his Labor and Studies; as the
Purity and Politeness of it, might be the Effects of his Roman Education, and
his keeping the best Company. And if he defended himself but slightly whene're
he was accused; that may be reckoned his great Complaisance to those Noble
Persons.

These Crimes he was often charged with; but in the Thirty Fifth Year of his
Age, either to avoid these Scandals, or to instruct himself in the Customs and
Manners of the Grecians, he left Rome to go for that Country, and d^ed soon
after his departure, in the Year of Rome 594, Nine Years before the Third
Punick War, and 157 before Christ. The Place and Manner of his death is very
doubtful. Some say he died in his return from Gree^e to Rome, with a great
number of Greek Comedies Translated by him, and lost with him. Others that he
dyed at Stymphalus, a Village in ^r^adia, for Grief of losing those Comedies he
had Translated. But here we leave all to the Judgment of more curious Persons.

It is said by several, that he died very poor; but however his Daughter (the
only Child he left) after his decease was married to a Roman Knight; to whom he
left a House and a Garden of Six Acres, which was situated under the
Appian-Way, nigh that place called Villa-Martis.

THE Fair ANDRIAN, A COMEDY, Acted at the Feast of Cibele, WHEN M. Fulvius and
M. Glabrio were Curule Edil's, By the Company of L Ambivius Turpio. and L.
Attilius of Prenestae.

Flaccus made free by Claudius, composed the Music, which was perform*d on two
equal Flutes, the one Right-handed, and the other Left handed.

It was taken wholly from the Greek and Acted,

Under the Consulship of M. Marcellus, and C. Sulpicius.

A. V. C. 587. before Christ. 162.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Simo, An old rich Merchant of Athens; very kind and indulgent to his Son, but
otherwise of a ^isposition somewhat peevish. Chremes, His Friend and Neighbor
Father to Philumena; of an easy pliant temper. Pamphilus, Simo^ s Son; very
civil, courteous and obedient; but passionately in love with Glycerie. Charine,
A young Gentlemen his Friend; in love with Chremes' s Daughter Philumena.
Socia, Simo' s Steward. Dromo, His Fo^tman. Davus, Servant to Pamphilus; a
saucy, cunning, intriguing Fellow, always helping his Master out in his Amors,
and putting Tricks upon Simo. Byrrhie, Servant to Charine. Crito, A Stranger of
the Isle of Andro; an honest downright Country Fellow.
WOMEN.
Glycerie, The Fair Andrian; debaucht and kept by Pamphilus Mysis, Her Ma^d,
very faithful and careful. Lesbia, An old S^aking Midwife.
MUTES.
Archillis, Glycerie' s Kurse. Servants to S^n^, Att^ndants, etc.
Scene, ATHENS.

The TIME about Seven or Eight Hours.

THE Fair ANDRIAN.
ACT I.
SCENE, The Street before Simo' s Door. TIME, The Forenoon.
Enter Simo, Socia, and other of Simo' s Servants, with Provisions, and Things,
as from the Market. Simo to the Servants. AWAY with those things there, and be
gone. -- But do you stay, Socia; I Have something to say to you.


Exeunt Servants. Soc. I understand ye, Sir: You Would ha'Care taken of these
things, I suppose.


Sim. Quite another Business.


Soc. Can my poor Skill be further Serviceable to you?


Sim. Nay, there is no need of that Skill of yours in the case: Be but as
Faithful and Secret as ye used to be, and the business is done.


Soc. I wait your Pleasure, Sir.


Sim. I Am sure you cannot but know what a fair and easy Master I have been t^ye
e're since I bought ye of a Child, and in requital of your good Services, I
gave ye your Freedom, the most that I could do for ye.


Soc. Sir, I Am not forgetful of it.


Sim. Nor do I repent it.


Soc. I Am very glad, Sir, to find ye pleased with any thing I ever did, or can
do; and am much obliged to ye for your good Opinion of me. But with Submission,
Sir, this somewhat troubles me: for such a reminding a Man of a Benefit seems
to intimate as if he were insensible of it. -- But in one Word, Sir, What can I
serve you in?


Sim. I Will tell you: in the first place you are to understand, that the Business
of the Wedding is all sham.


Soc. Why de'e put it upo'th World then?


Sim. I Will tell ye the whole Mystery of it, and give ye such a light into my
Son's Conversation and my Designs, that you will immediately see what part you
are to act in this Business. -- When I first took him from School, Socia, I
left him a little to himself, to try which way his Genius would lead him: which
was hard to know for certain, or indeed tolerably to guess at, whilst he was a
Boy, under the Awe of a Rod and Master.


Soc. Right, Sir.


Sim. You know it is a common thing for most young Men, to give up themselves
wholly either to Horses, Hounds, Books, or the like: New he was not over-fond
of any of these, though he was in at all. This I liked well.


Soc. Y' had reason, Sir: For not to be too much ^ddicted to any one thing, I
take to be the most excellent Rule of Life.


Sim. Then for his Conversation Socia: He was never uneasy upon any occasion,
nor would he ever spoil Company, but closed with all Humors, never thwarting
others, nor assuming too much to himself. And I think this was the way to get
Reputation and Friends without Envy.


Soc. He took a wise Course: For as the World goes now, Complaisance goes
current, when Plaindealing will not pass.


Sim. In this Interim, there comes a Woman about three Years ago from Andro,
who takes Lodgings in our Neighborhood, forced hither by the scantiness of her
own Fortune, and the neglect of her Relations: But she was a fine Woman indeed,
and in the very Flower of her Age.


Soc. Ah, Sir! I fear this same fine Woman bodes us no good.


Sim. At first indeed, she lived a very honest; thrifty, and laborious sort of
a Life, earning her Bread at her Fingers ends. But afterward, when the
Love-business came on, and the Golden Promises from this and the other, (as
People had rather follow their Pleasure than their Work) she accepts of their
Offers, and immediately sets up the Trad^. Some of her Gallants, as ill luck
would have it, carried my Boy along with 'em for Company's sake. Then said I to
my self, the Fool's noo^'d, noo^'d, he is smitten. So I made it my Business
in the Morning to watch the Lacky's going and coming, and would ask 'em now and
then, Hark ye good Boy, tell me ye little Rogue to whose turn fell Chyrsis last
Night? For you must know that was the Name she went by.


Soc. Very well, Sir.


Sim. They Would tell me, Phedrus, Clinie, or Niceratus perhaps, (for those were
all in with her) Ay, Rut my good Lads, What did Pamphilus? What did ^e? (they would
cry) Why? he only eat with 'em, and paid his Club. This pleased me to the very
Soul. So I fell to pumping 'em another time, but not one Word that Pamphilus
had ever been dabbling. This I thought a sufficient Trial, and a considerable
Instance of his Virtue. For he that has to do with such sort of Cattle, and
comes off clear, you may safely trust him with the Management of himself. When
others saw how I relish^t it, they fell in one and all, and said a hundred fine
things, I warrant ye, what a Blessed Father I was to have such a towardly Son.
-- In one Word, the Reputation of it wrought so upon my Neighbor Chremes, that
nothing would serve him, but a Match between my Son and his Daughter, with a
good Portion over and above too, The Proposal took, we both agreed upon it, and
this was to have been the Wedding Day.


Soc. Very good, And what obstruction now?


Sim. I Will tell ye. -- In a very few days whilst this was doing, Chyrsis dies
--


Soc. In a good hour, Sir. We are all made then. To be free with ye, I did n't
like this same Chrysis.


Sim. My Son, you must know, and the humble Servants of Chrysis were together,
and together took care of the Funeral: He was really sad, and now and then
dropped a Tear, which I did n't dislike. For, thought I, He that is so much
moved, and upon such slender acquaintance, What if she had been his own
Mistress? How would he take on if I should die? All this I looked upon to be
the Effects of good Nature, and a sweet Temper. -- To c^nclude, I my self to
humor him went also to the Funeral without suspecting any thing.


Soc. How, Sir! And what then? Fearfully.


Sim. I Will tell ye -- The Body is brought out, the Company moves, and amongst
the Women 'twas my Fortune to cast my Eye upon a young Creature, with a Face --


Soc. Good enough perhaps.


Sim. Ay Socia, and an Air so modest, so pretty, nothing could be more
charming. -- Now finding this Woman so much more concerned than the rest, and
her Behavior much more genteel and graceful than any there; I went and
whispered to the Servants to know who she was. They told me, The dead Person's
Sister. That Word struck me to the very Heart. Well, well, (though I) the whole
Business is unravelled, and the Tears and the Whining are no longer a Mystery.


Soc. I Am in such a Fright to know how this business will come off.


Sim. Well: the Funeral marches, we follow, come to the place where the Body
was to be laid, put it into the Fire, and give her a Tear: Mean time, the
Sister I told ye of, runs like a Madwoman up to the Fire, and truly a'most
into it. At which Pamphilus in a great fright discovers tha^ Love which he had
so well dissembled, and concealed before, runs to her, takes her in his Arms My
dear Gleycerie, says he, What de^e do? Would ye destroy your self? With that
all in Tears she flings her self upon him, and with so much tenderness too,
that you might easily pe^ceive 'twasn't the first time of their acquaintance.


Soc. Ah! How Is this Sir? In a maze.


Sim. Away go I very moody and dissatisfied, but not enough to make a Wrangle
on it, For if I had chid him, he would have said, Pray, Sir, What have I done? What
have I deserved, Sir? What Is my Fault, Sir? A foolish Woman would have burnt her
self, I hinderd her, and saved her Life it may be. This is as fair a Plea as
can be.


Soc. You Have Reason, Sir: For had you blamed him for saving her out of the
Flames, what would ye have done if he had thrown her in?


Sim. Next day comes my Neighbor Chremes storming like a Madman, That there
was Roguery ith Case, and that most certainly Pamphilus, and this Woman were
engaged together. I denied it, he affirmed it, and in fine, went his way in a
Pet as if he would break ^ff the Match with his Daughter.


Soc. And did n't ye School your Son upon this?


Sim. No, no: 'twas n't enough yet to pick a ^^^rrel at.


Soc. How so I beseech ye?


Sim. He might have said: You, Sir, are now putting a stop to all my Pleasures
of this nature; Shortly I must be married, and live after another's Humor,
mean time, pray Sir, let me live a little after my own. --


Soc. Well Sir! If this will not do, What can you possibly find to chide him for?


Sim. Why, if he refuses to marry upon the account of his Miss, that Business,
must be laid home to him first. Now my design is by means of this Mock-wedding
to find a just Cause of being angry, if he shou'dn't agree to it: And that if
the Rogue Davus has any Trick in his Head, he may put it off if he can; I a'nt
like to be his Chapman: Tho I know he will be at it tooth and nail, and more to
plague me perhaps, than to pleasure my Son.


Soc. What makes ye think so?


Sim. De'e ask that Question? Ever while ye live, What Is bred in the Bone will
never out o^ the Flesh. But if I find him tampering, I Will --. In short, put the
Case that Pamphilus shou'dn't boggle (as I heartily wish he would not) then
Chremes is only ^o be sweetened, and I hope 'twill do. Now the part you're to
act is to countenance the Marriage, mortify Davus, watch the Boy, and be a Spy
upon their Councels.


Soc. Enough Sir, I Will take care of all. -- Now I suppose we may retire Sir.


Sim. Go. I Will follow ye presently. Exit Socia. Simo walks about studying.

My Life on it, this Boy o^mine has no stomach to a Wife: For if he had, Davus
would not have been so startled at the Talk of a Match in hand. -- But hold ye!
Yonder he comes. Enter Davus at another part of the Stage, not seeing Simo.


Dav. to himself. I should have wondered if thi^ Business had gone off so: and
that fleering Sweetness of my Master I didn't like. For when he heard the Match
was breaking, he stood with his Finger in his Mouth, and never so much as
grumbled at it. --


Sim. overhearing. But Sirrah! now he will, you shall see, and make ye smoke
for t^ to^. Aside.


Dav. to himself. I Will warrant ye his Business was to owl us into a Fool's
Paradise, and In The midst of all our hop's have taken us napping, before. we
could bethink our selves of spoiling the jo^. A cunning old Fellow!


Sim. listening. This Rogue! What says he? Aside.


Dav. discovering Simo S Life my Master's up^ the Back of me, and I nere dreamed
of him. Softly,


Sim. Davus!


Dav. seeming not to know him Umph! Who Is that?


Sim. Here, Sir, this way.


Dav. What would this old Fellow have? Softly.


Sim. partly hearing. De^e m^tter Sirrah?


Dav. Who I, Sir?


Sim. And ask Questions too? -- Sirrah it is the Town-talk that my Son keeps a
Miss.


Dav. The Town's much concerned I warrant for what our Pam does. Aside.


Sim. Rascal! De'e mind what I say or no? Angrily.


Dav. O yes, Sir, very much.


Sim. I should be looked upon as a hard Father I know, for peeping into his
Intrigues. -- For what is gone and past I regard not much; for he had Liberty
enough, so long as 'twas fit for me to give it, or him to take it. But now the
Case is alter^d, and new Circumstances call for new Measures and new Manners;
and therefore I require you, or if 'twere decent, let me entreat ye good Davus,
that my Son take up and mend.


Dav. Sir, I Am in the dark all this while.


Sim. Your Wenchers you know are sick at the Name of Wife and Matrimony --


Dav. Ay, Sir, so they say indeed.


Sim. -- Then if any such has got a Tutor of his own Kidney, he shall be sure
to be plied of the weak side.


Dav. Really, Sir, I don't understand ye.


Sim. No? That Is strange. Angrily.


Dav. Why Sir, I Am plain Davus still, no Conjurer.


Sim. Then you would have the rest of my Mind in words at length.


Dav. Yes Sir, to choose.


Sim. Look ye Sirrah! if I catch ye in any of your Roguy Legerdemain tricks to
hinder this Match, or that ye have a Mind to show how shrewd you are at
Plotting: I Will have your Skin stripped over your Ears, and you sent to Bridewel
Sirrah! there to lie and rot, upon this Condition, and by this token, that when
e're I take you out, I Will give you leave to put me in. -- What, does your
Rogueship understand me now? Have NOT I spoke plain enough yet?


Dav. Ay shrewdly. It Is the very thing it self without going about.


Sim. Well Sirrah! Trick me in any thing but this.


Dav. Gently, gently, Sir, I beseech ye. Jeeringly.


Sim. Rascal de'e laugh at me too? But I know ye well enough, and remember what
I tell ye; don't Act hand over Head, and pretend ye had not fair play shown ye.
-- Take this for a Warning Exit Simo.


Davus alone. Why seriously poor Davy, it is high time to bestir thy stumps, and
to leave offdozing; at least if a body may guess at the old Man's meaning by
his Mumping. If these Brains don't help me out at a dead lift, to pot goes
Pilgarlick, or his Master for certain. -- [He studies.] And hang me for a Dog,
if I know which side to take, whether to help my young Master, or make fair
with his Father. -- Should I leave the Son, the poor Rogue may hang himself for
ought I know; and if I help him, I dread an old Fox whom the Devil cannot
outwit. -- In the first place he has certainly smelt out his Son's haunts, then
he suspects and keeps a deadly narrow Eye over me, lest I should play fast and
loose with him in this Business. If he smokes it I Am no Man of this World; or
if the Toy takes him in the Head, right or wrong he will find an occasion to have
me into Lobs-pound in a trice. -- Besides all this, here is another piece of
damned Luck, this same Glycerie (whether Wife or Miss I cannot tell) is
undoubtedly with Child by my master; and troth it is the pleasantest thing in
the World, to tell their Adventure; for it looks more like a Romance than an
Amo^r. Whatsee're God sends'em they are resolved to bring it up. And they have
contrived to sham the Mother upon the World for a Citizen of Athens. Now (say
they) once upon a time there was a certain old Man a Merchant of our Town, who
was cast away upon the Isle of Andro: He dying, there did Chrysis' s Father
take this young Orphan cast ashore, and bring her up. It Is all stuff. OF my
conscience it sounds like a Lie; but however the Story takes hugely with them.
--

Mysis appears at Glycerie's Door. But hold! here comes her Girl Mysis. -- I Will
even go to the Change, and hunt up my Master Pamphilus, his Father else will go
nigh to surprise him before he has his Lesson.

Exit Davus.

As Mysis Enters upon the Stage, Archillis comes to the Door.


Mys. to Archillis. Yes, Yes: I understand ye Archillis without all this noise:
You Would have me go for Lesbia by all means. But upon my word she is a true Toper,
and a giddy Brain Creature, not fit to be trusted with a Womans's first Labor;
But however I ll bring her. -- Archillis retires, and Mysis turns to her
Spectators. Didn't. ye see how eager this old Trot was to have her come,
because they might Fuddle their Noses together. -- Well! Heavens grant my poor
Mistress a good Delivery, and that any body may miscarry under her Hands rather
than she. --

Enter Pamphilus at a distance. But what is here to do that Mr. Pamphilus is so
strangely discrdered? -- It makes me tremble to think what should be the
matter. -- There Is Mischief a brewing, and I ll stay a little to see what comes
on it.

She retires to one side of the Stage.
Pamp. to himself. Was ever such a thing done or thought of yet by Man? Is this
the part of a Father?


Mys. What mischief's in the Wind now trow? Aside.


Pam. to himself. If this ben't severity with a witness, before God and Man
there is no such thing in nature. -- My Father it seems designed to have married
me to day. One would have thought I might have known on it before. Or at least
have had some notice of my own Wedding.


Mys. Alas! What Is this I hear?

Aside.
Pam. to himself. What means this Chremes too? Who but lately declared against
the Match. Has he changed his own Mind, because he saw I would not change mine?
Is he so resolutely bent to rend me from my dearest Glycerie? If it comes to
that once, I Am ruined beyond Redemption. -- Was there ever such an awkward and
unlucky Fellow upon Earth as I? -- O Heavens! Is there no way to shuffle off
the Alliance with this Chremes? How grossly have I been abused and trampled on?
All things were agreed upon, every thing signed and sealed; of a sudden I their
Cast-off must be brought on again. But why? unless there is some damnable
Roguery in the bottom on it, which I am very suspicious of. Now because this
Dowdy lies upon her Father's Hands, and no body else will, I must.

Scornfully.
Mys. I vow these Words make my poor heart go pit-a-pat.

Aside.
Pam. to himself. But what shall I say of my Father all this while? Alas for
him! That he should so carelessly huddle up a thing of so great Consequence. --
He told me upon the Change as he went by me even now, Pamphilus, You're to be
married to day, go home presently, and make your self ready: Which sounded to
me as if he said, Go home presently and hang your self. It stunn d me so that I
had not a Word to answer, nor the least Color of excuse, though never so foolish,
false, or extravagant. In short, I was Tongue-tied. -- But if any body should
ask me now, What would ye have done, supposing you had had timely notice on it?
Why sure I would have done something not to have done this. -- But as the Case
now stands, Where shall I begin first? so many Difficulties cumber and distract
my Soul at once: On this side Love, pity for that dear Creature, and my being
urged to marry; on that side the Reverence due to my Father who has hitherto
indulged me in all that Heart could wish, and shall I turn Rebel at last? --
I Am very unhappy, and which side to take to I know not.


Mys. coming nearer. Alas! How I dread as much which side he will take to! But
now it is absolutely necessary for him to speak with her, or for me to tell him
something about her. For when the Minds upon the Balance, the least thing
in the World turns the Scale.

Aside.
Pam. What Voice is that? -- Is it you Mysis? in good time.


Mys. O Mr. Pamphilus, well met.


Pam. How does your Mistress.


Mys. She Sir? Why she is just now in her Labor: then it goes the harder with
the poor Creature, because she hears this is to be your Wedding day; but worst
of all for fear you should leave her at ^ast.


Pam. Oh hideous! Can I entertain such a Thought? Shall I suffer an unfortunate
Gentlewoman to be ruined for my Pleasure, who put her Life and Honor into my
hands? One that I Have lov d with the Fondness and Tenderness of a Husband? Shall
I expose so much Modesty and Virtue to the Temptation of so strong a Necessity?
No, no: it must never be.


Mys. That is to say if you could help it; but I Am afraid you cannot stand the
Brunt of your Father.


Pam. But can ye think me such a Scoundrel? So ungrateful? So inhumane? Nay and
so brutal too? That neither Friendship, Love, nor Honor, can make or keep me
honest?


Mys. This I can assure ye, Sir, you do her great wrong if you forget her.


Pam. Forget her, say ye? -- O Mysis, Mysis! What Chrysis spoke to me about her
Sister, is to this day engraven on my Heart, she was just dying, I remember,
when she called; I went to her, you among ye withdrew, we alone, she thus
began. My Pamphilus! you see the Youth and Beauty of this poor Girl; I needn't
tell ye how little these signify either to the security of her Virtue, or
Fortune. -- Now by this Hand of yours, and your natural Goodness I beg of ye: I
adjure ye by the Faith you ve given this poor Creature, and by her solitary
Condition, to be true to her, and never for sake her. -- If you ve ever been to
me as my own Brother, if you're the Man in the World whom she ever most esteem,
d, if she never denied ye any thing, that she could grant ye: I now bequeath ye
to her for a Husband, a Friend, a Guardian, and a Father too. I leave ye also
Master of my Fortune to do with it as ye please. -- With these Words she joined
our Hands, and in the very Action died. I received her, and am resolved to keep
her.


Mys. Indeed, Sir, I hope so.


Pam. But why from your Mistress at this time?


Mys. I Am going for a Midwife.


Pam. Prithee make haste then. [ She is going off. But Hark ye: not a word of
the Wedding to her; for fear it should make her the worse.


Mys. I understand ye.

Exeunt severally.
End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Charine attended by Byrrhie. Cha. As they enter. -- How Is this Byrrhie? Is she
to be married to Mr. Pamphilus to day? Hah!


Byr. Neither better nor worse.


Cha. How know ye that?


Byr. I had it of Davus at the Change.


Cha. Unlucky Creature that I am! There Is some Life in a Man as long as he lies
hovering betwixt hope and fear, but when he comes to despond once, he sinks
amain, and his Heart's as heavy as a lump of Lead. --


Byr. For Goodness sake, Sir, be but so much a Philosopher, as if ye cannot have
what ye would, content your self with what you may.


Cha. Nay, there is nothing I Would have, but my dear Philumena.


Byr. Ah, Sir, Were it not much better to try if ye can put that Love out of
your Head, than to indulge your Passion thus, stand blowing o the Cole, and to
no purpose neither.


Cha. It Is an easier Matter to give Council than to take it, and if you had my
Distemper, you d say so.


Byr. Well, well, Sir! what ye please for that.

Enter Pamphilus at a distance.
Cha. But stay a little, I see Mr. Pamphilus yonder. Since my Life's at stake,
I Am resolv d to make a Bolt or a Shaft on t.


Byr. What whim take's my Master now? Aside.


Cha. Why I will so beg, and beg of him, and tell him such a dismal story of my
Love, that I fancy he may be prevailed upon to put off the Wedding for two or
three days; mean time something may happen.


Byr. And that something is just nothing at all. Aside.


Cha. What think ye Byrrhie had I best go to him or no?


Byr. By all means, Sir, tho to no other purpose than to make him believe you
ll Cuckold him, if he marries her.


Cha. Go hang your self, ye suspicious Cur.


Pam. coming nearer. O here is Mr Charine. -- Your Servant, Sir.


Cha. Oh, Sir, the very man I wanted! -- For if you don't keep up my Heart,
protect, assist and advise me, I Am undone.


Pam. Troth, Sir, you have found me but in a sorry Condition, either to assist or
advise ye. -- But, pray, Sir, tell me what you would have.


Cha. Arn't you to be married to day, Sir?


Pam. It Is so reported.


Cha. If ye do, Sir, you have seen your last of me.


Pam. Why so, Sir?


Cha. Alas, Sir, I daren't tell ye. -- Prithee, Byrrhie, you tell him.


Byr. I will, Sir.


Pam. to Byrrhie. Well, what is the Business?


Byr. He Is only in love with your Spouse, that is all, Sir.


Pam. Truly we arn't both of a Mind. -- But, pray be plain with me, Is there no
nearer Engagement between you and her?


Cha. Ah, Sir, none at all.


Pam. O my Soul I wish there were,


Cha. Now as you have any Love or Friendship for me, I do adjure ye not to marry
her; --


Pam. Sir, I Will do my best in the Case.


Cha. -- But if ye cannot avoid it, or if the Wedding be so much to your Heart's
desire, --


Pam. My Heart's desire? Angrily.


Cha. -- At least put it off a day or two longer, that I may get out of the way.


Pam. But hear me a little, Mr. Charine. This is all to the Tune of, I thank ye
for nothing. For I ll assure ye I Am more against the Match, than you are for it.


Cha. That word has brought me to Life again.


Pam. Now if there be any thing to be done between you and your Man Byrrhie,
fall to work upon it, lie, contrive, do but order the Matter so that she may be
yours; and let me alone to see she shall never be mine.


Cha. Enough, Sir.


Pam. seeing Davus afar off. But yonder comes Davus in the lucky Minute, whose
Advice I rely upon.


Cha. to Byrrhie. Ay Davus -- but you, Sirrah, are good for nothing, but to
tell me what I shall be never the better for. -- In short, out of my sight.


Byr. With all my Heart, Sir. Runs out.

Enter Davus at a distance, looking about him.


Dav. to himself. In the name of Goodness!

What a world of good News do I bring? -- But where is our Pam. now? For I ve
that to tell him which will rid him of his present Fears, and make his Heart
leap in his Belly.


Cha. There Is something pleases him, if a Body knew what it were.


Pam. There Is nothing in it; the Fellow hasn't heard the Story of my misfortunes.


Dav. to himself. -- I Will warrant, did he but know he was to be married today,
--


Cha. Do You hear him, Sir?


Dav. to himself. -- He Would post about the Town in a pitiful condition after me.
-- But where the De'l shall I meet with him now? Or where shall I go to find
him?


Cha. What not a word to him?


Dav. to himself. Well I ll be marching. Going off.


Pam. So-ho! Davus, stay.


Dav. not knowing him. What Fellow's that interrupts? -- [ turning about O
Lord! My Master Pamphilus! the Man I looked for: -- And Heyday! here is Mr.
Charine too! rarely well met, for IN ve Business with ye both.


Pam. Ah Davus! quite ruined! --


Dav. interrupting. But hear me first.


Pam. I Am a lost man. --


Dav. I know your Grief. Hastily.


Cha. And my Life's at stake. --


Dav turning to Charine. That I know too.


Pam. I Am to be married --


Dav. As if I didn't know that too. Angrily.


Pam. But to day Davus.


Davus. Zookers! You Have put me besides my Senses. I know all. -- You're afraid
ye should marry her, to Pamphilus -- and you re afraid ye should not. to
Charine.


Cha. Pam. together, Thou have nicked it. Ay, the very same.


Dav. That very same's nothing by this Light, trust me, Sir.


Pam. Prithee good Boy, without any more ado rid me from my Fears.


Dav. So I will, Sir, in a trice. Imprimis, Mr Chremes parts with no Daughter
to day.


Pam. How do you know that?


Dav. I know it well enough, Sir -- Your Father just now took me aside, and told
me, You must be Married to day, with a long Story at the tail on it, not worth
telling you now. Upon this I ran full speed to the Change, to acquaint you
with it, where when I found ye not, I gets me up on high, then stares me round
about, but no Pamphilus appears. By chance I espied Byrrhie, asked him if he
had seen ye, but no tidings yet. This fretted my very Guts. To work goes my
Noddle, to know what to do. Mean while on my return I began to smell the whole
Business out. A^, ha! there is not a Bit extraordinary for a Treat, the old Man
out of Tune too. A Wedding clapped up in a trice. These things don't hang well
together.


Pam. Well, what of all this?


Dav. Away marched I to Neighbor Chremes's; when I got there, not a Creature
stirring before the Door did I see, which made me laugh in my sleeve.


Cha. That Is well.


Pam. On with your Story.


Dav. There staid I some time, but the De^l a Person saw I going out or in,
never an old Governante; nor the least preparations or hurry in all the House.


Pam. I grant this is a good sign.


Dav. Does this look like a Wedding?


Pam. Indeed, Davus, I think not.


Da. Marry come up with your think nots -- Ye know nothing I see, why it is as
plain as a Pack Staff. As I was beating the Hoof homewards, who should I meet
but Mr. Chremes's Boy, coming from the Market with a Bunch of Herbs, and Three
ha perth of little little Fishes, for the old Man's Supper.


Cha. God-a-mercy Davus This day have thou set me upon my Legs again.

hear


Dav. What a plaguey Mistake you lie under?


Cha. Why so? You're Master is not like to have her


Da. Well done Logic! As if there were never another Man in the World, but
your Worship and my Master. If ye don t look about ye, make Friends to the old
Gentleman, and ply the Lady briskly, ye may snap short for all that tho.


Cha. Your Councels good, I ll follow't. Tho in troth my hopes have often
jilted me, and so farewell.

Exit Charine.
Pam. Prithee Davus, what does my Father propose to himself? what makes him
double thus?


Da. I Will tell ye, Sir. If he should take pet now that Mr. Chremes will not part
with his Daughter, he could not but blame himself for it, and right enough too,
till he finds how you stand affected to the Wedding. But if it goes off on your
side, the blame will be laid all at your door; and there will be the Devil to
do then.


Pam. What? Shall I truckle?


Da. Why, Sir, he is your Father, and you will have a hard task on it Besides your
Mistress has no body to stand by her, upon the least occasion he will quickly
make the Town too hot for her.


Pam. Too hot for her?

Angrily and scornfully.
Dav. In the turning of a Hand, Sir.


Pam. Prithee, honest Davus, what shall I do in this case


Da. Why even tell him you will have her.


Pam Oh!


Da. Why that Sigh now?


Pam. What tell him a thing so far from my Heart?


Da. Why not, I pray?


Pam. O Davus, never, never --


Da. Never deny't man.


Pam. Don't put me upon it.


Da. Consider well what will come on it.


Pam. Yes, that 'twill put me out of the one and in with the other.


Da. No, no, you're wide. -- Now I fancy that your Father will say some such
thing as this. Come Son I must needs have ye Marry to day. With all my Heart,
say you -- Well; And what can he quarrel at now? This will ruin all his
Designs, and you in a whole Skin all this while. For it is as certain as
certainty it self, that Mr. Chremes will not give ye his Daughter. So that you
needn't break a jot of your own Measures for fear of his altering his mind. Do
but tell your Father you will marry, and let him be angry if he can. As for your
flattering your self, that no body else will part with his Daughter to one in
your Circumstances. I Will answer that in a word, your Father will tie a Beggar
Wench upon your Back, rather than let ye whore of this rate -- Look ye, if he
find ye once indifferent: He Will sleep over it, and look ye out another no body
knows when. In the mean time something may happen on our side.


Pam. Think ye so?


Da. No doubt on it, I Will warrant ye.


Pam. Have a care where thou leadst me.


Da. What will ye never have done?


Pam. Well I ll say as you would have me. But you must take special care it don't
come to my Father's Ear that I Have a Child, and that I Am in for Maintenance.


Da. O Confident Devil.


Pam. Why she bound me upon my Oath to take care on it, as a Token I would never
forsake her.


Da. Well, we'll take care on it --

Enter Simo at a great distance.

Yonder comes your Father, put on your the other Face quick.


Sim. to himself. These Blades are conferring Notes; I have a mind to see what
they would be at.


Da. The good old Man takes it for granted, that you will refuse to marry. He
comes so cogitabund from some by corner or another; he questions not but he has
that in his Head which will put ye to a confounded Nonplus -- Be sure to have
all your Brains about ye.


Pam. I Will do what I can Davus.


Da. Come, Sir, tell him but you will marry her, and if ever he opens his Mouth
to ye again upon that Business, never believe Davus.

Enter Byrrhie at another part of the Stage watching them.


Byr. to himself. This Master of mine has discharged me a while from all other
Services, to make me a Spy upon Mr Pamphilus's Designs about this Wedding. For
this purpose have I dogged Father Greybeard upon the heel -- O here they are
all together. -- Faith I Will play at Bo-peep here.

Withdraws to the side of the Stage.
Sim. coming nearer. O here are the Gentlemen I want.


Da. 'S't! mind your Cue.


Sim. Pamphilus!


Dav. softly Turn quick as tho you had not seen him.


Pam. turning hastily about. Hah my dear Father!


Da. Excellent IN Faith.

Aside to Pamphilus.
Sim. I must have ye marry to day as I told ye.


Byr. Now I am plaguely afraid whether his answer will be for us. Aside.


Pam. Sir, I shall be ready to obey ye in this and all other Commands.


Byr. Say ye so?

Aside.
Da. The old Man's Mouth is stopped.

Aside.
Byr. What answered he?

Aside.
Sim. Why this is like a Son, when ye cheerfully do as your Father would have ye


Da. Will ye believe me another time?

Aside to Pamphilus
Byr. For ought I perceive, my poor Master may go whistle for a Wife.

Aside.
Sim. Go in Pamphilus, that you may be at hand when you're wanted.


Pam. I Am going, Sir.

Exit Pamphilus.
Byr. coming from his covert. Is there no Faith in Man? well I find the old
Saying stands good, Every Man for his own ends. I remember once I had a glimps
of this Lass; 'Sbobs! a charming Creature! And Mr Pamphilus is in the right
on it, if he had rather lie by such a one himself than my Master should. -- I Will
go tell him all; it is but venturing a few hard words for a little hard News.
Ex. Byr.


Da. Now this old Mumpsimus concludes I ve got some notable Intrigue in my
Budget, and that I planted my self here upon the same account.

Aside.
Sim. What says Davus to the World?


Da. There Is no News stirring, Sir.


Sim. None say ye?

Angrily.
Da. None at all, Sir.


Sim. Truly but I looked for something tho.


Da. He has lost his Aim I percieve, and that nettles him too.

Aside.
Sim. Sirrah, can ye speak without a Lie in your Mouth?


Da. Most fluently, Sir.


Sim. Come, Do'sn't this Match stick in my Son's Stomach, because of his Amors
with the Stranger?


Da. Why truly, Sir, no, -- or were it so, that uneasiness would off in a day
or two's time, (D ye understand me, Sir?) then all would be well again. But now
he has fairly taken the Point by the right handle.


Sim. I commend him for it.


Da. Indeed when you winked at it, and his Age bore him out in it, he did wench
a little, but then he did it secretly, and like a Man of Honor took care it
should be no Blot to his Scutcheon. -- Now it is time to look out for a Wife,
he has his thoughts wholly upon Matrimony.


Sim. Methought he looked a little downish upon it tho.


Da. Not at all for that, but there is something else he didn't take so well at
your hands.


Sim. What Is that pray?


Da. A mere trifle, Sir.


Sim. What is it, for a trifle?


Da. Nay nothing at all to speak on.


Sim. Well, well, I must know what it is.


Da. He says, You're too sparing of your Purse.


Sim. Who I?

Angrily.
Da. Yes, you Sir. -- For, says he, my Father has laid out but Ten Groats for a
Supper, And is that to be my Wedding Treat forsooth? Which of my Companions can
I invite at such a time as this? And under the Rose, Sir, I think you are a
little too closefisted: I could wish it were otherwise.


Sim. Leave your prating Sirrah.


Da. I ve stung him I see.

Aside.
Sim. Let me alone to see that all be well. --

Exit Davus.
Simo alone. What Is the meaning of all this? -- What would this old Hocus be
at? -- If there be any piece of Roguery here on foot, I ll lay my Life he is
chief Actor in it. Exit after him.


The end of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Enter Mysis and Lesbia on one part of the Stage; on another Simo and Davus
observing them. Mys. TRuly Lesbia, you're much in the the right on it. A faithful
Lover is a very great rarity.


Sim. This Maid belongs to the Andrian; What say you to it?


Da. Yes Sir.


Mys. to Lesbia But this Mr. Pamphilus --


Sim. What says she?

Aside.
Mys. -- Has signed and sealed over again; --


Sim. So, so!


Da. Would the old Man's Ears were stopped, or her Tongue out for me.

Aside.
Mys. -- For whatever God sends her, he has ordered to be brought up.


Sim. Confusion! What do I hear? If what she says be true, all is past recovery.

Les. A sweet natured young Gentleman I Will warrant ye.


Mys. Oh a most sweet natured -- But come along, for you will be too late else


Les. Well let us in then. Exeunt Mysis and Lesbia.


Da. How shall we recover our selves out of this Relapse.

Aside.
Sim. walking aside. What means all this? -- Is my Son so mad then? And for a
stranger too? But hold! Now I see which way the Hare goes. -- That I could not
find it before, like a senseless Sot as I was.

softly.
Dav. partly overhearing. What Is that he has found out, says he?


Sim. Oh here begins the Rogues tricks; they pretend a great Belly among 'em to
beat off Mr. Chremes from the Match.

Aside.
Glycerie within Oh! -- Oh! -- Help kind Heavens and free me from my Pains. --
I beseech ye. Oh --


Sim. softly. Ha, ha, ha, -- so nimble! A very good Jest! After she heard of my
being at the Door, she presently falls in Labor forsooth. -- Your Farce was not
well timed Mr. Rogue. [to Dav.


Da. Meaning me, Sir?


Sim. Ah Sirrah, were your Actors out in their Parts?


Da. I don't understand ye, Sir, in the least.


Sim. If this Rascal had served me so in a real wedding here would have been
fine work with a vengeance. But now he makes a Rod for his own Back; for my
part I Am safe enough.

Enter Lesbia from Glycerie's House, not seeing Simo and Davus.
Les. to Archillis at the Door. For what is past Archillis, and for a Woman in
her Condition every thing is as well as a Body could wish. In the first place
let her be well bathed; and then let h^ take the Dose I prescribe her to drink,
and just the quantity. I shall be back again in a minute. -- Archillis retires,
Lesbia speaks to her self. Heart of my Body! Pamphilus has got a very pretty
Boy. I hope in Heaven he will live to make as good a Man as his Father, who
scorned to wrong this innocent Creature.

Exit Lesbia.
Sim. What Man alive that knew thee, would not swear that this was one of thy
Rogues tricks?


Da. What Rogues tricks, Sir?


Sim. Within Doors there were no Orders given about the big-bellied woman; but
when she was once out, she sets up a bawling in the Streets to those within,
that the whole Town might ring on it. -- Why Davus am I to be made a Property;
or what do thou see in my Face, to think of making so palpable an Ass of me?
If it had been more artificial, it would have looked like somewhat of Reverence
for me, if I should have found it out.


Da. Faith the old Fool cheats himself, not I.

Aside.
Sim. Didn't I charge ye strictly? Nay didn't I threaten ye too? But what cared
you? 'Twas all but so much Breath lost. Can ye think me so mad, as to believe
this woman's brought to Bed?


Da. Oh have I found out his blind-side? I know my Cue then.

Aside.
Sim. Have ye never a Tongue in your Head Sirrah?


Da. Why what would ye believe? As if you had not an Item of this beforehand.


Sim. Who should give me an Item?


Da. Strange! Did you find out this Imposture, and your self too.

Jeeringly.
Sim. Very fine! I Am laughed at.


Da. I Am sure 'twas told ye Sir; How should you suspect it else?


Sim. How? cause I knew thee for a Rogue.


Da. As much as to say I was the Contriver on it.


Sim. Nothing so certain. I knew't.


Da. Sir you're mightily mistaken in your Man;


Sim. Mistaken in my Man!


Da. For if I go about to speak a Word, you pre^^ly think that I put upon ye.


Sim. Belike I lie then.


Da. Troth at this rate I dare scarce move my ^ips to ye.


Sim. This I Am certain of, that there has been no h^^ly laid here.


Da. Are ye very certain often? Yet for all that you will have a Child laid at
your door before you're aware on it. This, Sir, will certainly be, and remember
that I told ye on it now, that if there should happen any Roguery in the Case, it
mightn't be laid to Davus's charge. I would feign have ye believe better things
of Davus.


Sim. But how do you know they will trick a Child upon us?


Da. I heard it, and believe it too. And there are a thousand Circumstances
which make me be of that mind. For first the Gentlewoman cried she was with
Child by your Son, which is found to be a mere sham. As soon as she heard of a
Wedding on foot; her Maid forsooth is posted away presently for the Midwife;
and for a Child over and above. But if it chance that you should not see the
Child at your door, the Wedding may go on for all this.


Sim. How Is this? -- As soon as ye heard of these Plots, Pray why could not
Pamphilus have been acquainted withal.


Da. And who wast do you think but I that parted them? For the whole Town knew
that he was up to the Ears in Love. Now he has set his Mind upon a Wife. As for
the Business of the Child, let me alone with that. Go on with the Wedding as
you have begun, Heavens prosper it I say.


Sim. Very well! -- Now ye may go in, and wait there till I come, and get ready
what is wanting.

Exit Davus.
Simo alone. The fellow was not very urgent upon me to believe his Stories; and
may be all he said was not true neither. Be it so or no, I care not a Straw: the
main thing I stand upon is my Son's promise. -- Well I Will go see for my
Neighbor Chremes, and beg his Daughter; then if I get her, I Will have a Wedding
to day in spite of their ^eeths. I don't question my Son's promise at all. If
he draws back, I can fairly force him to it now --

Enter Chremes. Here comes the Man in as good time as a body could wish. -- A
good day to ye Neighbor Chremes.


Chr. O Sir, you're the Man I looked for.


Sim. And I you.


Chr. You're well met Sir, -- there are those who told me they heard from your
own Mouth, that this day your Son and my Daughter were to be married. Now I Am
come to see whether you of they are well in their Wits.


Sim. Have a little patience, and you ll hear my Desires, and an Answer to your
Question too.


Chr. Well Neighbor, let us hear't then.


Sim. I beg of ye for Heaven's sake, by our Friendship begun with our Childhood
and increased with our Years: By your dear Daughter, and my only Son, (whose
welfare depends wholly upon you) to assist me in this weighty point? and let
the Match still go on, as we formerly designed.


Chr. Pray, Sir, no such Entreaties: As tho I could not grant it without all
this begging. Do You think I Am not the same man as when I made the first offer?
If the Match be for both their goods, let 'em be sent for out of hand. But if
more harm than good be like to come on it, I Would have ye consi^er Matters
impartially, as tho she were your Daughter, and Pamphilus my Son.


Sim. It Is upon such Conditions that I desire it, and press it so forward. Nor
should I ha been so urgent, had not the Matter required it.


Chr. As how I beseech ye?


Sim. O Sir, my Son and his Mistress are fallen out.


Chr. Mere Tales!


Sim. Believe me Neighbor it is true.


Chr. Yes Faith just as I tell ye, Love's a mere Caterwawl, where scratc Sing
begets kissing.


Sim. Say ye so Sir, pray then let us prevent the worst now we ve fair
opportunity, whilst the edge of his Appetite is taken off by Affronts and I^^
usage. Let Us give him a Wife before these whe^^ling Queans by their Tricks and
false Tears soften his Lovesick Mind to pity. I hope, Sir, wh^^ he is once
reclaimed by the pleasant Conversation of a virtuous Wife, he will easily wind
himself out of these Mischiefs.


Chr. You're of this Opinion, but I am not; they will never endure to be
together, and I shall be as uneasy under it.


Sim. But how can you know it, till you have experienced it?


Chr. It Is ill buying Experience at the Expense of my Daughter.


Sim. Why when the worst is come to the worst, if such a thing should happen
(which Heavens forbid) they can but part. But should he once take up and mend,
consider how many Advantages will happen. First I shall have my Son well
settled, you an honest Son-in-Law, and your Daughter a good Husband.


Chr. What Is all this ado for? If you're fully persuaded that all will prove
for the best, God forbid I should be your hinderance in the least.


Sim. Indeed Sir, I have always had a high esteem for ye.


Chr. But to the purpose.


Sim. Well Sir.


Chr. How come ye to know that your Son and his Mistress are fallen out?


Sim. Why Sir, Davus, a Privy-Councellor of theirs told me so, and withal urged
me to strike up the Match with all speed. And do you think he would have don't,
had not he known my Son was willing too. -- Now I think on it, you shall hear't
from his own Mouth. -- to Servants within So ho! within there, bid Davus come
hither. --

Enter Davus to them. But see here he comes himself.


Dav. to Sim. I was just coming to you Sir.


Sim. Well, what is the Matter?


Da. Why don't ye send for the Bride, Sir; it grows late. Fawningly.


Sim. to Chremes. Look ye there now, do you hear him? -- to Davus Well, Davus,
Servants are slippery, and I had a fancy once that you were as likely to serve
your Master a slippery trick as another body; especially in the Case of my
Son's Amors.


Da. Lord Sir! I do such a thing?


Sim. I was once of that Opinion, and for fear of the worst kept something to
my self which now ^ll discover to ye.


Da. And what may that be I pray Sir?


Sim. I Will tell ye, for I could now find in my heart to trust thee


Da. I hope you're satisfied in my Fidelity at last.


Sim. In short, there was nothing of Marriage in the Case.


Da. How, Sir, no Marriage?


Sim. No, no, 'twas but a Contrivance to feel your Pulse.


Da. Will ye tell me so?


Sim. Even just so Davus.


Da. Why look ye Sir, I could never comprehend this. Bless me! there is a damned
reach in it.

Jeering.
Sim. But hear me on now. -- No sooner had I sent you in, whom should I meet
but my Neighbor here in the very nick? --


Da. ^S death is it come to this then? Softly.


Sim. -- I up and told him, What you told me. --


Dav softly. Confusion! What Is this I hear?


Sim -- I begged his Daughter, and with much ado prevailed --


Da. Undone, undone! Softly.


Sim partly hearing. How? What say ye?


Da. I said 'twas excellently well done.


Sim. As for Mr. Chremes he is ready.


Chr. Well I Will just step home, and put all things in order then I Will come
back, and tell ye more o^ my mind. Exit Chremes. Davus looks simply upon Simo.


Sim. Now prithee Davus, seeing this is a Ma^ch wholly of thy making. --


Da. 'Twas wholly of my making with a Pox to it. Aside.


Sim. -- I d have ye take my Son in hand and help to reclaim him.


Da. Yes Sir, I Will do my best. Coldly.


Sim. That Is easily done now he is upo' the peevish pin.


Da. Well Sir set your Heart at rest


Sim. Do It then, but where is he now?


Da. Ten to one he is at home.


Sim. Well I Will step in, and tell him just what I told you. Exit Simo.


Davus alone. So! I shall be hanged -- I ve no more to do, but strait to Prison
goes poor Davus with a vengeance, -- there is no crying Peccavi in the the Case.
I Have turned all Topsey-turvey, imposed upon the old Man, noos'd his Son into.
Matrimony; and brought a Business about, that the one never dreamed of, and the
other was afraid of -- This it is to be super-subtle! Had I sat still, and not
been tampering, all had been well enough.

Enter Pamphilus at a distance. But look now, as the Devil would have it, yonder
he comes. -- I Am damned already. -- What would I give for a convenient
Precipice to dash my Brains out. He sneaks aside.


Pam. to himself. Where Is the Villain that has undone me?


Da. Heavens! what will become of me. Aside.


Pam to himself. I must confess I Am well enough served, like a senseless
short-sighted Fop as I was what venture my Life and Soul to the Secrecy of a
prating Fool? I shall pay dear for being a Blockhead; but as I live that Dog
shall not carry it ^^f so.


Da. If I sea pe hanging this bout, I Will be sworn the Gallows will never have
me. Aside.


Pam. to himself. What excuse shall I pretend to ^y Father? Shall I break off,
when but just now I engaged my self to marry. -- With what Face shall I dare to
offer it? -- I Am at a wretched Nonplus --


Dav. listening. And so am I in good Faith, tho my wits are on the Tenterhooks;
yet I must pretend I Have that in my Head will fetch him off again, tho 'twere
only to put off this plaguey Business a little longer. Aside.


Pam. seeing Davus. Hah! Are ye there?


Da. 'Sdeath he sees me. Softly hanging his Head.


Pam. Pray come hither good Mr. Rogue! what Excuse now? -- Don't ye see, you
Rascal, what ^ miserable Condition your damned Contrivances have brought me in
to? Angrily.


Da. But I Will soon bring ye off again.


Pam. You bring me off again?


Da. Yes Sir, without doubt.


Pam. Without doubt as ye did before. Scornfully.


Da. I hope Sir a little better too.


Pam. How can I credit such a Villain? Can you set a Matter entirely lost and
desperate to rights again? -- Very fine! what a rare fellow have I relied upon?
who this day amidst a calm has raised a Storm, and forced an odious Match upon
me in spite of my Teeth? -- Didn't I tell you how 'twould be, you Rascal?


Dav. You did so, Sir.


Pam. What do you deserve for your Pains?


Da. A Halter I must confess. -- But pray, Sir, reprieve me, till I Have
recovered my Senses a little I Will soon see what is to be done in the Case.


Pam. I Am sorry I have not time to give you your, due. I have scarce enough to
look to my self much less to punish you. Exeunt Amio.


The end of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Charine by himself. DId ever any body believe, or but-read of people so
horribly base, as to take pleasure in the Miseries of others, and out of them
Ruins to make their own Fortunes? -- Ah i^ this true or no? Yes, yes! it is
true with a vengeance. There are a brutal sort of Men that ma'te some scruple
of a downright Refusal; but when the time of performance comes; they pluck the
Mas^ aside with trembling hands, forced to discover what they are, and give a
flat Denial; then being past all shame they cry, Pray who are you Sir^ What are
you to me Sir? Shall I resign my Mistress to you Sir? Oh Sir, I Would have ye know,
Charity always begins at home. If ye charge them with breach of Honor, they
re, not ashamed: they can blush when there is no reason for it; but when there
is, they shake hands with their Modesty. -- what Measures shall I take? --
Shall I go to him and reason the Case with him for this Affront? -- I Will give
him ill Language enough. -- Hold Sir (may some say) you will be never the better
for it -- Oh much; I shall certainly plague him to some purpose, and so ease my
Mind a little that way.

He goes toward Simo' s Door, where he is met by Pamphilus and Davus. Pam. Ah
dear Sir, I ve most inconsiderately ruined you and my self too, except Heaven
help us.


Cha. How! Inconsiderately do you call it? then ye ^rn't to seek for an excuse.
You're a fine Man of your word indeed. Scornfully.


Pam. How so, Sir?


Cha. Do You think to catch me a second time with your Flams?


Pam. What do you mean, Sir?


Cha. I no sooner told ye of my Passion for Madam Philumena, but you were
strangely smitten with her. -- What a wretch was I to judge of another's
Generosity by my own?


Pam. You re still under a mistake, Sir.


Cha. Were not your Joys complete enough before without bubbling me the poor
Cully, and ^rilling me on with fantastic Hopes. -- But there! take her for
me. Very angrily,


Pam. I take her? -- Ah Sir, you cannot concieve what troubles I lie under; and
to what a miserable pass this Rascal of mine has brought me by his damned
Projects.


Cha. Where Is the wonder, since he took you for his Pattern.


Pam. I Am sure ye would not talk at this rate if ye knew either me, or my
Circumstanccs.


Cha. Jeeringly. Yes, yes: I know very well-some words have passed between your
Father and you; and that is the reason he is so very angry with ye: yet he
could not force ye to marry to day.


Pam. Nay Sir, to let ye see how little ye know my troubles, there was no
Wedding to be to day, nor any thing of a Wife designed for me.


Cha. Yes Sir, I know 'twas a voluntary Compulsion. --


Pam. But hold Sir, ye don't know the Business yet.


Cha. Yes so much on it, that you're just upon having her.


Pam. Why do you rack me thus? Do but hear. -- He never gave over tampering with
me to tell my Father I Would marry her: Nay, he lay pressing and begging of me, till
in plain dealing I could hold out no longer.


Cha. What He do you mean?


Pam. Why Davus, that He.


Cha. Who Davus?


Pam. It Is Davus all over.


Cha. How so?


Pam. Indeed I cannot tell, unless the angry Gods to punish me, made me give ear
to that Rascal.


Cha. to Dav. Is this true Sirrah?


Dav. Ay too true.


Cha. What say ye Villain? Hah! -- The Gallows reward ye for it. -- Now answer
me; if all the Devils in Hell were mustered together to force a Match upon him,
could they have given fitter advice than this?


Dav. I confess Sir, I have been a little outwitted, but yet I don't despair.


Cha. Very likely. Jeeringly.


Dav. The last Nail would not go, but we'll drive one that shall; unless you
fancy a bad Beginning always makes a bad Ending.


Pam. to Dav. Right Boy; I know if you will but set your wits to work, you will
bring me two Weddings out of one. Jeeringly.


Dav. Sir, I Am bound, as your Servant, to trudge for ye Night and Day, with
might and main, even to venture my Neck, as long as I can do you any good. For
what happens cross you ought to pardon. Tho'my Measures were broke, yet I did
my best; if you can find how to do it better, I Will be gone.


Pam. With all my heart. -- But first put me in the Condition you found me.


Pam. I Will do it Sir.


Pam. But out of hand then.


Dav. Hold 'S't! -- Glycerie's Door opens there.


Pam. What Is that to the purpose?


Dav. There must I make my Plot.


Pam. What Is your Plot to seek? Hah!


Dav. But now I'dad I Have hit on it.

Enter Mysis from Glycerie' s House.


Mys. to Glycerie within. Well! this same Pumphilus of yours, I ll go hunt him
up, and bring him along with me, if he be above ground -- But my dea^ don't you
lie fretting your self in the mean time? She comes from the door.


Pam. Oh Mysis!


Mys. What Is the matter? -- turning about Oh Mr. Pamphilus you're well met.


Pam. Why, what is the matter?


Mys. I am to charm you from my Mistress, that if you have any Love for her,
you would come to her presently; she says she longs strangely to see ye.


Pam. Alas, unhappy Man! -- My misfortunes come one upo'th neck of another --
to Davus Must we two now be plagued upon your account? I am sent for only
because she heard of the Wedding.


Cha. pointing to Davus. Had Not this Gentleman been tampering, how well and
quiet might all have been?


Dav. Very well! He Is not mad enough himself, but you must make him worse.
Aside to Charine.


Mys. to Pamphilus. And truly, Sir, that is it which makes my poor Mistress take
on so.


Pam. Mysis! I swear to thee by all that is Sacred, I Will never leave this
Creature though I should lose all the Friends I have in the whole world for it.
This is she I wished for; and my wishes are granted; our Humors are well
enough suited. He that offers to divide us I Will have nothing to do with him,
Death, and nothing but Death shall do it. --


Mys. I Am revived again.


Pam. The Oracle never spoke a truer thing. -- If the breaking off this Match
could be done by any body but me, I should be glad on it, but if that cannot be,
I Will even make a bold push on it, and own the thing. -- What think ye of me? To
Charine.


Cha. Just as deep in the Dirt, as I in the Mire.


Dav. My Brains are at work.


Cha. to Davus. You Are a bold Britain.


Pam. to Dav. I know what you would be at Jeeringly.


Dav. Depend on me, I Will do your Business to your hand. Pam. It must be
presently then.


Dav. I have it in my Head, Sir, I have it.


Cha. What Is that I prithee?


Dav. Your Pardon Sir, I Am working for my Master, not for you; therefore don't
mistake me.


Cha. Well, I Am satisfied.


Pam. Well, what will ye do now?


Dav. Come, come, I want time for my Business, and mustn't spend it in prating;
to deal plainly with ye, you do but hinder me, and I had rather have your Room
than your Company.

Pushing them.
Pam. Well I Will to my Mistress. Exit Pamphilus.


Dav. staring on Charine. Well, what is your Business here? which way are you
santring?


Cha. Shall I tell ye the very truth? --


Dav. interrupting him. Yes, yes, why not? -- we shall have a Speech on it.


Cha. Prithee what shall poor I do?


Dav. Very pleasant IN faith! Arn't ye content that I Have put off the wedding,
and reprieved ye for one short day?


Cha. But yet Davus --

Shaking his Head.
Dav. interrupting. What but yet?


Cha. That I may but marry her.


Da. A pleasant Freak!


Cha. Order the Matter so that you may come to my House there if possible.
Pointing to his House.


Da. What should I come for I Have no Business.


Cha. But if something should happen --


Dav. interrupting. Well, well, I Will come.


Cha. If there be any occasion, I shall be at home.

Exit Charine.
Dav. Mysis, I must go out a little, do but you stay till I come back. Mys.
What for?


Da. For a certain Reason that I know.


Mys. Prithee be quick then.


Da. I Will be here in a trice.

Exit Davus.
Mysis alone. Is there nothing in this world that a Man can call his own? --
Blessed Heaven? I took this Mr. Pamphilus to be the very Heart and Soul of my
Mistress, a Friend, a Lover, and in effect a Husband, and all in one, and ready
to serve her upon all occasions: And yet after all, what Miseries does this
unfortunate Woman endure for his sake? And how much greater is her present
Trouble, than all her former Satisfaction.

Enter. Enter Davus with Glycerie's Child in his Arms. O here comes Davus
again. -- Prithee good Boy what have we here? -- discovering the Child Where
do you carry that Child? --


Da. Now Mysis for one cast of thy Skill and Cunning at a Pinch.


Mys. What Plot's next Davus?


Da. Here, take the Child quickly, and lay it at our Door.


Mys. Prithee what on the cold Ground?


Da. Cannot ye take some of those Herbs there, and lay under it?


Mys. Well and why cannot ye do it your self?


Da. Why if my Master put me to swear whether I laid it there or no, I may do it
with a safe Conscience.


Mys. I understand ye. But pray how came this sudden qualm upon you? -- Give it
me then She takes the Child and moves toward Simo' s Door.


Da. Prithee go faster and be back again in a moment, that I may give ye your
Lesson. --

Chremes appears at a great distance.

But Oh the Devil!


Mys. starting back. What Is the Matter now?


Da. Yonder Is the Bride's Father; and I must even go another way to work now.

Aside.
Mys. I cannot imagine what you would have.


Da. I Will make as if I came from that way there of the Right Hand. -- Be sure to
put in a word or two upon occasion to make our Stories hang together.


Mys. Of My Conscience I know your designs no more than a Post. -- If I can do
you any Service (which you know better than I) I Will stay where I am, without
putting any stop to your Business.

As Chremes comes toward Mysis, Davus sneaks to the other side


Chr. to himself. Every thing's ready now for my Daughter's Wedding, and we have
nothing to do more but to invite the Guests. -- seeing the Child at the Door.
But what have we here in the Name of Goodness? -- Goes nearer, and uncovers the
Child's Face. A Child upo' my Life. -- Hark ye Gossip! Did you lay this Child
here? to Mysis.


Mys. looking fearfully about. Hah! What Is become of him?


Chr. What are ye Tongue-ty'd?


Mys Alas! he is not to be seen. -- O dear heart, the Fellow has left me and is
vanished.

Davus appears seemingly out of Breath, pretending he sees not Chremes, and
bawls as loud as he can.


Da. Bless me! what a Bustle's yonder in the Market! -- There Is a squabble
indeed -- then Corn is confoundedly dear. -- Troth I have nothing else to say.

softly.
Mys. to Davus. Prithee what must I be left alone for thus?


Dav. looking upon the Child. Heyday! what Farce is here? -- turning to Mysis
Oh ho! whence came this Bantling? Pray who brought it hither? He winks on her.


Mys. not understanding. What Is the Fellow a Fool to ask me such a Question?


Da. Who should I ask? there is no body else here to ask?


Chr. I wonder whence it should come? Aside.


Da. Come will ye give me an Answer or no?

Angrily.
Mys. Oh Lord!


Dav. softly to her To the Right Hand a little.


Mys. The Man is mop'd, wan't it your self? --


Dav. softly. If ye offer to speak one word from the Point, at your Peril be
it. Holding up his Finger.


Mys. Dye threaten me?


Dav. aloud. Whence came this Child? -- softly speak out VVench.


Mys. From our House.


Dav. aloud. Ha, ha, ha, -- it is no wonder if a Strumpet be so impudent.


Chr. I Am mistaken if this ben't the Andrian's Maid.

Aside.
Da. Can ye find no body else to make sport with?


Chr. I came in the very critical Minute.

Aside.
Da. You Would best make haste, and be packing with the Child from the Door. -- As
she is about it, he speaks softly. But stay tho; see that ye don't budge from
this place.

Holding up his Finger.
Mys. Shame take ye for me, ye do so fright me.


Dav. aloud. Is It you I speak to or no?


Mys. Why what would the man have?


Da. Have with a Pox? Come tell me whose Child you have laid there, once for all,
tell me.


Mys. You don't know I warrant ye.


Da. A fig for what I know; do you tell me what I ask.


Mys. It Is yours among ye!


Dav. aloud. Which of ours? All of us didn't get it.


Mys. Why it is Mr Pamphilus's.


Da. Zookers! what my Master Pamphilus's.

Very Angrily.
Mys. Very fine! why is not it?


Chr. I was always in the right to be against this Match.

Aside.
Dav. very loud. This is a Roguery deserves the Lash.


Mys. Why do you bawl so?


Da. Why didn't I see this very Child brought to your House last Night?


Mys. Oh thou brazen Face!


Da. I Am sure I saw Gammer Cauthara as big as she could tumble with something
she carried.


Mys. Well 'twas a Blessing, that many creditable women were at my Mistress's
Labor.


Dav. I Am sure she did not know her Man for whom she designed this Trick. I
warrant, said they, when Chremes sees the Child, he will not part with his
Daughter. But in faith he will do it the sooner for that.


Chr. In Faith but he will not tho. Aside.


Dav. Now therefore in plain English, if ye don't take away the Bastard, I Will
kick it into the middle of the Street, and take ye and set your A -- in the
Kennel.


Mys. You're either drunk or mad sure.


Dav. How one piece of Roguery brings out another: Now they begin to buz it
about, that this Glycerie is a Citizen of Athens, --


Chr. How? Aside.


Dav. -- So that the Law will make him marry her in spite of his teeth.


Mys. Under favor, sweet Sir, Is she not a Citizen?


Chr. I had like to have fooled fair, why I had almost noos'd my self. Aside.


Dav. Whose Tongue's that? turning about to Chremes O Sir, you're come in the
luckiest time that can be. -- Pray Sir hear me. --


Chr. I Have heard all. Dav. How all?


Chr. Why all from the beginning.


Dav. You Have heard it then? -- Fine Rogueries on foot! Now shou'dn't this same
Jade be Carted? -- to Mysis Don't think that poor Davus is the Man you play
upon. Here Is the Gentleman himself. pointing to Chremes.


Mys. Ah dear! Indeed Sir, an't please your Worship, I have not spoke one word of
a Lie.


Chr. I know the whole Business. -- But is my Neighbor Simo within?


Dav. I think so Sir. Exit Chremes.

Davus goes to play with Mysis.


Mys. Hands off Varlet! If I don't do your Errand to my Mistress, never trust
me.


Dav. Oh thou silly Soul thou dosn't know how the Case stands.


Mys. How should I?


Dav. Why this is the Bride's Father, and without all this, he could not have
known what we'd have him.


Mys. Could Not ye give me an Item before?


Dav. Pshaw! as if there were no difference between what Nature does briskly on
a sudden, and what is done by dull direction.

Enter at a distance Crito in a Country habit.


Cri. to himself. Why I was told that our Chrysis lived somewhere down this
Lane. And she found there was more to be got by Jaderyin the Town than Honesty
in the Country. But now as she is dead I Am Heir at Law to her Goods. Where shall
I ask about her? -- O there are Folks. -- go's up to them. By your leave I pray.


Mys. Goodnow, who is that? Is Not it old Crito, Mrs. Chrysis's Kinsman? -- The
very same.


Cri. O Mysis! I Am glad to see thee.


Mys. And I you, good Crito.


Cri. And is it so with poor Chrysis, Hah? --

Sorrowfully.
Mys. Yes indeed; she has left us to our sorrows.

Sighing.
Crit. Pray how do you do? -- How go's the World? Pretty hoddy, Hah?


Mys. What we? -- They that cannot do as they would, must even do as they may,
as the saying is.


Cri. How does young Glycerie? Has she found her Relations here?


Mys. Ah, would she had.


Cri. What not yet? -- Then I Have brought my Hogs to a fair Market. 'Sbud if I
had known so much beforehand, the De'el a foot would I have stirred out of my
House. For she passed with every body for Chrysis's Sister, and she is now in
possession of what she had. Now for me, that know no body, to hamper my self in
Lawsuits, there are Examples enough in the world to keep me from burning my
fingers. And, now I think on it, she may get some spruce Gallant to stand by
her, for she was in the Teens, let me tell ye, when she went from us, the
people will cry out, This is a beggarly Rascal, that sets up only a forged
Title. And then a body would make some Conscience too of turning the poor Girl
a begging.


Mys. Go thy ways honest Crito in troth; you are the same Crito still.


Cri. Come bring me to her however; since I Am come so far, I Will see the poor
Rogue.


Mys. With all my heart.

Exit Crito and Mysis with the Child.
Dav. looking carefully about. I Will follow 'em, but would not for the world that
the old Man should see me this bout. Exit after them


End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Chremes and Simo. Chr. entering. COme Mr. Simo, you have had proof enough in all
Conscience of my Friendship to ye; and I Have run risque enough for you:
Therefore pray let us have no more of these Importunities. I have complied with
ye now so long, that I was within a very little of undoing my Daughter.


Sim. Nay Sir, I must more and more entreat you and adjure ye, that you would make
good all your Promises with your Effects.


Chr, But pray see Sir, how unreasonable your Passion makes ye? For as long as
you can obtain your own Ends, you don't regard common Civility, nor well
consider what you would have your self. If ye did, I Am sure you would not desire to
serve me after this rate.


Sim. After what rate pray?


Chr. Ah Sir, do you ask that Question? You Have put me upon marrying my Daughter
to a wild Spark of the Town, that is pre-ingag'd and a Marriagehater, to have 'em
always wrangling, and forced to part in a fortnight's time; thus my Daughter's
to be mortified; and your Son t have the Benefit of it. I promised ye and began
to perform with ye, whilst the matter would bear it; and since 'twill bear no
longer, ye must have Patience. His Mistress they say is a free Citizen, and
there is a Child got between 'em; therefore pray don't give us any further
disturbance.


Sim. For Goodness sake, Sir, don't trouble your Head with such idle Stories. I
tell ye it is their chief Interest to make him as bad they can; this is all a
Trick from one end to the other to break off the Match; now do but take away
the Cause of this, and the Effect ceases of it self.


Chr. You're out indeed Sir; for I just now saw her Maid and Davus quarrelling
about it.


Sim. I know the trick.


Chr. Nay they were in earnest, for they little thought of my seeing 'em


Sim. That I believe too, for I had an Item of this Stratagem from Davus; and I
thought to have given ye a hint on it, but something put it out of my Head.

Enter Davus just appearing at Glycerie's Door.


Dav. to them within. -- It Is my Royal will and pleasure, that no Grief come
within these walls to day. --


Chr. Look ye, yonder is your Man Davus.


Sim. Whence comes the Rogue? In a fret.


Dav. to them within. Let her rely upon my Worship and this honest Stranger. --


Sim. listening. What Is there now a brewing. Aside.


Dav. coming from the Door. Well, for the Man, the nick of Time, and the
Encounter take 'em all together, never was any thing so pat to our purpose.
Aside.


Sim. partly overhearing. Ah damned Rogue! Who does he commend so? Aside.


Dav. to himself. Now Devil do thy worst; we are as safe as a Thief in a Mill.


Sim. Why don't I speak to him? Aside


Dav. perceiving Simo. 'S death here is my Master, what had I best do? Softly.


Sim. to Dav. Oh how is it with your Worship?

Scornfully.
Dav. O my good Masters! Simo and Chremes both. Why all things are ready
within. Very briskly.


Sim. You Have taken a world of pains I don t doubt. Jeeringly.


Da. Now, Sir, send for the Bride as soon as ye please. Leeringly.


Sim. Very well! -- there is nothing but that wanting. -- But good Sir, let me
ask ye one Question. -- What business had you at that House Sirrah? pointing to
Glycerie's House.


Da. Who I, Sir? Sim. Ay you Sir.


Da. Meaning me Sir?


Sim. Yes, you Sir, if ye must be told so often.


Da. Why Sir, 'twasn't three minutes since I went in --


Sim. Sirrah, do I ask ye how long since? Angrily


Dav. -- With my Master Pamphilus.


Sim. hastily. And is he there then? -- O my Torture! -- Ye Hang-dog, didn't ye
tell me they were broken all to pieces?


Da. So they are Sir.


Sim. What should he do there then? Hastily.


Chr. What do you think Sir? -- Only the other brush of quarrelling. Jeeringly.


Da. Ah Mr Chremes, there is more in the Wind; I Will tell ye perhaps one of the
foulest Stories you ever met withal. -- pointing to Glycerie's House Here Is a
certain old Man just come to Town, whence the Lord knows, a shrewd wary Fellow,
I Will warrant him; if ye did but see him you would say he is no ordinary Personage;
for he looks as grave as an Alderman, and talks like a Judge.


Sim. What News from him pray? Hastily.


Da. Nay, none to speak of -- Only I remember he was a saying --


Sim. Well but what was he a saying?


Da. -- That he certainly knows Glycerie to be a Citizen of Athens.


Sim. Soho! Dromo! Dromo! In a fury.


Da. What a Devil's to do now? Aside.


Sim Dromo I say! Louder.


Da. But hear me, Sir, -- In a fright.


Sim. Dog! Speak but another word -- Why Dromo, Dromo! Louder yet.


Da. upon his knees. I beseech ye Sir, hear me Enter Dromo.


Dro. to Simo. Your pleasure Sir.


Sim. Take this Rascal in, and truss him up imimediately. In a fury.


Dro. Who do you mean Sir?


Sim. Davus here.


Dav. Why good Sir, why?


Sim. It Is my pleasure -- to Dromo take him away I say.


Da. Why what have I done Sir?


Sim. Away with him. to Dromo.


Da. If you catch me in a Lie, cut my Throat.


Sim. stopping his Ears. I Will not hear a word -- I Will put your Rogueship out of
Humor.


Da. Notwithstanding it be true.


Sim. Notwithstanding -- do you to Dromo take him and fetter him. And do you
hear, let him be tied Neck and Heels like a Beast as he is -- Away. -- Exit
Dromo leading in Davus.

As I Am a living Soul, Sirrah, I Will make ye to know this day what it is for a
Servant to put tricks upon his Master, and for a Son to make sport with his
Father. Walking about in a great Passion.


Chr. For Heaven's sake Sir moderate your Passion.


Sim. Ah Sir, when it comes to the Duty of a Son, that is a tender point: Don't
ye pity me? -- that I should take so much pains for such an ungracious wretch?
-- Weeps looking toward Glycerie's House. Soho! Pamphilus! -- out of your
fulsom Nest. -- Ha ye no Grace left?

Enter Pamphilus.
Pam. Who calls there? -- seeing Simo Oh it is my Father. I Am Planet struck.


Sim. What say thou, the most ungracious -- Very angrily.


Chr. O fie Sir, leave this ill Language, and argue the case calmly.


Sim. As though the worst Language was not good enough for him. -- to Pamphilus
and do you say now that Glycerie is a Citizen?


Pam. It Is so reported, Sir.


Sim. Reported, Jackanapes? -- O prodigious Impudence! was ever such an
unthinking Coxcomb? Does he repent of any thing he has done? Nay has he Grace
so much as to blush at it? -- Is he so little Master of himself as to set his
Heart upon such an infamous woman without regard either to the Customs or Laws
of his Country, or to the will and Pleasure of his Father?


Pam. Oh me! Sighing.


Sim. O Pamphilus, are ye at last convinced? -- then, then indeed you should
have thought of this, when first ye took your swing in all that is base, then you
should have cried, Oh me! -- walks about in a rage But what do I mean? Why
should I plague and torment my self? Or why cark my self in my old Age for a
mad hot headed Fool? Shall he play the Puppy and must I suffer for it? -- E'n
let him have her, make his best of her, and Kennel together.


Pam. Dear Father! -- In a soft Tone.


Sim. interrupting. Why dear Father? As though you stood in need of such a
Father. -- You Have got your House, your Wife and Children, and the dear Father
never the wiser; you have brought your Cheat to prove her a Citizen. -- You Have
got the day much good may't do ye.


Pam. Pray hear me one word Sir.


Sim. What can you say for your self? Turning away.


Chr. Good Sir, give him the hearing.


Sim. I hear him? What should I hear him for Mr. Chremes?


Chr. But you may let him speak tho.


Sim. Let him speak then, who hinders him?


Pam. in a soft tone. Sir, I confess I loved, and if to love be Sin, I confess
that too. -- But now dear Sir I Am at your disposal, and submit to whatsoever
you shall think fit or command. Would ye have me marry one woman, and part with
another: I must bear either, as well as I can. Only thus much let me beg of ye,
that you wou'dn t believe that I suborned this old Man: Let me but clear my
self of that and bring him face to face.


Sim. Bring him?


Pam. Pray Sir let me.


Chr. It Is nothing but reason, pray let him.


Pam. Sir, I beseech ye don t deny me.


Sim. Well: let it be so then. --

Exit Pamphilus. You see Sir, I Am content with any thing as long as I ben't
grossly imposed upon.


Chr. A small Punishment serves for a great Fault, between Father and Son.

Re-enter Pamphilus with Crito.
Cri. entering. -- Well without any more words now; for three Reasons are as
good as three thousand. I ll do it either for your own sake, or for Truth's
sake, or for poor Glycerie's sake, that I Have a great kindness for.


Chr. Is that old Crito of Andro? -- the very same. -- Troth Crito I Am glad to
see thee. What wind blew thee to Athens?


Cri. A chance one. -- Is this Mr. Simo?


Chr. Yes.


Sim. Do You ask for me? -- Hark ye Friend,

Have you the face to say, that Glycerie is a Citizen of Athens?


Cri. And have ye the Face to deny it? Pertly.


Sim. You Have your Lesson without Book I perceive.


Cri. Why that pray? Surliiy.


Sim. Would ye know? -- Don't ye deserve to l e laid by the Heels for this? Are
you come here to trapan and inveigle raw young Gentlemen? And to feed their
Fancies with fine Flams, and ga^ Promises? --


Cri. interrupting What Is the man mad? Surlily.


Sim. Then you make Matches between the^ and their Whores together. Crito
stares and wonders at the^.


Pam. Alas! how do I tremble for fear the o'd man shoudn't stand his ground.
Asi^^.


Chr. to Simo. If ye knew this man as well as ^, you would be of another mind. Why
he is as honest ^ man as e're broke Bread.


Sim. The Devil's Broker! He honest? -- to come just in the nick on the Wedding
da^, to set up for an Evidence, and was never here before in his whole Life?
well must his testimony carry't?


Pam. If I wern't afraid of my Father, I ve that at my Tongue's end would help
him out at a d^^^ lift. Aside,


Sim. A Knight of the post!


Cri. What does be call me? Walks about in a h^ss.


Chr. It Is his way, you would better let him alone.


Cri. Let him look to it. If he pretends to talk what e're he has a mind to,
I Will make him hear something that he has no mind to. to Simo. Pish! Do I hinder
or care a Fart for your VVeddings? what cannot ye bear your Misfortunes like a
man? -- whether I spoke true or false you ll know immediately. -- turning to
Chremes. Once upon a time do you see, there was a certain Athenian Merchant cast
away at Andro, and that little Girl with him; this man, being in want, had the
hap to apply himself to Chrysiss Father. --


Sim. interrupting. Now he begins a fine Tale.


Chr. Pray let him go on.


Cri. Why does he put me out? Angrily.


C^r. On with your Story.


Cri. Well! Now this same Crysis's Father, (D^^e mind?) was my Kinsman. And
there did I hear the Man himself say, that he was a Merchant of Athens; in
short, there he died.


Chr. His Name?


Cri. His Name? -- Let me see, Oh his Name was Phania.


Chr. Bless me! I Am in a cold sweat. Aside.


Cri. Why truly Sir, I think they call him Phania. However, this I Am sure of,
he said he was a ^amnusian; --


Chr. Oh Heavens! Aside.


Cri. -- And a world of people in Andro heard as much as I.


Chr. aside. Would it were no worse than I w^sh for. -- But prithee Crito tell
me. What said he about this Girl? Did he say she was his own?


Cri. No Sir.


Chr. Whose then pray?


Cri. His Brother's I think.


Chr. OF my Soul she is mine then.


Cri. What do you say, Sir?


Sim. How Is this? what say ye? Hastily.


Pam. Courage Pamphilus, Courage! Aside.


Sim. What make ye believe it so readily?


Chr. Why this Phania was my Brother.


Sim. I know it: I was well acquainted with him.


Chr. In The time o the late Wars he fled for it, and ^^llow'd me into Asia, but
was afraid to leave my ^^ughter behind him. Now Sir, this is the first ^^ws I
ve heard of him ever since.


Pam. Methinks I Am in another world. My M^nd's distracted twixt Fear and Hope,
Joy and ^onder at such a sudden B^essing. Aside.


^^m. I m glad upon several accounts sh's found (...) your Daughter.


Pam. I believe, Sir, it is true.


Chr. But hark ye Crito there is one scruple yet that makes me uneasy.


Pam. Would you and your Scruples were hanged together. This is hunting for a
Knot in a Bulr^^^.

Aside.
Cri. What Is that Sir?


Chr. The Name will not do.


Cri. Truly she had another Name when she was a little one.


Chr. Prithee what is it? Don't ye remember?


Cri. I Am hammering at it. He studies upon.


Pam. aside. Shall I suffer his shallow Brain (...) stop the Current of my
Joys, when I can cure (...) with a word speaking? No I ll not suffer't Do You
hear Mr. Chremes! Passibula is the Name you want.


Cri. Chr. together, Ay, that is it, that is it. The very same.


Pam. I had it from her own Mouth a thousand times.


Sim. Truly this is good News for all on's, and I hope you think so too. to
Chremes.


Chr. As I hope to be saved it is true.


Pam. to Simo. And what is to be done next Sir?


Sim. Why now we are all friends again.


Pam. The best of Fathers! -- I suppose Me Chremes will allow us to be in statu
quo.


Chr. And all the Reason in the world, unless your Father's against all.


Pam. Sim. together, I Am sure he is not. I agree to it.


Chr. Mr Pamphilus, you shall have two thousand Pounds with her.


Pam. I Am satisfied Sir.


Chr. Well I Will to my poor Girl in an instant -- Come, Crito, go you along with
me, for I make a doubt whether she knows me or no.

Exeunt Crito and Chremes.
Sim. And had not ye better send for her now?


Pam. I think 'twere better, and that shall be Davis's business.


Sim. But that cannot be.


Pam. Why so Sir?


Sim. Because he is a little engaged


Pam. As how Sir?


Sim. Why he is bound Neck and Heels.


Pam. Ah Sir, 'twasn't well done.


Sim. I Am sure I ordered it to be well done.

Merrily.
Pam. Pray, Sir, let him be undone then.


Sim. Well, let it be so then.


Pam. But immediately Sir, if you please.


Sim. I Will in and about it.


Pam. A blessed and happy days work! Ex. Simo.

Enter Charine at a distance.
Cha. to himself. Well I Will go to see how squares go with Mr. Pamphilus. -- Oh
yonder he is. Observes him.


Pam. Some may be apt to think my Heart is far From what my Lips do utter, but
even Now, Now it is I Am Conscious what I says most true. That Gods themselves
would not immortal be, Were not their Joys like them immortal too. -- And now
methinks I Am all encircled round With Heavenly Bliss, if no Left handed God
Come in between and dash my sweets with sour. Oh for a Friend to whom I might
relate This blessed Change to make it the more complete.


Cha. What Is the meaning of these Reptures?

Enter Davus at a distance.
Pam. Oh yonder is Davus, the Man of the whole Earth I could have wished for; for
I Am sure there is not a Soul can more heartily relish my Enjoyments.


Dav. to himself. Where should a man light of this same Pamphilus now?


Pam. Oh Davus!


Dav. not seeing him. Who art thou for a man?


Pam. It Is I old Rock!


Dav. turning about. What you Sir?


Pam. Ay ye don't know what good Fortune I ve met withal.


Da. No Faith! But I know to my sorrow what Fortune I Have met withal. Shrugging
his shoulders.


Pam. Ay Boy that I know too.


Da. Just as the world goes. Bad News always flys faster than good.


Pam. My dearest has found out her Parents.


Dav. Before George it is brave. Merrily.


Cha. listening. Bless me! Aside.


Pam. And her Father is one of our great Cronies.


Da. Who Is that pray?


Pam. No less than Mr Chremes.


Da. Spoken like a Cherubim!


Pam. I Have now nothing to do but to marry her, and --


Cha. The Man dreams of what he has a mind to waking. Aside.


Pam. Then for the Child Davus --


Da. No more of him. I Will warrant ye he will come to be a Hero at last.


Cha. going to them. I Am a made Man, if all this be true, -- I Will e'n speak
with 'em. Aside.


Pam. Who goes there? -- O dear Charine, you're come in the luckiest time that
could be.


Cha. I m very well, pleased --


Pam. How! Have ye heard the News then?


Cha. Every Syllable. -- Well I hope will not forget your old Friend on your
Wedding day. Mr. Chremes is now your own, if you will but say the word, I Am sure
he will do it.


Pam. I ll warrant ye, not forget ye. -- 'T would be too long to wait Mr.
Chremes's coming, let us even go to my Mistress where we shall be sure to find
him. -- But do you Davus go home, and send Company to remove her to our's. --
What makes ye stand like a Post? -- why don't ye move?


Dav. I Am going Sir. --

Exeunt Pamphilus and Charine. Davus turns to the Spectators. Gallants, You
must not expect their return, for the Match and every thing else will be made
up within Doors. -- One Clap, good Gentlemen.


The End of the Fair Andrian.
The Eunuch. A COMEDY, Acted at the Feast of Cybele, WHEN L. Postumius Albinius
and L. Cornelius Merula were Curule Edil's, By the Company of L. Ambivius
Turpio, and L. Attilius of Preneste.

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was performed on two
Right-handed FLUTES.

It was taken from the GREEK of Menander;

Acted twice under the Consulship of M. Valerius, and C. Fannius.

A. U. C. 593. before Christ 156.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Laches, Father to Phedrie, and Cherea. Phedrie, His Eldest Son, a Gentleman of
a soft and easy Temper, fondly in Love with That's, whom he keeps. Cherea, His
younger Brother, a hot, wild, amorous Youth, wantonly in Love with Pamphila.
Antipho, A young Gent. Cherea' s Companion and Confident. Chremes, A young
Country Squire, somewhat blunt in Speech and Behavior, and unacquainted with
the Tricks of the Town. Thraso. A Proud, Self-conceited, Pedantick, Bragging,
Hectoring, Clownish Officer; A Pretender to Thais, and one that believes
himself a great Wit, and a Man of Courage, when at the same time he is both
Coward and Coxcomb. Gnatho, The Parasite, a hanger on of the Captains; a
crafty, sly, insinuating wheadling, buffooning Fellow, always extolling the
Captain's Wit and Valor, and by an ingenious equivocating sort of Flattery,
abusing the Captain to the very Face. Parmeno, Servant to Phedrie, and his
Counselor, a bold, cunning, intriguing Fellow, and a downright Woman-hater.
^^^us, The Eunuch. ^anga, Servant to Thraso.
WOMEN.
Thais, A Noble Courtesan, kept by Phedrie, a good natured Creature, of a
flattering, insinuating, winning disposition. Pythia, Her Maid very busy and
faithful, a mortal Enemy to Parmeno. Doria, Another Servant to Thais. Sophrona,
A Nurse.
MUTES.
Simalio, Dorax, Syriscus, Servants to the Captain.
Scene, ATHENS,

The Time Six or Seven Hours.

The EUNUCH.
ACT I.
SCENE, The Street before Simo^ s Door. TIME, The Forenoon.
Phedrie attended by Parmeno. Phe. entering. What Is to be done now? Shall Not I go
to her? -- What not now, when she sends for me so kindly? -- Or shall I resolve
never to put up the Affronts of a Jilting Mistress? -- She shut me out; now she
invites me in -- Go with a Pox? -- No that I will not, tho she would beg it on her
Knees.

Angrily.
Par. Troth Sir, if you could hold out at this rate, 'twou'd be the best and
bravest thing you ever did: but if ye begin upo'th^ Huff, and your Heart not
serve ye to go through with it; if you faint in the Enterprise, and go before
you're sent for, or so much as reconciled, and sneakingly tell her, You're so
entirely devoted to her, as not to live an hour without her, your business is
done to all Intents and Purposes. She Will ride you to death when she has you at
mercy. -- Wherefore I Would have you be twice advised before it be too late. For
alas Sir, what will reason or moderation signify in a Case that will bear
neither: For Love you know is strangely whimsical, containing Affronts,
Jealousies, Jars, Parlies, Wars, then Peace again. Now for you to ask Advice to
love by, is all one as if you ask advice to run mad by. -- As for your present
Resolutions while your Blood is up, What go to her? When a Rival's preferr^d?
My self refused? Even Entrance denied me? Never persuade me to^t; I Will die
first. I Will make her know I Am none of her Cully. Why ^n good faith Sir, one
pitiful hypocritical Drop of a Tear, which this Creature can hardly for her
Soul squeeze out of her Eyes with all her scrubbing, will confound all this
bluster, bring you to your whining Peccavi, and make you submit to ^er
Ladyships's mercy.


Phe. Oh horrid shame! -- Now I see she is a ^ursed Jilt, and I^a miserable
Fool; I Am sick on it, ^et I die with Love; then I perish with my Know^^dge and
Senses about me, both living and look^ng on. And I know not what to do.


Par. What should you do Sir, but free your ^^lf from her as cheap as you can?
If you cannot ^^aw the Stake fairly, make the best of a bad ^^me, and never
stand vexing your self for the ^^tter.


Phe. Do You think that is the best way?


Par. Ay Sir, if you know the best way. -- Add no more Troubles to those that
Love has ^rought on^ye; but bear what is already befaln ^^ like a Man. --

Enter Thais at some distance.

Oh yonder comes the Cater-pillar that spoils all our ^aivest, and leaves us to
starve. Aside.


Thais to her self. Unhappy woman! I am very much afraid that Phedrie should
take it worse, or otherwise than I intended, that I did not let him in
yesterday.


Phe. Ah Parmeno! I Am all over in a cold sweat at the very sight of her.


Par. Brisk up Sir! To her I say, she carries Fire enough to warm ye with a
vengeance


Tha. over-hearing. How now Phedrie! What are you here? And waiting at the Door
too? why didn't ye come in without any more ado?


Par. The De^el a word's here of shutting the Door upon us. Aside.


Tha. What Speechless my Dear?


Phe. Well asked Madam! for these Doors were always wide open to me, and I the
highest in your Ladyship's Favors. Scornfully.


Tha. Let these things pass my Dear. Clapping him on the Cheek with her Fan.


Ph. angrily. How! Pass! -- more mildly. Ah Thais, Thais, would that you and I
did but love equally, and went an even pace: that what you have done might
trouble you as much as me: or that I might concern my self as little at it, as
you do.


Tha. interrupting. Prithee don't fret thy self my pretty Phedrie, for by this
light twasn't because I loved or cared for any body more than thy dear self,
but as the case stood ^twas a thing not to be avoided.


Par. Likely enough: that is usual. -- She poor Soul shut him out of doors out
of stark Love and Kindness. Jeeringly.


Tha. to Par. Say ye so Parmeno? -- Well, well, go on: -- to Phe. but prithee
my Dear, hear but why I sent for ye.


Phe. We'll hear ye for once.


Tha. First let me know, whether this Man here can keep Counsel.


Par. Meaning me Madam? -- The rarest Fellow i the world at it; but we must
enter into Articles about keeping your Secrets; if the Story be true, I am as
mute as a Fish; but if it be a falsity, a Foppery, or a Flam, 'twill out in an
instant, I Am full of holes, and run like a Seive. Therefore pray Madam, not a
word of a Lie as you hope for Secrecy.


Tha. My Mother was born at Samo, but lived at Rhodes.


Par. Mum, mum for that.

Aside.
Tha. There it was that a certain Merchant presented her with a fine young Girl
Kidnapp'd from Attica.


Phe. Was she a Gentlewoman?


Tha. I suppose so: We could not tell for a certain. She told us her Parents
Names; as for her Country, and other Tokens she forgot, nor could it be
otherwise expected because of her Age. The Merchant added withal, that he
understood by the Pirates (of whom he bought her) that she was stolen from Sunio
hard by Athens -- No sooner did my Mother take charge on her, but she gave her
the best Education she could, and bred her up like her own Child: So that we
were generally taken for Sisters. In company with that Stranger (the only
person I was then engaged withal) did I come hither, who left me all I have at
present.


Par. interrupting. A couple of Rappers. -- Gush.


Tha. Why so?


Par. Because forsooth one Dish to be sure would never satisfy you, neither
was he your sole Benefactor; for this Gentleman's Pocket has smoaked to some
Tune for most of your Bravery.


Tha. Be it so: But cannot you let me go on with my Stor? -- to Phe. whilst
things stood thus: the Captain, who began to take some liking to me marched
into Caria, mean time I got acquainted with thee my dear Rogue. And thou
know how dearly I have loved thee e're since, even to the trusting thee with
the greatest of my Secrets. --


Phe. Parmeno will let go again.


Par. You may swear it, Sir.


Tha. For Loves sake, dear Hearts! hear me out -- Not long after my Mother died
at Rhodes; now my Uncle, you must know, was a little given to the World, and
perceiving the Girl was very likely, and had a good hand at the Lute, hoped to
make Money of her, and forthwith exposed her to Sale, and made his Markets on
her. As good Luck would have it, my Friend the Captain being there, buys her
for a Present for me, being perfectly ignorant of this whole Affair. He Is just
come to Town, and perceiving what is between you and I, he invents many Excuses
and Flams to put off his parting with her as long as he can: But says, could he
but persuade himself I loved him better than you, and were he not miserably
afraid that when I once got her I should turn him off, he would part with her
presently. This he is still afraid of, but as far as I can perceive he has a
hankering after her himself.


Phe. And is it got no farther than hankering?


Tha. No, for I ve made strict enquiry -- Now my dear Phedrie, I Have a thousand
Reasons why I Would wheedle him out of her. First, because she goes for my Sister;
and then to restore her to her Friends; for I Am a lonesome Woman here, no body
with me, neither Friend nor Kinsman; therefore I hope by this good Office to
make my self Friends; therefore if you love me help me out in the Management of
this business: Let this Swaggerer be Master of Mis-rule for two or three days
-- What no Answer.

Fawningly.
Phe. Thou basest of thy Sex! -- What shall I answer thee, who dealest so
ungratefully by me? Walks about in a Passion.


Par. O rare Master of mine! Gramercy say I: He Is touched now -- E'dad you are
a Man every Inch of thee.

Aside.
Phe. As if I didn't know what you would be at. -- in another tone mocking her
A young Girl was Kidnapp'd hence, -- my Mother bred her up like her own, -- she
went for my Sister -- Id fain wheedle him out of her -- and restore her to her
Friends -- All this stuff is to shift me off, and to take in your Captain
forsooth; But why I pray? Only because he is more in your Ladyship's Favor than
I am? and you're plaguily afraid this Girl will put your Nose out of joint, and
take your Iusty Stallion from you.

Scornfully.
Tha. Who I afraid on it?


Phe. Ay you: Why should you be so concerned else? Is he the only Person that
has made you Presents? Did ye ever find me close fisted? The Other day you asked
for a Black, didn't I go Post haste and get you one? And then you would have your
Eunuch forsooth, purely, because your Ladies of Quality have 'em, this I got
too: I Am sure yesterday I paid down of the nail no less than fifty Guineas for
'em both. Tho I Am slighted by ye, yet you see I didn't forget ye; and my Good
nature's finely rewarded.


Tha. How Is this my Phedrie! No, though I should be very glad to have this Girl,
and I believe I might this way as easily as may be; yet rather than disoblige
thee, I ll do what thou wou'd'st have me Fawningly.


Phe. Oh that that word came from your Heart now rather than disoblige thee.
Could I but believe that was spoken sincerely, I could then bear any thing.


Par. He staggers: one damned wheedle has don't in a trice.

Aside.
Tha. Ah dear! Don't I then speak from my Heart? When did I ever deny you a
Request, tho 'twere made but in a jest? And yet I cannot for my Soul obtain the
Favor of your absence but for two days.

Weeping.
Phe. Ay if it were but two days -- But what if that two should prove twenty?


Tha. Indeed Sir, It shall be no more than two or --


Phe. interrupting. Or what? No more on it.


Tha. It shall be no longer indeed. Let me prevail with thee for once.


Phe. Well for once you shall have your Mind.

Coldly.
Tha. Now I love thee most wonderfully, thou have so obliged me.


Phe. Well I ll into the Country, and there pine away for these two days. --
That Is my Resolution since my cruel Dear must have her Humor. -- But Parmeno,
do you take care to deliver the Eunuch, and Black in my absence.


Parm. I will Sir.


Phe. God b'uy my dearest Thais, for two long days.


Tha. God b'uy to thee my sweet Creature. Have you any other Commands?


Phe. What can I desire further; but that tho the Captain has your Company, yet
your Heart may be at another place: Let me both night and day be the
Entertainment of your Love, your Wishes, your Dreams, your Expectations, your
Thoughts, your Hopes, your Pleasure, your All. In fine, let your Heart be as
much mine, as mine is yours

Exeunt Phedrie and Parmeno.
Thais alone.
Tha. Dear Heart! I Am afraid Predrie believes not one word of what I have said,
but takes me for one of your Jilting Creatures of the Town. But I that know my
own Heart best, am sure, I Have devised no Flams; nor is there any Soul I love so
fondly and tenderly as this Gentleman. And whatsoever I have done in the case
was purely for the sake of the poor Girl, whose Brother, a person of some
Repute, I hope I Have in a manner found out. To day he appointed to give me a
visit, I ll step in and wait his coming.

Exit.
End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Phedrie attended by Parmeno. Phe. DO as I ordered ye, Let the Presents be
carried.


Par. So they shall Sir.


Phe. But with care then.


Par. It shall be done, Sir.


Phe. But with speed too. Par. It shall so.


Phe. Have I ^^'d ye enough on it.


Par. All! That's a Question indeed?

Angrily. As though 'twas so hard a piece of business. -- For my part Sir, I wish
with all my Soul that you were as sure of winning a Thousand pounds as ye are
of losing these Presents.


Phe. Prithee don't trouble your Head about those things, for if I lose them I
lose my self too, which is far the greater loss.


Par. It shall not trouble me, but I ll do your Business effectually. -- Have you
any further Commands for me?


Phe. Be sure you set off the Presents with all the Commendations you can; and
give my Rival all the Interruption imaginable.


Par. Pshaw! I Would have done that without your bidding.


Phe. Well I ll into the Country; and there tarry.

Offers to go.
Par. I fancy so.

Jerringly.
Phe. returning. But hark ye Parmens.


Par. What Is your pleasure, Sir?


Phe. Do really think I can have so much power over my self as to hold out my
whose time?


Par. Who you Sir? No Faith: For either you will come back again presently, or
else your want of sleep will send ye hither at Midnight with a Whynot?


Phe. I Will tire my self as much as I can, that I may sleep whether I will or no.


Par. Twon't do Sir, tire your self as much as ye please, you will be never the
nearer


Phe. All this signifies nothing Parmeno. -- I must break the neck of this
est^minate Humor; I indulge my self too much; in short, do you think I cannot
live without her three whole days if occasion serve?


Par. How Sir! What three live long days? For shame Sir! Jeeringly.


Phe. Nay I Am sully resolved upon it however.

Exit Phedrie.
Parmeno alone. Heavens! What a plaguey thing's this! that Love should alter men
so strangely, as you cannot know 'em for the same? There was never a Gentleman
in Town had a better Headpiece a graver Carriage, and less given to the Flesh
than this master of mine. --

Enter Gnatho leading Pamphila, attended by her Waiting Maid at a distance from
Parmeno. But who comes yonder in the Name of Goodness? Ha, ha, it is that
wheadling Rascal Gnatho, a hanger on of the Captains. He has got the young
Gentlewoman by the Fist, as a Present to his Lady. -- Bless me what a
smug-faced little Rogue it is. No wonder if I make but a scurvy Figure to day
with my old rotten Eunuch. -- Why this Creature cuts out Thais her self.

Walks about the Door.
Gnatho, to himself. Bless me! to see the difference between one man and
another, betwixt a Fool and a Philosopher! The thing I say it for is this: As I
was coming along to day I stumbled upon one of my own Rank and Quality; an
honest Fellow I ll warrant him, who had made a shift to guzzel away an Estate
as I had done before him. I seeing such a rough, nasty, meager Fellow, rigged
out with Rags and Rheumatisms. What Is the meaning of this fine Dress? quoth I,
Alas! (said he) I had an Estate once, but played the Fool and coudnt keep it,
and you see what Im brought to: All my Friends and Acquaintance fly me as they
would the Plague -- Here I began to look down upon him with scorn: Why you
whoreson Blockhead, said I, is it come to that then, that you hadnt left your
self an Aftergame? Have ye lost your Brains and your Money together? Why do but
look on me, who was once in the same Case with your self? How fresh and
sparkish, how Genteel I go, and how strong and lusty I am? I have the Indies at
Command, tho Lands I have none; and tho I have scarce a Groat in the world, yet
I want for nothing. In another Tone But (says he) Im of such an unluckly
Constitution that neither buffooning nor beating will agree with me. How Is
that, said I, do you think that is the way? No you're plaguily wide of the Mark.
In the days of Yore this might have done well enough: but we are now in another
Method, and perhaps I was the Inventer of it too -- There Is a sort of people in
the World who ^et up for Wits of the first Rate, and yet have no more Brains
than Maggots: Now these are the Men for my turn: but then I am not their
Merry-Andrew to make them sport, but very readily make sport at them, tho at
the same time I praise their parts to the Skies. If they say any thing, I cry
it up too. If they unsay it, I commend 'em for that too: What they deny, I
deny: What they affirm, I affirm: In fine, Ive brought my self to be just of
their Mind in every thing: and by this means, I get many a sweet Bit, and a
sweet Penny.


Par. A very pretty Fellow upo' my word! Give him a Fool and he will make him a
Madman. Aside.


Gna. Whilst this Chat lasted we got to the Marketplace, where I was joyfully
met by a Troop of Confectioners, Fishmongers, Butchers, Cooks, Pastrymen,
Fishermen, and Poulterers; all of my old Cronies whom I had been a good
Customer to before, and since I had spent my Estate, and am so still: They
Complimented me with Hat in Hand, invited me to Supper, and were very glad to
see my Worship: when my poor hunger-starvd Comrade saw I was so highly in their
Books, and live so bravely at ease, he begged of me for Heaven's sake to teach
him a little of my Art. I bid him follow me, and be my Pupil; and as the Sects
of Philosophers borrowed their Names from their Masters, so all that have
learned the Art of Wheadling should from me be called Gnathonicks.


Par. To see the virtue now of living at ease, and being fed at another Man's
Table Aside.


Gna. But hold Im plaguey backward in handing this present to Mrs. Thais, and to
invite her to the Treat -- advances toward the Door and sees Parmeno yonder is
Parmeno our Rival's Servant all in the dumps before the door: Our Business goes
swimmingly on; these Sparks will have but a cold Suit on it -- I Am resciv'd to
have a little sport with this poor Rogue.


Par. I warrant they think this Gift will make the Lady theirs for ever. Aside.


Gna. My nown dear Friend! Gnath^'s thy very humble Servant. Well what are ye
upon now?

Jeeringly.
Par. Upon my Legs. Surlily.


Gna. I I see that. -- But don't ye see something here that offends your
Eyesight. pointing to Pam.


Par. Yes you. Surlily.


Gna. That I believe too. -- But is there nothing else?


Par. Why what should there be?


Gna. Because, my Friend, you seem to be a little out of Humor.


Par. Not in the least.


Gna. Nay I would not have ye do so. -- But what think ye of this Present? Hah!


Par. Why she is tolerable.


Gna. I Have galled him I see. Softly.


Par. over-hearing. How plaguily he is mistaken now? Aside.


Gna. Will Not Madam Thais be mightily taken with this Present think ye?


Par. As much as to say our Nose is out of joint: But hark ^e Friend, every Dog
has his day; there is a time for all things.


Gna. Now, Parmeno will I give thee a Holy Day for this half Year; and save
thee the trouble of trotting up and down, and sitting up till four or five in
the morning. Don't I do ye a prodigious piece of Service? Par Who me? Ay a
damnable one.


Gna. Thus I always oblige Friends.


Par. You do well.


Gna. But perhaps I detain ye Sir; your business possibly calls ye elsewhere?


Par. No I Am at my Journey's end.


Gna. Pray Sir, do me the favor then to introduce me to the Lady.


Par. Very good! This present will be your Pasport now.


Gna. Will ye be pleased to have any one sent out to ye? Exit Gnatho,
Pamphilia, and Waiting Maid


Par. alone. Let but two days be over, and I Will take care that you may knock
till your Heart aches without admittance, though now you are so happy as to have
the Doors fly open at a touch of your little Finger.

Re-enter Gnatho.
Gna. What here still my nown Friend? Do You keep guard here that not an Embassy
by a Civil Messenger can pass privately between the Captain and the Lady? Exit
Gnatho.


Par. alone. Very wittily spoken! These wonderful fine things must needs please
the Captain? seeing Cherea. But hold, I see my Master's younger Son making this
way. -- I wonder what makes him from his post at Pireo, when he is upon Duty
there. -- There Is somewhat more than ordinary in the wind; -- And he is in great
haste too -- I cannot guess what makes him throw his Eyes about thus.

Enter Cherea at a distance from Parmeno, out of Breath, and looking about him.
Che. to himself. I Am undone! The pretty Creature's lost -- And so am I -- who
have unluckily mist on her. Where shall I look for her? where shall I trace
her? whom shall I ask for her? what blind Alley shall I range in? -- I Am in a
strange Quandary. -- I Have this comfort left, that she cannot be long incognito
where'ere she be. -- The most charming Look! From this Moment, I Have done with
the whole Sex be^ides. Your Every-day Las^es and Faces will never down again.


Par. Heyday! Here Is another in the whining and languishing Vein, or I Am beside
the Cushion -- The old Gentleman their Father's finely blessed? If this Spark
once begins the Sport, he will be so mad upon it, that Mr. Phedrie will be a Child
to him.

Aside.
Che. Would the De'el had this old Mumsimus for stopping my Journey: And me too
for staying, when I should have taken no notice of him. -- Ho! here is Parmeno!
Well met old Friend.


Par. Why so concerned, and yet so Gay? And whether a going?


Che. Who I? Troth I cannot tell whence I came, nor where I Am going, I Have lost
my Senses.


Par. How so I beseech ye?


Che. I Am in Love man.


Par. Heyday.


Che. Now old Boy, show what a Man your are: thou know how often thou have
promised me: Master Cherea, do but find out one you ve a mind to, and I Will show
what a Talent I have at Intriguing: You remember it was when I use to get you
many a good bit out of my Fathers Pantry, and no body e're the wiser, ye Rogue.


Par. Pshaw no more of that.


Che. Why, Faith ^twas even so: Therefore prithee now be as good as thy word,
at least if you think it worth beating your Brains about. -- This pretty
Creature is not at all like our Town Ladies, whose Mothers saddle their backs,
and strait-lace their Wastes to make em well shap^d. If any chance to grow a
little plumper than the rest, they presently cry, She Is an Hostess; and then
her Allowance must be shortened, and tho she be nat^^aly fat and lusty, yet by
her dieting she is made as slender as a B^^omstick: By this means one Woodcock
or another is caught in their Spring.


Par. And how is yours I beseech ye?


Che. Such a Beauty, the World never saw.


Par. Hey-day!


Che. Her Complexion true and natural; Her Body sound and strong, and as plump
as a Partridge.


Par. How old think ye? Che. About Sixteen.


Par. In the very prime I faith.


Che. Now, do you but help me to this sweet Creature, either by force, fraud,
or wheedle, I don't care which way, so I do but enjoy her.


Par. But what is this sweet Creature?


Che. Faith I know not.


Par. Whence came she?


Che. I cannot tell.


Par. Where does she live?


Che. Nor that neither.


Par. Where did you see her^


Che. In the Street here.


Par. How came you to lose her?


Che. That Is it I was cursing at, when I met you Nor do I think there is that
Man living, whose good Fortune had left him thus in the lurch. What a
Misfortune was here! -- I Am a very Wretch.


Par. What Is done to ye Sir?


Che. De^s ask? Don't ye know old Archidemides, my Father's Kinsman and
Companion?


Par. Yes, very well.


Che. This Fellow met me full butt, as I was hot upo' the Scent after this
pretty Creature.


Par. Faith 'twas a little unseasonable.


Che. Rather devilish unfortunare: for lighte^ Matters may be called
unseasonable For I can safel^ swear, I had not seen him this half Year till now,
when I neither desired nor wanted his Company. V^asn't this a damned Accident?
Hah! what say you?


Par. As you say, Sir, 'twas a damned Accident.


Che. He comes hobbling after me as far as he could see me, with his Chin and
his Knees together; his Joints shaking in his Hide; hanging his Jib like an old
Horse, and groaning like a rotten Sheep; He bawls out, Soho, Cherea, Soho! it is
you I would speak with. -- With that I made a halt. De'e know, says he, what is
my Business with ye? No, pray tell me Sir. Oh, said he, my Cause comes on to
morrow. And what then, said I? Why be sure (quoth he) to tell your Father, that
he must not fail to be at th'Court. I think he was a whole hour by the Clock in
telling this. I asked him if he had any further Business, he said None at all.
Away march I: And looking for this young Creature, I found she had taken down
this Street.


Par. My Life on it, if this ben't the same that was presented to Thais. Aside.


Che. As soon as I was got hither she was vanished.


Par. Had she any Attendance with her?


Che. Yes a Man and a Waiting-maid.


Par. Aside. The very same in faith. -- Set your Heart at rest, Sir, your
business is done.


Che. Sure thy Wits are a Wool-gathering.


Par. No, I know what I say.


Che. Why, can tell who she is? -- Prithee ^ell me. -- Did ye see her?
Hastily.


Par. I did see her, I know her too, (more than that) I can tell where she is
gone too.


Che. Ah dear Rogue! Do know her indeed?


Par. Yes, Sir.


Che. And can^st tell where she is gone too?


Par. She was brought hither as as a Present to ^^a^s.


Che. Is any Man living able to be at the Charge ^^ such a Present?


Par. Yes, Captain Thraso, your Brother's Ri^^^.


Che. For ought I see my Brother will be put to his last Trumps then.


Par. Ay Faith! so you would swear indeed, if you knew what a precious Present he
has provided to match this withal.


Che. What Is that prithee.


Par. An Eunuch.


Che. What that Tool of a Man that he bought yesterday? That haggish Fellow?


Par. That Is he Sir.


Che. Certainly he and his present will be kicked to the Devil. -- But I never
knew before that this Thais was our Neighbor.


Par. Why she is lately removd hither.


Che. Unlucky Whelp that I am! That I should never see her. -- But prithee tell
me is she such a Beauty as they talk of? Par. Every Jot.


Che. But short of our's my Life on it.


Par. Quite another thing.


Che. Prithee honest Boy, do but thy best to bring us both together.


Par. You shall have my good will in it. I Will do what I can to help ye: What
would he have more;

Going est
Che. Whither away now?


Par. Why home to hand the Presents hither according to your Brothers Orders.


Che. Oh the Luck of this same roguy Eunuch, to go into this House upon such an
Errand!


Par. Why so Sir?


Che. De^e ask that? Why he will always be blessed with the sight of his beautiful
Companion; they li talk together, live together, and now and then perhaps lie
together.


Par. What would you say now, if you were that blessed Creature?


Che. Which way? Speak dear Rogue. Hastily.


Par. Suppose you take his Clothes, --


Che. His Clothes? And how then?


Par. And be carried thither instead of him, --


Che. On, on Boy.


Par. And give out that you are he.


Che. I small your design.


Par. And there you may enjoy all those rare Blessings you fancied but just now
for another. You may eat and drink with her, sit by her, touch, ^^y with her,
and -- lie by her. For not a Creat^re in that House can tell what you are, or
whence you came. And besides, your Age and those Smooth chops of yours will
make you pass ^^r a Complete Eunuch.


Che. Spoken like an Angel! and advised like an Oracle! -- ^hugs Parmeno, and
is carrying him off.] Come away Boy, let us in and about it, equip me to ^^ghts
now, immediately away with m^, and bring me to her as fast as you can for your
Life.


Par. struggling. Hold Sir! -- what do you mean? I did but jest.


Che. 'Pshaw! That Is Nonsense.


Par. I Am ruin^d! How like a Fool have I done! where do you thrust me Sir? --
Faith you had almost ^usht me on my Nose -- It Is you I speak to Sir. Pray stay.


Che. But I say let us go.


Par. Are ye resolved upon it then?


Che. Absolutely.


Par. Have a ca^e you don't make more haste (...) good speed.


Che. No, no, let me alone for that.


Par. A^ but my Bones will smart for it. Oh! (...) horrible Villainy!


Che. A Villainy do you call it for a Man to go into a ^^dy-House; and a pay a
Company of silts in their ^n Coin? why if they make a Trade to abuse, torment
and trepan innocent young Men, is it not Justice and Equity to plague and
chouse them again? -- Shall Not I rather play Tricks with them, than with my
Father? This I should be blamed f^r; as for the other, 'twould be said, I served
them in their own kind.


Par. How Is this! Well! if ye be fully bent (...) on it, even take your own
course; but then (...) lay the blame at m^ door afterward.


Che. I will not then.


Par. And is it your will to have it so?


Che. It Is my will to have it so, and it must (...) so, and it shall be so; and
what I have said I w^^ stand by.


Par. Nay then follow me.


Che. Venus and Cupid favor the Design.

Exeunt (...)
The end of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Thraso and G^atho. Thr. WELL, but was she so very thankf^l then?


Gna. O yes Sir, most hugely.


Thr. And glad at Heart say ye?


Gna. O yes, but not so much for the Gift as the Giver: and for that let me
tell ye she is plaguil^. proud on it.

Enter Parmeno at a distance.
Par. to himself. I Am come to watch a fair Opportunity to bring my Presents in
too. -- But hold! Here Is Captain Bellswagger. Retires to one side.


Thr. Really I have the luck on it; every thing that I do is most wonderfully
taking.


Gna. I have observed as much.


Thr. The King of Persia, whenever I did him a kindness, was always very
sensible of it: He was not so to every body.


Gna. A smart Tongue so well hung as yours, makes all that Glory his own, which
others so long have toiled for.


Thr. Right Boy!


Gna. The King has you in his Eye then?


Thr. Right again.


Gna. And loves to have you there.


Thr. No doubt on it. -- Nay more he trusted his whole Army to my Conduct, and
follows my Advice in every thing.


Gna. Prodigious!


Thr. Then if he chanced to be weary of Comp^ny or Business, and had a Mind to
take a little ease -- as the -- you know what I mean.


Gna. Yes, Sir, As though when he had a mind to clear his Stomach, as a body may
so say, of all Concerns, --


Thr. Right, then would he take me to him Hand to First.


Gna. Ay marry Sir! this is a King indeed.


Thr. Oh! He Is a man of a Thousand. --


Gna. Yes, one of a million -- if he choose you for his Companion. Aside.


Thr. All the Officers envied me, and grumbl'd at me behind my back: I didn't
value it a Straw; they envied me damnably. But above all, one who had the
Charge of the Indian Elephants. This Fellow being more troublesome than the
rest, Prithee Strato, said I, why so plaguey Big? Is it because you are Lord
over a parcel of Beasts?


Gna. Neatly said, in faith, and shrewdly. -- Bless me! You overthrew Man and
Beast -- What said he, Sir?


Thr. Not a word.


Gna. Nay I don't know how he should.


Par. Bless me! This Captain's the blindest Coxcomb, and the other the vilest
Rascal I ever saw. Aside.


Thr. What think ye Gnatho? Did I ever tell ye how sharp I was upon the young
Rhodian Spark at a Feast?


Gna. Never, Sir, let us hear it, I pray, -- He has told it me a thousand times.
Aside.


Thr. This Rhodian Spark I told ye of, was with me at a Feast, where by chance
I had a small Girl; this Strippling began to be sweet upon her, an^ waggish
upon me too. How now you impudent Saucebox, (said I) you're Man's meat your
self, and yet have a mind to a Tit-bit.


Gna. Ha, ha, he.


Thr. What Is the matter? Hah!


Gna. Very fine, sharp and delicate; that could not be mended. -- But pray,
Sir, was this a^l your own? I took it for an old one.


Thr. Why did you ever hear't before?


Gna. Yes, Sir, very often: And it takes extremely. --


Thr. I Will affure you, 'twas all my own.


Gna. I am sorry you were so sharp upon the foolish young Gentleman.


Par. Ah the De'el take thee for a Rascal. Aside.


Gna. Pray, Sir, what did he say then?


Thr. He was quite dashed out of Countenance; And the whole Company was ready
to die with Laughing. After that every body was plaguey wary of meddling with me.


Gna. And well they might.


Thr. -- But hark ye, Gnatho, had I best clear my self to Thais from the
jealousy she has of my being in love with Pamphila.


Gna. Let that be the least of your Thoughts; but rather give her more cause to
be jealous.


Thr. Why so?


Gna. That Is a Question: Don't ye apprehend me Sir? Should she but speak a word
of Phedrie, or offer to commend him on purpose to plague you. --


Thr. That.


Gna. Your only way to prevent that, is, whenever she names Phedrie, be sure
you hit her in the Teeth with Pamphila; if she cries, let us have Phedrie to be
merry with us, do you answer, And Pamphila to give us a Song: If she praise his
shape, extol her Face: And be sure give her a Rowland for her Oliver, and that
will vex her to the Heart --


Thr. Ay, if she loved me, this might do, Gnatho.


Gna. As long as she desires and loves your Presents, you may lay your Life she
loves you. So (...) you may venture to teaze her; she will always (...) lest any
angry word should turn the (...) of your Bounty another way.


Thr. Thou say right. -- Why I never so much as dreamed of this before.


Gna. A good Jest in faith: Sure you didn't give your Mind to it; for had you set
your Wits about it, your Contrivance would have been worth fifty of mine

To them enter Thais attended by Pythia.
Tha. I fancied I heard the Captain's Tongue just now. -- Oh, here he as -- My
dear Hero, welcome. Hugs him.


Thr. Oh, my sweet Thais, my dear Honey, how, is it. -- Don't ye love me now,
for giving you this pretty Wench?


Par. Admirable in faith! how nobly he opens the Campaign. Aside.


Tha. Oh, Sir, I Am eternally obliged to you for it.


Gna. Let Us in to Supper I say: why this dallying?


Par. Here Is another too! Faith one would swear he is the Captain's Bastard,
they are so like one another. Aside.


Thr. to Gnatho. As soon as you will, for I am ready.


Par. advancing nigher. I Will to her, and make as tho I just came from home. --
Are you going a broad Madam. Aside to Thais


Tha. to him. Oh Parmeno, troth you are co^^ very lucky, I was just a going out.


^ar. Whither Madam?


Tha. Why don't ye see this Gentleman here. Aside to him


Par. I do see him, with a pox, to my sorrow. -- When you please Madam, my
Master's Presents a^^ at your Service. Aloud


Thr. What do we^stay for? why don't we ^^^ on?


Par. to Thraso. May it please your Honor, by your leave; first let me make my
Presents as I was ordered, and go and have a little harmless Chat with the Lady.


Thr. Special Presents! I Will warrant ye not to ^^ named the same day with mine.
Jeerin^.


Par. The Trial's all -- Goes toward Lach House So-ho! within there! send out
the person, I ordered -- Enter the Blackamoor. Here advan^^^ forward -- Here Is
a Lass come from as far as Prester John's Country.


Thr. I can have as good for Seven or Eight Guineas.


Gna. Ay and a better too.


Par. to them within You, Sir, Doras where are ye? stand forth Boy. -- Here Is
your Eunuch for ye then -- see what a pert look he has got, and ^ast in the
prime of his Age. Enter Cherea dressed up like the Eunu^h.


Tha. As I hope to be saved a very tight Fellow.


Par. What say ye now Mr. Gnatho: Do You spy any Faults here? -- And you noble
Captain? -- what never a word? -- That Is Commendation enough of all Conscience.
-- Try him in the Schools, Field, Music, or where you will, you ll find he has
had the Education of a Gentleman.


Thr. For a need that Eunuch would down well enough, tho a man was sober. Aside
to Gnatho.


Par. And yet Madam, the Gentleman that made these Presents, dosn't desire to
be your only Favorite, nor that all others should be thrust out of doors for
his sake: He dosn't tell your Romantic Stories of his Fights and Duels, nor
yet boast of his Wounds and Scars; neither does he stand in your Light, as a
certain person that shall be nameless. But when it shall be no trouble to you
Madam, when you please, and your Ladyship is at leisure,he thinks it favor
enough to be then admitted.


Thr. It Is Evident this Fellow has got some poor Grubstrect Merchant for his
Master.


Gna. Faith like enough; for he would not keep this Fellow so long, had he a
Shilling in his Pocket to hire him a better.


Par. Peace Dog. -- Thou art not worthy to ^e kicked -- If you can stoop to
flatter him, pointing to the Captain thus, you would be content to do the most
sordid thing in the world for a livelihood.


Thr. Shall we stay to hear this Fellow prate?

Angrily.
Tha. I Will only just step in with these, and order my Maids what to do; and
I Will be back again in an instant. Exeunt Thais, Che. and the Black.


Thr. I ll go before -- B^t do you stay and wait upon my Mistress. to Gnatho.


Par. Fie! it is beneath a General to Squire his own Mistress.


Thr. to Parmeno. Why should I spend my Breath upon thee? -- Like Master like
Man.

Exit Parmeno.
Gna. Ha, ha, he. --


Thr. What do you laugh at? Somewhat surlily.


Gna. Why what you just now said: Besides you put me in mind of the Rhodian
Spark, and I could not forbear -- but here is Madam Tha^^ again.

Re-enter Thais, Pythia and Attendants.


Thr. Run home and see that all the Rooms ^o ready.


Gna. I Am gone Sir. Exit Gnatho.


Tha. to Pythia. Be sure Pythia take care to do what I bid ye -- if Mr. Chremes
should chance to come to day, desire him to stay a little; if he is in haste,
beg him to come another time; if he cannot do that, send him over to the
Captains to me.


Pyt. I will Madam.


Tha. Hold -- I had something else to say. -- Let me see, -- O I remember't --
Be sure you make much of the young Gentlewoman. Do you keep home. Exit Pythia


Thr. Now let us march.


Tha. Do you follow me. to the Attendants. As they go off one way, enter
Chremes alone another way.


Chr. In troth the more I think and chew upon this business, the more I Am
afraid that this Thais should play me some plaguey Dog-trick or other; I find my
self damnably wheadl d by her. When she first sent for me,any man might have
wondered what business I had there; Faith I could not tell my self: but when I
came, she immediately casts about for Fetches and Excuses to make me tarry. I
have, (says she) just now been at my Devotion, therefore more fit to discourse
of grave and serious Matters. At that my Heart misgave me plaguily. She drew a
Chair and sat down by me, and fawning upon me, she began to pump for discourse.
When she had nothing else to say, she would fall a asking me, How long my Father
and Mother had been dead? I told her, a pretty while since: Then, whether I had
not a Seat at Sunio, and how far it stood off the Sea. Pox! I believe she liked
the Situation her self, and had a mind to gull me out on it. And lastly, If I
had not lost a young Sister thence? and who was with her then? What she had
about her whenlost? Whether 'twas possible for one to know her again? And such
like Stuff. I cannot imagine why the De'el she asked all these Questions;
without she designs to put her self upon me instead of this lost Sister; as it
is the ^mpudence of these Jades. However if she is alive, (...) is just Sixteen
and no more: but this same Thais is somewhat older than my self -- She has sent
again to beg of me very earuestly to come. -- ^ow let her tell her business
plainl, or trouble me o more. I ll be hanged if she catch me here a third ^ime.
So ho! within there! soho! knocks at the Door.


P^th. within Who is there?


C^r. It Is I, my Names Chreme^

Enter Pythia. (...) prett^ little Squire is it you?


Chr. So -- I said as much, this wheadling bode^ (...) good Aside.


Pyt. M Lady humbly desires you to come again to morr^^.


Chr. I Am to go into the Country.


Pyth. For love's sake Sir, do.


Chr. I tell you plainly I cannot.


Pyt. Why then, Sir, stay but a little till my Lady comes bac^.


Chr. Faith I don't intend it.


Pyt. Why not, dear Mr Chremcs. Fawningly.


Chr. Pox take ye for a dissembling Baggage.


P^th. Well if you be resolved, I beseech ye Sir, to give your self the trouble
of stepping over to her where she is.


Chr. I don't care if I do that.


P^th. to them within. Doria! Enter Doria. Go quickly and show this Gentleman
over to the Captain's. Exeunt severally. Enter Antipho alone.


Ant. Yesterday a Knot of good Fellows of us were got together at Pireo, where
we clubb d to have a Feast to d^y. We chose Cherea for our Steward. The
Forfeits were all laid down, and time and place agreed upon. The time's past,
and at the place they know nothing on it; our Gentleman Steward has given us the
^^ip, and Faith I cannot tell what to say, or think of the Business. -- The rest
of the Company have employed me to hunt about for him; I think I d as good call
in at his Father's -- discovering Cherea. But who is yonder a coming out of
Thais's House? is it he, or is it not he? -- As I live it is he -- He day! what
a Toy of a man have we got here? -- What means thi^ disguise? -- what
unaccountable freak is this? I am puzzled, and cant imagine for my Heart what is
the matter? whatsoever it be I will know before I stir a foot. Retires a little
on one side.

Enter Cherea, looking cautionsly about.
Che. to himself softly. But is no body here now? Not a Mortal. -- Does no body
dog me? -- Not so much as my Shadow. -- Shall I now give vent to my swelling
Joys? -- Oh Heavens! what would I give for some good Body to cut my Throat
immediately, that in the height of this Joy I may end my Life without the least
dash of misfortune. -- But is there never a curious inquisitive Fellow
following me close upon the Heel, to deafen and murder me with Question upon
Question at every turn? As, Why so transported? Why so wonderful merry? Whither
away so fast? Whence came ye? Where got ye this Garb? What Frolick's this? Are
ye in your Wits? or are ye stark mad?


Ant. advancing nigher. Faith, I Will even up to him, and do him that favor my
self. -- Cherea, what is it you chuckle at so? what means this fool's Coat? why
so merry about the Mouth? Hey brave! what do you mean? Do You pretend to be in your
wits? what do you stare for? -- Here they stare upon one another what never a
word?


Che. Huzzah! This is a day of Jubilee! well met old Soul! Gad take me, there is
not a Man alive I Would have wished for so soon as thy dear self.


Ant. Prithee tell me this mighty business.


Che. And prithee dear Rogue prepare thy self to receive it then. -- I suppose
you know my Brother's Mistress.


Ant. Yes, you mean Thais I suppose.


Che. The very same


Ant. I thought I knew her.


Che. This day a pretty young Female was presented to her. But why should I
stand prating, and commending her charming Face to thee my Friend, when thou
know so well what a Critic I am in Beauties? -- In short she fired my Blood.


Ant. Say you so?


Che. Ay Boy, had you but seen her, I Am sure you would say she was the Miracle of
her Sex. But to leave impertinencies, I was presently in up to the Ears; And as
good luck would have it, we had an Eunuch at home, which my Brother bought for
his Mistress, but was not yet delivered to her. Our Man Parmeno gave me an Item
of a Design, which I immediately put in Execution.


Ant. And what was that?


Che. Be patient and you will hear't the sooner. It was to change Clothes with
the Eunuch, and for me to be presented instead of him.


Ant. What for the Eunuch?


Che. Even so old Boy.


Ant. Prithee what advantage could you propose to your self by that?


Che. That Is worth the asking indeed, why to see her, discourse with her, and
be alone with the pretty Creature I loved (ye Rogue.) And do you make nothing of
this now? -- In short presented I was to Thais, who as soon as she received me,
very joyfully brought me home; and committed the Beautiful Creature to my
charge.


Ant. To whose Charge? to thine?


Che. Yes, to mine.


Ant. Marry, she was in safe Hands!


Che. She ordered that not a Man should com^ nigh her but my self, and charged
me not to stir a step from her; and that She and I should be alone together in
the Parlour. I looked as if Butter would not melt in my Mouth, and cried, Yes
Madam.


Ant. The Lord help thee.


Che. She told me she was going out to Supper; And with that drew all her Train
after her, except a few raw new comers to attend the fair Stranger. Those
prepared a Bath for my Angel: I urged 'em to hasten't as much as they could.
Whilst they were about it, this sweet Creature was sitting in a Withdrawing
Room, casting her Eyes upon a fair Piece, which was the picture of Jupiter, who
(as the story goes) came down into Danae's Lap in a Shower of Gold. I made bold
to dart a Look that way too, and finding how like the Intrigue was to mine, I
could not but be^ten times the more tickled at the Conceit on it. That a very God
should transform himself into a Mortal, and privately steal through the Tyles
of another Man's House, and so drop like a Shower into his Mistresses Arms. But
what God, thought I, was this? Why no less a God than the Thunderer himself,
who shakes the Battlements of Heaven. And should Flesh and Blood refuse to
follow his Example? I Will do it, and with all my Soul too. While these thoughts
were working in my Head, they called her away to the Bath, she goes, she
washes, she comes back: And then they put her to Bed, I stood waiting for the
word of Command. At last comes one to me, Prithee do you Dorus take this Fan,
and cool the young Gentlewoman thus, the time we are Bathing. When we have
done, you may bath if you have a mind to it.


Ant. I Would a given the whole almost to have seen that impudent Face of thine at
that time; how you carried your self; and how like a great Booby you managed
the Fan.


Che. The words were scarce out of her Mouth, but the^ all rushed out of the
Room to the Bath, and set up a Gaggle, as Servants do when their Master's
Back's turned. Mean time my dear Lady falls into a sweet sleep; with that I
cunningly casts a Sheep's E^e askiew through the Fan, showing him how he looked
and took a sidelong Glance round the Room to see that the Coast was clear. -- I
finding all right, made fast the Door.


Ant. What then brave Boy?


Che. How? what then? Simpleton!


Ant. A Simpleton indeed!


Che. Should I have neglected such a short, wished for, and unexpected
Opportunity, when it dropped into my very Mouth. I must have been a very Eunuch
indeed then.


Ant. Faith Boy, you are in the right. -- But in the mean time what is become of
our Treat?


Che. It Is just ready.


Ant. Troth, thou 'rt a brave Fellow. But where is it? At your House.


Che. No; at old Harry Platters.


Ant. That Is plaguey way off.


Che. We must go the faster then, that is all.


Ant. But will not you change your Clothes.


Che. How can I? Pox on it! I Am quite banished home, for fear my Brother should
see me, and what is worse, lest my old Father should become out of the Country.


Ant. Why then even let us go to our House; that is the nighest place I can think
of, to shift your self.


Che. That Is right; let us away then and lay our Heads together, how my Dear may
be for ever mine.


Ant. A Match then.


The end of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Doria alone, with a Casket under her Arm. AS I Am a living Soul, as much as I
can gather from the Captain's humor, I Am terribly af^aid this Swaggerer should
make some disturbance to day, and fall foul upon my Lad^. For as soon as young
Chremes, the Gentlewoman's Brother came thither, she asked leave of the Captain
to have him admitted. He began to huff and be angry, but yet durst not deny
her. Besides, my Lady urged him to desire the Gentleman to sit down and welcome,
because she would have him stay there, for this was not a proper time to tell him
all she had a mind to about his Sister. At last with a dogged Look, he coldly
bids him welcome. The Gentleman staid, and my Lady began to discourse. This
Captain Huff-cap imagining he had been a Rival brought under his Nose to
affront him, thought he would do something that should plague her too. Hark ye,
says he, go for Pamphila, to give us a Song. By no means in the World, cries my
Lady; What should such a Wench do at a Feast? The Captain being set upon it fell
to wrangling. Mean time the cunning Creature whips her Gold and Jewels into
this Casket, and slipped it into my Hand to carry off; which is a certain sign
she will not be long behind, as soon as she can get away.


Enter Phedrie at a distance. Phe. As I was walking to our Country House upon
the Road, (as it is usual with people when they are uneasy) a thousand thoughts
came running into my Head one after another, which I took all in the worst
Sense: To be short, whilst I was musing upon these things, I passed by my House
unawares, and had got half a Mile before I perceived it; upon that I turned
back with a Heart as heavy as Lead. -- When I was just got by the way to the
House, I stood still, and began to think thus with my self: What? must I be
forced to stay here eight and forty long hours without her? -- What of all
that? -- A mere trifle! -- How a trifle? -- What if I cannot kiss her Hand, yet
it is very hard if I cannot have one look at her? If I cannot have the one, sure I
may have the other: It Is better to be almost distanc'd, than to be quite thrown
out of the Race. With that I went by on purpose. -- But hold, what makes Pythia
run out of Doors in such a fright?

Enter Pythia looking about.
Pyth. to her self. Where Is this cursed, wicked Creature -- Wretch that I am!
where shall I find him? Or where shall I look for him? -- That ever any man
should have the impudence to offer at such a Villainy!


Phe. Alas! my Heart misgives me strangely.

Aside.
Pyth. to her self. Nay more than that; after the Villain had abused the Girl,
he tears her Clothes, and drags her up and down by the Hair o'th Head.


Phe. How Is this? Aside.


Pyth. to her self. O that I had but the Rogue in my Clutches now! -- How I
would claw the Eyes of the Whores-bird!


Phe. I cannot imagine what great disorder here has been in my absence -- I Will
even step to her Aside.

To Pyth. What Is the matter? whither in such haste? whom do you look for, Pythia?


Pyth. Hah, Mr Phedrie! Whom look for say ye? a Curse upon you and your
precious Presents both together.


Phe. Prithee tell me what is the matter?


Pyth. The Matter, quoth I? -- Your Eunuch that you gave us, what wicked Work
has he made here? He has gone and ravished the young Gentlewoman the Captain
gave my Lady.


Phe. in a maze. What say thou?


Pyth. I Am quite undone.


Phe. Ay and drunk too, I think.


Pyth. Would the worst of mine Enemies were as drunk as I am.


Dor. O Law, Pythia, was not it a very prodigious thing, ha!


Phe. You Are certainly mad. -- How is it possible for an Eunuch to do this?


Pyth. I cannot tell what he was; but what he has done, it is plain. The poor
young Creature is all in Tears, neither can ye get one Word from her. This
precious Rogue hides his Head now. I Am woefully afraid he has fingered somewhat
out of the House too, when he ran away.


Phe. It Is a wonder to me such a Limber-hamm'd Dog should get out of sight so
soon, unless he has ho^s'd himself at my Father's.


Pyth. Dear Sir, step in and see.


Phe. You shall know that presently.

Exit-Phedrie.
Dor. O Gemini! Prithee my Dear, did you ever hear of such a horrid Prank
before? I never did.


Pyth. Truly I have heard say, these Eunuchs are great Admirers of fine Women,
but can do nothing but slabber them over. But I, like a silly Jade as I was,
never thought of this: If I had, I should have locked up my Gentleman, and have
kept the Girl far enough from his reach.

Re-enter Phedrie dragging in Dorus by the Ears.
Phe. Come out ye infamous Dog! -- What do you hang an Arse ye Runagate
Scoundrel! -- Thou damnable Bargain out of your Kennel.


Dor. Good Sir.


Phe. Do but see what a damned Friday-face the J^il-bird makes? How came you
hither again? -- Why this change of Habit I pray? -- What answer Dog? -- Had I
staid but a minute longer, Pythia, I had miss does Rogue, you see hes just
equipt for the March.


Pyth. O dear Sir, have ye met with the Rascal?


Che. Met with him? Ay.


Pyth That Is good Luck indeed.


Dor. Ay special good Luck upo' my word:


Pyth. What ha ye done with him?


Phe. Done with him? Cannot ye see before ye?


Pyth. Whom should I see?


Phe. This Fellow here. Pointing to Dorus.


Pyth. What of this Fellow here?


Phe. The same that was sent to your House to day.


Pyth. I dare swear Sir, none of our House e're set eye upon him.


Phe. Sure they were blind then.


Pyth. Pray Sir, can ye believe this to be the Man that was brought to our
^ouse?


Phe. Believe't? The De'el (...) else had I to send.


Pyth. Fie! -- there is no Comparison to be made between this and that; for that
other had a fine Air, and looked like a Gentleman.


Phe. Ay, so you thought, because he had got his gay Clothes on: now he has
altered his Habit, you take him for an ugly Creature.


Pyth. Pray Sir, don't persuade me to it, as if there were no more difference
than that comes to. Why he that we had to day was such a fine young Fellow,
'twould have done your Heart good to have seen him. This is a dry, decrepit,
drowzy-headed Fumbler, and looks like a Weezle.


Phe. 'Sdeath! What stuff's this? -- You Have brought me to that pass, that for
my part I know not what I Have done my self. -- Come hither Sirrah, to Dorus
Didn't I buy ye, and pay for ye?


Dor. Yes, an't please you.


Pyth. Now pray Sir, let me have one pull at him.


Phe. Do so.


Pyth. Were you at our House to day? He nods L^ok ye, he denies it, -- He that
Parmen) brought was but sixteen.


Phe. Well I Will at him once again my self. First, tell me how you came by these
Clothes? What have you lost you Tongue? -- Ye ugly Dog, why don't ye answer me?
Angrily.


Dor. One Mr Cherea came. --


Phe. Not my Brother I hope?


Dor. Yes Sir?


Phe. When?


Dor. To day.


Phe. How long ago?


Dor. But a little while.


Phe. Who did he come with?


Dor. Parmeno, an't please you.


Phe. Did you know him before?


Dor. No Sir, nor ever heard of his name.


Phe. How came ye then to know 'twas my Brother?


Dor. Parmeno told me so. -- And 'twas Cherea gave me these Clothes --


Phe. Confusion!


Dor. -- And put on mine, and away they went together.


Pyth. to Phedrie. So Sir, Who Is drunk now? 'Twas I filled your Head with
Stories, was not it? Now it is as clear as the Sun, that the poor Gentlewoman's
ravished. Weeps.


Phe. Away ye Beast, -- Do You believe one word this Fellow prates?


Pyth. A Fig for believing! The thing's plain enough of it self.


Phe. softly to Dorus. Come a little this way, Dye mind me Sirrah? -- Nigher
yet. -- That Is well. -- Let me hear this Business once again, Did Cherea take
your Clothes from ye?


Dor. He did Sir,


Che. And put 'em on himself?


Dor. Yes Sir.


Che. And was sent hither in your stead.


Dor. Yes, that he was.


Phe. Oh Heavens! This is the most wicked impudent Dog living. Aloud in a
passion.


Pyth. Alas Sir! Are ye not convinced that we have been most basely abused?


Phe. No wonder if a cracked Chambermaid believes this Scoundrel: Angrily to
Pyth. -- But the truth on it is, I am somewhat gravelled my self softly -- Hark
ye Sirrah, deny all, or I Will cut your Throat aside to Dorus -- Cannot I rack the
Truth out of ye to day? Did ye see my Brother Cherea? Aloud to Dorus.


Dor. No indeed, Sir. Fearfully.


Phe. I see there is nothing to be done without blows. -- This way ye Dog -- He
hunts Counter. -- Down of your Knees, and ask me pardon.

Aside to Dorus.


Dor. kneeling. Good Sir, I beseech ye, forgive me.


Phe. Into your Kennel then. Beats him.


Dor. Hey, hey. Runs out howling.


Ph. Faith I could not tell how to make a fair come off without this Stratagem.
If so, the thing's past cure. Aside. -- Do You think ye Rascal to make a May Game
of me. Aloud to Dorus.

Exit after him.
Pyth. My Life on it, this damned plot is of Parmeno's contriving.


Dor. You may swear it.


Pyth. In Faith I Will pay him in his own Coin before I sleep. -- But prithee
Doria, what would advise me in the Case?


Dor. You mean in the young Gentlewoman's Business?


Pyth. Yes, whether we had best keep it to our selves, or tell on it.


Dor. In tr^th, if you're wise, take no notice of the Eunuch, or the Girl
either: for by that means you will keep out of harms way, and oblige our Lady
besides. You need only say the Eunuch has given us the slip:


Pyth. I Will follow your Counsel.


Dor. But yonder comes Mr. Chremes; -- My Lady is not far behind then


Pyth. What makes ye think so?


Dor. Because the Captain and she were almost at Daggers drawing when I left em.


Pyth. Then away with the Casket quick: -- I Will learn of this Gentleman what is
to do.

Exit Doria. To her, enter Chremes half drunk.
Chr. to himself. Hey-dazy! -- I have been finely bubbled In Faith. -- This Wine
has been too hard for me. -- The time I was toping, -- I thought my self as
sober as a Judge, -- But when I came to try my Legs, -- S bud my Feet nor my
head knew which was to go uppermost. --


Pyth. Oh Mr. Chremes!


Chr. Who Is that? -- Oh, the pretty, pretty, Phythie! Why thou art worth forty
of the Phythies I saw last.


Pyth. And upo' my Word you're forty times more pleasant than you were before.


Che. The old Saying's very true, If twasn't for Meat and good Drink the Women
might gnaw the Sheets. -- But your Mistress has been come home a long time I
suppose?


Pyth. Why is she come from the Captain's then?


Chr. Oh a damnable while -- They were quarrelling like Dog and Cat.


Pyth. Didn't she desire ye to follow her?


Chr. No, she only tipp'd a Wink at me as she went away.


Pyth. And was not that Item enough?


Chr. No Faith: I could not tell what her winking and twinking meant till the
Captain very civilly gave me to understand it by thrusting me Head and
Shoulders after her. -- But see she is upo' the Back on's already. -- I wonder
what Devil brought me hither before her. Enter Thais.


Tha. to herself. I believe this hectoring Bully will be upon my Back presently
to take away the Girl by force: Ay let him come: if he offers to touch her but
with one finger I Will pluck his Eyes out; -- I can away with his Impertinencies
and big Words, as long as they are but Words; but in faith if he comes to touch
our ^opyhold once, I Will make him smart for it. Angrity.


Chr. Ah Madam, I Have been here a long while.


Tha. My dear Chremes! 'twas you I wanted; Arn't you sensible this Quarrel was
upo' your account? And the whole business a concern of yours?


Chr. Of mine? Pray how so? As if I had been --


Tha. Whilst I Am taking pains to help you to your Sister, and restore her to
ye, I Am forced to sit down with these and a thousand such like Affronts.


Chr. Pray Madam, where is she now?


Tha. At home at my House.


Chr. Hah! Concern'dly.


Tha. What Is the Matter? you needn't fear; for her education hasn't been
beneath her self, or you either.


Che. What Is that you say?


Tha. Nothing but the truth. I freely give her to ye, and shant expect a
Farthing for my pains,


Chr. I thank ye Madam, and shall endeavor to make ye amends when time serves.


Tha. But have a care Sir, you don't lose her before you have her, for it is she
the Captain is coming to plunder us of by force of Arms. -- Do You hear, Pythia,
run n and fetch the Casket and To^ens quick.


Chr. discovering Thraso and his party. Do You see 'em Madam?


Pyth. Where is it set, Madam?


Tha. In the Chest of Drawers. -- Do You move no faster ye Baggage? Exit Pythia.


Chr. What an Army has this Fellow mustered up against ye? -- Lamentable!


Tha. What Cow-hearted my Dear?


Chr. Pshaw, I Cow-hearted? I Am as bold as a Lion. Struts.


Tha. Ay, and so you had need.


Chr. Ah Madam, I doubt ye take me for ^a -- strange Fellow.


Tha. However take this for your comfort, this Fellow you're to deal with is a
perfect Stranger, has less Interest, less Acquaintance, and fewer Friends to
back him than you.


Chr. That I know too: But 'tisn't for a wise Man to stand behind an Ass when
he kicks. I Would rather prevent a Quarrel before hand, than revenge it afterward.
-- Do you run in and Barricade the Door, whilst I run to the Piazza, and fetch
the Constable to keep the Peace. Going off.


Tha. catching him by the Cloak. Hold Sir.


Chr. I had better go.


Tha. Stand your ground pray. still holding him.


Chr. Pray let me go, I Will be back again in an instant.


Tha. Sir, you need not call any help -- do but tell him she is your Sister,
and that you lost her when she was young, and are now come to the knowledge of
her, then show him the Tokens.

Re-enter Pythia with the Casket.


Pyth. Here they are Madam.


Tha. Do you take 'em Sir. -- Chr. takes the Casket. If he offers the least
violence you may have him before his Betters: -- You understand me?


Chr. Yes very well


Tha. Be sure you speak this with a good Cou^age.


Chr. Edad, and so I will. struts and puts his Arms a Kimbow.


Tha. Up with your Cloak Man -- Dear Heart I Have pitched upon a Champion that
wants one himself. Aside Exeunt on one side.

Enter on the other side Thraso, Gnatho, Sanga, Servants with Link-boys,
Fire-forks, Shovels, Dishclouts, etc.


Tha. Prithee Gnatho; Is It for a Man of Honor to put up such a notorious
Affront as this? I Will dye upo' the spot first. -- Simalio, Donax, Syriscus,
follow your Leader. -- First I Will storm their Castle.


Gna. Very well.


Thr. Then I Will carry off the Damsel triumphantly.


Gna. Better and better.


Thr. And lastly, I Will put the Jilt under severe Contributions.


Gna. Best of all.


Thr. Advance Donax with your Truncheon, and Command the main Body. -- Simalio
Command you the Left Wing, and you Syriscus the Right. -- Where are the rest?
Where Is Captain Sanga with his Ragged Regiment?


San. Here Sir.


Thr. to Sanga. Ye lazy Son of a Whore! Do You think to engage the Enemy with a
Dish-clout, what did you bring that for?


San. Who I, Sir? Why I knew the Prowess of my General, and the Carriage of his
Soldiers so well, that they could never part without Blood and Wounds, so I
brought this to wipe 'em withal.


Thr. Where Is all the rest of 'em?


San. The rest, with a vengeance? There Is only Sannio left to keep the House
from running away.


Thr. Gnatho do you set 'em all in Rank and File. -- I Will bring up the Rear,
and there give the Signal for the Onset.


Gna. This it is to be Wise: When he has drawn ^p his Men in Battalia, he will
make sure of one ^Post for his own retreat. Aside.


Thr. This was always the F -- K -- 's way.

Chremes and Thais appear above.


Chr. Do You observe, Madam, what this Cutthroat's about? I see my Counsel was not
amiss when I advised ye to Barricade the Door.


Thr. Pshaw! This Fellow that you take for a Hector, is as Faint-hearted as a
Town Bully. -- Bear up Man.


Thr. to Gnatho. What had we best do?


Gna. Had we but a Mortar now to play upon 'em under the Covert way; one Bomb
would make 'em scamper.


Thr. discovering Thais. But hold, yonder is the Enemy.


Gna. Shall we give the Assault, noble General?


Thr. Hold I say. -- Wise Commanders usually send a Summons before they Storm:
Perhaps she will surrender upon Discretion before we make the Assault.


Gna. Oh wonderful! What plaguey things these Politics are? I never am in your
company, but I go away the wiser for it.


Thr. to Thais. Thais answer me the first Article, when I gave ye Pamphila,
didn't ye promise me so many days to my self?


Tha. What of all that?


Thr. That Is a pretty Question! -- Didn't ye bring one of your Gallants under
my Nose? What business had ye together? Why did you slink away with him from my
House?


Tha. Cause 'twas my Pleasure.


Thr. Why then deliver up Pamphila, unless you would have her carried off by force.


Chr. Deliver her to thee? Touch her if you ^a^e: Thou worst of -- Angrily.


Gna. to Chremes. Hah! Sir have a care, not a word more.


Chr. Do you prate, Buffoon.


Thr. Shall Not I touch what is my own?


Chr. Thine, Villain?


Gna. to Chremes I say once again, have a care Friend; I see you don't know who
you speak to?


Chr. to Gnatho. Will Not ye be gone, ye Rascal (...) to Thraso And you, Captain
Swash, do you know what to trust to? If ye give us the least disturbance here,
I Will make ye remember the Place, the Dav, and Person you affront too, as long
as you breathe.


Gna. to Chremes. Poor Wretch! I pity ye, that ye should provoke so great a Man
to be your Enemy.


Chr. I Will crack your Fools Pate for ye, if ye ben't gone presently.


G^na. Say you so, Mr. Snarle? Are your Hands so heavy?


Thr. to Chremes. Pray who are you for a Man? What would you have? And what
have yo^ ^o do with the Girl?


Chr. That ye shall know presently: First, I say s^e's Freeborn.


Thr. So!


Chr. And a Citizen of Athens.


Thr. How!


Chr. And my Sister too.


Thr. Oh Impudence.


Chr. Therefore Captain, Jeeringly. I tell ye once for all, lay hands on her if
you dare. -- to Thais Now, Madam, I Will step and fetch Sopl^ona, the Nurse, and
show her the Tokens.


Thr. Why will you, Sir, hinder me from meddling with what is my own?


Chr. Yes, that I will. Withdraws.


Gna. to Thraso. Bear witness, this Chremes own (...) himself a Thief, he has
done his own business.


Thr. to. Thais Do you say the same too?


Thr. Go look. Withdraws.

Here Thraso and Gnatho stare at one another.
Thr. What shall we do next?


Gna. E'n let us march home again -- By and by she will come fawning like a
Spaniel to beg your Pardon.


Thr. Think ye so?


Gna. Nothing more certain, I know the humor of these women well enough; when
you will, they will not, and when you will not, they will.


Thr. Thou have hit it.


Gna. Shall I dismiss the Army?


Thr. When you will.


Gna. to Sanga. Well Captain, you and yours are discharged, now like a noble
General take your Army into Quarters of Refreshment in the Kitchen.


San. Troth my belly chym'd Cupboard above half an hour ago.


Gna. Well said Tom Prog. --


Thr. Follow your Leader. Exeunt shouting


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Thais and Pythia. Tha. entering. Do You speak in Riddles still ye dirty Queen? In
another Tone mocking her. I do know, I don't know, he is fled, I heard on it, but
was not there. Hussy, cannot ye tell me in plain terms whatever the Matter is.
The poor Girl's Gown's rent, she is all in Tears, and will not speak. The Eunuch's
fled too; But why? -- What Is done? -- What no answer? --


Pyth. Alas, Madam, What would ye have me say? when they all affirm 'twasn't a
Eunuch that was here.


Tha. Who was it then^


Pyth. One Mr. Cherea.


Tha. What Mr. Cherea?


Pyth. The young Gentleman, Phedrie's Brother.


Tha. What Is that ye say ye VVitch?


Pyth. Nothing but what is certainly true.


Tha. Pray what should he do here? Upon what account came he hither, pray?


Pyth. I cannot guess, unless he was in Love with Pamphila.


Tha. 'S death, I Am undone then, all my Measures are broken if this be true.
Is^t for this the poor Creature bemoans her self so?


Pyth. So I believe, Madam.


Tha. How Is this ye Baggage? Didn't I give you a particular Charge about her,
when I went away.


Pyth. What could I do in the Case? You ordered that she should be wholly
committed to his care?


Tha. Oh you Jade, you set the Wolf to ^eep the Sheep: I Am ashamed to the Soul
to be so cursedly fool^d. -- Seeing Cherea afar off. But what fellow^s that?

Enter Cherea at a distance still in the Eunuch' s Dress.
Pyth. ^S't, Madam! Patience I beseech ye: All Is well, we have got our Spark in
Lob's pound.


Tha. Where is he?


Pyth. 'S't! on the Left Hand; Don't you see him? -- look there then.


Tha. I see him.


Pyth. Seize him immediately.


Tha. What can we do to him, Fool!


Pyth. Do to him, say ye? -- See, I beseech you, what a cursed impudent Look he
has got, --


Tha. I see no such thing.


Pyth. And with what Confidence he comes to us.


Che. to himself. Antipho's Father and Mother were both at home, as if they would
staid there on purpose, that I could not possibly g^t in without being
discovered. The time I was i^ the Porch, an Acquaintance o'mine came that way.
Upon this, I takes me to my heels as fast as I could, runs into a blind Alley,
then to another, and so to a third. Thus did I dance up and down in a Peck of
Troubles to prevent a discovery. -- But hold, is that Thais? The very same. --
I Am at a plaguey stand what to do. -- Pshaw, what care I? She can neither hang,
draw, nor quarter.


Tha. Let Us up to him. -- O good Sir Dorus, you're welcome home. -- Pray tell
me, Did you run away from us?


Che. True as you say, Madam. Looks simply.


Tha. And are extremely pleased with this vagary I warrant?


Che. Not so extremely neither Madam.


Tha. Do You think you shall come off so?


Che. Well Madam, pardon me this one Fault, if you catch me in another hang me
up.


Tha. Were you afraid that I should prove a harsh Mistress, that you ran for it?


Che. No indeed Madam.


Tha. Of what then?


Che. Why I was only afraid this woman should ha told Tales of me. Pointing to
Pythia.


Tha. Why what have you done then?


Che. A small matter.


Pyth. Impudence! A small matter do you call it? -- Is ravishing a Virgin and a
Citizen so small a Matter in your account? In a Passion.


Che. I took her for one of my fellow Servants.


Pyth. Thy fellow Servant? I can scarce keep my Nails out of the Eyes of him. --
Thou Devil incarnate! Are you come to laugh at us too? In a great Fury.


Tha. to Pythia. Keep off you Bedlam.


Pyth. Why Madam? As if there could have been any thing done to me, if I had
pulled his Locks for him, since he owns himself your Servant?


Tha. Triffling aside, -- Indeed, Mr. Cherea, you ve done a very unworthy
thing, and which did not become ye, for tho I had deserved this Affront never
so much, yet 'twas dishonorable for you to do it. As I live, I know not what
course to take about the poor Girl. You Have so broken all my Measures, that I
cannot possibly return her to her Friends, neither as I ought to do, nor as I
intended: that I might ingratiate my self among 'em by so complete an
Obligation.


Che. Now, Madam, I hope to see a lasting kindness betwixt us both. For from
such bad Beginnings as this often the greatest Friendships rise. And who knows
but some lucky Star has ordered this?


Tha. Why truly I interpret it thus, and wish it from my Soul.


Che. And I beg it might be so. Believe this one thing, 'twasn't to affront
you, but pure love caused all this.


Tha. I do believe it, and therefore rather pa^don it: For I Am not of that
Nature, Mr. Cherea, nor yet so insensible my self as not to know some what of
the Power of Love.


Che. As I hope for Happiness, Madam, I Am extremely taken with you.


Pyth. Faith, Madam, look to your self then.


Che. I would not hurt her if I might.


Pyth. I Will trust ye no farther than I can see ye.


Tha. Leave prating, Fool.


Che. Now, Madam, I must crave your Assistance in this great Design. I trust
and commit my self wholly to your disposal, and beg your Protection. Let me
die, if I don't marry her.


Tha. But what if your Father? --


Che. What he? -- I Am sure of his Consent, could she be proved to be a
Gentlewoman.


Tha. If you please to stay a little her Brother will be here strait: He Is but
stepped for the Nurse that brought her up. And so Sir you may be by at the
Discovery.


Che. Then I Will stay.


Tha. I think we'd better go in in the mean time than stay at the Door.


Che. With all my Heart.


Pyth. Do You know Madam whatyou're going to do?


Tha. Why that Question?


Pyth. Why? Sure you don't intend to take this Blade into your House again.


Tha. Why not?


Pyth. Trust me for once Madam, he will make some new Disturbance.


Tha. Prithee leave your tattling.


Pyth. It seems you have not made sufficient trial of him then.


Che. I Will do no harm good Mrs Pythia.


Pyth. I Will not trust ye an Ace good Mr. Cherea. -- ^anless your Head were off.


Che. But Mrs. Pythia thou shall be my Keeper.


Pyth. No Faith, who will trust their selves with you, either to keep or be
kept by ye? Away with ye. --

Enter at a distance Chremes and Sophrona.


Tha. What luck's here, here is the Brother just upon us.


Che. Alas-a-day! I beseech ye Madam, let us in. I would not for the world be
seen in the Street in this Dress.


Tha. Why so? 'Cause you're ashamed on it?


Che. Yes indeed am I.


Pyth. Yes indeed am I, say ye? For the young Woman Cherea! clapping her Hands
at him.


Tha. Do you go in, Sir, I Will follow ye. --

Exit Cherea But do you stay here Pythia to bring in Mr. Chremes. Exit. Thais.


Pyth. to her self. What Trick now? what mischief can I think of? -- How shall
I contrive to make this Rogue Parmeno pay Sauce for this damnable Cheat, he has
put upon us?


Che. Come, bestir your self Nurse a little faster.


Soph. So I do you see.


Chr. Ay, but you don't advance.


Pyth. to Chremes. Have you shown Nurse the Tokens?


Chr. Yes all of 'em.


Pyth. Pray, Sir, what says she? Does she know 'em again?


Chr. Ay, and remember 'em very well.


Pyth. That Is good News in troth, I wish the poor Gentlewoman well with all my
Heart. -- Be pleased to walk in, my Lady has looked for ye some time. -- Exeunt
Chremes and Sophrona.

Enter Parmeno at a distance. Yonder comes that precious Rogue Parmeno, -- In
the Name of Heaven, how unconcern'dly the Fellow stalks it? -- But I believe I
have found out a way to revenge my self on him as I would wish. -- I Will go in
and see the Truth of this Discovery, then I Will come again and fright the Rascal
to some Tune. Exit Pythia.


Par. alone. I Am come to see how Cherea carries on his Intrigue; which if it be
managed cunningly, goodly, goodly! what Monuments of Praise are due to my
Worship? For to say nothing of procuring him the Person he loves without
Trouble, Fees, or Charges, when the Amor might have proved very difficult and
costly from a covetous Bawd: I Have done that which I think I deserve a Statue
for; Having shown this Spark a way to know all the tricks and customs of these
common Jilts, and by timely notice to abhor 'em for ever after. When they are
abroad forsooth, none so cleanly, none so modish and genteel, none so
delicately neat as they: when their Ladyships feast with their Gallants, they
feed as nicely as possible: But to see the insatiable Gluttony, the vile
Nastiness, the griping Penury of these filthy Jades at home, how greedy of a
Crust, how eagerly they slabber and soss up Brown-George out of stinking
Pottage; to know all this before hand may be the saving of a young man.


Pyth. at the Door over-hearing him. Faith I Will be even with you for your
Rogueries you have said or done; you shall have small Joy Sirrah, in making Sport
with us.

Enter Pythia, taking no notice of Parmeno.


Pyth. entering. Bless me! what a base unworthy Action's this: An unfortunate
young Gentleman! And Parmeno, an ungracious Wretch to betray him hither!


Par. What Is in the wind now? Aside:


Pyth. to her self It grieves me to the Soul Dear Heart, I left the House in
haste to get out of the sight on it -- What a dreadful Example do they say
they will make on him?


Par. Heavens! what new mischief's this? Is my Plot come to this then? -- I Will
even speak to her. Aside. -- What Is the matter M^s. Pythia? what is that you
talked of? who is that will be made an Example?


Pyth. Do You ask that, ye desperate Fool? why you have quite ruined the young
Gentleman you had brought for the Eunuch, when you thought, I warrant, you had
put a trick upon us.


Par. How so? -- what has happened? -- Prithee tell me.


Pyth. I will so. -- You don't know then that the Girl that was presented to my
Lady to day, is a Gentlewoman o^ this Town, and her Brother a Person of Quality?


Par. I know nothing on it.


Pyth. But so it proved. -- And 'twas she that your poor wretch ravished. When
her Brother knew of it, a most bloody-minded Fellow, --


Par. What did he do? Fearfully.


Pyth. -- First bound him Hand and Foot, 'twou'd grieve your heart to see it.
--


Gna. Bound him? Damnation!


Pyth. -- Tho my Lady begged all she could for him.


Par. What say ye? Hastily.


Pyth. Now he threatens to serve him like a common Horner, a thing I never saw,
nor would not for the world.


Par. With what Face can he answer so great a Villainy? Pyth. Why so great, I
beseech you?


Par. Why is not it the greatest of all Villainies? -- Pray, who e're heard of
one apprehended for a Fornicator in a common Bawdy House?


Pyth. I cannot tell that.


Par. That you may not say you don't know on it, this I declare, and forewarn
you, that it is no less than Mr. Phedrie's Brother, --


Pyth. How? Prithee, 'tisn't he? Is It?


Par. -- Therefore your Lady had best take care he comes to no harm -- But why
don't I break into the House my self? Offers to go.


Pyth. Have a care what you do Parmeno, you will do him no good, and ruin your
self into the Bargain; for every body believes it is all your contrivance.


Par. coming back. What course shall I set upon? Seeing Laches at a distance
Oh, yonder comes my old Master from his Country House -- Shall I tell him on it
or no? -- Studies. -- In Troth I will, tho I certainly know I shall make a Rod
so my own Breech. Necessity has no Law, he must rescue his poor Son.


Pyth. You do well. -- I Will go in. -- Be sure you tell him the whole Story from
the beginning to the end.

Enter Laches.
Laches to himself. I always find this advantage from the nearness of my
Country House, that I Am never much tired with the Town or Country: When I begin
to be sick of the one, I shift Lodgings to the other. -- But is not that our Man
Parmeno? -- It Is he, as I hope to live. -- Parmeno! Who is it you wait for at
this House?


Par. turning short. Who Is that there? -- Ah, Sir, you're welcome to Town.


Lac. Who do you wait for? Hah!


Par. I Am Thunderstruck, I cannot wag my Tongue for fear. Aside,


Lac. Ha! What Is the matter? Why do you shake so? Is all well at home? Prithee
tell me.


Par. First I Would have you be fully satisfied of this one thing, Sir, that
whatever has happened, I Am as innocent as a newborn Babe.


Lac. Why, what is the matter?


Par. That Is well asked, for I should ha'^ told you that before. -- Mr. Phedrie
bought an Eunuch, which he presented to this woman.


Lac. To what woman?


Par. Thais.


Lac. He buy Eunuchs? -- S'bud, I Am undone then. -- what did he cost?


Par. Fifty pounds.


Lac. I must run my Country then.


Par. Then his Brother Cherea fell in Love with a Musick-Wench.


Lac. How! what? Is he in Love too? Does he know what belongs to that Sport
already? Is he come from his Post to the City? -- One Plague upon another!
Angrily, looking on Parmeno.


Par. Pray Sir, don't you direct your Discourse to me, I was not his Counselor.


Lac. Speak another word about your self, you Hangman? and as I live. -- But
tell me the whole business quickly.


Par. Mr. Cherea was sent there instead of the Eunuch, Sir.


Lac. Instead of the Eunuch.


Par. Very true Sir, and now they have appehended him for a Rape, and have bound
him Hand and Foot.


Lac. Hell and Furies!


Par. But mark the Impudence of these Jades.


Lac. Is there any Roguery you have not told me on yet?


Par. You Have heard all, Sir.


Lac. Why don't I break in upon 'em?

Exit Laches.
Parmeno alone. I don't question but I Have brought an old House upon my Head by
this day's work; and yet I could not possibly avoid it. -- However I Am pleased
that these Strumpets shall feel some of the smart by my Means. The old
Gentleman has sought an occasion this half Year, to make notorious Examples of
some of 'em, and now I think he has found one.

Enter Pythia.
Pyth. to her self. In Faith this was the pleasantest Scene I e're saw in my
Life, to see the old Gentleman come blundering upon us in such a mistake. I had
all the Sport to my self, because I knew his Ailment.


Par. over-hearing. What a Plague's here? Aside.


Pyth. to her self. I Am now come to see for the Fool Parmeno. -- But where in
the name of goodness shall I find him?


Par. Of My Soul she looks for me. Aside.


Pyth. to her self. O! I see him, I Will be with him presently.


Par. What Is the matter Mrs. Impertinence? What wo^'d you be at? what are you
so tickled at? -- what never a done?


Pyth. Oh my Sides! -- I Have almost burst my Sides with Laughing at thee.


Par. Your Reason, pray?


Pyth. A pretty Qnestion! -- Faith, you are the arrantest Ass I e're did, or
shall set my Eyes on? It Is utterly past my skill to tell thee what excellent
Sport thou have made within. -- I took thee for a cunning ingenious Fellow. --


Par. How Is this?


Pyth. Had ye no more wit than to believe presently what I said? were you not
ashamed of the Villainy you put the poor Gentleman upon, but you must tell Tales
of him to his Father? How simply did he look, think ye, when his Father
surpised him in that disguise? What? Don't you see what a fine pass you have
bronght your self to?


Par. Ha! How Is this you filthy Carrion? Did ye tell me a Lie, and then laugh
at the Wit on it? Do You think it such fine Sport to abuse us ye Jade.


Pyth. Oh the finest sport in the World.


Par. Do You think you shall not pay dearly for this?


Pyth. Perhaps so.


Par. Ay, Faith shall ye.


Pyth. I fancy as much. These Threats may come to Morrow, but you will be hanged
to day for entering a young Gentleman a Debauchee, and then discovering it,
they will both have a pull at your Coat for this.


Par. I Am a Reprobate.


Pyth. You see the Reward of your Roguery; and so Good b'ye to ye. Exit Pythia.


Par. alone. Like a senseless Fool! I Have betrayed my self like Rats with their
own Squeaking.

Enter Thraso and Gnatho at another part of the Stage.
Gna. to Thraso. What Is in hand now, Sir? Upon what Assurance or Design came we
hither? what Enterprise next, Sir?


Thr. Who I? I Will even surrender my self to her upon discretion, and even do as
she would have me.


Gna. How, Sir?


Thr. Why should I be less submissive to this Lady than Hercules was to Omphala?


Gna. A pat Example, -- would I could see the Slipper flung at your soft Head
too. Aside. -- But what makes her Door open? Discovering Cherea. What
mischief's a foot now? -- I think I never saw that Face before. -- What makes
him cut Capers thus as he comes out?

Enter Cherea.
Che. to himself. Come my dear Countrymen, was ever any Man born under a
happier Planet than my self? Not a Man upon my word. For it is plain the Powers
above to show in me how great their Sovereignty is have singled me out, on whom
they have showered down so many Blessings all at once.


Par. Why's he so merry trow?


Che. My dear Parmeno! It Is to thee I Am indebted for the Rise, the Advancement,
and the Perfection of my Comforts. -- Do know my dear sweet Creature's proved
a Gentlewoman? --


Par. I heard it by the bye, Sir.


Che. -- And that she is to be my Bride?


Par. As I hope to be Knighted that is Admirable.


Gna. Do You hear, Sir, what he says? Aside to Thraso.


Che. Then I am heartily glad my Brother's Amors are in such a happy
Condition. The Families are both united now; Thais has put her self wholly
under my Father's Care and Protection, and is wholly ours.


Par. Then, Mr Phedrie is like to have her for good and all.


Che. Yes, indeed.


Par. This too is worth a laughing at, for the mighty Captain's routed.


Che. Do you take care that my Brother may know of this as soon as ye can,
wheresoever he be.


Par. I Will see for him at home. Exit Parmeno.


Thr. So Gnatho, Do not think I Am gone to all Intents and Purposes?


Gna. There Is no thinking otherwise.


Cherea to himself. Where shall I begin first?

Or whom commend most? Him that advised me to do it, or my self that had the
Heart to venture upon it, or the good Fortune that directed us both, and that
brought so many Circumstances of so great moment, and so luckily too into the
Compass of one Day. --

Or shall I praise the Indulgence of my Father?

Great Jove! that do poor Mortals Fate secure,secure,

Grant that our Joys may with our Lives endure.

Enter Phedrie.
Phe. to himself. Bless me! Parmeno tells me Wonders. But where is my Brother?


Che. Here at your Service.


Phe. I Am extremely glad for your good Fortune, Brother.


Che. I believe so, and truly Brother, there is never a Mistress more worthy to
be beloved then yours, she has so vastly obliged our Family.


Phe. Hey-day! Do you commend her before my Face.


Thr. to Gnatho. I Am quite undone! The less I Hope the more I Love? Good
Gnatho, I rely wholly upon thee


Gna. What would you have me do Sir?


Thr. Bring it about either for Love or Money. that I may continue a little in
Madam Thais Favor.


Gna. That will be hard.


Thr. You can do it I know, if you give your Mind to it: If ye perform it,
Command what Gift or Reward you please, it is your own?


Gna. Shall it so Sir?


Thr. It shall indeed.


Gna. Why then Sir, if I do it, I desire to have free Egress and Regress into
your House, whether you be at home or abroad, and a Place at your Table,
whether invited or no.


Thr. It shall be so upon my Honor.


Gna. Well, I Will make an Effort.


Phe. Whose Tongue's that? -- O Captain is it you?


Thr. Gentlemen, I Am your humble Servant.


Phe. Perhaps you know not what has happened at this House.


Thr. Yes Sir, I do.


Phe. What makes ye scouting in these Quarters then?


Thr. Under your Protection, Gentlemen. --


Phe. Do You know the Protection you're to expect? Take this from me Good Man
Captain, if I find you sauntering here again in the Street, you mustn't think
to sham me off with; I was looking for a Friend, and my Business lay this way,
for you're like to have no Quarter.


Gna. Soft Sir, that is not like a Gentleman.


Phe. I Will be no worse than my word.


Gna. Indeed Sir, I didn't think you would been so huffy.


Phe. You Will find it just so.


Gna. Pray be pleased, Gentlemen, to hear your Servant Gnatho, a word or two,
and then do what you please in this Affair.


Phe. Lets hear't then.


Gna. Do you Captain move a little a Thraso stands off. one side: In the first
place, let me beseech ye both to be persuaded, that whatever I do in the case is
purely for my own sake, but if your Interest should jump with mine, you 're
unwise if you don't follow my Council. ^


Phe. Out with it then.


Gna. What if you took the Captain in amongst ye too? Fawningly.


Phe. How amongst us?


Gna. Consider a little better Sir. -- Why faith you and your Mistress live
very high, for you're used to an easy splendid Life, you have but a small
Allowance your self; and this Thais will be requiring more: Now that you may
supply her, and save your own Pocket, there is not a fitter or more convenient
Ur^nsil than this Blunderbuss i'th^whole World. F^^ (...), he has Money enough
at Command, and ^^e more prodigal on it than he. Then he is a Soft-headed Fool,
and a Half-witted Coxcomb, and a sumbling Fellow that snores Night and Day. Ye^
needn't fear the Gentlewoman's falling in Love with him; then you may kick him
out of Doors when you please. --


Phe to C^erea. What had we best do?


Gna. Then, Sir, what is best of all, he treats as high and nobly as a Lord.


Phe. Ten to one but we may have occasion for this fool sometime or other.


Che. I Am of that Mind too.


Gna. Gentlemen, I Am obliged to you. -- One Favor more let me beg of you, to
admit me also into your retinue. -- I Have been cleaving of that Block long
enough already.


Phe. We grant it.


Che. And with all our Hearts.


Gna. Then in requital Gentlemen, here is to the fleecing and jeering the Cully
to death.


Che. That Is well.


Phe. He deserves it.


Gna. to Thraso. Now noble Captain you may make your Approaches.


Thr. And prithee how do Matters stand?


Gna. How? the Gentlemen didn't know your worth: when I had informed 'em of
your good Qualities, and given 'em a Character of ye as your noble Actions and
Virtues deserve, your Suit was granted. Aside to him.


Thr. to Gnatho. Well have thou done. -- To Phe. and Che. Gentlemen, great
thanks do I return ye. I never was any where, but that all kind of People loved
me most dearly.


Gna. Didn't I tell ye how choice he was of his Expressions; polite upo' my
word.


Phe. Now there is nothing wanting; You may retire.

Turns to the Spectators. Gentlemen adieu, one kind Applause.


The end of the Eunuch.
THE Self-Tormenter. A COMEDY, Acted at the Feast of Cybele, WHEN L. Valerius
Flaccus, and L. Cornelius-Lentulus were Curule Edil's, By the Company of
Ambivius Turpio.

It was taken from the GREEK of Menander;

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was perform*d the
first time of Acting on unequal FLUTES; The second time on two Right-handed
FLUTES.

This PLAY was Acted a Third time,

Under the Consulship of Titus Sempronius, and M. Juventius.

A. U. C. 591. Ante Christ 159.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Chremes, An old Gentleman hard by Athens, of a Nature somewhat strict and
severe; very busy, and a great Meddler. Menedeme, A Gentleman, Chremes's
Neighbor; The Self-Tormenter; of a Melancholy, yet of a softer and milder
Disposition than the former. Clitipho, Chremes's Son, a hot, wild Spark; a
loose Lover, and somewhat stubborn to his Parents. Clinie, His Friend,
Menedeme's Son; of a civil, courteous, pliant Temper, passionately in Love with
Antiphila. Syrus, Servant to Clitipho, and his Instructor; a very slye, subtle,
active, intriguing Fellow: always plotting against Chremes, and tricking him of
Money. Dromo, Servant to Clinie.
WOMEN.
Sostrata, Chremes's Wife, of a soft, easy and indulgent Nature, very
submissive to her Husband. Antiphila, A young Gentlewoman; Clinie's Mistress,
very innocent, modest, loving, and faithful. Bacchis, A noted Courtesan, kept
by Clitipho, a haughty, proud, impudent, drinking, chargeable Miss. Phrygia,
Her waiting Maid. Antiphila's Nurse.
SCENE, The Fields near ATHENS.

The TIME about Ten or Eleven Hours.

THE Self-Tormenter.
ACT I.
SCENE, The Country before Chremes's Door. TIME, The Shut of the Evening.
Enter Chremes, and Menedeme, with a Rake, etc upon his Shoulders, returning
from the Field. Chr. THo our Acquaintance is but very short, for it began, ye
know, upon your buying this Farm here next mine; that and little else being the
occasion of it, yet, either your own worth or your Neighborhood, which I
esteem next door to Friendship, makes me take the boldness with all freedom to
tell ye, that you do not seem to live as becomes either your Age, or your
Condition. For in the Name of Heaven and Wonder! what do ye do with your self?
what would ye be at? If a body may Judge by your Face, you write Threescore at
least. I don't know any that is better seated; has a prettier Estate; or is
better served than you: and yet you manage all the Business your self, as if
you had not a Soul in the World to help ye. Let me go out never so early in the
Morning, or come home never so late at Night, there you're at it, Digging,
Plowing, or Lugging something or other; in a perpetual hurry, without any
regard to your Quality or Person, I Am very certain you don't do this for your
diversion. -- Perhaps you will say, I hate to see my Work go on so slowly: Let me
tell ye, Neighbor, if you would bestow but half the Pains upon your Servants, that
you do upon your Ground, your Business would go on ten times faster.


Men. Chremes, have you so much leisure from your own Business, as to mind
another Man's that dosn't concern ye?


Chr. Common Humanity, Sir, obliges me to be so concerned, as I Am a Man: And
therefore you may take what I say either by way of advice, or by way of
enquiry: that if what you do be well, I may do so too; if ill, I may divert you
from it.


Men. I have Reason for what I do: you may do as you please.


Chr. Can any Man have Reason to torment himself?


Men. I have.


Chr. If there were any just occasion for this toyling and moyling of yours, I
shou'dn't be against it. But then I would gladly know what it is: and what ye
ha done to deserve so ill of your self.


Men. Hey ho! Weeps.


Chr. Never cry for the Matter: but whatever it is let me know it: Out with it:
Fear nothing, but ^^pend upon me. I Will either condole with ye, or ^vise ye, or
assist ye in what else I can.


Men. Would ye needs know^t then?


Chr. For the very Reason I just told ye of.


Men. I Will tell ye then.


Chr. But pray Sir, down with your Tools the mean time, and don't tire your
self so.


Men. By no means.


Chr. Pray what is your design in it?


Men. Ah! Let me alone, that I may not indulge my self one minute.


Chr. Indeed, Sir, but I will not. He forces the Rake, etc. from him.


Men. Ah! that is not fair.


Chr. Bless me! What a weight's here?


Men. I deserve it all.


Chr. Come, come; out with it now.


Men. I have an only Son, a Youth. -- What did I say I have? Ah Chremes! I had
one indeed; but whether I have now or no, I know not. --


Chr. Why de'e say so?


Men. I II tell ye, Sir. -- Hard by dwells a poor old Woman of Cornith, whose
Daughter my Son began to be so fond of, that it had like to have been a Match;
and all this without my knowledge; When once I found out the Intrigue, I began
to take him to task roundly; and not with the tenderness that is due to the
Weaknesses of Youth: But extremely sharp I was, after the common ranting way of
Fathers. I was every day taunting at him: How now, said I, De'e think to go on
after this vile rate? And keep a Mistress so openly, whilst I am living? No
Clinie, you're mightily mistaken, and don't know me, if you think so; I shall
look upon ye as mine, as long as ye do what ye ought to do; but if otherwise, I
know what I ought to do, and you shall find it. I know this is only the effects
of too much Idleness; when I was at your Years I didn't give my Mind to Women;
but was forced to go a Soldier into Asia to get a Livelihood; where by the War
I got me both Riches and Honor too. At last, Matters came to that pass, that
the poor Boy hearing the same thing pressed upon him so often, and so gravely,
was brought over. And thinking my Age and Prudence better Guides than his own,
he shipped off for Asia, and went Reformade under the King of Persia there, Mr.
Chremes. --


Chr. How Is that, Sir?


Men. He stole away without my knowledge, and has been gone a whole quarter of
a year Weeps


Chr. You're both to blame. Yet what he has done showed both an ingenuous
Temper, and a brave Spirit.


Men. When I heard of this Journey from some of his Intimado's, I went home
with a Heart full of Sorrow, my Mind half distracted, not knowing where to turn
my Head for Grief. I sat me down, my Servants all attend my beck, some help To
undress me, others run to lay the Cloth, and get my Supper ready? And all most
diligent to assuage my Grief? At sight of this, I thus began to muse: Alas!
Must so many sweat and toil for me alone? So many strive to humor me? So many
Women spend their time to adorn my House and me? Shall all these vast expenses
be for me alone? For me, whose Cruelty has driven hence my Son? My only Son,
who ought to have an equal share with me or more, since Youth can better relish
these Enjoyments. If I still keep this course of Life, no plague too great can
^^ght upon my Head. Whilst he thus lives in penury a^^cad, banished from home
by my my severily, Ill even revenge his wrong upon my self: I Will labor, spare,
(...), and scrape up all for him. With that I put my resolution in practice;
for I Have turned all things (...) of doors left neither Dish, nor Bed for use,
(...) pulld down all. I turned off all my Maids (...) Men too, except a few to
till my Land, which were no charge to me. I exposed all to Sale, and put House
to be Sold over the Door. I raised the Sum of two or three thousand Pounds, and
bought this Farm, where I toil and moil every day: I Am fully persuaded
Neighbor, I do less injury to my poor Child whilst I Am in Misery, as well as
he: nor ought I to take any manner of Pleasure till he return safe to be sharer
with me.


Chr. I believe you are an indulgent Father, and he as dutiful a Son, if mamged
to the best advantage: But indeed you didn't know his Temper, nor he well
yours: And when things are so, there is no living. You never told him how much
you valued him, nor had he that confidence in you which he might have presumed
upon. If this had been, things had never came to this.


Men. Very true, Sir, I confess; but I Am most in fault.


Chr. In troth, Sir, I hope the best yet, and do verily believe you will see him
safe at home ere long


Men. Ah! Heavens grant I may.


Chr. I Will warrant ve, Sir. -- This is Bacchus's Day; and I should be gald of
your company ac Supper to night, if you could conveniently.


Men. I must beg your pardon for that.


Chr. Why so? -- Pray Sir give your self some little Refreshment. Im sure your
absent Son would gladl^ have it so


Men. There is no Reason I that forced him to hardship, shoud shift it off my
self.


Chr. Is that your resolution?


Men. It Is so, Sir.


Chr. Good night to ye Sir.


Men. And to you too.


Ex. Menedeme with his Rake upon his Shoulder. Chremes alone. I profess he has
forced Tears from me, and I cannot but pity the poor Gentleman. -- But as the
day goes it is time for me to invite my Neighbor Phania to Supper. -- Ill call
in and see if he is at home. --

Steps to Phania's Door and returns. Oh, I see he need not be reminded, for
they tell me he is at our House already. -- I make my Guests stay for me now:
Ill in to 'em. -- But what makes the Door go? -- who is that comes out of my
House. -- I Will step a little a one side.

He retires. Enter Clitipho.
Clit. to Clinie within at Chremes's House. As yet you needn't fear Clinie:
they have not been such a while away; I Am confident she will be here, and the
M^ssenger too in a short time. Therefore s^ake off these causeless Fears that
so torment ye.


Chr. Who Is that my Son talks to? Aside.


Clit. Oh! Here Is my Father; just as I was wishing for him, Ill up to him. --
Sir, Im glad (...) met with ye


Chr. Wh^ what is the Matter?

(...) Sir, dye know our Neighbor Mr. Mean(...)?


Chr. Yes, very well.


Clit. And that he has a Son too.


Chr. Yes, I heard he is in Asia.


Clit. No, Sir, but he is now at our house.


Chr. Indeed!


Clit. I happened on him just at his Landing, and brought him hither to Supper,
for we have been very intimate form our very childhood.


Chr. Your News pleases me strangely. -- What would I give now that Mr.
Menedeme had come when I invited him, that I might have been the first to have
surpised him with these joyful tidings. I believe 'tisn't too late yet.


Clit. O Sir, have a care what you do, twon't be proper.


Chr. Why not?


Clit. Because he is in a great Quandary what to do with himself. He Is but just
come ashore, and is dismally afraid, both of his Father's displeasure, and his
Mistress's Inconstancy; whom he love; most entirely. 'Twas upon her account
that all this stir, and his parting from his Father was occasioned.


Chr. I knowt.


Clit. He has just now sent his Footboy into the City to her, and I made our
Syrus go along with him.


Chr. What says the young Man to the world?


Clit. What, Sir? why that he is the greate^ Wretch in it.


Chr. He the greatest? No man less. Does he want for any thing that the World
calls good? his Father's well, his Country happy, he has st^re of Friends,
Relations of good Quality, and (...) plentiful Estate. And these always prove
good (...) had according as the Man is; they are blessings (...) those that
know how to use 'em, but plagues (...) them that do not.


Clit. But, Sir, his Father was always a cro's old Gentleman. And I Am afraid of
nothing (...) much, as that his Passion should make him (...) his Son worse
than he deserv^s.


Chr. What he cross? -- I Will say no more, though, it is convenient he should
stand in some awe of his Father. Aside.


Clit. What Is that you say to your self, Sir?


Chr. I say, that however the Case stood, he ought to have staid at home. If
his Father was a little more harsh than agreed with his debauchd Inclinations,
he should have taken it patiently; for whom should he bear withal, if he cannot
with his Father? Which is most proper, think ye, the Father to live after the
Son's humor, or the Son according to his Father's: As for the young Man's
pretending he is hardly dealt by, it is no such matter. For the Severities of
Parents, (I mean such as are not excessively severe) are very much the same;
namely, they will not suffer their Sons to be always at the Bawdyhouse, nor always
at the Tavern; and will allow 'em but a little spending Money; and yet all this
is for their Childrens good. For when ones Mind is quite drencht in
Debaucheries, all that he does will have a notable Smack on it. And Son take
this for a Rule, Never to buy Wit, when you can have it at another Man's cost.


Clit. I fancy so.


Chr. I Will go in, and see how Supper goes forward You know how late it is,
therefore don't be ou^ of the way. Exit Chremes.


Clitipho alone. What unconscionable Creatures these same Fathers are! to
expect their Children should turn Philosophers in their hanging Sleeves,
without so much as touching upo' the Levities of youth. They measure us by
their own depraved Appetities as they are at present, and not as they were
formerl^. -- Well! If ever Heaven send me a Son of my own, he shall have an
extreme loving Father o^ me: For he shall not be afraid to make me his very
Confessor, and I Will be s^re to give him Absolution: I Will not do as mine, who
slyly insinuates his Morals by a side Wind. It vexes me, -- when he begins to
be Mellow, he will then tell me of all his old Pranks! but now he reads me a Lect
re, about Buying of Wit at other Men's costs. A crafty Gentleman in faith! Little
does he think that he has preached to the wind. My Mistress's Words stick more
in my Stomach by half than all his Preachments: Give me this fine thing, and
buy me that: And in faith I cannot answer her a word. There Is none so damnably
put to it as I. -- Although this Mr. Clinie has enough lying upon his own hands,
yet his Mistress is well and modestly brought up, and unacquainted with the
tricks of the Town: but mine is an imperious, craving, stately Dame: damnably
expensive, and as proud as the Devil. When she asks me for any thing, I return
her a Nod; but to tell her I have not for her, is a Mortal Sin.

I did but lately these damned Tricks espy, Yet all lies hushed and kept from
Daddy's Eye.

Exit.
End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Enter Clinie as from Chremes 's, and Clitipho behind him at distance. Clin. to
himself. HAd there been any good News for me about my Mistress, I Am sure they would
have been here before now. But I Am horribly afraid some Body has been tampering
with her in my absence. There are a thousand circumstances running in my Brain
that rack my Mind: Opportunity, Place, Youth, a wicked Mother that governs her,
and that would pawn her Soul for Half a piece. --


Clit. Mr. Clinie.


Clin. What a Wretch am I?


Clit. Have a care, Sir, that none of your Fathers Family drop out and see you
here.


Clin. I Will look to that. -- But I Am afraid there is some mischief toward, for
my mind misgives me strangely.


Clit. Do You use to judge of things, before ye know what they are.


Clin. Why, if there had not been some unlukiness in the wind, we should have
seen 'em before this time.


Clit. They Will be here in a minute, Sir.


Clin. But when will that Minute come?


Clit. You don't consider that it is a great way off.' And when Women, ye know,
fall once to Powd'ring and Combing, they are an Age a rigging out.


Clin. Ah, Clitipho, I Am very uneasy.


Clit. Bear up man, -- yonder comes Dromo and Syrus both together.

Enter Syrus and Dromo at another part of the Stage talking together.
Sir. to Dromo. -- Say^st thou so my Lad? Ha^!


Dro. Just as I tell ye.


Sir. But hold, -- Looking about him. Whilst we go twattling on, we have lost the
women.


Clit. Do You hear that Clinie? Your Mistress will be here presently.


Clin. Yes, I do hear at last; and now am come to some Life and Sense again,
Clitipho.


Dro. to Syrus Faith I don't wonder they lag behind; having drawn so great a
train at their Heels.


Clin. over-hearing Dromo. Confusion! How came she by such a Train?


Clit. Do You ask me, Sir?


Sir. to Dromo. Troth we did not do well to leave 'em so, for they have things of
considerable value about 'em, --


Clit. All Is past recovery.


Sir. -- As Jewels and fine Clothes. -- Besides it is somewhat duskish, and they
know not a step of the way. -- In sober sadness we have done like a couple of
Fools. -- Prithee D^omo, do you go back, and meet them. -- Make haste: what
do you stay for?

Exit Dro.
Clin. Oh cursed misfortune, how basely have my hopes deceived me!

Aside.
Clit. What Is the matter? what makes ye so concerned now?


Clin. So concerned say ye? -- Don't ye hear what a train of Servants, what
Jewels and fine Clothes she brings with her? when I left her but with one Girl
to wait upon her: where should she have all this, think ye?


Clit. Po! Now I know his Distemper.


Sir. to himself. Bless me! What a damnable crew is coming? -- I Am sure our
House will scarce hold 'em all -- What a plaguey deal will they eat and drink,
and how woefully our old Master will be put to it! -- But hold here are the
Sparks I wanted.


Clin. Oh Heavens! What Is become of true Faith? Whilst for your sake,
Antiphila, I fled my Native Country like a rambling Madman; you have feathered
your Nest finely at home, and left me in the midst of all my troubles. You, I
say, that are the cause of my foulest disgrace, and of my being so regardless
of my Father. Now I Am ashamed and troubled to the Soul, that he who read me so
many good Lectures upon the Tric^^ of those Creatures, lost all his Advice; and
was not able to make me leave her. But now it must be done: When it might have
been much to my advantage, then I would not, -- Not a Creature more miserable
than me.


Sir. aside. Faith Mr. Clinie has misunderstood every Syllable we were talking
of. -- To Clinie. Hark ye, Sir; you think worse of your Mistress than she
deserves: for as far as we can gather from circumstances, she is still the same
Woman; and her Heart as true to you as ever.


Clin. How Is that? prithee tell me. For I Would d^si^e nothing in the world sooner
than to find my jealousies falsely grounded.


Sir. In the first place, that y^o may be sure to know all: the old Woman that
went for your Mistress's Mother was nothing related to her; and she is gone to
her long home. This by chance I heard Antiphila tell the other, as I was coming
along.


Clit. Prithee what other was that? Hastily.


Sir. Good Sir, have patience, and let me finish my first Story, and then I Will
come to yours.


Clit. Dispatch it quickly then.


Sir. To begin; when we were got to the House, Dromo knocks at the Door; out
comes an old Woman: as soon as she had opened it, Dromo whips in, and I after
him; the old Woman claps to the Door, and falls hard to work again. And now was
the time or never, Sir, to learn how your Mistr^ss had spent her time in your
absence; since we dropped upon her unawares, and this gave us an opportunity of
making a Guess at their common Practices; which give the best Light into
Peoples Humors. We found her hard at it, making of Tapestry, meanly dressed in
a Suit of Morning, for the old woman that is dead, I suppose. She had no rich or
gaudy Attire on, but dressed like those homely Dames that have no Gallants to
see: Nor yet daubed over with nasty paint: But her Hair loosly ^hevelled, and
carelessly thrown about her Shoulders. Forbear! Clinie going to speak.


Clin. Prithee honest boy, don't feed me like a Fool.


Sir. Well Sir, the old woman she spun: besides her there was a Girl weaving
too with patch't Clothes, ill dressed and very nasty.


Clit. If this be true, Mr. Clinie, as I fancy it is, you are the happiest Man
alive. Didn't you mind how sluttish and nasty he said the Maid was? That Is a
certain sign Man, the Mistress is honest' when the Confident goes in Rags: for
it is always the way to Fee the Chambermaid first, before they make court to
the Mistress.


Clin. Prithee, dear Rogue, on with your Story, but have a care of currying
Favor by your Flams. What said she, when you first mentioned me?


Sir. When I told her you were landed; and desired her company forth with, she
immediately threw aside her Work, and could not speak for crying; which, you may
be sure, was all for your sake.


Clin. As I hope for Mercy, I Am so transported, I scarce know where I am, I was
in such a fright but just now.


Clit. I knew, Sir, there was nothing amiss. -- Now it is my turn, Syrus: Let Us
know who that other was.


Sir. We Have brought Madam Bacchis your Mistress, Sir.


Clit. How? -- Bacchis do you say? Why ye cursed Dog whither do you bring her. In a
passion.


Sir. Whether do you bring her? Why to our house, Sir.


Clit. What to my Father's Sirrah? Hastily.


Sir. Yes, to your Father's.


Clit. To see the Impudence of this Rascal!


Sir. Hark ye, Sir, Eaint Heart never won fair Lady.


Clit. Look to it Sirrah, shall you pretend to advance your own Reputation upo'
my cost: If you step but the least awry, I Am gone to all intents and purposes
-- And what will ye do then?


Sir. But Sir --


Clit. But, What?


Sir. I Will tell ye, if you will give me leave.


Clin. Prithee give him leave.


Clit. Well then.


Sir. The case is thus, -- as if --


Clit. Pox he is going to tell a Story nine hours long.


Clin. I think so too. -- Therefore, Syrus, leave fooling, and come to the
point.


Sir. In troth Sir, I can hold no longer, you're grown so troublesome, that
there is no dealing with you. -- To Clitipho.


Clin. to Clitipho. Faith you should give him the hearing tho, therefore pray
be silent a little.


Sir. You Would have a Mistress, Sir; you would enjoy her, and be able to present her
too, but you would not run any hazard for her. Really you are wondrous wise: If
it be wisdom to aim at that which can never be. You must either take the Hazard
with the Prize, or lose the Prize and run no Hazard. Now, Sir, take which side
you love best: Tho I Am very certain the Plot I Have laid is both well contrived
and safe: First, you will have the liberty of your Mistresses Company under your
Father's Nose, without the least danger; and then by the self-same means I
shall find a Trick to nib the old Man of the Money you promised her; for which
you have so often deafen'd my Ears with your Duns. And what a Duce would you have
more?


Clit. Provided it be as you say.


Sir. Hang your Provideds, cannot you run the hazard on it.


Clit. Well, come on then, your Plot, how is it laid?


Sir. Your Mistress shall go for this Gentleman^s --


Clit. Very fine! -- But prithee, what shall we do with his own then? Shall she
be clapped upon his Back too, as tho one was not enough to crack his Credit.


Sir. We'll have her to your Mother's.


Clit. What to do there?


Sir. Faith, Sir, 'twill take up nine hours indeed to give ye the Why's and
Wherefore^s. It Is enough, that I have reason for it.


Clit. Mere stuff! I can see nothing as yet to remove my suspicions.


Sir. Hold Sir. -- If you're afraid of this Plot, I Have another in my head,
which I Am sure you will both own to be safe enough.


Clit. Prithee invent me such a one as that.


Sir. That I will in an instant. -- I Will give 'em the meeting, and pray 'em to
face about, and march home again. -- Scornfully.


Clit. Hah! What Is that you say?


Sir. I Will rid you of your Fears with a vengeance: that you may be sure to
^leep sound in a whole Skin. -- Is going off.


Clit. to Clinie. What had I best do now?


Clin. What you Sir? Why even make good use of --


Clit. Hark ye, Syrus, tell me truly what I should do.


Sir. Away, away, you will wish ye had, when it is too late.


Clin. Here Is a fair Opportunity offered; make good use on it while you may; you
aren't sure of having the like again.


Clit. Why, Syrus, I say.


Sir. Bawl till your Heart ache, I Will on for all that.


Clit. to Clinie. In good earnest you're in the right on it. -- But hark ye,
Syrus; Syrus I say; foho Syrus. -- Aloud.


Clit. No Syrus; I throw my self, my Love, my Reputation too into your Hands.
Ill leave all to your determination; but see you discharge your Trust well.


Sir. That Is Counsel worth laughing at in faith: As tho my Game was not at stake
as well as yours. If an unlucky cast comes up, and spoils all our Designs,
you will come off with a Reprimand, or so; But poor Pilgarlick must meet with a
dry beating. Upo' this Score, I must mind my Business very colsely. But you
must beg this Gentleman to gallant your Mistress the while.


Clin. He may be sure of my assistance: And as the case stands I Am obliged to it.


Clit. Oh, Sir, I Am extremely engaged to ye.


Clin. You must take care Bacchis ben't out in her part.


Sir. Oh, she has her Lesson to a tittle.


Clit. For my part, I wonder how you could wheedle her to come so soon; for she
sometimes would scorn the very best of ye.


Sir. I took her in the very critical minute, which is the most nicking
Advantage: For who should I find there but a sneaking Captain paying his
Devoirs for one single Night's Lodging; she managed this poor Devil tightly
with such Artifice, as to inflame his greedy Appetite by keeping him at Bay:
and at the same time to do a Signal piece of Service to you. -- But hark ye
Sir, have a care of making any false step: You know how plaguey shap-sighted
your Father is in these Intrigues. And I can tell, how hard it is for you to
keep your self within compass. You must have a mighty care of all
double-meaning expressions, of casting a Sheep's Eye over your left Shoulder;
of sighing, spitting, humming and jeering. --


Clit. Faith I Will act it rarely. --


Sir. See that you do then.


Clit. -- You your self shall admire me for it


Sir. But see how quickly the Ladies come after us?


Clit. Where are they? why dye hold me Boy: To Syrus holding him.


Sir. You Have nothing to do with her now.


Clit. Right, not before my Father. -- But till then. --


Sir. No nor till then neither.


Clit. Come let me go.


Sir. still holding him. Not a step, I say.


Clit. Prithee, for one minute.


S^r. That I forbid too.


Clit. A civil Respect at least.


Sir. Get ye gone, if you have any Guts in your Brains.


Clit. Well I Am going, but what must Clini^^ do?


Sir Stay here


Clit. He has a fine time ont!


Sir. Troop off, I say.

Clitipho walks on a little a one side. Enter at a distance Bacchis, Antiphila,
Dromo, Waiting-Maids, etc.


Bac. In troth, dear Philie, I cannot but commend ye, and think ye very happy;
in being so careful as to make your good Behavior wholly answerable to your
Beauty. As I Am a Sinner, I don't admire that all the Sparks of the Town should
die for ye, since your Discourse discovers the Sweetness of your disposition:
For my part, when I come to consider the Life and Conversation of all such as
you, who are n't common to every Coxcomb, I don't wonder to find ye so modest
and virtuous, and our selves so very little like ye. For you it is the best way
to be honest, but our Gallants will not suffer us to be so. Our Beauty makes 'em
adore us for a while, but when that is decayed, the Sparks are mad for a new
Face: So that if we didn't provide for our selves in time, we might even pine
away the rest of our days in a Desert. For you Madam, that take up with a
Person, whose Age and Nature is correspondent with your own, he wholly keeps
himself to you, and by mutual consent your Loves are made firm; and nothing can
ever separate your Hearts.


Ant. I Am little acquainted with others; my self I know well enough, who always
take care that my dear Clinie's Happiness shoud be the Foundaof my own.


Clin. overhearing. Ah, my dear Antiphila, it is for thy sake alone that Im come
home again; for whilst I was from thee all the Hardships I was put to were
nothing to the being deprivd of thy sweet Company.


Sir. to Clitipho peeping from his Covert. I believe him, Sir.


Clit. I can scarce contain my self old Boy! Is It not a plaguey thing to be
debarred of one's Humor? Hah!


Sir. to Clitipho. As far as I can perceive your Father will make ye smart
fort, if you bent gone.


Bac. What young Gentleman's that which ogles us so?


Ant. seeing Clinie. Oh, -- lend me your hand (...) beseech ye.


Bac. For Heaven sake, what all ye my Dear?


Ant. I Am going. -- Faints away.


Bac. Help. -- Alas, poor Soul! -- Antiphila ^ecovers a little. How came this
Fit upon ye my Philie!


Ant. in a soft Tone Do I see my Clinie, or do I dream.


Bac. Who's that you see?


Clin. My Life, my Soul; Heavens bless thee. -- Embracing.


Ant. And thee also my long wished for dear Clinie.


Clin. How is it my dear?


Ant. Well, since I Have got you again my Dear.


Clin. embracing. And have I got you again, my Dear, within these Arms? You
that I have so passionately longed for?


Sir. Come, come, turn in: The old Man and his Supper stays for ye. Exeunt
omnes.


End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Chremes alone. It Is just break of Day: And why shou'dn't I knock at my
Neighbor's door now, and give him the first news of his Son's Return, tho the
young man I fancy will hardly thank me for it? But when I see the poor
Geneleman take on so extremely for his Sons leaving him, how can I find in my
heart to keep from him this unexpected comfort, since his Son will be never the
worse for it neither? This must not be. For I will assist the old man to the
utmost of my power. And as I perceive his Son and mine help one another all
they can, and go hand in hand together in all their concerns; so it is but
reasonable that we their Fathers should do one another all the good Offices we
are able.

Enter Menedeme on the other side of the Stage with a Rake, etc. upon his
Shoulders. Men. to himself. Either I Am born under the Fatality of an unlucky
Planet, or that old Sayings worth nothing, that Time cures all things. For this
absence of my Son afflicts me every day more and more; and the longer he is
away, the more I desire to see him again, and the more I miss him.


Chr. to himself. Oh, yonder is the Gentleman himself coming from home; I Will to
him, and discourse. -- Morrow to ye Neighbor, I Am come to ye with such News,
that I believe you will be heartily desirous to know what it is.


Men. Why, Sir, have ye heard any thing of my Son then?


Chr. He Is safe and sound. Sir.


Men. Where is he, I beseech ye?


Chr. At my House, Sir.


Men. What my Son?


Chr. Yes, your Son.


Men. Is he come home then?


Chr. Yes, indeed.


Men. My Boy Clinie come home?

Throws down his Rake, etc.
Chr. Even so.


Men. Let Us be going then. -- I beseech ye, Sir, bring me to the sight of him.


Chr. But he would not for the World have ye know he is come back: He avoids your
Presence upon the account of what he has done; and is now afraid, you should be
more severe than ever.


Men. And didn't you tell him, how I was quite another man?


Chr. Not I Sir.


Men. Why didn't ye?


Chr. Because if he finds you so soft, and give way so easily, 'twill be the
whose for him and you too.


Men. It cannot be helped; for I Have been too too severe a Father already.


Chr. Ah, Sir, you are always upon the extremes, either too profuse or too
sparing; you run into the same inconveniences by one as well as the other.
Formerly you forced your Son out of Doors rather than suffer him to keep a
Mistress, who then was contented with a little, and would have been glad to
have snapp'd at any thing: but when she was forced, by his leaving her, to grow
common, and now cannot be kept without a Mine of Money; now you give him his
full liberty. For to let you know how she is accoutred for the Ruin of Mankind;
she carries at her Heels no less than ten or a dozen Waiting-Maids, with a
great luggage of Golden Trappings; were a Prince her Gallant, he d be put to t,
to maintain her: Don t you think to do it.


Men. Is she at your House too?


Chr. She at my House say ye? -- Yes, to my cost, I ve made but one Treat for
her and her Retinue; and I faith, if I make another, I must be forced to run my
Country. To omit other Charges, what a cursed deal of Wine has she consumed me
by her tasting and sipping only: Crying, Good old Father, this same Wine is too
rough, pray, Sir, let us have some that is more smooth. I pened every Cask and
Pipe in my Cellar, and all my Servants we: as busy as so many Bees: And this
was but one nights work; what will become of you then when they ll prey upon ye
every day? As I Am ^ living Soul, Sir, I heartily pity your condition.


Men. Even let him do as he lists: Let him take it, spend it, make Ducks and
Drakes of it; I'^^ resolved to bear it, so I can but have him at h^m^ with me.


Chr. If you be so much set upon it: I believe 'twill be much the better way to
conceal your Design, what're you allow him.


Men. What would ye have me do?


Chr. Any thing rather than that you intended^ Cannot you convey him Money by a
second hen^ and let your own Servant bubble ye or so? And the truth on it is, I
have an inkling that that are about some such thing already; and that they are
contriving how to do t most cleverly. My Man Syrus, he whispers with yours, and
the young Men they lay their Heads together too: And it is better to lose a Pound
this way than a Penny t other. 'Tisn't so much the Money, Neighbor, that is to
be minded, as the manne^ how to give it him with the least danger: For if he
once finds which way the Stream runs, and that you had rather part with your
Life and Money too, than lose him: Phy! What a vast Gap d^ you lay open to his
Debaucheries? So that your Life will be a burden to ye; For too much Libe^^
corrupts an Angel: Whatsoever Crotchet comes in his Crown, he will be for it
without considering whether his Demands be reasonable or no: You ll never
endure to see your Estate go to wreck, and your Son spoiled into the Bargain.
If you refuse him a Farthing; he will fall to the old Dog-trick, which he finds
will work most upon ye, and threaten to be gone forsooth.


Men. All this seems true and probable enough.


Chr. Troth, Sir, I could not sleep one wink this Night for racking my Head to
restore to you your Son.


Men. Your hand Sir. -- I hope, Sir, you will go on as you ve begun.


Chr. I m ready to serve ye.


Men. Do You know what I mean, Sir?


Chr. Let Us hear't.


Men. That you would hasten 'em in the Design, you perceive they have, of getting
the Money from me: For I long to give my Boy what he wants, and as much to have
a sight of him.


Chr. I Will do my best, Sir, I must take my Syrus in Hand, and give him his
Leston. -- But hold some body's coming out of my House. -- You had best get out
o'th way; for fear they perceive we are plotting together. A little business at
present calls me hence; for my Neighbor Simus and Crito have some difference
about some Lands, and made me their Referree: I Will go tell 'em they must not
look for me to day, as I promised them: I Will be here again in a minute.


Men. Pray Sir do. Exit Chremes.


Menedeme alone. Bless me! What an odd composition Men are of! that they should
see further and judge better of other Peoples Affairs than their own? It may
be, because in our own concerns we are too much prepossessed by our Passions of
Joy or Grief. This same Chremes now, how much wiser he seems to be for me, than
I am for my self? Going off.

Enter Chremes.
Chr. to Mededeme as he is going off. I have got clear of them both, that I may
serve you with more leisure.

Exit Menedeme with his Rake, etc. upon^h Shoulder is Enter Syrus at a
distance.
Sir. to himself. Well, Friend Syrus, take this way or that way, Money must be
had by hook or by crook; and our old Fox must be trapped too.


Chr. partly hearing. I wan't mistaken I perceive when I said they were about
some such design. Clinies Man is a poor dull Tool, but mine is a sharper; he
must do the Business.

Aside.
Sir. Whose Tongue's that? -- Zookers all is spoiled? Did he hear me trow or no?
-- Aside,


Chr. Syrus!


Sir. What is it you, Sir?


Chr. What Is your business here?


Sir. No great matter. -- You're a brave Man, Sir, to be stirring so early this
morning, after such a rattle last Night.


Chr. Why there was no hard drinking.


Sir. No hard drinking, say ye? marry, I think, you re heart of Oak.


Chr. No more of that.


Sir. This same Wench of Clinie's is a good sort of a Wench, and pleasant
enough.


Chr. Ay, so I found.


Sir. And in troth has a very good Face too.


Chr. So so.


Sir. Tho, not comparable to the Women in your days: but really as the World
goes now, the Woman is very well: And I don't wonder Clinie is so desperately
smitten: But he has a Father, a covetuous, miserable, griping old Hunks, our
next Neighbor; Do ye know him Sir? -- Because he is afraid he should be
starved himself, he has turned his poor Son out a grazing; D^n^ you know what I
say to be true?


Chr. Ay, Why not? -- There Is a Rascal deserves the Strapado.


Sir. What Rascal, Sir?

Fearfully.
Chr. The dull Rogue Clinie's Man. --


Sir. (Faith Syrus I was plaguily afraid of thy Corpse.

aside.
Chr. -- That suffered all this.


Sir. What could he do?


Chr. What could he do? Why he might ha found out some device, or invented any
slight to have helped the young Gentleman to Money for his Mistress: And so have
saved the stingy old Fellow from all this vexation, whether he would or no.


Sir. You're pleased to rally Sir.


Chr. It Was no more than his Duty, Syrus.


Sir. Pray, Sir, do you approve of those that put tricks upon their own Masters?


Chr. Yes, if there be just occasion for it.


Sir. Very well I faith.

Aside,
Chr. Sometimes a little Tricking saves a great deal of Trouble: As in this
Case, it would have kept his only Son from rambling.


Sir. Faith I cannot tell, whether he is in jest or in earnest: However he
encourages me to that which I had a plaguey mind to before.

Aside.
Chr. And now, Syrus, why does the Fellow ^dle away his time so, till his
Master be forc d to march off a second time, for not being able to defray his
Mistress's Charges: Will Not he raise one battery against the old Man's Pocket.


Sir. The Fellow's a Fool, God bless him


Chr. You should give him one Push for the young Gentleman's sake.


Sir. Sir, I Would dot with all my Heart, if you would say but the Word; for I Am a
complete Master of that Art. --


Chr. So much the better.


Sir, -- I don't use to fail, Sir.


Chr. Why do it then.


Sir. But pray, Sir, take care to remember this, if it should chance one day to
be your Son's case, for you know we are all subject to failings.


Chr. Ihope, I shall have no occasion for that.


Sir. Troth, so do I: nor do I mention this, because I suspect any such thing;
but I say again, if it should chance to happen so, that you mightn't, -- You
see he is but young. And e'dad, Sir, if that time once come, I should manage ye
most nobly.


Chr. Well talk of that when that time comes. Do you mind your present ^ue?
Exit Chremes.

Syrus alone. Well, I never heard Master talk better than mine upon this
occasion. I could never have hoped to have had such a large Toleration for
Roguery. -- But who comes out of our House there?

Re-enter Chremes with Clitipho.


Chr. to Clitipho entering. What Impudence is this I pray? 's this your Trade
Clitipho? Do these things become you? Hah!


Clit. What did I do, Sir;


Chr. Didn't I see ye just now with your hand in the Courtesan's Bosom?


S^r. listening. Alls out, I Am quite broke. --

Aside,
Clit. Who I, Sir?


Chr. These very Eyes saw it: come don't stand in a lie. You deal basely by the
Gentleman that you could not keep your hands to your self. For it is a great
Affront to entertain a Friend, and then play an underhand Game with his
Mistress. How strangely uncivil you were last night at Supper too?


Sir. You re in the Right on it, Sir. To Chremes.


Chr. And how troublesome too? That, as I Am a living Soul, I was miserably
afraid it should ha cost you a Duel. I know the humor of these Lovers is to
resent things extremely, which no body dream of.


Clit. But, Sir, he has a mighty confidence in me, and knows I will not serve him
an unhandsome Trick.


Chr. What then? But you might have left 'em together a little while however:
Lovers have a thousand things to say and do, which your Presence is a curb to;
I know this by my self: for I have never a Friend in the world, Clitipho, that I
dare trust all my private Actions with: I Am afraid of my Superior, and ashamed
of my Equal, lest the one should take me for a Fool, and the other for a
Debauchee. -- Suppose it to be his Case: For it is our Duty to know when and
where to be complaisant to a Friend.


Sir. Do You mind what he says?

Aside to Clit.
Clit. Ay, to my Sorrow.

Aside.
Sir. Didn't I tell you of this before? But you have played the part of a very
staid and reserved Gentleman! Aside, and jeeringly to Clitipho.


Clit. Prithee hold your Tongue.


Sir. You are in the right, Sir.


Chr. I swear Syrus, I Am ashamed of him.


Sir. So I believe, Sir: and good reason too, for it grieves me also very much.


Clit. What never a done?

Angrily.
Sir. Faith, Sir, I speak as I think.


Clit. to Chremes. Mustn t I come nigh 'em then?


Chr. Yes, in a civil way, but not as you do.


Sir. aside. Our Plot's just sinking: He Will betray all before we get one Bag of
Money. -- to Chremes. Pray, Sir, will ye be pleas d to take a Fool's Counsel
for once? Chr. What Is that?


Sir. To order him to withdraw a little


Clit. Whither, I pray?

Angrily.
Sir. Whither? why whither you please, make room for the Lovers, and take a
turn the while.


Clit. I take a turn? To what place?


Sir. Pish! as if ye wanted a place to walk in: take this way, or that way, or
which way you will.


Chr. He says right, I Will have it so.


Clit. Confound ye for a Dog! for sending me to the De'el's Arse a peak.


Sir. Keep your Hands to your self then another time. Aside to Clitipho.

Exit. Clitipho.
Sir. What say ye, Sir? What do you think will become of this Son of yours, if ye
don't, with the utmost Authority of a Father, give him due Correction and
Instruction?


Chr. Let me alone for that.


Sir. Ay, Sir, and now is the time you must watch him.


Chr. I Will warrant ye.


Sir. Ay, so you had best: for he minds me every day less and less.


Chr. But hark ye Syrus, though! Have ye considered the business, I told ye of?
He' ye found any Plot according to your Mind yet?


Sir. You mean about the bubbling of Menedeme. -- S't Sir! I Have just now
stumbl'd upon one.


Chr. You Are a brave Lad: Prithee what is^t?


Sir. I Will tell ye, Sir: But as one thing brings out another. Chr. What then
Boy?


Sir. This same Bacchis is a plaguey Jade.


Chr. So I thought.


Sir. aside. Yes, if you knew all. -- Do but observe what a Whore's trick she is
going to play. Here lives an old Woman of C^rinth, to whom this Baggage had
lent above thir^y ^ounds. --


Chr. Very well!


Sir. This old Woman's dead and gone, and left her young Daughter whom she,
keeps in pawn for for the Money.


Chr. So then.


Sir. Her has this Bacchis brought along with the rest: and she is now in your
Lady's Apartment.


Chr. Well, and how then?


Sir. She baits at Clinie to lay down the Money, and then she will give him the
Girl for an Acquittance. But she demands the full sum of Thirty Pounds. --


Chr. Does she so?


Sir. Whoo! Do You question it?


Chr. I did -- But what do you mean to do next?


Sir. Who I Sir? -- I Will away to Mr. Menedeme's tell him that this Girl was
spirited away from Caria, that she is one of a rich and noble Family, and he will
get the Lord knows what, if he will ransom her.


Chr. You Have missed the Mark.


C^r. Why so, Sir?


Chr. I Will answer ye for Menedeme: I Will have nothing to do with her: What Is
your Reply?


Cyr. Pray, Sir, speak more to our Mind.


Shr. There Is no occasion for that.


Sir. No occasion, Sir?


Chr. No marry is there.


Sir. Why, Sir? I don't take your meaning.


Chr. I Will tell ye presently. -- Stay, stay, a little! -- What Is the meaning of
this bustle at our Door.

Enter at a diflance Sostrata, with a Ring in her Hand, and the Nurse.
Sost. to the Nurse entering. If I ben't mightily mistaken, this is the very
Ring I suspect my Daughter had about her when exposed.


Chr. What means my Woman by this talk, Syrus?


Sost. How is it Nurse, is it not the same think ye?


Nur. Truly, Madam, I said 'twas the same, as soon as e're I saw't.


Sost. But did ye view it well?


Nur. Oh, very well, Madam.


Sost. Do you go in; and bring me word whether she has bathed her self; the
mean time I Will wait here for my Husband. Exit Nurse.


Sir. to Chremes. She wants you Sir, you had best step and see what she would have.
I cannot guess why she is so in the dumps: 'Tisn't for nothing I Am sure -- I fear
the worst.


Chr. Pshaw! What should it be? She Is only big with Fool, and wants to be
delivered.


Sost. Hah, my good old Man!


Chr. And my good old Woman too.


Sost. I was looking for thee my Bird.


Chr. Well now, your pleasure.


Sost. First, I Would desire ye to believe that I would n't do any thing against
your Commands.


Chr. That Is very hard to believe, but if you would have me, for once I Will believe't.


Sir. This clearing her self aforehand bodes some plaguey Mischief. Aside.


Sost. Don't you remember, when I was once big with Child, you strictly charged
me not to bring it up, if it proved a Girl.


Chr. I smell out the business, you have brought it up then. Is Not it so?


Sir. If that be true, 'twill make a damned hole in my Master's Pocket.


Sost. No such matter: for I gave it to an old Woman of Corinth, a good honest
Neighbor of ours to expose it.


Chr. Bless us! Was there ever such a Simpleton?


Sost. Oh me! What hurt have I done?


Chr. What hurt quoth a? Angrily.


Sost. Indeed dear Husband! If I have offended 'twas ignorantly.


Chr. I know this well enough, though you had never owned it, that every thing
you say or do is ignorantly and foolishly. How many Blunders have you committed
in this one thing! First, had you, regarded my Authority, the Girl should have
been made away withal, and you shou'dn't have come with an idle flam of her
Death, when you did all ye could to save her. -- But let that pass, 'twas
Fondness, and a Mother's Tenderness: (...) bear with^t. But how rarely you have
forecasted ^he Business! And what were your Intentions? P^ay consider on it.
It Is most manifest you have betrayed your* Child to this old Woman, either for a
common Prostitute, or to be exposed to public Sale. I fancy you thought any
thing would serve turn, so her Life was saved. But why should one trouble his
Head with such Fools, who know nothing ^f Justice, Honesty or Reason: Be it
better or worse, for 'em or against 'em, they see nothing but what they list.


Sost. My dear Chremes! I confess I was much to blame, and am convinc^d: And
now let me beg of ye, as Nature has made you the Wiser of the two, so be the
more generous: And let your Goodness protect my Simplicity.


Chr. Well I Will forgive ye this Fault: But in sober Sadness, Wife, my good
Nature will be the spoiling of ye. But now let us hear the occasion of this
Story whate re it be.


Sost. As we Women are always very foolish and superstitious; so when I gave
the Child to be exposed, I took a Ring off my Finger, and sent it with her;
that, if she died, she might have carried away some Token of our Kindness.


Chr. That Is well; so you saved the Child's Life, and had your own Humor into
the Bargain too.


Sost. showing a Ring. Look ye, this is the very Ring.


Chr. How came ye by^t?


Sost. The young Gentlewoman that Bacchis b^ought with her, --


Sir. How! Aside.


Chr. What says she to it?


Sost. -- She gave it me to hold, whilst she went to the Bath: At first I took
no notice on it; but when I eyed it more narrowly, I knew it, and came running
in all haste to acquaint you.


Chr. And what can ye suppose or gather from this Gentlewoman?


Sost. I cannot tell without you will examine her where she had it, if she can
inform you about it.


Sir. My Plot's countermin'd: I find there is more in the Wind than I could wish
for; she is certainly my Master's Daughter, if this be true. Aside.


Chr. Is the old Woman alive ye delivered the Child to?


Sost. I don't know.


Chr. How did she say she had disposed on it?


Sost. Just as I ordered her.


Chr. What Is her Name, that we may hunt her up?


Sost. Philtere.


Sir. The very same, She Is as surely found, as I Am lost. Aside.


Chr. Come, Wife, let us retire.


Sost. How things happen beyond my Expectation! I was extremely afraid you would
prove as severe now, as when you gave your first Orders.


Chr. A Man cannot always do, as he would, if his Estate will not afford^t: Now my
Circumstances are such, that I should be glad of a Daughter: Formerly 'twas
otherwise. Exeunt omnes.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Syrus alone. IF I am not very much mistaken, I Am in a fa^^ way to be utterly
routed; all my forces are so miserably straightened, that I shall never come of^
safe, unless I find out some way to keep the old Man from perceiving this to be
his Son's Mistress. For to hope for one sowce of Money, or to think of topping
upon the old Fellow will be to no purpose. I shall come off nobly, and with
flying Colors, if I can compound for a Leg or an Arm. It goes to the very
heart of me, to have such a delicate bit snatched so suddenly out of my very
Chaps. -- What shall I go about? -- Or what shall I invent? -- I must draw a
new Platform. -- Hanged, Diligence out does the Devil. -- Suppose I go this way
to work. -- Pox, that will not do -- Suppose that way. -- 'T will be all one. --
But I believe this will do it. -- No, -- Yes, best of all -- I have it, I have it: I
believe I shall once more come to the fingering of that damned Run-a-gate Money.


Enter Clinie at a distance.

Clin. to himself. From this time forward nothing can happen to me that can
give me any disquiet: Such is the Happiness I Am surpised into. I Will so wholly
give up my self to my Fathers pleasure now, that I Will be far better than he
himself can wish.


Sir. aside. I was not beside the mark I see: The Gentlewoman is really
discovered, by what I hear from the Spark -- to Clinie. I Am heartily glad, Sir,
things are fallen out so favorable to your desires.


Clin. Prithee, honest Boy, did you hear on it too?


Sir. Yes, for I was by at the discovery.


Clin. Did ye ever know any one so fortunate as I?


Sir. No, Sir.


Clin. Let me die if I Am half so glad for my own. sake as for hers, whom no
blessing can be too great for.


Sir. I believe so too. Now Clinie it comes to your turn to do us a small
kindness: You must remember your Friend, that his business may be secured too,
and his Mistress be still concealed from our old Gentleman.


Clin. not minding him. Gods! --


Sir. Forbear these Raptures.


Clin. -- Shall my dear Antiphila be mine then?


Sir. Will Not ye let me speak, Sir.


Clin. What would have me do, old Soul? ^m so transported, prithee bear with
me.


Sir. Faith so I do, but sore against my will.


Clin. still not minding him. We shall live as happy as the Gods.


Sir. I see my Labor's lost.


Clin. Now speak, I Am ready.


Sir. But by and by you will not.


Clin. Yes, but I will.


Sir. I tell ye, Sir, there is some care to be taken, that your Friend's
Business be secured. Now if you go away and leave Bacchis at our House, my old
Master will immediately find her to be his Son's Mistress: But if you take her
along with ye, the Intrigue will be as much i^th' dark, as ever 'twas,


Clin. Ah, but Syrus, nothing makes more against my wedding than this; for with
what Face can I speak on it to my Father? Do you mind what I say?


Sir. Yes.


Clin. What shall I say to him? what excuse can I pretend?


Sir. What? -- I would not have ye say one word of untruth: but even plainly
tell him the whole business. Clin. How!


Sir. I Would have ye tell him your Passion for Antiphila, and that you would needs
marry her: but that this Bacchis is Clitipho's Mistress.


Clin. You demand of me nothing but what is just, reasonable and easy; I
suppose you would have me beg my Father to keep all from your old Gentleman.


Sir. You mistake me; I Would have your Father tell him the whole story directly,
from top to bottom


Clin. How! Are you mad or drunk? In Troth you will plainly ruin him: Prithee-tell
me how he can have his Business secured, as ye say?


Sir. Oh, I reckon this a M^ster-piece of my Cunning: In this P^^t I triumph in
having that mighty knack and ^^^ulty at Juggling as to cheat both of them, by
telling the truth: So that when your old Gentleman shall tell our old Gentleman
of his Sons Mistress, he shall laugh at it.


Clin. So you ^^ce more destroy all my hopes of Matrimony: F^^ as long as
Chremes believes her to be my Mistre^^; he will never venture his Daughter upon
me. ^^rhaps you don't care whether I sink or swim, so you can but serve
Clitipho's turn.


Sir. What ^ Pox! Do You think I Would have ye act the Cheats for ever? One day serves
my turn, till I Have fingered the Money, that is all: Not a bit longer do I desire.


Clin. Will one day serve? But what if his Father should find out all i^th mean
time?


Sir. Right! And what if the Sky should fall!


Clin. I dread what will come on it.


Sir. Dread? A Fiddle-stick! As if you weren't ^ble to slip your Neck out o^
the Collar, when ^ou please; you may clear all by making a full discovery.


Clin. Well come on then, let Bacchis be brought over then.


Sir. That Is very well. -- Here she comes.

Enter Bacchis and Phyrgia.


Bac. to Phyrgia entering. I faith this Rogue's impudent Pretenses have brought
me hither to a fair purpose; in hopes of the Thirty Guinea's he promised me:
And if he fools me now, he shall ^awn and cringe, till his Heart ache for me, to
come hither again, and I Will not do it: Or else I Will ^ake an Assignation. and
appoint a time (which he will be sure to tell his Master of;) and when Ciitipho's
Mind is big with expectation, I Will baffle 'em and not come at all; and then
Syrus's Back shall ^^undly smart for it.


Clin. overhearing. She promises very fair, Sy^^^.


Sir. Do You think she is in jest, Sir? She Will as fairly ourform it, if I don't
look to my hits.


Bac to Phrygia They Are in a dead Sleep sure; (...)l^ll rouse 'em with a
vengeance. -- Hark ye, ^^rygia, did you take notice of Charine's House which
the Man showed us just now?


Phr. I did Madam.


Bac. It Is the very next House on the Right^and. Phr. I remember it.


Bac. Hie you thither, full speed: For the Captain is just now with Charine at
^acchus's Feast.


Sir. What a Devil's to do now? Aside.


Bac. Tell him I Am here sore against my will, and am kept by force: But I Will
have a trick to get rid of 'em, and come to him strait. Phrygia going off.


Sir. S death! I Am at my last Prayers Aside. Stay Madam, stay, Where are you
sending her, I beseech ye? Call her back.


Bac. to Phrygia. Get you gone, I say.


Sir. The Guineas are just ready, Madam.


Bac. Then I Will stay. Phrygia returns.


Sir. You shall receive em in a minute.


Bac. As you please for that: Do You see me in such haste for 'em?


Sir. Pray, Madam, do you know, what you are to do?


Bac. What?


Sir. You must just step over to Menedeme's, and all your Train must go too


Bac. Ye impudent Dog, what do you mean? Angrily.


Sir. To coin Money for your Ladiship's use?


Bac. Do You think me a fit Person to play upon thus?


Sir. No, I Am in earnest, Madam.


Bac. Have I any business with you there?


Sir. No, Madam, but there I Will pay you the Money.


Bac. Let Us be going then.


Sir. Come this way, Madam.


Ex. Bacchis led out by Clinie, and Phrygia.


Sir. Soho, Dromo.

Enter Dromo.
Dro. Who calls?


Sir. It Is I.


Dro. What Is the Matter?


Sir. Bring over all Bacchis's Servants to your House quickly.


D^o. Why so tho?


Sir. Don't stand to ask Questions, let em carry all their Baggage with em too:
The old Gentleman will think his Charge is lessened as soon as his House is
clear o^th Lumber: Faith he little thinks he shall pay sawee for it at the long
run: And you, Dromo, if you have any Wit, take not the least notice of what you
know.


Dro. You Will say, I Am a perfect Mute.

Exit Dromo, and presently reenters with Bacchis's Servants, and their
Luggage, crossing the Stage.

After them enter Chremes.
Chr. to himself. As I Am a Sinner, I cannot but pity my poor Neighbor's Case,
to see him under such great Misfortunes, as to be forced to maintain this
Creature, with all her Family at her back. I Am satisfied he will not feel much for
a Week or so, 'cause of his longing desire to see his Son. But when he once
comes to find such a vast Charge to continue daily, and that there will be no
end on it, he will wish his Boy at the furthest Indies. -- Oh, here is Syrus very
seasonably.


Sir. Why don't I board him? Aside.


Sir. Ha! Sir!


Chr. What makes ye so merry?


Sir. I Have wished for ye this half hour.


Chr. I fancy you ve been tampering with the old Gentleman about somewhat.


Sir. You mean that which we discoursed of just now -- No sooner said, but done.


Chr. In good earnest?


Sir. Yes, Sir, in good earnest.


Chr. Faith I cannot forbear stroaking thee. Come hither ye little Rogue, I ll
remember thee for this: E'dad I will.


Sir. Ah, Sir, if you knew how prettily it jumped into my Brain.


Chr. Pho! D ye pride your self 'cause of your good Luck?


Sir. Troth, not I: I only speak the truth.


Chr. L^^ hear t then.


Sir. Clinie has told his Father that Bacchis is your Son's Mistress: and that
he brought her thither only to cast a Mist before your E^es.


Chr. Very well!


Sir. Pray tell me what ye think on it.


Chr. 'Twas admirable, I swear.


Sir. aside. Ay, if you knew all -- But mark what Plot's behind. -- Then Clinie
tells him he has seen your Daughter, is much taken with her, and has a Mind to
marry her.


Chr. What she that we ve just found to be ours?


Sir. Yes, Sir. -- And he will desire his Father to get your consent.


Chr. Why so, Syrus? I don't understand any reason for it.


Sir. Pshaw! you're so dull of Apprehension.


Chr. Like enough.


Sir. His Father is to give him Money for the Wedding, to -- you take me, Sir?


Chr. To buy him a Wedding-suit, I warrant.


Sir. Right, right.


Chr. But I Will neither give him my Daughter, nor my Promise.


Sir. No, Sir? Why not?


Chr. Why not, say ye? Do You think I Will marry her to a --


Sir. As you please for that; I didn't say you should let him have her for good
and all; but only pretend it.


Chr. I hate such Pretenses. -- Plot as you please, so as you don't make me one
of the Plot. Shall I promise to give my Daughter when I don't intend to do any
such thing?


Sir. I was in hopes you might.


Chr. Not a bit on it.


Sir. In Troth it might have been done cleverly; I had never undertook it, had not
you urged me to it.


Chr. I grant it.


Sir. But however, Sir, my Intentions were good.


Chr. I d have ye by all means do your best to cheat Menedeme, but then I d have
ye go another way to work.


Sir. So I will, Sir, we'll find out one. -- But for the Money I told ye your
Daughter owes to Bacchis, that must be paid down upo' the Nail. Neither will
you (I presume) shift it off by saying, What is t to me? Did she lend me the
Money? Was It done by my Orders? What had she to do pawn my Daughter, without my
consent? As for that, the old Saying s true, You may have much Law of your
side, and but little Equity.


Chr. I ll have none of these shifts.


Sir. Though others may do it, yet 'twon't look well in you, for the whole Town
counts you a rich Man, and very well to pass in the World.


Chr. Well then I ll go, and pay the Money my self,


Sir. You d better order your Son to do that.


Chr. Why so?


Sir. Because he now goes under the Name of her Gallant. Chr. What of all that?


Sir. Why if he carry't himself, the thing will look as if it had something of
truth in it: And by that means I shall the more dexterously bring about my own
design too -- Oh, yonder is the Man, you would best step in and fetch the Money.


Chr. So I will. Exit Chremes.

Enter Clitipho at another part of the Stage.


Clit. to himself. There Is nothing so easy, but it becomes hard to an
unwilling mind. This very walk I have taken, tho but a little one, yet how
faint t has made me. And now, I dread nothing so much as to be sent on another
Fool's Errand, and not suffered to come nigh my dear Bacchis. -- to Syrus. Now
all the Gods confound thee for a Rogue, and all the fine Tricks and Inventions!
-- Thou art always framing some damned V^llany to plague me (...) Angrily.


Sir. Keep ^ur Curses to your self (if you go to that) I Am (...) Ill Nature had
liked to have brought my Neck to a Halter. Hussingly.


Clit. OF my Soul, I wish it had! I Am sure 'twas no more than you deserved.


Sir. Than I deserved. -- How so pray? I Am glad I know so much of your Mind
before ye received the Money I just got ready for ye.


Clit. What could I have said less to ye? You went and brought my Mistress
hither, and then not suffer me to come nigh her.


Sir. Well, I have done, I Am cool again. -- But can you guess where your
Mistress is?


Clit. Why at our House?


Sir. No but she is not.


Clit. Where then pray?


Sir. At Mr. Clinie^s.


Clit. All Is gone.


Sir. Courage, Sir: You your self shall go to her with the Money promised her
presently.


Clit. Thou pratest like a Fool; Where should I have it?


Sir. From your own Daddy.


Clit. You only banter me. Smilingly.


Sir. You Will soon see that.


Clit. Nay then I Am made for ever, Syrus! -- Dear Rogue, let me buss thee.


Sir. 'St! there comes your Father. -- Have a care you don't play the Fool, and
make a wonderment at the Matter; observe the Motion; do as you're bid, and ask
no Questions.

Enter Chremes with a bag of Money.


Chr. Where Is this Clitipho now?


Sir. Say, here Sir -- Aside to Clitipho.


Clit. Here he is, Sir.


Chr. to Syrus. Have you told him the Business?


Sir. Most of it, Sir.


Chr. to Clitipho. Here take this Money, and carry it to her.


Sir. Zookers: Why do you stand like a Post? Why don't ye take it? [Aside to
Clitipho.


Clit. Giv't me if you please. Chremes gives him the Money.


Sir. Follow me as fast as you can. -- To Clitipho. -- But you, Sir, be pleased
to stay here a minute till we come back, for we ve no occasion to stay long
there. To Chremes.

Exeunt Clitipho and Sy^us.


Chremes alone.

So my Daughter has got Thirty good Pounds of me already, which account goes
for her Board. I suppose the other Thirty must follow for fine Clothes. After
this comes a round Sum for a Portion. Well! This same Custom is the Devil. Now
must I leave all Works to find some honest Fellow to ease me of that Money I Have
been so long scraping together.

To him enter Menedeme.


Men. to Clinie within. Dear Child, now do I think my self the happiest Father
in the World, since I find you so well reform^d.


Chr. overhearing. How sweetly he is mistaken. Aside.


Men. Chremes! 'twas you I wanted. -- Now, Sir, you may be the making of my
Son, my self, and Family; and I beg you would do it.


Chr. Good Sir, What would ye have me do?


Men. It seems you have found out a Daughter to day. -- My Son Clinie desires
your Consent to marry her.


Chr. Bless me! What a strange Man are you?


Men. What do you mean?


Chr. Have ye so soon forgot the Trick we talked of just now, which was to be
played to chouse you of your Money? --


Men. I remember it.


Chr. -- Why this is it they are now at work upon. --


Men. What is it you say Chremes?


Chr. -- I ll warrant ye, this same Bacchis at your House is my Son's Mistress
too; Is she not?


Men. They say so.


Chr. And you believe it?


Men. Yes, that I do.


Chr. Then they pretend that your Son has a Mind to be married: So that when
I Have promised him my Daughter, you may let him have Money to buy Wedding-Cloaths
and the like.


Men. That Is the business then, he wants it for his Mistress. Chr. No doubt
on it.


Men. Alas unhapp^ Man! My Joys are nipt in the bud: And yet I Would rather endure
any thing than part with him again. -- What answer, Sir, shall I carry from ye,
that he may not perceive I Have found it out or lay it to Heart?


Chr. To Heart say ye? -- Pshaw! Menedeme you cocker him too much by half.


Men. Let it be so: I Am gone too far to draw back: -- I beg, Sir, but the
continuance of your Favors.


Chr. You may tell him we met and treated of the Match; --


Men. Well, and what more?


Chr. -- That I Am ready to do any thing: that I like him for a Son-in-Law: And
lastly, if you please you may tell him I Have given my Consent.


Men. Oh that is it I Would have.


Chr. That he may ask ye for the Money the sooner, and you the sooner part with
it according to your Wish.


Men. That Is what I aim at.


Chr. In Troth, by what I can see, you will quickly be cloyed with this Son of
yours; but as the Case stands, if you have your Wits about ye, you must give it
him very cautiously, and little by little.


Men. So I will.


Chr. You had best go in and see how much he would have, I shall be at home, if you
want me.


Men. It Is that I Would have, for whatever I do I shall make you acquainted with.
Exeunt.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Menedeme alone. FOr my part, I must own my self to be somewhat silly, and slow
of Apprehension: But my Neighbor here, this same Assistant, Counselor, and
sage Direct ^^o mine out-does me a bar and a half. All the honorable Titles of
a Fool, Blockhead, Clod-pate, Ass, and Dolt, may well enough be appl'd to me;
but they will not come up to him: for his Folly is beyond all Expression.


Enter Chremes at another part of the Stage.

Chr. to Sostrata within. P^ithee Wife don't tire out the Gods with being so
unmannerly overthankful for having found out your Daughter, unless you measure
them by your self, and fancy they can t understand a thing without hearing it a
hundred times over -- to himself But in the mean time, what a-duce makes
Clitipho and Syrus stay so long at Mendeme^s.


Men. Who are those that stay so long, Chremes?


Chr. Hah; Mr. Menedeme are you got hither again? -- Well, Sir, did ye tell
your Son what I said?


Men. Every Syllable, Sir.


Chr. And what says he to it?


Men. He was as much transported, as if he had a mind to be married.


Chr. Ha, -- ha, -- he. --


Men. What do you laugh at?


Chr. My Man Syrus's Trick came just into my Mind. Men. Indeed?


Chr. This cunning Rogue has a knack of setting other Peoples Faces as well as
his own.


Men. You mean my Son only counterfeits his Joy. Chr. Yes, Sir.


Men. This very business came in my Head too.


Chr. Ah he is a pickled Rogue. Laughs.


Men. You Would say so indeed if you knew all. Jeeringly


Chr. Say ye so?


Men. Pray, Sir, give me the hearing.


Chr. But hold. -- First, I desire to know how much you have thrown away upon
'em: For as soon as you told your Son I had promised him my Daughter,
immediately Dromo, I Will warrant ye, clapped in a Word, that the Bride wanted
Wedding Clothes, Jewels, Attendants, and the like, that you might give 'em
Money for 'em.

Laughs again.
Men. Not a word.


Chr. How! not a word. In a maze.


Men. No, indeed.


Chr. Nor your Son neither.


Men. Not a tittle, Sir, but was only very urgent to ha the match struck up to
day.


Chr. You amaze me. -- But what did my Man, did he say nothing too?


Men. Nothing at all.


Chr. How so, I beseech ye!


Men. Nay, I cannot tell. -- But I admire that you should see other things so
well, and not this. -- Pshaw! It Is only Syrus has set your Son's Face too so
admirably well, that no Man could suspect in the least this Bacchis to be my
Boy's Mistress.

Jeeringly.
Chr. How Is that!


Men. I Will not say a word of their kissing and clipping: for I reckon that
nothing.


Chr. What more could be done to carry on the Counterfeit? Men. Pish!


Chr. What is it, I beseech ye?


Men. Well, observe then. -- I Have a little withdrawing Room at the back part of
my House; where a Bed was brought in and made up.


Chr. What followed?


Men. What? -- Why thither went Clitipho.


Chr. All alone? Men. Yes alone.


Chr. My Mind misgives me strangely Aside.


Men. Immediately after him went Bacchis


Chr. All alone too. Men. Ay, all alone too


Chr. I Am ruined.


Men. As soon as they were in, they made fast the Door.


Chr. How! -- Was your Son a Looker on all the while.


Men. Why not? He and I saw it together.


Chr. Ay, Menedeme, she is certainly my Son's Whore then. I am absolutely undone.


Men. How so?


Chr. I have scarce where withal to keep House for ten days.


Men. What! Are ye concerned that he should help his Friend a little?


Chr. No, but for fear he should keephis she Friend.


Men. Yes, if he should indeed.


Chr. Do You question that? -- Do You know any one of such a base and poor Spirit,
as to suffer his own Mistress before his Face to be. -- Men.


Men. Ha -- ha -- he. Why not? That I might the easier be imposed upon.

Jeeringly.
Chr. Do You jeer me, Sir? -- Now what reason have I to curse my own Stupidity?
How many signs ha they given me to discover the Cheat, had not I been a
downright Stock? what things have I been an Eyewitness to? Fool that I am! --
But as I Am a living Soul they shall not go off Scotfree: for immediately I Will --
In a Passion.


Men. interrupting. Have ye no Government? Have ye no regard to your self?
Methinks my Example might be of use to ye.


Chr. My Anger quite distracts me Menedeme.


Men. That you should say such a word now. Is Not that a great failing in you to
advise others, and be so wi^e abroad, and yet cannot help your self at home?


Chr. What course shall I take?


Men. The same which you said I was so defective in -- Make him sensible that
you are his Father, that he may venture to trust all his Secrets, wants and
desires with you alone, lest he seek his redress elsewhere, and cry, Good bw'ye
Father.


Chr. Ay, let him be jogging to Jericho for me, rather than here by his
Debaucheries bring his poor Father to a Crust. For, Menedeme, if I go on thus
to supply all his Extravagances, I shall quickly come to your Hedging and
Ditching.


Men. What a great many Troubles will ye pull down upo' your Head, if you don't
look about ye: you will show your self a rigid Father, and pardon him at last,
when he will not give ye one good word for your pains.


Chr. Ah, Sir! You cannot conceive how much it goes to the Heart of me


Men. What you please for that. -- But what say ye to my proposal? will you
marry your Daughter to my Son? or have ye another in your Eye, that you like
better?


Clit. No; I like him for a Son-in-law, and I like the Alliance too.


Men. What Money shall I tell him you will give with her? -- What no answer? --


Chr. pausing. Money say ye? Shakes his Head.


Men. Yes, Sir.


Chr. Ah, Sir! Sighing.


Men. Come Chremes, don't trouble your self, though it be but a little; Portion
shall break no Squares.


Chr. I designed her indeed no more than Three hundred Pounds, being all my
Estate would bear: But if you tender the Welfare of me, my Estate, and Son, you
may tell him I Have promised to give all I Am worth for a Portion.


Men. What Project are ye framing now?


Chr. You may pretend to wonder at it, and ask him too why I did it.


Men. And so I may, for I cannot conceive, why you should do it.


Chr. No? -- Why to curb, and cool his Couage, now solely bent to Luxury, and
Debauchery, and bring him to that pass, that he shall not know where to turn
himself.


Men. What do you mean?


Chr. Pray, Sir, let me have my Humor in this thing.


Men. Well! -- But would ye have me do so indeed?


Chr. Yes.


Men. Then I will, Sir.


Chr. Well, Sir, let your Son get ready, and send for his Bride. As for mine
I Will rattle him to some Tune, as Fathers should do their Children. -- But for
that Dog Syrus. --


Men. What will ye do to him?

Whilst Chremes speaks the next Exit Menedeme.


Chr. What? If I live, I Will so lace his Jacket, and curry his Hide for him,
that he shall remember^t as long as he has an hour to breath: -- Damned Rogue,
to think to make a Laughingstock and May Game of me; I Will be hanged if the
Rascal dare have served a poor friendless VVidow so, as he has served me. Walks
about in a huff.

Reenters Menedeme with Clitipho, and Syrus following after.


Clit to Menedeme entering. I beseech ye Mr. Menedeme, is it come to that then?
that my Father should so suddenly cast off all natural Affection? For what
Offense? What grievous Crime have I miserable Fellow committed? I do but what
all ^oung Persons commonly do.


Men to Clitipho. I Am sensible this is most hard and severe to you that bear
the burden of it: but I my self resent it no less than you, though I know not
why, and can give ye no reason for it, but only my extraordinary kindness for ye.


Clit. Didn't ye say my Father was hard by?


Men. Yes, there he walks. Exit Menedeme.


Chr. What do you blame me for Clitipho? what I have done was to cure thee, and
the rashness too: when I saw you of that sluggish Nature, and were all for the
present Enjo^ment, without considering the Future; I then took a Method to
secure you from want, and my Estate from ruin. And seeing I could not make ye
m^ ^ei^, as by Nature I ought, I had recourse to your highest Relations, making
over and trusting all ^o their Hands. There you will ever find Sanctuary for you^
Miscarriages, meet with Diet, Clothes, and a House to hide. your head in.


Clit. VVoe's me!


Chr. This is better than by making you my Heir, to let Bacchis run away with
all.


Sir. I Am undone! What a Storm has my Rogueship raised before I was a ware --
Aside.


Clit. Would to God I were dead!


Chr. Pray learn first what it is to live, when you have tried that and don't like
it, then die if you will.


Sir. Good Sir, will you hear me one word.


Chr. Speak then.


Sir. But may I freely, Sir?


Chr. Speak I say.


Sir. What Injustice and Madness is it, that he should be punished for my
Offense, --


Chr. It Is done; don't you meddle nor make. No body impeaches you Syrus;
therefore you needn't look out for a Sanctuary, or one to plead for ye.


Sir. Pray, Sir, what is your design?


Chr. I Am neither angry with you nor him, nor ought you to be so with me for
what I have done.

Exit Chremes hastily.


Sir. He Is flung away. -- Pox! would I had asked him. -- Clit. What Syrus?


Sir. -- Where I should have had my Bellytimber, since he has turned us out of
doors, -- You it seems may mump it at your Sisters.


Clit. Am I reduced to this then, that I must starve for want of Bread?


Sir. However whilst there is Life there is hopes. --


Clit. Of what?


Sir. -- Of a good coming Stomach.


Clit. Are ye so gamesome in time of Adversity? And not give me one push at
this dead lift?


Sir. Yes, Sir, I Am ready for it, and was hammering on it all the time your
Father was Schooling of ye -- And as far as I can perceive. --


Clit. Prithee what?


Sir. pawsing. You shall have it presently.


Clit. Pray what is it?


Sir. The Case is thus: For my part, I don't believe you are any of their Son.


Clit. 'How's that Syrus? Art mad? Hastily.


Sir. I Will tell ye my Reasons, judge of 'em as you please. -- Whilst they had
none but you, and you alone were all their Joy, they then cocker'd you up, and
gave ye any thing. But now they have found a Daughter, they have found an
occasion to send you packing.


Clit. That seems very probable.


Sir. Do You think he would have been so damned mad for a Peccadillo else?


Clit. I cannot think he would.


Sir. There Is another business to be well considered: All Mothers you know are
Pleaders for their Sons Faults, and constantly take their parts against their
Fathers: But here we see no such matter.


Clit. Very true, Faith; therefore good Boy, tell me what to do.


Sir. Even put it to 'em to resolve ye that Scruple, and don't mince the
Matter: If it be false you will work upon their Affections: If true, you will know
your own Parents.


Clit. Your Counsel's good, I Will follow it.

Exit Clitipho.


Syrus alone. E^gad this was a lucky Hit: for the less hope the Spark has,
he will much the sooner make his Peace with his Father, and at his own Terms too.
-- Perhaps the Toy may take him i^th' Crown to tie himself to a Wife; but
God-a-mercy to Goodman Jobber Knowles here. Strikes himself on the Head. What
noise is that? -- Oh, it is the old Man coming again. -- I must even seamper
for it -- Considering what has been done, I wonder he didn't order me to be
trussed up with a Whip-stitch before now. -- I Will betake me to Mr. Menedeme's,
and get him beg me off. I Will never trust this old Fellow. Exit Syrus.

'Enter Chremes and Sostrata.


Sost. In Troth, my dear Husband, if you ben't very cautious, you will make the
Boy do himself some mischief. And I cannot but admire how such a Whim came into
your Head.


Chr. You Will be a Woman still! Cannot I do any thing but you must thwart me
presently, Mrs. Impertinence? -- Put the Case I should ask ye what is amiss
in it, or upon what account 'twas done, you cannot answer me. Therefore why do ye
so confidently oppose me, ye old Fool?


Sost. Cannot I answer ye?


Chr. Yes, yes, you can, I Would rather grant that, than tell the Story a hundred
times over.


Sost. What an unreasonable thing it is to make me stand like Mum-chance at such
a time as this?


Chr. I don't make ye, speak your Heart out, I Will do as I please for all that.


Sost. Will ye so?


Chr. Yes by Cocksnowns will I.


Sost. You don't consider the ill consequence of it. He Will think himself a
Foundling.


Chr. A Foundling say ye?


Sost. Indeed, dear Husband he will.


Chr. And you may so too.


Sost. Oh I beseech ye, let them say so that hate 's most: Shall I say he is
none of my Son, that is my Son?


Chr. What? Are ^e afraid you cannot make it ou^ he is your Son whene're you
please.


Sost. What because he is so like my new found Daughter?


Chr. No, but because he is so like you in Humors, which is a more convincing
Argument by half: That way you will easily prove him your own: For he resem bles
ye extremely: There Is never an ill quality in him, but you have the same:
Besides there is not another Woman upon God's Earth, that could have had such a
Son -- But here comes the Youth. -- How gravely he looks. When you view him
thoroughly, you will know what he is.

Enter Clitipho.


Clit. to Sostrata. If ever there was a time, Mother, you took delight or
pleasure in calling me Son, I Would entreat ye to bring it to remembrance, and take
pity upon a Wretch: who craves and desires to know who are his Parents.


Sost. For Heaven's sake dear Child, never so much as think you had your being
from any but us Clit. I cannot help it. Sighing.


Sost. weeping Ah me! How could ye find in your Heart to ask me such a
question? As I hope for your Prosperity when we are dead and gone, you are
mine, and his And look to it (if you have any kindness for your Mother) that I
never hear such a word from you again.


Chr. And, Jackanapes, if you have any Reverence for your Father. Let me see
any more of these Tricks, and you had better eat your Nails.


Clit. What Tricks, Sir?


Chr. If you must needs know, I Will tell ye. The Tricks of an^ impertinent,
idle, cheating, drinking, whori^g, con^uining Debauchee. -- Believe what I say,
and don't donbt but that I am your Father.


Sost. Does this come from a Fahter's Mouth?


Chr. No! Though you had sprung out o^ my fertile Brain, as Pallas they say did
from mighty Jove's, I Would not endure my self to be disgraced by your lewd Tricks.
Angrily.


Sost. The Gods forbid that.


Chr. I know not what the Gods will do, but I Will do my endeavor to prevent the
worst. -- to Clitipho. You look about for Parents, which you don't want, but
not at all for what is most wanting, as how to obey your Parents, and to
preserve what they by Industry have got. How could ye have the impudence to
cheat your Father, and bring before his Face your -- I am ashamed to, name the
filthy Word before you Mother; tho you were not so to do the baser Act.


Clit. Alas! How mad am I with my self! How ashamed of my self! I cannot so
much as see which way to begin to pacify him.

Enter Menedeme.


Men. to himself entering. In Troth, Chremes handles the poor young Gentleman too
severely, and too roughly; Therefore I Am come to make up the Breach again. --
Oh, best of all; there they are.


Chr. Oh Mr. Menedeme, Why is not my Daughsent for to your House? And the
Writings drawn about the Portion we agreed upon?


Sost. For God's sake Husband never do that.


Clit. kneeling. Dear Father! I beseech ye to pardon me.


Men. Pray do, Mr. Chremes; let his Repentance win upon ye so far.


Chr. Shall I in my right Senses part with my whole Estate to a Baggage. --
I Will be twice advised first.


Men. That we'll take care to prevent.


Clit. still kneeling. Sir, if you tender my Life, forgive me.


Sost. Come, come sweet Husband do.


Men. Prithee Mr. Chremes don't be so obstinate.


Chr. What means all this? -- Well, I perceive, I must not do what I designed.


Men. Now you do like a worthy Gentleman.


Chr. But then upon this Condition, that he shall do as I shall think most
proper for him.


Clit. I Will do any thing, Sir, pray command me.


Chr. I Would have ye Marry.


Clit. But Sir. --


Chr. I Will take no Excuses.


Men. I Will engage for him, he shall do it.


Chr. But he himself says no such matter.


Clit. My Case is desperate. Aside.


Sost. What do you boggle for Clitipho?


Chr. Nay let him even take his own way.


Men. He shall do as you would have him.

Sost. Marriage is a Bug bear to Fools, but they that have tried it find it a
Blessing.


Clitipho to Chremes. Well, I Will obey your pleasure, Sir.


Sost. to Clitipho. In good Faith my Boy I Have a fine Girl in my Eye for thee,
which you cannot choose but be pleased with; it is our Neighbor Phanacrates's
Daughter.


Clit. Pho! That Carrat-pated, Wall-eyed, Pimple-faced, Hook-nosed Creature? It
goes against me, Sir.


Chr. Loy ye now, how nice he is grown! -- You may guess what his Mind has been
mos^ upon


Sost. to Clitipho. I Will tell ye of another then


Clit. No need of that: Since I must marry, I Have just one in m^ own Eye, which
I like very well.


Sost. That Is my good Boy!


Clit Archonides's Daughter.


Sost. That Is as well as I could wish.


Clit. to Chremes. Now, Sir, I Have one Favor to beg.


Chr. What Is that?


Clit. To pardon Syrus all he has done for my sake.


Chr. Well, I will. Turns to the Spectators.

Gentlemen,

Fare ye well, and give us your approbation.

Exeunt omn^^
The End of the Self-Tormenter.
THE BROTHERS. A COMEDY, Acted at the Funeral-Games of L. Emilius Paulus. WHEN
Q. Fabius Maximus, and P. Cornelius the African were Curule Edil's, By the
Company of L. Attilius of Preneste, and Minucius Protimus.

Flaccu's made free by Claudius, Composed the Mu^^^, which was performed on
Tyrian FLUTES.

It was taken from the GREEK of Menander;

And ACTED Under the Consulship of L. Anicius, and M. Cornelius.

A. U. C. 583. Ante Christ 168.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Micio, A Rich Citizen of Athens, a mild, sweet-natur'd old Gentleman, and a
Batchelour; extreme loving and kind to his Nephews Eschine and Ctesipho; the
first of which he adopts for his own. Demea, His Brother, Father to Eschine and
Ctesipho, a Country Gentleman, and a violent, angry, fretful, busy, meddling
Fellow; strict and severe to his Sons, and a great pretender to Education.
Eschine, Demea' s Eldest Son, adopted by Micio, and in Love with Pamphila; a
wildish, loose Spark of the Town, generous and free hearted, who by reason of
Micio' s Indulgence often runs into open Extravagancies. Ctesipho, His Brother,
as naturally vicious as the other, but for want of Encouragement is very
fearful and secret, concealing all from his Father, whom he lives with in the
Country. Hegio, Sostrata' s Kinsman, a downright, true-hearted, honest
Athenian. Syrus, Eschine' s Servant, a jubtle, insinuating, sh, ingenious
Fe^low, bold and saucy, almost always bantering, imposing and putting upon
Demea. Dromo, Another of Eschine' s Servants. Ge^a, A very honest, true and
faithful Servant of Sostrata 's. S^nio, A Foolish Woman-Merchant, alias a Bawd.
WOMEN.
Sostrata, A decayed old Gentlewoman of Athens. Pamphila, Her Daughter,
Debauched by Eschine. Gautha^^, Nurse to Pamphila.
MUTES.
Parmeno, Storax, and other Servants of Micio 's, the Musick-Girl, Rabble,
Attendants, etc.
Scene, ATHENS.

TIME, about Eight or Nine Hours

THE BROTHERS.
ACT I.
SCENE, The Street before Micio' s Door. TIME, Betimes in the Morning.
Micio speaks within Storax, I say! --

Enter Micio alone.
Mic. entering. O! No News, I see, of Eschine since last Night's Entertainment,
nor of any of the Servants that went to bring him home. -- Well, it is true, as
they say, if a Man be but out of the way, or outstays his time a little, he is
less concerned at the Scolding and Suspicions of a jealous Wife, than a fond
Parent is for a Child upon the like occasion For she, if you don't come in at
your Hour, takes it for granted, that you have picked up a Girl, or a Girl you;
or else that you're at the Tavern, or some other place of Diversion, or so;
however that you fare well, whatever becomes of the poor Soul at home. But for
me now, what a World of Thoughts, and what a rabble of Whimsies have I in my
Head, for this Boys lying out last Night? Lest he should be starved with Cold,
^^mbl'd into a Cellar, or have broke a Leg or an Arm. -- Lord! That a Man should
set his Heart upon any thing, and make it dearer to him than himself. And upon
the whole Matter, this Boy is none of my Son neither, but my Brother's, who is
of a quite different Humor from me. For my part, I always chose the quiet Life
of the Town, to live at ease, and (what the Wits count a Happiness) have never
been troubled with a Wife. But my Brother of the other hand has always lived in
the Country, pinching and taking a world of Pains; committed Matrimony, and was
the Father of two Sons: The Eldest I have adopted, brought up, esteemed and
loved as my own; I please my self in him, the only Creature I dote upon. Then I
do all I can ^o make him think as well of me: I deny him nothing, let him even
do what he will himself, and don't think it fit upon every turn to make use of
my Authority. In short, I have brought him to ^his, that he will conceal none of
the Levities of his (...), which others so industriously hide from their
Fathers. For he that will not stick to falsify to his own Father, or will put
upon him, will be ^^ne to make bolder with other People. It Was always my
Opinion, That it is much better to ^eep Children in order by Shame and
Generosity of ^nclination, than by Fear, My Brother and I cannot agree in this
Point, and my way of Breeding will not down with him. Ever and anon he comes open
Mouth to me. -- Why Micio! What do you m^an? Will ye be the Ruin of our Child?
Why does he whore? Why does he drink? Why do you maintain him in all this? You
let him go too fine: You are extremely silly in it. He Is extremely severe, say
I, beyond all Right and Reason: And truly, in my Mind, that Man is very much
out, that believes that Government purely by force should have more Authority,
and a better Foundation, than when it is accompanied with Tenderness and
Respect. This is my Logic, and I argue thus. He that is compelled by Threats to
do his Duty, will be wary no longer than you have an Eye over him, but when he
sees he shall not be found out he will even follow his own Inclinations. But he
that is governed by Love obeys most cheerfully, strives to make his due returns,
and is the same whether you are present or absent. It Is a Father's part to use
his Child so as his own choice rather than outward constraint, should put him
upon doing well. Here lies the difference between a Father and a Master: and he
that does otherwise, let him own that he understands not at all how to govern
Children. seeing Demea at a distance. But is not that the Gentleman I am
discoursing of? -- It Is he for certain. -- He knits his B^ows, but I know not
why. I believe he is upon the Railing pin, as he uses to be.

Enter Demea.


Mic. Brother! You are welcome to Town.


Them. Oh! Well met! You're the Man I want.


Mic. What makes you so off the Hooks?


Them. Is that a Question for me? when we have got such a hopeful Youth as
Eschine?


Mic. I said, it would be so. Aside. What has he done now pray?


Them. What has he done? He Is ashamed of nothing, afraid of no body, and looks
upon himself to be a lawless Man. I have nothing to say to old Stories, but
what a prank has he just now played?


Mic. What Is that I pray?


Them. Why? he has gone and forced open a Man's Door, broke into his House, beat
the Master and and all his Family most barbarously, left 'em for dead, and
carried off a Wench he had a fancy for, by force of Arms. Every body cry d
shame on it: What a world of People told me on it, as I came along! Nay, the
whole Town rings on it. To say no more, if he would but take Example, does he
not see how closely his Brother minds his his business, lives sparingly and
soberly in the Country? He would not do such a thing for the World. But,
Brother, in blaming Eschine, I blame you too, it is you have been the spoiling of
him.


Mic. There Is nothing more unreasonable than a Man unacquainted with the World;
that thinks nothing well done, but what he does himself.


Them. Why that pray?


Mic. 'Cause you take things much otherwise than ye ought. Believe me Brother,
it is no such mighty business for a young Fellow to wench and drink a little:
No, nor ^et to break a Door: If you and I were less extravagant, twasn't for
want of Will, but Money: And you count that your Virtue, which is only owing to
Necessity; which is not fairly done. For had we had where-withal, we should have
been as wild as others: And had you but common Sense, you would give that fine
Son of yours the same liberty, whilst he is young: rather than he should, when
your Bones are laid (which he has often prayed for) take the same wild Courses
at an Age, when they will less become him.


Them. 'Sbud! You're enough to distract one! Then, be like there is no harm in a
young Man to live at this mad rate!


Mic. Patience, good Brother! Prithee don't deafen my Ears with old Stories.
You gave me your Son, and by Adoption he is mine; if he be extravagant, I shall
bear the blame on it, and pay for it over and above. He treats, he drinks, he
dresses! It Is all at my Charge. He keeps a Miss too! I Will supply his Pocket as
long as I Am able, and when that fails, perhaps they will turn him out. Has he
broke any Doors? They shall be made good. Torn any Clothes? They shall be
mended too. I thank my Stars I Have where-withal to do it, and as yet not uneasy
under it. In short! Either leave off complaining, or choose who you will be
judged by: and I Will make it appear, that you're more to blame than I.


Them. Mercy upon me! Learn to be a Father by them that are so indeed.


Mic. You are his Father by Nature, but I have the care of him.


Them. Ay, special care! Scornfully,


Mic. Nay, if you're at that Sport, I Will be gone.

Offers to go.
Them. Will ye so? --


Mic. What should I stay for to hear the same thing a thousand times over.


Them. It Is only from my concern for him.


Mic. And I Am concerned for him too; but, good Brother, let us each concern our
selves as we ought; you for one, and I for t^other: For you to take care of
both, looks as if you revoked that grant which made him mine.


Them. Ah! Brother. Shakes his Head.


Mic. I Will have it thus.


Them. Will ye so? -- Well, if that is your resolution: Let him squander all,
damn all, himself and all, it is all one to me. If ever I^ speak a Syllable more.
--


Mic. Now you begin to be angry again.

In a Passion
Them. Don't ye think there is reason for it. Do I desire to have your rare Son
from ye? It grieves me, I must confess, for he is my own Flesh and Blood still.
If I oppose, I shall -- But I have done. You Would have me take care of one, and so I
will. Heavens be praised, he proves after my own Heart. Your Profligate will
feel the smart on it at last. -- Well! But I will not be too hard upon him. Exit
Demea.


Micio alone. I believe part of what he said is true, but not all: And truly
I Am a little moved at it, though I would not show my self concerned before him:
For He Is such a strange Man, that to pacify him you must cr^ss, and out-hector
him, though then he can scarce contain himself. But should I chafe him, and
blow the Coal, I should even be a Madman for Company. Yet I must confess my
EschiM has been a kind of a naughty Boy in this business What Courtesan has not
he visited? Or what pretty Face has not he presented some Toy or other to? In
fine, not long ago (sick I thought of these Creatures) he told me he would take
up and marry. I was in hopes the Heats of his Youth had been abated, and was
heartily glad on it: When on a sudden a new Fires broke out. But I Will know it
whatever the Matter is, and go see whether I can meet with my Gentleman at the
Change.


Exit Micio.

End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Enter Eschine with a Sword drawn leading in the Musick-Girl, and attended by
Parmeno and Storax, after comes Sannio, running with the Rabble at his Heels.

S^n. as out of Breath. HElp -- good Neighbors, -- I beseech ye^ Help -- a --
miserable, innocent -- helpless Creature.


Esch. to the Girl. Stand your ground my pretty Rogue, and don't be afraid. Why
do thou look behind thee? There Is no danger at all: And while I Am by, let him
touch thee if he dare.


San. I Will have her again, in spite of the World. --


Esch. Though he is a very Rascal, yet he shall not provoke me to give him another
beating to day.


San. Hark ye, Sir, that you mightn't pretend to be ignorant of my Profession,
I tell ye I Am a Woman-Merchant.


Esch. A Cock-Bawd you mean.


San. And one of the greatest Repute in Town. And don't you fancy now that you
shall get off by saying, 'Twas against my will that you were abused: By the
Lord Harry, I value it not a Straw. Assure your self, I Will trounce ye to some
Tune; your fine Words shall never make amends for the Blows you gave me. I know
these will be your Tricks and Excuses. I Am extremely sorry for it, I Will take my
Oath you did not deserve this usage. When the truth on it is, I Have been used
worse than a Dog.


Esch. to Parmeno. Run quickly before, Sirrah, and open the Door.


San. You had as good stay where you are.

Parmeno opens the Door.


Esch. to the Girl. Step in quickly with him, my dear Rogue.


San. stepping between. But I forbid that tho.


Esch. Come hither Parmeno. -- You are too far. -- Stand close to that Son of a
Whore. -- So, that is well. Take care to keep your Eye full upon mine, that when
I tip the wink, you may be ready to give him a slap in the Face.


San. I Would fain see that. Eschine gives the Girl to Parmeno, which Sannio
seeing, runs and catches hold of her.


Esch. Have a care, Parmeno. Parmeno strikes him.


Esch. to Sannio. Dog! Let go your hold.


San. Oh, monstrous!


Esch. You shall ha the second part of the same Tune, if you have not a care.
Parmeno strikes him.


San. Murder! murder!


Esch. to Parmeno. Hold, you go beyond your Commission. But better too much,
than too little. -- You may march off now you have got your black and blue
Livery, Mr. Sannio!

Exit Parmeno with the Girl.


San. What do you mean, Sir? Do you reign Lord and Master here?


Esch. If I did, I Would reward your Bawdship according to your deserts.


San. Pray what Authority have you over me?


Esch. None perhaps.


San. How! Do You know who I am, Sir?


Esch. Nor yet desire it.


San. Did I meddle with any thing of yours pra?


Esch. If you had, Sirrah, it should have been a dear meddling.


San. Then how comes it to be more lawful for ^ou to take my Goods, which I
honestly bought and paid for? Answer me that pray.


Esch. You had not best stand bawling at this rate before the Door; if ye plague
us any more, I Will have ^^ dragged in, and whipped as long as ye can stand.


San. Bless me! Freeborn, and whipped!


Esch. That Is your Doom.


San. Oh the Wickedness of the Man! Is this the eneral Freedom they talk of,
with a Pox?


Esch. Worthy Mr. Pimp! If your mad Fit's ^ver, hear me a word, if your
Honor's so dis^os'd.


San. Was It I that was mad, or you?


Esch. Let that pass, now come to the point.


San. What point? Whither shall I come?


Esch. Will ye give me leave to speak about your ^usiness?


San. With all my heart, provided it be just.


Esch. Heigh toss! The Bawd's turned Puritan, and would teach me Justice.


San. Though I am a Bawd, the common bane of ^outh, a forsworn Wretch, a public
Nuisance; ^et I never did you any wrong, Sir?


Esch. That Is kept for an after-clap.


San. Pray, Mr. Eschine, return to your first ^roposal.


Esch. The Girl cost ye about Fifty Guineas, may ^^ never thrive with ye! The
Money shall be paid ^e again.


San. What if I will not part with her, who a plague shall force me? Will you?
Esch. No.


San. I was afraid you would.


Esch. Truly, Friend Sannio, between you and ^^, she is not to be sold at all;
for she is a Gentlewoman, and so I Will prove her to be. Now, Block^ead, choose
whether you will take the Money, or try it out at Law. -- Chew upon this, till
co^ back, worthy Mr. Pimpwell. Exit Eschi^


Sanni^ alone. Heavens! Now I don't won^ to see a Man's Brains turned by
Oppression. T^ Son of Thunder has ravished me out of my Cas^ beat me to Mumm,
took a Girl from me vi armis, and given poor Sanny above Five hund^
Bastinadoes. After this sweet usage he would have surrender up my Right and Title to
her without Interest. Faith he shall have her indeed, since deserves her so
well, and requires nothing ^^ what is just. -- Studies. Well I wish it mi^^ be
so, so he pays me down the Ready. -- B^ my Mind misgives me, damnably, that
whene^ I do but set the Price, he will presently bring W^nesses to swear 'twas a
direct Bargain between Then for my Money I may go whilstle for it, He say, Come
again an hour hence, to Morrow. The I can bear too, so I may be sure on it at
last, the it be some damage to me. -- 'Twill be so, sure as a Gun. Since Friend
Sanny thou have take up such a nasty Trade, thou must be content bear and
Pocket up the Affronts of such hectori^ Gallants. But since no body's here to
pay ^^ I do reckon my Chickens before they are ha^^^

Enter Syrus at a little distance.


Sir. to Eschine within. Hush! Not a w^^ more, I Will go to him my self, and make
him sk^ at the Money, and say, He Is rarely well dealt by,^ [Goes at Sannio.]
What Is the News with yo^ Mr. Sannio? I hear my Master and you have have kind of
a Scuffle.


San. shrugging. A Scuffle do you call^t; Never ^^ like surely! We were both
sufficiently tired: ^ with beating me, and I with being beaten.


Sir. You may thank your self for it.


San. How could I help it?


Sir. You should ha'born with the young Genman's Humor a little.


San. What could I do more? I Am sure I bore the blows upon my Face, he was
pleased to ^e me


Sir. Well, dye know what I Am going to say? balk an Ace sometimes is the best
play.


San. Heigh ho!


Sir. You are so timorous like a senseless Sot: ^^w if you had parted with a
little of your Right, ^^ humored the Gentleman, you would have got the ^vil and all
at the long run.


San. I don't love to buy a Pig in a Bag.


Sir. Ah, thou will never be worth any thing. ^^t upon ye, as if you had not a
Spring to catch ^oodcocks.


San. I believe that might be the best way, but ^ad never the Grace to follow
it, nor to refuse ^^ Ready, when I could get it.


Sir. Go to, I know your generous Spirit: As ^ugh you regarded half a hundred
Gu^nea's, so ^^ could serve my Master b^^: Besides they say, ^u re making a
Voyage to Cyprus.


San. Oh!


Sir. And have bought up several Commodities Transport thither; the Vessel's
hi^ed: I know ^ur Mind's a little wavering about this Money, ^^en you come back
I hope to see an end of the ^^iness.


San. I Have no Voyage to make. -- Faith I Am adone! It Is upon this they have built
their Plot.

Aside.
Sir. The Fellows upon the fret, I Have put a Flea ^ his ^ar. Aside.


San. to himself. Oh horrid! See how he has ^^ked me in the Critical mi^^te!
When I Have just 'd in a Stock of Fema^^, and other wares to carry to Cyprus. If
I lose my Fair it will have break me: And if I leave this business at six an^
sevens, the time will be over when I come back. There'll be no Remedy, and I
shall have a plagu^ cold Welcome. Are you come now, they will say, ^^ prosecute?
Why did ye let it run so long? Where h^^ ye been all this while? So that I had
better lo^ every cross on it, than tarry so long before I su^ for it?


Sir. Clapping him on the Shoulders. Well! Ha^ been casting up all the Gains of
this Voyage?


San. Is this like a Gentleman? Is this Mr. Es^^chine's Conscience to take away
a Girl by mai^ force?


Sir. aside. He sinks a main. -- I Have one thin^ more to propose, see if you
like it. Come, compound for half, rather than run a hazard of savin^ or losing
all; we'll make a hard shift but we'^ scrape up about five and twenty Guinea's
some where or other.


San. Oh miserable! Now poor I am in dange^ of losing part of the very
Principal. Is he pa^^ all shame? He has beat all my Teeth down my Throat; and
my Head into an an entire Gelly^ Then he would trick me of the Money into the
Bargain. -- I have no Voyage to make.


Sir. That Is as you please. -- Have ye any further Commands. -- I Am going.


San. Ay, pray good Mr. Syrus, however things have been, rather than sue and
quarrel, let him pa^ me my own: at least what she cost me. I know^ ye little
Rogue, you never had occasion, as yet^ to make use of me as a Friend: But if
you shou'd^ you will say I Am no forgetful or ungrateful Person.


Sir. I Will do my best. -- Oh, yonder come^ Ctesipho, I faith as brisk as as a
Body-louse for hi^ Mistress.


San. Well, will ye do as I desired ye?


Sir. Have a little Patience.

Enter Ctesipho. Sannio walks aside.


Ctes. to himself. When a Man stands in need of a good turn, he is glad to
receive it from any hand. But it does him a double pleasure, when it comes from
one he has reason to expect it from. Oh, Brother, Brother! How do I adore thee
now! This I Am sure of, that the very best Words I can give thee are short of
thy deserts. And I am happy in this particular beyond all Mortals. that I Have
the most accomplished Brother in nature.


Sir. Oh Mr. Ctesipho!


Ctes. Dear Rogue Syrus, where is my Brother?


Sir. Look ye, he is at home waiting for ye.


Ctes. Oh brave!


Sir. What Is the Matetr, Sir?


Ctes. The Matter old Boy? I should have been cold in my Grave, but for his
means. -- Ah, he is an honest Soul! he neglected his own Interest to serve mine.
He has taken upon himself all the Curses, Scandals, Love-Matters and
Miscarriages that belong to me; And what could he do more? But who comes there?
What makes the Door go?


Sir. Stay, stay, here he comes himself.


Enter Eschine.

Esch. Where Is the Scoundrel Son of a Whore?


San. Does he want me? Has he got any Money? I Am broke: the Devil a Penny do I
see.


Esch. Hah! This is lucky, 'twas you I was wishing for -- Well, how is it? All Is
well; off with that sour Look.


Ctes. Now I have reason, having such a Brother as you O Eschine! My true
Brother indeed! I dare not praise ye any more before your Face, lest you should
think it proceeded rather from Flattery than Gratitude.


Esch. Leave your fooling, as though we were mere Strangers to one another: But
this troubles me that we could not know of the business sooner; for the Matter
was come to that pass; that all the World could scarce have helped you, though
they had desired it. Ctes. Modesty hindered me.


Esch. Pshaw! 'twas folly, notmodesty. What! to be upon running your Country
for so small a Matter? Fie upon it: Heavens forbid that.


Ctes. 'Twasn't well I own.


Esch. to Syrus. What has Sannio concluded on? Sir. He Is grown very tame.


Esch. I Will to the Piazza and discharge him. -- but do you brother step in to
your Mistress.


San. Good Mr. Syrus, push on the business.

Aside to him.
Sir. Let Us be quick, Sir. For the Man's in haste for Cyprus.


San. I Am in no such haste. -- I Have nothing to do, but to wait for the Money.


Sir. You shall have it man, nver fear't.


San. What all?


Sir. Yes all. Say no more about it but follow us. San. So I will.

Exeunt Eschine and Sannio.


Ctes. to Syrus going off. Hark ye Syrus.


Sir. Well, Sir your pleasure.


Ctes. Prithee see that paltry Rascal dispatched as soon as possible, lest upon
farther provocation the business come to my Father's Ears; then I shall be
ruined to all Intents and Purposes.


Sir. That shall not be: Take Heart Sir. Do you toy away half an hour or so with
your Mist^ess, the mean time within. Order the Butler to lay the Cloth, and all
things to be got ready. As soon as the business is over, I Will march home with
plenty of Provisions.


Ctes. Prithee do: and since things have fallen out so luckily, let us even make
a day on it.

Exeunt severally.
The end of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Sostrata and Canthara. Sost. PRithee my good Nurse, how is she like to do?


Can. How! Troth I hope she will have a good time on it. Her Pains, my good
Mistress, are just beginning: You're as fearful now, as if y' had never been at
a Labor, nor cried out your self.


Sost. Alas-a-day! I Have no body at home: and we are all alone. Our Man Geta's
out of the way too; and there is never a Soul to send for the Midwife, or to call
Eschine.


Can. Without doubt, Eschine will be here anon: never a day goes over his Head,
but we have his Company.


Sost. He Is the only Comfort I have in my Affliction.


Can. As the Case stands, Mistress, the business could not fall into better
hands: since she had the mischance by such a Gentleman, of such a Parentage, so
generous, and so nobly descended.


Sost. You're much in the right: Heavens keep him ours for ever.

Enter Geta as out of Breath at a great distance.


Get. to himself. We are now brought to that pass, that if all the World laid
their Heads together, to find out a remedy for this mischief that has happened
to my self, my Mistress and her Daughter, they could do us no good. -- Oh
miserable! Such a Flood of Difficulties over whelm us, that it is impossible to
keep above water. Ravishment, Poverty, Oppression, Desertion, Infamy. -- Is the
Age so debauched? -- Abominable Villains! Cursed Wretches! This Devil of a Man.
--


Sost. Bless me! What makes our Geta in such a Fright, and in such haste?


Get. to himself. -- Whom nothing could restrain or move: Neither Promises,
Oaths, nor Pity, nor yet the approaching Travail of her he had so shamefully
abused.


Sost. I cannot well understand what the Fellow says.


Can. Pray, Mistress, let us go a little nigher to him.


Get. to himself Ah poor Geta! I Am scarce Compos mentis, my Passion has
inflamed me. I Would desire nothing more than to meet the whole Family of em, that
I might disgorge my rage upon em, now my Blood's up. I Would be contented to suffer
any thing, so I might have a swinging Revenge upon em. First, I Would tread out
that stinking Snuff his Father, that gave being to the vise Rascal. Then for
that Dog Syrus, that put him upon it. -- How I Would tear him piecemeal! I Would give
him such a toss, dash his Skull against the Stones, and strew the Streets with
his Brains. That Boy Eschine too, I Would tear out his Eyes, and after that break
his ^eck. -- The rest I Would down with em, drive em, drag em, pound 'em, and
trample em under m^ Feet. But what makes me loiter, when I should ^e telling
this damned News to my Mistress. Go.


Sost. Let Us call him back. -- Why, Geta! ing off.


Get. Pish, prithee don't trouble me, whosoever you are.


Sost. It Is your Mistress calls.


Get. Ay, where is she? -- turning about. I was hunting for you, Mistress,
'twas you I looked for. -- You Have met me as luckily as may be.


Sost. What Is the Matter? Why do pant so?


Get. Oh!


Sost. Why in such haste my poor Boy? Come take Breath. --


Get. We are absolutely --


Sost. What absolutely?


Get. -- Undone -- past all recovery. --


Sost. For Heavens sake, what is the Matter?

In a fright.
Get. Just now. --


Sost. What just now, Geta? --


Get. This Mr. Eschine. --


Sost. What of him?


Get. -- Has quite -- thrown off our Family.


Sost. Alas! Undone indeed! But how so?


Get. He Is run mad after another Face.


Sost. Wretch that I am!


Get. He didn't do things in the dark, but forced her from a Bawd in the Eyes
of the World.


Sost. Are you sure of this?


Get. Most sure, these very Eyes saw it.


Sost. weeping. Oh unfortunate Sostrata! what can thou trust to? Or whom
can thou trust? Our dear Eschine do this; The very Soul of us all; in whom we
placed our Hopes and Happiness? How often he swore he would not live a day without
his Pamphila? And said, he would put the Infant on his Father's Knees, and in that
sort beg his leave to marry her.


Get. Pray, Mistress, forbear weeping, but rather consider what is fit to be
done: whether we should put up the Affront, or tell it to a Friend.


Can. Hold, hold Man; Have lost thy Senses? Do You think this a business fit to
be blazed abroad?


Get. Nay, I Am for hushing of it against the World. First, The Case is plain,
he has left us for good and all: Now if we make it public, ten to one but
he will disown it, then your Reputation, and your Daughter's Honor will be
called in question. But put the Case he confesses all, 'twou'dn't be Prudence
to give him your Daughter, whilst he keeps another: Therefore take the thing
which way you please, Concealment is my Opinion.


Sost. Ah, by no means: I Will not agree to^t.


Get. What will ye do then?


Sost. Divulge it.


Get. How! Have a special care, Mistress, what you do.


Sost. The Case can never be worse than it is; For first, she has no Portion;
then she is robbed of that which might have went instead of one; so that she
cannot be put off for a Maid. I have one shift left, if he deny't, the Ring he
lost is proof enough. In fine, since my own Conscience tells me, that this
mishap cannot be charged either to my Covetousness, or to any base Ends that I
or my Daughter had in it, we'll even venture a Trial at Law.


Get. Do You think so? Pray, think on it again.


Sost. Do you, Geta, make all the haste you can to her Cousin Hegeos, and tell
him the whole Story: for he was a choice Friend of my poor Husbands, and had
always a great kindness for our Family.


Get. Ay faith, there is no body else looks upon us.


Sost. Good Canthara, do you run, and call the Mi^wife, that she may be in the
way if need be. exeunt severally.

Enter Demea alone.


Them. Undone, undone! They say my Boy Ctesipho made one with his Brother at the
Rape: That he should be able to debauch a Lad of his Sobriety is the only thing
that could add to my Misfortunes. -- Where shall I search for him? I Am afraid
they have carried him to some Bawdyhouse or other. The Rake-hell his Brother has
drawn him in. I Am confident. -- But yonder comes Syrus, I Will learn of him where
he is. But in faith he is one of their gang, and if he perceives I want him, the
Rogue will never tell me any thing; therefore he shall not know my design.

Enter Syrus at another part of the Stage, very merry.


Sir. to himself We Have been telling the whole Exploit to the old Gentleman, and
how ^twas carried on: I never saw the old Man so tickled inmy whole Life.


Them. over-hearing. Bless me! What a Coxcomb's my Brother?


Sir. to himself. He commended his Son, and thanked my Worship for advising of
him.


Them. I cannot hold any longer. Aside.


Sir. to himself. He told out the Money forthwith; and gave us a broad Piece
overplus to be merry withal, and e^ded 'twas employed even as I Would have it.


Them. Hah! If you would have any thing done as it should be, commend me to this
Gentleman. Aside.


Sir. starting. Ha, Mr. Demea, I didn't see ye. How does your Worship?


Them. How? -- I cannot but wonder at your fine way of living.


Sir. Faith, Sir, it is pretty Silly, and, to speak the truth, somewhat oddish --
Turning to Micio' s House. You Dromo, gut and scale the rest of o'th Fish, but
the great Conger-Eel let him play in the Water a little; when I come back,
we'll bone him, and not before.


Them. Are these scandalous Villainies to be allowed of?


Sir. to Demea. Truly, Sir, I don't like 'em at all, and do often cry out, --
to him within. Stephanio, see that the Salt-fish be well watered.


Them. Oh Heavens! Does he do this on purpose, or does he think 'twill be for
his Credit to ruin his Son? What a sad Creature am I! Methinks I have the day
before my Eyes when this Boy will be forced for want of bread to run his
Country, and list himself a Soldier.


Sir. Oh, Sir! There Is Wisdom now! to see things at a distance, and not only
what is just before ye.


Them. Well, have ye got the f^ddling Wench at your House?


Sir. She Is there within.


Them. The Devil! surely she is not to dwell there?


Sir. I believe, they are mad enough to have it so.


Them. Is It possible?


Sir. Ah the foppish Fondness and pernicious easiness of a Father!


Them. In good truth, I Am ashamed, and heartily grieved, for my Brother.


Sir. There Is too much; Ay, a great deal too much difference, Sir, between you
two (though I shou'dn't say so much before your Face) you, Sir, as much as
there is o'ye, are Wisdom all over: but he is a mere Gimcrack. Would you have
suffered your Son to have done thus!


Them. Suffered him? Zooks! I should have smel^ him out six whole Months, before
he had been concerned in such a business.


Sir. Ah Sir, you need not tell me what a wary Man you are.


Them. Heavens grant he may continue, as he i^.


Sir. Children prove as their Father's make 'em.


Them. But hark ye Syrus, Prithee did see him to day? Fawning ^^.


Sir. Mr. Ctesipho, Sir! (I Will send the old Foo^^ packing into the Country)
Aside. He Is gone into the Country, and hard at work by this time* to Demea.


Them. Are you sure he is there?


Sir. Sure? Why I saw him out o'Town my self.


Them. That Is well. I was afraid he had loiter'd hereabout still.


Sir. And was in a plaguey Huff too.


Them. At what prithee?


Sir. He fell out with his Brother in the open Market about the Music Wench.


Them. Say you so?


Sir. In Faith he spoke his Mind freely; for when we were paying the Money, in
drops he unawares upon the back on's: and sets up an outery; Arn't ye ashamed
Brot^er Eschine to commit such Villainies? That you should dishonor our Family
at this vile rate?


Them. E'dad he makes me weep for Joy.

Wipes his Eyes.
Sir. You don't only weaken your Estate, but your Reputation too.


Them. Heavens bless him! I hope he will never^ degenerate.


Sir. Who questions it?


Them. O Syrus, he poor Boy has his head full of these Morals.


Sir. And well he may, when he has such a Father at home to fill it.


Them. I do my best, and leave no Stone unturn^d, but exercise him in all that is
good. Above all I charge him, Look into Men's Actions as into a Glas^, and take
Example by 'em. Practice this, say I. --


Sir. Very well indeed.


Them. Shun that,


Sir. Shrew^d.


Them. This is commendable.


Sir. There you hit it again.


Them. That will not be allowed at all.


Sir. Most admirable.


Them. And moreover. --


Sir. interrupting. Your Pardon, Sir, I am n't at leisure for your Moreovers:
I Have got an excellent Dish of Fish to my Tooth, and I must take special care
that the^ ben't spoiled: For that is as scandalous a business among us, Sir, as
the neglect of your Duty is among them. And according to my Abilities I give my
fellow Servants Instructions after the self-same manner. This is too Salt (Say
I^) That Is too much, this is not done cleanly enough; that is well done, pray
remember to do so another time. I instruct 'em diligently, as well as my Palate
will serve me. Last of all too, I bid them 'em look into their Dishes as into a
Glass, and there learn their Duty. I confess these are all mere Toys: but what
signifies that? We must suit our Morals to the Persons we deal with. -- Please
to command me, Sir?


Them. Yes, to get a little more Wit among ye.


Sir. Do You design for the Country, Sir?


Them. Ay, to rights.


Sir. Ay, what should you do here, Sir, where all your good Morals are but
thrown away?

Exit Syrus.

Demea alone.

Ay, truly, I Will to my Country-Farm, since he that brought me hither is gone
back again. -- That Boy's all my care, he is my true Son; since my Brother will
have his own way, let him look to that Rake-hell. -- But who comes yonder at a
distance? Mr. Hegio, one of our own Ward? -- If my Eyes don't fail me, it is he
indeed. Ah, we have been Cronies from our Cradles. By Jove, such honest Citizens
are very scarce now adays! A Man^ of the right old Stamp for Virtue and
Fidelity, and would not do the Government any harm for the World. How glad am I
to see the remains of the old Stock! Ah, Life is a Pleasure to me now. I Will
wait for him here, and bid him Good Morrow, and have a little discourse with
him.

Enter Hegio and Geta at a distance.


Heg. Ye Powers! A dishonorable Action! What is it you say, Geta? Hah!


Get. Just as I told ye.


Heg. That ever that Family should be guilty of such an ungenteel thing. Oh,
Eschine! You didn't learn this of your Father, I Am sure.


Them. overhearing. Yes, he has heard of this singing Wench too, and it nearly
touches him tho a Stranger: but his sweet Father takes no notice on it. Oh
dismal! Would he was but by a little that he might hear all these Complaints.


Heg. If they will not give satisfaction, they mustn't think to carry it off thus.


Get. We all rely upon you, Sir: We have none else to stand by us: You are our
Guardian, and Father too. The old Gentleman upon his Deathbed bequeathed us all
to your Care, and if you forsake us, we are utterly undone.


Heg. No more of that: I Will not forsake ye, nor can I do it with a safe
Conscience.


Them. I Will to him. -- Honest Hegio, I Am heartily glad to see ye.


Heg. Oh! Mr. Demca, I Am your humble Servant, you are the Man I wanted.


Them. How so, Sir?


Heg. Why your Eldest Son Eschine, whom your Brother has adopted, has done
neither like an honest Man, nor a Gentleman.


Them. What has he done?


Heg. You knew one Simulus, a Friend and Cotemporary of ours.


Them. Yes, very well.


Heg. Why, he has debauched his Daughter?


Them. Oh! Sigh^.


Heg. Hold, Sir, the worst is to come yet.


Them. What more Mischief still?


Heg. Yes, truly; for that was, in some measure excusable. He had Opportunity,
Heat, Wine, and Youth to prompt him to it; 'twas but a humane Frailty. But when
he was sensible of his Fault, he comes forthwith to her Mother, weeping,
praying, entreating, promising and swearing he would take her home and marry her:
Upon this all was pardoned, hushed and relied upon. The young Woman proved with
Child upon this; has gone her Forty Weeks. But this sweet Youth is got to a
Ballad-singer, in the Devil's Name, keeps her at his Fathers, and has left the
the other to shift for her self.


Them. Is all this true are you sure?


Heg. The Mother is ready to prove it, the young Woman and the Business speaks
it self: Besides, here is Geta, as Servants are now, none of the worst, a
painful Fellow, who maintains 'em all, and keeps the whole Family himself; take
him, bind him, force the Truth out of him.


Get. Yes, verily Sir, rack me to death, if all ben't true: Besides Mr. Eschine
himself will not deny it, pray, Sir, bring us Face to Face.


Them. I Am horribly ashamed, and cannot imagine what to do, or what answer to
make him.


Pamphila within. Oh me! I Am torn in pieces, -- Help ye Powers above, and ease
me for Heaven's sake.


Heg. to Geta. Hah! Prithee was that she that cried out?


Get. Without doubt, Sir.


Heg. Ah, Mr. Demea, she calls upon your Honor now; and begs ye to do that
freely, which the Law would else oblige ye to. I beg Heaven to inspire ye to do
as you ought; but if you are otherwise minded, Mr. Demea, I Will maintain her and
her dead Father's Cause to the last Penny in my Purse. He was my Kinsman, we
were bred up Children together, we were together at Wars abroad, and Peace at
home, and together we under-went the straits of Poverty: Therefore I Will about
it, do my utmost, and bring it to a Trial, and rather lose my Life than desert
these poor Women. -- What answer will ye return?


Them. I Will go talk with my Brother, Sir; what Advice he gives, that I Will follow.


Heg. But, Mr. Demea, do but consider with your self, that the more you live at
Ease, the more Powerful, the more Rich, the more Happy, and the more Noble you
are, so much the more Honest and Just ought you to be, if you would be thought Men
of Honor.


Them. Away! No more, you shall have all Right and Justice done you.


Heg. Spoken like a worthy Gentleman. -- Geta, bring me to your Mistress.

Exeunt Hegio and Geta.


Demea alone. This was no more than I foretold. I wish to my Soul this was the
last mad Prank! But this allowance of so much Liberty will end at last in so me
sad Story or other. -- Well I Will go hunt for my Brother, and discharge this
News in his very Face. Exit Demea.

At the same time reenters Hegio.


Heg. to Sostrata within. Cheer up, good Coz, ANd comfort your Child's poor
heart as much aS you can. I Will go discourse Mr. Micio, if he be at the Piazza,
and let him know how the Case stands; if he designs to do us right, well and
good; If not, let him declare it plainly; that I may know how to take my
Measures accordingly. Exit.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Ctesipho and Syrus. Ctes. entering. -- MY Father gone into the Country say ye?


Sir. Above an hour ago.


Ctes. Prithee tell me true.


Sir. He Is at his Grainge, slaving himself most horribly by this time, I Will
warrant ye.


Ctes. Faith, if it might not endanger his health, ^^cou'd wish heartily he
might be so miserably tired, as to be laid up these three days.


Sir. So say I: and a longer time too, if possible.


Ctes. Ay, ay: for I Would very fain, now I Have begun the day merrily, make an end
of it merrily too* The only Quarrel I have with our Countty-house is, that it is
too, nigh the Town: Were it farther ^ff, before he could get thither and back
again, '^would be Night first. But now when he finds no Ctesipho at home, I Am
sure he will be upo' the spur back again in an instant. Then to Catechis^ng he
goes: Pray where have you been, Sir? What? Cannot a Man have a glimps of ye, in a
whole day's ^ime? What excuse. shall I have?


Sir. Have not ye got one ready?


Ctes. The Devil a one have I.


Sir. So much the worse: Why if you had but, one of your Domestics, a Friend,
or a guest, that were better than no body yet.


Ctes. I have, what then?


Sir. Pretend you had hasty business to dispatch.


Ctes. What when I had none? -- 'Twon't do.


Sir. 'Twill tho.


Ctes. Ay for the day: but if I lie out all Night, what excuse then Syrus?


Sir. It Is pity it is not more the Fashion to serve a Friend in the Nights as
well as day. -- But however, set your heart at rest; I know your Father's
humor to a hair. When he rages like a Lion, I can presently make him as quiet
as a Lamb.


Ctes. As how, I prithee?


Sir. Oh, he is mightily tickled when any body commends you: I make ye a very
Saint before* him, and reckon up all your virtuous Qualities.


Ctes. Mine?


Sir. Ay, yours: Then of a sudden the good Man cries like a little Child, for
Joy. -- Look to your self there.

Enter Demea at a distance.


Ctes. starting. What do you mean?


Sir. Talk of the Devil and his Horns appear*


Ctes. Is It my Father?


Sir. The very same.


Ctes. Prithee, Syrus, what shall we do now?


Sir. Run in quickly, I Will set my Wits to work.


Ctes. If he ask for me, say you have not seen me, do you hear?


Sir. Can ye hold your Tongue?

Exit Ctesipho.


Them. to himself. I Am the unluckiest Creature ^^at ever was born* In the first
place, my Brother is not to be found above Ground: Then as I was looking for
him, who should I see but a Workman just come from my Country House, and says
my Boy is not there neither. Nor can I tell for my Life what course to steer.


Ctes. appearing at the Window. Syrus!


Sir. What say ye?


Ctes. Does he enquire for me?


Sir. Yes, Faith.


Ctes. I Am undone.


Sir. Come, don't be discouraged.


Them. to himself. How great is this my Misfortune! I cannot sufficiently
understand it, unless I was predestined to be miserable. Is there any
mischief happens to our Family, to be sure I Am the first that am sensible on it,
the first that knows it, the first that reports it, and the only Man that feels
the weight when it falls.


Sir. Faith I cannot but laugh at him, to hear him say, that he is the first that
knows every thing, when he is the only Man that knows nothing. Aside.


Them. to himself. I Will even go again to see if my Brother be come back.


Ctes. Prithee, good Syrus, take care he don't break in upon us unawares.


Sir. Peace I say, I Will take care about it.


Ctes. Faith, Sir, but I shall not trust my Concerns in your hands to day: For
I Will secure my Girl and my self in some by Closet or other; E'dad that will be
the surest way by half. Ctesipho retires.


Sir. Away! I Will clear the Coast of him in a trice Sir. moves toward Demea
shrugging his Shoulders, and snivelling.


Them. Oh, there is the Hell-hound, Syrus.


Sir. to him self. If this Trade last long, there'll be no enduring the House.
I Would fain know of their Worships how many Masters I am to have; what a damnable
thing is this?


Them. What a yelping this Cur makes? What does he ail? -- What say you honest
Man? Is my Brother at home? Hah!


Sir. Pox o'your honest Men, I Am a dead Man.


Them. What Is the Matter?


Sir. The Matter with a plague? Your sober stayed Son Ctesipho has almost
beaten poor me and the Music Girl to death.


Them. What Is that you say? Hah!


Sir. See how he has slit my Lip up to my Nose.


Them. How comes this to pass?


Sir. He says, I was the occasion of the buying of her.


Them. Didn't you just now tell me, he was gone into the Country, and you
brought him part of the way.


Sir. True, Sir. But after that he came raving like a Madman, sparing never a
Mothers Son of us. He might have been ashamed to fall upon the Bones of a poor
old Man, who the other day dandled him in my Arms, when he was no higher than
this. Shows how high.


Them. Ha -- ha -- he -- God-a-mercy Ctesipho: Old Demea right. Well! you are a
Man every Inch of thee.


Sir. Do You commend him? but in faith he had best keep his flippant Fingers to
himself another time, if he understands himself.


Them. It Is bravely done!


Sir. Very bravely indeed! To Cock-crow over a silly Woman, and a poor Servant,
that daren't hold up a Finger against him? -- Yes, 'twas wonderful brave
in faith.


Them. He could not have done better. He Is of my Opinion in thinking you to be the
Ringleader of this Roguery. -- But is my Brother within?


Sir. No, he is abroad.


Them. I Am thinking where a-duce I may look for him.


Sir. I know where he is gone, but shall not tell till to Morrow.


Them. What Is that you say, Sirrah? hah!


Sir. Just so, Sir.


Them. I Will crack your Skull presently ye Dog.

Holds up his Cane.
Sir. bantering. I know not the Man's Name where he is; but the Place I do.


Them. Then tell me the place, Sirrah.


Sir. still bantering. Do you know the great Portico, that overlooks the
Butcher-row as you go down there?


Them. Well, what then?


Sir. still bantering. Go strait along this Street up there. pointing with his
Fingers. When you are got there, you will find on this hand a Descent, make a
civil step down there. After that you will see a little Chapel on that hand, and
hard by that a little narrow Lane.


Them. VVhereabouts is that?


Sir. There, where the great wild Fig Tree stands, do you know it, Sir?


Them. I do.


Sir. Keep directly through that.


Them. But that narrow Lane is no Thorow-fare.


Sir. Ud^s my Life it is true: I see I Am a silly Block-head, I was out. You must
come back again to the great Protico: E^dad here is a nigher way, and easier to
hit on. Do You know my Lord Cratine's great house?


Them. Yes.


Sir. When you are past that, turn to the Lefthand down the same Street: and
when you're come to the Temple turn to the Right Hand: before you come to the
Cit^ Gates hard by the H^rsepond, there is a certain Mill, right over against
that is a Joyner's Shop, and there you will find the G^ntleman.


Them. What business has he there?


Sir. To speak for little Oaken-ledg'd Tables to set in the Sun. --


Them. For your Worships to drink about -- Fine work I faith. But why amn't I
gone to him?

Exit Demea.


Syrus alone. Go thy ways for a Fool: I Will work thee off thy Stumps, as thou
deservest, thou old doting Chu^l. -- But Mr. Eschine sta^s a bloody while:
Dinner will be quite spoiled: As for C^^sipho hes wholly taken up with his
Mistress: but I^^^ take care of my own sweet Corpse; and will pi^^ out all the
good Bits I can f^^d, take off my Cups of my leisure, and so make the day as
long as I can. Exit Syrus.

Enter Micio and ^egio.


Mic. entering. -- Indeed, Mr. Hegio, I can see nothing in the whole business
that deserves such mighty Commendations. I discharge but my Duty, and give
satisfaction for the Faults of my own house: Perhaps you took me to be one of
those Men that think they receive an Injury when they do it themselves, and so
call Whore first: Now 'cause I didn't serve you so, do you think your self
obliged to me for it?


Heg. Far be it from me! I never imagined ye to be otherwise than I really find
ye: but let me engage ye so far as to step over with me to the Girl's Mother;
and tell her the very same you told me: that their Jealousy was false
grounded, and that he took away the Music Girl for his Brother.


Mic. If you think it convenient and necessary let us be going.


Heg. You do well, Sir! For you will lighten the poor creature's heart that is
ready to sink with Grief and Vexation, and keep up the character of a worthy
Gentlemen. But, Sir, if you don't think it so proper, I Will tell her what you
say my self.


Mic. No, no, I Will go with ye.


Heg. You oblige me, Sir: For howsoever it comes about, all that are a little
down in the world are very suspicious; take every thing at the worst hand, and
fancy themselves slighted, cause of their Misfortunes: Therefore twill give
great satisfaction to clear Mr. Eschine your self.


Heg. You say nothing but what is tru^e and reasonable.


Heg. Be pleased, Sir, to come this way.


Mic. I will.

Exeunt Hegio and Micio at the same time.


Eschine Enter alone. I Am quite distracted! That I should be so surpised with
this unlucky Misfortune, that I know not what to do or undertake! Fear
enfeebles my Limbs, Amazement shakes my Soul, and my Heart's incapable of
Advice. Alas! how shall I wind my self out of these Encumbrances, since their
Jealousies are seemingly wellgrounded? Mrs. Sostrata believes I bought the
M^sick Girl for my self: Old Canthara gave me to understand as much. For by
chance I saw her as she was going for the Midwife, I presently made up to her,
and asked her how my dear Pamphila did, whether she was near her time; and
whether she was then going for the Midwife? She presently let fly upon me. In
another Tone. Away, away Mr. Eschine; you have befooled us long enough, you have
cajoled us sufficiently with your fine Promises. Alack-a-day (said I) prithee
what do mean? You may go now (continued she) and take up with the Girl you
are so enamored with. I immediately perceived their Jealousy: But yet I kept
my Tongue between my Teeth, that I might not blab out any of my Brother's
Secrets to that tattling Gypsy, to have it ^laz'd about the Town in an instant
-- But what shall I do now? Shall I go and say she is my Brother's? A thing that
ought not ought not to be revealed for the World. -- Well! Let that pass,
perhaps they will not discover it. Then I am afraid they wont take things as they
are, there are so many Probabilities against me. It Was I,u self that took her
away, I my self that paid the Money for her, and it was I that furnished her with
Lodgings. I must own the Fault of all this lies at my door: For not telling my
Father how Cases stood between me and my Mistress; and not begging his Consent
to take her home and marry her. We^ve been in a dead sleep till now, but now
Eschine rouse thy self up. First of all I Will go to'em and clear my self. --
I Will up to the Door strait. Goes and steps short. Oh my heart! how sadly it
pants whenever I knock at this Door Goes and knocks. Soho! It Is your Friend
Eschine; some body open the Door quickly. -- But, have! I cannot imagine who
comes out there? -- I Will step a one side.

Enter Micio
Mic. to Sostrata within. Do as I ordered ye Mrs. Sostrata, I Will find out
Efchine to acquaiut him how Matters are carried on. -- But where is he that
knocked at the Door?


Esch. God's Death! My Father's Voice! I Am at a cursed Nonplus. Aside.


Mic. Eschine.


Esch. What business has he here? Aside.


Mic. Wast you that knocked at the door? -- He Is mute: Suppose I should banter
with him a little, I believe 'twou'dn't be amiss, since he would never trust me
with this Secret. -- Aside,


Mic. What cannot ye speak? To Eschine.


Esch. I didn't knock as I know of.


Mic. Indeed? Nay, I wondered what business should bring you hither. He
blushes: that is sign good enough Aside.


Esch. Good, Sir, (if I may be so bold) what business had you at that House?


Mic. None of my own. A Friend of mine brought me from the Change to be his
Spokesman in a Concern of his.


Esch. What was the Concern, Sir?


Mic. ^^l tell ye: In this House dwells an ordinary Woman or two; which I
suppose ^^u don't know, ^^, I Am sure you don't; for they have not lived long in
these parts.


Esch. Well, Sir, and what then?


Mic. Here Is an old Woman and her Daughter. --


Esch. So, Sir.


Mic. -- The Daughter has buried her Father: Now this Friend of mine is the
nearest Relation, and by Law is forced to marry her himself.


Esch. Undone! Aside.


Mic. partly hearing. What Is ^he Matter?


Esch. Nothing, very well. -- Proceed, Sir.


Mic. You must know he is just now come to take her away with him: For he dwells
at Miletus.


Esch. How! To take the Girl away with him?

Concernedly.
Mic. Yes.


Esch. What as far as Miletus, pray Sir?


Mic. Ay.


Esch aside. It stabs me to the Heart. -- And the Women, Sir, what say they
to it.


Mic. What should they, think ye? Even just nothing: Only the Mother pretends
her Daughter has a Child by another Man (I cannot tell who, for she named him
not) that he was the first comer, therefore the Kinsman must go without her.


Esch. So, Sir: And was not that a sufficient Demurrer?


Mic. No, indeed.


Esch. Why so, I beseech ye? Will he take her away in good earnest?


Mic. Ay, why shou'dn't he?


Esch. Indeed, Sir, this was extreme severe and cruel, (if I might take the
Liberty) I might say ungenreely done.


Mic. How so?


Esch. How so? What do you think will become of the poor young Man her first Lover
(who for ought you know loves her most desperately) when he shall see her
ravished before his Face, and hurried away from his sight for ever? Oh, 'twas a
very dishonorable thing of you, Sir!


Mic. Why do you talk at this rate? Whose Promise had he? Or whose Consent? When,
and how were they married? Pray who is the Man? What made him encroach upon
another Man's Right?


Esch. Was it fit for a Girl of her age to sit cross-legg'd at home waiting for
a Kinsman's coming the Lord knows when? Indeed, dear Father, you ought in
Justice to have alleged that, and ha defended it.


Mic. Very good! Should I have pleaded against my own Client? -- but prithee
Boy, what is all this to us? Or what have we to do with them? -- Come let us be
going -- How now Boy! why in tears tho? Eschine weeps.


Esch. Hear me one word, Sir, I beseech ye.


Mic. Poor Boy! I Have heard and know all: For loving thee I could not but be
concerned in whatever thou do.


Esch. Dear Sir! I Would fain deserve your Love as long as you live. This Fault
grieves me to the Soul; and I Am quite ashamed to look you in the Face.


Mic. I believe it sincerely: For I well know thy generous Temper: but I Am
afraid you don't mind your own Concerns. What kind of Government is it that you
think you live in? Thou have debauched a Girl, whom by Law thou ought not to
have touched; that is a great Fault, and though very great it is but a common
failing: Others have done it often, and Men of Repute too. But when that was
done, tell me, did you take the least care about it? Or did you forecast in
such a case what should have been done? Or how it should have been done? And if
thou had been ashamed to tell it me, could not I have know on it by others? In
this you were in doubt of for ten Months together: So you have betrayed your
self, the poor young Woman, and your own Child too, as much as you were able.
What? Do You think that the God's should do your work for ye, and you sleep the
while? Must she be brought to your Bedside, as if she were not worth the
fetching? I wou dn't have thee so miserably careless in other things for the
World. -- Come don't be cast down however, thou shall marry her.


Esch. How?


Mic. Don't be cast down, I say.


Esch. Pray, Sir, are ye in earnest?


Mic. In earnest: Why not?


Esch. That I cannot tell, unless it is 'cause the more passionately I desire to
have it so, the more I Am afraid it will not be so.


Mic. Get thee home, and say your Prayers, and then send for your Wife, go, get
thee gone.


Esch. What send for her presently?


Mic. Yes, presently.


Esch. What presently?


Mic. Presently, as soon as possible.


Esch. Let me never see good day, Sir, if I don't love ye better than my very
Eyes.


Mic. Than your Mistress too?


Esch. Full as well.


Mic. That Is much, indeed.


Esch. But what is become of the Miletian Spark?


Mic. He Is vanished, shipped off, and cast away by this time. -- But why don't ye
go, I say to your Prayers.


Esch. It would be better for you to do that, S^ir. I Am sure your Prayers will
be heard sooner than mine, since you are the better Man of the two.


Mic. I Will in, and take care of what is wanting. Do as I bid thee, if thou
know^st what is best for thy self. Exit Micio.


Eschine alone. What Happiness is this? would any one think he is my Father, or
I his Son? If he had been a Friend or a Brother could he have been more kind or
obliging! Ought I not to love him? To wear him next my Heart? His wonderful
Complaisance has obliged me to be so cautious, as imprudently to do nothing
that may displease him; wherefore I Will now be always upo' my Guard. -- But why
don't I go in, that I may not defer my Marriage! Exit Eschine.


Demea Enter alone out of Breath. I Am quite foundered with trotting up and
down. -- A plague confound thee, Syrus, for thy damned Directions. -- I Have
hobbl'd over the whole Town, been at the Gate, at the Horse-pond, and where
not? The Devil a Joyner's Shop could I find; or any Soul that so much as saw my
Brother. -- But now, I Am resolved I will not stir a step out of his House, till he
comes back.

Going off, and then enters Micio.


Mic. entering. I Will go and tell 'em for our parts we are ready.


Them. Oh, here he comes. -- I Have been looking for you these two hours.


Mic. What Is the business now?


Them. I Have fresh News to tell ye: horrid Villainies of that fine Son of yours.


Mic. Look ye now. Aside.


Them. New Villainies, damnable Villainies!


Mic. Prithee no more.


Them. Ah, you don't know what a fine Blade he is.


Mic. But I do.


Them. Poor Simpleton! I warrant thou dreamest I Am about the Singing-wench: No,
the Rascal has debauched a Citizen's Daughter.


Mic. That I know too.


Them. Bless me! Do You know it and suffer it too?


Mic. Ah, why shou'dn't I?


Them. What? Methinks you should bellow and run mad at it.


Mic. No: But I could wish it otherwise.


Them. He has got a Bastard too.


Mic. Heavens bless it, say I.


Them. And the Woman's not worth a Groat.


Mic. So they say.


Them. And shall he be married to a Beggar?


Mic. Yea verily.


Them. Well, and what is to be done next pray?


Mic. Why even what should be done next, have the young Woman brought home.


Them. Monstrous! And will ye suffer't?


Mic. How can I avoid it?


Them. Avoid it? Why, if you were not really concerned at it, 'twou'd become ye
to seem so however.


Mic. I Have given consent already: The business is concluded on: The Wedding's
as good as over: Every thing is secure, and I think this becomes me better.


Them. Then this Adventure pleases you wonderfully?


Mic. No, if I knew how to help it: since I cannot, I must bear't patiently.
Man's Life is like a Game at Tables, if you miss the Cast you have most need of,
you must correct that by Skill which fell out by chance.


Them. Your Servant, Mr. Corrector! Your Skill as you call it has fooled away
Fifty Guinea's upon a Ballad-singer; who in three or four days time must be
packed off; if not for a Piece of Money, at any rate.


Mic. There Is no body to buy her, nor do I design to sell her.


Them. What a-duce will ye do with her then?


Mic. Why keep her at home.


Them. Mercy upon my Soul^l A Whore and a Wife under the same Roof?


Mic. Why not, prithee?


Them. And you are sure you arn't mad?


Mic. Yes, indeed.


Them. Let me die, if e're I saw the like Folly^ In Faith I believe thou thy self
have a mind to have a me^ry strain with her now and then.


Mic. Why shou'dn't I?


Them. And the Bride, will not she be for learning the same Tune too?


Mic. No doubt on it.


Them. And thou pretty Child wilt hobble out the Hay amongst 'em too?


Mic. Like enough.


Them. Like enough with a Pox?


Mic. And rather than fail, Brother, thou shall make one of the Company.


Them. S^death! Are ye past all shame?


Mic. Prithee, Brother, throw off this sullen Humor of thine, and like a civil
Person be free and merry at your Son's Wedding. -- I Will just step and speak a
word at that House, and then I Will come back again. Exit to Sostrata 's.


Demea alone. Here Is a sweet Life! Here are fine Morals! Here Is mad work with a
witness! -- Let me see, a Wife not worth a Groat; a Ballad-singer under the
same Roof: Every thing running to riot in the House: A profligate young Rogue,
and a doting old Sot into the Bargain: Why Providence it self, if it should go
about it, would never be able to save this Family.

Enter Syrus, at a distance almost Drunk.


Sir. to himself. Faith and troth my little Rogue Sy, thou have junketted thy
pretty self deliciously, and played thy part very sumptuously. Go thy ways for
a Wag. -- strokes himself. Since I Have stuffed my sweet Corpse with the Dainties
within, it is my Honor's Pleasure to take a turn in the fresh Air without.
Walks and struts.


Them. There goes a rare Model of their Education.


Sir. Oh here is our old Stingo in faith -- How is^t old Gentleman? Why so
alamort?


Them. Oh damned Rascal.


Sir. How now old Wisdom, are you come to vent more Morals here? Belches.


Them. Would I were thy Master, --


Sir. E'gad you would be the richest Man under the ^^n, and your Estate would be
improved to a Miracle.


Them. I Would make thee an Example to all Rogues.


Sir. Why so? What have I done?


Them. Done, Rascal? In the heat of a disturbance, and in the midst of a most
horrid crime, scarce yet ^^tled, you have got drunk ye Swine, as if all were ^ell
and over.


Sir. Faith, would I had kept my Post. Aside.

Enter Dromo.


Dro. Do You hear Syrus? Mr. Ctesipho would pray ye to come to him.


Sir. Away with a Pox. Softly. Exit Dromo.


Them. What Is that he said of Ctesipho?


Sir. Nothing, Sir.


Them. How ye Goal-bird! Is Ctesipho nested there^


Sir. No, Sir; no.


Them. How came the Boy to name him then?


Sir. That Is another of the Name, a young Smell feast; do you know him?


Them. I will know presently. Going off.


Sir. holding him. What do you mean, Sir? Whither are ye going?


Them. Dog, let me go.


Sir. I say, don't go.


Them. Hands off ye Hell-hound; or by Heavens I Will brain ye. He holds up his
Cane, and Syrus let us go. Exit in a Fury.


Syrus alone. The Devil go with him: I Will be sworn he will be no welcome Reveller
to any of them, especially to poor Ctesipho. -- Zookers! where shall I bestow
my self? -- The time this plaguey Storm is blowing over, I Will even slink into
some by-corner, and there sleep out this Dose of Tipple. I think that will be
best. Exit staggering.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Enter Micio as from Sostrata 's

Mie. to Sostrata within. EVERY thing's ready with us, as I said before: And
the Wedding shall be when you please -- Coming forward. But who is that makes
our Doors fly so?

Enter Domea from Micio' s raving and in a passion.


Them. to himself. Hell and Furies! What shall I do? -- What will become of me?
Heavens, Earth, Seas! Whether am I to direct my Exclamations or Complaints?


Mic. Here Is a Man for ye! He has smelt out the Intrigue, and that makes him
bellow so. -- It Is so, I must expect a smart brush: But the Boys must be
helped. Aside.


Them. Oh here comes the common Bane and Ruin of our Children.


Mic. Pray Brother moderate your passion, and be a little cool.


Them. Well, I am moderate; I am cool. -- I Will not give ye an ill word. Let Us
reason the case calmly -- Was Not it a plain Bargain between us (and that of
your own proposing too) that you should have nothing to do with my Son, nor I
with ye^rs? Answer me directly now.


Mic. True; I don't deny it.


Them. What makes him a guzzling at your Hou^e then? Why do you entertain my
Child? Why (...) procure him a Wench, Brother? Is there not the ^^me reason for
you to deal as fairly by me, as I do by you? Since I neither meddle nor make
with your Son, methinks you shou'dn't with mine.


Mic. There Is no reason for that: None at all. The old Proverb says, Among
Friends all things are common.


Them. Very pretty I faith! Are you come to talk at that rate at last?


Mic. Good Brother, hear me a word if it be'nt too great trouble to ye. First
of all, if your Son's Charges are such a woeful burden to ye, pray consider a
little with your self, that formerly you maintained both of 'em according as
your Estate would bear it; and thought it then sufficient for both; looking
upon me as likel^ enough to marry: Why even follow that old course still,
^^ard, scrape, pinch, do all you can to raise their Fortunes, and take the
credit of it to your self. But then let the poor Rogues make use of my Purse
freely, since that comes to 'em over and ^^^ve -- 'T will not diminith one Furrow
of ^^^ Land, and what they have from me, you may look upon as clear Gains. Now,
Brother, if you do but impartially weigh all this, you would ease m^ ^our self, and
the poor Boys, of a world of tr^^^^


Them. I don't (...) Money, it is their Morals --


Mic. Hol^, (...). That Is it I was going upon Many (...) may be made, Brother,
upon (...) same thing; by which a Man ma concl^^^, (...) be the ruin of the
one, and no great hur^ to the (...): Not that there is any difference in the
thing, (...) the Persons that did it. Truly, by what I (...) the Boys, I Am
confident they will prove to our (...) desire: I find they have Wit, Discretion,
and Modesty enough upon occasion, and love one another entirely: so that it is
easy to perceive the^^ gen^rous Nature and Spirit: You may reclaim 'em when
you please: But perhaps you are afraid they aren't Husbands good enough. Ah,
Brother, Age has always this ill Property with it; as i^ makes us wiser, so it
makes us more worldly: And that will sufficiently incite 'em to be good
Husbands.


Them. Have a care Brother, these your fine Reasonings and gentle Nature don't
ruin us all.


Mic. Peace, never fear that: Lay aside this Disease, and be ruled by me to day:
-- Come, (...) up your countenance.


Them. more pleasantly. Well, since things require ^^, I must do so. But to
morrow I Will into the Country with my Son by break of day, --


Mic. At Midnight if you please, so you be but merry to day.


Them. -- And take that singing Wench along with me too.


Mic. Best of all; by that means you will keep (...) Son from rambling: Only take
care she don't (...) ye the slip.


D^m I Will warrant^ye. -- And then between the Oven and the Mill, I Will so
besmear her with Cinders, Smoke and Meal. -- Besides in the heat of the day,
I Will send her to rake up Stubble till she be Sunburned, and as black as a Coal.


Mic. That Is excellent: Now methinks you have some Prudence in ye; and whilst
she is in this cursed pickle, make your Son lie with her Nolens-Volens.


Them. Do You rally? well, you are a happy Man, to bear things so well, for m^
part I must --


Mic. interrupting What always in the same strain?


Them. I ha done, I ha done.


Mic. Pray walk in then, and since the Day's designed for Mirth, let us as
merrily spend it.

Exit Micio.


Demea alone. Never did Man cast up the business of his Life so exactly; but
still Experience, Years and Custom will bring in some new particulars that he
was not aware of, and show his Ignorance of what he thought he knew, and after
trial make him reject his former Opinions. This is plainly my case at present;
for since my G^ass is almost out, I renounce this rigid Life I have always led.
But why so? Because Experience s^^ws me there is nothing like gentleness and
good nature: And this truth appears plainly to all that know me and my Brother.
He always spent ^^s time in Ease and P^^^sure; always courteous, complaisant,
speaking ill of no Man, but caressed all: lived as he plea^'d, spent as he
thought sit, the World bless him, and love him too: But I, that rustic, rigid,
mor^se, pinching, brutish, griping Fellow, must need marry; and how have I
smarted for it! I had C^^^dren too, those were new Troubles: And truly, in
raising up their Fortunes, I Have worn out my Li^e and best Days; and now I Am
just a marching ^^ the Stage, the Fruit of all my Labor is to be ^^ted like a
Toad. But my Brother enjoys all (...) Pleasures of a Father without the
drudgery; they love him, and fly me like the Plague. Him (...) trust with all
their Secrets, dote upon him, l^^e with him, but me they slight: They both pray
(...) his Life, but long for my Death: Those I have brought up with the
greatest Labor, he has g^^^d with a little Cost; so I take all the Pains, and
he reaps all the Pleasure. -- Well, well, for on^e we'll try what can be done,
whether we can spe^k obligingly, and act the Gentleman too, since my Brother
urges me to^t I Would willingly have my C^^ldren love and respect me too; if Gifts
and Complements will do the Feat, I Will not be behind w^^h best of 'em: but my
Estate must go to wrack: What care I for that, since I Have one Foot in the Grave
already.

To him enter Syrus.
Sir. Do You hear, Sir, my Master desires you would not be out o^th' way.


Them. Who calls there? -- Honest Syrus, I Am glad to see thee: How is it? How
goes the World?


Sir. Very well, Sir. Yawning.


Them. aside. Excellent! This is the first time Ie'r used these expressions,
Honest Syrus, How is it? How goes the World? They came out plaguily against the
grain. -- To Syrus. Thou have shown thy self an admirable Servant, and I will
do thee a good turn with all my Soul, I fack I will.


Sir. I Am very much obliged to you, Sir.


Them. I fack Boy it is true; and thou shall find it so ere long.

Enter Geta at another part of the Stage.


Get. to Sostrata within. I Will go find em, Madam, and hasten em to carry over
my young Mistress. -- Coming from the Door. O here is Mr. Demea. -- Your humble
Servant, Sir.


Them. Prithee Lad what may I call thy Name?


Get. Geta, Sir.


Them. Honest Geta, why I look upon thee at present to be worth the weight in
Gold; I Would never desire to be better satisfied in a Servant, than that he should
be as trusty to his Master, as I have found thee to be, Geta. For that reason,
when it lies in my way, I Will do thee a good turn with all my Soul, I fack I
will -- I Am acting, Sir Courtly, and I do it rarely methinks. Aside.


Get. That Is more your Goodness than my Deserts.


Them. I shall do it by degrees: First of all I Will make these Scoundrels my own
Aside.


Esch. to himself. These delays kill me: That they should trifle away the time
with their formal Ceremonies, and tedious Preparations for the Wedding.


Them. Eschine, Boy, How wags the World?


Esch. Hah! Are you here my dear Father?


Them. Ay, in faith Boy, I am thy Father both by Inclination, and by Nature too,
and tender thee more than my Eyes -- But why dostn't thou send for thy sweet
Lady?


Esch. I desire nothing more; I only stay for the City-waits and Singing-men.


Them. Ho, Will thou take an old Fellow's Counsel for once?


Esch. Let Us hear't pray, Sir.


Them. Hang your Songsters, your Hubbubs, Flambeaux and Scrapers: And order the
great Stone Wall in the Garden to be pulled down immediately, and convey her
home that way: Run both Houses into one, and bring over the Mother, and her
whole Family to yours.


Esch. With all my heart. The pleasantest Father in the World!


Them. aside. Hey brave! I Am called pleasant now: My Brother's House will be a
Thorow-fare to all Comers, the whole Town will be there presently: His Purse
must smoke for it, and to some Tune too. But what is that to me? whilst by my
complaisance I oblige all. Aloud to Eschine. Go bid Babylo tell out half a
hundred Guinea's quick. -- But, Syrus, why don't you do as you are bid?


Sir. What, Sir?


Them. Break down the Wall. -- And do you Geta go, and bring 'em hither.


Get. Ay, God bless your Worship for being so kind to our poor Family. Excunt
Geta and Syrus.


Them. It Is no less than you deserve. -- What say^st thou Boy, hah!


Esch. I Am of your Opinion, Sir.


Them. It Is forty times better than bringing a Lying-in-Woman along the Streets.


Esch. Indeed, Sir! I know nothing like it.


Them. This is my way. -- But here comes my Brother. Enter Micio.


Mic. to Syrus within. My Brother order it, say ye? -- Where is he? Ha,
Brother, wast you that ordered this?


Them. Yes, that I do: And in this, and all other things, I Am ready to do what
may conduce to the uniting, serving, helping, and joining both Families
together.


Esch. Pray, Sir, let it be so. To Micio.


Mic. Well, I Have nothing to say against it.


Them. Troth it is no more than we are obliged to. -- For first, she is your Son's
VVife's Mother. --


Mic. What then?


Them. A very virtuous and modest Woman. --


Mic. So they say indeed.


Them. Pretty well in years. --


Mic. She is so.


Them. And past Childbearing, a lonesome Woman, and no body regards her. --


Mic. What a-duce would he be at? Aside.


Them. -- Therefore you ought to marry her, and you Eschine to do what you can
to bring it about.


Mic. Who I marry? Them. Yes, you.


Mic. I prithee? Them. Yes, you I say.


Mic. Po, you do but fool surely.


Them. to Eschine. If thou have any Life and Soul in thee, make him do it.


Esch. Dear Father --


Mic. interrupting. What? And do thou Blockhead mind what he says?


Them. It Is in vain to refuse, it cannot be avoided.


Mic. Po, you dote surely.


Esch. Good Sir! Let me obtain that Favor.


Mic. Ar't out of thy Wits, let me alone. angrily.


Them. Come, come, hearken to what your Son says for once.


Mic. Have not ye played the fool enough yet? Shall I marry at Threescore and
Five? And to an old Woman that is ready to drop into the Grave? This is your
wise Counsel, is it?


Esch. Pray Sir do, I Have promised it.


Mic. You promise with a Mischief! Promise for thy self, Chit.


Them. Fie, fie! What if he had begged a greater thing at your hands?


Mic. As if there was any thing greater than this.


Them. Pray grant his Request.


Esch. Good Sir, ben't so hard to be entreated.


Them. Po, promise him for once


Mic. Will ye never leave baiting me?


Esch. Not till I Have prevailed, Sir.


Mic. Troth, this is downright forcing a Man.


Them. Come, Micio, be good natured and do it.


Mic. Though this be the most damned, foolish, ridiculous Whim, and the most
averse to my Nature that can be; yet since you are so extremely hot upon it,
I Will humor ye for once.


Esch. This is excellent, I Am obliged to ye beyond measure.


Them. aside. Well, what is next? -- What shall I say next? This is as I Would have
it. -- What Is more to be done? -- to Micio. Ho! there is Hegio our poor Kinsman,
and nighest Relation; in truth, we ought in Conscience to do something for him.


Mic. What pray?


Them. There Is a small piece in the Suburbs, which you Farm out, pray let us give
him that to live on.


Mic. A small one say ye?


Them. Were it a great one you might give it to him: He has been as good as as
Father to Pamphila: Is a very honest Man, our Kinsman, and you cannot bestow it
better: Besides, Brother, there is a certain Proverb none of my own (I assure
ye) which you so well and wisely made use of: That Age has always that ill
Property of making us more Worldly, as well as more Wise. We should do well to
keep clear of this Scandal. It Is a true Proverb, Brother, and ought to be
regarded.


Mic. What Is all this? -- Well, let it be so, if he must needs have it so.


Esch. Brave Father I vow.


Them. Now you are my true Brother, both in Body and Soul.


Mic. I Am glad on it.


Them. I Have stabbed him with his own Weapons ^ sack. Aside laughing.

Enter Syrus with a Pick-Ax upon his Shoulders.


Sir. to Demea. The Job is done as you ordered, ^^^.


Them. Thou art an honest Lad. -- And of my Conscience I think Syrus deserves
his Freedom.


Mic. He his Freedom? For what Exploit?


Them. O for a thousand.


Sir. O dear Mr. Demea, you are a rare Gentleman, e^dad you are. You know I Have
looked to the young Gentlemen from their very Cradles: I taught em, advised
'em, and instructed 'em all I could possible.


Them. Nothing more evident: Nay more than that, he catered for 'em, pimp'd for
'em, and took ^are of a Debauchee in the Morning for 'em. These are no ordinary
Accomplishments, I can assure ye.


Sir. Your VVorship's very merry.


Them. Besides he was Adjutant-General in buying this Musick-Girl; 'twas he that
managed the whole Intrigue, and it is nothing but Justice to reward him, that it
may be an Encouragement to others: In short, Eschine desires it too.


Mic. to Eschine Do you desire't too?


Esch. Yes, if you please, Sir.


Mic. Since it is so, come hither Syrus. You Are free. Syrus kneels down, Micio
lays his Hand on his Head, after that gives him a cuff on the Ear.


Sir. rising up. Generously done: A thousand thanks to ye all, and to you Mr.
Demea.


Them. I Am well satisfied. Esch. And I too.


Sir. I don't question it, Sir: But I wish heartily my Joy were more complete,
that I might see my poor Spouse Phrygia to be made free too.


Them. Troth she is a mighty good Woman.


Sir. And the first that gave Teat to your Grandson to day.


Them. Faith, in good earnest, if she were the first, she deserves her Freedom
against the World.


Mic. What? For that Service only?


Them. Yes, for that: In fine, I Will pay for her Freedom.


Sir. God's blessing light upon your Worship, and grant all your wishes.


Mic. Syrus, thou have made a good days work on it.


Them. Besides, Brother, 'twou'd be a Deed of Charity to lend him a little Money
beforehand to begin the World withal: I Will engage he will soon pay it again.


Mic. Not a Souse.


Esch. He Is a very honest Fellow, Sir.


Sir. Upo' my word I Will pay ye again: Do but trust me.


Esch. Pray do, Sir.


Mic. I Will consider on it first,


Them. He shall pay ye.


Sir. to Demea. E'dad you're the best Man alive.


Esch. And the pleasantest i^th' World.


Mic. What Is the meaning of this Brother? How comes this change of Humor all
of a sudden? What a Fit's here of Squandring and Profusion!


Them. I Will tell ye. -- That you may know, Brother, these Sons of yours don't
reckon you a sweetnatur'd and pleasant Man, cause you live as you should, or do
what is just and reasonable, but you fawn, cocker, and give em what they II
spend. Now, Son Eschine, if you are dissatisfied at my course of Life, cause I
would not follow your humor in all things right or wrong; I Will not trouble my
Head any further, squander, buy Misses, and do what you will. But if you would
ha me inform ye, and set ye right, and upon occasion serve ye too, in some
things which by reason of your Youth you understand but little, are over fond
of, and don't much consider of, see here I Am ready to do it for you.


Esch. Dear Sir, we commit our selves wholly to your disposal; for you know
what is fitting to be done far better than we. -- But what will ye do in my
Brother's business?


Them. Well: Let him take the Musick-Girl; and so bid adieu to Wenching.


Esch. That Is very reasonable. To the Spectators.

Gentlemen, Your Favor.

Exeunt Omnes.
The End of the Brothers.
THE Tricks of Phormio.

A COMEDY, Acted at the Roman Sports, WHEN L. Posthumous Albinus and L.
Cornelius Merula, were Curule Edil's, By the Company of L Ambivius Turpio, and
L. Attilius of Preneste,

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was performed on
Unequal FLUTES.

It was taken from the GREEK of Apollodorus, call*d Epidicazomenos, and Acted
four times,

Under the Consulship of C. Fannius and M. Valerius.

A. V. C. 592. Before Christ 159.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Demipho, A rich old Citizen of Athens, somewhat Covetous, Mistrustful and
Peevish. Chremes, Demipho' s Brother, another Citizen of Athens, an old
Vxorious, Wife ridden Gentleman, and one who in his younger days loved a Girl
in a Corner. Antipho, Demipho' s Son, a Good-natured, Modest, Well bred young
Gentleman; very fond of Phanie his Wife. Phedrie, Chremes' s Son, an amorous
Gentile Spark of the Town, passionately in Love with a Masick-Girl. Phormio,
The Parasite, a bold, cheating, subtle, intriguing Fellow, and one of singular
Impudence. Geta, Servant to Antipho, an ingenious, designing, plotting Fellow,
true. o the Interests of Antipho, and his Cozen Phedrie. Davus, A Servant and
intimate Friend of Geta's. Dorio, A Covetous, Ill-natured, peevish Villainous
Bawd, Owner of Phedrie' s Music Girl. Hegio, Cratine, Crito, Three foolish
Advocates, Friends to Demipho.
WOMEN.
N^utistrata, Chremes' s Wife, a haughty and Imperious Woman, a great Talker,
always awing her Husband. Sophrona, Nurse to Phanie, an honest harmless old
Woman.
MUTES.
Dorcio, A Servant of Demipho's. ^havie, Married secretly to Antipho. Servants,
Attendants, etc.
Scene, ATHENS.

TIME, about Six or Seven Hours.

THE Tricks of Phormio.
ACT I.
SCENE, The Street before Demipho's Door. TIME, The Forenoon.
Davus alone, with a Bag of Money in his Hand. MY very good Friend and
Countryman Geta, came to me esterday about the Arrears of a small parcel of
Money he had left in my Hands formerl: he begged me to get it up; so I have,
and am just carrying it to him. His young Master has picked up a Wife I hear:
And this looks as if 'twere a Present for Mrs. Bride. What a confounded Custom
it is for those who have but a very little, to be always feeding them that have
abundance! All that this poor Fellow now, by starving himself, has bit by bit,
with much ado, scraped together out of his pitiful Allowance, must go at one
swoop, People never considering the pains it cost him the getting. And then
poor Geta must be squeezed over again, to give her Ladyship Joy of her
Bantling: And after that again upon the Anniversary of the Brat's Nativity,
when it is dedicated forsooth. The Child is the pretended Cause of all the
Presents, but it is the Mother runs away with all -- But is not that Geta there?
--


Enter Geta. Get. to them within. If a Red-hair'd Fellow should enquire for me.
--


Dav. He Is here, spare your breath.


Get. turning about. Ho, Davus! I was just coming to give ye the meeting.


Dav. Here, hold your Hand. Gives him the Bag. It Is all good and just what I
owed ye.


Get. Thou art an honest Fellow, and 'twas kindly done not to forget me.


Dav. Kind indeed, as the World goes now, I Will assure ye: For it is come to that
pass, that a Man must pray, and be thankful, to get his own again. But wh^ so
concerned?


Get. Who I? -- If you did but know the dread and danger I Am in.


Dav. As how pray?


Get. You shall know upon promise of Secrecy.


Dav. Away Simpleton! What, trust me with thy Money, and afraid to trust me
with a Secret? I shou'dn't get a Pin of my Sle^ve by falsifying with thee now.


Get. Prithee hear me then.


Dav. Yes, with both Ears.


Get. You know, Mr. Chremes, our old Master's elder Brother, don't ye?


Dav. Ver^ well.


Get. And his Son Phedrie too?


Dav. As well as I know thee.


Get. It so fell out, that the old Gentlemen took a Journey both together,
Chremes to Lemno, and our good Man to Cilicia, where an old Crony of his had
wheadled him over, Letter upon Letter, promising him whole Mountains of Gold,
with the Devil and all.


Dav. What to him that had enough, and to spare already?


Get. Never admire Man, it is his humor.


Dav. Pox of ill Luck! What pity it is I was not Grand Signior!


Get. When the old Gentlemen set out, they made me Tutor to their Sons.


Dav. Ah Geta, that was a hard task for thee.


Get. Troth so I found it by woeful Experience: I remember my unlucky Genius
bore very hard upon me that day. At first I began to be strict with them: But
what need many words? My faithfulness to my old Masters cost me many a sore
drubbing.


Dav. I thought as much: For what a madness is it to strive against the stream?


Get. Upo' that I let go the Reins, and contented my self to drive as they would
have me.


Dav. You knew how to make your own Markets.


Get. As for our Youngster, he was very regular for a while: But Mr. Phedrie
immediately picked up his Musick-Girl, and fell up to the Ears in Love. She was
kept, it seems, by a damnable griping Cockbawd. -- The old Gentlemen had taken
care to keep the young Men's Pockets at Low Water: So that our amorous Spark
could do nothing but look Babies in his Mistress's Eyes, follow her upo' the
Scent, and perhaps lead her to the Musick-School and back again. I and my young
Master having little else to do, must needs bear the Spark company. Right
against the School was a Barber's Shop, there did we commonly stay her coming
out. One day while we were dancing Attendance, in comes a young Fellow
snivelling at such a rate, as made ^^ all wonder, and ask him, What he all'd?
Why (said he) never till now did I take Poverty for such a sad grievous Burden:
Hand by I ve just been seeing a poor Girl, crying and taking on most heavily
for the Death of her Mother, by whose dead Body she was then sitting. She had
neither Friends, Acquaintance, nor Relation, besides one poor old Woman, to
stand by her, or look after the Funeral. It grieved me to the very Soul, for
she was an extraordinary Beauty. In short, we were all set agog at the Story.
Mr. A^^ipho presently cried, Shall we go and see her? Ay, ay, says* another,
Let Us go, prithee honest Man bring us to the place. Away we go, come to her,
see her: A pretty Rogue in faith she was: And what is more, she had nothing of
Ornament to set off her beauty: Her Hair all about her Ears, her Feet bare, all
out of order, her Cheeks blubbered, and dressed in such a pickle, that if she
had not been lovely to a Miracle, these Circumstances would have made her very
disagreeable. The Spark that was enam^^r'd with the Mu^ick-Girl only said,
She Is well enough; but ours, --


Dav. interrupting Was smitten, I warrant.


Get. Can ye guess how dee^ly? -- But now pray observe what came on it. The very
next day he goes right to the old Woman, and very fairly begs her leave for a
Nights Lodging; which she as fairly denied him, telling him, That his
pretensions were unreasonable, that the Girl was a Citizen's Daughter,
well-bred, and of a good Family; that if he would take her for better for
worse, he had the Law to bear him out in it; but if not, she had no more to say
to him. This put my Gentleman to a sad Nonplus* Marry her he would with all
his Heart, but was afraid of the old Gentleman abroad.


Dav. Would Not his Father have allowed on it, think ye, when he came back?


Get. What? to have married a Girl, who had neither Fortune nor Honor? Not
whilst his Eyes were open.


Dav. Well, and what came on it at last?


Get. What? -- Why a certain wheadling Ras^al, Phormio by Name, an audacious
Fellow, would ^h^ Devil had him for me.


Dav. What of him prithee?


Get. He put this damned Project into the young Man (...) ^ead I Am just about
to tell ye -- You know it is the ^aw here, that all Orphan-Girls must be married
to the next of Kin, and the same Law (...) the next of kin to marry them. Now,
says he, I Will say you are the Girl's Kinsman, and commence ^ S^^ against ye,
pretending to be a Friend of her Fa^^^^ (...) and bring it to a Trial; as for
who was her (...) who her Mother, and how you came to be her (...) let me alone
for forging all, to the best advan^^^e ^oo. When you disprove none of all this,
I shall (...) ye. When your Father comes home, he will be for t^^^^^ing o^me: But
what care I? the Girl will be (...) own.


Dav. A very pretty piece of Roguery in troth!


Get. Antipho was persuaded, the Business done, the Cause ^ry'd, we Cast, and
he Married.


Dav. What Is that you tell me?


Get. It Is even as I say.


Dav. Ah poor Geta, what will become of thee then?


Get. Faith I cannot tell; only thus much I know, that fall back, fall edge, we
must bear it.


Dav. Now I like ye: Spoken like a Philosopher!


Get. I Have no hopes but in this Inventing-Noddle of my own.


Dav. I commend thee.


Get. Should I go now and fee some petry Friend to plead for me thus! Good,
Sir, pardon him this once, but if he ever does the like again, I Will not open my
Mouth for him. 'Twere well if he didn't add, But when I am gone; Hang him Dog


Dav. But now for this Musick-Wench's Gentleman Usher, how he comes off?


Get. Poorly enough, Jove knows.


Dav. I warrant he has but little of the Ready to bestow on her.


Get. Not a Sowse: Only fine Words and gay Promises.


Dav. Is his Father come home or no?


Get. Not yet.


Dav. When do you look for your old Gentleman?


Get. I cannot tell positively; but I hear there s^a Letter from him at the
Custom-House, that came up by the Packet-Boat: I am just stepping for it.


Dav. Do You want any thing else with me, Geta?


Get. Nothing, but good bu'y to ye. Exit Davus


Geta alone. To them within. Soho Sirrah! -- What Is there no body at home?
Enter a Footboy. ^ere take this, and carry it to Dorcio. Gives him the Money.
Exeunt severally.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Antipho and Phedrie. Ant. entering. BUT Phedrie, is it come to that pass now,
that I should be afraid of my own Father, when I think of his return^ and a
Father that loves me so! If I had not been a rash Block-head, I might have
expected his coming home as became me.


Phe. What do you mean by all this?


Ant. A pretty question! When you your self were my chiefest Confident in this
mad Prank. Well, I could wish Phormio's Tongue had been out before he had given
me such Counsel, and pressed my willing Mind on to what has been the Foundation
of all my Miseries. If I had not enjoyed her at all, it might have made me
melancholy for three or four days or so; but then I shou'dn't have had this
perpetual vexation upon me, --


Phe. I give ye the hearing


Ant. -- Whilst I am in hourly expectations of my Father's sudden return, who
will pluck me from her Embraces.


Phe. Others are grieved for want of Enjoyment, but you for being glutted with
it. The God of Love has been too too liberal to ye, Cousin: For my part, yours
is a Life I Would as soon wish for, and desire, as any whatever. I should thank the
Gods did they bless me with so long a Banque^ of Love as you have been blessed
withal, and would be content to die the next mom^nt. Pray consider with your
self what trouble I endure by being debarred from the thing I love, and what
comfort you might take in your plentiful Enjoyment. I Will say nothing of your
having got a civil well-bred Women without any charge, and of your being
married to your own liking, to a Person of an unspotted Reputation. It Is
manifest you're happy, and only want a Mind that can tell when things are well.
Had you to do with a Bawd as I have, you would feel how it is then. But it is the
humor of us all, never to be contented.


Ant. But it is you your self, Cousin, that are the happy Man in my Opinion, who
have Power to consult at large, whether you had best keep her, love her still
or leave her: But I Have brought my self into such an unhappy strait, that I
neither know how to quit mine, nor keep her.

Enter Geta at a distance in great haste.


Ant. in a surprise. But what is the Matter now? Is Not that Geta in such haste?
-- It Is he for certain. -- Alas! my poor Heart forbodes that he is the Messenger
of some bad News or other.


Get to himself. In Troth, Geta, you are a dead Man, if thou do not find some
cunning shift or other to save thy self, and that quickly too, so many
Misfortunes are ready to seize thee, before thou^rt prepared for em. I can
neither tell how to escape em, nor how to get rid of them. Our Fool-hardiness
can never be concealed any longer. If my Noddle does not befriend us at this
pinch, either I or my poor Master must smart for it.


Ant. What makes him in such a Chafe trow?


Get. to himself. Then I Have but a Minute's time for Projection: M^ old Master's
upon our Backs.


Ant. What ill Luck is come to Town now?


Get to himself. When he comes to hear on it, how is it possible to pac^e him? If
I speak, he will be Choleric; say nothing, 'twill fret him; and for excusing my
self I had as good talk to the Wind. -- Poor Geta! Alas for thee! -- Then
besides my own trouble, Mr. Antipho is a great vexation to my Spirits: It Is him
I pity, and am now so much concerned for: It Is he that keeps me here; else I Would
have made a shift for one well enough, and been revenged of the old Man's
peevish Temper: I Would have fingered away something, and shown him a fair pair of
Heels for it.


Ant. partly hearing. What Fingering and Heels is the Fellow talking of?


Get. to himself. But where shall I find my Master Antipho? Or where shall I go
look him?


Phe. to Antipho. He names you, Cousin.


Ant. I expect to hear of some shrewd Misfortune by this Messenger.


Phe. Pho! Are ye out of your Wits?


Get. to himself. I Will even get me home; ten to one but he is there. [Going off.


Phe. to Antipho. Let Us call him back.


Ant. You, Sir, stay.


Get. not knowing him. You take upon ye sufficiently, whoever you are.


Ant. Geta, I say!


Get. turning about. Od's me, it is the very Man I wanted.


Ant. Prithee what is the News? Dispatch it in a word if ye can.


Get. I will so.


Ant. Out with it quick.


Get. Just now at the Waterside I saw --


Ant. My Father?


Get. You Have hit it.


Ant. Then I Am a dead Man.


Phe. God's Death!


Ant. Prithee what shall I do?


Phe. to Geta. How Is this?


Get. I tell ye I saw his Father, your Uncle.


Ant. What course shall I take to help me out in this sudden Misfortune? Ah!
Should my unlucky ^


Get. Ti^^^ (...) since things (...) are, you oug^^ (...) the more upon your
Gu^^^^ (...) Terfaint (...) fair Lady.

(...)


Get. But considering your present Circumstan^^^, you have great reason to be
otherwise; for if you^^ Fame, sees ye once down in the mouth, he will conclude you
are guilty of all.


Phe. He Is in the right on it.


Ant. I cannot change my Nature.


Get. Suppose you were put to a worse strait.


Ant. Why, not being able to do this, I should never do that.


Get. Pshaw! He Is good for nothing, Mr. Phedrie: Condemned already: Why should
we stand trifling away our time with him? I Will even be jogging.


Phe. And so will I too. They are going off.


Ant. Prithee, Geta! -- Suppose I look thus? -- He tries to look pleasantly. Is
this well?


Get. Not worth a Farthing.


Ant. Do but look on me now. Here he makes

What do you think of this? grimaces a good while, at last composes his
Countenance.


Get. No.


Ant. What say ye to it now?


Get. Somewhat thereabouts.


Ant. Will this?


Get. That will do it -- Keep ye there: Besure you answer him Word for Word, and
let not his nussing and hectoring dash you out o'Countenance.


Ant. Well enough.


Get. Say you were forced to it by the Law, and the Rules of Court; do you mark
me. -- He looks to one corner of the Stage. But what old Man's younder, at the
further end of the Street?


Ant. peeping. It Is my Father, I amn't able ^^ stand my ground. going off.


Get. What ha'ye a mind to do, Sir? VVhither so fast? Stay, stay, I say.


Ant. I know my own frailty, and fault too well: I give up my Phanie, and my
Life into your hands. Exit Antipho.


Phe. Prithee, Geta, what shall we do now?


Get. Why, you must expect a rattling, but poor Geta (if my Stars don't
deceive me) will be trussed up to rights. Troth, I think we must even follow
the same Advice we gave to Mr. Antipho.


Phe. Hang your Must! What you would have me do, command me freely.


Get. Don't ye remember, when we began this Enterprise first, how ye agreed to
manage it? That their Plea was just, fair, sure; in fine, the clearest Case in
the World.


Phe. I do.


Get. Why this you must make use of: If you can think of a better or a siner,
take it.


Phe. I Will do what I can.


Get. Do you give the first onset, I Will lie in ambush as a reserve for ye when
you begin to give ground.


Phe. Well enough.

Enter Demipho at a distance.

Phedrie and Geta move on one side, observing him.


Them. to himself. -- Is It come to that then?

My Son Antipho marry without my consent? Sure a Father's Authority. -- But why
did I name Authority? Methinks the fear of my Displeasure might have created
some Respect; what has he no shame in him? O impundent wickedness! And that
Hang-dog Geta, the Tutor too. --


Get. aside to Phed^ie. So, I Am brought in for a snack.


Them. to himself. Suppose they pretend, It Was done against his Will, the Law
sore'd him to it. Well, I understand, I grant it.


Get. That Is well enough.


Them. to himself. But to give up his Cause so willingly, and without one word
to the contrary, did the Law force him upon that too?


Phe. to Geta. That Is a hard Chapter.


Get. to Phedrie. Let me alone to clear that.


Them. to himself. I Am at a sad Nonplus, things have happened so contrary to my
expectations and belief. Then my Passion runs away with me, so as I cannot bring
my mind to the common use of thinking. Wherefore in a Calm we should be always
sure to provide for a Storm: So he that comes home from a long Journey, ought
to think of the Dangers, Losses and Banishment, that may befall him: He may find
his Son debauched, his Wife dead, and his Daughter dangerously ill. All these
are common Accidents, and should be no News to him, if they happen: But if
things fall out better than he expected, he may look upon it as clear Gains.


Get. aside to Phedrie. Troth, Sir, you would not think how much wiser I am than
this old Fox my Master. Iv'e fore-casted all my Misfortunes: Videlicet, When my
Master comes home, I must expect to beat Hemp in Beidewell all the days of my
Life, to be whipped and shackled, or sent to the Plough-tail. All this will be
no News to me, if any thing happens better than I expect, I shall look upon it
as clear Gains, in troth. -- But why ^on't you go to him, and sweeten him up a
little.

Phedrie moves toward Demipho.


Them. seeing Phedrie. Younder comes my Cousin Hedrie to meet me.


P^e. Dear Uncle your humble Servant.


Them. I Am glad to see thee, Coz; but where is P^ripho?


Phe. You're welcome home, Sir.


Them. I thank ye; -- but pray answer my Question.


Phe. He Is very well, Sir; within call. -- But your Affairs, Sir, do they
succeed to your desire?


Them. sighing. I wish they did.


Phe. Why what is amiss, Sir?


Them. Amiss, Phedrie? You Have made a fine Match among ye in my absence, have not ye?


Phe. Oh, ho! Is It that you are so angry with him for?


Get. A rare Actor in faith. Aside.


Them. And have NOT I reason to be so? I wish in my Soul, I could but set my Eyes
upon him, he should see what it is to provoke a good-natured Father


Phe. Indeed, Sir, he has done nothing to deserve your Anger.


Them. Look ye here! They Are all of a plece, hang all on a string; know one,
know all. Angrily.


Phe. Not so neither, Sir.


Them. Does one commit a Reguery, whip, th. other's ready to bear him out in it.
Does this do it? Then that is ready to plead for him: So they help one another
by turns.


Get. The old Man has hit upon both of their Humors better than he is aware on.
Aside.


Them. If it was not a Bargain between ye, you would not take his part so much as
you do.


Phe. Sir, if my Cousin Antipho had commit a fault to the prejudice either of
his Honor a Estate, I d sooner die than plead for him, but should leave him to
suffer the just demerit of ^^ Crimes. But of the other hand, if some Chea,
emboldned in his Knaveries, should lay his Snares to entrap unwary Youth, and
should compass his designs, is the fault ours, or the Judges? Who ^^ through
Envy take from the Rich their Right, and for pity give it to the Poor.


Get. Weren't I privy to this whole Affair, I should think what he says to be
as true as an Oracle. Aside.


Them. Can any Judge 'th' World know a Man's Right, when he stands like a Post
as he did?


Phe. He did like a modest Gentleman: For when he came in the open Court, Fear
and Modesty so surpised him, that he could not utter a word of what he had
premeditated.


Get: aside. An Orator in faith! -- But why don't I go and have a touch also
with the old Mumpsimus. -- Goes to Demipho. Dear Master, your humble Servant,
welcome home with all my Heart.


Them. Ho! Mr. Governor! The very prop of our Family! The Trustee o'r my Son in
my absence! I Am yours too. Jecringly.


Get. I hear, Sir, you're pleased to blame us all* undeservedly, and me too
that deserve it least of all: For what would ye had me have done i^th' case,
when you know, Sir, the Law will not admit a Slave to plead or be a Witness?


Them. Pish! I grant all this; and more, than that I own the Boy was bashful,
and you a Slave. But let her be never so much akin, there was no necessity for
his having her: the Law only obliges him to give her a Portion, and let her
look out for another Husband. Your reason pray, why he rather chose to marry a
Beggar Wench?


Get. Nay 'twasn't Reason, but Money that was wanting.


Them. He might have borrowed it any where.


Get. Any where, say ye? Sooner said than done.


Them. Rather than fail he should have taken it up on Interest.


Get. Ho, bravely spoken! As though any one would have trusted him while you are
alive.


Them. Well (...) It shall never go thus, it must not be. Shall I suster em to
live together one day to an end? No, I would not do it for the World. -- but I Would
fain ^^a^ this pal^y Rascal brought before me, or else direct me where he lives.


Get. You mean Phormio, Sir, don't ye?


Them. Yes, the Woman's great Spokes-man.


Get. I Will fetch him so ye presently.


Them. But where is Antipho now?


Phe. Gone out, Sir.


Them. Good Coz, do so much as seek him out for me, and bring him hither.


Phe. I Am going to rights. Exit Phedrie.


Get. To his Mistress he means. Aside.

Exit Geta another way.


Demipho alone. I Will just step in and return my Thanks for my safe arrival;
from thence I Will to the Piazza, and call some Friends to stand by me in this
business, that I may not be unprovided when Phormio come^.

Exit.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Phormio and Geta. Phor. entering. HOW! Mr. Antipho play at Bopeep for fear of
his Father, say ye?


Get. Very true.


Phor. So: Then poor Phany's left in the Lurch?


Get. Even so.


Phor. And the old Man's upo' the fret?


Get. Yes, indeed.


Phor. to himself So then! the burden lies all upon thy shoulders, poor
Phormio. Thou must take what comes on it, and even brew as thou have b^k'd. --
To work then, old Boy.


Get. Prithee about it then.


Phor. not minding Geta. Suppose he should ask me. --


Get. It Is you we only trust to.


Phor. studying That Is right. -- What if he should reply? --


Get. 'Twas you put us upon it.


Phor. still in a study. -- Ay, that will do.


Get. pulling by the Sleeve Prithee help us out then.


Phor. turning quick to Geta. Prithee, trail the old Fox hither: I Have all my
Traps ready laid for him.


Get. What design are ye upon now?


Phor. What would ye have me, but to let Phanie be his Wife still, clear Mr.
Antipho of all, and turn the whole stream of the old Man's Rage upon my self?


Get. Spoken like a courageous Man, and a true Friend! But in faith, honest
Phormio, I Am afraid this Lion's Heart of yours will bring that pretty Face to
look through a Pillory at the last.


Phor. Pshaw! Never fear that; I amn't to learn my Trade now; I know where to
take sure footing. How many Men do you think I have in my time beat, and left for
dead, Townsmen as well as Strangers? The oftener I exercised my Hand, the more
Skill I had. And pray when did ye ever hear of an Action of Battery clapped
upon my Back?


Get. How comes that about?


Phor. Pho! your Fowlers never aim at a Hawk ^r Kite that do mischief; but it is
your harmless Birds they are for. In one there is Profit, in the other only
Powder and Shot thrown away. Just so they who have any thing to lose are in the
most danger: It Is well known I Have nothing to lose but my Skin. You Will say
perhaps, They might seize my Person: They Would be hanged before they would maintain
such a devouring Glutton, as I am. And troth, I fancy they are in the right
on it, not to do me such an excellent good turn for a bad one.


Get. Faith, my young Master will n^r be able to make ye amends for this
kindness.


Phor. It Is we Vassals ow more than our Lives are worth for the Favors of our
Princes. Is Not a rare thing to feast it at free-cost, to perfume and bath ones
self, to have no trouble upon your Spirit, whilst another ^ear^ the Trouble and
Charge of all? For you to have all things to your liking, to laugh and take
^ou^ pleasure, whilst he (...) himself; to be honored with the first Cup, and
set at the upper end of the Table, to eat of the puzzling Banquet!


Get. What do you mean by the Word puzzling?


Phor. When there is such a Plenty as would puzzle ye which Dish to choose first,
ye little Rogue: And considering how delicious and costly all these Blessings
are: How can ye call the Founder of 'em less than a God on Earth?

Enter Demipho at a distance with Hegio, Cratine and Crito.


Get. Our old Gentleman's just upon us: Mind your hits, the first Onset will be
the bloodiest of all: If you can bear the brunt of that, you may manage him as
you please afterward.


Them. to his Followers. Hark ye, my Friends, was ever Man treated at such a
contemptuous rate as I? -- Your Opinion, Gentlemen.


Get. The Man's in wrath.


Phor. softly. Hold your Tongue; S't! -- I Will rowse him, I ll warrant ye. Very
loud. O wonderful! Does Demipho deny Phanie to be his Kinswoman? Heavens bless
us! -- What, deny his own Kindred?


Get. He does, what then?


Them. I think yonder is our Antagonist. -- Keep those Neighbors.


Phor. aloud. Does Not he know who her Father was?


Get. No.


Phor. Nor yet Stilpho neither?


Get. No marry does not he.


Phor. aloud. Ay, because she had nothing left her, her Father's disowned, and
she slighted. See what it is to be a covetous old Hunks.


Get. You Would better be hanged ye Dog, than c^ll my Master covetous. Seeming in a
passion.


Them over-hearing. Abominable Impudence! What is he come to call Whore first?


Phor. aloud. Now I cannot blame the young Gentleman indeed, for not knowing
Stilpho, 'cause he was an old poor Man, that lived by his Labor, and was for
the most part in the Country, where he hired a small piece of Ground of my
Father: The poor old Man has often complained to me how basely Demipho his
Kinsman had slighted him; but what a Man did he slight thus? Why one of the
honestest Men that ever wore a Head.


Get. See that he and you prove as good as ye pretend.


Phor. You be hanged: If I had not found him to be as I say, I would never have
engaged our Family in such terrible feuds upon her account, who is now so
ungenteely slighted by your Master.


Get. What, still abuse my Master behind his back? Ye foul mouthed Va^let.


Phor. It Is no more than he deserves.


Get. Say ye so, Jail-bird? Vnbottons his Collar, and clenches his Fist at him.


Them coming nigher. Geta!


Get. not minding Demipho Abominable Thief! Damnable Che^^^


Phor. softly to Geta. Prithee give him an Answer.


Get. turning about. Who Is that calls? -- Oh, Sir --


Them. Don't Quarrel.


Get. This Vari^t has been laying such base things to your Worship's Charge,
that none but this Scoundrel would ^a been guilty of.


Them. Well, say no more on it -- To Phormio But, hark ye, young Man, by your
good leave I Would ask ye one civil Question, if you please to give an Answer to it.
Pray who was this Friend of yours that you were talking of? Tell me plainly,
and how near did he say he was related to me?


Phor. You are for pumping, as though you didn'^ know him.


Them. I know him?


Phor. Most certainly.


Them. I deny't, you that affirm it, prove it, and rub up my Memory.


Phor. I warrant you don't know one of your own Flesh and Blood.


Them. You make me stark mad: Cannot ye tell me his Name?


Phor. His Name? with all my heart. Studies.


Them. Why don't ye out with it then?


Phor. Pox on it, it is slipped out of my Head. Sofly to Geta.


Them. Hah! What Is that you mutter?


Phor. softly to Geta. If you remember the Name we mentioned just now, prithee
prompt me. -- Aloud to Demipho Ha, ha, he, -- You shall have none of the Name
for me, as if you didn't know it already: You're upo'th catch I find Here
Phormio laughs, and speaks as loud as he can, that Geta may tell him the Name,
and Demipho not hear^t.


Them. I scorn your Words.


Get. softly to Phermio. Stilpho, Stilpho.


Phor. The Name, Ha -- ha -- he -- But what care I? The Name's Stilpho.


Them. Who, say ye?


Phor. I say Stilpho; as if you didn't know him.


Them. I ll take my Corporal Oath I know no such Man, nor was I ever akin to
any of that Name.


Phor. Is It possible? Arn't you ashamed to say so? Had he left you a sowsing
Sum of Money --


Them. The Devil take ye.


Phor. -- You Would have been the first that should have traced him, and his
Pedigree, from the Conqueror.


Them. Well, be it so: If I had undertaken it, I must have made it out, which
way she was my Kinswoman: Therefore prithee do you the same: Tell me which way
she is related to me.


Get. Faith well urged, Sir -- Aside to Phormio Look to your self, my Friend.


Phor. I made it out as clear as the Sun in open Court, where 'twas to be done:
If 'twere Forgery, why didn't your Son make it appear to be so?


Them. Tell not me of my Son; he behaved himself worse than a Changling.


Phor. But you, Sir, that are so wondrous wise, may go into Court, and procure
a second Hearing o^th same Cause, since you play Rex here, and take upon ye the
sole Prerogative of having the same Cause tried twice over.


Them. Though I Have been much abused in this business, yet rather than be plagued
with Lawsuits, and your impertinent Tongue, let her go for my Kinswoman, I Will
give her a Portion as the Law requires -- Here, take half a score Pieces, and
away with her. Offers him Money.


Phor. Ha -- ha -- he --: A very pleasant Man in faith!


Them. What would the Man have, don't I offer very fair? Cannot I claim the
Privilege of the Common Law?


^hor. Is it so, sweet Sir? When you have made use of a Citizen's Daughter, does
the Law allow ye to give her a Whores Pay, and send her packing? Or does not it
rather require she should be married to the next of Kin, and keep to one Man,
lest want should make her do that which might be a Scandal to her Quality? And
you are against that, are ye?


Them. Ay, ay, to the next of Kin: But what is she akin to us? Or how pray?


Phor. Enough, enough: We needn't try it over again.


Them. I don't design it; but I shall push hard till I Have made an end on it,


Phor. You Would as good catch Butter-flies.


Them. I say, I will do it.


Phor. Besides, Sir, it is none of your Concern: It Is your Son is cast, and not
you: Your Dancing days were over long ago.


Them. Then you may suppose it is he that says all this to ye; if not, I Will turn
him and his Trull out of Doors.


Get. Now his Back's up. Aside.


Phor. You Would be twice advised first.


Them. You unlucky Dog, are ye resolved to do me all the mischief you're able?


Phor. He Is damnably afraid, tho he does all he can to conceal it. Aside to
Geta.


Get. to Phormio. Your design succeeds rarely.


Phor. What? Cannot ye endure with patience what cannot be cured! Come, do like a
Gentleman, that there may be a lasting Friendship between us. Jeering.


Them. Pish! Do I care a Fig for your Friendship? Or desire to see, or be
acquainted with such a Rascal?


Phor. If you two can agree upon it, you will have a Comfortress in your old Age:
Pray consider what time a day it is with ye.


Them. Pox, let her comfort thee; take her and the Devil to boot.


Phor. Good Sir, moderate your Passion. Jeering.


Them. Mark this then, without any more ado: If you don't make all the haste you
can, and take away your Jil^, I Will thrust her out by Head and Shoulders: That Is
the Word for all, Mr. Knave.


Phor. If ye o^^er her the least Affront unworthy her Quality, I Will clap a
swinging Action upon your back: That Is the Word for all, Mr. Alderman! -- Hark
ye, if the want me, you will find me at home. Aside to Geta.


Get. softly to Phormio. Well enough.

Exit Phormio.
Them. What a World of Care and Vexation has my Son brought me into, by
entangling himself, as well as me, in this unlucky Match! -- Then I cannot get
one glimps of him, to know what he can say, or how he stands affected. -- Run
in, Geta, and see whether he be come home or no.


Get. I will, Sir.

Exit Geta.
Them. You see, Gentlemen, how the case stands; What had I best to do? Your
Advice, Mr Counselor. To Hegio.


Heg. Meaning me, Sir? -- I think Mr. Cratine's the fittest Man to speak first,
if you please.


Them. Come on then, Mr. Cratine.


Cra. Who I, Sir?


Them. Yes you, Sir.


Cra. I Would willingly advis^ ye for the best; I am of Opinion, Sir, that what
your Son did in your absence, should, in Right and Reason, be nulled and void
ipso facto; and the Law will allow it. Dixi.


Them. Now for you, Mr Hogio.


Heg. I believe Mr. Cratine spoke as he thought; but as the saying is, So many
Men, so many Minds, every one as they like. In my Opinion, what the Law has
once determined shou'dn't be cancelled, and 'twou'd be a Scandal to offer at
such a thing.


Them. Now for your Opinion, Mr. Crito.


Cri. I desire time to consider on it; it is a weighty Affair.


Heg. Ha'^ye any further occasion for our Advice?


Them. You Have made rare work on it i'saith.

Exeun^ Hegi^, ^ratine and Crito.


Them. alone looking after 'em. So I Am more to seek now than ever.

Enter Geta.


Get. They say, Sir, he is not come back yet.


Them. I Will even stay till my Brother comes home; what Advice he gives in this
case, that I Will follow. I Will enquire at the Waterside when they expect him.
Exit Demipho.

Geta alone.
Get. And I Will go see for Mr. Antipho, and let him know how Squares go -- But
look yonder, he comes in Pudding-time.

Enter Antipho at a distance.


Ant to himself. In good troth, Antipho, thou and this faint Heart of thine are
mightily to be blamed: What? run away, and leave thy very Life and Soul to the
Management of Deputies? Could think they would take more care of thy business
than thy self? Let other Matters have gone how they would, the dear Creature at
home ought to have been looked after, for fear the poor Soul, that has lodged
all her Hopes and Fortunes in thy hands, should, for trusting to thy Promises,
come to any mischief.


Get. goes up to him Faith, Sir, we were just praying heartily for ye, but the
wrong way, because you slunk away and left us so fairly in the lurch.


Ant. It Was thee I wanted, Geta.


Get. -- But for all that we didn't flinch an Ace.


Ant. Prithee tell me in what posture my Affairs stand, and what have I to
trust to; does my Father know any thing of the main business?


Get. Not a bit.


Ant. Is there any hopes left then?


Get. Indeed I cannot tell --


Ant. Dear ^eart!.


Get. But Mr. Phedrie pleaded like a Counselor for ye.


Ant. He has been always very obliging.


Get. Then for Phormio, in this as in all other things, he has behaved himself
like a Hero,


Ant. What did he do?


Get. He quite out-hector'd your Father, as huffing as he was.


Ant. God-a-mercy Phormio, I faith.


Get. And I also did my best.


Ant hugging him. Ah, honest Rogue! Faith I Am obliged to ye all.


Get. The first Encounter was just as I tell ye; at present Matters go on very
smoothly; your Father, it seems, will let things rest till your Uncle comes
home.


Ant. Why till then?


Get. He says he will be advised by him in this business.


Ant. Ah Geta! How I dread his coming home, since I understand it is his
Sentence alone I must stand or fall by.


Get. Look, yonder is your Cousin Phedrie.


Ant. Where?


Get. Look ye! He Is just coming out piping hot from his old Sweating-House.

Enter Phedrie and Dorio; Antipho and Geta move on one side and observe them.


Phe. Nay, good Dorio, hear me.


Dor. The Devil I will.


Phe. But one word


Dor. Pox! don't teaze me so.


Phe. Do but hear what I Have to say.


Dor. I Am sick with hearing the same thing a thousand times over.


Phe. But I have something to offer, that you will be glad to hear of.


Dor. Well, let us hear it then.


Phe. Is It impossible for me to prevail upon ye, to stay but three short days?
-- Dorio is going off, and Phedrie holds him Whither so fast pray?


Dor. I Would have scored it up for a Wonder, if you had made me any new offer.


Ant to Geta. Alas, I Am horribly afraid the Bawd is working himself no good.


Ge, to Antipho. And so am I too.


Phe. You will not believe me then.


Dor That Is we^ guessed.


Phe. Suppose I pass my Word?


Dor. Mere Stuff!


Phe. You Would say 'twas one of the best days work ye er made in y^^r Life.


Dor. Idle Stories.


Phe. Do but trust me, and you shall not repent it; you will find it t^ be as I say.


Dor. Silly Phansies!


Phe. Good now try me, the time is not so long.


Dor. Cuckoo -- Cuckoo.


Phe. You are my Relation, you are my Father, you are my Friend, you. --


Dor. interrupting. Tattle on, tattle on.


Phe. Are ye of such a barbarous and inflexible Nature, that neither Pity nor
Entreaties can mollify ye?


Dor. And are you, Sir, so senseless and shameless, as to think your gay Words,
and fine flourishes, shall chouse me out of what is my own for nothing?


Ant. to Geta. Troth I Am sorry for him.


Phe. Alas! I am convinced he is in the right on it. Aside.


Get. to Antipho. I think they both come up each to his proper Character.


Phe. And must this Misfortune needs light upo' me in a time when my Cousin
Antipho is in the very same trouble himself?

Antipho and Geta go up to them.
Ant. to Phedrie. Ha! Cousin, what is the Matter?


Phe. turning to him. My Cousin Antipho's the happiest Man alive.


Ant. Who I?


Phe. In having what you love in your own Custody; not tor^^ented like me, with
such a Villain as this.


Ant. In my Custody say ye? -- Ay, indeed, I have, as the saying is, A Wolf by
the Ears: How to part from her I know not, and how to keep her I cannot tell.


Dor. My very Case, by the Mackins.


Ant. to Dorio. Courage Man, don't play the Bawd by halves. -- To Phedrie. But
prithee what has he done?


Phe. That Rascal? -- Why, like a hard-hearted wretch as he is, he has gone and
sold my dearest Pamphila.


Get. How! Sold her?


Ant. Sold her, say ye?


Phe. He has so.


Dor. A mighty business indeed, for a Man to make Money of his own Wares!


Phe. I cannot prevail upon him to stay but three days for me, and break off the
Bargain with him, till such time as I shall receive the Money my Friends
promised to lend me. -- To Dorio. If I don't pay it ye then, you shall not stay a
minute longer for me


Dor. You Will crack my Brain-pan presently.


Ant. He desires but a very little time, Dorio; Prithee ben't so hard-hearted.
The favor shall be requited to you double, take my Word for it.


Dor. Mere Shams!


Ant. to Phedrie. Can you suffer your Mistress to be Ravished from this
pleasant Town? -- To Dorio. And can you have the heart to part such fervent
Lovers?


Dor. That Is neither my Fault, nor yours.


Get. A plague on thee for a Rascal. Aside.


Dor. Look ye; many a month have I born with you against the grain; you 'ye
brought me nothing but Court Promises, Crocodile's Tears, and a Beggar's Purse:
Now on the other hand, I Have g^t me a Chapman that will pay me freely without
snivelling. Therefore, Sir, cede majoribus, I say.


Ant. In good earnest, as I remember there was a day set for my Cousin to have
her.


Phe. There was so.


Dor. Do I deny't?


Ant. Is that day past then?


Dor. No, but another's day came before it.


Ant. Arn't ye ashamed of your Knavery?


Dor. Not as long as I can get by it.


Get. Sordid Villain!


Phe. Dorio, Is that your conscience now?


Dor. It Is so; if you like me, make use of me.


Ant. Why should you cheat him thus?


Dor. Rather I faith, Mr. Antipho, it is he cheats me; he knew well enough what
I was, but I took him for another sort of a Gentleman; so that he has deceived
me: I am just for all the World as I used to be. But let that pass; thus much
I Will do. To morrow Morning the Captain says he will bring me the Money: Now, Mr.
Phedrie, if you will bring it first, I ll follow my own Rule, First come, first
served; and so good bu'y to ye.


Phe. What shall I do now? -- Where shall poor I now, that am worse than
nothing, scrape up such a Sum at so short a warning? -- If I could but have got
him to have stayed three days, the Money was promised me by that time. Walks to
and fro dejectedly.


Ant to Geta What, shall we leave our Friend in such a miserable case, who but
just now, as you told me, pleaded my Cause so handsomely? Shant we requite his
Courtesy in time of need?


Get. It Is but right and reason we should, I confess.


Ant. Come on then; you are the Man that can keep his Head above Water.


Get. What would ye have me do?


Ant. Procure him the Money.


Get. That I would with all my heart; but where must I have it?


Ant. My Father's at home.


Get. That I know, but what then?


Ant. Po! A word to the Wise is enough.


Get. Is it so, Sir?


Ant. Yes, indeed.


Get. Very pretty Counsel I faith! You may do it your self if you please; shall not
I come off with flying Colors, if I escape with a whole Skin upo' your account?
But I must needs venture my Neck upon his account too.


Ant. That Is true I own.


Phe. What, Geta! Am I no body wi'ye then?


Get. Not so neither: -- But is it nothing in your Esteem, that we have stirred
up the old Gentleman's Anger against us all, unless we provoke him again beyond
all hopes of Reconcilement?


Phe. Shall my Rival carry away my dearest beyond Sea, and I be the Spectator
too? -- Ah Cousin, speak with me while you may; take one farewell Look before I
leave ye.


Ant. Why, Sir, what crotchet comes in your Head now? Prithee tell me.


Phe. I Will traverse Sea and Land after her, or perish in the Attempt; that I Am
resolved on.


Get. A good Journey to ye, Sir; but soft and fair goes far.


Ant. Prithee, Geta, see if thou can help him a little.


Get. Help him, pray how?


Ant. Good now try however, for fear he do what may make us both repent, more
or less, hereafter.


Get. My Invention's upo'th' Tenter-hooks. -- ^tudies. He Is out o^ danger, or I
am mistaken; but still I Am afraid my poor Hide will smart for it.


Ant. Don't be afraid; we'll stand and fall with thee upon all accounts. ^


Get. to Phedrie. Well, how much Money do you want? Tell me.


Phe. Fourscore Guinea's or so: That Is all.


Get. Fourscore Guineas? Whoop! Whoop! She Is a plaguey dear bit, Mr. Phedrie.


Phe. No, she is an extraordinary Pennyworth.


Get. Come, no more; you shall ha the Mone^.


Phe. hugging him Rare Rogue!


Get. Come let me alone.


Phe. I want it just now.


Phe. And you shall have it just now; but I shall want Phormio, to second me
in the design.


Phe. to G^ta Pray step, and desire him to be at home.


Ant. He Is ready I warrant ye; lay what load you will upo' him he will bear't.
Hes the only Man of a thousand that is true to his Friend.


Get. Let Us away to him, out of hand.


Ant. Can I do ye any kindness in this Matter?


Get. None at all. Pray go and comfort the poor Creature at home, I know shes
almost dead with fear -- Why do you stay, Sir?


Ant. I know nothing I Would do with a more willing mind. Exit Antipho.


Phe. How will ye go to work in this business?


Get. I Will tell ye as we go along; therefore pray be moving. Exeunt Ambo.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Demipho and Chremes. Them ^^^^ing. -- WELL, ha'ye dispatched the Business you
went about to Lemno, Brother? Have ye brought your Daughter along with ye?


Chr. No.


Them. Why didn't ye?


Chr. After he, Mother saw I made a longer stay here than ordinary, and that
the Girl's Age would not admit of my farther delays, she and her whole Family
took Shipping, and (as I am informed) came hither in search after me.


Them. When you heard of this, how came you to tarry so long behind 'em?


Chr. Alas! I was sick all the time.


Them. How came that? Of what Distemper?


Chr. that is a Question! Above Threescore is Distemper sufficient -- But the
Master of the Ship that brought 'em over, told me, they are all landed safe.


Them. But, Brother, have ye heard of the shrewd Misfortune that happened to my
Son in my absence?


Chr. Ay truly; and it is that has broke the Neck of all my designs: For should
I offer my Daughter in Marriage to a Stranger, I must tell the whole Story, how
I came by her, and by whom; but you, I know, are as true to my Interest as I
can be my self. A Stranger, that would be my Son-in-Law, would hold his Tongue,
as long as we were good Friends together; but if he once disregarded me, he will
know more by half than I Would have him. Then I Am horribly afraid the business
should come to my Wife's Ear; if it does, my only remedy will be to take up my
Heels, and be marching: For to speak the Truth, I of the whole Family am the
only Friend to my self.


Them. I m sensible of it Brother, and it is a great trouble to me; but Ill leave
no Stone unturned, till I Have proved my self as good as my word. They walk aside.

Enter Geta, at a great distance.


Get. to himself. I never set my Eyes on a craftier Whores-bird than this
Phormio in all my Life. I came to the Bastard to tell him that we wanted the
Ready, and how we designed to angle for it; and I had scarce opened my Lips, but
he knew my meaning by my gaping. He was tickled at the Fancy, clappd me upo'
th back fort, asked for the old Gentleman, and on his Marrow-bones thanked the
Gods a thousand times, for putting an opportunity into his hands of showing
himself as much Mr. Phcdrie's, as he had been Mr Antipho's Friend. I bid him
wait for me at the Piazza, where I Would bring the old Cully to him. -- Seeing
Demipho. Look there he is! -- But whose that looking or his Left-shoulder? -- O
the Devil! Mr. Phedries Father? Pish! What a Bru^e am I to be afraid of that?
Is It cause thou have caught two Wood-cocks I thy Spring instead of one! -- I Am
sure it is safest to have two Strings to one's B^w. -- Ill try to get it of him I
(...) designed; if he answers my expectation, well: If not, then have at the
New-comer.

Enter Antipho at another part of the ^^^ge, observing the rest.


Ant. to himself. I look every minute for this Geta's coming back. -- Hah!
Yonder Is my Uncle wi' my Father, laying their Heads together God's Death! How I
dread what Designs his coming will put my Father upon!


Get. aside. Ill go to them. -- goes to that part of the Stage where Demipho
and Chremes are. What my Master Chremes?


Chr. Honest Geta, how is it?


Get. You're heartily welcome home, Sir.


Chr. I thank ye.


Get. How goes the World with you, Sir?


Chr. Much at one, upon my arrival here I find a great many Alterations, as I
used to do.


Get. So: Then you have heard of Mr. Antipho's business, I suppose?


Chr. All, all.


Get. to Demipho. What did you tell him, Sir? -- Was Not it an abominable thing
to be so put upon, Mr. Chremes?


Them. 'Twas that point he and I were just discoursing on.


Get. In troth, Sir, I Have been hammering upo' the same thing, and fancy I ve
thought of an Expedient.


Them. hastily. How, Geta! What Expedient?


Get. Just as I parted from you, by chance who should I meet with but Phormio?


Chr. Who, Phormio?


Get. Yes; he that is the young Woman's --


Chr. Oh, I know him.


Get. The Toy came into my Head, to feel his Pulse a little. I took him aside,
Prithee, Phormio (said I) had not ye better make an end of this Quarrel by fair
means, rather than foul? My Master's a free-hearted Gentleman, and one that
hates Law: But I faith, if he had taken all his Friends Advice, he d have kickd
her to the Devil before this time. -- Antipho behind over-hearing. What does
the Rogue mean? What would he be at?


Get. -- I Will warrant ye you think the Law can take hold of him for that? Pish!
We^ve had Council upon the Business already: And take my word for it, if you
once begin a Suit with this Gentleman -- he has his Tongue so well hung, he will
make ye smoke for it. But suppose he be Cast; it is no hanging Matter, and a
little Money will put all to rights again. After this Discourse, I found my
Gentleman took down a Peg lower: Here Is only you and my self (continued I)
Prithee, good Boy, tell me what you demand down and down, to secure my Master
from hearing any more of this business, to take the Girl off our hands, and to
plague us no farther --


Ant. What has Old-Nick bewitched the Fellow? Aside.


Get. -- I Am sure of this, if you will but propose any thing that is just and
reasonable, he is such a civil Gentleman, there will not be two words between ye.


Them. Who gave you Commission to say all this?


Chr. Po! He could not have spoken better to bring our design about.


Ant. All Is lost. Aside.


Chr. On with your Story.


Get. At first he talked like a Madman.


Chr. Why, what did he ask?


Get. What? The Devil and all: Even what his wild Fancy pleased.


Chr. Let Us hear't tho.


Get. He talked of two or three hundred Guinea's.


Chr. As many Devils take him: What, has he no Conscience?


Get. I told him as much my self: Good now (said I) suppose he had a Daughter
of his own to marry, would he give any more! He Is but little the better I s^d
for having none, since one's clapped on his Back he m^st give a Portion to. To
be short, omitting his ^dle Impertinencies, at last he came to this conclusion:
I Have had a mind (said he) from the very first, to marry my Friends Daughters,
which was no more than Reason required. For I foresaw the trouble the Girl
would be put to, by marrying into a rich Family, she being poor would be made a
Slave, not a Wife. But to be plain with ye, I want a Wife with a little Money
to pay off my Debts, now if Mr Demipho will give as large a Portion with her,
as I Am like to have with one I Am already engaged to, I Will choose her before any
Woman alive.


Ant. A body don't know what to make on it, whether it be Foolery or Knavery, or
whether the Man is silly or wilful. Aside.


Them. What if he has pawned his Soul, must we redeem it?


Get. I Have mortgaged (continued he) a piece of ground for 25 pounds --


Them. Well, well! Let him take her, I Will pay the Money.


Get. and an old House or two for as much more.


Them. Pox on him, that is too much by half [angrily


Chr. Make no noise then, he shall have as much as that of me.


Get. Then (quoth he) my Wife must have a Maid, more Household Stuff must be
bought, and a good handsome Wedding kept: These things put all together will
come to 25 pounds more.


Them. He shall clap six hundred Actions upon my back first. I Will not part with
a Groat: Shall the paltry Rascal make a Property of me. Walks about in a passion


Chr. Good Brother be pacified, I Will lay down the Money, get you but your Son
in the Mood to marry the Woman we'd have him.


Ant. Alas for me! Ah, Geta, thy Treacheries have undone me. Aside.


Chr. It Is upo' my account she is turned out, and it is but reason I should pay
the Costs and Charges.


Get. Let me know (said he) their Minds as soon as ye can, whether th^^ design
to let me have her or no, that I may get clear of the other, and know what to
trust to; for the other Girl's Friends are fully designed this very day to lay
me down the Portion.


Chr. He shall have it immediately, let him break off that Match, and take this
Girl.


Them. And the Devil take him into the Bargain.


Chr. I Have very luckily brought with me the Rent of my Wife's Farm at Lemno:
I Will take that, and tell my Wife you had an occasion to borrow it. Exeunt
Chremes and Demipho.

Antipho comes up to Geta.
Ant. Hark ye, Mr. Rogue!


Get. Ha, Sir.


Ant. Do You know what you have been a doing?


Get. Yes; nabb'd both the old Fools of their Money.


Ant. Is that enough think ye?


Get. Faith, Sir, I cannot tell, 'twas as much as you ordered me.


Ant. Dog! Are ye at cross Questions with me?

Kicks him.
Get. What do you mean, Sir?


Ant. Why, your Rogueship has brought Matters to that fine pass, that now I may
go hang my self. To make an Example of thee to all Villains, Heaven, Hell and
Earth confound thee. If you want any thing to be well done, I Will recommend ye
to my Spark here. -- What occasion had you to rip up the old Sore? And bring my
Dear's Name into Question? You Have possessed my Father with new hopes of turning
her off: And, sweet Sir, suppo^ing Phormio should accept of the Portion, he must
marry her then to be sure: And what will become of me then?


Get. Hell be hanged before he marries her.


Ant. I believe so: But when they come to demand their Money back again, he will
rather choose to go to Jail than betray us, I warrant ye. Scornfully.


Get. All Stories may be the worse for telling: The best part of this you have
left out, and only mentioned the worst. Now pray hear mine: If he receives the
Portion, he is obliged to marry her, as you say; I own: But then there must be
time allowed for getting things ready for the Wedding, for inviting of Guests,
and for the offering of his Oblations: The mean time Mr. Phedrie's Friends will
procure him the Money they promised him, and out of this may Phormio refund to
the old Gentlefolks.


Ant. Why so? Or what pretense can he make?


Get. Pretense? O he has a thousand in his Budget. What Prodigies have I seen
(may he pretend) since we made the Bargain? There came a strange Black Dog
yelping into my House: A flying Dragon came down the Water-spout, my speckled
Hen crow^d; The Priest forbad it, and the cunning Man charged me to meddle with
no new Business till Winter. These are as good pretenses as any In The World.
Thus shall things be ordered.


Ant. Provided they were so --


Get. So they shall, take my Word for it -- But here comes your Father, withdraw
and tell Mr. Phedrie the Money's our own. Exit Antipho.

Enter at another part of the Stage Demipho with a Bag of Money, and Chremes.


Them entering. Be content I say, I Will take care he shall not cheat us: I Will not
part with a Cross to day but upon sure grounds, and before sufficient Witnesses
to testify to whom, and for what I deliver it.


Get. over-hearing. How cautious our Sir Solomon is, where there is no need
on it! Aside.


Chr. Troth, and so you had need, Brother: But make haste whilst the Fit is
upon him. If the other Woman should chance to be beforehand with us, he may
throw us off perhaps.


Get. You are i^th' right on it.


Them. Bring me to him, Geta.


Get. I am ready, Sir.


Chr. When you have dispatched that, step over to my Wife, and desire her to
have some Discourse with the Girl before we pack her off, that she may tell
her, She has no Cause to be angry that we'd have her married to Phormio, since
he is the sitter Match, being intimately acquainted with her: and that we
haven't done contrary to our Duty, because we have given him as good a Portion
as he desired.


Them. Pshaw! what a-duce is all this to you?


Chr. O, a great deal, Brother.


Them. Is Not it enough for you to do your Duty, unless all the World commend ye
for it?


Chr. I Would willingly have her Consent though, that she might not pretend she was
turned out o'doors


Them. I can tell her all this my self.


Chr. But 'twill come better from a Woman though.


Them. I Will call upo' your Wife then.

Exit Demipho and Geta.


Chremes alone. I Am thinking now what corner of the Town to beat up for these
Women of Lemno.

To him enter Sophrona out of Demipho's House.
Soph. to her self. What shall I do? -- What Friend shall I make use of, poor
Fool that I am? Whom shall I trust with a Secret of so great Importance? Or
where shall I look out for assistance? -- I Am strangely afraid my poor Mistress
will be basely dealt withal for following my Counsel, for I hear the young
Gentleman's Father takes it very heinously.


Chr. What disconsolate old Creature's that which comes from my Brothers? A^^^.


Soph. to her self 'Twas nothing but Poverty that forced me to do what I did;
though I knew the Match was scarce good in Law, yet I advised (...) to it merely
to avoid starving.


Chr. In good truth, if I ben't mightily out I m^ guess, and if my Eyesight
don't deceive me, (...) my Daughter's Nurse. As^^^.


Soph. to her self. Nor can we as yet --


Chr. What had I best to do i'th^ Case? As^^^


Soph. to her self. -- Find out her Father.


Chr. Had I best go to her, or tarry here, an^ pick something out of her
Discourse? (...)


Soph. to her self. If I could find him out, m^ fear would be over


Chr. It Is she for certain -- I Will go talk to her.

aside.
Soph. Whose Voice is that trow?


Chr. Nurse Sophrona!

Soph And calls me too?


Chr. Look this way a little.


Soph. turning. Mercy of my Soul! Mr. Stilpho here?


Chr. No. Winking on her.


Soph. What deny your own Name?


Chr. Prithee, Nurse, come a little this way from that Door; and not a word
more of Stilpho Sof^ly.


Soph. No, Sir: And like your Worship, arn't you he you always said you were?


Chr. S^t, S^t. going from his own Door.


Soph. What? I hope, Sir, you arn't afraid of this Door.


Chr. No; but I Have a mad Woman there in a Cage: and I formerly gave my self a
Nickname for fear some of you should indiscreetly blab it about, and perhaps
my Wife should smell a Rat.


Soph. And troth that is the reason that we poor Souls could never hear any tale
or tidings of ye in Town.


Chr. Prithee tell me what business you had at that House you came out of? And
where ha you left your Mistresses?


Soph. A-lack-a-day. Sighing.


Chr. Hah! What Is the Matter? They arn't dead I hope


Soph. Your Daughter is alive; but the poor creat^^e her Mother broke her Heart
with grief. Weeps.


Chr. That Is bad News, indeed.


Soph. But I, a forlorn poor old Woman, married your Daughter as well as I
could, to the young Gentleman of that House.


Chr. What to Antipho?


Soph. Yes, Sir, to him.


Chr. How! Has he got two Wives then? angrily.


Soph. How so, I beseech ye? He never married any other but this.


Chr. What Is become of her then that went for his Kinswoman?


Soph. Your Daughter Sir's the Person.


Chr. How!


Soph. 'Twas only a contrivance of ours, that since he loved her, he might
marry her without a Portion.


Chr. Bless me! How often do things fall out by chance, which we have not the
heart to wish for! Upo' my coming home, I Have found my Daughter settled with the
Person I desired, and just as I wish^d. The very thing my Brother and I aimed
at, this old Woman, without any care of ours, has most carefully hit on. Aside.


Soph. Now, Sir, you had best see what is to be done in the case, the young
Gentleman's Fa^^^^ now come home, who, they say, highl^ (...) the Marriage.


Chr. interrupting. All Is safe enough. -- But in the Name of Goodness, I conjure
ye not to let any living Soul know she is mine.


Soph. Not from me, Sir.


Chr. Come along, ye shall hear all within.

Exeunt Ambo.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Demipho and Geta. Them. WE can blame none but our selves, for Knaves thriving
in their Knavery; for we must, forsooth, affect to be thought genteel and
generous: But we shou'dn't have outrun the Constable, as the saying is. We
could not be content to be cheated by him, but we must freely throw the Rascal a
good lump of Money into the Bargain, for him to live on till he can play us
such another Dog-trick.


Get. Nothing more certain.


Them. Now adays, none are rewarded more than such Rogues as would persuade ye
black's white.


Get. Nothing more sure.


Them. How like a couple of Fools we have managed our business with this Rascal!


Get. It Is managed well enough, provided he keeps to his word, and marries her.


Them. Is there any danger of that now?


Get. Faith, Sir, he is such a wavering sort of a Fellow, that I cannot tell but
he may recant.


Them. The Devil! He recant?


Get. That I cannot tell, Sir; I only suppose such a thing.


Them. I Will do as my Brother would have me; step and bring his Wife to talk with
the young Woman. -- Do you, Geta, go in and acquaint the Girl of her coming.
Exit Demipho.


Geta alone. We Have Coined Money for Mr. Phedrie: The old Gentlemen are as quiet
as Lambs: Care is taken that Phany shall not stir a Foot out of our House for the
present. --,But what next, Friend Geta? What Is to be done now? -- You Are as
deep in the Dirt as ever; and Tinker-like, in mending one hole have made two --
It Is true, there is a sound drubbing put off for a day or two longer; but
in faith thou will receive it, and with Interest too, if thou do not look
about thee -- Well, I Will go home and teach Phany her Lesson, that she may not be
surpised at Phormio's Behavior, or Nau^istrata's Discourse. Exit Geta, and as
he goes off,

Enter Demipho leading in Nausistrata.


Them. entring^ -- Come on then; and pray, Madam, make use of your fine knack of
speaking, ^ow, that the Girl may^'t think hardly of us, but be brought to do
what we'd have her freely and willingly.


Nau. So I will, Brother.


Them. Let your Endeavors be as serviceable to me now, as before your Purse was.


Nau. I should be glad to pleasure ye: But in troth, Brother, it is all long of
my naughty Man's carelessness that I cannot do so handsomely as I would.


Them. How so pray?


Nau. Why, in troth he does not manage the Estate, my Father left me, worth a
Farthing; for he constantly made nigh Four hundred Pound a Year of his Land. --
Bless me! to see the difference of Men


Them. Nigh Four hundred Pound a Year, say ye?


Nau. Yes, indeed, when things were at a lower rate by far than now.


Them. Very strange!


Nau. You wonder At it I warrant ye.


Them. AY, and I cannot forbear.


Nau. Would I had been a Man for his sake, I Would have shown him --


Them. Ay, aY, so you would. Jeeringly.


Nau. How I would have --


Them. interrupting. Spare your self, good Sister, to encounter the young Woman;
perhaps she will be too hard for ye at your own Weapon else.


Nau. I Will be ruled by ye: -- But here comes my good Man from your House.

Enter Chremes, goes up to Demipho not seeing his Wife.


Chr. Ho! Brother, have ye paid away the Money yet, or no?


Them. I did that presently.


Chr. I wish you had not. -- Sees Nausistrata and starts. God's Death my Wife! I
had like to have said too much. Aside.


Them. Why do you wish I had not, Brother?


Chr. Nothing, all is well.


Them. But hark ye, did ye tell the young Woman upon what account your Wife
was coming to her?


Chr. Every bit on it.


Them. Well, and what says she?


Chr. She cannot be persuaded to it.


Them. Why cannot she tho?


Chr. Because of the Love that is between 'em.


Them. Pish! What Is that to us?


Chr. O very much; -- Besides I Have found her to be our real Kinswoman.


Them. How? Are you mad too?


Chr. You Will find it so as I say: I don't speak but upon good grounds, pray
recollect your self a little.


Them. Certainly you are mad.


Nau. Good Brother Demipho, you will not wrong your Kinswoman, will ye?


Them. She Is none of mine.


Chr. Don't say so; her Father has another Name, and that bred your mistake.


Them. What? Didn't she know her own Father?


Chr. Yes marry did she.


Them. Why didn't he call himself by his own Name then?


Chr. Will ye never believe, nor understand me?

Aside to Demipho.


Them. How should I, if you will not tell me --


Chr. You^ll spoil all. Winks on him.


Nau. I cannot imagine what the business should be.


Them. Faith, nor I.


Chr. Must ye needs know all? As I hope for mercy, there is none so nigh akin
to her as you and I.


Them. Bless my Soul! Let Us all go in together; I Will know something or nothing
of her.


Chr. Hold! Them. What Is the Matter?


Chr. Have I got so little Credit with you, Brother?


Them. Would ye have me credit you without searching any further into the
business? -- Well, be it so then: But how will ye bestow your Friend's Daughter
the while?


Chr. She Will do well enough.


Them. Must we turn her off then?


Chr. Why not?


Them. And keep this Creature here?


Chr. Yes.


Them. Well, Sister, you may go home again if you please.


Nau. Troth, I think it is much the better way to keep her still, than part with
her; for when I first saw her, she looked very much like a Gentlewoman. Exit
Nausistrata.


Them. Now what is all this business?


Chr. looking after Nausistrata. Has she shut to the Door? Fearfully.


Them. Yes.


Chr. Wonderful! The best Luck in the World. I find it is my own Daughter that is
married to your Son.


Them. Hah! Is It possible?


Chr. This is no safe place to tell ye.


Them. Step into my House then.


Chr. But hark ye, I would not have so much as the two Boys know any thing of
this. Exeunt Ambo.


Enter at another part of the Stage alone. Antipho Let my own Concerns go as
they will, yet it is a Comfort to me that Matters go so well with my Cousin.
It Is a piece of Art for a Man to rule his Appetite so, that a small Matter
shall satisfy him when his Fortune is at the lowest Ebb. No sooner had my
Cousin Phedrie received the Money, but his Cares are over, for my part I know
no way to free my self from mine. If this business be concealed, I shall be
always in fear; if discovered Infamy will be my reward. -- I could not have the
Heart to go home, if I had not some-small hopes of enjoying my dear Phanie
still. -- But where shall I meet with Geta. to know of him what may be the most
convenient time of showing my self to my Father?

Enter Phormio at a distance.


Phor to himself. I Have received the Cash, paid off the Bawd, brought away the
Wench, and taken care that Phedrie should now enjoy her as his own; since she is
now out of her Slavery. -- I Have one thing still in hand which must be
dispatched, that is, To get leave of these old Curmudgeons to go and tope it a
little, for I Have cut out a few odd days for my own diversion.


Ant. Look, here is Phormio. -- What say?


Phor. What, Sir?


Ant. What Is my Cousin Phedrie about? Does he pretend to play the Epicure in
Love?


Phor. He Is going in his turn to act your part now.


Ant. Prithee, what part?


Phor. Of keeping out of his old Daddy's clutches, and he begs you would act his,
and plead his Cause for him; for he and I are to sing Old Rose together. -- I
am going to tell the old Gentlemen, that I am bound for Sunio-Fair, to buy the
little Slave Geta told 'em of. That so when they see I Am not in Town, they
may not imagine I make their Money fly. -- But your Door goes there.


Ant. Prithee see who comes out.


Phor. It Is Geta.

Enter Geta from Demipho' s in great haste, with a Cloak in his Hand.


Get. to himself. Thou blessed, blessed Fortune, how much is my Master Antipho
obliged to thee for this Day's Work.


Ant to Phormio. What does the Fellow mean?


Get. to himself. And out of how many cold Fits have thou freed us that are his
Friends? -- But why do I loyter? And not clap on my Cloak? Why don't I run to
find him out, and let him know how things have happened? Puts on his short
Cloak and struts about.


A(...) ^'ye understand what he says?


Phor. Do you, Sir?


Ant. Not a word.


Phor. Nor I neither.


Get. to himself. I Will go to old Dorio's, for there to be sure they are. Going
off.


Ant. Soho, Geta!


Get. Soho, to you too. -- 'Tisn't strange nor new for a Man of my quality to be
interrupted in the middle of his Journey.


Ant. Why, Geta!


Get. Faith he keeps his pace for all that. Your Impertinence shall never bring
me back.


Ant. VVon't ye stay then?


Get. Sirrah you shall be kick^d -- Some saucy Scullion or other that calls me
thus. Aside.


Ant. You shall be served the same sauce, if ye don't stay, ye Dog.


Get. This must be one that knows me very well, that is so free of his
Compliments. Turning about] But is not it he I want? -- It Is he.


Phor. to Antipho. Step up to him presently.


Ant. goes to Geta. What Is the News with you?


Get. O, Sir! The happiest Man this day alive! without doubt you are the
Darling of the Skies.


Ant. So I would be, and would have ye give me some reason to believe so.


Get. Is Not it enough if I plunge ye over Head and Ears in Joy?


Ant. You kill me with Impertinence.


Phor. Hang your Preambles, and say what you have to say quickly.


Get. Oh! -- Art thou here, old Rock?


Phor. Yes; But why this fooling?


Get. Observe then; Hem them! -- As soon^ as we gave you the Money at the
Piazza, we went strait home. To Phormio. -- In the way home my Master sent me
to your Lady. To Antipho.


Ant. For what?


Get. Nay, there I leave ye^ That Is nothing to our business, Sir, -- Just as I
was going int^^ner Apartment, her Boy Mida runs up to me, catches me hold by
the Cloak, and pulls me back. I turned about, and asked him what he meant; he
told me no body must come nigh his Mistress; that Sophrona just now brought Mr.
Demipho's Brother, Mr. Chremes; and that there they were all together. At that
word, I steals me up to the Door a Tiptoe, I went and stood close up to it, held
my Breath, laid my Ear to the Keyhole, and very attentively listened to their
Discourse, thus.

Showing how.
Ant. O brave Geta!


Get. There did I hear the pleasantest Story in the World, that before George I
could hardly forbear huzzaing there.


Phor. For what?


Get. For what do you think?


Ant. I cannot guess.


Get. And such a prodigious wonderful Passage too. -- 'Slid, your Uncle is
found to be your Spouse's own Father.


Ant. Hah! What Is that?


Get. He had formerly some private Acquaintance with her Mother at Lemno.


Phor. Mere Dreams! How came she not to know her own Father then?


Get. You may suppose there was a Reason for that: But do you think I that was
without Doors, could understand every word that was spoke within?


Phor. Faith now I think on it, there was some such flying Report.


Get. I Will give ye some further Proof. -- Whilst I stood listening, out goes
your Uncle, and presently after brought your Father in along with him; and bo^^
said you might keep her and welcome, In short, they have sent me to look for ye,
and bring ye to em.


Ant. throws his Arms about Geta' s Neck. Bless my Soul! away with me in a
moment: -- Are ye mad to stay?


Get. I Will do it, as I Am a living Man.


Ant. Dear Rogue, Phormio, farewell.


Phor. Adieu, adieu, Sir.

Exit Gera carrying off Antipho.

Phormio alone.

Let me die, if this be'nt a lucky hit. I am glad with all my Heart they have met
with such good Fortune, and so unexpectedly too. Faith now I Have an excellent
opportunity of bubbling both the old Fellows, and of taking the Money-care off
Phedrie's hands: So that he needn't be beholding to any of his Friends for it:
For the same Money I squeezed from these old Gripes, shall go for Phedrie's
use: And e'gad I Have found out a way will do it effectually: I must get me a new
stately Gate, and a fine set Countenance. -- But I Will step into the next blind
Alley, and pop out upon 'em as soon as they appear; for now I Am not for
Sunio-Fair, as I pretended.

He retires to one side of the Stage. Enter Demipho and Chremes.


Them. entering. I bless my Stars with all my heart, for the good Luck my
business has met with. -- But let us make what haste we can to Phormio, that we
may recover our Money, before he makes it all go to wreck.


Phor. comes from his covert, speaks to himself, meets Demipho, then starts
I Will go and see whether Mr. Demipho be at home, that I may --


Them. We were coming to you, Mr. Phormio.


Phor. Upo'th'old business I warrant.


Them. Yes, truly.


Phor. So I thought; but what need of that? A good Jest in troth. What, were ye
afraid I should not stand to what I said? Hark ye, Gentlemen, tho I am but a
poor Fellow, I always took care to be a Man of my Word.


Chr. to Demipho. Is Not she a well-bred Girl as I told ye?


Them. Yes, indeed


Phor. For that reason I Am come on purpose to tell ye, Sir, that I am ready,
and you may give her away as soon as you please; for I Have thrown off all my
other business, as 'twas ^easor* I should, when I saw that you (Gentlemen) were
so eager upon this.


Them. But my Brother here advises me to the contrary: For (says he) by doing
this you will become the common Town-talk; when you might have put her away with
some Credit, then you would not: And 'twou'd be a Scandal to turn her off now
she is married to your Son. In fine, he used almost the same Reasons, you urged
just now, against me.


Phor. Marry come up, how merry you are upon me!


Them. How so?


Phor. How so quoth a? Why now I can never marry the the other. With what Face,
think ye, can I go again to her I just now so bafely turned off?


Chr. aside to Demipho Tell him you find that Antipho will not endure to part with
her.


Them. Besides I find that Antipho will not endure to part with her. -- Therefore,
good Phormio, let me desire ye to step to the Bankers, and order the Money to
be paid me back again.


Phor. What? When I Have just paid it away to my Creditors?


Them. aside to Chremes. What shall we do now?


Phor. If you will let me have the Woman according to promise, so be it; if you
design to keep her Person, I Will keep her Portion, Mr. Demipho: For there is no
reason I should be fobb'd by ye for your pleasure only, since to save your
Credit I threw off another that would have had as good a Portion to a Farthing.


Them. Old-Nick take thee with thy Rhodomontades for a Rogue as thou art; I
warrant, you think I don't know you or your damned Tricks either.


Phor. This puts me beyond all patience.


Them. Why, would you marry her if she were proffered to ye?


Phor. Try me, try me.


Them. That so my Son might Bed and Board with her at your House: Was that your
Plot?


Phor. Ha! What Is that you sa^?


Them. I say, give me my Money.


Phor. And I say, give me my Wife.


Them. Come before a Justice of Peace, Sirrah,


Phor. A Justice of Peace? Nay, if you be thereabouts, I Will --


Them. What will ye do?


Phor. Who I, Sir? I warrant you suppose I Have none but Portionless Clients;
but I Will have ye to know, I Have those with Portions too.


Chr. What Is that to us?


Phor. Nothing, Sir; only I know one of them in this Town, whose Husband had --


Chr. The Devil. Aside.


Them. What Is the matter now?


Phor. -- Another Wife at Lemno.


Chr. I am dead. --

aside.
Phor. -- By whom he had a Daughter, which he brought up and no body ever the
wiser.


Chr. I am buried. Aside.


Phor. I Will just now go and acquaint the Gentlewoman with the long and the
short on it.


Chr. holding him. Pray now don't.


Phor. Ah, ha, Sir! Are you the Party concerned?


Them. How basely the Rogue plays upon us? aside


Chr. Come, we'll discharge ye.


Phor. Mere Flams.


Chr. What would ye have more? I tell ye we'll forgive ye the Money you have got
of ours. Softly.


Phor. I hear ye. -- What a plague d'^e play Childrens play with me? I wont, I
will; I will and I will not again; Give, take; it is said and unsaid, done and
undone again.


Chr. By what means? Or how the duce came he to know this? Aside to Demipho.

Demipho and Chremes walk on one side.
Them. I cannot imagine; for I am certain I never told any living Soul of it.


Chr. There Is Witchcraft in it, I Will be sworn, else.


Phor. I Have given them a Bone to pick. Aside.


Them. a^ide to Chremes. S^bud, shall this Rascal carry off such a round Sum of
Money, and abuse us to the very Face too? By Heavens he shall have my Heart for
his Supper as soon. Come pluck up a good Heart, Brother, and play the Man; you
see your failing has taken Air, and it is impossible to keep it from your Wife
now: Since she must know it from others, it is the best way for quietness sake
to tell her of it our selves; then we may worry this dirty Rascal as we please.
They move nigher to Phormio.


Phor. O lamentable! If I don't look about me I shall be trepanned, as sure as
a Gun. They make toward me like a couple of Bullies to hector me. Aside.


Chr. aside to Demipho. But I Am afraid she will never be reconciled to me.


Them. aside to Chremes Take heart Man, I Will certainly make up the business: You
may trust to that, Brother, since the Woman you had this Daughter by is dead,
and gone out of the way.


Phor. Is this your dealings, Gentlemen? You come upon me very cunningly
methinks: But in troth, Mr. Demipho, ^ou've done your Brother but little good
by provoking me thus. -- To Chremes And you, Sir, after you have taken your
swinge beyond Sea, and showed no regard to a Lady of Quality, but offered her
the most sensible Affronts; do you think by whining and praying to expiate ^our
Fault? No, with this Story I Will raise her in such Flames, that though you
dissolved into Tears, yet you shou'dn't be able to quen^h 'em.


Them. Plagues and Fu^ies seize the Rogue, and cast him into the deepest Pit of
Hell! Was there ever such an impudent Dog upon the Face of the Earth? Does Not
this R^gue deserve to be transported at the public Charge to some Desert
Island?


Chr. He has got me so upon the hank, that I know not what course to take with
him.


Them. I Have found a way: Let Us have him before a Justice.


^hor. Before a Justice? Ay, the She-Justice of this House then. It going
toward Chremes^ s.


Them. Follow him and hold him fast, till I call my Servants out.


Chr. holding him I amn't able to hold him: Come and help me. Here they both
hold him.


Phor. I Will clap an Action upon your back, Mr. Demipho. Them. Do It then.


Phor. And another upon yours, Mr. Chremes.

Enter a Servant or two from Demipho' s.


Them. to the Servants. Here, take away this Rascal. Here the Servants lay hold
of Phormio, he scuffles with them, throws down Demipho that comes to assist
them, but at last is overpowered.


Phor. Are ye at that Sport? Nay then it is time to cry out; Nausistrata, come
hither a little.


Chr. Gag the Villain.


Them. panting. What -- a confounded strong Dog he -- is.


Phor. aloud. Nausistrata, I say.


Chr. Will Not ye hold your Tongue, Sirrah?


Phor. Plague! I hold my Tongue?


Them. to the Servants. If he will not go along freely give him a punch in the Guts


Phor. Or scratch my Eyes out; I Have a way to be revenged for all that.

Enter Nausistrata: The Servants unhand

Phormio: Chremes looks very simply.


Naus. Who calls me?


Chr. Zookers! Aside.


Naus. Good Husband, what disturbance is this?


Phor. Hah! What is your Mouth stopped now?

To Chremes.


Naus. What Fellow's this? VVon't ye tell me?


Phor. He tell ye, Madam? In Faith his Head is so giddy, he cannot tell where he
is himself.


Chr. Good Duck! Don't believe one word he says.


Phor. Do but go and feel him, Madam; and hang me if he ben't as cold as a
Stone.


Chr. That signifies nothing.


Naus. What then? What does the Fellow talk of?


Phor. I Will tell ye, Madam, pray mind me.


Chr. Are ye resolved to believe him, Duck?


Naus. Prithee what can I believe, he has told me nothing yet.


Phor. The poor Man's fear has put him out of his Wits.


Naus. In troth this cannot be for nothing that you should be in such a fright.


Chr. Who I in a fright?


Pher. Ay, for certain; for if you ben't, and if this I Am going to tell, is of
no consequence, pray tell it y^^ self, Sir.


Them. Y^^ ^ascal, shall he tell it to humor you?


Phor. Oh you do ra^ely in taking your Brother's part


Naus. What, Husband, will not ye tell me the Business then?


Chr. faultring. Po -- but --


Naus. Bu^, what But?


Chr. There Is no oc^^^on for it --


Phor. Not for you, perhaps; but for her there is. -- At Lemno. --


Chr. Ha! what says he?


Them. Dog be silent


Phor. -- Without your knowledge --


Chr. -- Undone Aside.


Phor. -- He married a Wife. Chremes looks

upon the Ground.


Naus. Who, my Husband? Heavens forbid that.


Phor. Of My Soul it is all true.


Naus. Alas-a-day I am utterly ruined.


Phor. And there he got a Daughter by her, which you never dreamt of. --


Chr. What will become of me now? Aside.


Naus. Oh Heavens! Base and treacherou^ this. Weeps.


Phor. It Is as I say.


Naus. Was there ever such an unworthy Action heard of? When they come to their
Wives, they pretend they are old, forsooth -- ^ address my self to you,
Brother, for I am (...) to speak to him. Was it for this he we^^ so often, and
stayed so long at Lemno? Was this ^^^ low Price of Corn that made our Rents
f^^l?


Them. Indeed, Sister, I own he was in some fault, but yet it is a venial one.


Phor. He preaches to the Wind. Aside.


Them. It was not out of Contempt or Aversion to you he did this. About fifteen
years ago, he, in his Drink, had to do with this Woman, and had this Daughter
by her, but never touched her since; she is now dead, and gone out of the way,
who was your only grievance. Therefore, good Sister, take it patiently, as you
used to do other things.


Naus. Take it patiently? No: I had rather part from him for ever: For what can
I hope for now? Can I expect Age will teach him better things? If that would
have don't, he was old enough then: Or is my Age and Beauty like to please him
more than formerly? What reason can ye give to make me to look, or hope for his
amendment?


Phor. aside Ha -- ha -- ha -- Here Is a cast of my Office -- If any one has a
mind to come to Chremes's Funeral, now is the time. Now let any Man provoke my
Honor that dares, I Will serve him the same sauce I Will warrant him. -- Let him
be Friends with me now as soon as he please: I Have swing'd him off sufficiently
for once; and she has wherewithal to hit him in the Teeth as long as he has an
hour to live.


Naus. scornfully. I warrant ye, I deserved all this. -- But, Brother, what
need have I to reckon up how Faithful I Have been to him in every thing.


Them. I Am satisfied in that as well as you your self.


Naus. Do You really think I deserved this ill usage at his hands?


Them. Not in the least -- But since all your Complaints cannot undo what is
already done, forget and forgive: He begs your pardon, owns his Fault, and
promises amends. What can ye desire more?


Phor. aside. But in faith before the Pardon's sealed there must be a Proviso or
two made for my self and Mr. Phedrie. -- Hark ye, Madam, let me put in a word
before you answer.


Naus. Let Us hear it then.


Phor. I cokes'd your Husband out of Threescore and Fifteen Pounds, which I
gave to your Son to buy a Sweetheart of his of an old Pandar.


Chr. hastily. Hah! How Is that? --


Naus. interrupting. Is it such a strange think for your Son in his youthful
days to keep one Mistress, when you aren't ashamed to have two Wives? With what
Face can ye reprimand him? Answer me that pray.

Chremes draws back and looks sillily.


Them. He shall be ruled by you.


Naus. Well! that you may know my mind plainly, I Will neither pardon him,
promise him any thing, nor give him any Answer till I see my Son, to whose
determination I refer all; and shall do what he orders.


Phor. You Have done very discreetly, Madam.


Naus. to Phormio. Will that satisfy you?


Phor. Yes indeed, Madam, I am come off rarely and beyond expectation.


Naus. Pray, honest Man, what may I call your Name.


Phor. Mine, Madam? It Is Phormio, your whole Family's humble Servant, and
especially Mr Phedrie^s.


Naus. Honest Phormio! Whatever kindness I can do thee, and thou desire,
be it in Word or Deed I^il do it.


Phor. You honor me too much, Madam.


Naus. Troth it is no more than your deserve.


Phor. First then, Madam, will ye do something that will pleasure, me and fret
your Husband.


Naus. With all my Heart.


Phor. If you please invite me to Supper then.


Naus. Faith come and welcome.


Them. Let Us go in then.


Naus. Agreed, -- But where is Phedrie our Referee all this while?


Phor. I hope he will be here anon. --

To the Spectators.

Gentlemen,

Fare ye well, and clap.


The End of the Tricks of Phormio.
THE Mother-in-Law.

A COMEDY, Acted at the Roman Sports, WHEN S. Julius Caesar, and Cn. Cornelius
Dolabella, were Curule Edil's,

At that time it was not Acted quite through.

Flaccus made free by Claudius, Composed the Music, which was performed upon
two Equal FLUTES.

It was taken wholly from the Greek of Apollodorus.

Acted first under the Consulship of Cn. Octavius and T. Manlius.

It was Acted a second time at a Funeral Solemnity.

Acted a third time, when Q. Fulvius, and L. Murcie, were Curule Edil's.

A. V. C. 588. Before Christ 155.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Laches, An old Gentleman of Athens; very honest and true hearted, lately
retired into the Country. Phidippus Another old Citizen of Athens; his
Neighbor and Friend, indulgent to his Family, but somewhat Angry when stirred.
Pamphilus, Laches' s Son; a very gentile, civil, obliging, good natured young
Gentleman, and a great Respecter of his Parents, tho formerly somewhat
debauched. Parmeno, Servant to Pamphilus, and his Confident; a trusty, merry,
inquisitive Fellow. Socia, Another Servant of Phamphilus 's.
WOMEN.
Sostrata, The Mother in-law; Wife to Laches, a submissive, peaceable, kind old
Gentlewoman Myrrhina, Wife to Phidippus; easy, gentle, and fearful. Bacchis, A
noted Courtesan, formerly Miss to Pamphilus; very honest and generous
considering her Circumstances. Philotis, Another Courtesan; of a merry, gentle,
sweet, Nature. Syra, An old Woman of the same stamp, peevish, revengeful, and
ill natured.
MUTES.
Philumena, Wife to Pamphilus, and Daughter to Phidippus. Scirtus, A Boy of
Laches 's. The Nurse. Two Servants to Bacchis.
Scene, ATHENS.

TIME, about Six or Seven Hours.

THE Mother-in-Law.
ACT I.
SCENE, The Street, before Phidippus and Laches' s Door. TIME, The Forenoon
Enter Philotis and Syra. Phil. In Faith, old Syra, there is not one in forty of
these young Fellows that keeps touch with a Mistress -- Why here is Mr.
Pamphilus now, how many thousand Oaths has he sworn to Bacchis (and solemnly
too, that one could not but believe him) that he would never marry while she lived.
Very good, yet my Gentleman's married for all that.


Sir. For that Reason, Girl, let me advise and conjure you as a Friend to pity
none of the Sex; but fleece em maul 'em, pick the very Bones of every Creature
of em, that you get in your Clu^ches.


Phil. What all without exception? Sighing.


Sir. Ay every Mothers Son of em. -- Take this from an old Woman, that there is
none of these Sparks that are so sweet upon ye, that has any other design than
to have his will of ye, at as cheap a rate as he can. And prithee Child,
shou'dn't thou in justice countermine 'em.


Phil. But to serve all alike is too cruel, I vow.


Sir. Cruel to be revenged of ones Enemies? Or to take Cheats in their own
Traps? Ah! what pity it is, that I had not that Youth and Beauty of yours, or
you those Sentiments of these Matters that I have.

Enter Parmeno at a distance,


Par. to Scirtus within If the old Gentleman ask for me, tell him I Am just gone
to the Waterside, to enquire when Mr. Pamphilus comes home -- Do You hear, Boy?
If he asks for me, you may tell him so; if not say nothing; then this Excuse
will keep cold for another time. -- He comes from the Door. But is that Philly
there? -- Whence comes she, I wonder? -- Goes up to 'em. Philotis, I Am heartily
glad to see ye.


Phil. And I you, honest Parmeno.


Sir. Gods-buddikins, Parmeno, how do thou do my Lad?


Par. Uds fish, Grannum, how do thou? Ex. Syra. But prithee, Mrs. Philly,
where have you been diverting your self this live-long while?


Phil. But little diversion, Heaven knows; e're since I marched off with the
Captain to Corinth, the meerest Brute upon Earth, where I led a very Dog's Life
for two whole Years together.


Par. Ay faith! I warrant ye, you often sighed for old Athens again, and could
have wished your self hanged for undertaking the Journey.


Phil. It Is impossible to tell ye how eager I was to come home to get clear of
my Spark, and to see ye all once more; where I might have free liberty to enjoy
my Friends and Merry-meetings as formerly. For there I could not utter a Word
but what was shaped out by that rascally Captain.


Par. That same cutting ye short of your tattle, I fancy, must needs go against
the grain.


Phil. Well: But what a business is this that Bacchis has been telling of me
within? I could never have imagined Pamphilus could have found in his heart to
marry as long as she lived.


Par. Marry quoth a? Angrily.


Phil. Hey-day! Why is not he married.


Par. Married indeed: But I have a conceit this Marriage will not hold long.


Phil. Pray Heavens it may not, if it be to Baschis's Advantage. -- But how
shall I be certain of it? Good Boy, satisfy me in that.


Par. 'Tisn't a thing to be asked: Therefore pray don't be so inquisitive.


Phil. You're afraid, I warrant, that I should blaze it abroad: But let me
perish if I ask ye upon any such design, but only for my own private
Satisfaction.


Par. All your fine Wheadling shall never persuade me to trust my Back to your
Discretion.


Phil. Well don't then, who cares? As if now you had not much more mind to tell
me, than I to know. In a jaunting way.


Par. aside, E'dad she is in the right on t: Se has hit upo' my greatest Weakness
-- Well, Madam, promise Secrecy upon your Honor, and I ll tell ye^ all.


Phil. So: Now you're come to your self again. -- Upon my Honor then: away
with it.


Par. Mind me then. Phil. Well.


Par. Mr. Pamphilus was in the very height of his Passion for Mrs. Bacchis, when
his Father began to be earnest with him to marry. He alleged the usual
Arguments of all Fathers in the like Case, namely, That he was an old Man, had
no Child but him, and desired that he might not be destitute of a Support in
his old Age. At first he rejects the Proposal; but when his Father came to
press on the Business more zealously than ordinary, he was brought to such
straits that he could not tell which to prefer either Love or Duty. At last the
old Man by baiting and teazing his Son's Heart out, screwed him up to his
Pitch, and got him made sure to his next Neighbors Daughter. Pamphilus didn't
take it in such dudgeon till his wedding day came on; but when he saw all
things ready; and without more ado, marry he must; he laid it so much to heart,
that I Am persuaded if Bacchis her self had seen him in that plight, she
could not but have pitied him. For whene're he had any spare time of being by
himself, he would call me aside to him and cry, Ah, Parmeno, I m a lost Man What
have I done? What a dismal Condition have I brought my self into? I an't able
to bear the weight of it: Oh, 'twill break my Heart.


Phil. The Devil and his Damm take this Laches for a baiting old Cur.


Par. To cut short of my Story, the Bride was brought home: The first Night he
did not touch her: and the following was the same. --


Phil. The Duce take ye: what, a young Fellow to have his Bride in Bed with him
on the wedding-night, and pretty tipsie too, I warrant ye, and not -- A likely
business in troth: Come, this sounds like a Lie.


Par. I know you cannot tell how to believe me, ^ cause none comes to you, but
he comes sharp set: But alas, our young Gentleman had no Stomach at all to his
woman.


Phil. Well, but what then?


Par. A few days after, he takes me privately aside, and tells me, She was as
good a Maid as ever for all him; and that before he married, he hop d a Wise
might have gone down pretty well; but now (said he) I m resolved to part with
her e're long. Twould be a buseness in me, and much to the prejudice of the
poor Gentlewoman to abuse her so, as not to return her to her Friends, as I
received her.


Phil. T was done like a Man of Principles and Modesty.

Par. But then (continued he) ^wont be safe to publish my Intentions: and for
me to send her back to her Father, and have nothing to say against her, would
be too peremptory. All my hope is, when she finds there is no living together,
that she will be gone of her own accord.


Phil. But all this while did he continue his Visits to Bacchis.


Par. As constantly as the day came about: But (as it is usual for Women) when
she saw him another, she became more peevish and pretending than formerly.


Phil. I faith, and well she might.


Par. And this indeed was the chief cause of their parting. For by this time he
had recollected himself, and seriously considered his Mistress's Temper and his
Wife's; and well compared their Behaviors together. His Wife, he found, was a
sweetnatured Gentlewoman; virtuous and modest, patient under the Affronts and
Incivilites of a Husband, and willing to wink at his Faults. So that partly
touched with remorse for his usage of his Wife, and partly tired with the
insolence of his Whore; at last he gave Bacchis the slip, and settled his
Affections upon this woman, whose Humor he found so agreeable to his own. --
Mean time, an old Kinsman of our Master dies at Imbros, and made him his Heir;
and upon this unwilling Errand is our Lovesick Pamphilus posted away by his
Father. He leaves his Lady with his Mother; for the old Gentleman lives retired
in the Country, and seldom visits the Town.


Phil. But where is this Flaw in the Match all the while?


Par. I Am going to tell ye: At first, for a few days or so, the Mother, and the
Daughter-in-law agreed mighty well together. When all on a sudden the young
woman began to hate the old one most mortally, without any Quarrel or Complaint
on either side.


Phil. How came it about then?


Par. If at any time my old Lady Sostrata came to have a little Chat with her,
she would presently avoid the Room, and fly the Sight of her: But when she could
away with her Company no longer, she pretends her Mother had sent for her upon
some business of Devotion; and away she goes. After she had been there a while,
my Lady sends and desires her Company at home, she only returns her a lame
excuse of I know not what. She sends a second time, but no Gentlewoman comes:
At last after many Messages they pretend she is sick. Upo' this, any Lady steps
over her self, to give her a Visit, but no admittance could be got. When this
came to my old Master's Ears, yesterday he came out of the Country upo'this
very account, and discourses her Father about it. I cannot learn as yet what
passed between them? but I Am in a peck of troubles to know what will come on it
-- Now you have the long and the short of my Story. -- I must away to the place I
designed.


Phil. And so must I too: For I Have made an Assignation with a Country Squire
much about this time.


Par. I Will throw an old Shoe after ye, and wish ye good Luck.


Phil. Farewell Parmeno.


Par. And farewell to thee, my little Philly.

Exeunt severally.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Enter Laches and Sostrata after him.

Lach. entering. BLess my Soul! What a Strain's this? what a confounded
Conspiracy is this? That all Women should take the same Bias, and do or not do
every thing by consent? when did you see a Mother-in-Law that did not hate her
Daughter-in-Law? Their Endeavors to oppose their Husbands are the same, and
their cross-grained Stubborness the same. I faney they were all trained up for
Mischief in the same School, of which damned place of Education (if there be
any such) I Will be sworn my Dame is the Mistress.

Walks about in a huff.
Soft. This is a hard Case, that I should be accused of a business that I know
nothing of?


Lach. You know nothing of this then?


Soft. As I hope for merc^, I don't: And as I hope (my dear Laches!) we may
live long together.


Lach. Heavens forbid that, say I.


Soft. That I Am wrongfully accused, time will discover.


Lach. jeering. Yes, yes; you are wrongfully accused. -- Can Words be ill
enough to set ye out in your proper Colors? You that have disgraced me, your
self and our Family, and are laying in sufficient Matter to torment your Son?
Then you have provoked our new Friends and Relations to hate us, those who were
pleased to honor our Son with their Alliance: And you forsooth must start up,
and confound all, by your ill-condition'd Humors.


Soft. Who I?


Lach. Woman, I say you: Why you take me surely for a Block and not a Man.
Think ye because I Am retired into the Country, that I know nothing of your
Pranks and Transactions here in Town? But let me tell ye, I know much better
what is done here than at the place of my own residence; and that because my
Reputation abroad depends upon your Behavior at home. I heard indeed long ago
that Philumena could not endure ye, and made no wonder on it; twould have been a
greater Miracle if she could: But I little thought she could not have endured
the whole Family upo' your account; had ^^been aware of that, she should have
staid, and you packed off in faith. -- Pray see, Wife, what small rrason ye have
to vex me thus. I retired into the Country, gave way to ye, afforded ye enough
for your Necessities, and your Pleasures too; and that my Estate might the
better bear it, I Have wearied and toiled my self more than's convenient for my
Age; and could not ye after all this have took care that nothing disturbed my
repose?


Soft. By all that is good, what has happened was not through my means or fault.


Lach. No? Yes, but 'twas: For you're sele Mistress here. and you're only to be
blamed: Sure you might have looked after things in your own House since I Have
taken all other Cares off your hands. An old Woman to stand squabbling with a
Girl? Fie, fie! -- You will not lay the Fault upon her sure?


Soft. No: Dear Husband, I lay nothing to her charge.


Lach. OF my Soul I Am glad of that for poor Pam's sake: But as for you, do the
worst ye can, I cannot think worse of ye than I do.


Soft. But, good Husband, how do you know, but she may only pretend a displeasure
against me, to be the more at home with her Mother?


Lach. Never tell me that. Was Not yesterday's shutting the Door against ye
sufficient proof of her hatred?


Soft. They told me, she was very faint and weak; therefore 'twasn't convenient
to disturb her.


Lach. She Is sick, I fancy, of your ill Conditions more than of any thing else.
And no wonder in troth: for there is not a Mother of ye all but would have your
Sons marry: And whoever is the Person that pleases you; they must have: And
when to comply with your Humor they are married, to comply with your Humor
again, they must turn their Wives out of doors.

Phidippus appe^rs at his Door.


Phid. to Philumena within. Though I Am satisfied I Have Authority to force you to
obey what I Command, yet my Fatherly Affection prevails with me rather to give
way to ye, and not cross ye in your Humor.


Lach. Oh! here is my Brother Phidi^pus in good time, I shall know all from him.
-- They meet one another. I confess, Brother, I Am as indulgent to all my Family
as any Man; yet I suffer not my easiness to corrupt their Morals. Were you as
careful, I Am persuaded 'twould be more for your advantage, as well as ours: But
now I find you suffer 'em to ride ye as they list.


Phid. Look ye there now. Aside.


Lach. Yesterday I waited upon ye about your Daughter; you sent me away as wise
as I came: But let me tell ye, you don't do well to conceal the Cause of your
Anger, if ye design a lasting Alliance between us. If any of us have offended
ye, pray make it out; that so either by disproving or justifying what is done,
we may give as ample Satisfaction as you shall require. If Sickness' be the
Cause of keeping your Daughter at home, let me tell ye, Brother, it is too great
a Reflection upon us to imagine she shou'dn't have due attendance at my House.
As I hope to be saved, tho you are her Father, you shall not outdo me in this:
nor can you be more desirous of her Health than I am; and that for my poor Boys
sake, who I perceive loves her more than his life, and am confident will highly
resent it, when he comes to know on it; therefore pray let us have her home
before he comes back from his Voyage.


Phid. I Am satisfied, Brother, of your extraordinary Care and Affection for my
Daughter, and am apt to believe every Word you have said; but then I Would ha'ye
believe me too, that it is my hearty desire to have her to your House, if I
could prevail with her by any means.


Lach. Why what hinders ye? -- Softly. Hark ye, does she object any thing
against her Husband?


Phid. Nothing in the World; for when I urged it home to her, and seemed as
though I Would force her to return, she vowed by all that is good, She was not able to
endure your House, while her Pamphilus was away. Every one has his failings,
for my part I Am so soft-natured, I cannot cross and thwart my own Flesh and
Blood.


Lach. Dye hear that Mistress. Aside to Sostrata.


Sost. Ay, to my Sorrow. Aside.


Lach. Is that your Resolution then, Brother?


Phid. As the Case stands, it is so. -- But have ye any thing else to say? For
I Have a little business calls me in haste to the Piazza.


Lach. I Will bear ye Company if ye please.

Exeunt Phidippus and Laches.


Sostrata alone. In good faith we poor Wives have got a very ill Name with our
Husbands, because of a few bad Creatures, that make the World judge hardly of
us all. For as I hope for Heaven, I Am as innocent of what my Husband accuses me
of as the sucking infant. Yet it is next to impossible to be believed, there is
such a common Scandal sticks upon all Mother-in-Laws: But let me die if I Am one
that deserve it; for I Have been as tender of this same Creature, as if she had
been a Daughter of my own. I can t imagine why this Misfortune should light
upon my head. However upon many accounts I am extremely desirous of my Sons
return. Exit.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Enter Pamphilus and Parmeno, at the farther end of the Stage. Pam. -- WAs ever
Man so perplexed in his love as I? Unhappy Wretch! Have I been such a good
Husband of my Life for this? Was It this which made me so desirous of returning
home? Thad been better for me to have spent my days any where in the World,
than to come back hither, and find my self so unhappy here: For whatever
Misfortune befalls a Man, the longer it is before he knows it, is so much time
clearly gained.


Par. However, Sir, by your return, you will be able the sooner to make your self
easy. Had you staid away, the Breach would have been far wider. Now, Sir, I Am
confident that your presence will have a great Influence upon them all. So
you will learn the whole Business, rectify Misunderstandings, and make all
Friends again. All these dreadful Apprehensions of yours are in themselves but
very slight things.


Pam. Why do you pretend to comfort me, when I Am the greatest Wretch alive?
Before I marry d this Woman, my Heart was engag d elsewhere; how much I
suffered upon that account, any one may easily guess, without my telling; and
yet I never was the Man that dared to refuse the Match my Father put upon me: I
had but just weaned my self from Bacchis, and disengaged my Affections; but
just fixed my Love on Philumena; when alas, a new Business happens which forced
me to leave her too: Then I Am afraid I shall find either my Mother or Wife to
blame; and if so, the Consequence must be, that I shall be miserable still. For
Duty, Parmeno, binds me to bear with my Mother's Failings; and for my Wife, I Am
a thousand ways obliged to her, not only for meekly bearing with my Humors, but
also for concealing my unkind Usage to her from all the World. Certainly,
Parmeno, some extraordinary thing must have happe^e^, which gave occasion to
this Quarrel that has now lasted so long.


Par. Some fri^olous thing or other I Will warrant ye, Sir: For upon close
examination you will find that the greatest Quarrels han t always the greatest
Occasions. It Is frequent, S^r, to find the same thing make one Man sta^k mad,
and your mortal Enemy for ever, when it does not move another. How do
Childrenbite and scratch for the smallest Trifles! And why? Marry because their
Understandings are weak, and are not able to direct em: And your Women truly
are even as soon moved as Children; one chance word perhaps or so has been the
occasion of all this Disturbance.


Pam. Well! go in, Parmeno, and let 'em know I Am here.

Parmeno going off hears a Noise and slops short.
Par. Hah! What,s here to do.


Pam. S't! Listens


Par. Here Is a sad Bustle, they run up and down like mad -- Pray, Sir, come a
little this way. -- Pamphilus goes toward him. A little closer yet. They both
listen at Phidippus's Door. Ha! Dye hear, Sir?


Pam. Hold your prating. -- Shrieking within. Bless me! I hear some body shriek.


Par. So, you enjoin me silence, and talk your self.


Myr. within Doors. Prithee dear Child, as little noise as may be.


Pam. That Is like Philumena's Mother's Voice. -- Ruined!


Par. Why so.


Pam. Undone!


Par. Wherefore?


Pam. Ah, Parmeno, there is some Mischief more than ordinary has happened,
which they conceal from me.


Par. They said indeed your Lady was out of order, whether that be it or no, I
cannot tell.


Pam. I Am a lost Man. -- Why didn't ye tell me this before? Angrily.


Par. I con'dn't tell ye every thing at once.


Pam. What Is her Distemper?


Par. That I cannot tell.


Pam. How! Is no body gone for a Doctor?


Par. I cannot tell that neither.


Pam. But why don't I go in my self, that I may know for certain what is the
Business? -- Ah my dear Philumena, in what Condition shall I now find thee?
Should thy Life be in danger; I shall certainly die with thee. Exit Pamphilus.


Parmeno alone. I don't think it convenient to venture in after him: For I very
well know, they don't care for any of our Family. Yesterday they shut the Door
against my Lady her self. If she should chance to grow worse (which in troth I
wou'dnt have for my poor Masters sake) they will presently pretend (a plague on
them all) that one of Madam Sostrata's Servants came in, brought the Devil
along with him, and thereupon that she grew worse immediately: So my Mistress
will be blamed? but I shall have the worst on it.

The Noise increases within. Enter Sostrata on the other side.


Soft. to her self. Alas, I think I ve heard a strange sort of a Bustle in my
Sisters House, and for some time too. I vow, I Am extremely afraid poor
Philumenas Distemper grows worse and worse: But Heavens forbid it. Now I Will
give her a visit.

Shes going in.
Par. Hark ye, Madam!

Soft. Hah!
Par. You ll meet with another repulse, Madam.


Soft. turning about. Ha, Parmeno! are you there? -- Alas poor Wretch! What
shall I do? Shall Not I go see my Son's Wife, when she lies sick but at next door.


Par. If youd be ruled by me, Madam, neither see her, nor send to see her: For
to be fond of one that perfectly hates you seems a double piece of Folly.
You Will bestow your labor to no purpose, and be troublesome besides. -- Then,
Madam your Son went to see how she did, as soon as he came to Town.


Soft. How! my Son Pamphilus come ashore?


Par. Yes, Madam.


Sost. Heavens be praised. -- That word has revived me, and set my Heart at
rest.


Par. Upo' this account especially, I would not have ye go in: For if her Pains
be a little abated, I Am confident, now they are together, she will up and tell him
all that passed between you two; and how the Difference first began -- But see
where he comes. -- He seems very melancholy upon it.

Enter Pamphilus.


Soft. Ah, my Dear, dear Child! Embracing him.


Pam. Your Blessing, Madam.


Sost. Welcome home heartily. -- But how is it with your Wife?


Pam. OF the mending hand -- Wiping his Eyes.


Sost. Heavens continue it so. -- But why in tears Son? Why thus melancholy.


Pam. Nothing at all, Madam.


Sost. What Bustle was that? tell me: Was she taken with a sudden Fit?


Pam. Yes Madam.


Sost. What Is her Distemper?


Pam. An Ague.


Sost. A Quotidian?


Pam. So they tell me. -- Pray, Madam, walk in, I Will follow immediately.


Sost. So I will. Exit Sostrata.


Pam. Parmeno, do you run and meet my Servants, and help them home with their
Luggage.


Par. grumbling. What a-duce cannot they find the way home without a Guide?


Pam. You ll be gone will not ye? Exit Parmeno


Pamphilus alone walking about discontentedly. Where shall I begin now, to give
an account of those many surprising Misfortunes that have befallen me? Part of
which I heard, and part I saw with these very eyes; which made me run out of
the House half distracted. -- For when I hastily went in just now, in great
concern for my Wife (thinking to find her sick of another-gates Distemper than
what, alas! I found her in:) The Maids being surpised at first sight all of
'em o're-joyd, cried out, Hes come: But immediately after I perceived they
changed Countenance, because I happened to come at such an unlucky Minute: mean
time one of 'em ran up Stairs to give notice of my Arrival; and I, as eager to
see my Wife, follow her directly. No sooner was I got in, but immediately I
perceived her Ailment, unhappy Creature as I was: For they had no time in the
World to conceal the business, for her Cryings out did sufficiently discover
her Condition. When I saw this, Base and unworthy, said I! And with that
immediately flung out of the Room all in Tears, struck with Horror at such an
unheard of dismal Accident. Her Mother, poor Soul, followed me close, caught
me at the Door, and flung her self at my Feet, melting into Tears: so that I
could not but pity her: And truly, I Am of Opinion, as a Man's Fortune rises or
falls so is he up or down. She thus addressed her self to me: My dear
Pamphilus, you're an Eyewitness now of the Cause that made this unhappy
Creature leave your House: She was ravished sometime since by an unknown
Villain; and is now fled hither to hide her shame from you and the World. He
wipes his Eyes. But alas! the very Remembrance of her earnest Entreaties makes
me melt afresh. -- Whatsoever Chance or Fortune (continu d she) has brought you
hither at this juncture, by that we both conjure ye (if we may in Equity and
Justice presume so far) to bury and conceal this Mischance from the Eye of the
World. If ever (dear Pamphilus!) if ever you were sensible that she had any
Tenderness for ye, in requital she begs ye not to think that small Favor too
much to grant her. As for taking her again, use your own discretion. You're the
only Person that knows of her Lying in, and that the Child is none of yours:
For they say you had nothing to do with her the first two Months; and after you
had, it is now seven and no more. Your Behavior shows what your thoughts are
about it: Now, if it be possible (my Dear!) I wish and endeavor nothing more
than that her Lying in may be kept from her Father, and every Soul besides: But
should it come out, it shall go for a Miscarriage, I know none will think
otherwise; but, what is most likely, will suppose you the Father of it. The
Child shall immediately be exposed, and you never the worse for it; and by this
means you can suffer no inconvenience, and secure the poor Girls Reputation
besides. -- I passed my Word, and am resolved to keep it: But for taking her
again, I think it no ways for my Honor, nor will I do it; tho her Love and
Conversation have a very great Influence over me. -- I cannot but weep to think
what a melancholy Life I must lead for the future -- Weeps. O Fortune, Fortune,
what a changeable thing thou art! But my first Love has inured me to this
usage; I conquered that by reason, and how I must endeavor to do the like --

Enter Parmeno, Socia, and Porters at a great distance with Trunks,
Portmantaus, etc.

But yonder comes Parmeno with the rest, there is no occasion for him to be
hereabouts at this time; for he is the only Person I made privy to my Behavior
to my Wife, when we first married. I fear should he hear her frequent Shrieks,
he will discover her to be in Labor: I must even send him on some Errand or
other till all is over.


Par. to Socia. Say so? Had ye such a wretched Voyage on it? Hah!


Soc. In sober Sadness, Parmeno, 'tisn't possible to tell thee what a dismal
thing it is to be a Shipboard.


Par. Indeed?


Soc. Troth you are a happy Fellow, little do thou know what dangers thou
escapest by keeping always on dry ground. To pass over other Hardships, mark
but this: Thirty long Days and Nights or more, was I on Shipboard; expecting
evry minute to be sows'd to the bottom of the Sea, 'twas such plaguey stormy
weather all the time, and the Wind against us.


Par. Abominable!


Soc. So indeed I found it: In short, if I knew I must go back, rather than
do it, upon my Soul I Would show em a light pair of Heels for it.


Par. Ay, old Boy, thou'st been ready for that sport upon slighter occasions
than this: -- But hold, yonder is my Master Pamphilus before that Door, -- Go
all in, and I Will step to him, and see if he has any business wi' me.

Exeunt Socia and Porters.

Parmeno goes to P^mphilus.


Par. Are you here still, Sir.


Pam. Yes, I stay for you.


Par. What Is your Pleasure?


Pam. You must run as far as the Tower.


Par. Who must?


Pam. You must.


Par. As far as the Tower? For what pray, Sir?


Pam. To find out one Callidemides my Landlord of Myconia, who came over in the
same Vessel wi' me.


Par. God's Death! I Will be sworn this Master o'mine has made a Vow, that if e're he
got ashore, he would make me run my heart out. Aside.


Pam. Why don't ye stir?


Par. Must I say any thing to him, or must I only give him the meeting?


Pam. Tell him I cannot meet him to day as I appointed, that he may not stay to
no purpose, -- Fly.


Par. But Sir, I don't know what manner of Man he is.


Pam. I Will tell ye how to know him presently. -- He Is a huge, fiery-fac'd,
frizzled-crown'd fat Fellow, with wall-eyes, and looks as if he would fright ye.


Par. aside. Plague on him for a Son of Wh(...) Going off turns back. But
suppose he ben't there, must I stay till Night for him?


Pam. Ay, ay: Run Sirrah.


Par. I beg your Pardon for that, I Am quite foundered already. Exit Hobbling.

Pamphilus alone.

He Is gone, -- Now what course shall poor I take? -- I Am at a strange loss how
to conceal Philumenas lying in, as her Mother desired me. I profess, I cannot
but pity the poor Woman. Ill do what I can, but still I Will discharge my Duty to
my Parents, for my Love must give way to my Obedience.

Enter Laches and Phidippus at some distance

But lack-a-day there is my Father and Mr. Phidippus together, -- They make this
way too. -- I cannot devise what to say 'em.


Lach. to Phidippus. Didn't ye tell me just now that your Daughter only waited
for my Sons coming home.


Phid. Yes.


Lach. I hear he is come, let her be brought home then.


Pam. to himself. I cannot imagine what excuse to make to my Father for not
taking her home again --


Lach. over-hearing. What Voice is that?


Pam. to himself. Yet I Am fully resolved to keep firm to my first design.


Lach. O here is the Man we were talking of.


Pam. Your Blessing, Sir.


Lach. I Am glad to see thee.


Phid. Welcome h^me, Pamphilus; I Am also glad to see ye so sound and lusty
after your Vo^age.


Pam. Im obliged to ye Sir.


Lach. Are ye but just landed, Son?


Pam. Just now, Sir.


Lach. Well! and what has our Kinsman Phanie left us? Hah!


Pam. Wh(...) really, Sir, he was a Man given up to his Pleasures in his
Lifetime, and such as he seldom leave much to their Heirs: However they leave
this Commendation behind 'em, that as long as they livd, they lived like
Gentlemen.


Lach. Then thou have brought home nothing but that pretty Sentence instead of
an Estate.


Pam. That little he has left, may do us some kindness.


Lach. Ah! none at all. -- I wish heartily he were alive and in health again.


Phid. You may safely wish that: He Is past wishing for. -- I dare swear I know
which you would choose. Aside.


Lach. to Pamphilus. Yesterday my Brother here sent to desire his Daughter
might come to his House. -- Say you did.

Aside to Phidip pus ^hrusting him.


Phid. softly to Laches. Don,t punch me so. -- So I did. -- [Aloud to Pamphilus.


Lach. But now he will send her home again.


Phid. So I will.


Pam. Sir, I know the whole business, how every thing has been managed since I
went. I heard the whole Story as soon as e're I arrived.


Lach. Hang those envious Dev^ls, that were so officious as to tell it y^. In a
passion.


Pam. Im sure I took all possible care to ^void giving an^ of ye the least
offense: And had I^ mind to it, I could here tell ye how faithful, loving, and
kind I Have been to her; but I had rather ye should hear't from her own Mouth:
For by that means you ll the sooner believe my good Nature, when the Relation
comes from her that at present is so unkind to me. Heavens my witness, I had no
hand at all in this Difference: But since she thinks her self too good to stoop
to my Mother, when Modesty might have taught her to have born with her Humor;
and since there is no other way of composing the Difference, I must even part
with either one or the other. But now, Mr. Phidippus, Filial Duty obliges me to
take my Mother's part before my Wifes.


Lach. I am not displeased, Pamphilus, to find ye so ready to sacrifice all to
the Interests of your Parents: But have a care you don't engage too far in this
Quarrel.


Pam. How can I engage my self in a Quarrel against her, that never disobligd
me in any thing, but on the contrary has obliged me in many things? I love her,
honor her, and still desire with all my Soul to keep her: For I Have always
found her of a wonderful sweet Temper toward me; therefore I wish with all my
Heart she may spend the remainder of her days with a more fortunate Husband
than me; since mere necessity tears her from me.


Phid. It Is in your own power to hinder that.


Lach. Take her home again, if you be wise. Angrily.


Pam. That Is not my intention, Sir. I must now consult my Mother's Interest.
Exit Pamphilus.


Lach. Whether now? -- Stay, stay, I say. -- Where are ye going?


Phid. What Whim's this?

Surlily.
Lach. I told ye, Brother, how highly he would resent this; and therefore beggd of
ye to send home your Daughter in time.


Phid. 'Sbud I didn't think he had been such a Churl. Does he think Ill go
cringing with Cap in Hand to him? If he is disposed to take home his Wife, well
and good; if not, let him refund her Portion, pack off, and a F -- for him.

In a huff.
Lach. Look ye now; you're in as great a Fume as he.


Phid. Pamphilus, You're grown mighty huffish methinks after your Voyage. --


Lach. His anger will soon be over, tho indeed he had some cause.


Phid. Because forsooth you have got a little more Pelf fallen to ye, you swell
so much upon it.


Lach. What? You Will fall out wi'me too?


Phid. Let him consider on it, and tell me to day, whether he will have her or no;
that if he will not another may. Exit in a huff.


Laches alone.

Stay Brother, hear me but one word. -- He Is gone: -- But what is this to me? In
short, let 'em order their Matters as they please for me, since neither Brother
nor Son will hear Reason, nor mind one Word I say, Ill turn all my Forces upo'
my W^fe, the Promoter of all this Mischief, and discharge all that sticks in my
Stomach upon her.

Exit Laches, and as he goes off.


Myrrhina Enter in disorder. I Am ruined! What shall I do? -- Which way shall I
turn my self? -- Alas! What answer can I give my Husband? I Am persuaded he
heard the Child cry, which made him run so hastily into my Daughters Chamber,
without saying a word. Should he find that she is in Labor, I vow I cannot
devise what excuse to invent for the concealing of it. -- The Door goes, -- I Am
afraid hes upo'the Scent after me. -- I Am no Woman of this World.

Enter Phidippus.


Phid. entering. As soon as my Wife perceived I was going into my Daughters
Chamber, away she slunk out of doors -- But here she is tho. -- How now Wife?
-- She seems not to see him. Hark ye, it is you I speak to.


Myr. Meaning me, my dear Husband?


Phid. I your Husband? Do You regard me as a Husband, or so much as a Man? For
had ye esteemed me either one or the other (Gentlewoman!) you daren't have made me
such a public Scorn by your baseness.


Myr. By what baseness?


Phid. By what? -- Is Not your Daughter brought to bed? -- Hah! are ye
Tongue-tyd now? -- Who Is the Father pray?


Myr. Is that a Question for a Father to ask? -- Dear Heart, who do you think
should be but her own Husband?


Phid. I believe it, nor is it for a Father to think otherwise: But I Am amazed
why ye should so carefully keep all in hugger-mugger from us, especially when
she was delivered at her full time, and all things were as they should be.
Could ye be so damnably malicious, as to wish the poor Child's Death; which you
knew would be the occasion of a more lasting Friendship between us, rather than
suffer Man and Wife to live together contrary to your cross-grained Humor. --
I took it to be wholly their fault, but now I find it is all long of you.


Myr. Im a miserable Creature.


Phid. Would I were sure of that -- It now comes fresh into my mind, what you
formerly said on this subject, when the Match was first made. You professed
forsooth, that you could not away with a Son-in-law that kept his Wenches, and
lay abroad whole Nights together.


Myr. I had rather he should suspect any thing i't'h world, than guess at the
true Cause. Aside.


Phid. I knew that he kept a Mistress (Madam Wife!) long before you did: But I
never counted that such a mighty fault in a young Man; for it is what we are all
born with, but the time will quickly come when he will hate himself for it: But
you I see are still the same, and could never be at quiet till you had parted
em, and nulled the Marriage, 'cause it was of my making. Now it is plain how
rarely you stood affected to the Match.


Myr. Can ye suppose me so base and cruel to my own Flesh and Blood, if this
Match had been to our advantag?


Phid. Pish! You able to foresee or judge what is to our advantage? May be some
body informed informed you that they saw him going to or coming from his
Mistress. And what of all that, if he did it privately, and but seldom? Is Not
it more handsome for us to wink at such flailings, than blaze 'em abroad and get
nothing but ill will to our selves by the bargain? For could he so suddenly
draw his Affections from one he has loved so many years, I shou'dn't count him
a man, nor think him half stanch and constant enough for my Daughter.


Myr. Good Husband, no more of the young man; nor of my pretended faults
neither: Go and meet him privately, and ask him whether he will take home his
wife or no: If he says yes, send her away, if not, I think I Have taken a wise
course with my Daughter.


Phid. If he would not receive her, and you knew him in fault, Wife; I was not
far off, pray why was not I consulted; withal? This mads me to the Heart, to
find that ye dare do such a thing without my leave. I charge ye upon your Life,
not to let ^he Child stir out of the House. -- But what a Blockhead am I to
think she will mind what I say? I Will go in my self, and strictly charge my
Servants, to let no body carry it away. Exit Phidippus.


Myrrhina alone.

Let me die if I don't believe I Am the unhappiest Woman in the world: In good
truth, I plainly foresee how extremely ill he will take it if he knew all, since
he is so very angry for that little he does know; nor can I imagine how to alter
his Resolution. -- And this is the only Evil that could have befallen me after
all my other Disasters, if I should be forced to bring up a Child we don't know
the Father of. For when my Daughter was ravished, 'twas so dark she could not
discern his Face, nor yet get any Token from him, whereby to discover him
afterward (...) only when the Fellow left her, he forced a Ring off her
Finger. Upon the whole matter I Am strange^y afraid Mr. Pamphilus, when he comes
to hear w^ bring up another Man's Child instead of his, will no longer conceal
what we desired him to keep private. Exit Myrrhina.


The end of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Sostrata and Pamphilus; Laches comes to the Door and observes 'em.

Sost. entering. I Know well enough, Pamphilus, you suspect 'twas long of my
humors that your Wife left us, dissemble the matter as much as ye please: but
may I never obtain Mercy, no enjoy that Comfort from ye I expect, if e're to my
knowledge I did any thing that should give her any disgust against me. I always
believed you respected me, but now you have given certain proof of it: for your
Father has been telling me within, how far you prefer my Reputation to your
Love. And now I design to return ye the like Complement, and let ye know how
highly I esteem such Dutifulness. I believe, my dear Son, 'twill be better for
both your Satisfaction and my Reputation, if I retire into the Country with
your Father, as I Have fully resolved, so my presence will be no Eyesore to ye,
nor any pretense for your Wife's staying away.


Pam. Pray, Madam, what do you mean by this? Shall her silly Freaks drive you
into the Country? It must not be; nor can I endure to have the envious world
say, 'Twas done through my wilfulness, and not your good Nature: Besides, I
would not for e're so much ha'ye upon my account, banished the Enjoyment of your
Friends, Relations, and all the Diversions of the Town.


Sost. Truly Son, I Have now but little relish of these Enjoyments. Time was
indeed when I had my fill of them; but now I Am quite weary of those Gamhals. At
present my chief care is to keep my Age from being a burden to others, that so
they may not wish for my end* Here I find I Am despised without cause, and it is
time to retreat: By this means I fancy, I shall cut off all cause of
Discontent, clear my self of hard Suspicions, and humor 'em all: Therefore
pray let me avoid those Scandals we Women generally lie under.


Pam. How happy am I upon all accounts, were it not for this; since I have such
a Mother and such a Wife! Aside


Sost. Good, dear Boy, as the Case stands, try to make shift with one
inconveniency. If other things go according to your mind* and your Wife is as I
take her to be, grant me this one request, my Child, and have her home.


Pam. Ah! I Am very unhappy.


Sost. And I too: For I Am as much concerned at it^ as you can be, my dear
Child, for the Soul of ye.

Laches appears, and goes up to 'em.


Lach. So Wife, I overheard all your discourse just by here. It Is Policy to
comply freely with the Occasion, when you know force would follow else.


Sost. May it succeed well.


Lach. March into the Country then, and there we'll both bear with one another
humors.


Sost. I hope we shall.


Lach. Go in then, and pack up what things you will have occasion for. -- I Am
fix^d.


Sost. I shall obey your Orders. Exit Sostrata.


Pam. But, Sir! -- Concernedly


Lach. Well, Pamphilus.


Pam. Will ye send my Mother into the Country? By no means.


Lach. Why not?


Pam. Because, Sir, as yet I Am not resolved what to do with my Wife


Lach. How! What should ye do but take he^ home again?


Pam. aside. That I would with all my Hear^, and can hardly persuade my self
not to do it: But I^^^ not break one ^ot of my measure, but even take that
cours^ I think most convenient. -- -- To Laches. I presume, Sir, they will be
better Friends, if she stays where she is.


Lach. That Is more than you know: However 'tisn't a Pin matter to you whether
they be Friends or Foes, when once your Mother's out of the way. The truth on it
is, we old Folks are no good Compan^ to you young ones; and therefore we had
even as good go our way. In short, Pamphilus, your Mother and I are become
By-words to ye, The old Man, and the old Woman. -- -- But yonder comes my
Brother i^th' Critical minute. Let Us give him the meeting.

Enter Phidippus on the other side of the Stage; Laches moves toward him.


Phid. to Philumena within. Troth Daughter, I Am angry with you, and very much
too, for in sober Sadness it was a very scurvy trick; though your Mother's forcing
ye be your pretense, yet I Am sure she had no such excuse.


Lac. O Brother, you're come at the best time in the World.


Phid. Why so?


Pam. What answer shall I give 'em, or how be able to keep this Secret! Aside


Lach You may tell your Daughter, my Wife's going into the Country, so she
needn't be afraid to come home to her Husband.


Phid. Poh! Your Wife's innocent of all; it is my Wife that is the Broacher of
all this, --


Pam. Nay, then the Case is alter^d. Aside


Phid. -- And has caused all this ado, Mr. Laches


Pam. Let 'em cause what ado they please, so I don't take her home again. Aside.


Phid. Now Pamphilus I wish nothing more, if it can be brought about than that
there may be a lasting Alliance between us. If you are of another mind, pray
take the Child however.


Pam. He knows of that too: I Am past all hope

Aside
Lach. The Child? Prithee what Child? Hastily.


Phid. Why we have a Grandson, Brother. F^^ my Daughter when she left your
House, was big it seems; and I never so much as knew of her breeding till now.


Lach. Good, in troth, as I Am an honest Man; I Am heartily glad it is born, and
your Daughter well. -- But what a strange sort of a Woman is your wife Pam?
what odd kind of Fancies she has about her, so long to keep things in the dark
from us? I vow I cannot say how unhandsome it looks.


Phid. Truly, Brother, I Am as little pleased at the proceedings as you.


Pam. My mind was in suspense before, but now it is fixed; since she is to bring
a Brat with her that is none of mine. Aside.


Lach. Come, come, Pam, it is too late to stand shally, shally. --


Pam. I Am ruined, -- Aside.


Lach. I Have often wished for that happy day of having one to call you Father.
It Is come at last, Heavens be praised. --


Pam. -- Beyond Redemption. Aside.


Lach. -- Take home your Wife, without any more grumbling.


Pam. Truly, Sir, had she been minded to have had Children by me, or to have been
still my Wife, I Am certain she would never have concealed what I understand she has.
Now, since I plainly see she has withdrawn her Love from me, I don't believe we
shall ever agree well hereafter: why then should I take her again?


Lach. Poh! the young Girl did all by the Mothers Persuasion; and is that such
a strange thing? Do You expect to find any woman in the World without their
Faults? Han't Men their Failings too.


Phid. Well! Look to it your selves both of ye, whether ye think to have her or
leave her: I cannot answer for all that my foolish Wife does: For my own part,
do what you will, you shall not find me unreasonable on either side: Mean time
what shall we do wi' the Child?


Lach. A wise Query, in troth! Let the Business go which way it will send the
Child hither, since it is his, that we may nurse it as ours.


Pam. Shall I bring up that Child that the Mother takes no care of?


Lach. What Is that you say? Not bring it up, Pamphilus? Good-now shall we make
away with^t? -- Why this is downright madness: Upo' my Life I can hold no
longer. Now you force me to say what I would not have said before your
Fatherin-Law. Pamphilus weeps. -- Do You think I don't know what all this
snivelling, and what all this Disorder means? -- In another tone. First ye
pretended, You could not have her home because of your Mother; She promises to
leave the whole House to your selves: Since that Excuse will not hold good now,
forsooth, The Child's born without your Knowledge. You're mightily mistaken if
ye think I don't know what you hanker after: How long did I wink at your
keeping a Miss, in hopes at last of bringing ye over to a Wife? How patiently
did I bear your lavish Expenses that way? I plied ye, I entreated ^e to marry;
told ye 'twas high time, and by much persuasion, you did. Then you obeyed me,
as your Duty obliged ye to do: But now you're in with your Whore again; and to
pleasure her, will ruin your Wife, I plainly see you're relapsing into your
old course of Debaucheries.

Angrily.
Pam. Who I, Sir?


Lach. Yes you; and let me tell ye it is base to invent shams, to quarrel with
your Wife, that when ^nce she is out of sight, you may the better live with your
Strumpet. Your Wife was sensible of this; or what reason had she to leave the
house else?


Phid. He has hit upon it; certainly that is the reason.


Pam. If you please, Sir, I Will give it upon Oath, that it is nothing so as you
imagine.


Lach. For shame, take home your Wife then, or give us a better reason why you
will not.


Pam. 'Tisn't convenient at this time.


Lach. Take care of the Child then: that I hope is in no fault: We'll consider
of the Mother afterward.


Pam. walking on one side. I Am miserable on all sides: My Father has so woefully
gravelled me, that I cannot tell how to turn my self. -- I Will even step out of
the way since I shall do but little good by my being here. I believe, they will
hardly bring up the Child without my order, especial since my Mother-in-Law
will second me in the thing.

Aside. Pamphilus steal's off.


Lach. Do You steal away? What? Give us no direct Answer? -- Do You think he is not
crack-brain'd? -- Well! it is no matter, Brother, send the Child to me and I Will
bring him up.


Phid. With all my Heart. -- I don't wonder if his Wife been't pleased with
these fine doings; women are fretful Pieces, and cannot away with such Affronts.
This is the cause of their Quarrel; my wife told me on it her self, but I
would not mention it before him, nor would I believe it at first; but now tisas
clear as the Sun; I perceive now he is a downright Marriage-hater.


Lach. What should I do in the Case? what would ye advise me to?


Phid. What? why, first I think it is best for us to go to his Miss: Let us
first discourse her calmly, then charge her home; and if that will not do, let us
threaten her severely, if ever she has any thing more to do with your Son.


Lach. I Will follow your Advice. -- Goes toward his own House. Soho within
there. --

^nter a Boy. Step over to my Neighbor Bacchis; and tell her I Would speak with
her presently. -- Ex. Boy.

And I mnst desire you, Brother, to stand by me in this business.


Phid. Ah, Sir, I Have often told ye; and am still of the same mind, that I
desire nothing so much as that the Alliance between us may be lasting, if it be
possible to bring it about; and I hope we shall do it. -- But would ye have me
here when she comes?


Bach. No; you may go and provide a good Nurse for the Child. Exit Phidippus.
Enter Bacchis on the other side of the Stage, with two Waiting-maids, and
Laches' s Boy.


Bac. entering. I Will be sworn it is no small matter, ^^at makas Mr. Laches send
to speak wi me now. But in troth, I Am mightily mistaken if I don't guess ^^ the
business.


Lach to himself I must take special care, that my Passion don't hinder me from
gaining upon her according as I wish; nor make me do that in haste, which I may
repent at leisure. -- I Will accost her, -- Mrs. Bacchis your Servant.


Bac. Yours, good Mr. Laches.

Exit Boy.
Lach. Troth, I don't question but you somewhat wonder, why I sent to speak
with ye


Bac. And really when I consider my self, I am afraid lest the Scandal of my
Trade should be ^o my prejudice; for as to my behavior in it, I defy the
World --


Lach. If it be so; you have no reason to be afraict of me, Woman; for I Am of
those Years that a false Step is not so easily pardonable in me; therefore am
the more cautious to do nothing rashly. If both now and ever you do what ye can
justify, 'twould be very unhandsome in me to do ye any injury, and very unjust
since ye don't deserve it.


Bac. Upo' my word I Am extremely obliged to ye for that: For after an injury's
done, begging of one's Pardon is but small amends. -- But pray, Sir, your
Pleasure.


Lach. I hear you entertain my Son Pamphilus. -- Bac. interruptirg. Sir, --


Lach. Hear me out. -- Before he married, I winked at your Amors. -- Here
Bacchis is going to speak. -- Hold! I have not spoke all my mind yet. -- Now he is
married, you would do well to look out a more constant Lover in time. For Pamphilus
will not always have the same Inclinations, nor troth you the same Beauty.


Bac. Pray, Sir, who reports this?


Lach. His Mother-in-Law.


Bac. That I entertain him?


Lach. Yes, you: For that reason has she taken home her Daughter, and would
privately have made away with the Child she has by him.


Bach. Sir, If I knew any thing more Sacred than an Oath to convince ye, I Would
freely offer it to ye, that I had never any thing to do with your Son, since he
married.


Lach. Thou art a dainty fine girl! But can ye guess what further Favor I Would
desire of ye?


Bac. What is it, good Sir?


Lach. Only to step just in there, Pointing to Phidippuss House and offer the
Women within upon Oath to satisfy them, and clear your self of all.


Bacch. I Will obey you, Sir: but in good earnest; there is never a one in my
Circumstances would have don't, or shown her face before a young married woman
upon such an account: but I scorn to see your Son scandalized upon a false
story, or be undeservedly thought inconstant by such as should have a better
opinion of him. He has done me many a good turn, and now I Will do him one.


Lach. Your smooth Tongue has made me conceive a more favorable opinion of ye;
for twasn't only their Surmises, but I thought as bad of ye my self too. --
Since I Have now found ye otherwise than we took ye to be, pray see that you
prove still the same, and you may find a Friend of me: but if ye don't, --
Well, I say no more for fear of disobliging ye. -- This I Will advise ye, that
you would rather try what I can do as your Friend, than as your Enemy.


Bac. I Will do my best, Sir, to satisfy ye.

Enter at a distance Phidippus with a Nurse.


Phid. to the Nurse. I will not see ye want any thing, but you shall have freely
what my House will afford; but when you have eat and drank sufficiently, pray let
the Child suck its belly-full. Ex. Nurse.


Lach. See, there comes our Son's Father-in-law: He has got him a Nurse for the
Child. -- Brother! here is Mrs. Bacchis swears by all the Gods. --


Phid. Is that she?


Bach. Yes.


Phid. Troth, these sort of Creatures care little for the Gods, and the Gods as
little for them.


Bac. Take my Servants here, rack the truth out of 'em if ye please. The
business is now on foot, and I Am obliged to reconcile Mr. Pamphilus and his
Lady; which if I do, I shall get me Credit enough by being the only Person of
m^ Profession, that would have undertaken such a Business.


Lach. to Phid^^pus walking on one side. I find upon Examinati a (...) Vives
were mightily, out in their Conje^tures: ^^^^ver let us make use of this Woman
now, for when your Wife once perceives her mistake, she will quickly be pacified;
but if Pamphilus be angry 'cause his Wife was brought to Bed privately, that is
a trifle, he will soon be satisfied: And E'dad I can see nothing i'this business
that is worth falling out about.


Phid. Troth, would it were so as you say.


Lach. Examine her your self, since she is here, she will satisfy ye, I Will engage
for it.


Phid. What need all this? Don't ye know my Mind already i'this Matter? Let her
but satisfy the Women and I Am content.


Lach goes to Bacchis. Troth, Mrs. Bacchis, I I must desire ye to be as good as
your word to me.


Bac. Would ye have me go in, Sir, about this business.


Lach. Yes; and satisfy them, that they may believe it too.


Bac. I will, Sir; but I am sure to be no welcome Guest there; For a young
Woman, parted from her Husband upo' this account, is a mortal Enemy to a
Courtesan.


Bach. They Will be your Friends, when once they know on what Errand you are come.


Phid. I Will pass my word for that too, when they come to know your business:
For you will clear them of a Mistake, and your self of all Suspicion.


Bac. Alack-a-day, I Am so ashamed to look Madam Philumena in the Face. -- To her
Maids. Come both of ye after me.


Exeunt Phidippus, Bacchis, with her two Maids.

Laches alone. What could I have wished for more than what has happened to this
Woman, that she might procure her self Fri^nds without costing her any thing,
and do me a kindness into the Bargain: For if in reality she has withdrawn her
self from Pamphilus, it will be very much to her Interest, Reputation and
immortal Honor. For this one Act will for ever oblige my Son, and gain her our
Friendship.

Exit Laches.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Parmeno Enter at a distance. OF my Conscience this Master of mine counts my
labor worth nothing; he would not else ha'send me thus upon a Fool's Errand as
far as the Tower; where I Have loyter'd away a whole day in gaping for
Callidemides, the Myconian Friend. There did I sit all day like a Simpleton,
asking every body that came by, Pray, Sir, said I, are you a Myconian? No; says
he. Is your name Callidemides? quoth I. No, quoth he: Are you acquainted with
one Mr. Pamphilus? All answered i^th' Negative. OF my Soul there is no such Man
in the World. Faith, at last I was damnably out o^ Countenance, and fairly
slunk away. --

Enter Bacchis and her Maid

But what is the meaning of Bacchis's coming out of our Father-in-Law's? What
has she to do there?


Bac. O Parmeno! You could not come in a better time. You must run for your
Master Pamphilus in all haste.


Par. What for?


Bac. Tell him, I Would pray him to step hither a little.


Par. To you, Madam?


Bac. No; to his Lady.


Par. What Is to do there?


Bac. Nothing about you; therefore don't be so inquisitive.


Par. Must I say nothing else?


Bac. Yes; tell him that Madam Myrrhina challenges the Ring he formerly ga^ me,
and says 'twas her Daughters.


Par. I understand ye: Does the business require su^ch haste?


Bac. Yes, indeed: He^ll be here in a trice, when you tell him of it. -- What
are you asleep?


Par. Not in the least; nor I suppose an't like to day; for I have spent it
already in running and trapesing all o^re the Town. Exit.


Bacchis alone.

What great satisfaction has my coming procured Mr. Pamphilus to day? How many
Blessings have I brought him? And how many troubles have I freed him from? I
have saved him a Son, which his Wife, his Mother, and he were thinking to make
away with; recovered him a Loving Wife, whom he was just upon casting off, and
cleared him from the unjust Suspicions of both his Fathers -- This is the Ring
Showing a Ring on her Hand. That has procured him all this good Fortune. For
now I remember about nine months ago, he comes one Evening alone to my House,
much out of Breath, and much in Drink: It almost put me into a Fit; Prithee my
dear Pam (said I) for Love's sake, why so strangely disordered? Where got ye
this Ring? Prithee tell me. He pretended to mind something else? at that I grew
more suspicious, and urged him to tell me: At last my Gentleman confesses, That
coming along the Street he had forced a young Woman he knew not; and in
struggling took the Ring from her. Myrrhina spyed it just now on my Finger, and
asked me how I came by it? I told her the whole Story; upon which out came the
Discovery, that Philumena was the Party he made bold with, and this the Child
he got. -- In Troth I Am glad I should be the occasion of so much Joy to him,
though others of my Trade would never have been so; for it never makes for our
Interest to have our Sparks fond of Matrimony: But upon my Honesty, the smell
of a little Pelf shall never make me to do a base thing. Indeed, I had a very
free, joll^, pleasant Spark of him, whilst it was allowable; and this Match
happened ill for me, I must needs say: But my comfort is, I Have done nothing,
that I know of, to deserve so great a Misfortune* It Is but Justice to bear some
Inconveniences from him, that has been so good a Friend to me.


P^ter Pamphilus and Parmeno at a distance.


Pam. to Parmeno. -- Good Parmeno, have a care you give a clear and evident
Proof of this Business; and that you don't, only for a moment, make me believe
my self extremely happy.


Par. That Care's over.


Pam. For certain?


Par. Yes, for certain.


Pam. I Am in Heaven if it be so.


Par. You^ll find it so, I Will warrant ye.


Pam. Prithee, not so fast. -- I Am afraid you tell me one thing, and I think
it is another.


Par. Well, Sir.


Pam. I think you told me that my Mother Myrrhina discovered her own Ring upon
Bacchis's Finger --


Par. Right.


Pam. -- And the very same I formerly presented to her; and 'twas she bad ye
run, and tell me on it* Was Not it?


Par. Yes, she did.


Pam. Who alive then is a happier and finer Fellow than I? what reward must I
bestow on thee for this kind Message? what shall I? what? ^ cannot imagine.


Par. But I can, Sir.


Pam. Prithee what?


Par. Just nothing at all: For I cannot see any thing either in the Message or
Messenger that will turn to your Advantage.


Pam. Shall I suffer thee to go unrewarded, that have rescued me from the Jaws
of Death, and brought me to Life again? Surely thou can not think me so
ungrateful. -- But hold! there walks Bacchis before their Door, waiting for me
I fancy. -- I Will go to her.

Pamphilus goes up to Bacchis, Parmeno keeps his distance.


Bac. Mr. Pamphilus, your Servant.


Pam. Bacchis! My sweet Bacchis! Thou have made me my Dear!


Bac. There Is good News for you, Sir, and I Am heartily glad on it.


Pam. Your Actions speak it. -- I see you are still Mistress of your old
pleasant way, so that your Presence, Discourse, and Conversation will always be
charming, wheree're you go


Bac. And you, Sir, as I hope for Mercy, are still Master of your old sweet
Temper, and pleasant Humor: The World cannot show a more accomplished Gentleman
than you, Mr. Pamphilus.


Pam. Ha -- Ha -- He -- This to me Bacchis?


Bac. You have made an excellent choice of a Wife, Mr. Pamphilus; I never, that
I know of, saw her till now: I^vow, she is a lovely Creature.


Pam. Are ye in earnest?


Bac. Let me perish, Sir, if I ben't.


Pam. But pray did ye tell my Father any thing of this business.


Bac. Not a word.


Pam. Nor need ye, not so much as a Syllable: I don't desire this should prove
like a Comedy' where the whole Plot is discovered to every Body. Here only
those that should, know all; but those that should not, know nothing, but shall
^ lll be in the dark.


Bac. Nay more, I Will give a further Argument how easy it is to conceal it, for
Madam Myrrhina told her Husband, she was satisfied with my Depositions, and
believed You innocent.


Pam. Best of all: I hope all things will succeed according to our wishes

Par. comes behind and plucks his master.) Pray, Sir, may not I know what good
Office I Have done ye to day? and what you two are debating upon?


Pam. No Sirrah


Par. But I guess tho. -- I rescue him from the Jaws of Death? How did I do
that? Aside.


Pam. Little do thou think, Parmeno, what a piece of Service thou'st done me
to day; and from what Troubles thou have freed me.


Par. Your Pardon for that, Sir, I know it well enough, and did it on purpose.
Fawningly.


Pam. So I fancy.


Par. Do You think poor Parmeno shall let a day go over his Head without obliging
his Friends?


Pam. Come on then honest Parmeno.


Par. I Will follow ye, Sir

Exeunt Pamphilus and Bacchis with her Maids.

He turns to the Spectators. By my Soul, Gentlemen, I Have done more good to day,
without knowing it, than ever I did designedly in all my Life. -- I hope we have
pleased ye. Exit.


The End of the Mother-in-Law.
REMARKS UPON Terence's Comedies.
Remarks upon the Fair Andrian.
ACT I.
Page 1. Lin 5, 6. You Would have care taken of these things.] Nempe ut curentur
recte haec. The word Curentur is by some thought to be a Term proper to
Cookery; but where Authors differ, in this as also in other places, we make use
of general Words to avoid Errors.

Page 3. Lin. 27. The Fools noos'd, he is smitten.] Certe captus est, habet
Thus is an Allusion to the constant Phrase of the Gladiators, and consequently
the beauty of it is lost in our Language.

Page 4. Lin. 6, 7 For he that has to do with such sort of Cattel] N^^ qui cum
ingeaiis Conflictatur ejusmodi. This (...) is a word very fine and significant;
ad(...) inding to all the Shocks and Affaults that (...) ured Man is exposed to
in bad Company, and cannot be easily rendered into English.

Page 6. Lin 1. For had you blamed him for saving her out of the Flames, what
would ye ha done if he had thrown her in?) Nam si illum objurges, vitae qui
aeu^ilium tulit, quid facias illi, qui dederit damnum aut malum? This Sentence
is so odd, as will hardly admit of an accurate Translation without too much
flatness; therefore we have rather kept to the Author's Design, than to the
close Signification of the Words.

Page 8. Lin. 3^. And you sent to Bridewel.] In pistrinum, into the Grinding
House; That being then the most common Punishment for Slaves. Our calling of it
Bridewel, is only the changing of a Custom, by the same reason that we
afterward call Forum, the Change, and also Piazza, because 'twas a Public
place of Commerce and Resort. The like Liberty we have taken in other places.

Page 9. Lin. pennlt. They Are resolved to bring it up.] Decreverunt Tollere.
The word Tollere signifies taking off the Ground? This being an Allusion to a
common in those days of exposing their Children, therefore has more in it than
a Translation can express.

11. Lin. 20. Some damnable Roguery in the bottom on it.] Aliquid monstrialunt.
That is, the Woman has got some monstrous Imperfection, as a Wooden Leg, some
foul Disease, or the like, which her Friends very industriously smother. Some
think that this is a Proverbial Allusion; the Meaning whereof we have lost; but
that we leave to Critics.

Page 18. Lin. 10, 11. My Pamphilus! you see, etc.] Mi. Pamphile! hujus formam,
etc. These dozen Verses in the Original may serve to give the Reader a Taste of
our Authors Excellency in moving the Passions whenever there is occasion.

ACT II.
It Is observed that Charine and Byrrhie were added by our Author, and not taken
from Menander; or else Philumena must have went unprovided, and so have given
some disgust to the Audience. This under Plot of Charine does not only serve to
make all end well, but also to hasten the main Plot, and keep the Stage from
Languishing.

Page 18. Lin. 23. Never a Governantc.] Matronam nullam. Matrona was a Person,
that always assistled in Weddings, and had a particular Employment about the
Bride, as the Aruspex had about the Bridegroom. Non-observance of old Customs
are allowable in Translations of this nature.

Page 20. Lin. 11. So that you needn't break a Jot of your own Measures for
fear of his altering his mind.] Nectu ea causa minneris haec quae facis, ne is
mutet suam Sententiam. It Is a very hard Passage; therefore we have done it in
as general Terms as we could; perhaps, You mustn't leave your old ways, lest
Chermes should have a better Opinion of ye, might be somewhat more intelligible.

ACT III.
Page 25. Lin. 12. Your Farce was not well timed Mr. Rogue.] Non sat Commode
divisa sunt temporibus tibi, Dave, haec. This is an Allusion to the Theater,
and is the same as if he had said, Your Incidents were not well prepared. The
Translation comes short of the original, because the Rules of the stage were
then more strictly observed.

Ibid. Lin. 26. In the first place let her be well bath^d. It was their
constant Custom in Greece, for 2 Lying-in Woman to be immediately put into 2
Bath.

Page 33. Lin. 12. What do you deserve for your Pains? Quid meritus? This is an
Allusion to the Athenian Custom of saying, Quid meritus, to Condemned Persons,
whose Pains were augmented or diminished according to the Answer they gave;
therefore the Grace of this Expression is quite lost in our Language.

ACT IV.
Page 39 Lin. 13. Take some of those Herbs there] Ex Ara hinc sum Ferbcnas
tibi. It was usual for the Athenians to have an Altar at the corner of each
Street, daily covered over with fresh Herbs, and according to all probability,
the same Altar that was meant here. But this same Word Altar was not so
necessary to be taken notice of in a Translation.

Page 42 Lin 3. Many creditable Women.] Aliquot fuerunt Liberae; that is to
say, Free Citizens, for Slaves among them were no Witnesses. The Phrase,
creditable Women, is more agreeable to our Customs and Language, and also the
Person's Character that speaks it.

Page 43 Lin. 17. Why, I was told that our Chry sis lived somewhere down that
Lane.] To make Crito speak here like a plain Country Fellow, we believe is
neither contrary to his Character nor his Habitation, nor yet beneath the
Dignity of our Author.

ACT V.
Page 47. Lin 19. For he looks as grave as an Alderman, and talks like a
Judge.] Tristis severitasinest in Voltu, atque in Verbis sides. Madam D acier
commends this as one of the most elegant Lines in all Terence.

Page 47. line 35, 36. Trass him up immeditely.] Sublimem hunc intro rape. The
word Sublimem, signifies the usual Prison for Slaves, on the top of the House;
which is more than our words up means, or indeed, more than a Translation ought
to take notice of.

Page 48. line 12, 13. Let him be tied Neck and Heels, like a Beast as he is.]
Quadrupedem constringito. It was a Custom for the Athenians to tie Criminals
Hands and Feet together like a Calf. We have done this Passage according to our
own Customs, as we do many others of the like Nature.

Page 50. line 3, etc. Only thus much let me beg of ye, that you would not
believe that I suborned this old Man, etc] Pamphilus had all the Reason in the
World to endeavor to bring Simo and Crito together, that so he might clear
himself of such a Scandal as his Father very reasonably imputed to him. And
this was all the young Gentleman's Design, but the Poet had a far greater. which
the Audience could not so much as suspect: Namely, the Discovery of Glycerie,
which comes in very naturally.

Page 54. line 8, 9. Pam. Ah, Sir, 'twasn't well done. Sim. I Am sure I ordered
it to be well done.] Pam. Pater, non recte vinctus est, Sim. Haud ita jussi.
The meaning here is very doubtful; but there is certainly a playing upon the
word Recte; and not being able to find a better, we took this.

Page 56. line 4. Send Company to remove her to ours.] Among the Athenians,
their Lying-in Women were usually well enough to go abroad in a days time.

Remarks upon the Eunuch.
ACT I.
PAge 60. line 8, etc. What? Go to her? When a Rival's preferred? My self
refused? Even Entrance denied me? These Words express a great Passion,
consisting chiefly in the acting.

Page 61. line 21. And went an even pace.] Ac pariter fieret. The Word Pariter
is a Metaphor taken from the Pairing of Horses in a Chariot, where both bear an
equal share; therefore not to be so finely expressed in English.

Page 62. line 10. Mum, mum for that.] Potest taceri hoc. Madam D'acier
observes, that this is the most malicious Saying of Parmeno's that could be.
It Is as much as to say, Your Mother was a Whore, and I ve nothing to say
against it. And this appears from her removing from place to place, the common
sign of such People in those days.

Page 66. line 8, 9. Whose Brother I hope I Have in a manner found out.] Our
Author's Contrivance is very remarkable, for so ingeniously keeping Thais from
speaking any thing of Chremes, Pamphila's Brother, till Parmeno and his Master
were gone: A thing which (if discovered) would have spoiled the whole Plot.

ACT II.
PAge 67. lin. 26. How, Sir! What three live-long days?] Hui Univorsum triduum?
The word Univorsum, by reason of its immediate following of Totum, has a
peculiar Grace and Signification which our English Tongue will not reach
to-Madam D'acier is content to repeat the same words, but we have tried to give
it a lift.

Page 74. line 10. To tell your Father that he must not fail to be at the
Court.] Nuncies Patri, advocatus mane mihi esset ut meminerit. The word
Advocatus here signifies a Pleader a Solicitor, or perhaps a Witness, and
sometimes only a Friend. But in a Translation there was no need of being so
particular.

Page 76. line 32. Ay, but my Bones will smard for it.] At enim isthaec in me
cudetur faba. As much as to say, My Body must be their Threshing floor.
Critics differ about the meaning of it: But however it is an Allusion, and a
Proverbial Saying, which would sound but indifferently in a close Translation.

ACT III.
Page 82. line 28. You Would be content to do the moss sordid thing in the World
for a livelihood. E Flama petre te cibum posse Arbitror. It was a Custom among
them to throw Victuals into the Fire after the dead Body; and 'twas reckoned
one of the meanest things in the world to eat that, and the greatest Affront to
be told of it. Therefore to come nigh the Original here were to lose more of
the Grace of it than we have now.

Page 88. line 8. But what Good, etc.] At queno Deum? Qui templa coeli summa
sonitu concutit This is a verylofty Passage, taken, as Donatus says, from
Ennius in his (...) and neatly fitted for this place.

ACT IV.
Page 90. line 15. Whips her Gold and Jewels into this Casket.] These were
certain Ornaments that the Laws of Athens forbad Courtesans to wear publicly
in the Streets.

Ibid. line 35. It Is better to be almost distanc'd, than to be quite thrown out
of the Race.] Certe extrema linea amare, hand nihil est. This is an Allusion to
their Custom of Chariot Races, where the Racers were rewarded according to the
Marks or Lines they first arrived at.

Page 100. line 12, 13. Had we but a Mortar now to play upon 'em under the
Covert way; one Bomb would make ^om scamper.] Fundam tibi nunc nimis vellem
dari, ut tu illos procul hine ex occulto caederes: Facerent fugam. The liberty
we have here taken is only changing of a custom; perhaps a Squib or a Cracker
might have done as well; Gnat^o being somewhat upon the Droll with the Captain.

P. 102. l. 14, 15. Take your Army into Quarters of Refreshment i^th' Kitchen.]
Domi focique fac Vicissim ut memiveris. Th^s passage is admirable in the
Original, and its Beauty cannot be preserved in our Tongue, which consists in
the words Domi focique, and the Verb Memineris. It Is an Allusion to Generals
bidding their Soldiers (upon all desperate attempts) to think on their Houses
and warm Chimneys at home, which were taken for the chief Blessing of a
Soldier; and the word Memineris was then their constant word of Enouragement,
which also is lost in our Tongue.

ACT V.
PAge 108. Line 12, 13 Faith I Will be even with you for your ^^^^eries, etc.] It
was excellently contrived of Terence, to make Parmeno and Pythia perpetually to
quarrel and hate one another. For upon this depends the whole Action. By this
means old Laches (who comes upon the Stage purely by accident) is brought into
Thais's House, and the Catastrophe wound up with the greatest Address
imaginable. This is a remarkable instance of his admirable Art, in bringing
about his Incidents contrary to the Expectations of the Audience.

Page 117 Line 4. Here Is to the fleecing and jeering the Cully to death.] Hunc
comedendum and deridendum vobis propino. The Grace of the word Propino cannot
be kept up in our Tongue. Propinare, (...), properly signifies (according to
their Customs) to taste or drink a little first, and then give the Cup to
another. Gnatho alludes to this, and after an ingenious manner turns the use of
the word from drinks to other things. As much as to say, Gentlemen I Have had the
first Soup of this Blunderbuss, now you may take the rest. Some Copies have
Prebeo instead of Propino, but the Nature of the Verse shows that to be false.

Remarks upon the Self-Tormenter.
ACT I.
IT' has been much doubted in what place, and at what time the Scene opens. To
clear that as short as possible, it ought to be observed, that Chremes coming
home pretty late one Evening, just by his House he meets with Menedeme, who had
his Working-Tools upon his Shoulders, as being just come out of his Field, and
there they began their Discourse together. That the Scene was by Chremes and
Menedeme's Doors, and not in Menedeme's Working-Field, appears from Cli^ipho's
coming out of Chremess House at the latter-end of the first Act, and by a great
many other Circumstances afterward: And that it was late is plain from Page
122. line 5, 6. -- Or come home never so late at Night, there you're at it,
digging, etc. Now the Scene opens after this late time.

Page 122. line 20. etc.] And therefore you may take what I say either by way
of Advice, or by way of Enquiry; that if what you do be well, I may do so too;
if ill, I may divert you from it.] Vel me monere hoc, vel percontari puta;
rectum est, ego ut faciam; non; te ut deterream: These two Verses are very fine
and elaborate, and the Grace of 'em seems peculiar to the Latin Tongue. Here
Ego ut faciam answers to percontari; te ut deterream, to Monere. Besides
percontari is an Allusion to the Marriner's Word, when they fathom the Sea, and
consequently better than our Word Enquiry.

Page 123. line 4. Don't tire your self so.] Ne labora. Most have thought that
Menedeme was working in his Field at this time, and Chremes by saying ne Labora
desired him to leave off. But this mistake appears by what has been said
before. So that this ne Labora, was as much as to say, Don't weary and burden
your self with the great weight of these Tools.

Page 125. line 24. This is Bacchus' s Day.] Donysia hic sunt. The Athenians
had many Feasts of Bacchus, but two above all the rest, one in the Spring, and
the other in Autumn. Now this it seems was that in Autumn, called Dionysia in
agris, the place where this Scene lay,

ACT II.
PAge 135. line 9. We^ll have her to your Mothers]

Upon this Sentence depends the main Plot; and truly here is an admirable
Contrivance through most of this Scene, not only to bring about Syrus or
Clitipho's Design most ingeniously, but also the Poets, which was the Discovery
of Antiphila.

Page 138, line 31. I can scarce contain my self old Boy, etc.] In this all the
common Books are in an Error, in making this to be spoken by Clinie, whereas
indeed it is Clitipho, who does not go off the Stage, as it is generally believed,
but only hides himself.

ACT III.
PAge 141. line 25. With a great Luggage of Golden Trappings,] Ornatas vest,
atque Auro, It was the Custom among their Courtesans to have Servants to carry
their Finery for 'em, which was commonly such as the Athenian Laws forbad them
to wear publicly. Some think that Ornatas, etc. signifies her Maids fine
Clothes, but this has no probabisity.

Page 144. line 22. You're Heart of Oak.] Aquilae Senectus. The Latin is a
Proverbial Allusion to the Strength and Vigor of Eagles, who never die before
they are old, and then they are always drinking. For this reason have we taken
a Proverb of our own, used upon Fuddling occasions.

Page 145. line ult. I don't use to fail, Sire.] Non est mentiri meum. The
Sense of this place seems to have been mistaken by most People.

Page 151. line antepenult. That, if she dy^d, she might have carried away some
Token of our kindness.] This Passage is grounded upon an old Heathen Custom of
those Times; for they believed it a very great Crime for a Child to die,
without posfessing some part of its Parents Goods.

Ibid. line ult. So you saved the Child's Life, and had your own Humor into the
Bargain?] Conservasti te atque illam. This is a difficult Passage, but the
former Remark help to explain it; so it is Paraphrastically thus, Besides the
saving of your Daughter you have had the Satisfaction of discharging your
Conscience in not parting from her emptyhanded.

ACT IV.
PAge 154. line 6. Yes, for I was by at the Discovery. This Passage plainly
shows Syrus went in with Chremes and Sostrata, and so left the Stage clear;
consequently the Fourth Act must needs begin where we have made it.

Page 158 line 34. Clinie has told his Father that Bacchis is your Sons
Mistress, etc.] This is the beginning of a cunning Artifice, chiefly to amuse
Chremes, and the more ingeniously to bring in what he says, Page 160 line 2, 3.
But for the Money I told ye your Daughter owes to Bacchis, etc. and likewise to
create a Pretense for Clitipho's carrying the Money himself, without which the
Cheat might have been discovered too soon.

ACT V.
PAge 164. line 13. This same Assistant, Counselor, and sage Director of
mine.] Sed hic Adutor meus, and Minitor, and Premonstrator. These three Words,
Adjutor, Monitor, Premonstrator, are taken from the Theaters, signifying such a
teach and prompt the Actors. We have given the natural Sense, but their Beauty
consists in the Figurative Sense, for which we want suitable Words; only
Prompter might perhaps have done well enough, if we had made one Word serve for
three, as the French Lady in effect has done.

Page 169 line 7, 8. I ll be hanged if the Rascal dare have served a poor
Friendless Widow so as he served me.] Viduae mulieri, where lies the Emphasis.
Widows among the Ancients were looked upon as the most shiftless, helpless
Creatures of all; therefore the force of Viduae mulieri is much weakened in our
Language. The meanest Slave upon Earth, would have better come up to the
Original.

Page 171. line 3, 4. For my part I don't believe you are any of their Son.]
Here is an excellent Contrivance of Terence, in making Syrus propose such a
business to Clitipho, as to question his Parents; which does not only much
heighten the Character of Clitipho, but most dexterously and naturally brings
all to an end in due time.

Page 172. line penult. What because he is so like my newfound Daughter?] Quod
silia est Inventa? This is a very difficult Passage, and if we had come nigher
to the Original, we could have scarce made it Sense, however not clear and
intelligible.

Page 173 line penult. and ult. No! though you had sprung out of my fertile
Brain, as Pallas they say did from mighty Jove's.] Non, si ex capite sis meo
natus, item ut aiunt Minervam esse ex Jove. This may be thought too lofty for
Comedy, but if we consider it proceeds from Chremcs's extreme Passion, we shall
see it is not only fine but also natural. Upon this Horace in his Art of Poetry
lays down this Rule;

Interdum tamen and vocem Comedia tollit,

Iratusque Chermes tumido delitigat ore.

Page 174. line 11, 12. I Am ashamed to name the filthy Word before your
Mother.] The Greeks and Romans were obliged both by their Religion and Policy
not to mention any thing that so much as savoured of obscenity before their
Wives.

Page 175. line 25, 26. That Carrat-pated, Wall-ey'd, Pimple-fac'd, Hook-nos'd
Creature?] Rufamne illam virginem, cesiam, sparso cre adunco naso? Here is a
Happiness in our Language, which in composition of Words far excels all other
Languages that are known to these Western parts of the World; the Greek indeed
surpasses it.

Remarks upon the Brothers.
ACT I.
PAge 179. line 5. That went to bring him home.] Qui adversum ierant. Adversum
is an extraordinary proper word in this place; for Waitingmen were called
Adversitores. Our Tongue seems to want a good Word for it, except the Usher
will do, which is not so proper in this place neither.

Page 184. line 25. He told me he would take up and marry. Here Micio discovers
a very material thing to the Audience, and knows little of it himself. For as
yet Eschine had not told him whom he designed to marry. This seems to be a meat
Cast of our Poets Skill.

ACT II.
PAge 185. line 17, 18. San I am a Woman-Merchant. Esch. A Cock-Bawd you mean.]
San. Pgo Leno Sum. Esch. Scio. These Women-Merchants had peculiar Privileges
in Athens, and were Persons of some Repute; but because such People are more
scandalous among us, we have taken the liberty of translating Sico, according
to the Notion we have of those Creatures.

Page 186. line 32. Do You know who I am, Sir?] Nostion qui sim? These words have
a peculiar Meaning in the Original, which is lost in the Translation. For Nosti
me? and Nosti qui sim? Are the usual and common words between Debtors and
Creditors at the Bar. Therefore Sannio in saying Nostin qui sim? Did in effect
say, Do I owe you any Money, Sir?

Page 188. line 31, etc. 1 hear my Master and you have had a kind of a Scuffle.
San. A Scuffle do you call it? Never was the like surely.] Cum Hero nescio quid
concertasse? San. Nunquam vidi iniquius concertationem comparatam. The Grace of
the Original consists in the words, Concertasse and Comparatam; the first being
a proper Term to imply an Equality between Eschine and Sannio, and the latter a
word borrowed from the Gladiator's measuring their Swords; the Beauty of both
which is lost in the Translation.

Page 191. line 21, etc. He has taken upon himself all the Curses, Scandals,
Love-Matters, and Miscarriages that belong to me.] Eschine in taking all upon
himself, designed purely to oblige his Brother; but the Poet designed it to
bring about the main Incident, (Viz. Eschine's Marriage) most naturally and
dexterously. This Under-Plot of Clitipho and the Musick-Girl is admirably woven
into the plot; and is an excellent instance to show how useful and beautiful an
Under-Plot may be, and still preserve the Unity of Action.

Page 192. line ult. I Will march home with Plenty of Provisions.] Convortam me
domum cum obsonio. Here Syrus speaks as great as he can, for the word Convortam
belongs to Magnificence, and Triumph; which is almost lost in our Tongue:
Indeed, the word March would have been better, were it not now used upon every
slight and trivial account.

ACT III.
PAge 195. line 1, Pish! Don't trouble me whoever you are. Madam D'acier says,
that the Greeks took delight in staying the Slaves in the Streets, and amusing
'em, that so their Masters might beat them for loytering, when they come home.
It seems Geta thought that Sostrata served him so.

Page 195. line 33. He Would put the Infant on his Fathers Knees.] It was a
constant Custom among the Greeks, whenever they had a Child, immediately to put
it upon their Grand fathers Knees; probably to give them the Pleasure of seeing
themselves live again in a new Race.

ACT IV.
PAge 206. line 16. The first that report it.] Primus porro obnuncio. The word
Obnuncio is very proper, it signifies the telling of ill News, and is always
taken in a bad Sense. We have no word to answer it in our Tongue that we know
of.

Page 209. line 15. Make this day as long as I ^an.] Hunc producam diem. The
word Produco is a Funeral Term, and has a double Signification. Perhaps it
might have been as proper to have said: I Will bury this Day in Pleasures.

Page 214. line 1. But I Am afraid you don't mind your own Concerns, etc.] These
dozen Verses in the Original most admirably show the gentle Chidings of an
indulgent Father; and there is scarce a Word but deserves Consideration, each of
them making so deep an Impression upon a generous Mind.

Page 217. line 29. And thou, pretty Child, wilt hobble out the Hay among 'em?]
Tu inter eas restim ductans saltabis. This Phrase, Restim ductans, is an
Allusion to their old way of Dancing, but whether with a Rope, as the word
Restis seems to imply, or with joined hands, metaphorically so called, we leave
to Critics in Antiquity. We have translated it ^ighest to our Customs, and
Demea's Character.

Page 219. line 21. He^ll be no welcome Reveller.] Comissatorem haud sane
Commodum. The word Commissator, properly signifies one a little in drink that
goes in Masquerade to some new Company, and surprises them with his sudden and
unexpected coming: So that this is much more expressive than our Reveller.

ACT V.
HEre our Author is not so clear indinstinguishing his Acts as in other places;
for tho^ we have followed Madam D^acier in making the Fifth Act begin at Parata
a nobis sunt, yet we think we might with as much, or more reason have made it
begin at Defessus sum Ambulando. The common Books are undoubtedly all false in
this Point.

Page 221^ line 28. Many Observations may be made, Brother, upon two Persons
doing the same thing, etc.] Here Micio is hard put to it, which makes him talk a
little obscurely. In truth, Micio, through most of this Scene, tho in very few
words, says all that can be said to excuse his Nephew's Extravagancies: And
Terence's Conduct is excellent in this place, making Micio assuage his brother
so plausibly, and with so much color of Reason, when the Case would bear it so
ill.

Page 225. line 30. Bid Babylo tell out half a hundred Guineas quick.]
Interpreters seem much puzzled to find out who this Babylo is. Whether it be
Micio, or a Banker, or any one else, it is not material; and whether this Money
is for Eschine, Ctesipho, Syrus, or Sannio, the Humor is still the same, and
as well carried on.

Page 228. line 32. And took care of a Debauch in the Morning for 'em.] Apparar
ede die Convivium. Demea mentions this as an unusual thing, because the Romans
had their Feasts, great Entertainments, etc. always in the night; and to make a
full Meal before that time was scandalous.

Remarks upon the Tricks of Phormio.
ACT. I.
PAge 233. line 11, etc. All that this poor Fellow now, by starving himself,
has bit by bit, with much ado, scraped together out of his pityful Allowance
must go at one Swoop; People never considering the Pains it cost him the
getting.] Quod ille unciatim, vix, de demenso suo suum defraudans Genium
comparsit miser, id illa uni^ ersum abripiet, haud existimans Juanto labor
partum. These three Verses and a half are extreme fine and elaborate; All as
far as Miser is an exact and regular Climax, almost every Word having a
considerable Emphasis. After that, the Word Abripiet answers to Conraditur,
five Lines before; Vniversum, to Vnciatim vix, and de demenso suo, and haud
existimans, quanto labor partum, to suum defraudans Genium, and Comparsit
miser: So that our Translation may well fall short of it.

Page 236. line 23. Would have made her very disagreeable.] Haec formam
extinguerunt. The word Extinguo, is an excellent Word in this place, belonging
properly to Beauty, for the word Forma by its Derivation is observed to
signify Light, Flame, Heat.

Page 237. line 28. Antipho was persuaded, the Business done, the Cause tried,
we Cast, and he married.] Persuasum est homini; factum est; Ventum est:
Vincimur: Duxit. This is very concise and comprehensive in the Original. But
yet oftentimes (as in this Passage for instance), our Tongu^ has a Happiness
equal to the Latin in shortness of Expression; and where there is a Composition
of Words, Superior.

ACT II.
WE have made the Second Act begin at Adeone rem rediisse, dividing the first
Act of the common Books into two, and joining the Second and Third into one.
For it is plain there is a Cessation of Action, and the Stage cleared at, Da hoc
Dorcio: But there is neither at, Scd eccum ipsum video in ^^mporc huc se
recipere; All which Verse Madam D'acier, to make a Cessation more likely, has
l^ft out, when there was no other occasion but that, for her doing so.

Page 242. line 30. And let not his hussing and hectoring dash you out of
Countenance.] Ne suis to Irutus saevi victis protelet. The word Protelet is a
Term borrowed from the Husbandmen, and signifies the spoiling or breaking of a
Furrow by crossing it with a Plough. The Beauty of it lies in the Figurative
Sense which is lost in our Tongue.

Page 245. line 28. Sir, if my Cousin Antipho had committed a Fault to the
Prejudice either of his Honor or Estate, etc.] Here is a remarkable instance
of our Authors Closeness and Solidity of Sense, in making Phedrie here, and
Geta soon after, to say so much in a bad Cause, and that in so few Words too.

ACT III.
PAge 252 line 26. I say Stilpho, as if you didn't -- know him.] It Is very
remarkable that Phormio should speak so important a Truth unknown both to
himself and Demipho. The Poet makes it an ingenious Preparation to the
Probability of the Concealment and Discovery of Phanie; tho Phormio's Design
was quite otherwise.

Page 257. line 2. Out-hectored your Father.] Confutavit verbis Senem The word
Confuto is a proper Term in Cookery, used commonly for pouring cold Water into
a Pot that boils over: Perhaps we might have rendered it more properly -- cooled
the old Man's Courage.

ACT IV.
PAge 264. line 4. To take me to my Heels.] Vt me excutiam. Excutio signifies
to shake, and Madam D^acier says, 'twas customary for the Greeks and Eastern
People, to shake their Clothes at the Door of the House they went from.

Page 265. line 21, 22. I Have been hammering upo' the same thing, and fancy I Have
thought of an Expedient.] Geta's Expedient was the putting Phanie upon Phormio.
Here are four several Designs in it. Geta's design was to cheat the old Men of
their Money. Demipho's and Chremes's design was to part Antipho and Phanie, in
order to marry him elsewhere. But the Poet had a double design; First,
naturally to bring about Phanie's discovery in due time; And secondly, to make
the old Men and Phormio fall out, the natural Consequence being the adjusting
of Phedrie's Concerns, and making all end well.

ACT V.
PAge 273. line 5. We shou'dn't have outrun the Constable.] Ita fugias, ne
preter Casam. This is one of the most difficult Passages in all Terence, and
Interpreters very much differ about it, some making it praeter Causam. The most
probable Meaning seems to be Paraphrasti^ally thus: Go where you please, so you
keep your Eye upon your House, and give Rogues no advantage over you. If our
English Proverb, Outrun the Constable, should not answer it in all respects,
it is more our Unhappiness than our Fault.

Page 284. line 29, 30. They make toward me like a couple of Bullies to hector
me. Hi gladiatorio animo ad me affectant viam. This is a Metaphor taken from
the Roman Gladiators, who went with a Resolution to kill or be killed. If we
had made it, They make toward me like bloody-minded Fellows, that will neither
give nor take Quarter, it might perhaps have been nigher to the Original But
such a Liberty as ours is allowable where we have neither Custom nor Words to
express it closely.

Page 288. line 19. I Will serve him the same sa^ce, I Will warrant him] Faxo Tali
eum mactatum, atque hic est, infortunio. The Word Mactatum is borrowed from
their Sacrifices, and properly signifies Magis auctum. The Grace of it consists
in the Figurative Sense, and the comical joining it with Infortunio; which is
lost in our Language.

Remarks upon the Mother-in-law.
ACT I.
PAge 294. line 10, etc. Ah! what pity it is, that I had not that Youth and
Beauty of yours, or you those Sentiments of these Matters that I have.] Eheu me
miseram! Cur non aut isthaec mihi aetas and forma est, aut tibi haec sententia.
These two V^rses are very fine, and extreme hard to be equalled in a
Translation. To have made it more like the Origiual, perhaps this might have
done better: Ah, what pity it is, I have not your Youth and Beauty, or you but my
Discretion.

Page 295. line Penult. Mr. Pamphilus was ^i^th^ very height of his Passion for
Mrs. Bacchis, when his Father began to be earnest with him to marry, etc.] This
is the beginning of a most material Narration, which may be reckoned one of the
best in Terence; especially if we consider the ingenious Preparation for it in
the first Scene, and the Reasons Philotis had to enquire after this Business.
Parmeno designs it purely for his Masters vindication, which seems as necessary
in this place, as the Spectators Information.

Page 298. line 5. The old Gentleman lives retired in the Country, and seldom
visits the Town.] Nam senex rus abdidit se, huc raro in urbem Commeat. This is
a very material Circumstance in this Narration; and what makes it still further
remarkable, is the extraordinary Propriety of Terms. The word Abdidit implies a
perfect Retirement, or an entire Retreat: and Commeat, notes him a great
Stranger to the Town.

Ibid. line 11, etc. When all on a sudden the young Woman began to hate the old
one most mortally, without any Quarrel or Complaint on either side.] This
Passage (tho not perfectly true, but only believed by Parmeno) serves
excellently to keep the Audience in suspense to warm 'em, and make 'em eager to
know the Event of these things.

ACT II.
PAge 300. line 8, 9. And you forsooth must start up, and confound all, by your
ill-conditioned Humors.] Tu sola exorere, quae perturbes haec tua impudentia.
The Word Exorere in this place, is of great force, and signifies raising great
Mischiefs, and the like; in which it is used by Virgil in his fourth Enead.

Exoriare aliquis nostris ex ossibus ultor.

We have no word to answer it fully in our Tongue that we know of.

Page 302. line 30, etc. She vowed by all that is good, she was not able to
endure the House while her Pamphilus was away. This confirmed Laches in the
Suspicion of his Wife's Fault; The consequence of which, was her offering to go
into the Country to clear herself: And this occasioned Pamphil^s frivolous
Excuses; and these increased the old Men's Suspicions of his Infidelity; which
brought about the whole Discovery. The close and natural Dependence of each
Particular of this Plot is very remarkable.

ACT III.
PAge 303. line 23. Was ever Man so perplexed in his Love as I?] Nemini ego
plura acerba esseex Amore homini unquam oblata credo quam mi. Donatus's
Observation here is remarkable, That the Passions in this Scene would have been
too Sublime and Tragical for Comedy, were the words ex Amore left out. But
Love, it seems is a Passion predominant among ordinary, as well as great men,
and consequently its Emotions are natural here.

Page 306. line 23. But Heavens forbid it.] Quod te, Ae^sculapi, and te, Salus,
ne quid sit hujus oro. This was a Religious Custom in those days, which we
didn't think necessary to take notice of in a Translation.

Page 307. line 19. Nothing at all, Madam.] Recte, Matter. We know of no word in
our Language that can reach this word Recte, which in this place is very
proper, signifying, as Donatus observes, a refusing to answer a Question
without any Offense or Incivility to the Person that asks it.

Page 308. line 11. But immediately I perceived her Ailment.] Philumena^s
Labor was a very surprising Turn of the Stage, which did not only serve to
introduce these moving Passions which followed, but also to quicken the
Audience, and make em eager to know the Event.

Page 316 line 16, 17. May be some body informed you that they saw him going to
or coming from his Mistress. This Passage, and that above, Line 3, 4, in the
same Page is an excellent preparation toward the old Men's Suspicions of
Pamphilus's Infidelity, which afterward caused the meeting of Bacchis and
Myrrhina. This was hinted at in the last Remark of the Second Act, where it is
very observable that the Poet had prepared a Remedy, before the Audience so
much as suspected the Disease.

Page 317. line 17. Only when the Fellow left her, he forced a Ring off her
Finger.] These words are very important, though they seem to be spoken
accidentally, as were those in the last Remark; the Poet designed 'em to
prepare that remarkable Narration of Bacchis's in the last Act, where the whole
Plot is unravelled, and the Mystery discovered.

ACT IV.
PAge 317. line 27. I know well enough, Pamphilus, you suspect 'twas long of my
Humors that your Wife left us, etc.] Sostrata's offering to go into the
Country was designed on purpose by Terence to leave Pamphilus without excuse,
when he refused to take home his Wife: So that by this means the old Men's
Suspicion might be heightened and confirmed, and they might have all the reason
in the World to send for Bacchis, as they did. And indeed every little Incident
promotes and tends to that Design.

Page 321. line 14. Since she is to bring a Brat with her that is none of mine.]
Cum eam consequitur alienus Puer. Donatus observes, this is a Metaphor borrowed
from young ones following their Dams. The word Consequitur, is a proper Term
for that purpose, so that here is a considerable Beauty lost in the Translation.

Page 323. line pen What? Why, first I think it is best for us to send for his
Miss, etc.] The two old Men's Design here in sending for Bacchis, was very
material, and sufficiently apparent to the Audience; b^^ the Poets design was
more material, and cou'd^^ be foreseen by the Audience. In this the Beauty of
Incidents does chiefly consist.

Page 327 ^^e 11, 12 Let her but satisfy the Women, and I Am content.] Upon
Bacchis going to Myrrhina and Phiium^^^^ ded the unraveling of the whole Plot.
But that this might be done without the least bungling, and with all the
probability in the World, the Poet has contrived every Instrument and every
Scene so as to promote it, and give fair Pretexts for so doing.

ACT V.
THe Fifth Act must certainly begin where we have made it, for the Stage was
not cleared before. Terence's Skill is remarkable in making of this Act so very
short; or else the Spectators would have soon languished and grown cold after
the Discovery, having nothing more to expect. And so they would have done not
withstanding, had not the meeting of Pamphilus and Bacchis been somewhat more
jocose and pleasant, than is frequent in Terence.

Page 328 line 11, 12 Where I ve loytered away a whole day in gaping for
Callidemides.] These words are not to be taken in a literal Sense, for then the
Theatral Action would have lasted considerably above a day; whereas it does not
last seven Hours, as may be proved from many Circumstances.

Page 329. line 20. What great Satisfaction has my coming procured Mr.
Pamphilus to day? etc.] This is the beginning of an excellent Narration, and
the most material that could be; being the unravelling of all. It is remarkable
for three Excellencies: First, Bacchis came not here to make this Discovery to
the Audience, but only to go home: Secondly, after she was here, she did not
stay for that purpose, but only for Pamphilus. And Thirdly, she spoke it in so
few Words, and said such things before and after it, as made it seem to be
purely Accidental.

Page 331. line 22. So that your Presence, Discourse and Conversation will
always be charming, where ere you go.] Vt Voluptati Obitus, Sermo, Adventus
tuus, quocunque adveneris, semper siet. This is very fine in the Latin; and
that which chiefly hinders our Translation from reaching it, is the different
signification of the Words Obitus and Adventus; The first signifying an
Accidental; the second, a designed Meeting. We have no words to answer them
fully in our Language that we know of.

Page 332. line 1, 2. I don't desire this should prove like a Comedy, where the
whole Plot is discovered to every body, etc. It Is very remarkable that the
Mystery of this Play is known but to very few of the Actors, a thing very
uncommon either among the Ancients or Moderns; but here it was undoubtedly the
best way, since it so well saved Pamphilus's Credit.

We have been a little more particular in showing our Authors Management of
this Plot, that we may let People know, that there is great Art, much Plot, and
excellent Contrivance in that which is reckoned the very worst of his Plays.
And it is certainly the worst, if a mean Subject, want of Variety, few
Intrigues and Incidents, and want of Vnder-Plots can make it so.

FINIS.

