Unto His GRACE, HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER And the Right Honorable the
Estates of PARLIAMENT, The Representation and Petition of the Brewers in and
about Edinburgh.
Humbly shows,
THAT in the Month of July 1695. years, when the Parliament, was about the
giving to His Majesty, an additional Excise upon Ale etc.

The Brewers; then Represented to His Majesty's Commissioner, and the
Honorable Estates of Parliament, the lowness of their condition, and that
unless the price of Ale; were by them hightned to 32 d. per Pint as the
Minimum, they could not hold their Trade: Yet the Parliament, hopeing that the
prices of Victual would quickly fall, was pleased to appoint that only 28 d. As
the Minimum, which is the greatest price they ever could obtain for their
ordinary selling Ale: Albeit they were not hindered nor Disallowed by the
Government to have raised it higher, yet without the Authority of a Law, they
could not; although the prices of Victual and their burdens, did after that,
Encreass greatly: Whereupon the Brewers, in the Month of March last, meaned
themselves to the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council; But rheir Lordships did
not then find themselves Authorized to appoint. 32 d. for the Pint of Ale as
the Minimum, nor to do otherwise then the Parliament had done; albeit it was
then too plain that 32 d. was rather too low then to high a price for the
ordinary selling Ale, Which experience has now too cleary demonstrated, fora
great many Brewers who were Substantial men, and Skilful of their Trade of
brewing (all their Skill and Industry, notwithstanding) are quit broke, put
altogether from their Trade, and not only their own numerous Families
scattered, and exposed to want: but also many poor Families of their Servants,
who depended upon them by their breaking; are reduced to misery: and several
Noblemen, and Gentlemen, disappointed of the Payment of their Bear, which being
now too truly understood by His Grace, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the
Right Honorable the Estates of Parliament, they (as the Brewers are informed)
design that the burden of the additional Excise on the Brewers; so unsuportable
shall not ly on them after the Month of February next to come, which the
Brewers desire to acknowledge with all gratitude, as a mark of the Parliaments
compassion to them, yet most humbly crave liberty, to Represent: That unless
the price of their ordinary Ale be raised to 32 d. per Pint as the Minimum,
from the first day of September next to come School. to the first Match next to
come in the year 1699. during the concurring and continuing of the annexed and
additional Excises; of 6 d. being in all with the Touns Imposition 8 d. upon
each Pint of Ale, And that unless 28 d. for the Pint of Ale, be by the
Parliament appointed as the Minimum, after the last day of February next to
come (if of necessity the annexed Excise, must be continued) It is utterly
impossible for the Brewers, to hold their Trade, so as to pay their Victual and
the Respective, Excises.

Now that 32 d. per Pint from the 1st. of September to the 1st. of March both
next to come, is the least price can be appointed, is so plainly reasonable
that your Petitioners do not trouble the Parliament, with other arguments about
it, then what are above Represented, and if the price of Ale after February
next to come (the annexed Excise, being continued) be not 28 d. per Pint, the
Brewers are so far from being bettered by only easing them of the additional
Excise, of 3 d. per Pint, that they shall be in a worse case then before: if
the price of Ale shall fall 4 d. per Pint, especially seeing it is certain that
the three pennies of annexed Excise, come in place of the former two Merks does
amount at least to nine shilling and four pennies more. And the Brewers being
told by some, that they must be liable to the annexed Excise, after the Month
of February next to come whither they be able or not seeing (as is alleged) it
cannot be taken off now, They do desire and earnestly intrate, that in the most
accurat way, that can be devised an experiment by order of Authority may be
made, by causing brew a quantity of the several kinds of Malt to be procured
and brown by any trusty person or persons, (tho not trading) but Skilful in the
way of brewing, and that at the sight and occular insepction of such as shall
be Authorifed for that effect: that the real product of Malt being known, it
may be truly understood whither the Brewers be able or not to sell their Ale
under the rates desired in the present circumstances: And then to all men who
will soberly allow a little of their patience and serious thoughts upon this
weighty (tho too little pondered) affair, which so much concerns both the King
and Country, it will evidently appear that the Brewers are not able by their
Trade of brewing to pay their Victual and Excises unless the price of Ale be
hightned as above And by impartial reckoning it will be found that the Excises
have for these several years bygone been paid not by the drinkers (as is often
unconsideratly Alleged) but truly and indeed by the Brewers, and that not out
of any profit of their Trade, but out of their own private Stocks and fortuns
all which to a demonstration is evident from the computation following viz.

Paid by the Brewer,
To the Boll of Malt, now selling at 12. and 13. lib. per Boll, Reckoned here
only to 9. 10. 0. Annexed-Excise 1. 16. 0. Towns Imposition 1. 04. 0.
House-rent 0. 06. 0. Couperadge 0. 02. 0. Maintenance of Servants 0. 06. 8.
Coal and Candle 0. 13. 4. Penny per pound Drink-Money, and Expenses of
inbringing 1. 00. 0. Maintenance of Brewing-Looms, such as Coper, Coolers,
Fats, Floats, Wortstones, Gantrees. etc. 0. 06. 0. Summa, 15. 04. 0.

Received by the Brewer,
Per 18. Gallons of 28. d. Ale. which is more than can be drawn, albeit they
Survey to the Rate of 20 Gallons most unreasonably, and for the 18. Gallons
supposed, tho not got, the Brewer gets only 14. 08. 0. Per Draff, Barm, and
Dreg, according to the present rate 00. 14. 0. Per Balance of Loss 00. 02. 0.
Summa, 15. 04. 0.

By which Computation, Which is as candid as can be made, and which cannot de
quarrelled by any unbyassed Person; It plainly appears, That the Brewers have
been, and (so long as the Victual continues Dear) will be Losers, besides their
Hazard and frequent Loss by bad Debt, Returned; Run out, and Spoilt Ale, the
Taxes which they pay to the Town for their Trade, and other great Risques: And
when the Victual shall fall cheaper, they must draw a far shorter length and
quantity of Ale, and it is notourly known, that no Brewer can well draw 18
Gallons of any of the best Scots Barley at present of such Drink as can keep for
the necessary time of Running for Sale in a Tavern, or Alehouse; Albeit some
endeavored to get, and may be even got of the best English Victual sometime 20
Gallons, whereof a great part was often spoiled, because of its Weakness: But
the Tacks-men, and their Servants, taking advantage, that 20 Gallons had been
drawn of the best English Victual, they have never missed still to Survey to 20
Gallons for each Boll, even of the worst Scots Victual, by which their Surveys
are made up, as now they be. So many Brewers being already broken, these who
still are wrestleing to hold so much Credit, as to keep their numerous Families
together, find themselves necessitated, now when they have an oppurtunity to
lay their staitened Case before His Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner, And
the Right Honorable the Estates of Parliament, their great Patriots, from
whose Wisdom and Care, only they can expect seasonable and effectual Relief.

May it therefore please Your Grace, And Right Honorable Estates of
Parliament, To take Your Petitioners straightened Case unto Your serious
Consideration: And for preventing the ruin of so many Men, and their numerous
Families, who have not only hitherto paid so great Supplys for the Service of
their King and Country; But have and still do Maintain a very considerable
number of Servants, and their Families, and keep them from Sterving, Begging,
or being troublesome to the Country. Graciously to appoint that 32 pennies
Scots per Pint, shall be the Minimum for the Price of the Ale, from the first
of September to the first of March both next to come, dureing the concurring,
and continuing of the Annexed and Additional Excises, which with the Towns
Imposition make in all 8. d. of Ezcise upon each Pint of Ale: And to appoint,
that from the first of March next to come, dureing the continuing of the
Annexed Excise, that 28. d. per Pint, shall be the Minimum in and about
Edinburgh, And to Authorize the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, to hear
and Rectify to the Brewers, what they shall hereafter see grievous to them, so
far as their Lordships shall find just, without prejudice to His Majesty, and
to Empower Their Lordships to Raise and Low the Prices of Ale, as they shall
find Cause.

And Your Petitioners shall Pray.


