The Virtue of the COFFEE Drink. First publicly made and sold in England, by
Pasqua Rosee.
THE Grain or Berry called Coffee, grows upon little Trees, only in the
Deserts of Arabia.

It is brought from thence, and drunk generally throughout all the Grand
Seigniors Dominions.

It is a simple innocent thing, composed into a Drink, by being dried in an
Oven, and ground to Powder, and boiled up with Spring water, and about half a
pint of it to be drunk, fasting an hour before, and not Eating an hour after,
and to be taken as hot as possibly can be endured; the which will never fetch
the skin off the mouth, or raise any Blisters, by reason of that Heat.

The Turks drink at meals and other times, is usually Water, and their Diet
consists much of Fruit; the Crudities whereof are very much corrected by this
Drink.

T^^ ^^ality of this Drink is cold and Dry; and though it be a (...) neither
heats, nor inflames more then hot Posset.

(...) ^^th the Orifice of the Stomach, and fortifies the heat with^^^ (...)
good to help digestion and therefore of great use to be (...) a Clock a (...)
the morning.

(...) ^^^ens the Sprits, and makes the Heart Lightsome. (...) ^^fore Eyes, and
the better if you hold your Head (...) ^he Steem that way.

It suppresseth Fumes exceedingly, and therefore good against the Headache, and
will very much stop any Defluxion of Rheums, that distill from the Head upon the
Stomach, and so prevent and help Consumptions; and the Cough of the Lungs.

It is excellent to prevent and cure the Dropsy, Goat, and Scurvy.

It is known by experience to be better then any other Drying Drink for People
in years, or Children that have any running humors upon them, as the Kings
Evil. etc.

It is very good to prevent Mis-carryings in Childbearing Women.

It is a most excellent Remedy against the Spleen, Hypocondriack Winds, or the
like.

It will prevent Drowsiness, and make one fit for business, if one have occasion
to Watch; and therefore you are not to Drink of it after Supper, unless you
intend to be watchful, for it will hinder sleep for 3 or 4 hours.

It is observed that in Turkey, where this is generally drunk, that they are
not trobled with the Stone, Gout, Dropsy, or Scurvey, and that their Skins are
exceeding clear and white.

It is neither Laxative nor Restringent.

Made and Sold in St. Michaels Alley in Cornhill, by Pasqua Rosee, at the Sign
of his own Head.


