THE VICTORY OVER THE FLEET OF THE STATES GENERAL, OBTAINED BY HIS MAJESTY'S
NAVY ROYAL IN THE LATE ENGAGEMENT, Begun the 25. of July instant.

As it came from his Highness Prince Rupert, and His Grace the Duke of
Albemarle.

Published by Command.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1666.

THE VICTORY Over the Fleet of the States General, obtained by His Majesty's
Navy Royal in the late Engagement, begun the 25. July instant.
Sunday 22. instant, not without difficulty, we got the Fleet through the
Narrow; about Six in the Evening we came to an Anchor short of the Buoy in the
Gunfleet, within Six Leagues of the Enemy, who came to an Anchor off of the
Sledway.

Monday 23. Both Fleets weighed, and plied to and again with little VVind, and
that Night proved very Tempestuous.

Tuesday 24. It blew hard, and we were forced to keep to an Anchor till about
Two in the Afternoon, and then stood off to the Eastward, and Anchored about
eight Leagues from the Nesse.

Wednesday 25. By two in the morning we weighed Anchor, and by Daylight we had
the Enemy under our Lee: Sir Thomas Allen led the Van to the Eastward, with our
Larboard Tacks aboard, the VVind North-East; and as soon as he came to the head
of the Enemies Fleet, which was at ten of the Clock, we gave the Signal to bear
in in a Line, our selves with the Red Squadron in the middle, and Sir Jeremy
Smith with the Blew, bringing up the Rear. We plied them so close, that they
could not Tack upon us; and so we continued fighting till about four in the
Afternoon, and then De Ruyter with the main Body of his Fleet gave ground, whom
we pursued with the Red and White Squadrons, leaving Sir Jeremy Smith with the
Blew Squadron, engaged with Van Tromp and a Squadron of their Fleet. All Night
we followed the Enemy, and again next Morning as soon as it was light we began
the Chase, and were in great hopes of taking De Ruyter; but the VVind being
little, he spoomed away before it, so that our smaller Fregats could hardly get
up with him. And by Ten a Clock Thursday Morning, we had pursued them as far as
the Durlow, which was about Eighteen Leagues, and there he lay till About two
in the Afternoon; which time we were so near the Banks of Sand, that we could
not make the Chase any farther, and De Ruyter, and those with him, had
opportunity to run into that place.

In this Chase we possessed us of Two of the Enemies Great Ships, the one a
Vice Admiral of 60 Guns, 24 of them Brass, and 290 Men, commanded by Adrian
Bankaert; The other the Snake of Haerlem, of 66 Guns, 320 Men, Commanded by
Ruart Hellibrant; both which we set on fire, not being willing to spare any Men
to bring them off, after we had taken all their Men out of them. As soon as we
gave off pursuit of the Enemy, we called a Council of Flag-Officers, and whilst
they were with us, we discovered some Sails N. W. of us, and heard a shooting,
which we judged to be Sir Jeremiah Smith fighting Van Trump and his Squadron:
Whereupon we determined to draw off the Fleet, and so endeavor to intercept
them before they got into their Harbors.

Upon the Appearance of these Fleets, we found the Wind at N. E. they standing
right in, and we right out, as close as we could lie, and stood up till we
could see their Squadron, and Sir Jeremiah Smith chasing of them: After we came
fair up with them, we Tacked, and stood in the same way that they did; and
about Twelve a Clock at night, came to an Anchor, taking part of the Leeward
Tide, to draw them upon us; which fell out within a League, as we expected it:
But by the morning we perceived Sir Jeremiah Smith had lost Van Trump in the
Night, and was now out of sight; so as the VVind having varied to the Enemies
Advantage, they stood into the Land of the Island of Schawen, toward the
Baniarts, and we stood in after them with the Royal Charles, to six Fathom
Water, where now we are expecting what the Enemy will do.

This is word for word his Highness Prince Rupert, and his Grace the Duke of
Albemarle's Narrative of this last Engagement, their Modesty in relating,
equalling their Valor and Conduct in maintaining the Fight; the sum of which
success is, That on the 25th. the fight began with equal numbers, 90 Men of
War, and 17 Fireships on each side; after five hours close fighting, the
greatest body of the Enemy bore away toward their own Coast, and on the 26th.
that body was totally broken, and beaten into their Harbors, whither the 27th.
the rest followed, broken and beaten in the same manner; our Fleet being
Masters, and keeping the Sea, and at this present lying upon their Coast, with
the loss of one Ship only burnt, out of which the Captain and the men were
saved: and this after the Enemy had bragged through the World that they had
blocked up our Fleet in the River of Thames, and had brought a Land Army with
Tools, and all other Materials to conquer England, or at least to set it on
fire in all parts: What effectually the Enemies loss was, more then is told
herein, as well by Ships burnt as sunk, of which there can be no Prisoners to
tell Particulars, we shall know in time, though their Art in dissembling them
is always admirable; and the dis-ingenuity of their former Relations has been
such, that we cannot but look that they should ring their Bells, make
Bonefires, and send Narratives to all the Courts in Christendom of their great
success now. God grant them more of this kind, and let us thankfully prostrate
our selves before Him for the great Valor and Conduct of our Generals, and the
Universal bravery and vigor with which all the Commanders, Seamen and
Soldiers fought in this happy occasion, for the service of their King, and the
Honor of His Kingdoms.

FINIS.

