A MEMORIAL Delivered to His MAJESTY (July 21/31 1664.) From the Lord VAN-GOHG,
Ambassador from the STATES GENERAL of the UNITED PROVINCES.

Translated into English.

With the ANSWER Which His Sacred MAJESTY returned thereunto.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the year* 1664

THE MEMORIAL OF THE DUTCH AMBASSADOR TO HIS MAJESTY.
SIR,
THe underwritten Ambassador of the States General of the United Netherlands,
Your good Friends and Allies, having had the honor of several Audiences with
Your Majesty, and therein made known to You such Orders as he has from time to
time received from his Masters, upon occasion of, and concerning diverse
Affairs, and especially these following: To wit,

Seeing it is understood and perceived, that Vessels of War are fitting and
preparing on both sides, which if they go forth to Sea and meet there together,
might by some misunderstanding, fall foul upon one another; Your Majesty would
therefore be pleased to keep back Your Fleet, and (...) suffer it to go to Sea;
as their Lordships offer on their p^^^ to do; the whole intent and design
tending only to the safety of both parties, and the prevention of the foresai^
sinister encounters.

Moreover, whereas their Lordships have been informed that Captain Holmes, with
the Vessels under his command has now again (as heretofore) done very great
and enormous injuries to the Netherlandish Company of the Wes^ Indies, by
taking diverse of their Vessels upon the Coast o^ Africa, as also by making
himself Master of some Place^ and Forts belonging unto them, and namely amongst
othe^^ of Capo Verde, etc. which is directly contrary, not onl^ to the Treaty
last concluded between Your Majesty and the States of the United Provinces, but
also to mutual amit^ and good neighborhood: The said Ambassador did therefore,
in the name of his Superiors, demand restitution o^ the same, and that
reparation might be made of the damage^ and interests which the said Company
and other Subject^ of their Lordships who were concerned, have suffered
thereby; as also, that the like proceedings and violences might be prevented
for the future by an express Order.

In the third place, that their Lordships, being from day to day confirmed by
certain Intelligence coming from that Coast, that the foresaid action of
Captain Holmes had not only been effected in the manner above-specified, but
also that he was intended to carry on his design further, by making incursions
and seizing upon all the Coast, and that for his better success therein, he
expected a notable supply of Ships from England, as the whole matter may be
proved by the testimony and depositions of credible persons newly come from
thence: Which actions being without right, reason and equity, and which
consequently cannot be endured, nor looked upon with a good eye, Your Majesty
was entreated that it might be Your good Pleasure to command as well the said
Captain Holmes, as others who were in that engagement, or are held to have been
employed therein, not only to restore the foresaid Forts and Vessels so taken,
and to repair the damages thereby suffered (as reason requires) but also that
the Ships which by report are now ready to set Sail, or which may be fitting
for that end, may, by Your Majesty's express Command, be prohibited and charged
not to do or cause any other injury or damage to the said Company; or to any
other the Subjects of the United Provinces.

Fourthly, Forasmuch as the poor and afflicted reformed Churches in the valleys
of Piedmont have represented, that after the agreement made with his Royal
Highness the Duke of Savoy some while since, they are again overwhelmed and
ruined by exactions and charges required of them to defray the expenses of the
Army which the said Duke had commanded against them, which charges amounted to
so high a sum, that it was impossible for them to make it up, for the reasons
more at large alleged in their Remonstrance; Therefore they have desired the
intercession of the States General with Your Majesty, that Your Ambassador in
the Court of France may have order to procure from his most Christian Majesty
(as being Mediator between his said Royal Highness and them) as much favor and
comfort to those poor afflicted Churches as can possibly by any means be
obtained.

And finally, considering that the Vessels coming from the United Provinces
into the Rivers, Streams and Roads of this Kingdom, are stopped there under
pretense that there be Persons and Commodities on board which come from places
infected with the Plague, or at least suspected to be so, by which means the
freedom of Trade and Passage is obstructed and disturbed, to the great
prejudice of the inhabitants of both Nations: The said Ambassador therefore
insisted thereupon, that the same might be remedied, or at least that the
strictness of those Orders might be mitigated in such measure as in reason
shall be found convenient; And that the rather, because, by the mercy of God,
all the Provinces in general are not infected with the Contagion.

To all that is abovesaid, Your Majesty has been pleased to answer in effect;
to wit, upon the first point, touching keeping of the Fleet from going to Sea,
That the numbers which were fitted and prepared on Your Majesty's side being no
way extraordinary, but only for common and customary use, and without design of
bringing any damage or inconvenience upon the inhabitants of the United
Provinces, the said Vessels could not be kept from going to Sea, because Your
Majesty's Honor was engaged therein; Nevertheless, that You would give such
Orders to the Chief Commander of Your said Fleet, that their Lordships shall
have no cause to apprehend any sinister encounters from it.

As to the second, touching the action of Captain Holmes; Your Majesty thought
good to answer thereunto, That You had received no information of it, and that
having given no Order for his so doing, You would cause reparation to be made,
if the matter proved to be true, and that the said Captain Holmes should be
punished according as the case should require: Nevertheless adding thereunto
afterward at another Audience, that the West India Company had likewise done
much damage to Your Majesty's Subjects upon the said Coast, pretending to be
Masters thereof to themselves alone; which thing ought to be considered also in
its proper season, judging it unreasonable and unjust that the Trade of the
English upon that Coast should continually be disturbed and hindered.

And as to the third, Your Majesty was pleased to say as before, That You had
received no information of Holmes his actions in those parts; and for so much
as concerned the Ships which are ready to set Sail toward the Coast of Africa,
that they were not in a condition to make any attempt there, being only
Merchantmen, unto which there was added but one Man of War for their Convoy.

For what regards the poor Piemontoies, That You were sensibly touched with the
miserable condition of those Churches and People, and for that reason Your
Majesty had already given Order to Your Ambassador in France to contribute unto
their relief and comfort in Your Name; But forasmuch as at present there occur
some new difficulties concerning the said Churches, Your Majesty would advise
more particularly thereupon.

And lastly, concerning the Merchants Ships which come from the United
Provinces into this Kingdom, and are stopped without permission to Land any
where, because they are suspected to come from some place infected with the
sickness, there being no distinction made between Provinces and Cities really
afflicted with the said Contagion, and those which are not so at all; That Your
Majesty having an extraordinary apprehension of that disease, had great reason
to use all possible precaution against it; Notwithstanding, that the business
should also be thought upon more fully.

All which points abovesaid having been repeated by the said Ambassador at his
last Audience, and instance thereupon made, that according to their Lordships
desires Your Majesty would be pleased to explain Your Self in Writing, to put
the minds of his Superiors out of perplexity and disquiet; and Your Majesty
having to that purpose desired, that all should be comprised in a Memorial for
an Answer to be given thereunto in Writing: The said Memorial (May it please
Your Majesty) is here most humbly presented, with like prayer, that such Order
may be taken therein, as that by a favorable answer (which the said Ambassador
expects from Your Majesty) he may be enabled to give his Masters content.

M. Van-Gogh.
From Chelsey, July 21/31 1664.
HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER To the foregoing MEMORIAL.
THe Ambassador of the United Provinces having so particularly set down the
Answers he received from Us in his several Audiences to his particular demands;
albeit We think he may well acquiesce with the same, yet since he has thought
fit by his Memorial, to desire an Answer in writing, We are very well pleased
to satisfy him herein, that the States General may see the sincerity of Our
proceedings toward them.

Concerning the preparations and provision of Vessels of War, it is notoriously
known; that in the beginning of this year We gave order for the providing a
less guard of Ships for the Summer, then has been set out any year since our
happy Restoration for that season, believing Our Self to be in so good
Intelligence with all Our Neighbors* that We might well (...) charge; when Our
Parliament, upon the cry of the whole Nation, with some earnestness pressed Us
to take an extraordinary way to repair Our people, for the many and daily
injuries they sustained from the Subjects of the United Provinces by
depredations at Sea, in other places as well as in the East Indies, in which
there were some circumstances of that presumption, in declaring their Dominion
and inhibiting of Commerce against the Law of Nations, as all Princes are
equally concerned therein with Us; We made no other answer to Our Parliament,
then that We made no doubt but that Our good Allies, the States of the United
Provinces, to whom in truth the injuries sustained could not reasonably (We
thought) be imputed, would cause justice to be done; in order to which, We
would appoint Our Minister residing there to make a representation and
complaint. For which temper and moderation (when it may be, another resolution,
considering the nature of the provocations, would have been more agreeable to
the desires of Our Parliament) We expected the thanks of Our good Neighbors,
when on the contrary they no sooner received advice of this Answer returned by
Us, then in a very extraordinary manner they gave direction for the present
setting out of a very great number of Ships of War, without any other visible
cause then to manifest to the world how much they defied Us and Our Parliament.
Upon all which, as We should have been thought to have had very little
foresight for our Honor or Interest, if We had not prepared a considerable
Fleet for Our defense, (the charge and expense whereof We would have been very
glad to have prevented) so the same being prepared, it will be thought a very
strange proposition* that it be (...) kept within the Ports; and it will be
found by their demeanor, that their Instructions are not to do any injury to
Our Neighbors and Friends, but to defend Our Self, Our Dominions and Our
Subjects from receiving injuries from Our enemies. Nor in truth can we believe
or imagine, that the United Provinces (from whom We have deserved well, and
with whom We are ready to maintain a fast friendship, to which many other
considerations, besides that great one of the Protestant Religion, should
dispose both of Us) will deny to do Us justice upon Our reasonable demands, or
that they will ever sacrifice the Peace of their Country for the support of the
miscarriages of particular persons, or a particular Company, who We find by
experience more considers their own profit and interest, then the honor or
safety of the Government under which they live; which the States General will
well weigh and consider.

As We did with great frankness, and as an everlasting manifestation of Our
affection and kindness, conclude the late Treaty with the United Provinces, by
which many very memorable discourtesies and injuries to Our Self and Our
people, and particularly that of Amboyna, were put in oblivion; So We have most
exactly observed every Article on Our part, and have no sooner been moved in
any particular, in which the Subjects of the United Provinces have been
grieved, then We have given order for their redress, in the most expedite way,
without putting them to those formalities which are usual in Courts of Justice:
whereas We are very sorry to say, that upon all the complaints made at the Hague
by Our Minister, in which the matter of Fact has been most notorious and
convincing, and the Right most apparent, redress has not been given to any one
and such delays used in all, as are upon the matter, and in the consequence of
it, a plain denial of Justice, which brings every day great complaints to Us
from Our Subjects of all parts: Notwithstanding all which, We have not to this
day granted one Letter of Mart upon the Subjects of the United Provinces.

Concerning Captain Holmes, We have with great sincerity assured the
Ambassador, that he had no Commission to take Capo Verde, nor any other place
belonging to the Dutch, or to do any Act of Hostility upon any of the Subjects
of the United Provinces, that was not for the defense of Our Subjects and their
Trade into those parts: And we cannot but expect, that this Our free
Declaration should find more credit with Our Allies, then any informations or
examinations of Mariners and Seamen, who seldom know what they inform. We
expect the said Captain Holmes his arrival here every day, and will then, upon
due enquiry into all that he has done, determine what is just. The Ships at
present designed for those parts are Ships of Trade, and have neither power nor
will to wrong the Subjects of the United Provinces. But we are very heartily
sorry to hear, not from general rumor, or the loose discourses of hear-sayes,
but from the pregnant evidence and full information of Our Governor of Our
Fort of Cormantine, That about the end of January last, the Commanders of the
Ships belonging to the Dutch West India Company, after many assaults upon Our
Merchants Ships in those Seas, and forbidding and restraining them from Trade,
did stir up and hire the King of Fantine to assault and surprise that Our
Castle of Cormantine, and to put the same into their hands for the price of
sixty Bendys, whereof one half was paid down by the said Dutch Commanders, with
this condition likewise, that the said Natives should enjoy to themselves all
the plunder of that Our said Castle. In pursuance of which infamous Contract,
and the better to enable them to perform the same, the Dutch Commanders
supplied the said King of Fantine with a good quantity of Muskets, Powder and
Cartages; whereof Our Commander having notice, by the blessing of God surprised
the same: which it may be is one of those Acts of Hostility whereof mention is
made in this Memorial, We having no notice of any other. Two Men of War,
belonging to the Dutch Company, came from the Mina to Cape Coast to attend this
enterprise at the time appointed, and accordingly the King of Fantine upon the
fifth day of February last came with five hundred men in hope to have surprised
Our Castle; but finding himself discovered, and forced to retire with some
loss, he advanced again the next day with a Body of three thousand men, and
continued a sharp fight with Our men for the space of four hours, after which
time he was beaten off with great loss, and has since with shame and sorrow
acknowledged his breach of faith toward Us, and declared the motives and
Contract aforesaid; the Dutch Ships at the same time driving a small Ship
belonging to Our Merchants under the command of Captain Borthwick into Our Port
Inashange, anchored by him, hindered all the Canoes from coming on board him,
and took his Boat and five men, which they would not restore till they found
their other enterprise had miscarried. We cannot in any degree doubt that the
States of the United Provinces will manifest their detestation of this
perfidious design, and cause exemplary Justice to be done upon the Persons
guilty of it, which We expect and require; and that instead of sending Ships of
War to justify these unwarrantable and scandalous proceedings, (which would be
attended with ill effects, and would insensibly produce a War between the two
Nations, which we desire to prevent) their Wisdoms will reprehend and warn
their West India Company, that they hereafter forbear those outrages, and that
they do not presume under the style of Merchants to usurp the Prerogative of
Princes, and assume such a Dominion to themselves, as if it were in truth
vested in them, would not warrant them to inhibit Traffic and Commerce with
their Neighbors, but must incense all Christian Princes against their
presumption.

Concerning the Reformed Churches in the valleys o^ Piedmont, toward whom We
have expressed Our compassion and charity in a contribution since Our happy
Restoration, as We will be always ready to relieve and protect the afflicted
state of any Protestant Churches to Our Power; We being not fully informed of
their condition, or the grounds of their late sufferings, know not what more to
do, then to desire the most Christian King to use his mediation, which We doubt
not but he will do upon the desire of Our Ambassador in Ou^ name, and
acccording to Our directions.

We are exceedingly afflicted for those places within the Dominions of the
United Provinces which are (...) present infected with the Plague, and do
heartily pray to God that he will speedily withdraw that his Visitation from
them, and in the mean time do in a great degree suffer with them, by the
suspending that Traffic and Commerce which is so much for the good of both
Nations: But it cannot be expected or desired, that We will neglect or decline
that provident care of Our People which is due to them, in using all possible
means to preserve them from that Contagion, which cannot be done without such
restraints, which are for the present with great loss and damage to both
People, and to which We hope the goodness of God will shortly put a period, by
making the correspondence as safe and wholesome as it has been, and restoring
perfect health to the places now infected, as well as to their Neighbors, who
cannot but in a degree suffer with them, though they are not under the same
calamity.

We having now complied with the Ambassadors desires, in giving this particular
Answer in writing to his Memorial, and to all that he has proposed to Us, We
make no question but he will faithfully transmit the same to Our good Friends
and Allies the United Provinces; and We desire him the said Ambassador to
assure them, that We are so firmly resolved to maintain a firm Amity and
Friendship with them, that a War (by the blessing of God) cannot fall out
between Us, except they depart from all Rules of Justice, and suffer their
Subjects to involve them in a War to support the wrong they do their Neighbors
against all Right; which we are most confident they will never be induced to
do, and which mischief (of which no man can foresee the end) their great
Wisdoms will prevent.

CHARLES R. By His Majesty's Command,


