TRVTH's Pursuit after FALSEHOOD: OR, Certain untruths made manifest that was
lately published in the News-book bearing date April 18. 1664. and those false
Aspersions cast upon an Innocent People (called Quakers) truly testified
against, and the truth witnessed unto, for the better Information of all
People, and the Satisfaction of all that are sober-minded.

ALSO, It may serve for a word of caution and good advice to all those of what
Degree or Quality soever they be, that has or may have any hand in persecuting
an Innocent people for their Conscience sake.

By a Lover of Truth and uprightness, but a Hater of Lying and Falsehood,
William Warwick.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1664.

Truth's Pursuit after Falsehood.
WHoever thou art, or of what degree, quality, or place thou may be in in this
world, into whose view this little Paper may come, let prejudice be laid aside,
and in Gods fear let it b^ ^ead, and let that which is just and equal (that
never did nor will deceive any) even Gods Witness in thy heart and conscience
be Judge in this Matter.

I having seen and read the News-book published the Monday 18 of April (so
called) 1664. could not but be grieved in my spirit to see the audaciousness
and impudency of the Publisher thereof, who by insinuating and lying would
incense both Rulers, Magistrates, and People against an innocent and peaceable
people, who in scorn are called Quakers, who are well known to be a people that
seeks the good, welfare, and prosperity of the souls and bodies of all men, and
are found walking in the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, who said, Love
your enemies, and follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.

And now friends and people into whose hand this may come, the everlasting God
of Compassions having so far manifested his love unto my soul, as to make known
his living and unchangeable truth unto me from all the deceivable ways and
changeable Worships which are in the World, and not only so, but has also
inclined my heart to walk therein, unto his holy name be the praise and glory
over all for ever; And having thus tasted of the love of God, and many a time
been overcome therewith, even to the begetting of love again in my heart unto
the Lord, and unto his truth which lives in my heart, and is become more dear
unto me then all things beside it; I judge it to be no less then my duty,
according to my measure and the ability that God has given me, to bear my
testimony for the Lord at this time, as my being concerned therein, and
represented unto the Nation as a person that makes it my business, to provide,
fit up, and disperse seditious Pamphlets: and I can truly say in the fear of
God, it is not out of any ambition or desire that I have to appear in print, or
any self seeking or self end whatsoever, but simply and nakedly that the truth
may be cleared from those false and scandalous aspersions which this Enemy of
Godliness has cast upon it, and for the better information of those that
desires to know the truth of this Matter. I shall not much meddle with those
whom the scoffing seed of Ishmael calls Hobby-horses, or others wherein the
truth is not so much concerned, but leave them to answer for themselves.

And first of all, the Intelligencer is pleased to signify the fair hope and
expectation he has that somewhat will be done ere long for the suppressing of
Conventicles; the necessity whereof (says he) discovers it self daily, for it
is not now enough for the Phanatiques to have their private Meetings in
corners, and to enjoy them with all freedom and impunitie, unless they may
triumph over Authority in the open streets.

Answer. Now Cains nature is made manifest, who was the first persecutor for
Religion, and the Wolfs teeth begins to appear under the sheeps cloashing,
notwithstanding the sinceth words and soft outside, yet will bire fore when it
has opportunity. And as for Conventicles, the Meetings of the people of God
(scornfully called Quakers) cannot truly be called such, for their Meetings are
public and their doors stands open, that all that comes may both hear and see
what is spoken or done: Surely this zealot for the Church of England had
forgotten (when he writ this Intelligence) what his Godsather and Godmother (so
called) did promise and vow in his name; viz. that he should forsake the Devil
and all his works; and is not Lying the work of the Devil? and does he not lie
when he says, It is not now enough for the Phanatiques (as he calls them) to
have their private Meetings, and to enjoy them with all freedom and impunity,
unless they may triumph over Authority in the open streets? To prove this to be
a Lie, we need not go far for evidence; Let the Goals and Prisons throughout
this Nation testify how many innocent persons are at this very time sufferers
therein, for no other cause but meeting together in Gods fear to wait upon him:
and many thousands in and about this great City of London are eyewitnesses how
we have been and are with Staves and Holberds kept out of our own hired houses
and meeting-places, and so many times have been necessitated to meet in the
street? and this he calls triumphing over Authority; and all that have any true
knowledge of our practice, principle, or doctrine can bear us witness that the
tendency thereof, has not been to triumph over Authority, or to the
countenancing or encouraging of any in the least so to do, or to oppose,
resist, or rebel against those in Authority; but on the contrary, we have been
willing and ready to obey all and every just and lawful commands of our
Superiors, and that not for fear of wrath but for conscience suke, and wherein
they have required our obedience to any thing contrary to the mind and will of
God revealed and made known unto us, we have in the sear of God and in the
spirit of meekness born our testimony against it through our patient suffering
of whatever they have bin permitted to inflict upon us and have rather chosen
to lay down and part with all that is near and dear unto us, then to fin
against the Lord, or to deny him before men, or to give that unto man which
only and alone belongs unto God, even the rule and dominion over our
Consciences, and the Lord our God through his tender mercy has preserved us
hitherto, and still does in the same mind firm and steadfast, unmovable, and
without wavering, well knowing on whom we have believed, notwithstanding all
the cruel threatenings that are daily breathed against us, yet our confidence is
in the Lord, and in the power of his might; and though the Furnace may be heat
yet 7 times hotter, our God is the same as ever he was, who never leaves nor
forsakes them that put their trust in him; but is and will be present with his
Chosen Inheritance, and the People in whom he has placed his Name, and made
his Power known; but the hope of the hippocrite shall perish, and the
expectation of the ungodly shall utterly fail.

Further, the intelligencer, (or rather foul informer) says it is past that
time of day with us now, to discover the danger of schismatical meetings, yet
concerning their ways and practices, a word perhaps of Information may not be
amiss.

Answer. That Information which is contrary to Truth must needs be amiss, and
he would have come off with more credit if he had told of some news far remote,
and saved his labor as to this which may so easily be disproved, and it is but
reasonable and equal; that first he should have proved the Quakers meetings to
have been schismatical by the Scriptures, before he had concluded them so to
be; or at least wise have procured some of his pious Clergy, or dignified
Bishops as he calls them, to have come to our meetings, and openly in the
audience of the people, by righteous reason and sound Arguments grounded upon
the holy Scriptures of Truth convinced us, that the way we walk in is error,
and that the way and practice they walk and are sound in is Apostolical, and
according to the Scripture, then people would have believed them; otherwise,
will not people be ready to say, they are lazy and idle shepherds; and conclude
that they have not Truth on their side; notwithstanding their Spiritual Courts
Carnal Laws and Carnal Weapons, by which they would force and compel people to
come to their Church, and bow and conform to their worship, when as yet they
have not con^inced them that it is the way that God would have them worship in;
and so it being contrary to their says they would force them to be Hypocrites,
for Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: Therefore consider this all you that
would force people to conform to your worship contrary to the persuasion of the
Spirit of God in their hearts and consciences, and be well advised what you do;
for the Lord has opened the eyes of many people, and you can never being them
into blindness again: and though you build your nests on high and say in your
hearts you have the strength and power of the three Kingdoms on your side, and
so trust in the Arm of flesh, and so forget the Lord and his dealings with you
and your Fathers in the years that are past: It may be worth your serious
consideration, to consider what was the ground or cause of the Lords giving of
you into the hands of your enemies then, and leaving you as it were without
hope of ever enjoying such a day, as he has miraculously given you again, and
once more entrusted you withal: and now search and try your ways, and see
whether the same ground and Gause that caused the anger of the Lord to be
kindled against you, and your Fathers then, be not sound amongst you now, and
if upon diligent search you find it so to be, what reason can you produce to
your selves that the same effect will not follow; For the Lord is just in all
his ways, and righteous in all his doings and now count me not your enemy for
telling you the truth.

But hearken unto the witness of God in your own hearts, which condemns you in
secret for your evil deeds, for that will deal plainly with you, and testify
to the truth of these things; for in Gods holy sear I declare that I write not
these things out of any enmity to the Persons or person of any of you, but in
tender bowels of love, that if happily any of you may hearken and consider, and
turn unto the Lord before your day be turned into night, and the patience and
long suffering of the Lord come to an end as to you-ward, and the hour of your
visitation be wholly over; surely the time hastens, whither you hear or
forbear, I am clear, and remember that you were once more warned.

And further, the Intelligencer says; At the Bull and Mouth in St Martins near
Aldersgate (a spacious building and the common meeting place of the Quakers)
there are first 2 schools where the Children are taught by Catechisms express,
that the Ceremonies of the Church of England are Idolatrous, and the Ministers
Antichristian; there are likewise under the same roof a Bookseller, and a
Book-binder, both Quakers, whose business it is to provide and fit up seditious
Pamphlets to disperse at their meetings, meddling with no other but what are
against the Government, as may appear by diverse pestilent Libels that have been
lately seized in several quarters of the house, and from the same place and
person, Books of that quality have been taken no less then five times in the
space of a fortnight.

Answer, As for the Catechism that he seems to be so much offended at, the
Author thereof has proved by the Scriptures of Truth the things therein
asserted; which is more then Roger Lestrange, has done or any of the Bishops
or Clergy so called, as to prove by the holy Scriptures the Quakers meetings to
be schismatical, and their Books to be seditious pamphlets and pestilent
libels, before he had so represented them to the Nation; neither he, nor the
Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England would willingly be so
represented themselves without any further proof then a bare affirmation, ye^
if any one should call them Antichristian, they would not be pleased though
they are found walking contrary to the command of Christ, who said unto the
true Christian^, as ye would that men should do unto you, so do ye unto them,
did Roger Lestrange do so when he took away my books 5 times in less then the
space of 14 days as he confesses they were taken away, he had as much and more
cause to be ashamed in the taking of them away as to be ashamed to confess who
took them away; for he that discovers theft ought also as much as in him lies
to discover the thief, and do such as persecute for Religion, do as they would
be done by; would they have their goods spoiled? would they be separated from
their Wises and tender Children, and from their honest and lawful employment,
by which they provide for their Families and are serviceable in their
generation; would they be thrust into noysom prisons and stinking Dungeous, and
there endure a stifling and a languishing Martyrdom (as thany has done whose
innocent blood cries for vengeance as righteous Abels did) would they be
banished out of their native Country? would they be proceeded against as
felons, and to be put to death without mercy? and for no other cause, but for
doing that which they are persuaded by the spirit of God (in their hearts and
consciences) they ought to do; and if they should not do it they should sin
against the Lord; or on the other hand for refusing to do that, which by the
same holy Spirit of God they are persuaded they ought not to do; and if they do
it they should therein also sin against the Lord. And now you who would be
called Christians, would you be so done unto, and for no other cause but as
before mentioned? let Gods witness speak in your hearts and it will answer no;
then remember Christ's words (its no vain repetition,) as ye would that men
should do unto you, so do you unto them, and if any man say that he loves God
and keeps not his Commandments he is a liar; and again, if ye love me keep my
Commandments says Christ Jesus; so try your selves and see what spirit you
are on, for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, then
far from being a true Christian, for the Spirit of Christ never persecuted any,
but was persecuted in all Ages and Generations, neither came he to destroy men's
lives, but to save them, therefore let none deceive themselves with a name or
profession of Christianity, only for except men and women be born again, and so
become new creatures, there will be no entrance into Gods Kingdom, but their
place will be with the goats on the left hand, and sad will be their sentence

And as for our meddling with no other books, but such as are against the
Government, it is utterly false, and the lie returned upon his own head that
published it, for we meddle with none such, but our books are well known unto
thousands that they are not against the Government; but against all
unrighteousness where ever it is; whether in Kings, Rulers, Priest or people;
and this is not contrary but agreeable to the Scriptures of Truth, as it is
written, thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, nor suffer sin to lie
upon him, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them: and for this cause was Christ Jesus hated of the world, because
he testified against them that their deeds were evil and so are and have been
his followers in all ages, and herein is the Scripture fulfilled, they that
will live godly shall suffer persecution, and says Christ Jesus, Marvel not if
the world hate you, it hated me, before you; the servant is not greater then
his Lord, and if they have done so to the green tree, what will they do to the
dry?

And as for his calling those books which he took from the Bull and mouth
pestilent Libels, it is the proper name of his own lying phamphlet, and most
suitable to the nature and quality thereof; as every sober and impartial reader
may easily judge, for the tendency of a great part of his phamphlet is to
misrepresent an innocent people, unto the King, Parliament, and the whole
Nation, as Haman did the Lords people unto Ahasuerus, there is a certain people
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of thy
Kingdom, and their laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the
Kings laws. Therefore, its not for the Kings profit to suffer them, if it
please the King, let it be written that they may be destroyed. Est. ^.8.9. And
does not Roger Le-strange what in him lies, seek to render the Lords people so
now, by calling their books pestilent libels, and against the government, and
so endeavors what he can to parallel wicked Haman, and to stir up the spirit of
persecution, that the innocent may be destroyed, and is not the spirit of
persecution both pestilent, infectious and destructive to men, Countries, and
whole Nations, as may be seen more at large in a book called A special Warrant
for the apprehending of the Spirit of persecution: and is not the spirit that
is now in this man one and the self same with that in Haman, or are his hopes
now more fair, or his exspectation more strong then Hamans was; then when the
Letters were sealed with the Kings ring, and sent by posts into all the Kings
provinces to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and
old, little children and women in one day: and did not the Lord deliver then,
and is not he as able to deliver now, and did not the just hand and judgment
of the Lord overtake Haman then, and will he clear the guilty now, surely nay,
if ye are sound in the same spirit whoever you are, though high and exalted and
think your selves secure: yet the hand of the Lord will find you out, and his
just judgments will overtake you and sweep you away as with the besom of
destruction, except you speedily repent; then shall you remember with sorrow
and anguish, and confess to the truth of what is here written; for the day is
at hand wherein the mournful people of the Lord (who now are made willing to
give their backs to the smiters, and their cheeks to them that plucks off the
hair) shall sing for joy of heart, when their persecutors shall howl for
vexation of spirit, so having cleard my conscience in this matter though some
may be offended at my plainness, and because I have told them the truth, and
for this my testimony may yet be the more hated by such as have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, and hearts and understand not the things that belongs
to their everlasting peace, yet my reward I feel with the Lord, and am well
contented with my portion, and rests in the will of God, and in perfect love
and good will toward all men, who am known by the name of

William Warwick.

POSTSCRIPT.
Whereas it is said in the news book which was given forth in this Month
called April upon the fourth day of the said Month upon the day called Monday.
That two Quakers were employed from Leeds upon the twelfth day of October to
give notice that the Yorkshire forces would be up that night. That there was a
meeting according to appointment in Kirby Stephen Pa^rish etc. But this is a
great mistake and a false thing concerning the people called Quakers for
several credible persons went to the Justices and queried of them why they did
offer to send such a thing up to London, which its like would come forth in the
News-book which would be a great prejudice and hurt to this people who were
innocent; the Justices answer was, that their Intelligence was from two men
that looked sober, and only one person would not be persuaded, but he would put
them in Quakers who had some malice against them; and so the Justices reported
it was through that man's doings, and he would not be persuaded otherwise: And
the evidence in the Court before judge Twisden and judge Turner at the Assize
at Appleby was as follows, viz. That 2 young men that were strangers, came
and gave intelligence to Captain Atkinson -- They asked what they were, and the
evidence said he knew not, they were sober men. -- Now one person caused them
to be put in Quakers; and so when some had laid before the justices how it was
wrong, and how they had wronged those people; And the justices said that one
person amongst them would have it to be so, and so put it off themselves, --
which the judges knows what the evidence was that was given in open Court.

So in civility, and according to Equity, this ought to be amended and
corrected in the next News-book, For the discourse about it that the aforesaid
persons had with the justices, was after the thing was drawn up to be sent to
the King, and the person that did it was not present when the rest of the
justices were spoken to about it -- And so its good to remove that calumny and
slander off, of the said people which is cast upon them throughout the Nation,
for it is but reason and equity so to do; for a testimony was given in the face
of a Country and so it is known; and the correcting such things renders the
publisher prudent. If any will not believe this testimony, desire them to go to
the said Judge for further testimony.

Further,

And whereas he says and declares once for all in his news published the day
called thursday April 21. 1664. as to endeavor to make any people ridiculous,
(and would fain cover his malice with this cloak) that labors to make the
Government odious to the people, and further says he, resolves to follow the
same course till authority stop his hand, which clearly does demonstrate that
it is his own act and therein himself abuses Authority by doing that which
Authority (as his own words imply) has just cause to put a stop unto, or else
he must conclude that Authority may do that which is in it self unjust; let
these things be weighed and considered in Gods fear, for they are of
concernment. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
both they are an abomination unto the Lord.

The End.

