UNTO HIS GRACE. HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER And the Right Honorable, The
ESTATES of PARLIAMENT. The OWNERS and MASTERS of the SHIPS belonging in the
Town of BORROWSTOUNNESS, GRANGE-PANNS, and QUEENSFERRIE.
Shows,

THAT whereas in the Year 1695, there was an unprinted Act past, imposing Four
Shilling Scots yearly upon the Tunn of all Ships belonging to this Kingdom, and
Sixteen Shilling Scots upon the Tun of Foreign Ships, coming within the Rivers
and Harbors belonging to this Nation; and that in order to the defraying of of
Mr. Adair's Charges in making up of Maps of the Coasts, and Mr. Slezer's
Charges for making Maps and Prospects of the Castles and Forts within this
Kingdom; which Four Shilling of Tunnage has been strictly exacted off us, for
all Years preceding August last. As to which we humbly Represent, That the
exacting of the said Tunnage is a very heavy Burden upon us, and if continued,
will absolutely destroy our Trade and Shipping: And whatever is in use to be
exacted from Foreign Ships, yet it is the Practice of all Nations to free
their own Ships of such Tunnage, for encouraging of their Shipping. And
therefore it is, that albeit in France they exact 50 Souce per Tun; in Denmark
a Rix Dollar and six Stivers, in Holland fifteen Stivers per Last of all
Foreign Ships, and so in many other Places; yet they exact nothing upon the
account of Tunnage of their own Ships. And our Loss and Prejudice by the said
Tunnage is so much the greater, that our Ships being pretty large, our
principal Trade being to carry Coals, and such other bulkish Commodities
Abroad; a good part of our Profit is exhausted by the said Tunnage, and Tunnage
and Last-money which is exacted from us Abroad, which is very considerable. And
we having had great Loss of our Shipping the time of the War, and rather than
made any Gain, have brought a Debt upon our Ships: And now in the time of Peace
when we may expect to have some Trade, if the said Tunnage be not taken off, we
will be necessitate to lay up our Ships, or other ways dispose of them. And
seeing there nothing tends more to the Thriving and Promoting of Trade in a
Nation, than the encouraging of Shipping, without which Foreign Trade, which
is that, That principally enriches a Kingdom, cannot be carried on.

It is therefore humbly craved, That his Grace His Majesty's High Commissioner,
and the Right Honorable the Estates of Parliament, may take the Premises to
their Consideration, and altogether to Discharge the foresaid Imposition of 4
sh upon the Tun of Scots Ships since August last, and in time-comming, and to
lay the samen wholly upon Foreign Ships, for whose use principally the Maps of
the Coasts are Designed to be made for their Trade and Security; the Scots
Masters and Mariners being sufficiently acquainted with their own Coast, and
having Maps thereof whereby they have directed their Courses of a longtime, and
as yet have none other: So that the said Maps can be of little or no use or
benefit to them; and it seems Reasonable, that seeing Forraigners, who are not
acquaint with our Coast, does principally reap the Benefit of these Maps,
whereof the Expenses were to be defrayed by that Imposition, that they should
only bear the Burden, and they cannot complain that it is too high, seeing it is
a third part less than the Scots Ships pays in any place abroad. And Your
Petitioners shall ever pray.


