A Well-Resolved Man; OR, Good Resolutions, and Good Endeavor
PSALM. 75.9, 10. THE FIRST PART.
SECT. I.
THE God of all happiness having been pleased to often give Divine and Heavenly
Joys to many of his people; and (amongst the many) to smile some shines thereof
to one of his [though unworthy] servants* did thereby the rather move me to
study and endeavor (as well as (...) could) to declare the like Divine Joys and
happiness to other. And he did by some occasions also set me on work to a
little show the evil follyness of obstinate, Popish, and some kind of vicious,
seditious, and ill-minded Enemies of Goodness (of which likewise some things
may be more known in good time): And then had I occasion to think that some
men's Horns (though much shorter then their Combs and Ears) did deserve a little
checking, either by showing, brushing, or de^iding the same, or otherwise. And
what Monster-men the Wicked are, and what kind of Combs, as well as Horns they
have; and how the illness thereof may be well brushed or checked, may [in some
after Parts hereof] be shown: and likewise of being at the best side, and
partaking of the much joys and happiness of God's People. And so it was, that
(among many times) being one time so well busied, [studying and endeavoring
as well as my weakness could] to cheerfully declare some things of the much
goodness of our God to his people, and to give some [both useful and pleasing]
checks, to wicked follyness, and some encouragements to blessed Graciousness;
and having God's Book before me, I (providentially) turned to the 75 Psalm, and
reading toward the end thereof as follows:

But I will declare for ever, and sing praises to the God of Jacob All the
Horns of the Wicked also will I cut off, etc.

Psalm. 75.9, 10. It then seemed to me, that no sooner had the Kingly Prophet,
in much zealous-wise set himself to well declare abroad the much goodness of
our God, and well-sing his praises, but the Horns of the Wicked were set in his
way: Right well did he therefore resolve to all-cut them off, to unborn
[unpower] such wicked men; as well a^ also to encourage the Righteous, as it
follows, ver. 10. Then did I from the same 9th and 10th verses, collect these
four following general Observations, as the Heads of, (or pertaining to) the
intended ensuing Discourse.

First, (since the Divine-spirited Psalmist, was so very well-resolved to
declare for ever and sing praises to the God of Jacob, etc.) that every
well-resolved man should likewise do right well, (when, and as well as they may
conveniently) to cheerfully, and with divine praises declare the much goodness
of our God to his Jacob-like (...); yea, though if any ill-minded Esaus, (or
any of old Satan's Messengers) ^y wicked Horn combmen, would therefore malign,
oppose, or any way set Horns with Combs against them, Genesis 27.41. Psalm. 75.1,
4, 5. 1 John 12.13, 14, 15. Rev. 2.17.

Secondly, since King David was [as all good Magistrates should be] so well
resolved to check, or cut off the horns of the wicked, so calling the same, and
figuratively meaning thereby their ill-used power and wrong fullness, we
likewise may endeavor to check the ill-usedness thereof against us, and that
partly by showing and blushing their combs and long ears (so calling the same,
and figuratively meaning thereby their pride, folly, and wickedness) and that
to be done partly by good round confutations, and both serious and deriding
Reprehensions, (when good persuasions, and other good ways will not serve for
Conversion) and chiefly by, or with the Sword of the Spirit, called the Word of
God, or according thereunto, Prove. 26.3. Psalm. 52.6, 7. and 59.8. and 75.4, 5.
and 149.6. Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 4.12.

Thirdly, (since this so wel-resolved Man, the Prophetical K. David, was (1.) A
Type of Jesus Christ, (2.) A good Magistrate. (3.) A good Prophet. And (4.) a
good man; since he did so well resolve, as beforementioned), that we should do
very well to side under our Captain General Jesus Christ, as some of his
Angel-men, against Satan and his, ( Rev. 12.) also under such good Magistrates,
and with such good Ministers and People, who ( David-like) do most love God's
goodness and praises, and most check or Horn-cut (much obstinate Antichristian
and vicious) wicked men; who Comb-fully fling Horns or Harms against the same
and them.
And likewise to side with such who do most love or encourage Right, Truth, and
Goodness.

And so fourthly, with them to partake of the much exaltive happiness of God's
people, for so it follows, ver. 10. But the Horns (that is, the well-used
power and happiness of the Righteous) shall be exalted; and that either partly
on Earth, by knowing, and present enjoying as much as they can of their Divine
Felicities, and Dignities in Jesus Christ; and sometimes it may be Temporal
Blessings added, with exalted Heaven minded Enjoyment thereof; or however, may
have Divine Joys, both in troubles and prosperity, and all things working for
their good, either here, or especially hereafter in Heaven, and of their much
exalted happiness therein for ever.

Then did I likewise ( from the same 9th and 10th verses of Psalm 75.) note or
collect some more particular Observations, of which I may write more hereafter;
but herein I intend some things that have some relation to the beforementioned
four general Observations [and that the rather upon some occasions] and the
first general Observation thereof, with some particular Application to partly
be the ground of this first Part; and so herein to write some things according
thereunto: First, more particularly in the next Section; And secondly, more
publicly, and generally, in the after Section of this Part.

SECT. II.
FIrst, more particularly, A much well Resolved-Man will be right willing,
as well as he can (when conveniently he may) to cheerfully declare abroad the
Divine Goodness and praises of Him the God of Jacob; yea, though if any wicked
Horn-Combmen would therefore malign, oppose, or set Horns with their Combs much
illy against him. And so this Divine-Spirited Psalmist, in many other of his
Psalms, would often particularly tell what GOD had done for Him, and that
sometimes notwithstanding many ill Enemies; and so what particular Blessings,
Protections, Deliverances, Joys, and Felicities, his GOD had given unto him.
And the like we read of many other Saints in all Ages; of which I may elsewhere
give many Instancies. But here I would occasionally write a few Words of one
with whom I am very well acquainted, and know or believe him to be a much
Well-Resolved, and Well-endeavouring Man.

And here I might, to the Divine Praise, particularly declare of many blessed
and happy Experiences, and what Divine and Heaveny Joys his GOD has sometimes
given him both in health and sickness, in troubles and prosperity. But now
only a little of some things. And so if he did formerly (in something
published) to God's Glory particularly tell (and that with a much asseveration
for the truth thereof, and wishing God's Blessing according) how that he knew a
man some years ago, when he was a little more then a Child, and that in a time
of his much sickness, who then enjoyed such joys, as he believes were very
beginnings and partakings of Heaven: Such as the very Thoughts thereof has
often since much rejoyed him, and did much incite him to write some things of
Divine and Heaveny happiness on Earth, etc. And if he did so declare and tell
the same only to God's Glory, acknowledging his own altogether weakness and
infirmities, 2 Cor. 12. (being ready to so much glory in such much humble
acknowledgments,) as to question whether it were better for the present to be
in Heaven already, or here so well preparing for more happiness therein, by
such acknowledging his own weakness and infirmities, that God's grace, power,
and glory, may be only manifested thereby, verse. 5* 9, 10. And if any Divine
Glory shall be occasioned by this, or some other following Declarings, some
Enemies might have a little thanks, as well as something else, for the same,
since to them he might say (with the much Heaven-joyed Apostle) Ye have
compelled me.

And therefore also he may be the better excused, if he were apt to think, that
such Divine and Heavenny Joys and Encouragements, in such youngness and
sickness, as well as after, were a sufficient CALL to write some things in
Divinity; yea, (...) himself. For (...) a little talk or jest against Day or
Temporal (...) (as some are (...) term Us) their Writing in Divinity; they may
know, the^e are very many Scriptures and Reasons for the same, whereof some
they may see in Sir Richard Baker's ^ommendations thereof printed; and many
other also may be given; (and the farre-fetcht Arguments to the contrary, may
(if occasion) be well derided to scorn) yea, insomuch, as even the Popish
Priests themselves, as much as they ride the people, are yet ashamed to deny
them Writing and Printing in Divinity, while only what is not contrary to
their Religion; much more have good Protestant Ministers thought well of any
men's such good Endeavors, which they know Orthodox.

I might also, to the Divine Praise, tell how Heaven has often smiled Joys and
Blessings, upon his good Resolutions and Endeavors, (especially in Writing
some things concerning Man's Happiness) and also particularly of many Divine
Providence, Protections, and Encouragements, sometimes notwithstanding ill
Enemies, and their being evil-ey'd against a Man's good Resolutions, and of
hopeful turning their wrongful Opposision to his good. And how, if any (with
old Satan) will be such ill-comb Enemies, to go on to much oppose him, they are
not like to get much thereby, unless some shewment of their Evil-Combness, if
not also a little Checkment of their ill-bent Horn-ness; though he would rather
hope they will not much fling Horns against him; and thereby show long Combs
and Ears, but that mistakes (if any be) may be well rectifyed; and Christian
Love, Peace, and Right, well occasioned.

And I might likewise further declare (to Divine Praise) that he is a Man who
resolves, lives, and would endeavor as well as he can, and when convinced of any
amissements, would presently resolve (and glory in) amendment: A Man that has
so well resolved, lived, and endeavored, that he does much protest (desiring
also the blessing of the Almighty, according to the truth of this Protestation)
that he does seriously wish that all his faults might be written in the face
and sight of the Sun and World, to be read of all men, upon condition, that his
good Intents, Endeavors, and Resolutions, (by Divine Blessing) were therewith
also written, read, and seen of all men. And likewise how he is a Man that has
so well lived, and well-endeavoured, as he hopes and believes that his very
Enemies (unless there be any as Knavish and Impudent as old Satan) they will
readily acknowledge, or however well think that he has been, and is a much
wel-endeavouring, and a Well-resolved Man.

And again, I might likewise (upon occasion) tell, how when heretofore a
distemper of Natural Melancholy sometimes came upon him (much at new Wakings)
the thoughts of some Divine and Heaven^y Joys have quickly dispelled the same.
And so when Enemies have sometimes occasioned in him a little just indignation;
yet upon remembering such Divine Joys, his Spirits have been quickly composed
again, and settled in quiet rejoying; and then though, according to our Saviors
counsel ( Luke 17, 3.) when Enemies trespass against him, (yea strangely
persecute him) he may well rebuke them; tyet does his often lightsome Spirit
incline to do it by some lively, mirthy, yet round Brushes, Girds, and
Derisions, father then by such plainer cudgelling Rebukes, and more then
Rebukes as some deserve) yet if they repent (as it follows) ver. 3, 4. and so
amend, he would much freely forgive them; yea, does so, even before they repent
and amend, and while, he rebukes them; and wishing the same, or something,
might occasion their Conversions with as much Blessings and Happiness, as our
God will, or Heaven can give and bestow on them. And so likewise I might tell
what Divine and Heavenny Joys he has sometimes had in health and prosperity;
insomuch, as sometimes ready to forget himself while thinking thereof; and has
gone a good time another way then intended, before he remembered himself; yea,
sometimes even in company, has bin asked a question twice, and laughed at before
he could pull down his Mind to answer; though he hopes not so unconveniently to
forget himself again hereafter. And also how such Joys (while well-minding
himself, and his convenient occasions, as every man should) have often made his
Thoughts, Studies, Occasions, Recreations, Enjoyments, and much of his
lifetime more pleasant and delightsome, though yet he thinks himself
altogether unworthy of the least of any such Joys and Blessings, and would the
more therefore render praises to his God, the Divine Giver thereof.

And also further (the rather if, or since Enemies occasion it) I might
well-tell or suppose that he is a man whom GOD has so well blessed, that how
much-soever the strong and high-graced (whether low or high placed men) are
beyond him in Joys and Happiness; yet, that he, while he may with Divine
Blessing quietly serve his God with such a sufficiency as he has given him, if
ill men do not manifestly much wrong him (as they are not like to do it very
easily without Comb-brushing, if they would) yea, or if Men and Devils oppose
to hinder, yet while he may continue to enjoy his GOD, and study to serve Him
and His People, would be ready to vye Happiness even on Earth, with the most
Purse-proud, Comb-proud, ungracious Man living; and that (...) so as not only
being ready to both pity and laugh at him, till he shake off his
Wicked-Combness; but also hoping to out-vye him so far, as some Joys, being
Partakings or Beginnings of Heaven, are beyond these of Earth, or meer-Man
(much more of the commonly distempered ill-passionated wicked Man) besides the
infusions of a kind of Heavened Joy, that an Heavenny-mind adds in, or with
both Troubles and Prosperity, and so as raising all terrene good and happiness,
to a much better and higher Enjoyment* ( Prove. 16.8. and 37.6) and besides (in
whatsoever condition) the assurance of all working to his good, especially to
the increase of his everlasting happiness, 1 Pet. 1.8. Romans 8.28. 2 Cor. 4.17.
and 7.4. and 8.2.

In sum, If I should suppose, and particularly declare, the many Divine
Experiences, Providence, Protections, Directions, Blessings, Joys, and
Encouragements, which he has had in health and in sickness; and among some
good friends, and notwithstanding some ill Enemies, and so both in Troubles and
Prosperity; and if I should so declare, that all men might fully know the same,
though if evil-ey'd hinder-good men, would very much vex thereat, yet would the
good or best men, all presently wel-know, or be ready to say-out that he
(blessed man) though much unworthy, had, and has yet very much reason (with
the Psalmist, and other well-resolved men) to particularly declare the much
goodness of our GOD to his praise, etc. Verse 9

SECT. III.
SEcondly, more publicly also, will a much well resolved man be willing (when
occasion) to speak, or any way declare abroad Gods goodness and praises, yea
though if any evil eyed ill-minded men would therefore show horns with Combs
against him, ( verse. 9. etc.) And so like this well resolved Psalmist professes
also in Psalm. 40.3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, and in several other of his praisfull
Psalms. And likewise many other much well-resolved Saints in all Ages have
been so willing to publicly well employ their Talents, either by acting,
speaking, studying, writing, or the like, when occasion, though oftentimes
some ill minded men have therefore much detracted from, and opposed the. And so
likewise in these and times to come, will many such well-resolved men be
cheerfully willing to do any good (when conveniently they may) and to let
their light shine to their Heavenly Fathers glory, though Owle-sighted,
hate-light men, or evil-ey'd hinder-light men, or such whose horns or Combs
hang in their light, would therefore much envy malign, gainsay, or ill oppose
them, Math. 5.15, 16. and 25.17, 18.22, 23* Mark. 4.21. Psalm. 75.1, 4, 5, 9, 10.

But here a few words of some application. Good men I hope will think right
well of my good endeavors and resolutions in this public impressing way; I
hopeing to do some good thereby how little soever, and having more then
ordinary engagements and occasions thereunto; and the rather while I do not
censure or blame these, who though much able do yet think it more discretion to
forbear in this Impressing way; while yet we may well blame, check or brush
some ill-detracture, sneaking, evil-ev'd, base-spirited, hinderers and opposers
of goodness. But of this I may (if occasion) write some things elsewhere; and
how detracters and persecuters are the worst of men, and most
Father-Satan-like, and of their base and rediculous humors; and (among other
things) how they deserve to be crowned (instead of Laurel) with a Coronet of
two bigg Ears on a Knaves cap with a Coxcomb and bell.

And now to come to what I cheefely intend in this Section. I being willing,
(for want of Tallants) to bring a few Mites into the public Treasury. I
desire upon occasion to give some very short account of some of my intended
good endeavors, and resolutions tending to a declareing of Gods goodness to
his praise, and his peoples happiness ( verse 9.) And first to name one book
entitled, A Divine Mirror, or, The happy Man, etc. Wherein a regenerate
gracious man may behold much of his divine and heaveny happiness on Earth.
Which book is well beg^n printed, and might have been published a good time
before now, if first some intended additions, and since some occasioned
diversions had not hindered the same: By which it may be well known to our Gods
praise, that a much gracious man can or may often much rejoice in many several
respects; yea often times though if ill-minded men would comely show their
horns against him. And so how he can rejoice much more then the ungracious
men, even in external and moral felicities, though especially indivine and
heavenny happiness. And well is it, if therein, as likewise in some other
intended Treatises, I hope to see far better my former litte and weak (though
gracious and virtuous) endeavors, and so to declare such divine and heavenny
happiness (however yet weakly) as to g^ve some occasion to hope as well as
wish, of some conversation amongst Angels; and of learning some divinity in
Heaven, and of God himself, Phil. 3.20. Heb. 12.22. Joh. 6.45. Psalm. 71.17.

And to give only here this little short account of the intents of the before
mentioned book. Wherein by way of Character of an happy man, is or may be
showed (as in a Divine Mirror to such) several things of the following heads.
Of Gods love to him in Jesus Christ. Of his blessed Union in Christ. Of the
divine Spirit in him; and much blessings and felicityes of all these. Also of
his divine graces; his divine happy heavenny faith; And of his such hope; And
so of his divine love. Likewise of his Evangellicall humilliation, Repentance,
and filial fear, occasioning much exaltation, joy, and love in God. Also of
other his divine graces; and of his moral virtues ingraced and so raised to
more happiness. Of his divine gracious and often joyous, prayers, praiseings,
and other good Christian exercises, and good endeavors and resolutions. Of his
Orthodox Religion and felicities thereof. Of his blessed peace as far as he
may with all men; and much love to, and Communion with the Saints. Also of his
divine gracious courage, and of his contentment, and often divine joys in
Troubles. And how the same and oppositions do and may often turn to his good.
And of his good use and heaven-minded enjoyment of external happiness and
prosperity. Of his much happiness in God. And so in and with him of his divine
and heavenny life, welfare, Wisdom, Power, Amiablenesse, Fre^nds, Riches,
Honors, pleasures, and how his God gives, is, and will be such happiness to
him. Also of his divine joys; and how the same are always habitual, and
often actual, free, ready, quick instant, lively, much Angelliseing his soul,
and thereby adding to all his other felicities. And how sometimes may be
unexpressable, and how, superterrene, super-humane, divine and heavenny. Of his
entertayning, enjoying, and increasing such divine and heavenly infusions. And
of his soul, often eying and having conversation in Heaven, and enjoying in
some degrees the felicities thereof already. And of his divine Communion and
fruition of God. And so how his soul may be more sublimed to an heavenny
temper, often entertayning and enjoying partakings of the divine self and
Heaven within him. Also how such divine and heavenny graces, joys, and
felicityes are in some respects communicative, to such as are capable thereof,
And how if all men would seriously endeavor to be such as he, we might behold
a more Angellicall Heavenny age on earth, to the increase of the everlasting
happiness in Heaven, to divine glory.

And I have declared also how I intended to write some things with divine
blessing concerning public good and happiness (and right well is it to wish
or endeavor what (with convenience) we may thereof, Psalm. 122.6, 7, 8, 9.) And
in the former impression here of some years ago, I did give some account of
an intended book concerning much hopeful good and happiness in these Nations,
and that intermixed among and by way of several Reasons for submission to
Higher Powers. But having since above a year and half ago Impressed something
thereof called A Word in Season, or A few words of 34. heads of Reasons for
submission to Higher Powers; And of much hopeful good and happiness to these
Nations. I forbear to Reprint the same in this Impression, and rather referr
the Reader thereunto, intending to add the same or another Impression thereof
hereunto, next after this first part. And though I wish some ill-minded-men
would not be so evil eyed against the same and other good Resolutions, as to
occasion much wrongs, deceits, and hindrances, and among other to occasion
that in long time I could not or cannot sell, have, or dispose any thing of a
message, and Lands, made over to me by my late brother, for some money to him,
and much engaged for him, so as neither I, nor the Creditors could yet be paid
thereof, nor his Children have the Remainder as intended and offered; and also
occasion such falsenesse in trust, that I could not, or cannot sell, have, or
dispose any of about fourscore and ten pounds a year elsewhere, nor yet any
(unless so litlittle as less then charges in looking for it) of whom I
trusted above two thousand pounds worth of the same Lands, at St. Peter's, and
Tilmston; and also goods, or of some hundred pounds of my Rent received by whom
trusted, or that any would often say or threaten I should get none thereof,
unless I would comply not to Print Books, or it seems be engaged not to Print
such things as some are evil eyed against, though good Resolutions. And I wish
I may have no occasion to Impresse a Tragicomicall Narrative of some wrongs,
hindrances, Ill-triks, and persecutions, and how yet, old Satan is not like to
get much by setting on to the same, unless some exaltation of (...) Comb
rather then horns; though for other enemies I wish rather their love and peace
with some Rightment. But though if some disconcentented, unpeaceable, sedicious
or ill-minded men (of several Cleaks) would be so evil-ey'd as to show their
horns (though much longer Combs thereby) against such good endeavors and
resolutions, yet well-minded, peaceable, and gracious men will (I hope) much
rejoice and praise our God for such much hopeful good and happiness, as in
the following Papers intended to be added hereunto, may in some little part
appear, though especially more plainly, when such further good Resolutions
thereof are finished and published.

Again, In the former Impression hereof I did also mention some things to
divine praise, of another intended book to be called, A Divine Kingdom in Men,
or the Heavenly age on Earth Of which I had thought likewise to have given some
account in another Sect on of this Impression hereof. But having since also
Imprinted something thereof, entitled, Exalted happiness, or, A few words
concerning a Divine Kingdom, and the increase thereof to much happy heavenny
times on earth, and to some degrees of Heaven within us; Intending likewise to
add the same (with the other) hereunto. I referr the Reader (if he please)
thereunto; hopeing that (though if some would be so evil or Owle-ey'd, ill, or
narrow-minded, addle or thick-headed, as to detract from, little mind, or show
Combs against the same, yet gracious heaven-minded men will much rejoice at
such much exalted happiness, and much cheerfully render or sing praises for
the same to him who is so good a God to his Jacoblike (his gracious) people,
verse 9.

And I may also, if occasion, in a second part hereof, proceed to the next
general observation mentioned in the first Section, of checking the
il^busednesse of wicked men's horns, though by showing and brushing their Combs
and long ears and otherwise. And therein (among others) some things, if
occasion, of a Tragicomicall Narrative, and round Brush, or Catechize. And some
things (further then in the former Impression) of an intended Tragicomicall
book wherein may be showed how that old Satan has figuratively a Comb as well
as Horns, and his Servants both Combs and long Ears. And how they may be well
checked, derided, brushed, ordered, etc. And divine gracious and virtuous men
rejoice and enjoy a much happy age.

I may also proceed, if God please, to his praise, to a third and fourth part,
concerning the third and fourth general observations before mentioned of being
at the best side (contrary to the worst Comb-men) and much partaking of the
exaltive happiness of Gods people; according to the end of Psalm. 75. verse. 10.
(Of which some things may be likewise perceived in part, by the two following
little discourses, (especially that of exalted happiness, etc: intended to be
added hereunto.) And so likewise of some more particular observations; and
among other, of gracious men's exaltive dignities and felicities in Jesus
Christ, in our God, and Heaven-Kingdome. And of much knowing and enjoying such
divine and Heavenny happiness, and thereby also more Heaven-minded enjoyment
of temporal felicities. And how all things (both troubles and prosperity) may
work to their good, either on earth, or especially in Heaven. And of their much
exalted happiness (in severalls) therein. And so how at last (when the
obstinate unconverted wicked men shall be all horn-cutied, and Comb-shewn
elsewhere) they that are Gods Children shall (to his glory) be all exalted for
ever and Triumph in Heaven.

FINIS.

