SHERLOCK against SHERLOCK.

The Master of the TEMPLE's REASONS FOR His late taking the OATH to Their
MAJESTY'S, ANSWERED, BY THE Rector of St. George Botolph-Lane. WITH MODEST
REMARKS On the Doctors Celebrated NOTIONS OF ALLEGIANCE TO SOVEREIGN POWERS.

-- Quantum Mutatus ab illo.
Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit Ipsum.
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, and are to be Sold by
Alexander Henderson Bookseller at the upper-end of the Locken-Booths. 1691.

THE PREFACE
THE Church of Rome's Pretense to Infalibility, has been decryed by not a few,
who at the same time, have been as Dogmatical in every Punctilio, or things
wholly Extrinsick to the Christian Religion; as if the singular Privilege of
the Church had been transplanted from Rome to a People that would bring forth
better (...) thereof: Nor has this Imperious Principle confined it self to
those things which seem more within it sphere (which if done in Moderation,
would never have been (...) by the Sober part of Mankind) but has encroacht
upon Politicians, on a prete^^ of rectifying the Unchristian Principles they
had infected the World with: As if there was to be no manner of knowledge in
the Universe, but what should proceed from the Priests Lips: And the (...) and
Thummim of these Holy Ones has contributed not a little (by rubbing off the
Laodicean T^^per) to inflame the World with a Blind Zeal and Virulent Hatred;
and to set a Man and his Friends a variance together: And all this is
propagated by means of a Follish belief in the more simple People, of the
Infallibility of those Persons, from a Blind Reverence given to them, on the
account of this Function.

That this is no fiction, will appear beyond all Contradiction, if we but
consider what has been (...) out of Pulpits, and not long ago dropped from the
Pens of not a few, who have been accounted the great Proficients in Reason, and
merely upon the foresaid account, greedily swallowed up by the more (...)
considerate; though the more knowing of that side, espoused those Tenets, from a
more pernicious Principle, that they might the easier, like the great Fishes,
domineer over, and devour others; and he (...) wholly abandoned his Reason; to
whatever their Caprice suggests, who has the Face to deny it.

Among all others, none has appeared a stouter Champion for those Tenets in
General, (...) Learned Doctor: And, for ought I know, none has contributed more
to increase the number of Mal contents, to their present Majesty's, from those
Principles, than He has; And yet, we see, how, (...) a sudden. He has been
pleased to Act Diametrically, contrary to them; though, at the same time, (...)
Vindication, He seems still to own them: which, in the Eyes of all
understanding Men, is no (...) than for a Person to inveigh loudly against all
manner of Debauchery, and yet, at the same time, (...) guilty of some notorious
Acts of it.

I am glad, that this Learned Person has taken the Oaths, (whatever was his
Motive in doing so) as St. Paul was glad that Christ was Preached; though some
did it out of Envy, and others, from (...) other sinister Principle: But that
the Doctor should Vindicate his taking the Oaths, and yet (...) former
Principles, is, I confess a Riddle beyond my Capacity to unfold. I have
therefore briefly proposed to public Consideration, what the Doctor has
formerly proposed as Matters of highest ^^^^tance, which seem with a Witness,
to contradict some Passages in his Vindication, (though He at the same time,
suggests, That he is the same Man as formerly,) that He may (for the
satisfaction (...) great many Persons, that are not a little concerned for it)
either please to reconcile those passages (...) what He has formerly so
industriously Preached and Written, or formally retract his former Principles
on this point, as pernicious to All Mankind. By doing whereof (for ought I
know) he may more advantage the Public, than He has hitherto done by his
Learned Writings.

I might mind him, That in Vindicating himself, He (as his best Topic) might
have said something in Vindication of heir Majesty's Government: But my design
being chiefly to show Him, (...) He is at (...) with Himself, I wave it; not
doubting but this Case will, by some other Hand, be presented to this Learned
Casuist.

SHERLOCK against SHERLOCK.
The Master of the TEMPLE. In his Case of Allegiance, Affirms
THat all Sovereign Princes, who are settled in their Thrones, are placed there
by God, and invested with his Authority, and therefore must be obeyed by all,
Subjects, as the Ministers of God, wthout enquiring into their Legal Right and
Title to the Throne. Alleg page 10.

That the Scripture has given us no Directions in this Case, but to submit, and
pay all Obedience of Subjects to the present Powers. It makes no distinction,
that ever I could find, between Rightful Kings, and Usurpers; between Kings we
must, and whom we must not obey; but the General Rule is, Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers for all Power is of God, Ibid. p. 18.

The English Monarchy is Hereditary, and the Lineal Heir has the Legal Right to
the Crown: Grant this; But still we must consider, how far this is a Law to all
private Subjects; how far every Subject is bound in Conscience by this
Constitution, to give the Possession of the Crown to the Right Heir and not to
suffer any one else to take it; or it he do, not to pay Allegiance to him, or
own him for his King. What Law is there that says this? And I think the reason
of the thing does not prove it. The Law does not refer the Cognizance of such
Matters to private Subjects; and therefore they are not Bound by Law to take
care of it; and I know nothing but Law can Bind us to a legal Constitution.
Legal Rights must be determined by alegal Authority; and there is no Authority
can take Cognizance of the Titles and Claim of Princes, and the disposal of the
Crown, but the Estates of the Realm: They indeed are oblidged to take Notice of
the legal Descent of the Crown; and if through mistake, or any other Cause they
set the Crown upon a wrong Head, they must answer for it; but private Subjects,
who have no legal Cognizance of the matter, are Bound by no Law, that I know
of, to disown a King, whom the Estates have owned, though they should think the
Right is in the other. If Authority may not overruled private Subjects in these
Cases, even against their own private Opinions, and justify their Obedience to
a King, who is placed in the Throne, Subjects are in a very ill Case, who have
no Authority to Judge, and no Power to Resist: There are numerous Cases,
wherein Subjects must acquiesce in the determinations of a legal Authority,
against what they think a legal Right: The reason and necessities of Government
require it; and the Law, which gives a Right will not allow us to vindicate our
Right against a legal Authority. And therefore it does no follow merely from
the Law of Succession, that Subjects are Bound in Conscience to own no Kings,
who is not the rightful Heir. Ibid. page 52. 53.

The Queston is not, Whether the Monarchy be Hereditary, that is agreed, but
whether in an Hereditary Monarchy we must pay Allegiance to no Prince who is
not the legal Heir, though possessed of the Throne; this the Lawyers deny, and
produce Law for it; and if there be such Laws, It is certain by Law, we may pay
Allegiance to a King in Possession, notwithstanding the fundamental
Constitution of an Hereditary Monarchy; for the Law, which makes one, allows
and commands the other; and then it is an Hereditary Monarchy, with this
reserve of paying Allegiance to the King in Possession, when the legal Heir
cannot obtain his Right.

And this I take to be a very wise Constitution, which secures the Kings Right,
as far as Law can do it; but if the King should be deprived of his Right,
(which the Experience of all Ages proves he may be) does not think fit that the
Government should sink with him, and therefore makes provision for the Security
of the Government, and of the Subjects under the Regnant Prince, which the
Reasons and Necessities of Government require and justify, though there had been
no Law for it.

Now it is enough to prove, that Allegiance is by Law due to a King de facto,
if Treason may be committed against him; for no Treason can be committed where
no Allegiance is due.

This is confessed, that all such Acts as are Treason against a King de jure,
are Treason, when comited against a King de facto, but not, say they, because
Allegiance is due to him, but because they are against the order of Government,
and therefore are Treason by the presumed consent of the King de jure. In Ans.

That such Acts are against the Order of Government, and very destructive to
it, is the only reason why they are made Treason by Law; and this is a good
reason why the Law should make them Treason against a King de facto, as a King
de jure Ibid page 57, 58.

Yet one may reasonably presume, that a King who forsakes his Kingdom, to
consult his own Safety will give his Subjects leave to consult theirs: If this
will justify a King to save himself, by leaving his Kingdom, why will it not
justify Subjects, when their King has left them, to submit and comply with the
prevailing Powers, as far as is necessary to preserve themselves? That is, even
by Oaths of Allegiance; Self-preservation is as much a Law to Subjects, as to
the Prince; and he is as much Sworn to Govern and Protect his Subjects, as they
are to Obey and Defend him; and if the necessities of Self preservation,
Absolve him from his Oath of Governing and Protecting his People, I desire to
know, why the same necessity will not absolve Subjects from their Oaths to
their Prince. A Prince may Govern by Law, and Protect his Subjects, and yet in
Fact they deny their Allegiance to him. Alleg. p. 42.

It is true, we must in all Cases be contented to suffer in doing our Duty; for
we must choose rather to Suffer, than to Sin; and it is no Argument, that
anything ceases to be my Duty, because it exposes me to Suffering: But then we
must be very sure that it is our Duty; that it is expressly enjoined us by the
Laws of God and Nature, before we venture to suffer for it. But then we are to
learn our Duty, not from any express Law of God or Nature, but from the Reason
and Nature of things. It is a sufficient Argument that it is not my Duty, which
will expose me to great sufferings, without serving any Good end; nay, which
exposes me to Sufferings, for contradicting the natural end and intention of
that Duty, for which I pretend to Suffer.

But let us grant, that this Principle is the best Security to the Rights of
Princes; is the Right of any Prince so Sacred, as to stand in competition with
the very being of Human Societies, and the Safety and Preservation of all his
Subjects? and must we then defend a Princes Right, with the Destruction of the
Nation, and the Ruin of all his Subjects? Which is most necessary, That the
Nation should be, or, that such a Prince should Govern it. p. 45.

The Rector of Saint George Botolph-Lane. In his Case of Resistance.
THere is another Objection a against what the Apostle affirms, That there is no
Power but of God: The Powers that be, are ordained of God. For, is the Power of
Victorious Rebels and Usurpers from God? Did O C. receive his Power from God?
then it seems, it was unlawful to Resist him too, or to Conspire against him.

To this I answer, That the most Prosperous Rebel is not the Higher, while our
Natural Prince, to whom we owe Obedience and Subjection, is in Being. And
therefore though such Men may get the Power into their hand by God's Permission,
yet not by God's Ordinance; and he who Resists them, does not Resist the
Ordinance of GOD, but the Usurpations of Men. In Hereditary Kingdoms ( which is
England) the King never Dies; but the same minute that the natural Person of
one King Dies, the Crown descends upon the next Blood; and therefore he who
Rebelleth against the Father, continues a Rebel in the Reign of the Son, which
commences with his Father's Death.

It is otherwise indeed, where none can pretend a greater Right to the Crown,
than the Usurper; for there Possession of Power seems to give a Right. Thus
many of the Roman Emperors came to the Crown by very ill means; but when they
were Possessed of it, they were the Higher Powers; for the Crown did not descend
by Inheritance, but sometimes by the Election of the Senate, sometimes the
Army, which always draws a consent after it: And therefore the Apostle does not
direct the Christians to enquire by what Title the Emperors held their Crowns;
but Commands them to submit to those who had the Power in their hands; for the
Possession of Supreme and Sovereign Power is Title enough, when there is no
better Title to oppose aginst it.

There are Two Examples in Scripture, which manifestly confirm what I have now
said.

The first is, in the Kingdom of Israel, after the Ten Tribes had divided from
the House of Judah, and the Family of David, GOD had not entailed the Kingdom
upon any certain Family; He had indeed by Abijah the Prophet promised, after
Solomon's Death, Ten Tribes to Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat 1 Kings 11.29. etc.
but had afterward, by the same Prophet, threatened Jeroboam to destroy his
whole Family, Chap. 15.10, 11. Baasha fulfils this Prophecy, by the Traitorous
Murder of Nadab (who successed his Father Jeroboamin the Kingdom) and Usurped
the Government himself, and slew all Jeroboam's House, ver. 28, 29. This
Murder and Treason is numbered among the Sins of Baasha; for which GOD
afterward threatened to destroy his House, as he had done the House of
Jeroboam, chap. 16. ver. 7. Ela succeeded Baash, who had no better Title than
his Father, and yet Zimri, who Slew him, is accused of Treason for it, v. 20.
Zimri Usurped the Kingdom when he had Slain his Master, but he was only a vain
Pretender to it, when he wanted Power; for when the People who were Encamped
against Gibbethon, heard that Zimri had Killed the King, they made Omri King,
and went immediately and Besieged Tizza, where Zimri had naken Possession of
the King's Palace; who, finding no way to Escape, set Fire to it himself, and
died in the Flames of it. And now Israel was divided between Omri and Tibri;
but those who followed Omri, prevailed against those who followed Tibri; and
Tribri died, and Omri Reigned, ver. 21.22. All which plainly shows, that where
there is no regular Succession to the Kingdom, there, Possession of Power makes
a King, who cannot afterward be resisted and opposed without the guilt of
Treason.

But it was otherwise in the Kingdom of Judah, which GOD himself had entailed
on David 's Family, as appears from the Example of Joam, who was concealed by
his Aunt Jehosheba, and hid in the House of the Lord for Six Years.

During this Time, Athaliah Reigned, and had the whole Power of Government in
her hands; but yet this did not make her a Sovereign and irresistible Prince,
the right Heir of the Crown was yet alive: And therefore in the Seventh Year,
Jehojada the Priest set Joash, upon the Throne, and Slew Athaliah, and guilty
of no Treason or Rebellion in doing so, 2 Kings 11. which shows, That no
Usurpations can extinguish the Right and Title of a natural Prince. Such
Usurpers, though they have the Possession of the Supreme Power, yet they have
no right to it; and though GOD, for wise Reasons, may sometimes permit such
Usurpations, yet while his Providence secures the Persons of such Deposed and
Banished Princes from Violence, he secures their Title too. As it was in
Nebuchadnezzar's Vision, Dan. 4.26. The Tree is cut down, but the Stump of the
Roots is left in the Earth. The Kingdom shall be sure to them, after that they
shall know that the Heavens do Rule.

Case of Resistance of Supreme Powers Pages 127, 128, 129, 130, 131 132.

Self-Defence was never allowed by GOD or Nature, against public Authority,
but only against Private Violence.

There was a Time, when Fathers had the Power of Life and Death over their own
Children: Now, I would only ask these Men, if a Son, at that time, saw his
Father coming to Kill him, and that, as he thought, very unjustly, he might
Kill his Father to defend himself. This never was allowed by the most Barbarous
Nations in the World: and yet it may be justified by this Principle of
Self-Defence, as it is urged by those Men; which is a plain Argument that it is
false. It is an express Law, That he that Smites his Father or his Mother,
shall be surely put to Death. Exodus 21.15. and yet then the Power of Parents
was restrained by Public Laws. And the Authority of a Prince is not less
Sacred than of a Parent; He Is God's Minister and Vicegerent, and Subjects are
expressly forbid to resist; and it is a vain thing to pretend a natural Right,
against the express Law of God.

2. For the Sole Power of the Sword is in the Kings hands; and therefore no
Private Man can take the Sword in his own Defense, but by the Kings Authority;
and certainly he cannot be presumed to give any Man Authority, to use the Sword
against himself. And therefore, as Christ tells Peter, He that takes the Sword,
shall Perish by the Sword; He who draws the Sword against the lawful Powers,
deserves to dye by it.

3. We may consider also, That it is an external Law, That private Defense must
give place (...) public Good. Now, he that takes Arms to defend his own Life,
and some few others, involves a whole Nation in Blood and Confusion, and
occasions the Miserable Slaughter of more Men than a long Succession of Tyrants
could destroy. Such Men Sacrifice many Thousand Lives, both of Friends and
Enemies. to a private Self-Defence, and if this be the Law of Nature, we may
well (...) Nature a Stepmother, that has Armed us to (...) own Ruin and
Confusion.

Case of Resistance, page 203, 204, 205. Considerations and Reflections upon
some of Doctor Sherlock's Celebrated Positions, concerning Passive Obedience,
and Non Resistance.
WE shall now consider the Doctor's Reasons, why the King is Irresistible in
all Cases, which are these.

1. That the King has a Personal Authority, antecedent to all the Laws of the
Land, independent on them, and superior to them. Case of Resistance, page, 196.

Now, This is not true, for the King is King by Law, and has his Authority from
the Law. Indeed, our Authors says, (in the same Page) That the great Lawyer,
Bracton (by those very words of his, Lex facit Regem) was far enough from
understanding, that the King receives his Sovereign Power from the Law. I
confess I never was so well acquainted with Bracton, as to know what secret
Meanings he had, contrary to the Sense of his Words; and therefore cannot tell
how far he was from understanding. That the King receives his Sovereign Power
from the Law; but I am sure he was not far from saying so; for he says it in
the very next words; Attribuat igitur Rex quod Lex attribuites, videlicet,
Dommationem and Potestatem. He proves, that the King is under the Law, and
ought to Govern by the Law, because he is made King, by the Law, and receives
his Power and Authority from the Law; and then adds, what the Doctor is pleased
to cite, Non est enim Rex, ubi dominatur Voluntas, and non Lex: He is no King
who Governs by Arbitrary Will, and not by Law; that is, no lawful English King,
Bracton must mean, for still he may be a Good Outlandish and Assyrian King and
Tyrant, though his Arbitrary Will does all: For the Doctor ( Case of Resist.
page, 41.) quotes out of Dan. 5.18.19. That God gave Nebuchadnezzar such an
Absolute Kingdom, that whom he would he slew, and whom he would he made
Alive, and whom he would he set up, and whom he would he pulled down, And
I hope no Man Tyrannizes over his People who uses the Prerogative which God has
given him; therefore the Doctor rendering Lex facit Regem, To Govern by Law,
makes a Sovereign Prince a King, and distinguishes him from a Tyrant, will pass
with none but such ordinary Readers as he write his Book or, and who never saw
Bracton.

Chancellor For tescue likewise says. That a limited Monarch receives his
power, a Populo estaxam, which unriddles the Doctors Riddle in the same place,
How the Law can make the King, when the King makes the Law? But it is such a
wonderful thing, that there should be a Law to create a King, and to enable
him so far in the making of Laws, as to make his consent necessary to the being
of all Future Laws; was it not thus when the two houses were Erected, and
endowed with the like Power, notwithstanding the Doctors says. ( page 196.)
That the Law has no Authority, nor can give any, but what it receivs from the
King. For the Laws are made Authoritate Parliamenti, which is by the Authority
of the King, Lords and Commons.

But to lay aside Bracton and Fortescue, let us a little reason the Matter.
This Personal Authority of the King, antecedent to all the Laws of the Land
independent on them, and superior to them: whence is it; has be a Throne like
God? Is he of Himself, and for Himself? Or has he a Personal Authority from
God, antecedent to Laws, to be a King? Then show a Revelation from God where he
is named. Or has he the Natural Authority of a Father to Govern his Children?
Then it must be proved That he has begotten his three Kingdoms, and all the
People, in all other His Majesty's Dominions? Or has he a Personal Patriarchal
Authority which is set up as a shadow of the Authority of a Father, whereby the
Eldest Son is his Father by Representation? Then it must be proved. That the
King is the Eldest Son of the Eldest House of all the Families of the Earth. Or
were mankind made in the day of their Creation, by Nations, and Created Prince
and People, as they were Created Male and Female? but if none of these things
can be said, then it remains. That a Civil Authority, that is, a mutual Consent
and Contract of the Parties, first Founded this Civil Relation of King and
Subject, as we see it every day does of Master and Servant, which is another
Civil Relation; and that the Consent of a Community or Society, is a Law. and
the Foundation of all Civil Laws whatsoever, is proved beyond all
contradiction, by Mr. Hooker Eccl Pol. Li(...), 1, chap. 10.

Another Reason which the Doctor gives, why the King is Irresistible in all
Cases, is Because he is Sovereign: and it is essential to Sovereignty to be
irresistible in all Cases. Which is false: For the King of Polland (...)
Sovereign, he Coins Money with his own Image and Superscription upon it, which,
according to the Doctor, page 50 Is a certain Mark of Sovereignty, and page 51.
By the very Impression on their Money it is evident, That he is their Sovereign
Lord: He styles himself by the same Grace of God with any King in Christendom,
and wears the like Crown: He Assembles Diets; he disposes of all Offices; he
judges the Palatines themselves, and is full of the Marks of Sovereignty. And
yet he that shall take a Polish Penny, and make such work with it, as the
Doctor does with the Roman Tribute Money, and out of it read Lectures either of
Active or Passive Obedience in all Cases, will read amiss: For in case he
break his Coronation Oath, they owe him no Obedience at all, of any kind; for
this is one Clause in it: Quod si Sacramentum meum violavero, Incolae Regni
nullam nobis obedientiam praestare tenebuntur. So that in case he violate his
Oath, his Irresistibility departs from him, and he becomes like other Men.

I come now to the Doctor's Second Case; which is resolved under the covert and
Countenance of the former, That as well inferior Magistrates, as others employed
by a Popish Tyrannical Prince, in the most Illegal and Outrageous Acts of
Violence ( such as Cutting of Throats, etc.) are as Irresistible as the Prince
himself (under pretense of having the Prince's Authority to do these Acts) and
must be submitted to, under pain of Hell, and Eternal Damnation. Now, to show
the Authority which we are bound to submit to, not in Laws, but in Persons who
Act contrary to Law, he has brought the following Argument, which is the most
labored of any in his Book: Nay, it is very false and absurd to say, That
every Illegal. Is an Vnauthoritative Act, which carry no Objection with it.
This is contrary to the practice of all Judicatures, and the daily Experience
of Men, who suffer in their Lives, Bodies and Estates, by an unjust and Illegal
Sentence: For the most illegal Judgment is Valid, till it be reversed by some
Superior Court; which most illegal, but Authoritative Judgment, derives its
Authority, not from the Law, but the but the Person of him whose Judgment it
is. Case of Obed. Page 193.194.195.

Now, to use his own words, this is very false and absurd all over.

For first. Legal and Authorative are all one* and Illegal Authority is in
England, unlawful lawful Power. Secondly, It is not true, That an Illegal
Judgment is valid, till it be reversed: For the Judgment of a Man to Death, in
an Arbitrary way, either contrary to the Verdict of his Jury, or without a
Jury, is not Authorative or Valid at all, no not for an hour. But, I suppose,
by illegal Judgments, the Doctors means legal Judgments, which have Error in
them; and if these should not be Valid, and stand good till that Error be
found in some Higher Court, there could not be legal nor Illegal, nor any
Judgments at all; but all humane Judicatures must come to an end: For if
Judgment cannot be given, till we have Judges who are not subject to Error,
the Laws must ly by and rust; and there can be no administration of Justice.
Thirdly, The Authority of a Judgment which is Erroneous, is not from the Judges
Personal Authority above the Law, nor from his Mistakes beside the Law but from
that Jurisdiction and Authority which the Law has given to Courts and Judicial
Proceedings, which, if they be in due course of Law, are legal, and are
presumed to be every way right, and as they should be, and free from Error,
till the contrary appears in some Higher Court. But if the Judges in
Westminster Hall should use a Personal Authority, superior to Law, in Judging
Men to Death without a Jury, or in condemning a Man when his Jury acquit him,
or the like, the Law having given no Authority to any such proceedings, these
Judgments would be illegal and void, and have no Authority at all.

Secondly, Another Reason why we must submit to Illegal Violence is this:
Because though they have no legal Authority for it, yet we have no legal
Authority to defend our selves against it, page, 192 But he himself has given as
full an answer to this as can be desired, in these words, For no Man can want
Authority to defend his Life against him that has no Authority to take it away,
page 59.

Thirdly, We must submit to Illegal Violence, because the People cannot call
inferior Magistrates to an Account, page 191. But sure the People may defend
themselves against the Murderous Attempts of inferior Magistrates, without
pretending to call them to an account, or sitting in Judgment upon them: And
when they themselves are called to an account for this Defense, they may give a
very good account of it, by the 28. H. 8. cap. 5.

Fourthly, We must not defend our selves when we are Persecuted to Death for
our Religion, contrary to the Laws of England, because we must not defend our
selves, when we are thus persecuted contrary to the Laws of God and Nature,
which are as Sacred and inviolable as the Laws of our Country. Case of Alleg p
200.

Answer. I grant that the Laws God and Nature are more sacred and Inviolable
than the Laws of our Country; but they give us no Civil Rights and Liberties,
as the Laws of England have done. Every Liege Subject of England has a legal
Property in his Life, Liberty and Estate, in the free Exercise of the
Protestant Religion established amongst us; and a legal Possession may be
legally defended: Now, the Laws of England, in Queen Mary's Time were against
the Protestants, and stripped them of this unvaluable Blessing, and therefore
though they chose rather to observe the Laws of God and Nature, than those of
their Country, which at that time violated both the other; yet withal, they
submitted to the Laws of their Country, which alone (...) and take away all
legal Rights and Titles, and, when all is said, are (...) only Measures of
Civil Obedience.

Fifthly, Men must not defend their Lives against a lawless (...) Persecution,
when they are Condemned by no Law, becau^^ the (...) defend their Lives, when
they are Condemned by a Wicked, Persecuting, Popish Law: For such lawless
Persecution, has as much Authority as such a Wicked Persecuting Law. page 202.
This is manifestly false: For a lawless Popish Persecution has no Authority at
all, but has all the Authority of Heaven and Earth against it; whereas a wicked
Popish, Persecuting Law, though, as it is wicked, it cannot Command our
Obedience; yet, as it is a Law, it may dispose of our Civil Rights. If Queen
Mary's Laws were no Laws, because they were wicked Persecuting Laws, why were
they Repealed? why were they not declared to be null from the beginning?

Sixthly, That Non Resistance of Illegal Violence, is the best way to secure
the public Peace and Tranquillity, and the best way for every Man's private
Defense; for self-defence may involve many others in Blood, and besides,
exposes a Man's self. page 205, 206. That is to say, when the public Peace is
violated in an high manner, the best way to secure is quietly to suffer it
still to be broken farther; a Man's best defense is to Die patiently, for fear
of being Killed: And when (...) are broke loose, the only way to prevent the
effusion of more Christian Blood, is to let them alone. Now, in opposition to
this Doctrine I shall only remember the Doctor, That if there had not been a
Defense made against the Irish Cutthroats in Forty One, though they had the
Impudence to pretend the King's Commission, there had hardly been Protestant
left, but the Prestilent Northern Heresy had been through^^ extirpated in that
Kingdom:

Seventhly. Another Reason is, Because Non Resistance is certainly the best way
to prevent the change of a Limited into an Absolute Monarchy, page 212. Now,
this is so far from being true, that on the other hand, absolute Non
Resistance, even of the most illegal Violence, (...) actually change the
Government, and sets up an Absolute and Arbitrary Power in the shortest way,
and by the surer side. For a Prince, whom the Laws themselves have made
Absolute, has thereby no more than a Right and Title to an Absolute Subjection;
but Non Resistance puts him into the actual Possession of it. The Doctor
himself has made this (...) beyond all contradiction; for, he says, That
Non-Resistance is as perfect Subjection, as can be paid to Sovereign Princes,
page 44. and 11^, he calls it, The only perfect and absolute Subjection we owe
to Princes. Now, the most perfect and absolute Subjection that can be paid,
erects the most absolute Government that can be devised. For these words are of
Eternal Truth, which we read in page 64. of this Book; For Authority and
Subjection are Correlates, they have mutual respect to each other, and
therefore they must stand and fall together: There is no Authority, where there
is no Subjection due; and there is no Subjection due, where there is no
Authority. And is not this as bright and as evident a Truth: There is no
absolute Authority, where there is no absolute Subjection due; and there can be
no absolute Subjection due, where there is no absolute Authority?

I shall now produce some Reasons, to prove the Lawfulness of Defending our
selves against Illegal Violence; which is a Truth so obvious, and so agreeable
to the common sense of Mankind, that even those Men, who set themselves to
oppose it, do often times assert it unawares, and gave unanswerable Reasons for
it; I shall therefore, first set down those Concessions which the force of
Truth has Extorted from the Doctor, and secondly, add some other Arguments to
them.

First, No Man wants Authority to defend his Life against him who has no
Authority to take it way, page 69. But no Man whatsoever has any just and legal
Authority, (that is, any Authority at all,) to take it away contrary to Law,
page 191. And from these premises, it is easy for any Man to infer the
Conclusion.

Secondly, He that Resists the Usurpations of Men, does not Resist the
Ordinance of God, which alone is forbidden to be Resisted. But Acts of
Arbitrary and Illegal Violence, are the Usurpations of Men. These again are the
Doctors Doctrines, the former, page 128. the other, page, 211, 212. he
acknowledges, that the assuming of an Absolute and Arbitrary Power in this
Kingdom, would be Usurpation; though he says at the same time, That no Prince
in this Kingdom ever Usurped such a Power, which is notoriously false, for
Richard the Second by Name did. not to mention any other.

Thirdly, The Doctor, page, 126. has these words, Every Man has the Right of
Self-Preservation, as inti^e under Civil Government, as he had in a State of
Nature: Under what Government soever I live, I may still kill another Man, when
I have no other way to preserve my life from unjust Violence by private Hands.
Now the Hands of Subordinate Magistrates, Employed in Acts of Illegal Violence,
are private Hands, and Armed with no manner of Authority at all; of which this
is a most convincing Proof, That they may be Hanged by Law for such Acts, which
no Man can or ought to Suffer for what he does by Authority. They are no
Officers at all in such Acts, for Illegal Violence is no part of their Office.
Now, after the Doctor has answered his own Arguments, I shall desire him to do
as much for these which follow.

First, No Man can Authorize himself: But in Acts of Illegal Violence if a
Subordinate Magistrate have any Authority at all, he must Authorize himself:
For it is a contradiction to say, The Law Authorize him to do an Illegal Act,
as the Doctor well observes, page 195. And it is false to say, That the King,
who can do no wrong, can Authorize another to do it. In the great Conference of
the Lords and Commons, 3 Caroli, concerning the Contents of the Petition of
Right, the Law was held to be, That if the King Command a Man to do Injury to
another, the Command is void, and the Actor of it Author, and the Actor becomes
the Wrong doer; that is, he Acts of his own Head, and Authorizes himself.

Secondly, The Illegal Violence of Subordinate Magistrates cannot be more
Irresistible, only by being more Criminal than it is in other Men; for that
would be to make a Man's Crime to be his Protection. (...) Illegal Violence done
by subordinate Magistrates, is not only as inauthoritative, as if it were
committed by private Persons, but likewise more Criminal, as being done with a
face and color of Authority, and under pretense of Law, making that partaker
of their Crime, violati^^ and blemshing the Law at once.

FINIS.

