To the HONORABLE The Commons OF ENGLAND ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, The Humble
PROPOSALS of James Whiston, For Advance of his Majesty's REVENUE on Double
Brandies, etc. Encouragement of Loyal Subjects, Merchants and others, Increase
of Navigation, and the Prevention of Frauds, Perjuries, and other Abuses.
THat till a little before the late dreadful Sickness, French Spirits paid but
4 d. per Gallon Excise, they being then generally used as the Ground work to
make Strong Water withal, which are dulcifyed, mixed with Seeds, etc. But
about the said Sickness-year, the People betaking themselves to the drinking
Brandy simple in the room of Strong Water perfectly made, a Dispute and great
Suits of Law between his Majesty and the Importers arose, whether the said
Commodity should pay 4 d. per Gallon more, as Strong*waters perfectly made did,
or not? The Merchants applied themselves to the Parliament then sitting for
Relief, who declared in an Explanatory Act in the 22d of his late Majesty, that
Brandy was, and is a Strong-water perfectly made, and accordingly Enacted it
should pay an Excise of 4 d. more per Gallon, as such; by which Term of Brandy
in the said Act was, no doubt, intended only single Brandy, and by the words
perfectly made was meant no more but perfectly made potable, or to the usual
Standard of such Spirits called Proof; Single Brandy being then and ever since
drank in lieu of Strong Water: Nor was there any such thing commonly Imported
here as double Brandy at that time. But now of late it is become a great
practice to draw their Spirits (here now called Brandy) into two Thirds, three
Fifths, and sometimes full double in strength stronger than the former single
Spirits or Brandies usually were, (for Brandies may be known to a sixty fourth
part, how much they are made above that Standard intended by the Act under the
term or word perfectly made, which is the same with what Dealers in that
Commodity call Proof, or single Brandy.

And on purpose to defraud his Majesty of his Revenue therein, a very great
part of the Brandies Imported are, and most, or all, (if not speedily
prevented) will be Imported two Thirds, three Fifths, and some full double in
Strength stronger than common single and potable Brandy ought to be: But after
the Importer of such double Brandies has paid the Excise at 8 d. per Gallon
only, such double goods not being potable, unless they are lowered with Water,
the too common abuse is to adulterate them with English Spirits of a far
cheaper value, whereby the Quantity vended is not only sometimes made double,
and oft-times near treble more than what his Majesty was paid Duty for; but his
Majesty's Subjects have not the said Commodity in so good and wholesome a kind
as in Justice they ought.

As Brandies perfectly made in Foreign Parts, are always understood to be
such as are potable, or only proof; so the like is observed in English Spirits
made here, which pay a Duty; for if made Double, (as some are for Lackering,
and Physical, and other uses) the Officer charges and makes them pay according
to the Quality, reducing it to single; else the Distillers would make them
generally Double, (as they do Brandy aforesaid in other Parts) and after the
Duty at the rate of Single is paid, then they would lower them again, by which
means his Majesty would be defrauded at home of that Duty the Parliament
intended, as he is now by such Importations from abroad; and certainly there is
less reason his Majesty should be defrauded in a greater Revenue by an Imported
Liquor, than in a smaller matter by his own Subjects here at home.

Also were the Importers of Double Brandy discouraged from such Importations,
(which might forthwith be done by laying on a Duty in the Excise,
proportionably to what they are in strength stronger than Single, and Potable
Brandy) there would be Imported near double the Quantity in Single, which would
add to his Majesty's Revenue, and encourage Navigation, and keep his Majesty's
Subjects from being couzened, etc. And it will prevent the abuses of great
numbers of French and other Aliens here, who lie sculking in Corners, and are
the general Importers and Adulterators of the said Double Brandies, who do not
only the Injuries aforesaid, The better to prevent the running of Brandies
hereafter may it be enacted that no Brandies be imported in any Cask less than
84 Gallons.
but oft-times defraud his Majesty of very much Duty; and hereby his Majesty's
able and worthy Subjects, Merchants of better Reputation and Principles than to
Adulterate or Save the Duty of the said Commodity, are very much discouraged,
and beat out of their former fair Trade. Besides, the prevention of the said
frauds, will keep diverse from Forswearing themselves, who too often upon
Shipping out of such lowered and mixed Brandies, make Oath that they are as they
were imported, and thereby may draw back one half of the Customs for such Goods.

It is provided by Law, (the 15 of Charles the Second) That if a Brewer brew
double Drink, and pays the Duty of strong, yet if he shall be found lowering
of it, he forfeits 20 s. per Barrel, which indeed the Brewers too frequently
do, it being difficult to be discovered, and also the Victualler does take his
quantity of double Drink in Casks by it self, and of small Beer by it self,
which pays in each specie, one as single strong Drink, and the other as small,
yet afterward this Victualler in drawing them out by Retail, shall draw such a
proportion of one and the other together, so that in truth he sells them both
for strong Drink. Besides, if he sell this double or treble drink entire, it is
still the same fraud to the King, since while he pays Excise but as for Common
strong Drink, he sells it for double the Price or more, and the same supplies
the room of as much more drink in quantity, proportionably to the Improvement
made in strength and quality. And the Collectors may as well be Judges thereof,
as now they are if any shall brew strong Drink, and call or pretend to sell it
under the Notion of Small, yet they justly oblige them to pay according to its
kind, and so it may be done in all other Cases ad Valorem above what it shall
be worth more than the current Price. It is therefore humbly submited, whether
if the Brewer were thus in all Cases made to pay a Duty for double or treble
Drink proportionably to its value above single, it might not only prevent the
said Frauds, but levy a Duty according to the true intent of the Act of
Parliament.

Now for the prevention of the aforesaid Frauds, and plain distinguishing of
all such Brandies as shall be imported hereafter; and the better to enable his
Majesty to levy an equal Duty upon the same, and to decide the Controversy
between his Majesty and his Subjects about that Branch of the Revenue, which
his Majesty without doubt has already a Right unto, it is humbly Prayed that
this Honorable House would be pleased to Explain the said Act, and declare all
such Brandies to pay from a Penny to Eight Pence per Gallon over and above
single Brandy, proportionably to what they shall be found above proof and
perfectly made, which every Artist, and most Dealers in the Commodity do well
know, else they could not buy and sell the same at Prizes proportionate to its
strength and goodness; and even at this time in the Custom House they enter ad
Valorem in one and the same day single Brandy at 24 s. per Tun, and so on
proportionably to the value to 48 s. per Tun, according to the distinctions of
the said Brandies as they are above proof, which Method and Practice having for
about sixteen years been discontinued, this Prop^ser has lately in Print
remonstrated the Prejudice thereby done the Crown; whereupon the same was
revived, and appears so just and reasonable, that the very Importers themselves
are satisfied therein.

It is further humbly submitted, that if the said single Brandies were made to
pay 4 d. per Gallon more at least (provided our English Spirits and Aqua Vitae
be advanced one fourth more also) yet it would not lessen the Importation, the
Consumption thereof being daily more and more in use and esteem, even to the
utter Ruin and Hinderance of all other imported Strong Water; and also
diminishing of our English Beer and Ale and other Manufactures. Besides, it is
the most whole Family killing Liquor that ever came up since the Creation, as
by daily experience, the very Dealers therein themselves, as well as others,
are ready to averr. And what Reason can be Alleged, That 3, 4, 5, 6, to 7, or
more Tuns of Wines abroad, shall be distilled into one Tun of Brandy, and yet
that Tun of Brandy, which does so much mischief, should pay but a little above
half the Duty of one Tun of Wine: The Truth is, were the Duty far more upon
Brandies, it would neither hinder the Importation, nor does it affect the
English, but the French; for they must continue the making of them, as much as
ever; for they chiefly make such Wines into Brandy as ly^ up so far in the
Country, that they cannot with advantage bring them down in specie, or have
sale for. And the same motive still continuing, they will be glad to accept any
prizes, rather than make nothing of them.

Whereas it may be Objected, that if a greater Duty be laid upon Brandies, or
other Commodities, his Majesty will not receive so much in his Revenue thereon
as before, by Reason that then there would be the prospect of so great a profit
to the Importers, as may tempt them to use more Tricks to bring the same in
privately, and defraud his Majesty of his Duties (which is commonly called
Running of Goods.) -- In Answer to this, it is humbly submitted to
Consideration, whether necessary and profitable Laws ought to be forborne out of
respect to such kind of Persons and their Ill courses, or whether rather all
Offenders in that kind ought not by the severity of good and wholesome Laws to
be so chastized, as may deter them and others from such unjust, disloyal and
ungodly Practices: For since the Laws of God and Man do justly condemn
Cheaters, Couseners, Thieves, etc. betwixt party and party to be both Fined and
Corporally punished, according to the Nature and Circumstances of the Persons
and their Offenses; I see no reason why those who live in the constant practice
of Robbing and Defrauding their SOVEREIGN, and get large Estates thereby,
should escape free from being liable to the like Fines and Corporal
Punishments. For as the Sin can be no less to steal from or defraud his
Majesty, of that which is his Majesty's Right, than it is for private Persons
to Cozen and Cheat one another, so in the former Case, both the Insolency is
the greater, a Crime next to Sacrilege, the Example more pernicious, and the
Consequences much more dangerous, as impairing the Public Revenue established
for the support of the Government. Nor will it signify much to allege, That
there are great pecuniary Mulcts already imposed by Law on such as shall be
convicted of those Crimes; for as they reckon it no great hazard, whether they
shall be discovered or not, so if they escape once in twice in some
Commodities, twice in thrice in others, and so in some more, some less,
according to the Duty payable and first cost of the Goods, they will still be
Gainers, and thence are encouraged to persist; but one smart Corporal
Animadversion would be much more prevalent and effectual. The present Penalties
being but like Doors and Locks to secure our private Estates, which may perhaps
keep off modest Pilferers, but when bold Villains will notwithstanding break in
further, such provisions as these cannot be too little to restrain them. And if
any of his Majesty's Officers be found Tardy by wilful Negligence, Connivance,
Bribes, etc. That they not only lose their places, but also undergo Corporal
Punishment, and withal be so far disabled to serve his Majesty, or give
Evidence, or be of a Jury, as much as if convicted of Perjury or Forgery at the
Common Law; since besides simple Injustice and fraud, their Offenses are
aggravated with the highest Ingratitude, Treachery and direct forswearing
themselves, in deceiving their Royal Master; who graciously preferred them to
their Places, and whom they are sworn faithfully to serve. Moreover, besides
such Corporal Punishments on the Person, may it be fit, That the Ships, parts
of Ships, Goods, Boats, Lighters, Cranes, Wharf, and Tackling whatsoever
employed or used in or about any such fraud, be absolutely forfeited, one
Moiety to his Majesty, the other to the Prosecutor (saving the Parts, Shares
and Properties of such as are Innocent and no way privy thereunto.) For it is
not only the Kings Interest, but the Subjects too, to have his Majesty's Duties
duly and equally paid. For look how much the Ill dealer gained by defrauding
the King of, so much the honest Merchant loses, the other being able to
undersell him proportionably. But by such wholesome Provisions duly executed,
not only this deceitful Practice would be prevented, and thereby his Majesty's
Revenues much Improved, but also his Majesty might be eased of the Charge of
near Half the number of Officers now Employed, and yet his Revenue more justly
and duly collected.

This Proposer has several other Proposals to offer to this Honorable House,
all which equally tend to the Advance of his Majesty's Revenues, etc. and also
are as greatly for his Majesty's Subjects Interests to have them put into Laws.

Anno 1685.

