STRANGE NEWS From Bishop-Hatfield IN HERTFORD-SHIRE, January the 25 1680.
Being a Relation of Elizabeth Freeman, a single Woman, aged about one and
thirty years, Daughter to Elizabeth Freeman of Bishop-Hatfield in the County of
Hertford Widow; taken before Sr. Joseph Jordan,Knight, and Richard Lee, D. D.
Rector of Hatfield, and Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty
FIrst, she gives an account, that on Monday at night, being January the twenty
fourth, 1680. she sitting by her Mothers fireside, between five and six of the
Clock in the Evening, with a Child in her lap, she heard a Voice behind her,
which mildly said, Sweetheart: Whereupon she turning her Face about, saw an
appearance of a Woman, as she conceived, all in White, covered with a white
Vale, so that she saw no Face, but a very white Hand, was laid on the back of
her Chair, The Apparition further said to her. The fiftenth Day of May it is
appointed for the Royal Blood to be poisoned, and said likewise, be not
afraid, J am sent to tell thee; and so vanished.

Secondly, That on Teusday, January the twentyfifth, 1680. between five and six
at night, coming to her Mothers from a friends house, being within four or five
Pole of the door, the Apparition appeared to her again in white and veiled as
before, and said, Do you remember what I sai^? and she answered, yes, And that
young woman she further said, In the name of the Father, the Son, and Holy
Ghost, what art thou? and immediately it appeared in a very glorious shape, and
with a more harsh voice, said, Tell King Charles from me and bid him not remove
his Parliament, and stand to his Council, and said likewise, Do as J bid you,
to which the young woman answered, yes, and so the Apparition vanished.

Thirdly On Wednesday, January the twentyeth sixth 1680. between the said hours
of five and six in the evening she sitting by the fire, and her Mother sitring
by her, the said Apparition came again to her; at the sight whereof she could
not spoke, and her Mother perceiving her to be troubled, said to her Daughter,
see thou any thing? The Daughter not able to speak, noded with her head;
whereat her Mother said, shall J go out? and thereupon her Daughter being
enabled to speak, (the Apparition nodding to her,) said, yes; upon which her
Mother going out, the Apparition said Do the Message. She answered, I will, so
soon as God shall enable me, and it said Be not afraid, continued the
Apparition, and so vanished; and she cried Mother, Mother, and then her Mother
and some other friends came in.

Fourthly, The said Apparition appeared to the said Maid on Thursday in the
evening, between the aforesaid hours of five and six, she being at a Neighbors
house, but said nothing to her. This was taken from the Maids own mouth, by me.

Richard Wilkison.

London, Printed in the Year 1681.


