THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE PEOPLE Commmonly called QUAKERS, ASSERTED Against the
Unjust Charge of their being no CHRISTIANS, Upon several Questions relating to
those Matters, wherein their Christian Belief is Questioned.

Printed in the Year, 1693.

The Christianity of the People commonly called QUAKERS, Asserted against the
Unjust Charge of their being no CHRISTIANS, etc.
Question, What Is your Belief concerning the Blessed Trinity, as our Term is?

Answer. Our Belief is, that in the Unity of the Godhead there is Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, being those Three Divine Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and that these Three are One,
according to Holy Scripture Testimony.

Quest. Do you Believe the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ the Eternal
Son of God, or that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man?

Answ. Yes, we verily believe that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man, according
as Holy Scripture Testifies of Him, God over all blessed for ever, the true God
and Eternal Life, the One Mediator between God and Men, even the Man Christ
Jesus.

Quest. Do you believe and expect Salvation, and Justification, by the
Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, or by your own Righteousness or Works?

Answ. By Jesus Christ his Righteousness, Merits and Works, and not by our own,
God is not indebted to us for our deservings, but we to Him for his free Grace
in Christ Jesus, whereby we are saved through Faith in Him (not of our selves)
and by his Grace enabled truly and acceptably to serve and follow Him as He
requires! He is our All in All, who works all in us that is well pleasing to
God.

Quest. Do you believe Remission of Sin, and Redemption through the Sufferings,
Death and Blood of Christ?

Answ. Yes, through Faith in Him as he Suffered and Died for all Men, gave
himself a Ransom for all, and His Blood being shed for the Remission of Sins;
so all they who sincerely believe and obey Him, receive the Benefits and
blessed Effects of his suffering and dying for them, they by Faith in his Name,
receive and partake of that Eternal Redemption which he has obtained for us,
who gave Himself for Us that he might Redeem us from all iniquity; he died for
our Sins, and rose again for our Justification; and if we walk in the Light, as
he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another; and the Blood of Jesus
Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

Quest. Do you believe and own the Divine Offices of Jesus Christ in His Church?

Answ. Yes, verily we sincerely believe and own Christ, not only as He is the
Light of the World, enlightening every Man coming into it; but also that he is
given for a Leader, and for a Commander. And that he is both King, Priest, and
Prophet to and over his Church and People. He is the Minister of the Sanctuary
which the Lord pitched, and not Man, and we are to hear him in all things.

Quest. Do you believe or own Baptism as Essential to Christianity, or
necessary to Salvation, and for the Ingrafting us into Christ and His Church?

Answ. We believe and are fully persuaded, That Baptism which is Essential to
Christianity, and the saving Baptism, or the Cause without which none can be
true Christians, or saved, is the inward or spiritual washing of Regeneration
by the Word of Life, This is the saving Baptism into Christ and his Church,
which produces the Answer of a Good Conscience toward God, of which the
outward was a Figure, 1 Pet. 3.21. This is that One Baptism of Christ by one
Spirit into that one Body, whereof Christ is Head.

As to Dipping or Sprinkling Infants, or Young Children we find no Precept or
President in Holy Scripture for the practice thereof, and therefore we cannot
think out not believing it Essential (or necessary) to Salvation, or making
Christians a sufficient Argument to prove us no Christians (unless it can be
proved that none are saved without it, and that all are saved that have it.)
Considering also what is Positively affirmed in the 39 Articles; as in the 6th
Article, That whatsoever is not Read in the Holy Scriptures, nor may be proved
thereby, is not to be required of any Man, That it should be believed as an
Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. And in
the 20th Article, That the Church ought not to Decree or Enforce any thing
against or besides Holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of Salvation. And in
Article 21. That things ordained by General Councils as necessary to Salvation,
have neither strength nor authority, unless that they be taken out of Holy
Scripture.

Quest. Do you believe or own the Lords Supper, either as a sign of the Love
that Christians ought to have among themselves, or as a Seal of the Saints
Communion and Commemoration of Christ's Death for us, or as Figurative of
Christ's Body and Blood spiritually received by Faith.

Answ The Supper of the Lord we own, and renderly consider in a twofold sense,
1. In the Figure, 2. In the Substance. 1st. That our Lord Jesus Christ, at His
Supper with His Disciples, did eat the Passover (which was for the fulfilling
and consummation of the Feasts under the Law;) see Luke 22. And at this Supper
He did take and Minister Bread and the Cup to his Disciples (for there was no
Transubstantiation) saying. This do in remembrance of me; and said the Apostle,
As often as ye shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye show the Lords Death
till he come. 1 Cor. 11. After this they did more clearly know His coming, and
Christ after the Spirit; Jesus Christ in them, 2 Cor, 13.5. and 5.16. 2d And
Christ said to his Disciples, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the
Vine until that day I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Mat. 26.29.
And likewise of the Bread, I will not any more eat thereof, until it be
fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke 22.16. And he further said, I appoint
unto you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed to me, that ye may Eat and Drink
at my Table in my Kingdom, etc. Luke 22.29, 30. In these things we believe he
spoke mysteriously, and that every Member of his Spiritual Church, does daily
spiritually partake of his Body and Blood by Faith, as the Cup of Blessing
which we Bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread
which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? for we being
many are One Bread, and One Body, for we are all partakers of that ONE Bread, 1
Cor. 10.15, 16, 17. The Son of God says, Behold I stand at the Door and knock,
if any man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him, and will SUP
with him, and he with me, Rev. 3.20. And Wisdom calls to the simple, Come Eat
of my Bread, and Drink of my Wine, Prove. 9.4, 5. And says Christ, The Bread of
God is he that comes down from Heaven, and gives Life unto the World. I am
that Bread of Life; my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. He
that Eats my Flesh, and Drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him, John
6. We believe that all who thus do truly partake of Christ by Faith, are in
true Communion and Love among themselves, which they do want who are only in
the outward Observation of Sign and Shadows.

Quest. Do you own the Seals of the New Covenant?

Answ. Yes, as the New Covenant i^ Spiritual, so are the Seals thereof (a^ they
may be termed) proper to it, and therefore we believe they stand not in any
external Shadow, Sign or Figure, bu^ in spirit and substance, the Seals of the
New Covenant (which is inward and spiritual) must needs be the Evidence*
Testimony, and work of the Holy Spirit giving us assurance through Faith of our
share and interest in that Covenant. Se^ what the Holy Scripture says in this
case; see 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed us, and has given us the earnest
of the spirit in our Hearts. Ephesians. 1.13. After that ye believed ye were sealed
with the ^oly spirit of Promise. And Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy
spirit of God where^y ye are sealed unto the day of Redemp^ion.

Our Christian sense and belief in these Matters may be briefly summed up in
that follows, viz.

1. We believe, That the spiritual ap^earance, and living enjoyment of Christ
(...) spirit, is above all outward signs, sha^ows, or figures, or a Remembrance
on^y of him thereby. And that Christ more ^learly discovers himself by his
Spirit in ^he New Covenant, than by any outward Representations in the Old, or
thereunto ^ppertaining. 2. That the One Baptism of the Spirit ^s a Seal or
Confirmation of the New Covenant to true Believers, and of them ^n it; and so
is their spiritual Eating and Drinking with Him in his Kingdom a certain
Assurance, Seal or Evidence o^ their Spiritual Communion with him, and in him.
3. As all outward shadows and figure were of a decreasing nature, so there
(...) the substance thereof, which they poin^ed at, and wherein they ended,
thoug^ the names given to the shadows were carried along to the substance also,
tha^ it might the more plainly appear in Scripture how the shadows were
fulfilled i^ the substance Christ; as in the Old Covenant there was outward
Circumcision of the Flesh; in the New, there is the inward Circumcision of the
Spirit. I^ the Old, there was diverse Washings o^ Baptisms, Heb. 9.10. In the
New. the One Baptism of Christ; in the Old, the Feast of the outward Passover
kept with Unleavened Bread, and other Feasts observed, etc. in the New
Covenant, Jesus Christ is our Passover, and the Feast is to be kept with
Unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth; and here the One Bread of Life is
known and received. 4. We do not read nor find in Scripture, that One outward
Type or Sha^ow, was a Type of another Type outward, but always of the thing
Typified ^r Shadowed forth, which was the sub^tance and end of that Shadow or
Type, ^s may be shown at large, if any under^ake to show us any shadow or thing
that ^s figurative in its own nature (mention^d in Scripture) which they
suppose we cannot show the substance of, under the ^ame Name or Title.
Quest. Do you believe and own the Ho^^ Scriptures, contained in the Books of
the Old and New Testament, to be given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain
all Mat^ers of Doctrine and Testimony, etc. necessary to be believed and
practiced in order ^o Salvation, and Peace with God?

Answ. Yes, we do, and by the assis^ance of the Grace and good Spirit of God,
which gives the true understan^ing of the mind of God, and meaning Holy
Scripture, we always desire to li^^ in the Faith, Knowledge and Practice them
in all things appertaining to Li^^ and Godliness, Holy Scripture being gi^en by
Divine Inspiration, is profitable (...) Doctrine, Correction, and Instruction,
the the Man of God may be perfect, th^rowly furnished unto every good Wo^^ able
to make the Man of God wise u^^^ salvation, through Faith in Christ Jes^^

Writ in behalf of the People of God c^^led QUAKERS, by some of them.


