THE EXPERIENCES OF God's Gracious Dealing WITH Mrs. Elizabeth White, Late Wife
of Mr. Thomas White of Coldecot in the County of Bucks. As they were written
under her own hand, and found in her Closet after her decease, she dying in
Childbed, December. 5. 1669.

PSALM. 66.16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my Soul. GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, One of His Majesty's
Printers, Anno Dom. School.

The Experiences of Gods Gracious dealing with Mrs. Elizabeth White.
FRom my Childhood the Lord has inclined my heart to seek after the best
things, and my Fathers chiefest care was, to bring me up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord: my nature being somewhat more mild than the rest of my
Sisters, I was ready to think my self some body, and with the proud Pharisee,
to thank God that I was not as others, not considering that I was but like a
Wolf chained up, which keeps its nature still, as I by the goodness of God have
seen, since the Lord was pleased to lay his eyesalve upon me. I was a great
lover of Histories, and other foolish Books, and did often spend my
sleeping-time in reading of them, and sometimes I should think I did not do
well in so doing, but I was so bewitched by them, that I could not forbear; and
hearing of a friend of mine, which was esteemed a very holy woman, that did
delight in Histories, I then concluded it was no sin, and gave my self wholly
then to this kind of folly, when I had any spare time, for two or three years.
I had sometimes slight thoughts of Repentance, but was loath to set about it,
and so I should put the Lord off from time to time with delays, thinking still
I should find a fitter time then the present. I remember about a month before I
was married, my Father would have me receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and I was very willing to it until I considered what was requsite to be in
those which did partake thereof, and then I began to doubt that I had not those
things which were requisite wrought in me, as Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Repentance, etc. and then this Scripture came into my mind, He that doubts is
damned if he eat, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin: when I had considered
those things I was filled with sorrow, and could not tell what to do, I was
loath to disobey my Father, and more loath to eat and drink my own damnation; in
this perplexity I set my self to seek the Lord for his grace, being at that
time somewhat sensible of the want of it; when I had thus done, I began to be
comforted, verily thinking, that now I had repented, and could believe in
Christ Jesus: and having some notional knowledge of things, I was indiffe^ently
well satisfied, thinking that when I wa^ married, I should have more leisure to
serv^ God; and then going to the Minister of the Par^sh, to be examined before
I was admitted and finding my self able to answer him, ^ thought all was well
with me then, and so unworthy I went to the Lords Table, not quest^oning but
that I was in as good a condition a^ any of the rest which did receive. But
blesse^ for ever be the Lord which broke my false confidence, and swept away my
refuge of Lies which I then trusted in, and showed me my sad condition I was in
by nature and practice, more clearly than ever before; and this was about a
quarter of a year after I was married, in the year, 1657. the Minister being
upon this subject, Prove. 1.23. Turn ye at my reproof, etc. being upon the use
of trial, whether indeed we had turned to God or no? he bid us examine our
selves by some marks which he then gave, and it was at this time that God did
begin to manifest his love to me, as I trust, in my effectual vocation; here
the Lord was pleased to open my heart, as he did the heart of Lydia, so that I
attended to the things that were spoken, so that I perceived my heart was not
right in the sight of God, and that my hope was but like that of the Hypocrite
which perishes; when I came home I besought the Lord to turn me if I were not
yet turned to him, but yet I had not that through sense of sin, as I had
afterward: About three weeks after, the Minister coming to our house, my
Husband and I was speaking that we would desire him to pray with us in our
Chamber, but that time he could not stay, the next day he came and asked for
me, telling me that my Husband told him that I would speak with him. O how was
I surprised* I could not tell what to say upon the sudden, I was so hurried in
my thoughts. O how loath was I to acquaint him with my sad state ^ I was ashamed
to tell him that I was yet a stranger to God and all goodness, till it was
forced from me, which when he heard he did not go about to comfort me, but he
asked me if ever I was convicted before? and I told him yes; and he repeated
the first verse. of the 29. Chap. of the Proverbs, He that being often reproved,
hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy: when I
heard this I was wonderfully troubled; then there came many sins to my
remembrance, which I had taken no notice of before, counting them small sins;
now the time which was spent in reading Histories I remembered with bitter
grief, and I thought that there was no mercy for me, but he persuaded me there
was hope of mercy for such as I, and that the Lord waited to be gracious to
poor sinners, and then I was a little satisfied for the present; but then I
was troubled with blasphemous thoughts, which were very grievous to me, I
thought I had a heart worse than the Devil, and wondered that I was not
consumed in some strange manner; when I have seen a Spider, which of all things
is most loathsome to me, I have been ready to wish my self such a one,
esteeming of it to be in a far happier condition than I was; I was afraid to be
in the dark lest I should met the devil; I doubted whether I was elected, I had
read, that I was not of him that wills, nor him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy: Then I thought if I were not elected, it was to no purpose to
strive, for what God has decreed must be, but yet I was unwilling to perish, I
could not be so satisfied, although I had but little hope to obtain mercy, yet
I could not but ask it, I was also very frequent in hearing the Word preached
and read, not daring to let slip an opportunity, but not without many tears,
lest it should increase my condemnation: in this condition I remained a great
while, but not without some secret supports from the Lord, sometimes by a word
cast in upon my spirit, sometimes I was refreshed I could not tell how, but I
should be ready to think this was a delusion; I remember the Scriptures were
these, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord that obeys the voice
of his Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. John 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but
I have chosen you and ordained you that ye should go and bring forth much
fruit, and that your fruit should remain, etc. Lam. 3.25. The Lord is good unto
the soul that waits for him, and to them that seek him; It is good that a man
should both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, etc. These
words did support me very much, therefore, I write them out and laid them in my
Closet, that they might still be in my eye, that I might when I looked upon
them be encouraged to hope in and wait upon the Lord; but these comforts were
but transient, but yet whiles they lasted they were very sweet supports, but
when gone I fell to doubting, thinking all was delusions, and thus I
dishonored God (...) my unbelief; I doubted much of my sincerity often saying
I was an hypocrite, but if at an^ time I was asked in what I was one, I could
not tell; but had this Scripture very often in my mind, There is a way which
seems right unto a man, but the end thereof is death: And so I thought I was
but seemingly right, and therefore must needs perish: and in this condition I
continued a long time, but I heard that a hypocrite seldom or never doubted
his condition* and that it was a sign of sincerity, to desire a sincere heart;
and this I durst not deny, knowing that I did desire it rather than the whole
world.

Thus being better satisfied, I resolved to se^ about my duty, but all this
while I did not see such a high price upon the Lord Jesus as I should, but
still I thought that I must do something to merit salvation, not daring to
venture my soul with all its concernments upon Christ, therefore I should tie
my self to pray six times a day, and then I should be satisfied, and thin^ all
was well with me then: but if I at any tim^ failed of my number, then I was
dis-satisfied and so in other duties; so that my comforts did not flow from the
blood and righteousness of Jesus, but from my own duties; but blessed be the
Lord, who likewise shook this foundation, even because he had a favor to me:
for being in discourse with a friend, he desired me to read Shephards sincere
Convert; which I did; and here did I see as in a glass my folly, for there were
signs given whereby I might try my self, whether I did rest in duties. One I
remember was this, If I never saw I rested in Duties, then it was a sure sign
that I then did; another was this, If I prized the bare performance of duties
so, as to think when I had prayed with some life, that I had done very well;
and again, If I saw but little of my vile heart by Duties, then it was a sign I
rested in them, and that I was yet in the way to Hell, though in the cleanliest
way, and should certainly perish if I rested here. Now this I plainly saw was
my condition, but how to get out of it I knew not, for now I was in a worse
condition than at the beginning, finding it abundantly more hard to deny
righteous self than sinful self: I thought it wonderful strange, that I must be
saved by the righteousness of another, if ever I were saved; O this my proud
heart was unwilling to yield to, and yet I was very desirous of salvation: But
when the Lord had led me into my own heart, and showed me the vileness of that
more, and that if the Lord should leave me to my self, I should commit all kind
of sin, and that with greedines, such was the vileness of my nature, and that
if it were possible I should now live holily, yet I could not satisfy the
justice of God for what was past, therefore I resolved to cast my self upon
Christ Jesus that sure foundation, which God had laid and not man, and if I
perished, to perish here, but much opposition did I meet with from Satan and my
own heart, before I could really do it, I could seal to the truth of that
scripture, Ephesians. 1.19. That God did put forth his mighty power, when a soul was
made to believe: but yet I was not at quiet, but had many fears and doubts that
all was false, because I had been so often deceived, and now I began to ^ee
mine own vileness more than ever and ^ound my heart ran out to the Lord Jesus
in love, but doubted very much of his love to me, yet sometimes I should have
some persuasions of my interest in Christ, and that his love was toward me;
and whilst this persuasion lasted I should be very comfortable and be ready to
think I should never be moved, as David did: but when God hid his face, I was
troubled and fell to doubting all again, not having learned that heavenly skill
of living by Faith, but yet I did not wholly cast off my confidence, but had
some pin hole of hope in the worst condition. I remember the consideration of
this scripture, John 3.8. He that is born of God does not commit sin, filled me
with many fears knowing how apt I was to commit sin, notwithstanding my
striving against it: but a little while after I was satisfied, understanding
the place better, that it was not meant of sins of infirmity, but of making
sins ones trade, etc. and this was I confident I did not, but rather trembled
at the thoughts of it; but when this was over, Satan and my own unbelieving
heart will still be presenting something whereby to occasion doubts, so that
for the space of one year and a half, I had scarcely any settled peace, now and
then a good word thrown in which would revive me for the present, but the
comfort would be soon gone, as Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give, and a new
spirit will I put in you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your
flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh, and will put my spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes, etc. This Promise I should often plead
with God very sensibly and with much confidence: another was John 11.25. I am
the resurrection and the life, he that believes on me, though he were dead yet
should he live: And whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die. This
I remember was very sweet to me; once when I was in great fear lest my heart
should grow dead, and when I was with Child I was much dejected, having a sense
of my approaching danger, and wanting an assurance of my everlasting happiness;
but whilst I was considering of these things, I had this Scripture set home
with abundance of sweetness, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, and in the time of my
extremity this word was set home upon my heart again, and my good God made me
to experience the truth of it in a wonderful manner, for I had speedy
deliverance beyond my expectation, which filled my heart and mouth with praises
to the Lord; about three days after a friend coming to visit me, I related to
her how good the Lord had been unto me, and how sweetly my heart was
established, but no sooner was my friend gone, but I was tempted to think my
faith was false, but I labored what I could to encourage my self in the Lord my
God.

But as I lay in my bed, I thought I saw three men before me, and it was
presently suggested to me that these were the three persons in the Trinity; O
then I was very much troubled, but I knew I was under a temptation, and
therefore cried to the Lord for help, but was not p^esently delivered from it;
but I had this Scripture brought to my mind, No man shall see my face and live,
Exodus 33.20. But not being yet freed, I began to consider what I had heard and
read as means to help against such temptations, at last I remembered, that Mr.
Bolton in his Book of instructions for the right comforting of afflicted
consciences, gave this direction, after the party had prayed for help against
the Tempter, and done what they could in repelling him by the Word of God, that
if they were yet followed by Satan, that then they should set about some honest
employment; but now I was in Bed, and knew not what to set about for the
present, at last I resolved to try to suckle my Child, which I did, and then
lay down again, and found that I was pretty well freed from that temptation,
and finding my self much distempered in my head I desired the Lord to give me
rest, and went about to compose my self to sleep; but as I lay I thought Satan
stood before me, asking where I could find a promise for sleep, at present I
could not think of any, but after some study this was brought into my mind, The
Lord will give his beloved sleep; this word comforted me, but yet I could not
all that night get any sleep, but still thought I saw Satan laughing at me,
because I had no sleep, and yet trusted in his word; thus all the night I
continued weak in body and comfortless in mind, so that in the morning I
expected nothing but death, then beginning to think more seriously of my
change, Satan as I then thought asked me where was my assurance of my
everlasting happiness; at this I was very much troubled, knowing I had not full
assurance, but yet some good hope through the goodness of God I had, therefore
my heart made answer, it is true I have no assurance, but I have cast my self
wholly upon the Lord Christ, and in him only is my hope, and here will I rest,
and if I perish I perish, but sure I am such shall not perish, for Christ has
promised them eternal life. Thus being assisted by the Lord, I vanquished Satan
for that time: and being thus at peace, I quickly fell asleep, and dreamed
there was a Ladder set upon the earth, whose top reached to heaven, and I
thought I was to go up yt Ladder into heaven, and that as fast as I got up I
was pulled down again, which caused me to shed abundance of tears fearing that
I should never get up, and I thought something from above drew me by the arms,
but I could not see what, but at last I thought I was in heaven where all tears
were wiped from mine eyes, and I was filled with rejoicing, but when I had been
there a little while, I thought I was to go back again to the earth, and this
very much troubled me: but then I thought I heard a voice saying, it would be
but for a little while, and that I should die in Childbed, and that the night
before I dyed I should have full assurance; this very much rejoiced me, (and I
was very desirous to know of what child I should dye, but that was denied me,
upon this account, because I should be always prepared, but when I did awake I
was filled with unexpressible joy, earnestly longing to be dissolved and to be
with Christ which was best of all, and yet willing if the Lord pleased to
suffer any thing which might be inflicted on me. Then I remembered how Satan,
when I was about to turn to God, would present the sufferings of Gods people to
me, thinking by that means to turn me back again, and how I should be
discouraged by them but being filled with the joys of Gods Spirit I thought I
could suffer any thing, not wondering, as I had done, how the Saints of old
could bear up so bravely under their sufferings. But after I began to amend, my
joys were not so full, as they had been, but I had a more settled peace than
formerly I had, blessed be the Lord; I had many various changes in my
spiritual state but once having a great sense of a hard heart, and being
desirous to have it molified, I was tempted to do some great evil, as the only
means to break me; and that it might be the readier entertained, Satan put it
into my heart to consider the condition of Nathaniel Butler, whose heart was
unbroken till the commission of that horrid sin of murder, and then this great
evil brought him to a sight and sense of all sin* this temptation was very
strong upon me, but yet stronger was he that was with me, than he that was
against me; for at that very instant did the Lord cast into my heart that happy
word, Romans 8.3. Let us do evil that good may come, whose damnation is just.
This word proved a happy means to repel the temptation; but yet this mercy I
had forgot, till the Lord revived it upon my heart, almost two years after as I
was reading the Chapter.

And since my Child was weaned, I was in such a state of deadness and darkness,
that I thought if I was ever raised out of it I should never question my
condition again; I was tempted to think that the Scripture was not the word of
God? I had let out my affection in a wonderful measure to my Child, and yet my
Lord forsook me not, but dispelled my darkness, and filled me with rejoicing; O
What shall I render to him? After this I grew into another damp, and was raised
again, and I trust the Lord will keep me notwithstanding all the mist which
shall be raised in my heart by sin and Satan, even by his power through faith
unto Salvation. These Scriptures revived me (...) several times; when I was in
heaviness for want of the presence of God at the Ordinan^^ of the Lords Supper,
Prove. 8.34. Blessed ar^ they that watch daily at my gates, waiting a^ the posts
of my door, Mat. 20.15. Is it no^ lawful for me to do what I will with my ow^^
This cheeked me and made me willing to wa^ at that time; But this is my
comfort, God (...) unchangeable, who I trust will carry me through all the
difficulties I shall met with here below^ and I trust will ere long bring me to
the e^joyment of himself, where I shall be past si^ning and sorrowing. And as a
further test^mony of my interest in Christ, by the effects (...) my Faith, I
have these Evidences.

First, My love to God, which is greater the to any thing in the world besides,
and my G^ has left it upon record, that he loves them the love him, Prove.
8.17. I know my love is n^ so great as it should be; but I am sure n^ greatest
grief is, that I can love him no bette^ and in this case God will accept the
will (...) the deed.

Secondly, I know my love is sincere by the because I love the Children of God,
for as is, 1 John 5.1. Every one that loves hi^ that begot, loves him also
that is begotten (...) him: and by this I know that I love the children of God,
because I love God; so tha^ this is another evidence that I am passed from
death to life, even because I love the brethren, 1 John 3.14.

Thirdly, I can appeal to the Lord, who is the searcher of hearts, that the
breathings of my soul are chiefly after holiness, that I might be more like
unto the Lord Jesus, my desire is to serve God in all things, and to have a
real and hearty respect unto all Gods commandments, and I desire if it were
possible, that I might never sin more, but rather that I might behave my self
in all holy conversation, as one that has indeed and in truth experienced how
good and gracious the Lord is: I bless God I can truly say, that my hottest
conflicts are against those sins which are obvious only to the eye of God, even
my sinful thoughts, though they come not into action; O many a sad heart have I
had when I have considered the vileness of my thoughts, and yet have been
unblameable in my conversation, and this is still my daily sorrow, and
therefore I trust they shall never be my ruin, but that the Lord will shortly
re^oyce the heart of his poor servant, in giving me the victory over these and
all my other inbred corruptions, which have so often made a separation between
my dear Lord and my poor soul.

Fourthly, I find a great change in any heart as touching the Word of God, for
where heretofore like a wretch as I was, I esteemed a playbook before it, now,
blessed the Lord, I prize it before all other, and good reason have I for it,
for by it has the Lord quickened m^ and therefore as long as I live I will give
u^ my self to walk according to the rule of it, begin^ the spirit of God to
open the mystery of it to m^ that so I might not only have the Letter, b^ the
very mind of Christ.

Fifthly, I see nothing in my self that mak^ me more worthy of salvation than
another, know that I have deserved to lie in flames, (...) well as any that are
now in the place of tormen^ and that nothing but mercy has stepped betwe^ my
soul and everlasting burnings, and therefore I heartily wish, that I might
always admiring of this free grace of God in chus^^ me before the foundation of
the world was la^ so unworthy a creature as I am, to set his l^ upon me, and
let go so many thousands, t^ were more capable to bring Glory to his na^ than ^
am: O the height, and depth, a^ breadth, and length of this love of God in Ch^
Jesus, which has abounded to me a poor a^ unworthy creature ^ it is indeed
such a love passes knowledge, and therefore I can no^ sufficiently admire it,
whilst I am here in body, which makes me long to be dissolv^ that so I might
know it more clearly, and swallowed up in the eternal admiration of Amen.

And these are my principles which I tr^ I shall hold fast even to my death.
1. I believe that the Scriptures contained in the Old and New Testament are
the word of God written by the Prophets and holy men, as they were inspired by
God, to be ye rule of Faith and life to his people: I believe all that God in
his word wills me to believe, being persuaded by the spirit of God concerning
the truth of it; I believe that there is one only eternal God, who has his
Being from himself, and has given a Being to all his Creatures, both in heaven
and earth, and under the earth, and from eternity to eternity does whatsoever
he will: I believe that this eternal Godhead is distinguished into three
Persons, the Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeding
from them both, I believe that God created man in his own image, in
righteousness, and holiness giving him dominion over all the Creatures, and
likewise gave him liberty to continue in this happy condition if he would, but
he having liberty to stand or to fall in his own hands, quickly lost that
happiness which God had instated him in, by yiedling to the inticements of
Satan, so that breaking the commands of God he brought a curse upon himself,
and all his posterity, so that all mankind by nature are now in a miserable
condition, children of wrath, heirs of Hell, etc. And I do believe, that God
from all eternity knew what man would do when he had created him, so that
Adam's fall did but usher in, as it were, a greater blessedness: for I do
believe there has been an eternal Covenant between the Father and the Son, in
the electing some to life even before the foundation of the earth was said: so
that no sooner had man fallen, but God promised a Savior, even the Lord Jesus
Christ who in his divine nature is in all things equal with God the Father, and
that such was his exceeding love and pity to poor lost creatures that had
broken his commands, and said themselves liable to the Curse, that rather then
they should perish, he has laid aside the Robes of his glory, and took upon
him the nature of man, but without sin; and that he was conceived by the holy
Ghost, born of a Virgin, and while he was on earth was loaded with reproaches
and scorns, and did at last suffer upon the cross for the sins of his Elect,
where he bore the weight of Gods wrath in his Soul, by his heaviness in his
Agony, and satisfied the Justice of God in his body, which was crucified till
he dyed; and I believe that he was buried, and that the third day he rose again
from the dead, having conquered sin, death, and hell, for believers, and that
he was seen of his Disciples, and others, forty days after his Resurrection,
and in their sight did ascend into Heaven, with the same Body which was
Crucified upon the Cross, where he is set down at the right Hand of the Majesty
on High, and is become a glorious Mediator between GOD and Man, being anointed
of God to be an eternal King, Priest, and Prophet to the Saints, whose peace he
has purchased by the Blood of his Cross: and I believe that at the last and
great Day, the Lord Jesus, when all his Elect are gathered in, will rend the
Heavens and come down to judge the World in Righteousness, when all Nations
shall be gathered before him, even they that sleep in the dust of the earth
shall awake, some to everlasting Life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt: and I believe that those which are alive at the coming of the Lord,
shall be caught up into the Clouds together with those that were asleep in
Jesus, to meet the Lord in the Air, where they shall sit with Christ upon
Thrones to judge all the Hypocrites, and unbelievers, to eternal damnation both
of soul and body in Hell, where the worm dies not, and the fire never shall be
out; and the wicked being gone into everlasting punishment, I believe that the
Righteous shall enter into Life eternal, where they shall for ever be singing
of Praises, and Hallelujahs to Him who loved them, and washed them from their
sins in his own Blood.

These are my principles, and I trust the Lord will so fix me in them, that I
may never be tossed too and fro with any contrary winds of Doctrine, as too
many in these latter days are; nay I am even at this time persuaded by the
Lord, that I shall not be l^d away by the errors of the wicked, because the Lord
has not only rightly informed my judgment concerning these things, but has
also given me good Hope, through grace, that he is my Father, the Lord Jesus
having dyed for my sins, and risen again for my justification; and this is that
which brings comfort to my soul, and makes me to rejoice, though not seeing,
yet believing, even with joy unspeakable and full of glory; so I doubt not but
the Lord Jesus my dear Redeemer, will so support me by his grace, that
whatsoever my condition has been or shall be here in this little moment of
time, yet that I shall not fail of salvation through Christ in heaven for ever,
for in him only is my hope, and I will make mention of his righteousness; and
of his only, who is the Lord my righteousness; and therefore to him be all the
glory given now and for evermore, Amen.

This confession of my Faith and my Experiences was written in a time of sweet
peace: my reasons why I writ them were these 1. Because formerly when I had
enjoyed the sweet presence of God, and been for the time filled with rejoicing,
yet when God had withdrawn the light of his countenance from me, I presently
fell to questioning all the dealings of God with me, and so dishonored God by
my unbelief, so that now being under the sense of love, and being desirous for
the time to come to glorify God more in the great work of unbelieving, I write
down my Experiences, hoping they may be sweet supports to me in a time of
darkness.

2. My desire to treasure up the Experiences which I have had of Gods goodness
to me, was ^^other reason why I write them, knowing ^w apt I am to let slip out
of my remem^^ance that which is good.

3. I have been often called upon to see that ^y principles be right, and to
make sure my ^idences for heaven; and therefore that I may ^^stifie my
obedience to God and his Word, and that I might increase my joy in the Lord, ^y
believing more firmly what the Lord had ^one for my soul, I set about the work
of heart-^arching, to see what I could find in me that ^rought me within the
compass of everlasting ^^essedness; and some things I found, blessed be ^he
Lord, which I thought was worthy to be re^orded, which was hss own work in me
and for me, and therefore I write them down, and heartily desire that God may
have the Glory of his own grace: for I know that he only has wrought all my
works in me, for of my self I am not able to think a good thought, speak a good
word or do a good action. And I trust that the Lord will perfect that which
concerns me, and not forsake the work of his own hands, that so I may be to the
praise of the glory of his grace all the days of my life. Amen.

FINIS.

