To hi Grace His MAJESTY'S High Commissioner. and the Honorable Estates of
PARLIAMENT.
The Humble PETITION of JOHN WEIR OF NEWTON,
Shows,
THAT by a special Remit from the Second Session of this current Parliament, to
the Commission for Fines and Forfaultures, I having pursued John Hamilton of
Kilkerscleugh, to pay to me the Damnage and Expenses which I was put to, by the
malicious Information of the said John Hamilton against me, and wrongous
Imprisonment of me thereupon, in Anno 1683, for the alleged Crimes of Treason
therein contained: And this being considered by the Commission, They, by their
Interloquitor dated the 2 of February 1691 Years, Fand, That the said John
Hamilton had out of Malice threatened to pursue me to the Gallows; and that he
did wilfully Inform against me, when he was under no necessity to do the same:
And therefore fand him liable to refound to me so much of the Damnage and
Expenses libelled, as they should modify, I proving my Imprisonment for the
Crimes he informed against me, and giving my Oath in litem for the Expenses,
and assigned a Day, and allowed Diligence to me for that effect; and allowed
him to be heard upon this Defense: viz. That he offered to prove, That he was
forced to Depone against me, prior to the time deponed upon by my Witnesses:
Conform whereunto I adduced Witnesses before the said Commission, and gave my
Oath in litem upon the Expenses: And therefore the said Commission by their
last Interloquitor, dated the Tenth Day of February 1691 Years, Fand, That the
only Cause of my Imprisonment was, the Information given in by Gilkerscleugh
against me, and that I continued in Prison more than Two Years; and that they
were of opinion, That Kilkerscleugh ought to be decerned to pay to me, Three
Thousand and Five Hundred Merks Scots Money, for the Causes foresaid, with
Annualrent from the Date of the said Interloquitor. Which Action having since
lain over unprosecute, I, conform to an Act of this present Session of
Parliament, gave in a new Petition to the Committee of Parliament for Security
of the Kingdom, for a Warrant to Cite the said John Hamilton before the
Parliament, to the effect above-written: And accordingly, upon the 18 Day of
June 1695, They granted Warrant to Macers, or Messengers at Arms, to Cite, or
Intimate, to the said John Hamilton to appear before the Parliament, upon
Twenty Eight Hours, if within the Town of Edinburgh, and if forth thereof, upon
Ten Days: And upon the Twenty Day of the said Month of June, I caused James
Aikman Messenger, lawfully Summond the said John Hamilton personally, to appear
before the Parliament the First Day of July next to come, to the effect
above-written, as the said Petition, Warrant and Execution thereon, herewith
produced, will testify: And seeing that the said Cause has long depended, and is
not yet brought to a Conclusion, notwithstanding of the Justness thereof, and
the warrantable procedure therein, in manner above-represented.

May it therefore please Your Grace and honorable Estates of Parliament, to
take the Premises to Your most serious Consideration, and conform to the
Interloquitor of the said Commission of Parliament for Fines and Forfaultures,
to discern the said John Hamilton of Kilkerscleugh to make payment to me of the
Sum of Three Thousand and Five Hundred Merks, modified by them to me, with
Annualrent thereof since the said Tenth Day of February 1691, and in time
coming, during the not payment According to Justice.

And Your Petitioner shall ever Pray, etc.

