A BRIEF RELATION OF THE Just and Undeniable TITLE OF ALPHONSO THE SIXTH KING
of PORTVGAL, Now Reigning, 1661.

Warranted By the Fundamental LAWS of that NATION.

By Raph Whitfeld, Gent.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1661.

A brief Relation of the just Title of Alphonso, now King of Portugal.
IT is the opinion of many, that the Right and Title to the Crown of Portugal
resides in the Kings of Spain, an Error springing either from their not
knowing the Genealogies of those Princes, or from an apprehension that sixty
years possession by the Austrian Family could make a Title indubitable, which
was never warranted by right of blood, or by the Laws of Portugal. It is true,
Philip the Second, who seized upon that Kingdom, was the Son of a Portugal
Princess, but she had a Brother, whose issue yet remains, and from whom
descends the present King of Portugal, who being descended from a Brother, must
be preferred before the issue of the Sister, the Male being adjudged the better
by all the Laws of Christendom, though perhaps among the Amazons the Laws were
otherwise. But to make good this Title, I must run back to the beginning of the
Portugal Monarchy, and present you with some of their Fundamental Laws, whose
Authority can never be gainsaid.

In the Year 1139. Don Alphonso, General of the Portugal Army, then ready to
encounter with five Mohammedan Kings, commanding an Army of four hundred
thousand Moors, was unanimously saluted King, which Legion of Locusts by his
courage and conduct were put to flight, and easily became the first Trophies to
this conquering King. And now the angry storm of War blown over, the King
betakes himself to the Arts of Peace, to make good Laws, which was done by
assembling the three Estates in the City of Lamego, where were enacted many
Laws, which they justly account their Fundamentals, as unalterable as those of
the Medes and Persians, made Sacred by the observation of them both by Prince
and People, to the holy tie of which they both oblieg'd their Faith; these Laws
then are the ground on which we build, and from whence we shall easily justify
the undoubted Title of the now King of Portugal.

First, it was Enacted, that his Son, and Grandson, and so forward, should
reign after him in secula seculorum, but if the King have only Daughters, the
Eldest should be Queen after her Father, upon condition she be married to a
Native of Portugal, and that he be a Nobleman, who shall not take upon him the
name of a King, until he has a Son born, nor wear a Crown on his head, nor
take the right hand of his Wife.

But that which I insist on, is the last clause which I shall faithfully
transcribe.

Sit ista Lex in sempiternum, quod Prima Filia Regis accipiat maritum de
Portugale, ut non veniat regnum ad Extraneos; and si casaverit cum Principe
extraneo, non sit Regina: quia nunquam volumus nostrum Regnum ire de
Portugalensibus qui nos sua fortitudine Reges fecerunt, fine adjutorio alieno,
per suam fortitudinem and cum sanguine suo.

Let it be a Law for ever, that the Kings Eldest Daughter marry a Native of
Portugal, that so the Crown may never descend to Strangers; and in case she
should marry a Prince that is a Stranger, let her not be Queen: for we will
never have our Kingdom go out of the Race of the Portugals, who have made us
Kings by their own Valor, with out foreign assistance, by their own valor,
and with the effusion of their own blood.

This Law was put in execution after the death of Fernando the ninth King of
that Race; for Donna Beatrice his Daughter, being married to a foreign Prince,
was excluded, and King John the First was advanced to the Throne, from whom
descended Emmanuel the fourteenth King, who had six Sons and two Daughters.

1. Don John, afterward King, Father of John Prince of Portugal, Father of
Sebastian, King of Portugal, slain in Africa, 1578. without issue. 2 Son was
Don Lewis, who left no issue Legitimate. 3 Son Don Fernando, who died without
issue. 4 Son Don Alphonso Cardinal, Archbishop of Lisbon, and Abbot of
Alcobaza, never married. 5 Son Don Henry, Cardinal, and Archbishop of Braga,
afterward King. 6 Son Don Edward, who left two Daughters, the Eldest was Mary,
married out of the Kingdom to Alexander Duke of Parma; the Younger was
Katherine, married in Portugal to John Duke of Braganza, Grandfather of John
the Fourth, King of Portugal, Father of Alphonso now reigning.
Of King Emmanuels two Daughters, the Eldest was married to the Emperor
Charles the 5th. Father of Philip the Second, King of Spain, Grandfather of
Philip the Fourth, from whom it was regained by the Right Heir.

The youngest Daughter of Emmanuel King of Portugal was married to the Duke of
Savoy, Father of Philip Duke of Savoy.

After the death of King Sebastian, slain as aforesaid without Issue, the Crown
of Portugal sell to his gre^^ Uncle, Henry the Cardinal, at 67. years of age,
who sweyed the Scepter two years, and died unmarried: Now the Masculine Race of
Emmanuel being extinct, the Female, according to the Fundamental Laws of
Lamego, were to succeed.

There were several Pretenders, as Philip the Second of Spain, whose Mother was
daughter to Emmanuel, and the Duke of Savoy, descended from the youngest
Daughter of Emmanuel, and both of them could but pretend a Title, for they had
no Right.

The True and Undoubted Right rested in the Children of Don Edward, one of the
Sons of Emmanuel as aforesaid, and Brother to the King of Spains Mother, and
the Duke of Parma's the forementioned Pretenders. He left, as we said, two
Daughters, Mary, the Eldest, married to the Duke of Parma; and Katherine, the
Youngest, to the Duke of Braganza, Rainuccio Prince of Parma, though the Son of
the Eldest Daughter of Prince Edward, could not succeed, because his Mother was
married out of Portugal, for the Fundamental Laws, which were those of Lamego,
as upon the Failer of the Male Line, they made the Female capable of
Succession, did it with this restriction, that they should be married within
Portugal, if they married any Foreign Prince, they should have no Right in the
Succession, which was barred by this Match of Princess Mary with the Duke of
Parma, an Italian, and it was great reason that this Law, which was twin-born
with the Monarchy of Portugal, should be justly observed, and was so, after the
death of Don Fernando, the 9th. King, whose Daughter was excluded the
Succession, by virtue of this Law of Lamego, which both Prince and People were
sworn to observe; nor can any think it hard measure to the Dukes of Parma, to
be excluded the Succession to the Crown, being descended of Prince Edwards
Eldest Daughter, and that the Duke of Braganza, descended of the Younger
Daughter, who married with a Native of Portugal, should have the undoubted
Right: For had it not been for that Law, which excludes the Daughter of
Portugal, i^ married to a stranger, Emmanuel (the Father of Prince Edward, from
whom the Duke of Parma claims) had never been King, but it had gone with the
Daughter of Fernando the 9th. King of Portugal, justly excluded by their Laws,
for marrying with a Forreigner; and the posterity of the Eldest Daughter cannot
quarrel with this Clause in the Law of Lamego, seeing it was that very Clause,
and that alone, that brought the Sovereignty to the Line of Emmanuel, from whom
the Prince of Parma descends. Katherine the Youngest Daughter of Prince Edward,
married to the Duke of Braganza, a Native of Portugal, could only lay a just
claim to the Crown. But Philip the Second, of Spain, though he could not
pretend so far as the Duke of Parma, as being descended from a Daughter, whose
Brothers Heirs must in all reason be preferred before hers, yet to acquire a
Kingdom, which might join the whole Continent of Spain together in one hand, he
dis-inherits all Right, and by his Martial Favorite the Duke of Alva, invades
Portugal with an Army, marching directly toward Lisbon, where wisely striking
at the Head, he brought a whole Kingdom on their Knees, and receives a Crown,
adorned with the richest Jewels of the East, (that Nation having many rich
Factories there) which happened in the Year, 1580. Being thus possessed, he left it
to his Son Philip 3d and he to Philip 4th till the Year 1640. When on a sudden,
not only Portugal, but the Islands and Territories thereunto belonging ( Ceuta
in Barbary excepted) fell from the Spaniard like a Dream, and awakened its old
Glory and Freedom, in the Person of the Duke of Braganza (Grandson of that Duke
of Braganza that married Katherine, Daughter of Prince Edward, Son of Emmanuel,
King of Portugal) then presently proclaimed by the Name of John the 4th. King
of Portugal, and so owned by all Princes, whom the Austrian Greatness did not
overawe; who dying, left his Crown descending by a Just and Undoubted Title to
Alphonso the Sixth, now King of Portugal.

FINIS.

