A SOBER REPLY TO Mr Robert Steed's EPISTLE Concerning SINGING.

WHEREIN All his Objections against that Way he calls the Common and Popular
Way of Singing Psalms, etc. are Impartially Examined, and in the Spirit of
Meekness, fully Answered.

Recommended to the consideration of all the Saints and Churches of Christ, by
diverse Elders and Ministers of Baptized Congregations.

Who desire their Brethren who are against such Singing, without prejudice to
read these Lines, and consider them.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1691.

To all the Saints and Churches of Christ, who are not Convinced that it is
their Duty to Sing the Praises of God.
Beloved Brethren,
IT is matter of great Grief and Trouble to us, to see any of our People, much
more so many, lying short (for want of Light) of this great Christian Duty of
Singing Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs; which, as the Churches are enjoined
in the New Testament to do, so we find it was always practiced by the Lords
People generally in their public Assemblies, in Gods Worship, both in Time of
the Law and Gospel: But more especially to find some amongst us so resolute in
Opposing of it, and others to make Divisions upon the Practice thereof, and yet
find so little Argument against it. Mr. Steed (as it seems to us) has not so
fairly stated the Question as he should, which ought to have been this: Viz.
Whether Singing the Praises of God by the whole Church in their public
Assemblies, be a Gospel Duty, or not? However, we have read and considered this
ensuing Answer to his Epistle, and finding it so fully and soberly done, think
it necessary to recommend it to all your Considerations, hoping it may tend to
enlighten many of your Souls who as yet have doubts about it, which that it
may, we shall commit it to the Blessing of the great God, and remain

Yours in the Work of the Gospel, Joseph Masters, William Collins, Richard
Adams, James Jones, Hercules Collins, J. Warner, Richard Mariot, Abednego
Smith, Leonard Harrison, Benjamin Dennis, Joseph Wright, Benjamin Keach, Jo.
Hammond, William Groom, R. Allen, Samuel Bagwell, John Christopher.


To the Elders, Minisiters and Members of the Baptized Churches, throughout
England and Wales.
Beloved in our Lord,
THat common Proverb used amongst us, viz. That Custom is a second Nature, we
find true in things Natural and Religious: Old Customs, tho never so bad, are
hardly left, Jer. 13.23. and long neglected Duties we come up slowly to. And
that which makes Reformation in any thing the more difficult, is that
Opposition it usually meets with, many times, from those, whose Duty and Office
does in a special manner Oblige them to restore every Trdth of God that is
fallen in our Streets. And such has been our case, (tho much to be lamented)
that when it pleased God to open the Eyes of many amongst us into that holy
Ordinance of Singing his Praise both in Private and Public, and from the clear
Evidence of his Word, made us sensible that this part of Divine Worship, so
frequently commanded and commended in Holy Writ, both to Jews and Gentiles, is
as Ancient as the World, and will continue when Time shall be swallowed up in
Eternity. We had then no Mind to have published our thoughts to the World, nor
to have troubled the Churches with any Dissertations about it. But endeavored
to have a Friendly Debate with our Brethren, who were convened to consult the
Churches Welfare: But our Endeavors theretn being obstructed by the Opposers
of this Truth; Soon after some of them, from an imprudent Zeal to maintain
their own mistaken Sentiments, openly opposed this holy Truth of God, and took
unto themselves a kind of lawless Liberty, not only to calumniate those who
endeavored the restoration of this Ordinance, but also to Reproach the Truth
of God in this particular, by calling it Will Worship, Formal, Carnal,
Invented, etc. which put us upon a necessity (unless we would betray the Truth
of Christ by a sinful silence) to discover their great Mistakes and
unaccountable Absurdities and Prevarications herein, to all that desire to wait
upon God in the way of Holiness, and to remove the Stumbling Blocks that busy
men have endeavored to trouble those Churches with, who desire to live in
peace. This has occasioned the publishing of this little Treatise now in thine
hand, which is hereby recommended to thy diligent and candid perusal; and
whoever thou may be that read, I have only these few things to desire of
thee: Make the Word of GOD thy Rule in Judging, lay by all Prejudice, weigh
what thou find in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and do not judge before
thou have read what is said for this holy Ordinance. And remember, that every
Truth of God, has some Adversaries, and if thou will not receive Truth, until
its Adversaries have nothing to say, thou must receive no Truth at all, until
the Devil is bound, and all the Nations of the World undeceived. Wait at the
Throne of Grace, in a humble Spirit, for Light in this particular; if thou art
yet in the Dark concerning this holy Institution. And whether thou do own and
practice this Ordinance or not, see that thou put on Charity toward those that
are otherwise minded; and if you cannot all agree, to sing the Praises of God
together here on Earth, I am sure all the Children of God will harmonize in
this Work in Heaven. Now that the Lord might bless this little Treatise to thy
Establishment in the Truth of Singing Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, to his
own Glory, and thy Souls and others Comfort and Edification, is the Desire, and
shall be the Prayer of thine in the Lord,

Thomas Whinnel.

A Sober Reply to Mr. Robert Steed's Epistle.
SIR,
HAD you wrote private Letters to your own people about your sentiments
concerning singing the praises of God, to obstruct the restoration of that
blessed Gospel Ordinance, and not have published it to the World, we might have
seen no such Cause (as now we do) to answer your Epistle.

When we heard you were a writing, we expected it would have contained an
answer to what has lately been published in vindication thereof by Reverend
Mr. Knowles, Mr. Keach, Dr. Wright, Mr. Whinnel, etc. but we now see no such
thing attempted, but contrariwise only a heap of words, being little elfe than
the substance of what Mr. Marlow has troubled the World and Churches with. And
it seems as if the Sermon you formerly preached against this Holy Truth of
Christ, was the muddy Fountain from whence his lines proceeded; and that it was
you those worthy Persons in the dark contended with, which was hinted to some
of us some time since.

But truly Sir, this way of yours seems new as well as strange: Has any
controversible Truth met with such usage? you at once give up the cause
provided those weighty Treatises, so full of Scripture Arguments are not
answered; for all men may see all that you have said, fully answered before
your Epistle was printed: But you, it is like, foresaw some great Advantage by
your Essay, in that you find some of your People so hardened, and prejudiced
against Singing the Praises of God, that they will not be at the charge to buy
those Books, nor trouble themselves to read them, and you giving yours away, we
see we must do the like, if we would leave them without excuse here, and in the
great Day.

There is one thing that we cannot pass by without Lamentation, viz. in that
you were not satisfied to preach down in your Congregation what your Reverend
Brother Mr. Know^es, your Fellow Elder, who is (as we may say) the Father of
the Church, had preached up, but now writ-against him also; One would have
thought Modesty, and Respect to his great Age, Learning, and Sincerity, and to
prevent reproach, might have stopped your Pen, and unadvised attempt: Is it not
sad to see that one Elder in such a Cause and Spirit, shoald appear in print
against another? Are these things lovely, or of good report? could you have
found no other way to have put an end to the controversy amongst your own
People, since you pretend only to be concerned for the Members of your own
Congregation? There are some who also have too much conntenanced Divisions in
Churches upon the account of Singing the praises of God, we shall be glad if
you can clear your self in that matter: And the more inexcuseable they seem to
be, since to their Knowledge the Assembly of the Elders, Ministers and
Messengers of our Churches declared their utter dislike of any Breach or
Division in the Churches upon the account of the practice or non-practice of
Singing of Psalms, as it is now, and and has in every Age been performed; and
also gave Advice to the contrary: Moreover, your Epistle is dispersed abroad,
and many of them given away in diverse Churches in the City, and amongst others
in the Country.

But to proceed, tho your Epistle has nothing contained in it but what has
been effectually answered, yet we think it not convenient to let any thing come
out, designed to obstruct or hinder the practice of this great and Sacred Duty
without an Answer; we shall therefore examine each part and paragraph thereof,
and give you a Sober Reply, that so all stumbling blocks may be removed out of
the way of Gods People, and those Churches cleared from the charge of humane
Innovations, etc. who are in the practice of it.

First of all, For your great care for the Souls of your People no Body can
blame you: But in Page 1. to suggest that Satan may beguile them by their
adhering to this Ordinance of Singing Psalms in God's public Worship, shows
you are of a bitter Spirit, and very censorious. It was not Satan but Jesus
Christ, in your Reverend Brother, who strove to promote that Truth of his in
his own, and other Churches of the Saints; had you mentioned any other thing
you call an Error, which your Members, etc. were in danger to be beguiled with:
This should have been passed by. But to put us out of doubt what your meaning
is, you in page 3. seem to bewail those dear Churches Satan has hereby
beguiled already.

2. In the second place we will come to consider of the great Question which
you say is raised among the Baptized Churches, etc. Which is (say you) whether
the common way of Singing by a set and stinted Form, with a whole Congregation
every one together, without exception, lifting up their Voices, be an Ordinance
of our Lord Jesus, or whether it ought not to be exploded as an invention of
Men; being of the same quality, if not worse than common stinted set Forms of
Prayer. Tho you state not the question fairly, yet we

Reply. We are glad the proper question is raised among the Baptized Churches,
and the practice of it too in near thirty of them, diverse others also having to
the praise of God, and Joy of our Souls, lately received it, and have got, and
are endeavoring to get into the practice thereof. Nor will the hard Names you
give it hinder the general reception of it, unless you had any hard Arguments
to bring against it, which we see you have not found as yet, and we are sure
never will, for it is in vain to strive against the stream of Sacred Truth of
singing the praises of God too.

Common way of Singing, etc. It Is a good word if well intended: We read of
common Salvation, common Faith, etc. Our way of Preaching is never the worse
because it is the common way that other Churches have among them, and is used by
other Ministers, nor no more is our way of Singing. 2. It may be called common
because used before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel Dispensation,
in the Churches of Christ in the purest Times. 3. Let it also go for the common
way of Singing, as that which is owned and witnessed to by Gods Word, and his
faithful People in opposition to some unknown, unheard of and secret way
which you suggest, which no body understands: for singing of Psalms, You say,
is an Ordinance, it may be, nay, should be practiced in a Gospel Church, page
4. But how it ought to be done, no Body can understand by your Epistle, the
way you hint at is hidden; some mode or manner it is you would have, but it is a
secret not yet revealed; it is a hard case you should suggest, that a Gospel
Ordinance, enjoined on the Churches, should lie so dark and obscure in Christ's
New Testament, that no Body should be able to understand what the matter is
which should be sung, nor who the Persons are that should sing, and yet the
Holy Ghost calls them Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, [a set stinted Form.]

Reply. A set stinted Form, we affirm positively in the fear of God, is laid
down both in Col. 3.16. and Ephesians. 5.19. A Psalm cannot be a Psalm, nor a Hymn an
Hymn, nor a Spiritual Song a Song, without a set stinted Form, it cannot be
without so many distinct set or stinted words, Syllables and Lines.

You may as well say a Chapter is not a set stinted Form, as once to suggest
the Scripture-Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, which the Holy Ghost enjoins
the Churches to sing, are not set and stinted Forms; or to suppose because set
and stinted Forms, they are to be exploded as an invention of men: Pray Brother
how came Scripture, Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, which in the Original
are in Meter, to be the Inventions of carnal men? Had carnal men a hand in
compiling the Sacred Bible, and enjoining Gospel Precepts? and how came a set
stinted Form of Psalms, Hymns, etc. contained, and plainly laid down in Gods
Word, to be as bad or worse than a set and stinted Form of humane composed and
imposed Prayers; when humane inventions are as good as Divine and Sacred
Institutions, we will be of your mind, and then we will say you spoke Truth,
but not till then can we believe you, nor regard what you say on this account.
If there had been no Scripture, Psalms, etc. in being, nor known to the
Churches, when the Holy Ghost enjoined them to sing Psalms: Or if the ordinary
Gifts of the Spirit might not serve and enable us as well to put a Psalm or
Hymn in order to be sung, as a Doctrine in order to be preached: Then you might
say the Church was to wait for some extraordinary effusion of the Spirit, or
some miraculous Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, before they could perform
that Duty; nor could that Duty be performed longer than such gifts abode in the
Church: And if so, you had said something, but now we see you have said nothing
that has weight in it: but more of this anon. You say, With a whole
Congregation, every one together without exception, lifting up their Voices
together, [that is in singing.]

Reply. Must this way of Singing be exploded as an invention of men, God
forbid, for then Moses and the whole Congregation were guilty of an invention
of men, and Deborah, and Barak, David, and all Israel, and which is worse,
Christ and his Apostles, Paul and Silas; nay, and an invention of men is
enjoined on the Church; for they all are enjoined thus to be Sung together,
every one of them, not one excepted, take two or three Arguments further to
make it appear, the Churches were thus required to sing.

1. That way Christ and his Disciples sung, the Churches were to sing, because
Christ and his Disciples set the direct Pattern: But Christ and his Disciples
sung all together, as is fully proved in the late Treatises. Ergo.

2. If the Churches are enjoined to sing, and not one Member is exempted or
excepted, then they are all to sing, and to sing together according to the
Pattern given by Christ and his Disciples; but the Churches are enjoined to
sing, and not one Member exempted or excepted: Ergo, They all are to sing, and
to sing together according to the Pattern given by Christ and his Disciples,
Mat. 26:30 Mark 14.26.

3. If singing Gods Praises were under the Law with Voices lift up together,
and the Saints are in the New Testament required to sing, and no other way is
prescribed or laid down how they should sing.

Then the Saints in the New Testament ought to sing as they sang under the old.

But such was the Singing of Gods People under the Law, and the Churches are
enjoined to sing Psalms in the New Testament, and no other way prescribed or
laid down how they should sing, Ergo.

The Churches are now to sing in the times of the Gospel, as Gods People under
the Lqw.

But you say the former, that is, Singing with Voices together, was unanimously
concluded by the most part, if not all the Baptized Churches, to be
Will Worship.

1. Reply. Suppose it was so concluded to be by them then, might they not be
mistaken? Had they attained to a perfection of Knowledge in the whole Will of
God? or were those Churches appointed by the Lord to be our Pattern further
than they followed Christ and the Primitive Church?

2. We ask you whether or no generally the same Baptized Churches in those
times did not as unanimously conclude and declare it too, that for a Gospel
Minister to have a Yearly Allowance, or a competent Maintenance, was an humane
Invention and Antichristian? We speak in part upon our own Knowledge, and by
good Information we have had from others, that both those Gospel Duties and
Ordinances were equally decryed, and we suppose you are not Ignorant of it;
nay, and we hear some Churches, or members of those Churches are of the same
Opinion still. How now Dear Brother, are you for building what was destroyed;
if not, we are no more guilty in the one than you are in the other, and to our
grief, since it was so concluded then, we find it comes to be so hard a thing
to bring our Churches to embrace the one or the other as they ought.

3. What if through a hot, and an unaccountable Zeal, our Churches in the
beginning of the last Reformation did throw away some pure Gold with much
Antichristian dross, ought they not, now God has graciously been pleased to
open their Eyes, to labor to recover the Gold again, we mean both those great
Gospel Duties, viz. Singing of Scripture Psalms, and the Ministers maintenance.
Honored Brother, The path of the Just is as a shining light, that shines more
and more to the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. God does not discover all his whole
Mind and Will to his people at once, but some at one time, and some at another.

And blessed be God, there are some risen up, of whom Mr. Steed is one, who
affirms, That the Ministers of the Gospel ought to have a competent
maintenance, so that they may comfortably live of it, and some others are risen
up, who do not only affirm that, but also that the Churches ought to sing the
praises of God, and prove it too by undeniable Arguments, and in that common
way that was used by the Church of Israel under the Law, and by the Lord Jesus,
and his Church and Churches under the Times of the Gospel.

And as it is now commonly used in most Churches of Christ in our days, viz.
with Voices lifted up together, and hereby we do build what was wanting, and
restore an Ordinance too long neglected by some of the Churches of Christ.

Others contemn our way of preaching, and call it a common Artificial acquired
attainment, as you contemn and call our Singing: But how dare you so rashly
affirm, or intimate, That this way of Singing is brought into some Churches by
the guile and policy of Satan, and compare it with Common Prayer? have you an
infallible Spirit? Men may in some cases be bold in their assertions, when they
speak of some Truths that the whole Body of the Godly are established in: But
thus to speak against an Ordinance, which almost all the Faithful people of
God, and Churches now and in every Age, have received as an undoubted Truth of
Christ, is hard.

Especially considering how weak your Arguments seem to be, or how little you
have to say against it Sir, this way of singing of Scripture Psalms, is as
certainly an Ordinance of Christ, as Preaching, Prayer etc. are such, and so it
will appear one day, say you what you please, who affirm singing to be an
Ordinance in the Church, and yet sing not properly at all in any manner of way,
but wholly live in the neglect of this great Duty.

But you in Page 2. affirm, you are for singing: These are your words, viz. The
outcry is, you are against singing in the Church, if Persons in Judgment and
Conscience testify against common singing, as that which ought not to be used
in a Church of Christ, which, say you, is false, and as vile a Slander as the
former, for they are for singing, that is, for praising of God, or teaching one
another, or themselves in Psalms and Hymns, etc.

Reply. Brother, it is a hard case prejudice against an Ordinance should so
blind your Eyes, that with all your Learning, you should not know what singing
is, but conclude simple praising of God in Prayer, is singing: has not Mr.
Keach in the first Chapter of his Treatise clearly confuted this Conceit, to
which you make no reply: Singing is a distinct act of the Voice, and it is known
to all mankind how it differs from any other acts of the bodily Organs, as Mr.
Gosnal once told Mr. Kiffin in a discourse they had about it.

We say and testify you sing not, and do appeal to all men in the World,
whether praising God in Prayer is singing; tho you do praise God, yet we say
you do not sing his Praise, which the Churches are enjoined to do. Are you
willing to join issue in this one single point in a sober Dispute? If you can
prove you sing in any proper sense, (for it is not an improper or metaphorical
singing which the Holy Ghost enjoins on the Churches) we will give up the Cause
to you. But if that be not singing you speak of, you must acknowledge it is
true, what you are charged with, viz. That you are against singing in the
Church, and so wholly neglect it, through ignorance of what at is: And it
cannot be a false Calumny or Accusation that you are charged with, which you
intimate Page. 2. whilst you decry that way of singing which you call common,
since you are in the practice of no singing at all, neither of the whole Church,
nor of one single person.

2. Can any wise man be so ignorant as to conclude those Precepts, Ephesians. 5.19.
Col. 3.16. do mean a bare exhorting one another out of the Book of Psalms, and
not such an admonishing one another in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs, that
is in singing of them? That we are exhorted to sing Psalms, etc. no man who has
not lost his senses can deny; and if that singing was no more than praising God
in Prayer, then it would follow, in Prayer we exhort one another, and speak one
to another; and how absurd it is to affirm, that, we will leave to all men's
consideration.

Dear Brother, we have a great respect for you, and doubt not but God has
endowed you with good abilities to preach his Word; but this Exposition of
yours, of admonishing one another in Psalms, etc. singing and making melody in
our hearts to the Lord, must be wholly exploded as a great Error.

2. To proceed, if Gospel singing were nothing else than praising of God in
Prayer, etc. why do you speak of waiting for such Gifts from the Holy Spirit,
as may put you into a Capacity to perform it fully according to the primitive
Platform and Pattern? These words betray you, and may sufficiently inform every
man's judgment who shall read your Epistle, that you are conscious to your self
of the present want of the practice of this great Gospel Duty which you say
may, nay should be in a Church of Christ.

For if you sing when you praise God, and that answers the Mind of God in those
Gospel Precepts, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. what need you wait for such gifts to put
you into a capacity to perform it fully, according to the Primitive Platform
and Pattern? it appears that solemn giving of thanks or praising of God in
Prayer, is not singing according to the primitive Platform in your Conscience
and Confession: (certainly, to do duty, and not according to the Gospel
Pattern, is sinful;) but that the primitive way or manner of singing you are
waiting for; in which it seems you are turned Seeker: we dread the Effects of
your Notion, and that it may ensnare many gracious and well-meaning Christians.
May not they well say, Since we have not those special Gifts to perform one
Ordinance, and that we ought not to practice it until we have such Gifts which
were in the Primitive Church, we must peform or practice none until those
extraordinary Gifts do return, (which there is no ground to believe ever will:)
This is what the Seekers assert, and was we of your mind in the case of
Singing, we know we could not withstand the casting off all Ordinances, from
such a Supposition you suggest.

How inconsistent to Gospel simplicity does what you affirm seem to be, let all
men judge: One while you are for Singing, and intimate you are in the practice
of it too; and what singing is that? Why, you tell us, viz. It Is praising of
God, and if that be not Singing, then you are wholly without it.

But notwithstanding this Singing, you intimate you are waiting for such Gifts
as may put you into a Capacity to perform it fully according to the primitive
Platform and Pattern: So that it seems you do not sing as yet according to the
primitive Platform and Pattern, and if so, your singing cannot be allowed, nor
will it serve to discharge that Gospel Duty; because every thing in Gods
Worship that is accepted, ought to be done according to the primitive Pattern;
but if the one be Gospel Singing, there is no need of the other, and if the
latter which you wait for Gifts to perform at present, be the true primitive
way of Singing, certainly the other can be no singing at all: Because it
differs quite in the Nature of it from that which you intimate you are waiting
for Gifts to perform.

You call the common way an Invention, and render it as bad as offering strange
Fire, but you do not prove it is so. You mention Reverend Mr. Edward Harrison,
who you say was concerned; that such sort of Singing was to be avoided as
Will Worship: It Is strange if he looked upon it with such an evil Eye, he did
not leave a Testimony against it, as he did against Laying on of Hands upon
Baptized Believers as such.

But what do you mention Mr. Harrison for, as one on your side? May not we cite
Reverend Mr. Tomes, a man famous beyond most for the Baptized Way, who was for
this Way of Singing; and so was the Learned and pious Mr. Gosnall, and the late
pious, prudent, laborious, learned and faithful Mr. Jesse, and learned and
godly Vavasor Powel, and so is the Reverend, Pious Learned and Laborious Mr.
Hans. Knowls, and some hundreds of able Divines perhaps not inferior to any of
them. Comparisons are not pleasing, but why may not one faithful, pious and
learned Minister be regarded, and his Steps and Sentiments followed, as well as
another? All the Baptists were not against this way of Singing when first our
Churches were planted.

But let some worthy men say what they please, and call it Will Worship, we
matter it not, since we find this way of Singing was always used both under
the Old and New Testament: Tho Mr. Harrison and his Congregation would not sing
together, yet Mr. Harrisons great Master Jesus Christ and his Congregation, did
sing together, who is our Pattern, and not Mr. Edward Harrison, further than he
followed Christ.

But why will you not enter into the List of this Controversy? pray be not
unwilling to answer those Books lately published, or else dispute out this
point soberly, in a sweet cool Gospel Spirit? If you can convince us we are in
an Error, we shall retract it, and bless God for your care of our Souls, and
Churches, which you affirm are carried away with an invention of men, from our
Virgin simplicity: we shall now examine what you lay down in the fourth page of
your Epistle, which it seems is the heads of a Sermon you preached against
Singing, after Reverend Mr. Knowles had in the Morning preached it up as a
Gospel Ordinnace: sad case!

First, You say you shall show what Singing is, that may or should be practiced
in a Gospel Church.

Secondly, In what order or manner it ought to be managed according to Divine
Appointment.

Thirdly, How it appears that the Common Singing is not an Ordinance of Jesus
Christ.

Fourthly, Shall consider you say, some Scriptures that are alleged for this
common Singing in the New Testament.

Fifthly, Shall mention something concerning your waiting on the Lord for the
full reviving of it according to the primitive Pattern.

First then, (you say,) As to what that Singing is that may or should be
practiced in a Gospel Church, I shall thus briefly, say you, describe it, viz.
It is the solemn, joyful distinct expressing or sounding forth the high praise
of the great God, and his Son Jesus Christ, etc. according as the Holy Spirit
gives ability or utterance to an Elder, or gifted Brother, in a Church or
Assembly of the Saints, which is to be brought forth from a right frame, and to
be managed in an orderly manner, according to the direction given us in the
Holy Scripture of the New Testament, which is the only Rule for the discovery
of, and guiding us into the practice of Gospel Ordinances, whereunto it does
not appear, nor can it be proved that the common Artificial Rhimes, Measures or
Tunes are essential to it, I say they are not Essential to it, though not
unlawful.

I. Reply. We must needs say your method is well cut out, but ill made up.

For First, you leave us in the dark about what you believe singing is, tho you
say it is a distinct expressing or sounding forth the high praise of God, etc.
for you may yet mean as far as any Body can see, hereby only praising of God in
Prayer, unless you had added, it is a solemn distinct expressing or sounding
forth the high Praises of God, by a musical melodious modulation or tuning of
the Voice, which only distinguishes what singing is, from any other distinct
act of the bodily Organs, as it is always understood by all Mankind: it is well
however, you dare not say Rhimes, Measures or Tunes are unlawful. We will not
say as well as you, Rhyme is Essential to it: but if it be a Psalm, Hymn or
Song, and yet not Meter, or measured feet, we and all Mankind are generally
mistaken, for we know not how Prose differs from Meter any other ways; but if
there may be a melodious modulation of the Voice, or a proper singing without
Meter, we will not contend about that; and if you can sing that way, pray use
your liberty; but since Rhyme, measures and Tunes are not unlawful, (as you
positively affirm they are not) you ought to leave us to our liberty, and not
condemn that as an invention of men, or an Error, which we perceive you dare
not do, because you know in the Original the Book of Psalms, part of Job,
Hannah's and Deborah's Songs, Prove. Eccles. and Song of Solomon, the Song of
Isaiah, the Lamentations and Habbukkuk, etc. are in Meter.

2. But why may we not sing with measured feet? etc.

1. Your first reason is, Because you say thtre is no Rule in the New Testament
enjoining them, nor any example for such a practice.

Answer. There is a Rule in the New Testament enjoining singing Psalms, Hymns
and Spiritual Songs: And from thence we thus reason, If the Church knows no
other singing of Psalms, Hymns, etc. but such a way, viz. in Meter, as was used
under the old Testament, then that way the Churches are to sing, but the former
is true.

2. If Psalms, Hymns, or Songs differ only from Prose, because they are in
Meter, and this too in the common understanding of all men, then the Psalm,
Hymn, or Song is or must be in Meter, or measured feet, etc. that is sung, or
else it is no Hymn or Song at all, but only in conceit and fancy.

Whereas, as you ask, whether a person cannot be merry in the Lord, express his
Joy in Praise and Thanksgiving with cheerful Voice, without such an Artificial
Composure before mentioned.

Answer. We do not deny but a person may be merry in the Lord, and express his
Joy in Praise and Thanksgiving with a cheerful Voice too, and yet not sing the
Praises of God; what tho we that way do and are to rejoice, yet ought we not to
leave the other undone, viz. to express our Joy when merry in the Lord by
singing, because we are enjoined by the Lord to sing and make melody; will you
teach and instruct the Almighty? What, says some, cannot we Worship God without
going into the water and be baptized, or remember Christ's Death without
breaking Bread, and drinking Wine. Take heed, dear Brother, singing the Praises
of God is enjoined on us, and on the Churches of Christ, it is not left to our
liberty, whether we will do it or not: And other praising of God with cheerful
voice must not exclude this way, nor can it without Sin in neglect of a holy
Duty. And Brother, you have no more reason to call it an artificial composure,
than so to call our composed Sermons. The Prophet had a very pleasant composed
voice in Preaching, so have some now, but must they be charged with an
artificial composure; who gave man that melodious tongue but God, and was it to
any other design think you than to sing forth his praise?

Secondly, You say, If those things (that is Meter, Verse and Tune) be
essential, then this Singing would be more a Natural Art, or rather an
Artificial acquired attainment than a Spiritual gift.

Answ. We answer, Natural Art, and Natural Gifts are from God, as Speech, or to
speak, is given to us by him: It Is moreover an Ordinance to read God's Word,
and an absolute Duty, and yet it cannot be attained without Art, and barely to
read is more an Artificial acquired attainment than a Spiritual; so is it
barely to sing, and to preach, pray, and hear too; but to read, to pray, to
preach, and to sing Spiritually, cannot be done without Spiritual gifts, for
without Grace in the Heart, none of those Natural, Moral and Artificial
acquired seize can be performed acceptably to God.

Thirdly, you say, Then the Melody would be as much in the Voice or Tune, as in
the Heart, contrary to Ephesians. 5.

Answ. The Melody ought to be in the Heart according to Ephesians. 5. and in the
Voice too, or else it could not be singing; it is not to be a melody without the
Voice, but if it be only in the Voice, and no Spiritual Melody in the Heart,
then it is, we grant, contrary to Ephesians. 5. Does not your supposed way of singing
with cheerful Voice, consist as well in the Voice as in the Heart.

The Psalmist tells us, when God brought back the Captivity of Sion, He filled
their mouths with laughter, and their Tongues with singing. Singing is only an
act of the Tongue or Voice, and so acknowledged by all Mankind.

Lastly you say, There be such Speeches recorded in Scripture, which are and
may be called Songs of praise, which we do not find were uttered with tuneable
Singing, but with an audible solemn cheerful Voice, as that which is called the
Song of Hannah, etc. and the blessed Virgin.

Answ. Why do you assert any such things? if they praised God in a Song, they
sung the praises of God; but they praised God in a Song, Ergo, they sung his
praise; this must be granted, unless you can prove any did praise God in a Song
without Singing.

2. If this be not so, the propriety of Speech, or acts of the bodily Organs
are confounded, and we left in the dark, and the common Understanding of all
Mankind deceived.

3. Tho it is not said they sung those Songs, yet their Singing of them is
directly employed, because they praised God and magnified him in Songs.

4. You know those Songs in the Original are in Meter: Were you not a Scholar,
we should not so much admire at your mistake; it was no proper Song they
praised God in, if it were not sung, and none dare say that those are
metaphorically called Songs.

5. But you must conclude they were Tropical and Metaphorical Songs, or else
believe they in a proper sense, according to the common Understanding of Man.
kind in general, did sing those Songs. To conclude with this Head, viz. What
Singing is? all men may perceive your Trumpet gives in this matter an uncertain
found, for one while you intimate it is praising of God in Prayer, another while
you suggest you wait for a special gift, to perform it according to the
Primitive platform.

And after all, do not say it is a musical melodious modulation, or tuning of
the Voice, tho but of one single person alone, which is the distinction of that
distinct act of the voice known to the common race of mankind.

So that when that Gift is attained you wait for, we know not what a sort of
Singing we shall have: But the Word of God has not left us thus in the dark
about what it is to sing.

1. All Learned Men affirm it is an act of the voice, which all men know how it
differs from any other act of the bodily Organs, as Prayer, common praises,
rejoicing, preaching, crying, shouting, etc. as it also clearly appears from
Exodus 32.17.

2. That it is clearly distinguished from the Duty of Prayer, as another
distinct act, by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 14.15. What is it then? I will pray
with the Spirit, and will pray with the understanding also, I will sing with
the Spirit, and will sing with the understanding also. Common praise is by all
confessed to be a part or branch of Prayer, and comprehended in prayer, and
therefore that is not singing; the same we have laid down by the Apostle, James
5.13.

3. In a word, it is we say again a musical melodious praising of God, which had
you affirmed, you had not left your people in the dark about it, as now you
have. But to proceed, we shall referr our Reader for his further satisfaction
concerning this to Mr. Keach's Book, Chap. 1. p. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. It Is
called the making a joyful noise to the Lord, Psalm. 81.1. and Psalm. 91.1. In
Rev. 19. it is said those that shall sing those Hallelujahs, shall make a noise
as of a great Thunder, which cannot be the voice of one single man.

Secondly, We shall come to examine that which in page 5. you call the order or
manner of Singing, which you say we are plainly directed unto, by what is
recorded in 1 Cor. 14. From 26th. Verse you say it is a gift of the Holy Spirit
bestowed on whom and when he pleases, for the Edification of the Church, and
that the Psalm was to be uttered or sung by him that had it singly.

Answ. That it was to be uttered or spoken forth by one singly, is granted, but
that it was sung by him alone singly, we deny; the reason you give for your
bold assertion follows in the said fifth page of your Epistle.

1. For, or because they were so to prophecy, viz. one by one, the same
direction being given you say, for expressing or singing of a Psalm, verse 31.

Answ. Brother, why did you not rehearse that 29, 30, 31. verses, for had you
so done, all who read your Epistle might see what you say is not true, there is
nothing expressed or spoken in verse 28, 29, 30, 31, about singing at all.

We will give the Reader the trouble to read the Verse which our Brother
affirms this assertion from, and let it be considered. This Text had need to be
plain for his purpose, because he cites no other place of Scripture for what he
says, but this one only, to prove that one single person should sing in the
Church alone; Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the others judge,
ver. 29. If any thing be revealed to another that fitteth by, let the first
hold his peace, ver. 30. For ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may
learn, and all may be comforted, ver. 31.

These are the verses from whence Mr. Steed affirms the Apostle gives
directions about singing one by one, as in the case of prophesying: But how
greatly he is mistaken, will appear.

1. For it is plain from hence, that the Apostle speaks only of prophesying or
preaching, and not of Singing: And evident it is, that but one single person at
once ought to preach, prophecy, or interpret the Scripture, and this direction
the Apostle gives about the exercise of those gifts, because the contrary is
confusion all the World knows.

But it is not confusion for two, three, or threescore to sing together, for if
it were, Moses and the whole Congregation, and Christ and his Disciples
performed a confused piece of Worship, which is Blasphemy to assert.

2. You say it is positively asserted by the Holy Spirit, that to do otherwise
is not order but confusion, which the All-wise God is not the Author of: ver.
33. From this Rule it is, say you, that our Prayers, our Doctrines and
Exhortations are uttered singly in the Churches.

And that we do not admit of those responses or repetitions with audible voice
of the multitude in Prayer, which are allowed of, and practiced in some
Protestant Assemblies, shall we admit of this Rule, to guide us in some Cases,
and deny it in others? etc.

1. Answ. The Apostle condemns that practice, as being confusion, which seemed
to be so by Unbelievers as well as Believers, and so by all men in general; and
such a practice, which if the Church allowed it, if Unbelievers come into their
Assemblies they would say, Are they not mad? And so indeed they might say,
should they see several together at one time a preaching, prophesying, or
interpreting the Scripture, or vocally praying together: But it was never
looked upon by Jews or Gentiles to be confusion for a great multitude to sing
together, for so the Lords People, viz. Israel of old sung, and so sung the
Heathen Nations to their Gods, therefore this of singing together could not be
intended.

2. Can any Man be so blind to think there was such a practice that was
confusion in Gods Worship under the Law, for you will not deny but the Levites
or the Priesthood then sung together in their courses, in which was typified,
some conclude, the whole Spiritual Priesthood under the Gospel, or the whole
Church singing together with Grace in their Hearts unto the Lord.

3. Since the Scripture you bring does not prove what you affirm, in the
Judgment of all wise Men generally, but is only your own Interpretation of it:
And since no Scripture is of a private Interpretation, We Exhort you in God's
Fear to prove this your Exposition of it by some other place or places of the
Holy Scripture, viz. Show, where ever any one Man singly alone did ever sing,
or was allowed so to do in God's ordinary Worship, either in the Church of the
Jews, or in the Gospel Church; which if you cannot do, your Interpretation is
utterly to be rejected. You know, Honored Brother, this is the same Argument
we use to Detect Men in other Cases, when they put their own private sense on
any Text, which they cannot prove from any other place of sacred Scripture.

Fourthly, Your fourth Reason for one single Persons singing, is taken from
Ver. 34. where the Apostle says, Let your Women keep silent in the Church, for
it is not permitted unto them to speak, but they are Commanded to be under
Obedience, as also says the Law.

Answ. About this we argue thus, viz. Since in your Judgment the Apostle had
excluded Men to sing together in the Church, and that they were not admitted to
sing, but only one singly alone, the Women were much more, you may conclude,
had that been his sense forbidden, and so no room left to subjoyn this
Prohibition.

2. But the Context and Scope of the Text opens what the Apostle intends, he is
a treating about Prophesying or Teaching doctrinally in the Church, and gives
liberty to all gifted Men so to do, provided they did it in order, viz. One by
One: But least the Women should conclude who had the Gift of Prophecy or
Teaching they might use that Gift, and take upon them to Teach or Exercise
Authority over the Men, the Apostle lays down this Prohibition, they must not
be permitted in a Ministerial way, to Preach or Teach in the Church in ordinary
Administration, but be in Obedience or Subjection, as says also the Law: So
that it appears it is no other Prohibition on Women than what was under the Law,
therefore extends not to prohibit them from singing, for they were suffered so
to do then; Miriam and Deborah sung in the Congregation, and it is left to their
Praise and Commendation; so that from what you say in the last place, p. 6. as
to this, viz. that all this is delivered with solemn awful Charge, etc.
signifies nothing to confute singing of a multitude together, though Preaching,
Prophecy, or Interpreting the Scriptures together in a disorderly and confused
manner, is here forbidden.

And that this is the absolute sense and meaning of the Apostle on this place,
we averr is confirmed by all the learned, best and most faithful-Expositors and
Annotators that ever wrote; we know none dissent, or are of your Opinion.

Thirdly, Say you, Thus briefly having declared what Singing is, and how a
Psalm or Spiritual Song, according to the Institution of our Lord Jesus ought
to be brought in the Church, it from hence plainly, you say, appears, what
manner of Singing is not his Ordinance:

Viz. That common Singing of a mixed multitude, etc. consisting of
Church Members; and hearers good and bad, Men, Women and Children, Professors
and Profane together.

Answ. You draw this Conclusion too soon; for there seems no one Argument
against such a singing yet, but you add then in the next place,

First, You say it was never so appointed for a standing Ordinance in the
Church of the Jews, where there were Instruments of Music and Singers
appointed, which are done away in Christ.

1 Reply. As to singing Praises to God with Voices together in a mixed
Congregation, that was a Duty performed by the Lords Israel before the Law was
given forth, Exodus 15.1, 2. and therefore though Music and Singing-men ceased
when Christ came, yet singing did not cease, because, as the Brethren have
proved, it is part of Moral and Natural Religion, and therefore a standing
Ordinance.

2. Because 'twas Practiced by Christ and his Disciples in a
Gospel-Congregation, with Voices together.

3. Because it is enjoined on the Gospel Church without any New Directions given
about it, or appropriating it to the Ministry only, or some one gifted Person,
who was to sing by immediate Inspiration, as you conceive.

Secondly, You say it is most evident that now in the Gospel Times there is no
such Institution of our Lord Jesus, etc.

Neither does it, you say, comport with his spiritual Dispensation, who has
appointed his Church-Ordinances to be administered by none but such who are
orderly added to the Church, and qualified by the Gifts of the Holy Spirit for
it, being solemnly allowed or orderly called to such an Holy Exercise.

1. Answ. There is an Institution now in these Gospel times to sing Psalms,
Hymns and Spiritual Songs, Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. and therefore it comports with
this Spiritual Dispensation; as touching singing in a mixed Congregation,
wherein the controversy lies, it seems you so sing as well as others, for if
you do not sing in a mixed Congregregation with professors and profane, you do
not sing in the Church at all. Brother, take heed least you condemn the thing
which you allow; do you sing or not in the Church? You intimate page 2. it is a
false Calumny or accusation to say you do not, pray then consider whether you
do not suffer others in prayer to sing with you in your sense, nay all that
will. Also you say, when one sings all may be said to sing, as in Prayer.

Obj. But may be you will say, they do not join their voices with yours.

Answ. Brother, is not their joining their Hearts in your singing as you call
it more in the sight of God, than a bare joining the voice; it is expressed Ephesians.
5. in the Heart as well as with the Voice. Pray consider this, and blame us no
more for pleading for singing in such a mixed multitude.

2. Are none but such who are orderly added to the Church, and qualified by the
Gifts of the Holy Spirit allowed to worship God with the Church? Then you are a
grievous Offender, for we are sure you never worship God in his Church in any
Gospel Ordinance save breaking of Bread, but all in your Assemblies are allowed
or suffered to worship God with you: Is not hearing God's Word and Prayer
spiritual Gospel Ordinances? in the last you think you sing too, and do not
your Congregation, when you perform these Duties, consist of Church Members
good and bad, Men, and Women, and Children, professors and profane together,
and are not these Ordinances of our Lord Jesus?

3. Why may we suffer others to pray and praise God with us, and not suffer
them to sing his praise with us?

4. You betray your Gospel Simplicity, we fear, by this Objection, since you do
not allow of proper singing by the Church alone: we should think you made a
more honest scruple in the case if you were for the Churches singing alone; but
you are against the Saints singing apart, as much as their singing with others.

5. Where have we a Rule to put the Hearers out of our Assemblies when we are
met to worship God? or to command them not to join their Hearts in Prayer with
us, or their Voices and Hearts in singing Psalms, etc? Sure if it had been
unlawful, we should have had some Directions in that matter.

6. We do not join with them in prayer, nor singing, tho they join with us; we
will not suffer them to bring forth a Psalm or a Doctrine that are not godly,
no more than to make them our mouth in prayer.

7. If they are enjoined to pray and praise God, and sing his praise too, tho
they cannot do it acceptably without holy habits, and the exercise of Faith,
then it can be no fault in us to suffer and permit them so to do: but the
former you cannot deny, therefore we cannot be faulty to permit them so to do.

8. Singing of Psalms is full of Admonition and Spiritual Instruction, and some
we can assure you have been wrought upon by their singing, such power it has
had upon their Souls; and shall we debarr them of such a precious Ordinance,
that God has blessed to the Conversion of some Sinners Souls.

In page 7. you say, This Common way of Singing is an invention suited to the
humane Constituiion of a National Church, where Believers and Unbelievers,
Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial are put together, etc.

1 Answ. If it be an Invention, pray who invented it, and in what Age of the
World was it done? certainly you must charge it upon Moses, because he was the
first we read of who put a mixed Congregation upon Singing the praises of God:
you forget your self we fear, our dear Brother, for you cannot deny but that
Congregation did so sing, yea, and a mixed Congregation it was also.

2. Tho in close Communion, in breaking of Bread, we are to separate our selves
from Unbelievers, and must have no fellowship with them; Yet a Gospel Church is
not to separate in time of other Gospel Duties and Ordinances from such, nor do
you call upon yours so to do; pray Brother change your thoughts, and do not
fight against the Truth, for you cannot stand before it, it is too strong to be
overcome by fancies and fictions of Men's Minds.

But in page 7. you are bold again to affirm, That Singing of composed Songs by
all the Members of a Church, both Men and Women lifting up their Voices
together, is not an Ordinance of our Lord Jesus: Your further Reasons follow.

First, You say, Because there is no such thing appointed by him, or recorded
so to be in the Holy Scripture of the New Testament.

1 Answ. The Churches are commanded by the Holy Ghost to sing Scripture-psalms,
Hymns and Spiritual Songs without exception: And this is recorded Ephesians. 5. Col.
3. We argue, that either the whole Church must sing all together, or else only
some of them, or one single person only.

But since they are all enjoined to sing, or the Duty is required of the whole
Church without exception, and not tied or limited to any person or persons in
particular, it follows, they are all to Sing, and so to Sing as the Lords
People sung under the Old Testament, and Christ and his Disciples, who sung
together; had it been limited to the Elder, or some gilted person, we may be
sure the Holy Ghost would have given directions in the case, or hinted at such
a thing.

Secondly, In the second place you hint, the whole Church, with every Member,
had Communion together according to the Primitive Pattern, and wherein they
continued, is expressly declared to be in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship,
breaking of Bread and Prayer, Acts 2.42. Here you say is not the least mention
of their singing together, which if it had been practiced in those times, as it
is now by many, would it not have bin expressed?

Reply. Brother, you confess Singing is an Ordinance that was practiced in the
primitive Church, tho as you conceive by one single person only: Now if so, how
comes it to pass this Argument of yours has any weight in it, since there is no
more mention of one single persons singing than of the whole Churches? this is
against any singing, and so against yours, as much as against that we contend
for.

2. Dear Brother, you forget that Singing of Psalms was part of the Apostles
Doctrine, and that they taught the Churches so to sing; we argue thus, If the
Apostle taught the whole Church to sing, then such a singing was part of their
Doctrine in which they continued: But the Apostles taught the whole Church to
sing, Ergo, that was part of their Doctrine, in which that Church continued.

Thirdly, You object against the whole Church to sing, because Women are
plainly forbidden to speak in the Church, that is, say you, to utter a
Doctrine, or a Psalm, etc.

Answ. We have showed your mistake in this; a Woman is only prohibited from
teaching or preaching in the Church, she must not exercise authority over the
Man. For to teach Authoritatively has that contained in it; they are not
forbidden to sing because under the Law they were (as we said before) permitted
so to do, and they are not denied any liberty in the Gospel Church, which they
had and might have under the Law in that case.

Fourthly, You argue against such singing, Because every Member of the Church,
you say, is not capable to be exercised in that common way of Singing, for some
have, you say, not a tuneable Voice, or natural Faculty of Singing, some may
not understand immediately that composed Song read to them, may not be in a
joyful frame, and so cannot sing all together with the Spirit, and
Understanding, as is required, 1 Cor. 14.15.

Answ. We do not believe any one Member is totally without a tuneable Voice, or
the faculty o^ Singing, tho some may not have it to that degree o^ acuteness as
some others, no more than they may in Prayer; yet such who cannot pray so
elequently, or acutely express themselves, ought to pray nevertheless as well
as they can, and so in Singing they may do it as well as they can.

2. They are all to join in Prayer in their Hearts with the Minister; but may
be some may not so clearly and immediately understand some of the expressions
their Ministers use, and so with the Spirit and Understanding cannot join in
Prayer in their Hearts, and so with you in your way of singing.

3. Such who cannot, may forbear either joining in such Expressions either with
you, or us; and such who are not in a joyful frame may forbear too; we do not
believe every one must sing always with the Church, or they sin: But tho they
may not be in a joyful frame, God nevertheless deserves his praises, and he is
in a very bad frame indeed that is out of a frame to laud and praise the Name
of God: the Apostle bids us rejoice evermore, and tho sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing in the Lord.

Fifthly, You say Singing is to be practiced as that it may be for teaching and
admonishing one another; therefore, Col. 3.16. some are to teach, and some to
be taught: are all Teachers and all Admonishers at one time, but none taught,
which is confusion?

1 Answ. By the way, this shows Singing is not part of Prayer, or praising of
God in Prayer; sure you do not use Prayer to teach or admonish one another.

2. The Psalm has the teaching and admonishing in it, and all in singing
Psalms may be said to teach, and yet all by the Psalm are taught and
admonished. And since God has commanded us to teach and admonish one another,
viz. In Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in our
Hearts to the Lord; how dare you contradict it, or oppose our so doing? It Is a
different way of teaching one another, than in the way of a Ministers
preaching, and yet it is no confusion; it is a teaching and admonishing one
another in singing of Psalms; and how all may be sai^ in so doing to teach, and
yet be taught, see Mr, Keaches Book, page 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 120.
Did not Moses and the whole Congregation of Israel sing together, Exodus 15.1?
and were they not all nevertheless by that Song admonished, etc. and was that
confusion?

You say, if a Preacher should teach the people, by uttering or speaking out a
sentence of his Sermon, and all his hearers should say it or sing it after him,
and so proceed, would this, say you, be reputed an orderly way for the
instruction and edification of the people? So that this Scripture which is so
frequently alleged to countenance common Singing, is a plain and evident
witness, say you, against it, etc.

1 Reply. How many sentences of a Sermon may be contained in one or more of
David's Psalms, which Psalm may be, and often times is sung after the Sermon is
ended, and yet the People may be sweetly, and in an orderly way instructed and
edified thereby? for did not Gods people of old thus sing in the words of
David, 2 Chronicles. 29.30? Dare you say that way which God has taught and
commanded his people to teach and admonish one another, may not be reputed an
orderly way for instruction and edification of them? evident it is he has
commanded them to teach and admonish one another in Psalms in singing, Col.
3.16.

2. We thus reason, Either the Apostle gives directions in those Scriptures,
Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. to Ministers to preach from, or out of Psalms, Hymns,
etc. or to them to pray and praise God in prayer, or else he enjoins them to be
found in some other Ordinance or Duty, distinct or quite different from either
of the other, namely, to sing Psalms, Hymns, etc.

1. Now he cannot intend Preaching, or Directions to Ministers, because he does
not say, Admonish one another from or out of Psalms, but in Psalms. Nor is
there any shadow of reason why the Apostle should give particular Directions to
Ministers to Preach out of the Psalms.

2. Because in the same breath, as we may say, he exhorts them to sing; so that
according to all wise and worthy Expositors, he means no other Teaching than
that which is in singing of Psalms, etc.

3. Because he does not direct his words to Ministers, but to the whole Church,
even to all that are to be filled with the Spirit, and to have the Word of
Christ to dwell richly in them, which is every Man and Woman's Duty; all that
were or are filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, or who have true Grace in
their Hearts, or have cause to rejoice in God, are required to sing Psalms.

2. It cannot intend Prayer, or Praising of God in Prayer, because thereby we
only speak to God, and not to Teach and Admonish one another. If we are no
where in Holy Scripture said in Prayer, or Praising of God in Prayer, to Teach
and Admonish one another, then such an Exposition is to be exploded as
erroneous; but in Prayer, etc. we are no where said to Teach or Admonish one
another:

Therefore it must intend some other Duty or Ordinance that is distinct or
different to both the former, Viz. That of Teaching and Admonishing one another
in Psalms, by singing of them together.

So that in opposition to what you say, these places so frequently alleged do
not only countenance that which you call common singing, but positively enjoins
it on the Churches.

Sixthly, This common way of Singing, you say, cannot be allowed in the Church,
because the Members cannot by lifting up their Voices sing together, but it
must be by some composed set stinted form of some ones making, which they must
have read to them, or they must read it themselves line after line, and so to
sing (say you) does not appear to be the Mind and Will of our Lord Jesus.

1 Reply. Are not the Psalms of David, and other Scripture Songs set and
stinted Forms? and because they are so, must they not be allowed in the Church?
God, it appears, does enjoin them, and therefore allows them though you will not.

2. But why must they be composed Forms of some ones making? has not the Holy
Ghost left us in the Holy Scripture, Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs? we
plead for no other Psalms but such that are of the Spirits composing, or
composed by the Spirit.

3. We see where your sore is, you are for Singing by Inspiritation, viz.
Psalms given immediately by some special Gift, and hence are against the whole
Churches Singing; because if you should have such a special Psalm to bring
forth, others you foresee cannot sing with you; but the same Psalm you must
read or pronounce to them, and so it would be a stinted Form to others as well
as Scripture-psalms are so. Brother, how could all the Congregation of Israel
Sing with Moses, if he did not, or some others, read or pronounce each line to
them?

4. But why do you say so to sing does not appear to be the Mind and Will of
God? you proceed, and say,

1. Because he never appointed or commanded that one person should write or
indite a Prayer or Song for another; nor did he promise a Blessing to them in
their so doing in his New Testament.

Reply. God has appointed and commanded his people to sing Psalms, Hymns or
Spiritual Songs, which are left on record in the Scripture as to the matter of
them; and he has as much appointed one person to set them in order to be sung,
as he has appointed or commanded any person to indite a Sermon to preach it.

2. In vain is all you speak, about writing or inditing prayers for another;
for God himself has made, appointed and given us a book of Psalms, but no such
Common Prayer Book: Had the Holy Ghost compiled a Form of Prayers, as he has a
Form of Psalms, and commanded us so to pray, as he has enjoined us so to sing,
must we have rejected them? Singing of Psalms is of Divine Authority, say you
what you please, if our Bible be of Divine Authority.

But Secondly, You say such singing does not appear to be the Will of God,
because the Lord has expressly declared, that this Religious Singing-ought to
proceed from the Word dwelling richly in them, Col. 3.16. And being filled with
the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. Now, say you, if they may or ought to sing by a set,
stinted, composed form that is before them, it is then but reading or hearing
of a Psalm or a Song read to them, and then they are sufficiently furnished for
this solemn work, tho they are never so empty of the Word of Truth, or
destitute of the Spirit, or indeed grossly ignorant, which is in downright terms
to contradict the Counsel and Command of the Sovereign Lord, etc.

1 Reply. It Is well you do acknowledge there is a religious singing: But
Brother, who of us plead for such a carnal empty sort of Singing as you speak
of? Do we in order to a Religlous Singing, say there needs no more but the
knowledge of the matter to be sung, viz. the Psalm to be read to us? we say all
that sing ought to sing with the Spirit, and with Grace in their Hearts: So
that here you beat the Air, for we detest such a Singing which you mention.

2. As touching the Word of Christ dwelling richly in us, to which you might
have added in all wisdom in those who sing Spiritually, it is absolutely
necessary: But pray remember, it is the Word of Christ we have upon record, it is
not some new inspired matter immediately given in, nor does singing require
more of that Soul-enriching, indwelling Word of Christ, than in Preaching,
Prayer, Meditation, etc. the Word of Christ ought to dwell in us richly in all
wisdom, as Dr. Wright shows, that so we may know when and how to pray, when and
what to preach, when and how to hear, when and how to read, when and how to
meditate, and when and how Spiritually to sing David's Psalms, or other
Scripture Hymns and Spiritual Songs. Many excellent Duties, as he shows p. 63.
may be spoiled in the observation of them; there may be a praying which is sin,
reading and not consider, hearing a favor of death, partaking of the Lords
Supper to Judgment, giving all to the poor, and profit nothing, and a singing
of Gods praises, and soon forget his works, or without Grace in the Heart, or
be ignorant of the Soul-enriching Word, and destitute of the Spirit: Therefore
as Singing, so all other Duties ought to be performed in the Spirit, and with
Understanding and Grace in the Heart to the Lord: and to a right singing of
Scripture-psalms, etc. it is needful the Word of Christ dwell in us richly in
all wisdom, not as touching the bringing forth of a Psalm, as to the matter of
it, so much as to a Spiritual singing of that Psalm with Grace, Wisdom, and
Divine Influences. Singing Psalms, says he, is to be reverently performed for
God's Glory and Honor, and not for the pleasing our selves: So that one must
suit his inward Thoughts to the matter; if it be of praise to God, our Hearts
must be elevated and cheerful; if in the Psalm or Hymn, Petitions be contained,
fervent; if threatening, great awe of God; if deliverance, raised hope; if
Judgment, fear; if Duty, holy purpose to obey; if Promises, to believe; if
Prophecy, expectation: Thus the Word in all wisdom should dwell in us, that so
we may know how to sing to the Glory of God, and our own Instruction, Comfort
and Consolation as in other Duties. Some have lately told you, that the Word of
Christ is to be in us richly, as well to help us to compile a Scripture Hymn,
as to compile a Scripture Sermon; but we conclude it ought to dwell in all
richly as in one, not so much (as we said before) to bring forth a Psalm, as to
a right Spiritual singing of Psalms, Hymns and Divine Songs. It Is a great
mistake to suppose the Spirit ought so to dwell richly in us, as immediately to
inspire us to bring forth a Psalm both Matter, Manner, and Tune in an
extraordinary sort.

1. Because we are exhorted to let it dwell in us richly, it is pressed upon the
Saints in general as their Duty, so to be filled with it; special Gifts were
only given to some, and not taught as a Duty to be attained by all, but as a
promise, given to some in particular, as the Spirit distributed to every man
that had them as he pleased.

2. Nor can it be proved the matter of the Psalm spoken of in 1 Cor. 14. was
immediateiy given when they were met together. But they had a Doctrine, had a
Psalm, etc. when first they came together, 1 Cor. 14.26. How is it brethren?
when you come together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, etc.
they were not to wait for them, but had them ready; so that the Church was not
at uncertainty about them, which might be a Psalm of David, we reading of no
other so called; and they might bring it forth in some extraordinary manner,
and may be in an unknown Tongue, which they were not permitted to do, unless
there was an Interpreter, that so others might join with him that had it: For
that word, When I pray, I will pray with the Spirit, and with the Understanding
also, does not mean only when he was alone, but when in the Church, that others
might pray with him; and so he would when he sung, Sing with the Spirit, and
with the understanding also; not only when alone, but also in the Church, that
others might sing with him. And since we never read of any one Man's singing
alone in any Church-Assembly, we do affirm, such a practice would be a mere
Humane Innovation, and to be abominated.

Thirdly, You say, If singing be principally intended for a solemn praising of
God, which praising is the highest service we can perform to him, it most
naturally and directly tending to the honor of his Glorious Name: If then (say
you) a composed, posed, stinted Form of another making may be used in Singing,
why may it not much more be used in Prayer, which is in comparison a lower sort
of Worship?

1 Reply. We say a stinted form of Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs are left
in Gods Words as composed by the Spirit, which the Churches are required and
exhorted to sing; of which Dr. Wright tells you in his Treatise, there are
about twelve in singing still, if that will do, in the New Testament, page 15.
besides a multitude in the Old Testament, as proper to be sung as they, and are
in the Original in Meter too: Had there been such stinted Forms of prayer left
in Gods Word as composed by the Spirit, and we enjoined so to pray, what
objection could have been against the using of them we know not?

2. You would have a Psalm given by immediate Inspiration, and so sung by a
special Gift, or you would have none at all: we know none of your mind, and of
the Mind of your party, except those called the sweet Singers of Israel.

But we positively deny there were ever any such Psalms brought into the
Churches of Christ, and do require you to give us but one example of such a
bringing forth of a Psalm, viz. the matter, manner, and Tune, and all by
immediate Inspiration, or special gift, and sung by one Man alone, for we have
showed that 1 Cor. 14. proves no such thing. Also we would know if there should
be such Psalms given now, or hereafter, as you hint there were in the
Apostolical Church, whether such Psalms would not be of equal Authority to
Canonical Scripture? also were there such Psalms then given; how comes it to
pass we have them not left in Gods Word, seeing we have others left on record?

3. But could you prove some did bring forth such Psalms, by a special Gift, in
the Gospel day, what would that signisie, since it would follow, and could not
be denied but they brought forth their Doctrines, etc. also, by the same
miraculous and extraordinary Spirit, and we must no more attempt to preach
without such an extraordinary Gift, than not to sing Psalms without the said
extraordinary and special Gift, but must throw off all Ordinances till those
Gifts return: if what you say be true,

4. Why do you say Prayer is a lower sort of worship than Singing, we utterly
deny it: What Duty is more sublime of sacred than right Spiritual prayer? But
though prayer be so great a Duty, and we have no stinted Forms left for it, yet
in singing, which is also a great Gospel Duty, we have a stinted Form
mentioned. A psalm cannot be a psalm, as we told you once already, without a set
and stinted Form; all also may pray together without a stinted Form, but all
cannot sing together without they know the set Psalm, Hymn and Spiritual Song:
So that from the Nature of Singing, or how it differs from prayer, we argue,
there is a necessity of the one and not of the other. Could the Disciples have
sung that Hymn with Christ unless the matter sung were spoken out, or
pronounced to them? Therefore though we condemn as well as you the composing,
using and imposing set Forms of Prayer, yet we show and prove that set Forms of
Singing David's Psalms, and other Scripture Hymns composed by the Holy Spirit,
are of Divine Institution; and hereby we do not contradict our Testimony
against the former sort of Will Worship, page 8. of your Epistle. And from
hence in opposition to what you there say, we affirm, this Argument of yours
carries no weight nor demonstration in it at all, against that you call the
common way of Singing. Nor do we give up the Cause in the least, for which we
have suffered in testifying against a Form of humane Antichristian or Popish
prayers. Nor is our alleging against you, that liberty which you may, and many
pious Ministers do take in composing a set and stinted form of preaching
without force of argument; for we affirm, and will, God assisting, maintain it,
there is to every degree as much ground for others to object against setting
(by careful study) as the Spirit shall enable us, a set Form of a Sermon to be
preached, as there is for you to condemn the composing or setting in order by
the help of the Spirit a Scripture-psalm, Hymn, or Spiritual Song to be sung:
To say Preachers do not confine themselves to that set Form they have studied,
we say is not true of many of them, though may be you do not so confine your
self; and will you affirm they that do so, do not preach Spiritually, but by a
humane stinted form; we must assure you should you so speak, it will beget
another controversy as hot as this; and what will the effects of your Essay
be, think you, in the end, should you thus proceed? is the Sermon Humane if
every word be pre meditated, that he afterward delivers? And may not a
Minister preach over again the same Sermon, verbatim, to another Congregation
and be justified: See that place Acts 13.42.

The true state of the Case depending is this, viz. preaching is Gods
Ordinance, but no particular set stinted Form or method of preaching is laid
down in the Gospel. Therefore let us not condemn one another, but leave each
man to his liberty, so be he preaches, and the like also in singing, provided
singing be not wholly omitted from such groundless pretenses, or a practice
brought in the room of it that never was used in Gods Church. None sound in the
Faith pretend to preach by immediate Inspiration, or by an extraordinary Gift,
but by the ordinary Gifts, by studying the Mediate written word, and the Spirit
may help us to study, and pre-meditate every word we intend to speak, and yet
our preaching may be Spiritual, and be as successful as if we studied not, but
speak only what comes into our Minds when we deliver it; nay, and how
unprofitable and confused generally such Men's preaching is, all Men know, who
preach extemporally: so Singing is Gods Ordinance, but none who are sound in
the Faith pretend to sing Psalms by immediate Inspiration; nor is there any
more ground to wait for a special gift to sing than to preach; and how confused
such extemporary Singing might be, all may foresee: It Is easy to pretend to a
Gift, and so deceive the people as some do, who pretend they preach by
immediate Inspiration. And unless the person can work Miracles to prove he
sings by an immediate Spirit, or a special Gift, who would believe him? nay,
and there is more ground for a set, stinted Form of singing than of preaching,
because the Scripture-psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs are left in Gods Word
as set, and stinted pre-composed Forms, and cannot be without such Forms; it is
a small variation to put the Scripture-Psalm, etc. into English Meter, without
which they could not be melodiously sung according to the Precept, and the
proper Nature of Singing: it seems to us that you would have such a sort of
singing as the Quakers have of preaching. Suppose a Controversy should arise
amongst Gods people from what you say against singing, and some should say
there is no ground for a set, and stinted Form of preaching, but say preaching
must be performed from a special immediate or extraordinary Gift, as in the
Apostles time, and so from thence will preach no more; they doubtless would
have as much ground so to do as you have to cast off or oppose all singing of
Psalms, from the fame foot of an account, and pretend to wait for the return of
those Gifts that were in the Gospel Church.

Fourthly, You say you shall speak somewhat to those Scriptures in the New
Testament, which are alleged for this common singing; the first is that in
Matthew. 26.30. Mark 14.26. where it is said, they sung an Hymn, that is, Christ
and his Disciples after they had broke Bread, in Greek, they having hymned,
from hymneo. These Scriptures being the chief, you say, by the mistaken
apprehension of which this common singing is ushered in, and steals into the
Churches, you tell us you shall be the more large in speaking to them.

Reply. It Is your mistake, the chief Scriptures we allege for the Church to
sing together, are those in Ephesians. 5. Col. 3. which enjoins singing, they are
clear precepts; these are, it is true, the chief that are alleged for singing
after the Lords Supper. Also singing is no othewise ushered into the Churches
than Believers Baptism was: Nor does it steal in, but comes in lawfully by the
Authority both of Precept and Example; however, we will examine your Answers to
these Texts.

First, It is to be considered, say you, that several Learned Expositors do
assert, That this Hymn did belong to the Passover, and not to the Supper, the
Lords Supper being instituted before the whole Solemnity of the Passover was
finished, with the Bread and Wine that was appointed for it: which being
finished, they concluded with an Hymn, as the Jews were wont to do at such
seasons. If it then did appertain to the Passover, it was done away with it,
p. 9.

Reply. Why did you not recite those Learned Expositors you mention? for tho we
know and grant some learned Expositors do affirm, That the Jews ended their
Passover by singing a Psalm, yet they cannot prove what they say. Also we know
none who say this Hymn which our Savior and his Disciples sung, did appertain
to the Passover; nor do any Learned Expositors assert one single person alone
ever sung after the Lords Supper.

2. Here first of all you seem to confound the Passover and the Sacred
Ordinance of the Lords Supper together, intimating, the Passover was not
finished till after the Supper was celebrated; which is enough to cause some
weak Christians to question whether there be such an entire Gospel Ordinance as
(...) Lords Supper or no; or if there be, whether we ought not before, to eat a
Lamb, or Legs of Mutton ^s some do:

3. But do not mistake your self, it is positively said, that after ( Christ
took the Bread, and gave thanks, etc. and ^ave it to his Disciples, and said
eat, this is my Body, and took ^he Cup, and gave thanks, and said, drink ye all
of it, for ^his is my Blood of the New Testament: etc.) They sung ^n Hymn, the
singing of this Hymn was the very last thing they did before they went out into
the Mount of Olives, Mat. 26.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. your ^^rst Answer is but to
blot paper, or rather to cloud ^he matter; for did this Hymn appertain to the
^asseover, then here is no mention made of Christ's ^raising God any ways at all
after the celebration of the Ordinance of the Supper.

Secondly, But suppose, say you, it did belong to the Lords Supper, yet that
expression, They sung, etc. does not prove that they lifted up their Voices
together; but ^ather that there was such a consent or harmony in their Hearts,
that it was as much the action of them all, as if they had spoken together: So
we read Acts 4.24. it is expressed, that they lifted up their Voices together
with one accord, and said, etc. Does any person understand that they spoke
those words every one of them with an audible Voice together? surely no; but
that there was such a Harmony of their Hearts in that prayer, that it was as
much to be reputed every ones prayer, as if they had each one spoken it with
their mouths.

1 Reply. Brother, you forget it is read they hymned, from the Greek word
hymneo: pray where do you read where it is said any prayed, or praised God only
in prayer, they hymned? Or secondly, Where do you read, when many lifted up
their Voice, and hymned, or sung, but only one sung, and the other only
consented or harmonied in their Hearts, and sung not? Many (as our Brethren and
others show you) may be said to pray together, tho but one is the mouth; but
many cannot be said to sing together, by consenting, or liking, or joining in
their Hearts with what is sung, when but only one person indeed dosing, no more
than many may be said to preach ^^ gether, by consenting, or joining in their
Hea^^ with what one Man preaches, there is such a n^^^ral difference between
singing, preaching, and pr^^ing.

2. Why do you not answer what Renowned M^ Cotton, Dr. Roberts, Mr. Sidenham,
Mr. Caryl, Mr. We^^ Mr. Jesse, Mr. Knowles, Mr. Keach, Dr. Wright, Mr. Whinnel,
Mr. Ford, etc. have said in full confutati^^ of this mistake of yours. There is
no proper Hea^^ singing, nor Heart-preaching, though there is prop^^ mental, or
Heart-praying: Singing is only an act ^^ the Voice, and so understood by all
Mankind; and (...) a lie, to say all sung, if but one only sung, but (...) it
is not to say all prayed, when only one was (...) mouth. Unless you had
answered what those (...) thy persons have said, in vain is all you say upon
(...) account: and as touching that Text, Acts 4.24. you (...) not ignorant we
suppose that some do affirm, and (...) not without great probability, that they
lifted up th^^^ Voices in singing part of the second Psalm; all kn^^ there is a
saying or speaking in singing: And (...) they had prayed, the house was shaken,
verse 31. So (...) they might as far as you know, first lift up their V^^ces
together in singing the second Psalm, and afterward end in prayer.

2. Others conclude they all in a miraculous manner lifted up their Voices
together in prayer, all saying the same words; others, that they all said Am^^
at the close.

3. We have showed all may be said to pray to^^ther when but one is the mouth,
by joining in tho^^ petitions in their Hearts: But so it is not in singing
proper singing being an act of the Voice, none c^^ be said to sing unless their
Voices are heard; so th^^ this Text helps you not: How often do a multitu^^
hear one Person sing some affecting Song, with which they are raised in their
Spirits, and seem to eat ever^ word: now because this is so, can they be all
said to sing ^^at Song? You must say it, if what you speak is true, ^^d how
ridiculous that is, we will leave all to judge.

Thirdly, Neither does it (say you) appear that they (...) sung, every one with
their Voices together, because it (...) said, verse. 26. tho he blessed the
Bread, which was the ^^lemn Speech of one; it is said, They sung, etc. which
should ^^em to imply as if they did speak together in singing; but, ^y you, it
does not appear by that expression, because our lord Jesus, it is most likely,
in his Institution of that Or^inance, might or did give thanks and bless, in
the sin^ular number, as speaking only by himself, he being appointed, and
anointed in a peculiar manner to bless his people, and ^^s Ordinance which he
had instituted; for this we find (...) usually did before others on several
occasions, Mat. 11.25. ^ohn 11.41. Joh. 17. But, say you, at the conclusion of
^^at Ordinance his Disciples being refreshed with that Heavenly Banquet, their
praises and thanks to God for his ^reat love then manifested to them, might be
expressed in ^he plural number, as that it might be manifest that they all with
united Hearts joined in praising of God, as if it had ^een spoken by every one
of them, according to the forecited ^cripture, Acts 4.24.

1 Reply. You say it does not appear that they sung every one with their Voices
together, etc. show as there is any true or proper singing without the Voice,
and we will give you the Cause, we say there ^s none.

2. For you to intimate that the Disciples did not ^oyn in their Hearts with
our Lord Jesus, when he gave thanks, or blessed the Bread and the Cup, may ^ead
our people to err in Judgment, and be dangerous in making weak Christians
(since it comes out of a Pastors mouth) to think, that in the Blessing of those
Elements, there is something more contained than all good Protestants affirm,
because the Disciples were not admitted to join with their Masster in that
service, tho Apostles who were to administer it afterward themselves.

3. It also would follow, since that action of (...) Lord Jesus is to be our
Rule, whether an ordin^^^ Minister may be allowed to give thanks over (...)
Bread, and so over the Cup, or not? or if he may, (...) that the Members of the
Church may well conclu^^ they are not, ought not to be allowed to join wi^^
him; for otherwise that is no perfect pattern for (...) to celebrate the Lords
Supper. Nor do those Scriptures you cite stand you in any stead: Does it follo^
because a Minister sometimes prays alone, that the^^fore when he is engaged in
prayer in a public O^^inance with the Church, he must pray in the sin^^lar
number? it is not said he took Bread, and said, (...) thank thee, or Father I
pray thee bless this Bread, (...) all know when there are forty at Supper, and
(...) gives thanks, and they all join with him, yet it is (...) he that speaks
the words gives thanks.

4. What reason do you give why the Discip^^ should be alllowed to join with
their Master at (...) Conclusion, and not at the first giving of thanks? (...)
one; you beg the cause instead of arguing; but we ^^test your supposition, and
see you are hard put (...) to evade the Truth of God, and suggest that which
(...) most unlikely and dangerous to affirm.

5. You would have the last to be no more tha^ simple praising of God, and yet
it is, said they sung (...) Hymn: hard case! Who shall the unlearned believ^ Mr.
Steed, or our Learned Translators, and a gre^^ body of Learned and pious Men,
who well understoo^ the Greek Tongue? Austin on Psalm 52. we find spea^ing
thus, (viz.) Hymni sunt lauds Dei cum cantico, (...) si sit laus and non sit
dei, non est Hymnus; si sit laus, (...) Dei laus, and non cantetur, non est
Hymnus; oportet ergo ^^ si sit hymnus, habeat haec tria, and laudem, and Dei,
canti^ That is, Hymns are the praises of God with a Song; (...) it be praise,
and not the praise of God, it is not (...) Hymn; if it be the praise of God,
and not with (...) Song, neither is it a Hymn, which must have the^^ three in
it, viz. praise, the praising of God, and tha^ with a Song, or in singing. The
very same says Learned Dr. Duveil, on Acts 16.25. Hymns, says he, are Songs
which contain the praise of God; if it be praise and not of God, it is not a
Hymn; if it be praise, and of God, if it be not sung, it is not a Hymn. And Mr.
Henry Jesse in his Greek Lexicon says, the Greek word (...), to sing, to
celebrate, (...), the same (...), a Hymn, or Song, Act. 16.25. Mat. 26.30. An
Hymn, says he, is a Song whereby the praises of God are sung; if therefore
they hymned all, they sung all, unless there is a proper singing without the
voice.

Fourthly, But suppose they did then sing speaking together, which yet there
is, say you, no evidence for, as was before mentioned; yet we do not find any
ground why that example should be obliging now to the Churches, for it appears
that there were some circumstances in that first institution as there was in
the first celebratiion of the Passover, that are not obliging afterward, as
the entering upon it after Supper, and washing the Disciples feet (as is most
probable) after it: Joh. 13.24. So neither does this kind of Singing appear to
be a Duty to be performed as a continuing Ordinance.

1 Reply. Brother, who denies but there was some circumstances in the first
Institution that are not obliging? yet can you, or any wise man think that part
of Religious Worship to be a Circumstance? for you dare not deny but praising
of God in singing, or without singing is a great part of Religious Worship,
therefore no circumstantial matter, as that after Supper, and in an upper room,
and in the night, etc.

2. It may appear to all, that the other great part of the Ordinance, viz. That
of giving of Thanks, or blessing of the Bread and Wine, is no Rule for us, not
obliging us according to your Notion, since you intimate our Lord Jesus
performed it alone, not suffering his Disciples to join in their Spirits with
him; if this is not to curtail the Sacred Ordinance, we know nothing.

3. Nor if this be granted; have you any gro^^ (from what Christ and his
Disciples) did, to p^^^ God at the close of the Ordinance, no more than (...)
have to sing an Hymn: Sure our people are will to be misled, if they see not
your strange mistake to say no worse, from the esteem we have of your p^^son,
and station; we desire all that doubt of sing^^^ an Hymn, well to observe your
varying Answers, a^^ the little of solid argument there is in any one (...)
them; but we will examine your three Reasons w^^^^ you conclude, if they did
then sing an Hymn together, yet that is not obliging to the Churches.

1. Because, say you, we do not find it recorde^ in the relation of the
celebration of this Ordinan^^ by the Churches, after the Ascension of our Lord
Jesus, 'when they were fully settled and established.

Reply. We find no mention of the form or mann^^ of the celebration of this
Ordinance in any one Church had there been a relation of one Churches manner
(...) clebration of the Lords Supper, and no singing (...) the conclusion of
it, and yet an account of all the ^ther parts; your first Reason might seem to
have some weight in it, but since we have no such instances, there ^^ nothing
at all in this.

2. Because, say you, when the Apostle Paul give an account of the performance
of that Ordinance, as he received it from the Lord Jesus, he makes (...)
mention of their singing together at the ending (...) it, though he does
particularly declare the manner (...) of it is celebration; which certainly
would have been, had it been a concluding Ordinance continually to be
practiced, as some do affirm it ought to be he does not indeed make mention of
returning thanks at the end of it, nor was there any need it should be
mentioned, because it necessarily and naturally follows, that after kindness
and Grace received, we should return a thankful acknowledgment, we being
commanded in every thing to give thanks: Therefore tho we have no particular
Precept or Example for it, yet we give thanks at the end of our Meals as well
as crave a blessing at the beginning of them, as that which naturally follows
our being refreshed by the bounty and blessing of God: But for singing
together, say you, it being a more than ordinary circumstance, that has
several things appertaining to it; had it been intended as a Duty, at such a
season, as there was great reason it should be so, no question but it would
have been mentioned: And without Controversy, the solemn giving of thanks
after the Supper, is the substance of what was intended by the Hymn; neither
does the Greek word restrain it to singing, but to a general giving of thanks,
p. 10, 11.

1 Reply. What you say here, must not be admitted by any means; nor does there
seem any congruity, or Gospel simplicity in your Answer, for at the close you
clearly grant the Hymn does intend a general rule for giving of thanks, yet at
the beginning seem utterly to deny that the Hymn is any ways binding on us, or
a rule for us: And that first, because Paul does not mention it in 1 Cor.
11.23. where he gives an account of the Institution of the Supper.

2. We say the Institution is the perfect pattern and Rule for us to follow,
which that Church and all others the Apostle well knew had the perfect
knowledge of: And remarkable it is, the Apostle leaves out another part of the
Solemnity, he does not mention that our Savior when he took the Cup gave
thanks, as well as he does not mention the Hymn: Therefore in the celebration
of that Ordinance, we and all Ministers go to the Institution, Mat. 26.26.
Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, etc. verse. 27. and he took the Cup and gave
thanks: So that if you administer it according to that in 1 Cor. 11. and not
exactly according to the Institution; you must leave out giving thanks when you
take the Cup, which if you did, who would break Bread with you, because not
done according to the pattern.

3. Moreover, you know in the administration (...) Baptism you as well as we go
to the words of the Institution, and not to the relation of the words mentioned
after the Ascension of Christ, when person^ were baptized. In the Acts we read
of several baptized, and not one word expressed, of the Name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, yet were also baptized no doubt.

4. The Apostle as you your self take notice, does not mention returning thanks
after they had done, a^ well as he speaks not of the Hymn, and you suppose them
was no need of it, as if our wisdom might teach u^ that, since we give thanks
after our meals: Brother, the Ordinance of the Lords Supper is another kind o^
thing than our common meals, we do not give thank^ when we take the Cup to
drink: Sir, Man's wisdom must make no Supplement to the holy Supper.

5. It appears by your arguing against Singing, tha^ in your Conscience
praising of God in Prayer is no^ singing, otherwise there is no room for a
trial of ski^^ to evade it: And as to the Greek word, we have showed, (as our
Translators do affirm, and other Learned in the Greek Tongue, do restrain it to
singing, etc.) that it is not an Hymn, if not a Song, and sung to the praise of
God. Do not some of u^ know what the Greek word imports, as well as others? and
have not our Brethren said enough in their late Treatises upon that account, to
which you give no Reply. Could you produce three able Grecians who render the
word otherwise, we may bring threescore who contradict them. Bez^ whom few may
compare with, translates it (...) (...), quum hymnum cecinissent, When they ha^
sung an Hymn: Schrevelius and Hill in their Lexicons, (...), Celebro hymnum
coeno: And is it wisdom in you to give a contrary sense to our faithful and
learned Taanslators? and do not other ignorant persons betray their great
weakness, who do confront our last and best Translators, fly to an old corrupt
Translation in Sion Collegde. Moreover, if the Greek word does not restrain it
to singing, then it follows in your Judgment, that simple or bear giving of
thanks is not singing; by which you give away the Cause, and implicitly
acknowledge you never sing at all in a proper sense: But to proceed, If you
will not mind the Pattern, by the help of God we will.

There is the like parity of Reason also for singing, after that wonderful
manifestation of Gods rich Grace and Bounty, as there is for simple praise; for
never greater cause to be spiritually merry, and rejoice in God, than when we
receive such a Seal and Token of his Eternal Love and Favor to our Souls in
that Redemption we have through Christ's Blood.

Thirdly, Such a kind of Singing an Hymn you say, is not to be practiced now,
because we find the uttering or singing of a Psalm or Hymn in the Church, was
by command of the Lord to be managed after another manner, as appears from the
before mentioned, 1 Cor. 14.26.

Reply. This is merely to beg the Cause; that manner of Singing you referr to
is but your own private Conceit and Opinion, which we have answered already.
The practice of our Savior is a perfect Rule, and we cannot err while we
follow it, for he is set forth as an Example for us in his Obedience in the
discharge of Gospel Ordinances: Had we not a Mind to spare you, how justly
might you be exposed by your strange and cloudy reasonings? If the Copy is to
be imitated in one thing, why not in another?

2. You do but suppose Singing was managed after another manner, from that Text
1 Cor. 14.26. viz. by one single person, and that too by a special or
extraordinary Gift in Gods ordinary worship, which you prove not, nor can you
whilst you live on Earth: Is it not said, with the voice together they shall
sing, Isa. 52.8?

3. And suppose it was then managed by such a gift; was not preaching or a
Doctrine, etc. also managed by the same kind of Gifts, and must we not preach
etc. now, because no such Gifts?

Object. The second Objection you pretend to answer, is that about Paul and
Silas 's singing praise to God, Acts 16.25.

1. To this, you say, p. 11. Paul and Silas prayed as well as sang praises, and
were heard by the prisoners: Can we think, (say you) that when they prayed they
spoke both together? Why then should any suppose they listed up their Voices
together in singing praises, the Holy Spirit gives no other account of the one
than of the other?

Reply. We say to you in answer; why should any think the Holy Ghost speaks in
the Clouds, or unintelligibly? When they prayed no body doubts but that one
only was the mouth; but if they both sung, then one did not sing alone, because
all Mankind understand the act of Singing, as has been proved, differs quite
from that of praying. Many may, we tell you again, be truly and properly said
to pray together, when only one is the mouth, but many cannot be said to sing
together, if but one single person only truly and properly sings.

2. Therefore tho the prisoners heard them, it is not to be thought they heard
both their Voices when they prayed, but yet did hear both their Voices when
they sung.

3. Had it been no more than praising of God in Prayer, the Holy Ghost had not
added, and sung praises; strange! you will distinguish no better on the Natures
of differing Ordinances, according to the common understanding of all Mankind!
Do you always when you praise God, or give thanks for your meat and drink,
before or after meat, sing? would not any Body of understanding smile at you,
should you so speak?

2. You say we may safely conclude they did not sing by lifting up their Voices
together, because we may judge that the Apostle knowing the Mind of the Lord in
that particular, which he could and did communicate unto others, would not
allow himself or this Companion to be transgressors of it.

1 Reply. Dear Brother, you argue not at all; strange! that such lines should
come from such a Pen: You take that for granted which you prove not, and which
we deny by force of argument. We say the Apostle well knew singing with Voices
together was the practice of the Lords people under the Law, and that so Christ
and his Disciples sung, and therefore so he and Silas sung, and were no
transgressors.

2. And since Paul and Silas, who you say, knew the Mind of the Lord in that
particular sung, together; we say so it is our Duty to do, and they that do it
not, neglect a Gospel Duty.

Object. The third Objection you pretend to answer, is from that in Jam. 5.13.
Is any merry, let him sing Psams.

This Scripture, you say, is no direction for a Church assembled to employ
themselves in singing together: But how a particular person in a joyful frame
ought to manage his Mirth, or Comfort to the Glory of God. Certainly it can
never be a right Inference, say you, that because a single person when cheerful
or comfortable, is exhorted to sing praise to God, therefore to conclude, that
it is the Duty of the Church of Christ in its public Assembly to have all the
Members sing together with Artificial Rhimes, and Tunes, a composed Song, or
Psalm, tho not commanded so to do, and although they be not in a joyful frame,
is a strange inference.

1 Reply. We in the first place cannot but observe how clearly you here give
away the Cause, viz. do not you plainly intimate, that singing is a different
thing from Prayer, or common ordinary praising of God in Prayer; for if you do
not grant this, there is nothing in what you say, for as one man ought so to
praise God when in a joyful frame, so you know ought a whole Church together to
do the same. Pray consider of this, it looks ill upon you.

2. We do not urge this Text to prove a whole Assembly ought to sing together,
and you know it well enough; but to prove that singing is some other Act, Duty,
or Thing than that of praising of God you plead for, and would have to be
Gospel-singing: But however, we would willingly know, or be informed, if one
Man when glad, or sees cause to rejoice in the Lord, may and ought to sing, why
many, if in the same frame, may not sing, and sing together.

3. However, you are short in this Duty, when merry, or see cause to rejoice in
the Lord as a single person; do you ever sing Psalms? we hope you sometimes are
merry in the Lord, certainly you cannot conclude this intends some special
Gift: Had every one that was merry or joyful in the Lord, a special Gift to
sing? or can you think the Apostle puts them upon a Duty they were not in a
capacity to perform? It Is not left at the liberty of a person that is in a
joyful frame to sing Psalms if he pleases, but he is as much required to sing
Psalms as a person afflicted is to pray.

4. As to Rhyme, Tunes, etc. if there be a singing of Psalms (a proper singing
we mean) without Tunes, Meter, etc. you may so sing, tho we know none. Rhyme we
do not say is essential to singing, tho Verse or Meter is, but blame us not we
so sing, seeing you positively affirm it is not unlawful. Talk no more of
composed Psalms, you know David's Psalms were composed by the Spirit of God,
and Scripture songs are as Sacred as Scripture prose; we know no Psalms but
those called David's Psalms.

2. You say this Singing here directed unto, is when a person is merry, or
comfortable, which certainly is to be suitable to his praying when afflicted
and sorrowful, which is not by reading a prayer of another composing, but by
pouring out his Soul in earnest Requests to God, as he shall be assisted by the
Holy Spirit. In like manner, the Singing here intended is not the reading and
tuning of a Psalm out of a Book, or writing of another composing; but his
solemn expressing the praise of God, and his joyful thanks to God, as the Holy
Spirit does assist him with a tuneable Voice, or otherwise: shall Prayer be
with the Spirit, and singing praises, which is the highest worship be by a
form? Surely, say you, we are otherwise directed by the Word of God, 1 Cor.
14.15. And we are counseled to labor to be filled with the Spirit, if we will
speak to our selves in Psalms and Hymns, Ephesians. 5.19. which if it may be
performed by reading and tuning a Psalm or Song indicted for us, may it not be
by a person in a car^^^ as much as by one in a Spiritual state and frame. This
Singing, say you, that a Christian in his cheerfulness is directed unto (we
humbly conceive) is explained Ephesians. 5.4. Neither foolish talking nor jesting,
which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks. Where Believers are
directed how to improve their merry and cheerful seasons, first negatively, not
as the World commonly does in foolish talking and jesting, to stir up laughter
and vain mirth by; Secondly, positively to recreate their Spirits, by getting
up and holding forth their joy and comfort in praising and blessing the Name of
the Lord, as he shall graciously enable them, whether with Meter, Tunes, or
otherwise.

3 Reply. That a person should sing when in a joyful frame, by influence or
help of the Spirit, we deny not, as a person afflicted is so to pray, and not
by reading of a prayer; yet singing of Psalms is one thing, and prayer another;
may not a Man spiritually sing one of David's Psalms, or other Scripture-Hymns,
or Sacred Songs, because he did not compose it himself? Do you suppose that
every Man and woman in those Times had that special Gift to bring forth a Psalm
for it is evident every Man and Woman some time or another may be merry or
joyful in the Lord, and then they lie. without exception, under the same
obligation to sing Psalms. You it seems admit of Singing with a tuneable Voice;
Nor indeed is there any other singing known to Mankind. Now if every Man has
not the special Gift to bring forth a Psalm, both Matter, Manner and Tune, etc.
by an immediate help of the Spirit, we find you suppose they cannot sing Psalms
according to this Precept; nor must they sing any Psalms but of their own
enditing: Doubtless the weakest person that had no special Gift, If merry in
the Lord, is bound and obliged to sing Psalms as well as any other, therefore
singing was not tied up to persons who had a special Gift so to sing: Besides,
the Psalms are contained in the Holy Scripture which we are to sing, the matter
being already composed by the Spirit; therefore praying and singing greatly
differ, tho both are to be performed by the assistance of the Spirit. Brother,
there is a Book of Psalms left for us in Gods Word to sing by, but no Book of
Prayers is there left for us to pray by, therefore you say nothing: Nor is that
doubtless true which you conceive from Ephesians. 5.4. i.e. that the Apostle there
gives directions about singing, but rather it is about speaking, viz. that we
should not in our common discourse, etc. use foolish talking nor jesting, but
that God should be always in our Minds, and we ready always to give thanks to
him: For as Men are subject to sing foolish Songs when merry, which the Apostle
James implicitly reproves and gives directions then to sing Psalms: so they
are as ready to use jestings and foolish talkings, especlally at Feasts, which
are not convenient. Therefore St. Paul gives directions to avoid them, and to
give thanks to God for all we have, and demean our selves with gravity, and an
Holy and Heavenly Spirit.

5. Now we come to the fifth and last thing you insist upon, viz. you say you
shall speak a little to the last particular you mentioned, which is this, viz.

But it may be said, is there no way to revive that Ordinance of Singing, or
bringing forth a Psalm in the Church as it was in the primitive times, or as we
have it recorded 1 Cor. 14.26?

First, You say the Church has that which is chiefly intended by it, in their
solemn giving of Thanks, and praising of God together, as they have continual
occasion and opportunity for it.

Reply. Why do you say the Church has that which was chiefly intended, if the
Church has not the Ordinance or thing it self? is not this like what some say
of Sprinkling, (viz.) Tho Baptism was performed by dipping, or applying the
subject to the Water in the primitive times, and we use sprinkling, say they,
yet we have that which was chiefly intended by it, for we use water, and apply
it to the Subject; and sprinkling with the Blood of Christ is mentioned as well
as washing in his Blood, and we use the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
when we do it, etc. What is it your Church has? Why you praise God together,
and so you ought, aad may every hour, and yet have none of this Ordinance,
because praising of God in prayer is not singing of his praises, tho praising
of God be the chief thing intended, yet it is no other than a musical or
melodious singing of his praises, which if you do not so, you have not the
chief thing intended. Why should God enjoin his people to sing his praise, if
to praise him in prayer without singing was sufficient? is not this to exalt
your Wisdom above the Wisdom of God? or to make void a Gospel precept by your
Tradition? read that in Matthew.

2. It may be confidently expected, say you, that if the Lords people did more
earnestly pray, and wait for a more plentiful pouring forth of the Holy Spirit,
there might be more assistance afforded for enditing and uttering a Psalm or
Spiritual Song according to the primitive pattern.

1 Reply. If you have that which was chiefly intended by singing, what need is
there to expect any more of the Spirit to be performed to endite a Psalm, or to
pray for such pourings forth of the Spirit to that end? tho we all have cause
to pray for more of the Holy Spirit to be poured forth, yet not to revive the
practice of any Gospel Ordinance, which we see plainly the Churches were
enjoined to perform; for if we want it to revive one Duty, we want it to revive
all.

2. Prayer is an Ordinance, Preaching is an Ordinance, Baptism and the Lords
Supper are Ordinances, and you are found in the discharge of all these Duties
too, tho it may be in some things you may not so exactly be found in the
performance of them according to the primitive Pattern, and may pray for the
Spirit to be poured forth in a greater measure to help you to discharge your
Duties in those Ordinances; but you will not however neglect them under such
pretenses, why then do you wholly neglect this of Singing the praises of God
under such a pretense, i. e. for want of more of the Spirit to endite and utter
a Psalm?

3. What ground have you to expect, or to pray for those extraordinary Gifts to
perform any Gospel Ordinance which were in the primitive Times? if there is no
promise for their return, then no ground of Faith to pray for them.

4. May not this tend to cause our people to cast off all other Ordinances upon
the same pretenses, and turn Seekers? it is very dangerous what you suggest here.

5. It appears you allow of enditing a Psalm, and that the Spirit may return to
enable a person so to do. Brother, dare you say those Godly Men who endite
Hymns and Spiritual Songs do not bring them forth now by the help of the Holy
Spirit? pray in form us, how we or any people may infallibly know that an Hymn
is endited by the Spirit; may not, some as much question whether you or other
Ministers endite or compile their Sermons by the assistance of Gods Spirit, by
the same rule as you may question whether or no they have the assistance of the
Spirit to endite Hymns.

6. There are some that can, and do sometimes now bring forth an Hymn
extemporarily, may not you conclude the Spirit is returned already to enable
them so to do? or what evidence further do you expect of such a thing
hereafter, when more of the Spirit is poured forth? or how will you know, it is
not a common nor a natural Gift which such a person has? Brother, you seem to
many wise men who have read your Epistle, to be in this matter a great
Enthusiast.

7. Lastly, Can any Man endite an Hymn or Psalm without study and premediation?
Certainly what you hint here of enditing and uttering a Psalm or Spiritual Song
when the Spirit is poured forth, etc. is just the same thing which we say many
of the Lords Servants by the present help of the Spirit are enabled to do now.

3. It is clearly manifested, you say, in the Holy Scriptures, and sadly
experienced, That the Church or Interest of Christ in the World was to be, and
has been not only a long time kept under by Persecution and Bondage by the
power of Spiritual Babylon, etc. in which time the Harps have been as it were
hung upon the willows, Psalm. 137.2. The Witnesses have prophesied in Sackcloth,
and the Church in the Wilderness, whereby it has been a season more for crying
and mourning, than for rejoicing or singing: But also the Holy Spirit has been
in a great measure withdrawn, those eminent Gifts that were in the primitive
Times have not been distributed to the Saints, the Church has been fed and
nourished, but not feasted as in the beginning. And it is ^^markable, that in
the Revelations, etc. we have little or no mention made of a Song of praise
uttere^^ in Heaven, that is, the Church, after the advanc^ment of the mystery
of Iniquity, etc. till the Lan^ appeared again on Mount Sion, etc. Therefore i^
such a time, you say, it is no wonder if there be so fe^ Spiritual Songs
endited and sung in the Churches, according to the primitive pattern. It is now
a time rather to be joining in united prayers for our mutual preservation, than
to be contending about bringing in aga^^ this common formal singing into the
Churches, p. 13. etc.

Reply. What is all this mentioned for? what the Israel of old under that
dispensation, whose promise and privileges were external, and more earthly
th^^ Spiritual, in the time of their Captivity, being carr^ed away out of their
own Land, refused to sing o^ of the Songs of Sion, especially at the taunting
(...) quest of their insulting Enemies: Does it follow from hence that the
Saints in the Gospel days under Suffering and Persecution must not sing? True,
were o^ privileges outward or earthly as theirs were, th^^ might be the like
reason for us to say as they di^ and hang our Harps on the willows. But
Brother, y^^ know better, our privileges and promises are mo^^ sublime,
Spiritual and Heavenly, the ground of ou^ singing Gods praises are not for
outward peac^ earthly Riches and Prosperity, etc. but for Je^^ Christ, or
Redemption through his Blood, Union (...) Communion with the Father and the
Son, pardon of S^^ Justification, Adoption, free access to the Throne of Gr^^
the witnessings and sealings of the Holy Spirit, peace Conscience, and joy in
the Holy Ghost, with the hope ^^ Eternal life, and as our sufferings do abound
in us, so^^ consolation also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. for the things we
ought to sing the high praises of God; h^^ is matter of a Song, and from hence
God deserve^ a glorious manner to have his praises celebrated: (...) you think
any outward mercies can better tune (...) Hearts and Tongues to sing Psalms,
Hymns and Spiritual Songs, than these high, sublime and chiefest of ^lessings?
Were a people more affected with outward or external mercies, or with
deliverances from ^ersecution under Antichrist, than with the mercies before
mentioned, it would rather betray their sincerity than otherwise, and discover
a carnal heart.

2. It is not known to all the World how sweetly and frequently the poor Saints
and Martyrs sung ^salms, etc. just as they went into the Fire, like as Christ
and his Disciples sung the night before he was ^etrayed, and Paul and Silas
when in prison, and ^^eir feet fast in the stocks. What tho we have cause to
^ourn, yet we have cause always to rejoice? nay, and we are exhorted to account
it all joy when we fall into temptation: as the Apostles when they had been
^eat, rejoiced they were accounted worthy to suffer ^^ame for Christ's Name sake.

3. Besides, why do you intimate as if the Church under persecution and reign
of Antichrist, have not had such a measure of the Spirit and presence of God to
feast them, as well as feed them; doubtless the Saints in the ^arkest time of
Antichrist were most gloriously feasted (...) any in any age of the Church, by
which means they ^ung a new Song, even the Song of the Lamb who had ^edeemed
them out of every kindred, tongue, people, and Nation, Rev. 5.9. True, when
Babylon is down it may add to ^^eir joy, and when they sing the Song of Moses
as well as ^he Song of the Lamb, then the melody may seem more ^weet: But we
must tell you, God at all times de^erves his praises, tho we were in the same
condition with the Church of the Jews, and it is not unknown (...) you, the Book
of the Lamentations was a mourn^ul Song, and tho their case was deplorable, yet
they ^ung, It is the Lords mercies we are not consumed, be^^use his compassions
fail not, Lam. 3.22. The Lord is ^^y portion says my Soul, etc. the Lord is
good unto them ^^at wait for him, ver. 24, 25. Thus they sung then, and thus we
may and ought to sing now. We grant, when Babylon is down, the Tongues of many
(...) have been dumb shall sing, i. e. many shall then (...) converted, and
from thence shall sing; but we (...) (before that time comes) have obtained
that Grace (...) Blessing, have as much cause to sing now as they sh^^ then:
But since that will be a day of general Conv^^sion, or wherein multitudes shall
be brought in^^ Christ, it is noted as a special time of singing.

4. Do you think there wants now such a measure the Spirit that is sufficient
to put any one Gospel O^dinance into practice? The smallness of the Gifts,
(...) Measures of the Spirit cannot justify any person the neglect of any
Gospel Duty; you forget y^^^self, singing of Psalms is a Gospel Precept, and
the^^fore we must that way praise God, or we neglect a du^^

5. What you speak of formal Singing, etc. aff^^^ us not, we plead for no such
thing, but say our sing is Spiritual, as our preaching and praying is so, and
invention, but a Sacred Institution of the Gospel.

6. What you speak concerning the Lords Peo^^^ after the Captivity in the
rebuilding the Temple, ^^^ving no Urim and Thumim, etc. makes against your
(...) we would know whether there was any one O^^^nance they neglected from
such pretenses, viz. t^^^ had no Urim and Thumim, nor Ark of the Coven^^^^ or
wanted some other visible demonstranion of G^^^ presence, or special Gifts to
perform it: the Lord pen your eyes to do as they did, who as they fou^^ written
in the Law of Moses, presently set about (...) work, without waiting for any
visible or special ^^^dence of Gods Spirit, or presence with them, (...) were
accepted with God.

He that forced himself in haste to offer a Sacr^^^^^ and would not wait, you
say, was sharply rep^^^ed, 1 Samuel 13.12. and sustained great damage b^ tho he
seemed to make a fair plea for what he (...) the Lord grant, say you, it may
not be so (...) those who out of pretended Zeal to restore an O^^^nance, would
bring in that which is not of Di^^^^ Institution, but humane Invention and
Composit^^^ etc. page 13.

1 Reply. How unreasonably and impertinently yo^ ^ring the passage here in of
Saul's offering a Sacrifice to atone for his sin of Disobedience, let all wise
^^en judge; for as it belonged not to him, so hi^ Conscience told him he should
forbear the doing of (...): But we know it belongs to us, and to all the
Churches of Christ to sing Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs: and sure you
cannot be so censorious to ^^dge, we do that which belongs not to us? and also
^^rce our selves to do it against the light of our Conscience.

2. The second thing asserted by you is as bad and (...) Unchri^^^^n as the
former, viz. That our Zeal to ^estore a lost Ordinance, is but pretended, in
which ^ou hint as if we were but a company of Hypo^^ites in what we do herein;
God will judge between you and us, who alone is able, and whose ^^ace and right
it is: you presume too far on Gods ^rerogative.

3. How dare you say singing of Psalms, etc. ^ith Voices together (for that we
suppose you mean) (...) not of Divine Institution, but of humane invention and
composition? David's Psalms, and other Scrip^^re Hymns and Spiritual Songs are
not of humane ^omposition, unless part of the Holy Bible is a piece (...)
humane Invention; and for the singing of such ^salms, it is commanded, or
positively required or ^^joyned on us, and on the Churches of the Saints, (...)
evident to all whose eyes are enlightened, from ^^ph. 5.19. Col. 3.16. and that
our Savior with his ^isciples, Moses and all Israel, Paul and Silas sung
^^gether, has been proved beyond doubt.

4. Should one man force himself to sing alone in ^^e Church, under pretense of
a specfal Gift, you ^ight see cause to charge him after that manner, i.e.
^^cing himself so to do, there being no Command nei^^er Precept nor Example for
such a practice, therefore such an act would be humane, and not of Di^^ne
Appointment.

5. Saul did not what God commanded, and therefore (...) reproved, nay more
than that: (...) enough to fear upon the like acc^^^ (...) our People do not
sing Psalms, (...) commanded to do, but strive to (...) p^^ctice of it. Our
Savior says, He (...) breaks the least of these Commandments, and teaches
(...) so to do, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of ^^^ven, Matthew.
5.19. Not that we have so little Ch^^^^ty as to charge you as guilty herein,
but you w^^^^ do well to consider that passage.

6. It grieves us to see such lines should drop (...) your Pen as your Epistle
is made up of, sin^^ we (...) what wise men (who have no great love to you us,)
speak not only of you, but of the Baptists in ^^neral) upon the account
thereof; and here is room ^^deed for them to say, we in restoring Baptism, etc.
but force our selves without any power received (...) on high: But when you can
prove we may and o^^ to restore one lost Ordinance without a special ^^sure of
the Spirit, etc. and not another, we shall ^ther consider of what you have
said: Some say, (...) have read your Epistle, that the Baptists are turn
Quakers, Enthusiasts, and what not?

We hope our Reverend Brethren, who are not convinced of Singing, but dare not
censure others, (...) see cause to prevent the coming out of any more (...)
kind of stuff for the time to come, and find out (...) other way to put an end
to this unpleasant Con^^^versie, which all know was begun by Mr. Mar^ tho the
more which is said against singing of Psal^^ etc. we are sure it will tend for
the further clea^ it up to be the duty of the Churches.

You to close your Epistle, would have your pe^^^^ to consider what a presence
of God was with the ^^^tized Churches formerly, with continual addition (...)
them, etc. however it has been unduly represe^^^^ by a Zealot for common
singing to the contrary, and^

Reply. That our Churches were blessed in those ti^^^ we deny not, and yet this
is weakly added by (...) ^^^ce they walked up according to (...) received; but
we have little (...) should be prosperous, or alike (...) has convinced us of
this a (...) ^ould we wilfully neglect them? (...) mean, we know not.

Is not Prayer, you say, a moral duty as much as singing (...) be, why then do
they not call upon all to lift up their Voices ^^^ether in prayer, etc. there
be many bundreds that can speak ^^^ibly, that cannot sing at all, or not
tunably, certainly all ^^^ural or moral duty and worship must be managed
accord^^^ to the directions of the great God, as he has revealed ^o us by our
Lord Jesus, and his Apostles in the New Te^^^ment: to which you mention 1 Cor.
14.26.

Reply. We deny not (you know well enough) pray^^ to be a moral Duty, as well
as singing the praises of (...) is such; but all men know for a whole
Congre^^^ion to lift up their voices together in prayer would (...) confusion,
but so it is not for a whole Congregati^^ to lift up their voices together in
singing; and were (...) so, you must charge the Church of God under the ^^w,
and Christ and his Disciples, Paul and Silas, etc. ^^th confusion under the
Gospel (as we said before) ^^ose practice we say is our pattern in the managing
^^^t Duty: as touching that Scripture 1 Cor. 14.26. (...) have answered your
cloudy mistakes about that ^^xt, tho the Prophets or Teachers are to speak one
(...) one to prevent confusion, yet that is no direction (...) singing Psalms:
Nor is there one presicent, that in ^^ds ordinary and public worship, any one
person ^^er sung alone, though there are diverse for social sing^^g, or singing
with united voices.

2. If that Text referrs to ordinary Gifts as well as ^^traordinary, as you
grant it does, then why do you ^^t set upon the practice of your way of singing
in the church? page 14. We deny that any Christian Man or ^oman is without a
tunable Voice, tho not all to ^^at degree as some have, through want of
exercise. ^ou sheak as if you was for Peace and Union in the Churches, tho in
this matter at present we are no^ a mind; would to God we had good proof of it:
(...) why must not singing be admitted, you give no ^^^son for it, but because
you say it is an Invention, an ^^novation, etc.

But what must be done to them who resolvedly persist in such course, our Lord
declares, you say, and commands us to mark th^^ and to have no fellow ship with
them, or to avoid them, Romans 15.^^

Reply. Is this your love to your Brethren who are for Sing^^^ and resolve to
persist in promoting of it? No Liberty of Con^^^ence will you allow to such, it
appears, to walk according their light; this shows how you are for Love and
Union: (...) case! It Is well Reverend Kn^llys is dead: Blessed be God, the
Churches who are for singing have more Charity for their diss^^^ing Members;
they are willing to have communion with th^^ tho they resolvedly oppose at
present the singing the praise^ (...) God, and refuse communion with the
Churches for no other ^^^son: and it is to be feared you have been an ill
Instrument in ^^^ matter, as what you say here sufficiently evinces. In most
Church in London there are some who sing in God's Worship, and (...) zealous
for it, what must they do with them? The truth is, (...) such Members are to be
marked, etc. who cause divisions in ^^^ Church, you have here taught such
Churches: All men may (...) what their Duty is toward them who separate
themselves u^ this account, the Lord in mercy open your eyes as well as the
(...) that so all Bitterness, Pride, Ignorance and Prejudice may be av^^^ed,
and Love, Peace, Charity and Concord, maintained i^ the Churches of the Saints.

To conclude, we desire such Members to consider, who s^^^rate themselves from
any Church or Churches upon the acc^^^^ before mentioned, that they do as much
as in them lies exc^^municate such Churches; also we would know whether in
(...) Judgments singing of Psalms is a capital Error, and that ^^sus Christ
has withdrawn himself from such a Church (...) not, let them consider, what
ground they have to ^^^^draw themselves, and violate their solemn Covenant with
su^^ Church.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SVch who desire to have the whole that has been said of lat^ Dr. Wright, Mr.
Keach, Mr. Knowls, Mr. Whinnel, for ^^^cial singing of Psalms, may have them of
Mr. John Harris at Harrow in the Poultrey, bound up all together with this,
price (...) or either if them single.

Dr. Wright's stitcht with Mr. Whinnel's is 6 d.


