A Brief, and PLAIN APOLOGY Written By JOHN WHEELWRIGHT: Wherein he does
vindicate himself, From al those Errors, Heresies, and Flagitious Crimes, laid
to his charge by Mr. Thomas Weld, in his short story, And further Fastened upon
him, by Mr. Samuel Rutherford in his Survey of Antinomianisme. Wherein Free
Grace is Maintained in three Propositions, and Four Thesis VIZ. Prop. 1. That
the Faith of Gods Elect, whereby they do believe on Christ, is not grounded
upon a conditional Promise, made to gracious qualifications previous to Faith.
Prop. 2. That the first evidence of our Justification, is not any work of
Sanctification. Prop. 3. That an act of Faith, which is grounded upon gracious
Qualifications, previous to Union, and Works as first evidences, is legal.
These. 1. That Assurance of Justfication from Works of Sanctification, is not
our Assurance of Faith. These. 2. That Justification goes in order before our
Believing. These. 3. That the Faith of Gods Elect, whereby they do believe on
Christ, is grounded upon a free, simple, absolute promise of Grace. These. 4.
That all Promises proper and peculiar to the Gospel, are absolute.


He that is first in his own cause seems just: but his neighbor comes, and
Searches him,

Prove. 18.17. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more unto the perfect day,

Prove. 4.18. LONDON; Printed by Edward Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the
Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchang. 1658.

To the Christian Reader.
IF that old Maxim of Jeroms be true; In suspicione haereseas nolo quanquam
esse patientem, surely there is no reason, I should suffer what is written
against me, by Mr. Thomas Weld, and Mr. Samuel Rutherford, without any reply.
The Montanists, Priscilianists, Gno^ticks, Borboritae, Caenosy, that dirty
sect, Thomas Munsterus, Jo^annes Leidensis, Kniperdolingus, have not many more
marks of infamy, and reproach drawn upon them, then these my adversaries have
imprinted upon me. They bring me upon the Stage, present me unto the worlds
view, Stigmatize me, for an Arch-Familist, Antinomian, Li^ertine, seducer: lay
me under the guilt of Contempt of Authority, and ^edition: relate me to an
hundred, and eleven errors, nine unsavory spee^^s, make all the heresies, and
enormous crimes in the Country to center ^^^e. My conscience does acquit me
with such clear evidence, against al ^^^se horrible accusations, that I could
willingly pass by all in silence, were (...) not true which Augustine says; qui
fidens conscientiae suae negligit fa^^^m suam crudelis est. I am no stoic, but
very sensible of al indigni^^^s, and injuries put upon me: yet should I not in
this case, have opened (...) mouth, did not the Loud, and strong call of Mr.
Weld, and Mr. ^utherford, constrain me to publish my Defense. Should I consent
by ^^^ful silence, to what they charge upon me, not only to the great dishonor
of (...) self, Ministry, and my relations here upon earth, but of my Lord, and
Master, in heaven Christ Jesus, I should grievously sin, against the Law (...)
God, Nature and Grace.

The best way to clear up things is to follow that rule of Aristotle's, (...).
The truth I not only evidence it self, but discover falshod. Veniat veritas ut
posfalsitas de^^ehendi.

John Wheelwright,

Free Grace maintained, etc.
THE chief Cause of all my sufferings in New England (so far as I know) was
certain Doctrine, with its Application, which I delivered in the Church of
Boston, concerning the grounds of a special Faith, the substance whereof is
contained in these three following Propositions, which I shall confirm.

PROPOSITION I. That the Faith of Gods Elect, whereby they do believe on
Christ, is not grounded upon a conditional Promise, made to gracious
qualifications previous to Faith.
1. First, There are no such gracious qualifications precedent to union; for
then should that which is born of the flesh be Spirit, a man dead in
trespasses, and sins, put forth acts of spiritual life, an evil tree bring
forth good fruit, an enemy to God do his Will, a person without union do
something, he must act graciously who has no formal principles of such acts,
then may a man please God without Faith, and qualify himself by sin.

2. The setting up of antecedent gracious qualifications, as a ground of our
Faith, is quiet opposite to the clear revelation of Gods free grace, and the
ministration of his power in our conversion, and the Lord walks in a contrary
way toward his Elect. He cries down all flesh, all power in our selves to act
graciously, that the glory of his power may be revealed, Isa. 40. He puts out
the light of seeming gracious qualifications, and calls us out of darkness,
making us sensible of the palpable darkness of sin, and misery, wherein we are
inthraled, that the light of his grace, and mercy in Christ, may appear unto
us, (as it is in it self) mavelous, 1 Pet. 2.9. The almighty power of God,
the mavelous grace, and mercy of God toward us in Christ, could never be so
apprehended of us in our effectual call, did we look at our selves as
precedently gracious.

3. They who ground their Faith upon these gracious qualifications can never be
at any certainty. By what light do such (being in the state of nature) discern
that they are rightly qualified, having performed (as they call it) the
Condition of Faith? It is not the light of the Spirit, Faith, and Word.

4. They who are of this judgment, build their Faith upon an imaginary
foundation, a Work, and a Word: The Work is done out of Christ, the Word is a
supposed promise made to this Work, unto which the free promise of Grace has
no respect.

Object. 1. The Lord invites such as thirst, and are gracciously qualified to
come unto him?

Answ. If it be meant of Evangelical thirsting, it presupposes union, and a
formal principle of life, dead men thirst-not. They are not called upon
firstly to believe, but to renew Faiths act: Neither is it their grace, but
their want of grace, which is used as an Argument to persuade them to come.

Object. 2. By gracious qualifications, and preparations for Christ, is not
meant qualifications formally gracious, but only such as effect, or have
relation to true Grace, which does necessarily follow them.

Answ. It is acknowledged that some Writers thus express themselves; They raise
up these qualifications to a very great height, and assert that they are proper
to Gods Elect, not to be found in any reprobate, calling them the Condition of
Faith, and that the Soul thus prepared sees that the promise belongs unto her;
yet deny that they are works of Sanctification. I cannot see but they who
affirm that they are works distinguishing between Elect, and Reprobates, and
Arguments that the promise belongs unto them, and yet will not have them to
flow from a formal principle of saving Grace, do imply a contradiction; Whether
these qualifications, and preparations for Christ, be denominated gracious,
formally, efficiently, or relatively in order to true Grace, it cannot be
showed out of Gods Word, That any promise runs thus; If you be thus, or thus
prepared for Christ, then he belongs unto you: ye have performed the condition,
and the benefit conditioned is yours: I do acknowledge that the formal object
of an efficacious Call are Elect persons prepared by the Law, being sick, lost,
dead sinners to their own apprehensions, to the end that sin may abound, and
grace abound, and that to their sense, and feeling, Rom 5.20. But there ate no
preparations wrought either by Law, or Gospel which so qualify the Soul, as a
man may conclude from thence, That God calls with a purpose to save.

Mr. Culverwel in his Treatise of Faith, much bewailes the cordition of such,
who build their Faith upon the change of their lives, affirming, That they can
never have sound, and steadfast Faith, but an unconstant, and staggering opinion
at the best.

This grounding of Faith upon gracious qualifications before union, is much
oppugned by Mr. Coltan in his New Covenant, and by Mr. Norton in his Orth.
Evang. Surely this is a doctrine which has too much affinity with that of the
Jesuits, and Arminians, who imagine that God makes a promise, that he will
give supernatural Grace to men upon condition they will use well their common
grace.

PROPOSITION II. That the first evidence of our Justification, is not any work
of Sanctification.
1. All good works are to be done in Faith, Heb. 11.4. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.8.
We must (as ^^rsinus says) be persuaded, that both our persons, and our
actions are accepted in and through Christ. If this persuasion be the cause of
good Works, there must be a ground of this persuasion precedent to our Works.
Good Works are the effects of a former evidence: therefore not our first
evidences.

2. All Moral Duties are comprehended under this general Precept of Love, by
which Faith works, Gal. 5.6. as being either the elicite, or imperate acts of
Love: but we cannot truly love God, or our neighbor, before we know, and
believe the love that God has to us, 1 John 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Who is
righteous (says Bernard) but he that requiteth the love of God with love
again? Which is never done, except the Holy Ghost reveal unto a man by Faith,
Gods eternal purpose concerning his future Salvation. Epist. 107. If all our
acts of evangelical love, flow from the apprehension of Gods love to us, they
cannot be procreant causes of this apprehension, nor our first evidences.

3. All that the Gospel requires of us, is to believe and repent: We cannot
evangelically repent before we perceive in some measure that God is reconciled
unto us in Christ, Zach. 12.10. Ezekiel. 16.63. Wherefore it is not our
repentance, nor any work of Sanctification which is our first evidence. A man
cannot earnestly apply himself to Repentance, unless he know himself to be of
God, Cato. Inot. 3.3.2.

4. All Works of Sanctification are so many acts of gratitude, which has ever
relation to some former known benefit, and especially our Redemption through
Christ, 1 Cor. 6.20. This benefit must be known by some Argument precedent to
our works. Therefore Sanctification is not our first evidence. ursinus makes
Gratitude the third part of his Catechism, and places it after man's misery,
and freedom through Christ.

5. All good works must be done in the name of Christ our Mediator, Col. 3.17.
in obedience to God our Father. Then are we to know Christ to be our Mediator,
and God our Father, and so by consequence our justification, by some Argument
antecedaneous to our works.

6. The appearing of Gods grace which brings Salvation, and of the kindness and
love of God our Savior, justifying of us by his grace is the cause of all our
good works, Tit. 2, and 3. If the appearing of Justification and Salvation to
the eye of Faith, be the cause of all our Sanctification, then is not
Sanctification our first evidence.

7. All good works, from the first to the last, are to be done without a servil
fear, Luke 1.74. This sear is never removed, but by a precedent sight of our
deliverance from our spiritual enemies: wherefore our Redemption and
Justification is made known unto us by some other means, which goes in order
before all works of Sanctification.

8. To begin to evidence a good estate from works, is opposite to the method
prescribed by the Apostle Peter. He did write to Christians, who knew, and
believed their justification; for believing they rejoiced in joy unspeakable,
and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. He exhorts them to add unto their Faith, Virtue,
etc. 2. Pet. 1.5. This Faith was existent out of its causes, not to be grounded
upon works, but only confirmed by them. He does not say, Add unto your works
faith of assurance, but add unto your faith works. Therefore this Faith of
assurance is not founded upon sanctification, as a first evidence.

9. We have two distinct witnesses of our good estate, which in order do
precede our sanctification. 1 Our inward call of the spirit. 2 Our act of
believing on the Son of God. The spirits inward call, accompanying the outward,
begets this act of Faith, 1 John 5.10. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. This act of Faith brings
forth works of Sanctification, Gal. 5.6. Sanctification is in order the last of
the three witnesses of a good estate, as being the effect of the two former:
wherefore it is not our first evidence. Hoc est initium salutis nostrae, quod
in nobis sentimus: efficax interna vocatio Dei, and fides nostra assentiens.
Zanchie De Certa salute Ecclesiae.

Mr. Calvin (with other learned and godly Divines, living in that age, wherein
the light of the Gospel did abundantly break forth) defined justifying Faith,
not only by an act of the Will, whereby we receive Christ, and his benefits,
but also by an act of the Mind, by which we are certainly persuaded of Gods
love to us in Christ, and he does constantly deny sanctification to be our
first evidence; and in his Commentaries upon Peter and John, calls Works
after-proofs, Faiths props. Both he, and Zanchie, do acknowledge (with all
sound Divines, and the whole Church) that good works evidence; but with this
caution, There must be a former evidence. Mr. Calvin thus expresses himself,
But forasmuch as of the fruits of Regeneration the Saints gather an Argument,
of the Holy Ghosts dwelling in them, they do thereby not slenderly strengthen
themselves, to look for the help of God in their necessities, when by
experience, they find him their Father in so great a matter. And even this also
they cannot do, unless first they have conceived the goodness of God, sealed
with no other assuredness than that of the promise; for if they begin to weigh
it by good works, nothing shall be more uncertain, or more weak, Inst. 3.14.19.
Zanchie does declare his judgment in the same expressions, Loco 11. De
Justificatione. Calvin upon this text, 1 John 3.19. And hereby we know that we
are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him: does thus Comment;
Semper autem me minerimus, non habere nos, ex charitate notitiam quam dicit
Apostolus quasi inde petenda sit salutis certitude, and certe non aliunde
cognoscimus nos esse filios Dei, nisi quia gratuitam suam Adoptionem cordibus
nostris per spiritum suum obsignat: Et nos certum ejus pignus in christo
oblatum fide amplectimur. This is the question here determined by Mr. Calvin,
How we come first to know that we are the Children of God, and by the like
reason justified? He denies that it is by any argument taken from our love. How
then? By the inward witness of the Spirit, persuading us of our Adoption. What
use then are we to make of our love to the Brethren, in point of evidencing? It
under props, (says he) and strengthens our persuasion. These are his words;
Est igitur charitas accessio, vel adminiculum inferius al sidei fulturam, non
fundamentum quo nititur. Zanchie upon Ephesians. 5.1. draws this as an inference
from that text; Sciamus ergo and pro fundamento christianae Pietatis teneamus,
hoc primum principium, fidem. i. certissimam perswasionem de remissione
peccatorum, ex sola paterna clementia condonatorum, causam esse omnium
virtutum, omnium bonorum operum, omnisque verae obedientiae. They who stand for
the first evidencing of Works overthrow this fundamental principle. The Answer
which Mr. Cotton gives to this Question, Whether some saving qualification may
be a first evidence of Justification? is thus set down by himself in terminis;
A man may have an Argument from thence, (yea, I doubt not a firm, and strong
Argument) but not a first evidence. In his Answer to Mr. Baylie,

Object. 1. Keeping Gods Commandments, and love to the Brethren, are brought in
by the Apostle John, as first evidences of Justification, 1 John 2.3. and 3.14.

Answ. These, and the like Scriptures strongly argue, That works of
Sanctification are cerrain evidences of a good estate, which is a truth so
clearly held forth in Gods Word, as if it were written with a beam of the Sun:
But can it be concluded from hence, That John, and the Christians to whom he
wrote (amongst which they of the lowest rank did know the Father, had received
an unction from the holy One, and knew all things) had no former evidence of
their justification? Did they never hear the inward witness of the Spirit, nor
see their Falth by which they did receive this witness? Did they conclude a
good estate, by reflecting upon their keeping Gods Commandments, and love to
the Brethren, without any immediate discerning of their inward Call, or their
act, or acts of believing, as precedent in order to their works? Whether was
this keeping Gods Commandments, and love to the Brethren, the procreant cause
of their knowing, and believing the love of God to them, or the contrary? The
Apostle puts it out of doubt, 1 John 4.16.20. We know and believe the love that
God has to us: What effect does this produce? We love him because he first
loved us. It is our knowing and believing that God loved us first, even from
eternity, that makes us love him. This is then the Apostles meaning, We who
have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father, we who are
believers, are confirmed in our Faith, because it is operative, and works,
causing us to keep Gods Commandments, and this special Commandment of loving
the Brethren. What is the keeping of Gods Commandments, but charity out of a
pure heart, and Faith unfeined? 1 Timothy 1.5. Faith whereby we are truly
persuaded, of Gods mercy toward us in Christ, is the mother of a good
Conscience, and charity. What is love to the Brethren, but an holy affection,
wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, whereby upon the apprehension of Gods love to
us in Christ, we do from our very hearts, wish well unto them, and study to do
them all the good we can? 1 John 4.16.19, 20. Truly we should neither love God,
nor the Brethren, nor his Commandments, did he not first make known his love in
Christ to us. Mr. Calvin upon these words, 1 John 2.3. And hereby we do know
that we know him, if we keep his Commandments: writes thus, Notandus est hic
orde. quum dicit, nos cognoscere quod noverimus. Significat Dei obedientiam sic
conjunct am esse scientiae, ut tamen haes ordine fit prior: ^cuti necesse est
causam effectu suo esse priorem.

Object. 2. An Effect argues the Cause, as well as the Cause does its Effect;
Why may we not begin with keeping Gods Commandments, and love to the Brethren,
to evidence a good estate, and make them our first evidences? We can know by
fruit, that there is a tree upon which it did grow; and by streams, that there
is a fountain from which they did flow, though we never see the tree, or the
spring.

Answ. The tree does naturally bring forth its fruits, and the fountain sends
out its streams without any act of ours, whether we see them, or not: But
Justification, (which is a gracious act of God, acquitting of us from our sins,
and accepting us as just, for the righteousness sake of Christ, received by
Faith) does not cause us to bring forth works of Righteousness, and true
holiness, by a mere Physical force, but as apprehended by Faith, which works by
love, Gal. 5.6. The persuasion that Mary Magdalene had of the pardon of her
many sins, made her love much, Luke 7.46. If a tree did not bring forth fruit,
nor a fountain send out water, but by our looking on them, as the instrumental
cause, surely we should see the tree, as going before the fruit, and the
springhead before the streams. Good works are such effects, as are caused by
our apprehension of Gods mercy toward us in Christ.

Object. 3. No man can limit God, to what evidence he shall first bring into
the Conscience of a justified estate.

Answ. True, yet can God limit himself: He can do more by his absolute power,
than he does by that which is actual. If the Lord will have all works of
sanctification, to be done in Faith, out of love, without a slavish fear, as so
many acts of gratitude, for our Redemption through Christ, they who deny
sanctification to be the first evidence, do not limit God, but are limited by
God. The Gospel is as immutable in the order, as in the substance of its parts,
being an everlasting Gospel, Rev. 14.6

Object. 4. Many of Gods Children can evidence to themselves a good estate, by
their love to God, his children, and commandments, who never were persuaded of
Gods love to them, by any argument taken either from the inward testimony of
the holy Ghost, or their act, or acts of believing.

Answ. This is asserted gratis, but not proved. How did those Children of God
come unto Christ? Surely they were taught of God, and heard the spirits inward
call. He that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes unto me, Joh. 6.45.
What made them follow Christ by Faith, and holy Obedience? It was this inward
voice of the spirit, accompanying the outward word, which they did hear, and
know. Christ's sheep hear his voice, and follow him, for they know his voice,
Joh. 10.3, 4. That which made them believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, was the
inward witness of the spirit. He that believes on the Son of God, has the
witness in himself, 1 John 5.10. Can it truly be said, That these Children of
God so sanctified, as they can thereby discern their justification, did never
hear, nor know the spirits inward call, nor see their says? Can a man love
God, or his children, who knows not, (in some degree) his reconciliation? A man
in the state of nature, hates God, and his children, and this enmity is never
slain, before peace be revealed, Ephesians. 2.16, 17. We cannot love the law of God,
except we know its rigor, and curse, to be taken from us through Christ. We
must be delivered from the law, in respect of its rigid exaction, and
malediction, and that to our apprehensions, before we can serve, in the newness
of the Spirit, Romans 7.6. Suppose that Gods true children should say, That
sanctification is their first evidence, God speaks no such thing in his Word,
to the which we must rather attend, but the quite contrary, as has been
proved: neither can they rest in that way of evidencing, who are truly
gracious; for the law of grace binds them, first to be persuaded of remission
of sins, and then to serve God without fear, from this persuasion, and this law
is written in their hearts. If men under the law should glory in their
penitency, works of sanctification, and strict walking, as first evidences,
they may be convinced a priori, because they want this cause hereof, viz. The
apprehension of Gods mercy toward them in Christ: even as we cut off
Enthusiasts, Antinomians, Familists, Libertines, who boast of their full
assurance, a posteriori, by reason they have not the effects, penitency, works
of sanctification, and strict walking. The middle way is the Gospel way, to
wit, from the appearing of Gods grace, to our own souls in particular, to deny
ungodliness, and wordly lusts, to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this
present world.

PROPOSITION III. That an act of Faith, which is grounded upon gracious
Qualifications, previous to Union, and Works as first evidences, is legal.
The Works upon which this seeming act of Faith is founded, are not
evangelical, but legal, which I thus demonstrate:

1. After that the Commandment comes, the spirit of bondage in the law, we are
said to be married to the law, bring forth fruit unto the law, and to serve in
the oldness of the letter, unril we be espoused unto Christ, Romans 7: Before
Faith come in the free Promise, we are kept under the law, schooled, and
overawed by the law, Gal. 3.23, 24. We are in bondage under the law, til we
receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.3, 4, 5. Acts done by them, as such, who
are married to the law, in bondage under the law, must needs be legal; and of
this nature, are all supposed gracious qualifications before faith.

2. Works made first evidences, (and that de jure) though they go under the
name of works of sanctifitation: yet are they indeed works of the law, because
they do not proceed from principles evangelical, but legal.

1. They are not done in Faith, whereby we are persuaded that our persons, and
our actions are accepted in, and through Christ. No, our works must first be
done, and our persuasion must be the effect of these works. We must see our
works accepted, before our persons.

2. They are not done in Love; for how can we love God, before we know, and
believe, the love that he has to us, 1 John 14 16.19. Our apprehension of Gods
love, must only be an effect of our works, and of some imaginal promise made to
us, in respect of these our works.

3. They cannot be acts of Gratitude, for our Redemption through Christ. These
works must be the first means, whereby we come to know our Redemption, and
justification.

4. They are all done out of Bondage, and servile Fear. This servile fear is
never cast out, but by a sure persuasion of Gods love to us, 1 John 4.18. And
what is the cause of this fear, but the spirit of bondage? Romans 8.15.

Wherefore it does necessarily follow, That a conclusion which does stay it
self upon these legal media, works done out of this fear, is no conclusion of
Faith, but (if we may so call it) a conclusion of works, being grounded upon
works of the law. Estius (though a Popish writer) speaks to this purpose upon
Heb 8.10. Itaque fatemur, tempore veieris Testamenti fuisse novi Testamenti
filios: Et contra tempore Novi Testamenti, non paucos censeri filios Testamenti
veteris, videlicet eos omnes, qui carualibus Judaeis similes, timore poenae
legem servant, imo non servant: Sed sibi servare videntur, ut loquitur August.
lib. 3. conte. 2. Epist. Pel. Cap. 4.

The Application which I made of this Doctrine, was this for substance: They
who have no more Faith than is built upon gracious qualifications before union,
and works made first evidences, are under a covenant of works, and though they
be never so much reformed; yet will they persecute them under the covenant of
grace, as did Paul before his conversion, the Scribes, Pharisees, etc.
Wherefore if any shall profess themselves to be legal, and raise up persecution
against you, for this truth, contend earnestly for it, in a way of patient
suffering, by the sword of the spirit, the word of God. The Doctrine contained
in these three Propositions, and this or the like general hupothetical
application, was the cause of my deep sufferings. It seems that you (Brother
Weld) with some others, who prosecuted against me, did build the Faith upon
gracious qualifications precedent to union, and works as first evidences, I
censure this Doctrine of yours to be legal, as aforesaid: and hereupon you are
filled with indignation, cast me out as the filth of the world, and
offscouring of al things, make me a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and
to men, which you effect by these means.

About two months after the Preaching of my Sermon, before ever I was dealt
withal in a brotherly way, I am sent for to the Court, to answer for what I had
delivered; where I have the true cause of my sufferings suppressed, and put out
of sight, and a feigned cause closely, and secretly brought in.

Certain of my Brethren, the Reverend Elders, had a great hand in this
mysterious business; for whilst my cause was depending, long before my
banishment, an Accusation was secretly drawn up against me in writing, put into
the Court, thus inscribed:

The Grounds and Reasons of the Dissent of the Elders of the Churches, from
some things delivered by Mr. VVhelewright upon the Fast Day, which they do here
present to the Honored Court, and the Churches of Christ planted amongst us, to
be considered of; desiring Grace, Truth, and Peace, from God the Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ. In this Accusation, I am charged to have delivered these
Four Points:

I. That Faith, and Repentance, are no parts of the Doctrine of the Gospel. II.
That to evidence Justification by Sanctification, is a covenant of Works. III.
That they who see in themselves any Sanctification, and thence conclude a good
estate, shall never be saved. IV. They who hold not according to this Doctrine,
are Antichrists, enemies to Christ, and under a covenant of Works.
Whether my Brethren the Elders dealt regularly, and justly with me, either
for the Manner, or Matter of this Accusation, I shall now make it appear.

As for the Manner, I shall not much insist upon it; but the truth is, They
accuse me to the Court secretly. In the Preface to their Charge, after many
bitter invectives, ranking me amongst the instruments of Satan, acted by him,
to put down the Kingdom of Christ upon earth, because I could not do it in
heaven, etc. It is pretended by them, That they do not write so much, to
aggravate my fault in the eye of Authority, as to convince me in my Conscience,
and to bring me to Repentance: yet all this while they conceal it from me,
neither did I ever come to know of this their writing, more or less, by their
means, or by the Court, but a Gentleman my Friend, one of the Magistrates, did
procure a copy to be transcribed secretly in all haste, and sent it unto me.

For the Matter of their Accusation, I shall examine the grounds of the several
branches of their Charge:

I. They inform the Court, That I taught, That Faith, and Repentance, are no
parts of the Doctrine of the Gospel. The reason which they give is, because I
said, That in the Gospel there is nothing revealed but Christ. Surely it could
not be imagined, that I meant that nothing is revealed in the whole Gospel, but
this simple term Christ. The words immediately precedent (which they leave out,
taking that absolutely, which I spoke in some respect) declare my sense. When
the Lord (said I) draws his Elect to believe in Christ, he does not reveal unto
them some work, and from that work carries them to believe on him, there is
nothing revealed but Christ. I exclude qualifications, from that promise,
wherein Christ is revealed, offered, given to be believed on, and make it
absolute. How should I deny Faith to be part of the Gospel, in that discourse,
in which my chief scope was, to put a difference between a legal, and
evangelical Faith? The two Deputys Testimony, concerning some expressions which
I used in a Sermon at the Mount, did not agree, made nothing to the purpose. If
I had spoken something then, from which such a conclusion would follow, (which
I never did) can you necessarily conclude from thence, That I delivered the
same in my Sermon at the Fast, as you accuse me? As for this Article of your
Charge, there is not to be found in my whole Sermon, a syllable sounding that
way, ne gry quidem. To my best remembrance, all that I have spoken, taught,
written at any time concerning Faith, and Repentance, from which you might take
occasion to draw such a groundless inference, was this for substance:

1. That Faith, and Repentance are law i. e. our inherent conformity to the law
of the Gospel, in opposition to the righteousness of the Promise, which is
Christ's righteousness, and that only in point of justification. I asserted
herein no more but this, That Faith and Repentance, is not that justice for
which we are acquitted before God, it is alone, the righteousness of God which
is by Faith.

2. That these conditional Promises, believe, and be saved; repent, and be
saved; are not proper, and peculiar to the Gospel, as conditional, but common
to the law with the Gospel, though not in respect of their matter, yet in
regard of their conditional form, to difference them from absolut promises,
peculiar to the Gospel, both for matter, and form.

3. Those conditional Promises being made the whole entire Gospel, by an
exclusion of al absolute Promises, without any relation unto them, becomes a
covenant of Works for form. A mere conditional covenant is a legal covenant.
This is one essential difference, between the covenant of Works, and Grace. In
the covenant of Works all the Promises are merely conditional: in the covenant
of Grace, with relation to Gods Elect, the Promises are either absolute, or
upon conditions absolutely promised. Will it follow from these principles, That
I deny the doctrine of Faith, and Repentance to be part of the doctrine of the
Gospel, or the gifts of Faith, and Repentance, to be evangelical Graces? God
forbid I should. This is a fundamental Error of the Antinomians, who
confounding justification, and sanctification, imagine that Christ did as well
perform for us, the conditions of the Gospel, as the law, repenting, and
believing for us. All my constant hearers can bear me witness, That I have ever
Preached, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. I never
denied these conditional Promises to be part of the Gospel, but I deny them to
be the whole Gospel. I do in the name of the Lord (as I am called) exhort al
men, not only to believe, but repent, and you amongst the rest.

II. The Second Error of which you accuse me is, That to evidence
Justification by Sanctification, is a Covenant of Works. You infer this from
these expressions in the broken Notes, taken by others, (which I owned only for
substance, but not for all expressions) that if men think to be saved, because
they see some work of Sanctification in themselves, if they be saved, it is
without the Gospel, this is a covenant of works. I spoke with relation to that
which immediately went before, to wit, when the Lord is pleased to convert any
Soul unto himself, he does not reveal unto him some work, and from that work
carries him to believe on Christ. All that I affirmed herein was this, To make
gracious Qualifications previous to Faith the media, to baild that act of Faith
upon, by which we believe on Christ, is not evangelical, but legal. What though
I called them works of Sanctification? I did not mean they were such indeed,
but in the opinion of some.

III. This is the Third Error which you fasten upon me, That they who see in
themselves any Sanctification, and thence conclude a good estate, shall never
be saved. This conclusion is inferred by you from the former Passages, in none
of which I denied the evidencing of true Sanctification, but of supposed
Sanctification, as gracious Qualifications before Union, and Works made first
evidences. You reason still from that which is spoken in some respect, to that
which is spoken absolutely. You cut off, part of these defective Notes, and
give such a sense, as the words seem to carry considered by themselves, without
any Relation to that which goes before, or follows. You dis-member, wrest,
torture, by putting upon the rack, some broken Notes of an extemporary Sermon,
and make them speak what you think good against the Preacher: and where they
are altogether silent, and speak not one word, you put in words of your own,
which makes for your purpose. Let such dealings pass for current, what Sermon
can be Preached by any Minister of the Gospel, which ye may not arraign,
accuse, condemn, banish, as guilty of Heresy, contempt of Authority,
Sedition, and what not? No man can say with a good Conscience, That I did at
any time, in public, or private, in Old England, or in New, deny true
Sanctification to be a good evidence. I look at Works of Sanctification, to be
no dubious, nor litigious evidence, but demonstrative, and infallible, without
which the imagined spirits witness is delusory, and al supposed Faith is vain.
The Sanctification which I denied to be any good evidence, are certain effects
of the spirit of bondage, and works of the law; and I taught, That an act of
Faith founded upon them, is not saving, and according to the Gospel, but legal,
against them, who never knew their inward call, or hear, and learn of the
Father, and so by Faith come unto Christ. The inward witness of the Spirit, in
a simple promise of grace, is not immediately, and in it self discerned by
them, but by their legal Reformation, going under the name of sanctification.

These are my apprehensions concerning our evidencing a good estate. The
immediate foundation of that act of Faith, by which we are persuaded, That
Christ and his benefits is ours, and by which we do receive him, is the free,
simple, absolute promise of grace, applied by the spirit in our effectual call,
which is called throughout the Gospel, by way of excellency, the promise, and
therefore al Gods children are called (...), the children of the promise, Romans
9 8. This Promise indeed is indefinite, yet is it determined to every Elect
person, in his efficacious call. The indefinite Promise, with a commandment to
believe, and make it particular, comes not in word only, but also in Power, and
in the holy Ghost, from whence he can thus conclude; I am persuaded to believe
by Christ, not only outwardly in his words, but inwardly by his Spirit in my
heart, that the promise, and Christ promised belongs unto me: therefore Christ
with all his benefits is mine. The medium of the particular Application, of the
general Promise, is the inward witness of the spirit of Adoption, who, (as Mr.
Perkins says, in his Sermon, entitled, Christ the true and perfect gain)
bears witness to our consciences, of such things as God has given us in
particular, and are only in general manner, propunded in the Promise. The
Apostle Paul grounded his Faith upon this simple promise. The indefinite runs
thus; Christ loved the world, and gave himself for the world. Christ came into
the world to save sinners. Paul applies it, and makes it particular, (according
to Christ's command) for thus he expresses himself, He loved me, and gave
himself for me, Gal. 2.20. Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of
which I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. How came Paul to make this application? Because
he was persuaded thereunto, not only outwardly in the word, but inwardly by the
spirit in his heart, 1 Cor. 10.12. The Apostle John says, That he that
believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself, 1 John 5.10.
Believing on the Son of God, is the effect; the witness in himself the cause.
Mr. Calvin thus expounds it; Non dicit Deum extra loqui, sed unumquemque
fidelem intus in seipso sentire, fidei suae authorem. If it be objected, That
our first act of Faith, cannot be a persuasion that Christ is ours, because he
is not ours antecedently to our act of believing, that seems to me easily to be
answered. Christ unites himself unto us by his Spirit, in our effectual call,
infusing the seed of Faith, and al other saving graces, is in us, novo modo
operandi, gives us a new heart, and puts his spirit within us, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
Christ is ours by a passive Reception, antecedently, in order, to our act of
believing. Christ unites himself unto us by his spirit, before we join our
selves to him by an act of believing, Phil. 3.12. Faith being thus founded,
upon the free simple promise of grace, applied by the spirit of promise, is
confirmed diverse ways.

1. First by works of Sanctification, the immediate proper effects thereof. For
though the habit of Faith, be not the cause of the habits of other Christian
virtues: yet is the act of faith, the spirits instrument, to produce al acts of
sanctity, as being apprehensive of Gods grace, mercy, love in Christ, and other
motives, and perswasives, to induce to good works, receiving strength from
Christ, enabling us to perform them. So that true faith works by love, which
love, with other Christian virtues, wherein we do resemble Christ, to whom we
are united, are unto us a seal of that fellowship we have with him, according
to that of the Apostle, In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy
spirit of Promise, Ephesians. 1.13. The spirit in sealing of us, imprints in some
measure, the very image of Christ upon us, consisting in righteousness, and
true holiness, being not only holy in his essence, and nature, but in regard of
his gracious effects in us. All these works of Sanctification, are so many
arguments of the truth of our Faith, 1 John 2.3. and 3.14. They are
distinguishing marks, and put a manifest difference between the children of
God, and the children of the Devil, 1 John 3.10. They who do not know God to be
their God, as well by putting his law in their inward parts, and writing it in
their hearts, as by forgving their iniquities, were never truly taught of God,
Jer. 31.33, 34. This is one end of the spirits giving, that holy spirit, that
spirit of sanctification, not only to work sanctification, but to teach us to
know it, amongst other things, which are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.
This has been practiced by Job, David, Hezekiah, Paul, and the whole Church of
the Elect, believers, and saints, from time, to time, in all generations, who,
after that they had built their Faith upon Christ, revealed, offered, given in
the free promise, did under-prop, confirm, strengthen the same, by works of
sanctification.

2. Secondly by the immediate testimony of the holy Ghost. There is an inward
testimony of the spirit, common to al true Christians, Rom 8.16. which, I take,
to be an act of the spirit, applying the Gospel with such power, as we perceive
it is the spirit who speaks, and it be gets in us an affured Faith, 1 Thessalonians.
1.5. This is immediate, in, and by the word of grace: for of his own will begat
he us, with the word of truth, James 1.10. The immediate testimony is, (I
conceive) an act of the spirit, by which he does dictate, and strongly suggest,
with a soul-ravishing inward voice, to a believing, penitent, humble,
overcoming Saint, that he is the child of God, his sins are forgiven, or the
like, being compared to hidden Manna, a white stone, a new name, Rev. 2.17.
which does exceedingly confirm Faith, and it is not (I suppose) the portion of
every good Christian, but a special benefit given by God, who is a most free
agent, before, in, or after sufferings for the name sake of Christ, or some
special service done unto him, as God sees meet. Sundry of our learned, godly,
orthodox Divines do acknowledge such a testimony, as Dr. Preston, Mr. Bolton,
Mr. Elton, with others: and diverse of the Martyrs had experience thereof, as (I
doubt not) many Christians have at this day. This is part of the Comforters
office, (...), that which is taught in the Word, he shall bring to remembrance,
John 14.26. The spirit of truth, never reveals any thing in this kind
immediately, for the confirmation of Faith, which is not revealed, in the words
of truth. He shall not speak of himself (says Christ) he shall take of mine,
and show it unto you, Joh. 16.13, 14. This immediate Testimony differs not from
that which is mediate by the Word, in the thing testified, but in the manner of
testifying, and stablisheth the Soul, by making a deeper impression, filling it
with joy, and with the holy Ghost.

3. By spiritual sense, and experience: There is in Gods Children, not only
(...) and (...), but (...), Phil. 1.9. By reason of use, they have their senses
exercised, Heb. 5.14. and that by divine objects.

1. They are many times made very sensible of the grace, mercy, and love of God
unto them in Christ. The love of God is shed abroad in their hearts, by the
holy Ghost which is given unto them, Romans 5.5. The Lord does again and again
lift upon them the light of his countenance, and in the light of his favor,
they see the light of all felicity, Psalm. 36 9. Christ does manifest himself
unto them in the Spirit, Joh. 14.21. They hear, see, look upon, and handle the
word of life, 1 John 1.1. They taste, and see that the Lord is good.

2. They have frequently, and for the most part, as of sin, so likewise of the
work of Gods grace in them, sense and experience. The wind of the Spirit blows
into the gardens of their Souls, and the spices of saving graces, with a
fragrant smell flow out, Cant. 4.16. The Sun of Righteousness shines into the
hearts of Believers, acts upon the saving graces of his own spirit, excites,
and stirs them up, from whence a sweet scent goes out, as from some costly
perfumed Ointment. When Faith, love, joy, godly sorrow for sin, humility,
patience, with other saving graces, are vigourously acted, it exceedingly
affects the Saints, who are very sensible of it.

The Virgins love Christ, not only for the savor of the ointment of his own
Righteousness, which they perceive, and receive by faith, but even of these
good ointments powered into them, Cant. 1. The Spouse in the Canticles, David,
Paul, with others, do largely express the great sense, and feeling they had, of
the gifts of Gods Spirit in them, accompanying salvation, as an Argument of
that fellowship which they had with Christ.

3. Believers have an experimental knowledge of the gracious Works of Gods
Providence about them, which does likewise confirm their Faith. So had David, 1 Samuel 17.37. So had Paul, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18 For though there be no marks set upon
the outward acts of Gods Providence, whereby they may be discerned, to proceed
from Gods eternal, and fatherly love, yet do the children of God behold them,
in, and through the covenant of Grace, as testimonies of Gods favor, and feel
them to be such, by their gracious effects, knowing by experience, that
chastisements, and corrections for sin are for their good, Psalm. 119.71. So
that the long experience which we have of Gods grace upon us, his work of grace
in us, the gracious works of his providence about us, is a special means to
strengthen our faith.

This, (for the substance) is all that I have ever Taught, or held forth
concerning evidencing a good estate. I am not for the sole witnessing of the
Spirit, with Enthusiasts, nor of Faith alone, with Solifidians, nor of works in
the first place, with you: but of al these Three in one, and that in the
Apostles order, 1 John 5. The Spirits inward effective testimony of Gods grace
toward us in Christ, in giving him unto us, in the free simple promise, with a
command to believe, begets faith, faith produces works of sanctification,
sanctification confirms faith. Promises are so many Declarations of Gods good
Will toward us, and it is the spirits office to apply them. I do humbly
conceive, That when the Spirit of Promise applies the absolute Promise of
Grace, that by way of excellency, is called The spirits witness; otherwise I do
not see, how the spirits witness should be a distinct witness from water, and
blood: If the conditional Promise made to believing be applied, that is the
witness of blood; let the conditional Promise made to sanctification, have its
application, that is the witness of water: He who has one of these three
witnesses, has them all in some degree; and he that wants one, wants them all:
for all these three are brought in by Christ, when he comes into our hearts, in
our effectual call, as witnesses of his gracious presence. So that a Christian
can reason thus; I have the spirits witness, I am a believer, I am a Saint;
therefore Christ dwells in me, and I in him. This is the sum of all concerning
Evidencing; That act of Faith by which we believe that Christ, and his
Righteousness is given to us, and we receive him, is begotten by the inward
testimony of the spirit, in an absolute promise, confirmed by works of
sanctification, the immediate testimony of the holy Ghost, spiritual sense, and
experience. Because I would not acknowledge your works to be good Evidences,
which you will needs have to appear, before Gods Grace, or Faith appear, you
are highly displeased, and labor to make the Court, Churches, and all the
world believe, that I taught, That sanctification is no good Evidence, and if a
man conclude a good estate from sanctification, which he sees in himself, he
shall never be saved.

4. The Fourth Error which you charge me to have delivered is; That they who
hold not according to this Doctrine, are Antichristians, enemies to Christ, and
under a Covenant of Works.

If by this Doctrine you had meant, That Doctrine which indeed I taught, owned
by me in my first Three Propositions, you had done me wrong. I did never
expressly, nor implicitly affirm; That they who were not of my judgment, about
the grounds of a special Faith, or order of evidencing, were under a covenant
of Works; I was not so censorious. I doubt not but many of your judgment, who
are truly gracious, having an internal principle of true faith, byassing their
spirits another way, than they discern. The persons so judged by me, were such
as walked, and only walked according to that judgment which I condemend, not
only Theoretically, but Practically. But seeing by this Doctrine you
understand, that Heretical, Blasphemous Doctrine, contained in the three former
parts of your Accusation, which you have fathered upon me fallaciously, without
any just cause, it is a double injury, and this member of your charge, must
needs vanish away, with the rest of your devised calumnies, putting a corrupt
sense, upon certain expressions, in the Notes of my Sermon, contrary to all
rules of interpretation, divine, and humane.

This groundwork being thus secretly laid, in the conclusion, I am censured by
the majorpart of the Court, to banishment, as guilty of those two crimes,
Contempt of Authority, and Sedition. That I was justly condemned, and censured
by the court, is that which you, in your short story, endeavor to prove, but
by what evidence of reason, and force of arguments, falls now into
consideration, to be examined, and discussed.

1. First, You go about to prove that I was guilty of Contempt of Authority,
because (say you) I did not study Truth, and Peace, which Authority required.
Contempt is an act of the mind, whereby we little, or not at all regard a
thing: Contempt of Authority is when a man does willingly refuse to submit to
the promulgated just Laws, or lawful known commands of Magistrates, as such,
and hereupon proceeds to do something contrary to those laws and commands. I
know no law, or command prohibiting me to Preach what I delivered: Neither do I
see, how any such law could be just: and it will be a difficult thing for you
to prove, That I acted from obstinacy of Will, and such a defect of the Mind. I
have already proved the truth of my Doctrine, and that I endeavored to bring
my Heaters to consent to that Doctrine, cannot be denied; so that herein I
studied truth, and peace. Peradventure some Magistrates, and Elders, intended
that I should not Preach against gracious qualifications before union, and the
first evidencing of Works, but rather to have cried down the contrary Doctrine,
as Antinomianisme, and Familism: and because I did not Preach according to
their Minds, this is looked at as contempt of Authority. If to preach true
Doctrine, and unite men in the truth, contrary to the intent of some
Magistrates, and Elders, be contempt of Authority, surely the Prophets, Christ,
and his Apostles were notorious delinquents, and guilty of this crime. You
speak of other contemptuous carriages, but instance in no particulars. I came
one day tardy to the Court, of which you tell all the world, but that was from
misinformation, not out of any contempt. I used some expressions of an
acquitting glorying conscience, when I suffered such shame in your Assemblies,
and did despise that shame, and so did he who was free enough from contempt of
Authority, endure the Cross, despising the shame.

2. In the second place you undertake to make it good, That I was guilty of
Sedition, by these Arguments:

1. First (say you) I inflamed the minds of men one against another, caused
divisions, made breaches. All this was accidental. The word of God is a fire, a
sword, and hammer to inflame, divide, break in pieces. If simply to make
divisions were Sedition, it would more strongly conclude against Christ than
Barrabas. Your Arguments taken from Ethnic partial descriptions of Sedition,
are of no force against Christians. Sedition is a dividing civil Societies, as
they are combined together, in an unity of justice, and common utility. My
Division was not Civil, but Spiritual. I did not go about to divide in that
which was just, and profitable, but in that Error of gracious Qualifications
before Union, and Works first Evidencing. Paul was accused by Tertullus the
Orator, for a pestilent fellow, and a mover of Sedition, upon the like ground.

2. Secondly, You Object, That I laid most of the Magistrates, and Elders,
under a Covenant of Works. To lay men under a covenant of Works simply in it
self, is not any transgression Political, Moral, or Evangelical. The Syllogism
which concluded the Elders under that covenant, was this; They who walk in that
way described by me to be a Covenant of Works, are under that Covenant. But the
Elders Walk in that way described by me, to be a Covenant of Works. Therefore
the Elders are under that Covenant. Upon much questioning in the Court, the
major was made by me; upon a question put by the Court to the Elders, the minor
was brought into Court, in writing, by them. The Conclusion was made by the
Court. My Proposition was conditional, or equipollent thereunto, and
conditionalis prepositio nihil ponit in esse, seu nihil certe affirmat. The
Elders assumption made it absolute. The Argument by which I described a man
under a covenant of Works, were the internal motions of his spirit, known only
to God, and his own conscience, and the Argument sub una, and utraque, is not a
pari. In a word, I did not so much as in my thoughts, conclude the Magistrates,
and Elders, or any one of them, or any other person, absolutely to be under
that covenant. This conclusion, The Magistrate, and Elders are under a covenant
of Works, cannot be deduced from any thing delivered by me, without the Elders
Assumption, in which I had no hand. This was the Courts frequent, and main
Objection against me, That I laid them, and the Elders under a Covenant of
Works. I desired to know of them in what line, or page, protesting that I
neither expressed, nor intended any such thing. Far be it from me to take Gods
Office out of his hand, who is the searcher of the heart, and the tryer of the
reins of all men. If the Elders Assumption, and the Courts Conclusion be
removed, there remains nothing for me to suffer for, but only my Proposition,
which (it seems) did pungere, and cut deep. If it cannot be proved out of my
Sermon, that I said, the Magistrates, Elders, and most of the Country, were
under a Covenant of Works, etc. I am innocent.

3. Thirdly, You Reason from the Seditious Effects of my Sermon. I do not know
any following Seditious practices; But if there were any such, they are not to
be called Effects, but Events. That is put for a cause, which is no cause I do
not see any innate force in my Sermon, to produce any Effects, but these; 1. To
draw the Hearers from your Tenants about Faiths grounds, both in judgment, and
practice. 2. To Unite them in that judgment, and practice, which I apprehended
to be evangelical. 3. To contend by Arguments, and sufferings with such as did
profess themselves to be legal, persecuting them for the Truth herein, in case
any such should arise. Might not all this have been done without Sedition?
Tertullian reports, That the Gentiles used to fall upon Christians in time of
public Calamity. If Tiber and Nilus did not overflow, if the heavens
restrained their influence, if there were Earthquakes, Wars, Famine,
Pestilence, as the cause of all those evils, whenas indeed the cause was in
themselves.

4. You make a great matter of certain typical, and allegorical expressions,
which I used to set forth our spiritual combat, taken from bodily fightings, which
you would have to be understood in their literal, and proper sense, as if I
should stir up to a bodily fight. You confess that I did otherwise express my
meaning, and why will not you take my meaning as I did express it? Why might not
I use scripture expressions in a scripture sense? To cut off all your Arguments
at once; all this while you dispute ex non concessis. You have grounded the
Courts sentence, Censure, and all your reasons to maintain the justice of the
Court, upon the matter contained in that secret Accusation before mentioned,
which did never show its face openly, but acted in tenebris. Brother Weld, you
would have your Hearers to take it for granted, That I delivered that which you
charged upon me in your Accusation, to which you relate all your defense of the
Courts justice. You lay this as a groundwork, as will appear by sundry
passages in that which you call a short story, but especially in your Preface
to it. These are your words; Now you might hear one of them Preach a most
dangerous Sermon in a great Assembly; when he divided the whole Country into
two rancks, some (that were of his opinion) under a Covenant of Grace; and
those were friends to Christ: Others, under a Covenant of Works, whom they
might know by this, if they did evidence their good estate by sanctification:
These were (said he) Enemies to Christ, Herod's, Pilates, Scribes, Pharisees,
yea, Antichrists. I confess, if this were true, I had deservedly suffered. But
I pray you Mr. Weld, let me come a little closer unto you: With what good
conscience can you report these things? First, That which you relate is not
contained in the Notes of my Sermon, which I suppose, are upon record in the
Court of the Massachusetts in New England, neither immediately, nor in their
principles. Secondly, After your Accusation before mentioned came to my hands,
I sent an Answer to you Elders, which you received, showing my self much
grieved with that your clandestine, unparalled practice, disclaiming these
Errors which you charged upon me, as erroneous, and wicked, showing that you
had no ground to father them upon me. Thirdly, I was questioned in the Court
about these particulars: First, They asked me, Whether Faith, and Repentance
were any Conditions of the Gospel? I Answered, They were Conditions consequent,
but not antecedent; that is, they followed Christ's giving of himself unto us in
a free promise, but went not before. Secondly, They demanded of me, Whether
Sanctification was any Evidence of a good Estate? Yes; (said I) it is secondary
evidence, but not the first. Thirdly, The Court put this Question to me, Whom I
meant of by those under a Covenant of Works? To which I Replied, I intend it of
none absolutely, but conditionally, if they walk in that way which I describe
to be legal. I did openly in the Court, and I doubt not, in your hearing,
plainly express my sense, and meaning. Fourthly, Reverend Mr. Cotton, who
constantly in the Court stood by me, and with me, in a speech which he made,
bears this witness to the Doctrine I taught, I do conceive, and profess, That
our Brother Whelewrights Doctrine is according to God, in the Points
controverted, and wholly, and altogether, and nothing did I hear alleged
against the Doctrine, proved by the Word of God. Would that learned, judicious,
holy man of God give such testimony to that Doctrine, delivered by me, or would
you have suffered it in him, if it had been according to your Report? Certainly
he would have abhorred it, and born as much witness against it as you.
Miserable is that cause which cannot be justified, without such feigned
Accusations, against so much light. Will these their Fictions justify the
Courts acts? To set a fairer color upon your cause, and make it more probable
that I was justly condemned, and censured by the Court, you do in your short
story take this course:

1. First, You put upon me many odious, and reproachful Names: I am styled by
you an Antinomian, Familist, Libertine, Seducer; My conscience bears me
witness, That I do not hold (so far as I know) any opinion of Sectaries, as
such, nor any Doctrine condemned in any approved Council, or Synod, but such as
is maintained by some Orthodox Divines, not disconsonant from the Harmony of
Churches Confessions, though I do not build my Faith upon the Dictates of men,
but only upon the written Word of God. I am not (through Gods infinite mercy)
an Antinomian, Familist, Libertine, or any other Sectary, but a Christian. I do
(with Mr. Calvin) prefer the Papists before them: Mr. Weld would drown me in
that Pit of Heresies which was privily dug for me.

The Points of Doctrine which I held, wherein I did really differ from my
Reverend Brethren, in matters of greatest concernment, were (so far as I know)
only these Five following Positions: 1. That to conclude that Christ belongs
unto us from Qualifications precedent to Union is legal, and no conclusion of
Faith. 2. That to conclude a good estate from Works, as first evidences of our
union, is legal, and no conclusion of Faith. 3. That the Faith of Gods Elect by
which they do believe on Christ, is grounded upon an absolute promise of grace.
4. That the first evidence of Gods grace and mercy in giving of us Christ, is
the inward witness of the spirit, in an absolute promise of Grace. 5. That in
our passive conversion, we are justified by a passive reception of Christ,
precedently (in order of nature) to our act of believing.


If I may justly be branded for an Antinomian, Libertine, Familist, Seducer, by
reason of the Assertions, or such as are dependent upon them, I cannot justify
my self: yet let me be convinced that they, or any of them, are erroneous, I
shall by Gods grace retract. Errare possum Haereticus esse nolo.

2. Secondly, You would make your Reader believe, page 25. That in the Synod I
disputed, and maintained these Points contained in your Charge, which you call
the groundwork of my imagined Sedition. You know very well, Brother Weld, that
long before the Synod in my Answer to the Elders, I disowned them as wicked
Errors showing that they were your groundless Inferences, and is it likely I
should defend them in the Synod? There was no such matter. The Positions which
I brought into the Synod, (to my best knowledge) were these ensuing, which I
shall explicate, and confirm.

THESIS, I. That Assurance of Justification from Works of Sanctification, is
not our Assurance of Faith.
Assurance of Faith may be taken in a Twofold sense; 1. Largely, for whatsoever
assurance we have of Gods special love to us in Christ, from Scripture-grounds,
in which sense a conclusion deduced from true Works of Sanctification, is a
conclusion of Faith, believed in its premises, or one of them; the other being
known by spiritual sense. The witness which the spirit gives in a conditional
promise, is as true, as that which he bears in an absolute promise. No man
living (says Vega) should ever draw me to doubt of my being in the state of
Grace, if I might infer it out of two Propositions, the one believed, and the
other made some way evident unto me. 2ly. Assurance of Faith may be taken
strictly, and properly, for our first persuasion we have of Gods mercy toward
us in Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5 This distinction is in use amongst Protestant
Writers, and the Papists understand them in this sense. Certainty (says Mr.
Perkins) is either of Faith, or Experimental, which Papists call Moral.
Certainty by Faith is to apply the promise of salvation to our selves, and to
believe without doubting, that remission of sins belongs unto us. Moral
certainty is that which proceeds from Works of sanctification, as signs and
tokens of true Faith. Treat. of Con. cap. 3. Bellarmine does acknowledge this
Moral certainty, with this difference from us, That it is only conjectural: but
he will by no means admit of that absolute persuasion, precedent to our works,
calling it the Lutheran presumption. They (says he) will have their certainty
to go before their works, and not to follow them. Tom. 4. Cap. 9. De
Justificatione. So that in this Thesis: I do not deny simply, that we have any
assurance of Justification from our works of sancttification, (far be it from
me,) but that the assurance which we have from our works, is our first
persuasion of Gods Grace, and mercy toward us in Christ, which properly, in
strictness of speech, is called an assurance of Faith, is denied by me. In
which respect I said in my Sermon, That our first persuasion of Gods love was
not by faith it self. 1. By faith as an argument, though it be by faith as an
organ, or instrument. Consonant to this is that which is affirmed by Zanchy in
his dispute with Mazhacchius, about the order of evidencing our election, page
361. Thus he writes; Quis hic non videat aperte qualis fuerit sententia Buceri
in hac materia? Nimirum, ut incipiamus a priori, id est, contemplatione soluis
divinae bonitatis, and gratiae in Christo oblatae and in Evangelio revelatae:
Et inde certam persuasionem concipiamus, nos vere fuisse ad aeternam salutem
electos, ideoque; nunc efficaciter vocari. Deinde descendamus ad id, quod etiam
revera est posterius, nimirnm ad certum fidem, assensum, and obsequium vocanti
praebendum. This is all which I do herein assert, That our first persuasion of
Gods mercy toward us in Christ, is not founded upon any arguments taken from
our works of sanctification, which I have abundantly proved in my second
Proposition, whether I refer the Reader.

THESIS, II. That Justification goes in order before our Believing.
Justification by a passive Faith, goes in order of Nature before our act of
believing, which is thus confirmed.

1. We have the Spirit of Adoption, are made partakers of divine Nature, become
new creatures, before we put forth any act of Faith, 1 John 5.1. Joh. 1.12, 13.
This is Mr. Calvin's Note upon this 13. verse. Negat Evangelista posse quemquam
credere nisi qui ex Deo genitus est. Now whereas it seems by the twelfth verse
that we are not the sons of God, but consequently to our act of believing, he
does thus answer it; In respect of our sense we do not begin to be the sons of
God, but after faith.

2. We are no sooner living in the first Adam, but his sin is imputed unto us,
before we commit any actual sin, Romans 5. and by the like reason, as soon as we
live in the second Adam, his righteousness is imputed unto us, before we put
forth any act of righteousness. As in carnal Generation all men are born
sinners, even by imputation: So in spiritual regeneration, all men are born
righteous, having the righteousness of Christ imputed to them.

3. If we be not justified antecedently to our act of believing, then can a man
in the state of condemnation, do that eminent work of God, to believe on
Christ, whereas except we be in Union with Christ, and so by consequence in the
state of Grace, we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. To Believe is the act of a Person
either in the state of Grace, or in the state of condemnation. Not of
condemnation; therefore of grace, and we are justified before our act of Faith.

4. Elect Infants dying before they come to years of discretion, or sanctified
in their Mothers Wombs, are justified by the habit of Faith: Persons in this
state of Grace being adulti, cease not to be justified when they fall into
sownes, or otherwise put forth no act of Faith, which, (I suppose) would
follow, were they not justified by the seed of Faith. If the seed failed in
such a case, so much as the act does, by what band should they be united unto
Christ? And how could persons out of union with Christ be justified? The
Belgic Professors in the Synod of Dort, give this as a reason, Why the Faith
by which we are first converted, and from which we are called Believers, is not
an act but an habit infused of God, because otherwise, often upon one and the
same day, we should be Believers, and Unbeleevers; the children of God, and the
children of the Devil. It would (I conceive) upon the same ground follow, That
were we not justified by the habit of Faith, but only by the act, we should
many times be successively justified, and unjustified. Chamier thus expresses
himself, I say it is most true, That justifying Faith does follow, if not in
time, yet in order justification. Mr. Cotton says in his New Covenant, page
55. A man is as passive in regeneration, as in his first generation; only God
gives his spirit, that does unite us unto Christ, which is received by Faith,
together with Adoption, and Justification: and yet by the act of Believing we
are justified also, Gal. 2.16. that is manifested to be justified in our own
consciences.

Object. 1. This is against the judgment of our Orthodox Divines, who
generally make Faith an instrumental cause of our Justification.

Answ. They who do affirm, That in our active conversion, we perceive, and
receive Christ by an act of Faith, do not deny a passive reception precedent to
that act, in our conversion, wherein we are altogether passive.

Object. 2. The Scripture never says, That we are justified by the habit of
Faith, but rather by the act.

Answ. The Scripture does not say, That we are justified by the habit, or act
of Faith in terminis, but in sense. These are frequent Gospel expressions, We
are justified by Faith. Faith is taken as well for the habit, as the act. When
Faith is said not to fail, that is to be understood of the habit: When we are
commanded to Believe, that is meant of the act. Bucer (says Zanchy) is not
ashamed to say, That we believe sometimes in act, sometimes only in habit,
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Let a man be in
Christ, whether by the act, or by the habit of Faith, he is justified. Which
way soever Christ, and his righteousness is made ours, this righteousness is
counted to us for ours by God, who counts things as they are.

Object. 3. He that believes not, is condemned already, Joh. 3.18. We are not
then justified, but consequently to our act of believing.

Answ. The act of Faith does ever follow the habit, and in order of time, they
can scarce be distinguished the one from the other: But in order of causality,
Gods work goes before ours. A Christian is in the order of nature, in the state
of grace before Faiths act, though not in time. In a word, when it is said, He
that believes not, is condemned already; it must be understood thus: He that
believes not either actu secundo, or actu primo, else what will become of us
when we are asleep, and put forth no act of believing?

Object. 4. If we be justified antecedently to our act of Faith, then
justification goes before vocation, contrary to that Romans 8.30. And whom he
called, them he also justified.

Answ. That does not follow; Vocation is a gracious act of God, by which we are
brought into fellowship with Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. We are in our effectual call,
drawn into union with Christ, by a Physical act of God, in our passive
conversion, precedently to our act of believing. Faith goes in order before
justification, both in our passive, and active conversion: the habit in the
one, and both habit, and act in the other.

THESIS, III. That the Faith of Gods Elect, whereby they do believe on Christ,
is grounded upon a free, simple, absolute promise of Grace.
The Question is, Whether God in the Gospel do first reveal his special love to
his Elect, in giving of them Christ, and blessing through him, in a conditional
promise, or in an absolute promise? I say in an absolute. These are my
Arguments.

1. Almighty God himself, the Prophets, Angels, John Baptist, Christ, and the
Apostles, in the publishing of the Gospel, have ever propounded Christ to be
believed on, in an absolute promise of Grace, Genesis 3.15. and 15.5. Isa. 9.6.
Hos. 2.19, 20. Luke 2.10, 11. Matthew. 3.2. and 4.17. and 10.7.

2. The Elect have always founded that act of Faith, by which they did believe
on Christ, upon this principle, Abraham believed on the Lord, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness. Upon what promise did he ground his Faith?
Upon this absolute promise, Thus shall thy Seed be, Genesis 15.5, 6. This Faith of
Abraham is made a pattern for all the spiritual seed of Abraham to follow, Rom
4.23, 24, 25. Paul describes the Faith by which he spiritually lived, Gal.
2.20. In what Promise was Christ revealed? Even in this absolute Declaration of
Gods good Will toward him: who loved me, and gave himself for me. The Apostle
tells us, That all the Elect are born as Isaac was: Now we Brethren, as Isaac
was, are the children of the Promise, Gal. 4.28. In what form runs the Promise?
This is the word of Promise; At this time I will come, and Sarah shall have a
Son, Rom 9.9. The children of this absolute Promise are counted for the seed,
verse. 8.

3. The proper immediate effects of justifying Faith, do strongly argue, That
it is built upon an absolute promise powerfully applied by the spirit, in our
effectual call. How comes Faith to work by Love? It apprehends Gods love to us
in Christ. How does it cause Rejoicing? It beholds Christ given for us, and to
us out of Gods eternal love: Abraham rejoiced to see Chrtsts day, and he saw
it, and was glad, Joh. 8.56. How does it beget Peace? It looks at God as
reconciled unto us in Christ. How does it cause Repentance? It makes us
apprehensive that we have sinned against our Savior. Omnium appetitivorum
motuum causa est bonum, vel malum apprehensum.

4. As in Conjugal Contracts amongst us, the Husband does first make known his
Love, and express his absolute consent: so does Christ when he does betroth the
Church of his Elect unto himself in their effectual Call. I will say unto them
that were not my People, Thou art my People, and they shall say, thou art my
God, Hos. 2.23.

5. If our Faith be not founded upon an absolute Promise, then is not the
Covenant of Grace established upon better Promises (for form) than the Covenant
of Works, contrary to that which is affirmed by the Apostle, Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12. The New Covenant Promises are better than the Old, in this respect
amongst the rest, That they are absolute, or upon conditions absolutely
promised.

6. The absolute Promises are either only to be propounded to Believers
antecedently; or else also to Unbeleevers for the begetting of Faith: But they
are not only to be propounded to Believers antecedently. They were no
Believers, to whom the Lord by the Prophet Hosea applies the absolute Promises,
Hos. 2.19, 20. being such as were unmarried, and not betrothed to what end did
he propound them, if not to build faith upon?

7. There is no conditional Promise, or Grant in all the Word of God, wherein
Christ does convey himself over to us, for the beginning of Salvation. Christ
does absolutely promise to give us a new heart, inhabit in us his Spirit, Ezekiel.
36.26, 27. What ever the Remonstrants say, to put in any condition, is against
Scripture and Reason. Wherefore we must believe on Christ, and receive him as
given in an absolute Promise of Grace. This very Doctrine which teaches us to
ground our faith, whereby we are persuaded of Gods Love to us in Christ, upon
an absolute Promise, is maintained by Zanchy in his Miscellanies against
Marbuchius, who objects against it as one of Zanchy's Errors, and new
Revelations: but he does earnestly contend for the truth hereof, affirming of
it to be the Judgment of Bucer, and that conformable to the Scriptures. Which
he could not but embrace, proving it by Four Arguments, and Answers three
Objections. The Definition of Justifying Faith, given by Dr. Zanchy, and Mr.
Calvin, declares them to be of this mind: Faith (say they) is a steadfast and
assured knowledge of Gods kindness toward us, which being grounded upon the
truth of the free Promise in Christ, is both revealed to our minds, and sealed
in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost. They make two Essential parts of Faith, 1. An
apprehension of Gods Love to us in Christ, which is an act of the Intellect. 2.
A receiving and embracing of Christ, which is an act of the Will: And they
ground both these Acts upon a free Promise of Grace, efficaciously applied by
the Holy Ghost. These are the words of Mr. Calvin upon Gal 3.7. Faith is not an
imagination of our own forging: it is an assuredness which we conceive of Gods
Goodness, when he comes unto us, and utters familiarly his love that he
bears to us. This has been the constant Definition of Justifying Faith,
given by our Orthodox Divines in Luthers time, and of many since: Fides est
certa persuasio, et (...), qua cum servatorem amplectimur hac fiducia, quod
crucifixus, and mortuus sit in propitiationem pro peccatis, non aliarum tantum,
sed et meis. Melanchthon, Beza, with many others, describe Faith after that
manner, and generally, this is part of the description of it: Faith is a
certain persuasion of Gods mercy toward us in Christ; which they could not do,
did they not ground it upon an absolute Promise. All our Expositors of the
Creed, who make this part of the meaning of that Article, I believe in Jesus
Christ, to be, I believe that Christ is mine, and place it before that act of
the heart, by which we rely on Christ, do found it upon an absolute Promise.
Mr. Perkins in his Exposition of the Creed, says, That no man can put his
confidence in God, till he be first persuaded of Gods mercy toward him in
Christ. This is Mr. Dikes Judgment on Phil. 5. First we must believe that
Christ is ours, before we can be able to commit our selves to him, for the will
and affections follow the understanding. Mr. Cotton in his N. Covenant,
declares himself fully to be of this Judgment, and says, Faith to receive
Christ, is ever upon an absolute Promise. page 56. which is as much as I affirm.

Object. 1. The Promise propounded in the Gospel, for the begetting of faith,
is conditional, Believe, and be saved.

Answ. That is not the Gospels first Promise. There is an absolute indefinite
Promise (I take an absolute Promise for that, which shall certainly be
accomplished in Gods Elect) precedent to this, viz. The Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand, to which the command of Believing in the conditional Promise, has
relation. As in the Covenant of Works, first there is an absolute Law given,
and then a conditional Covenant made, Do this, and live: So in the Covenant of
Grace, first there is made an absolute Promise of Salvation through Christ
(taking absolute in that sense which I have named) and then a conditional
Covenant, Believe, and be saved. When I am commanded to believe the Gospel, or
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, it is intended, that I believe this absolute
Promise, not only Historically, but Applicatorily, and that I receive and rely
upon Christ promised, and then I shall not perish, but have everlasting life.
The act of faith is not terminated in the Promise, but in the simple term
Christ.

Object. 2. There is no absolute Promise of Salvation through Christ, in all
the Gospel.

Answ. That is not so. The first Gospel Promise of Grace and Life was absolute,
The seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. This is
renewed to Abraham, In thee shall all Families of the Earth be blessed, Genesis
12.3. Is not this a simple categorical Proposition, and Declaration of Gods
good will in Christ to the World? And this was Gospel which was preached unto
Abraham, Gal. 3.8. To make things more clear: Take an absolute Promise, for
that which shall certainly be accomplished, and then the Gospel always begins
with an absolute Promise both of end, and means, to wit, Salvation, and all
means tending thereunto, with relation to Gods Elect: of which kind are the
Promises before mentioned, Genesis 3.15. and 12.3. Let an absolute Promise be
taken for that which shall receive its accomplishment, without any gracious
precedent act of ours, and then the beginning of our Salvation, to wit, a new
heart, a new spirit, and faith it self, is absolutely promised, Jer. 3.33, 34.
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. If by Salvation be meant the continuance, perfecting, and
consummation of Salvation in Gods eternal, and everlasting Kingdom, that is
indeed promised upon condition, we put forth acts of faith, repentance,
holiness, and righteousness throughout the whole course of our lives; all which
conditions (as has been said) are absolutely promised, Ezekiel. 36.27.
Conditiones N Faederis, non tantum praeceptae sunt, sed etiam promissae, Embd.
Min. in the Synod of Dordt.

Object. 3. The Promises to save absolutely, and upon condition of believing,
are inconsistent.

Answ. 1. To promise the beginning of Salvation absolutely, and the
continuance, and accomplishment of Salvation, upon condition of an holy,
penitential faith, stand well together. 2. To promise absolutely, that is,
assuredly, the continuance, perfecting, and consummation of Salvation upon
condition we actually believe, repent, and obey, is not inconsistent, because
the conditions are absolutely promised.

Object. 4. The absolute Promise of Salvation through Christ, propounded in the
Gospel, is not particular, and personal, but general, and indefinite: and
therefore if we believe it by particular application, we believe more than is
revealed.

Answ. Though the absolute Promise of Salvation through Christ, be general, and
indefinite; yet is it made particular to every Elect Person, in his effectual
call. This Promise is held forth with a commandment to apply it, and make it
particular. So says Zanchy, Lib. 5. De Natura Dei, Cap. 2. and Mr. Perkins
upon Gal. 2. When we are commanded to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, this is
one act that is required of us, to believe that Christ is ours, 1 John 5.13.
Whilst this Gospel is in preaching in our effectual Vocation, the Lord sends
the spirit of Adoption into our hearts, gives us a new heart, and a new spirit,
which new spirit persuades us to believe, and apply the Promise, and Christ
promised, and it is all one as if he should call us by name, Isa. 43.1. John
10.3. They who are thus persuaded by Christ, not only outwardly by his Word,
but inwardly by his Spirit in their hearts, have a good ground to believe that
the Promise belongs unto them, and that Christ is theirs, nor do they herein
believe more than is revealed. To believe what Christ commands, is no
Enthusiasme.

Object. 5. If all to whom the Gospel is preached, are commanded to believe,
that the absolute Promise belongs unto them, then are Reprobates commanded to
believe a lie.

Answ. Zanchy upon Hos. 2.1. and Mr. Perkins in his Treatise of Predestination,
answers thus in effect: Let Reprobates believe, and they shall not find it
false, but true. But because our act of Believing, works no change in the
Object; and our believing, makes not a thing true, but it must be true before
we believe, it is not satisfactory to me. Before I set down mine own
apprehensions (with humble submission to better Judgments) I think it requisite
that some things should be premised: 1. I embrace it for an undoubted truth,
That falsum non est objectum fidei: The Spirit of Truth does not persuade men
to believe Lies. The Spirit is truth, and is no lie, 1 John 2.27. 2ly, All to
whom the Gospel comes, are not only bound to put forth acts of Evangelical
obedience, but to have the principles of these acts: for we lost in Adam the
very principles of yielding obedience to the holy Will of God, to wit,
Integrity of Nature, with the presence and assistance of Gods gracious Spirit.
So that it is a sin to be unregenerate, and to want the spirit of Grace, where
the Gospel is preached, Jude, 19. 3ly, When Reprobates are commanded to
believe, the Lord requires of them these two things, 1. That they have a new
heart, and a new spirit, which is the spirit of Adoption, Ezekiel. 18.31. 2ly,
That they Elicite an act of Faith, from this new heart excited by this new
spirit. Let Reprobates then (according to the true sense of the Gospels
Command) have a new heart, and a new spirit, and believe from these principles,
that the absolute promise of Grace belongs unto them, and they shall not
believe a lie. Neither are Elect, nor Reprobates commanded actually to believe,
immediately from the principles of Nature, but by the intervening of a new
heart, and a new spirit, which are the principles of Grace: let these
intervene, and then it is not required that they believe more than is revealed,
and true. All true Christians believe that this Promise belongs unto them, in
habit, inclination, desire, or act, of which there are many degrees.

THESIS, IV. That all Promises proper and peculiar to the Gospel, are absolute.
In the Covenant of Grace there are two sorts of Promises: Some common to the
Law with the Gospel, though not for the matter, yet for the form into which
they are put: as Believe and be saved, Repent and be saved, and these are
conditional, belonging to Elect and Reprobates. There be other Promises
peculiar to the Gospel both for matter and form; as a new heart will I give
you, a new Spirit will I put within you, and these are absolute, Ezekiel. 36.26.
Which Promises though they be propounded in the promulgation of the Gospel to
all indifferently, yet are they proper only to Gods Elect. Of these Promises is
that to be understood which Prosper speaks, Lib. 1. De voc. Gent. Cap. 9. Manet
prorsus, et quotidie impletur quod Abrahae Dominus sine condition promisit,
sine lege donavit. And of these Promises does Zanchy mean, Miscell. Lib. 2.
These. 13. where he says, Promissiones de gratuita Dei misericordia deque
certa, et aeterna salute, etsi univer saliter omnibus proponuntur, et
praedicandae sunt: ad ipsos tamen tantum electos reipsa pertinent. And again,
De Common. Divinis. Evangelium proprie quod annuntiat, id absolute citra
conditionem annuntiat. It was denied in the Synod that there was any absolute
Promises. The Remonstrants Collat. Hag. Band. page 190. lin. 22. assert, That
the giving of a new heart is promised upon condition of our actual conversion.
Others would have these Promises to be only Predictions and Prophesies, but
seem to exclude them from being any part of the Covenant of Grace, whereas they
be the chief, and proper part: or else I cannot see that our first Parents had
any Gospel preached unto them in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. There is nothing but an
absolute Promise expressed, (in which all absolute Promises in both the senses
before mentioned are wrapped up) though I doubt not but the conditional Promise,
Believe and be saved, is implied. Our Orthodox Divines in the Synod of Dordt,
stand for these absolute Promises as parts of the Covenant of Grace, against
the Arminians, and that they are proper to the Gospel in respect of their
absolute form, cannot be denied, the Law has no Promises which run in that
form. It is evident which Zanchy says, Quicquid pertinet ad legem in
scripturis, conditionale est.

I have lost diverse Notes by often removals, but (to my best remembrance)
these, with one or two more of the like Nature, coincident with them, were all
the Positions which at first I intended for Disputation in the Synod. In heat
of Discourse in that Assembly, certain expressions fell from me, which were
numbered amongst my Errors, and made the chief matter of Dispute by them who
took all occasions and advantages to make me seem erroneous. Amongst the rest
(how it came in I do not well know) I said, That Christ was part of the new
Creature. The Question is, What is meant by the new Creature, or new Man, which
Christians are commanded to put on? I answer, Partly Christ with his new
created Righteousness, partly new created qualities in us. Which (I conceive)
may thus be proved: Adam is called (...); and Christ (...). Adam is the old
man, and Christ the new man. Hereupon (tropically) all sin which entered into
the World by Adam, is called the Old man; and all that righteousness which is
brought in by Christ, is called the New man; which righteousness of Christ's
becomes ours in our New Birth, partly by Imputation, partly by Regeneration,
Ephesians. 2.15.

Object. By the Old man which we are to put off, is only meant Sin, not Adam 's
Person: and therefore by the New man, is only meant new qualities in us, and
not Christ's Person.

Answ. By the Old man may be understood, not only the corruption of Nature,
which passes from Adam to us, but his disobedience, which becomes ours by
imputation. So that in some respect we are to put off Adam, that is, the
transgression of Adam in eating the forbidden Fruit, which was his in act, and
ours (...), and originally. I am not the first who have taken the New man in
that sense, which if it be not proper, yet is it true. We are to put on Christ
as well by Faith, as by imitation. I shall not much herein contend. Zanchy upon
Ephesians. 4.24. having set down the judgment of Ambrose, what is meant by the New
man which Christians are to put on, (who understood it of Christ himself) and
of others interpreting it of new qualities, delivers his own mind, and joins
them both together. Novus igitur homo primum est Christus ipse in nobis
inhabitans: deinde ipse nova totius hominis qualitas, et natura per Christum in
nobis creata, postremo nos ipsi Christo induti, et novae illius naturae
participes effecti, et in virtute (ut loquuntur scholia) viventes. Ye would
likewise have wrested other expressions which fell from me, to a corrupt sense;
as if I denied acting from a formal principle of Grace, or that any power was
conveyed by the Commandments of the Law to act graciously, which was far from
my sense. The Opinion of Peter Lombart, Lib. 1. Did. 18. that Charity is not
any thing created in the soul, but the Holy Ghost himself, is sufficiently
confuted by Aquinas, 22. c. q. 23.2. Far be it from me to deny the work of
Regeneration or new qualities. This was my meaning in these passages; that we
cannot act graciously from any inward principle of Grace, further than we are
acted upon by the Spirit of Christ in Union. That the Commandments of the Law,
are never accompanied by the Spirit, enabling us to perform them, being severed
from Christ, and the Covenant of Grace, or before faith come. Surely I
maintained none of these Points in the Synod, which you make the Groundwork of
Sedltion.

3. Thirdly, I am much condemned by you for obstinacy after conviction. Of what
was I convicted? Was it of laying the Magistrates, Elders, and the most part of
the Country under a covenant of works, absolutely, and that to the knowledge of
the hearers, out of Contempt of Authority to stir up Sedition? Contempt of
Authority and sedition is then made the circumstances and principles of an act,
to wit the laying them under a covenant of works in that sort. If that act be
not proved, contempt of Authority and Sedition vanish away, having no subject
to which they do adhere. A man cannot be justly condemned for wilful murder
unless it appear that he has committed murder: nor can I be justly condemned
for laying men under a covenant of works in that manner out of Contempt of
Authority, to raise up sedition, except it can be made evident, that I did lay
them under that Covenant. That is then to be enquired into, and proved by the
Court that the Magistrates, Elders and most of the Country were the men whom I
described and affirmed to be under a Covenant of works: otherwise contempt of
Authority, and sedition falls to the ground having no foundation. The Court
proceeded against me (as they said Ex officio which in case of public infamy,
and manifest evidence of the fact, is not only lawful, but necessary) and when
I humbly requested of the Honored Court, that my accusers might come forth, it
was answered by them that my sermon was my accuser. Then must my Sermon accuse
me of that fact which they judged contemptuous, and Seditious, or else I am
condemned without any accusation or accusers, merely from their will, and
pleasure. How will they make it appear that my Sermon was my accuser? The
Elders in their secret Accusation, showed them a way how to do it, viz. by
forcing my Sermon to speak thus; That faith, and repentance are no parts of the
Gospel. That Sanctification is no good evidence of a good estate. That they who
see in themselves any Sanctification, and thence conclude a good estate shall
never be saved. That they who are not of this judgment, are Antichristians,
enemies to Christ and under a covenant of works. This is made the ground by Mr.
Weld in the short story but the Court did not declare themselves to sentence me
upon this proof. How then will they make my sermon my accuser. I know not how
except it was thus; To take a proposition out of my sermon. And an assumption
which the Elders brought in (as has been said) and to conclude against me as
though I had been author of them both, was the false accusation, or application
etc. of my Sermon. Do you think in your Conscience that this was conviction,
and that I persist obstinate after conviction, my circumstantial failing I have
acknowledged. I did not much inquire after an Apology which I heard was written
in the Courts defense, because I know very well that the cause was incapable of
any just defense. I knew that if all the men in the world should combine
together they could not make a bad cause good, no, not the Lord himself: the
defect lies not in God, but in the thing. Let a man twist ten thousand sins,
together, he cannot cover sin with sin. If your cause was so just and
convincing why have you deserted the true cause, and set up a new title? prove
the ground of the Courts sentence out of my sermon, or else you say nothing.

4. Fourthly, You tell a story of a man, whom (as you say) I led into these
damnable errors, and heresies.

1. That the free promises are only for them under the Law. 2. That al our
assurance is by immediate revelation. 3. That in the New Testament there are no
signs. 4. That Baptism of water is of no use to them, who are Baptized by the
holy Ghost. 5. That a man may be adopted, and not justified. 6. That every new
creature is a dead lump, and acts not at al. 7. That we have no inherent
righteousness. 8. That the commandments are a dead letter.
I do reject, and abominate al these corrupt opinions as none of mine against
which I do oppose these following positions as mine own judgment.

1. That the free promises are no parts of the covenant of works, but of Grace.
2. That we do not only come to an assurance of a good estate by the immediate
Testimony of the Holy Ghost, but also by that which is mediate, from faith,
repentance, and works of sanctification. 3. That in the New Testament the Lord
gives to his confederates signs of their being in Covenant with him both
inward, and outward. 4. That Christians who are inwardly and invisibly
ingraffed into Christ, stand in need of an outward visible baptizing into him,
and into one body. 5. That justification, and adoption, are inseparable
benefits, flowing from our union with Christ. 6. That every new creature acts
from an inward formal principle of Spiritual life. 7. That we are not only
justified by the imputed righteousness of Christ received by faith, but also
have an inherent righteousness infused into us by the spirit of regeneration.
8. The Commandments are the spirits instrument, to quicken Gods elect.
The authors of the short story, do not propound this to be credited barely
upon their authority, (for than they might have deluded the reader, who would
believe it because of their report) but this witness which they bear against
me in such a matter of weight consists of this hypothetical proposition; If M.
Wheelwright tenderly contradicted this poor man, being newly come to the
profession of religion, then must he needs learn those points of Mr.
Wheelwright, or draw them as necessary consequents from some of his Tenants

The Consequent part of this proposition does not follow from the Antecedent,
here is no good consequence. And therefore this their Testimony must needs
appear to be palpably false, to al such as have the use of reason. How they
should conscientiously ground such an accusation upon such an argument I cannot
apprehend.

5. Fifthly You much glory in my conceived ruin, and call your proceedings
against me to banishment, the Lords mavelous doings. If by ruin you mean
the ruin of my doctrine, and cause, there is no such matter, that you have not
touched: it is a doctrine and cause of your own devising, and setting up which
you have ruined. If by ruin you understand ruin in respect of my outward man,
I must needs say you have labored to the utmost, to bring me to ruin, in my
self, Wife, Eleven children, Family, posterity by such acts before, in, and
after my banishment, as I shall not now mention: (for I love not to complain, I
serve no hard master, the Lord is my shield and my exceeding great reward) yet
even in this regard, has not the Lord delivered me over unto the will of my
adversaries, blessed be his name. If I and mine be ruinated by you temporally,
and prosper spiritually, ye shall do us no great hurt by such a ruin. What
though ye thought evil against me? the Lord meant it unto good. But why do you
call your doings in exiling, and afflicting of me, the Lords mavelous doings
The question then is this; whether your proceedings against me be Gods work, or
yours? This may easily be thus determined; If you can make it appear, that I am
an Antinomian, Familist, Libertine. Seducer, guilty of Contempt of Authority,
and Sedition, The Author of al these errors, and heresies to which you relate
me, in the short story that I am such a flagitious heretic, evil man, and
seducer, and vile miscreant as you paint me forth to be, then may the
proceedings be accounted Gods work. If you cannot make this apparent, then is
your proceedings against me, your own injurious, unrighteous, and more sinful
work, in which you live impenitent to this day, by a dangerous defect which
lies in your wills, I do acknowledge that this work of which you so much boast,
was the Lords mavelous decreed, and permitted work; but if you cannot make it
evident, that it was the Lords mavelous commanded, and approved doings, it
makes nothing against me, nor for you. The Lord in mercy grant that this work
which you have made with me, that you so highly extol, magnify, and put upon
record amongst Gods mavelous doings, be never laid to the charge of New
England: If I should answer to all the objections, and criminations made against
me, by the short story, I should to little purpose weary out my self, and the
reader. What I have thought required any reply, to that I have answered, the
rest I pass by in silence, committing my self, and my cause, unto him who
judges righteously.

Mr. Samuel Rutherford in his survey of Antinomianisme finding me deeply
wounded and cast out amougst a company of Antinomians, Familists, Libertines,
as their head, and leader, by the writer of the short story, falls upon me,
smites me (...), shoots many a deadly Arrow through the very heart of my good
name. The passages which I take notice of in the survey relating to me, are
these following.

1 Except my heart deceive me, give me leave to borrow an expression of Job, if
I lift up my hand, or a bloody pen against the truly Godly, or have a pick at
holiness, let my arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from
the bone, Job. 31.21.22. Epist. Page. 1.

2 It was observed in New England, when Familists grew, and in other parts of
New England, Familists devised such a difference, between the Covenant of
works, and of grace, especially after a Sermon preached by Mr. Wheelwright a
prime familist. etc. Page. 38. 39.

3 If Familists have such revelations. 1. They see the visions of God. 2. They
speak as acted by the spirit immediately, and so we are by the same certainty of
faith to believe what H. Nicholas. Wheelwright, etc. Page 40.

4 Mr. Knop prophesied of the hanging of the Lord of Grange, Mr. John Davison
uttered prophesies known to many of the Kingdom, diverse holy, and mortified
preachers in England, have done the like: No familists, or Antinomians, no
David George, nor H. Nicholas no man of that Gang, Randal, or Wheelwright, or
Den. etc. Page. 42.

5. The first author of these wicked opinions, were, N. Wheelwright, some
adherents to Mr. Wheelwright, etc. Page. 176.

6 Mr. Wheelwright, and others were convened before a civil Court in
Massachuset. October. 2. 1637. For disturbance of the public peace, where in
the Month of March Mr. Wheelwright was convict of Sedition: upon occasion
whereof a number of Familists gave in a petition, or remonstrance complaining
that their beloved Mr. Wheelwright was condemned for no fault, whereas his
doctrine was no other then the very expressions of the Holy Ghost himself,
though he had said expressly that Magistrates, Ministers, and most of the people
were under a Covenant of works and therefore were enemies to Christ, such as
Herod, Pilate, Scribes, Pharasees, and encouraged the people to rise up against
them, as Phylistins. etc. Page. 177. 178. Part. 1.

By what I have here transcribed out of the survey it is evident, that Mr.
Rutherford makes himself my judge. Severing me (in his notion) from the sheep,
and sets me amonst goats, condemning me amongst the rest, as a man not truly
Godly. And that he so judges, he swears, oppignorating his Arm to the
Shoulder blade.

This is a dreadful sentence which is passed against me, in respect of my
personal standing, by Mr. Rutherford. If he had thus judged me according to the
Gospel, I should have trembled but because it is done according to his own
imagination, and especially the short story, I despise it. Whether I truly
fear God or no, is better known to me then Mr. Rutherford. I do not love to
speak of any great matters concerning my self, the chief of al sinners: yet
seeing I am called, and compelled thereunto. I shall a little glory in the Lord.
After seven years spirit of bondage (as I remember,) for the space of this
five and twenty years, or there abouts, ever since the loving kindness of our
Lord, and Savior did appear to the eye of my faith, justifying of me freely
by his grace, I have (through Gods infinite mercy,) known in whom I do believe,
and though I have been assaulted with innumerable temptations outward, and
inward in these perilous, deluding times: yet have I not (through mercy) put
away a good Conscience, or made shipwreck of my faith. Doubtless Mr. Rutherford
is a very learned man, and I hope, a Godly man: yet is he but a man, and this
judgment of his is merely man's judgment, it proceeds not from God. With me it
is a very small thing to be judged of him, or of man's judgment; but he that
judges me is the Lord. By the grace of God I am what I am.

After that he has thus judged my person, then he comes to condemn my
doctrine, and practice. He calls me a Familist, a prime Familist, Author of
those wicked opinions, mentioned in the short story, a man convicted of
Sedition, and what not? If I were such a man as he describes, he might well judge
me to be a man that does not truly fear God, he might know me by my fruit. But
this fruit is the fruit of my adversaries vain imaginations, and (through Gods
great goodness) did never grow on me. If I had been such a man as you represent
me to the world, the Lord himself would have Stigmatized me with a witness. If
should out of Gods judgment, grow worse, and worse deceiving and being
deceived, my folly, and madness would have been made manifest unto al men, I
should have been filthy, and unjust still: the Lord who gave Jezabel a time to
repent, and she repented not, cast her into a bed, killed her children with
death, would discover my heresy. and wickedness, (though I labored never so
cunningly to palliate the same, and all the Churches should have known, that God
is he who searches the Reins, and hearts. Rev. 2.21.22.23. You have set upon
me all the fearful works of reprobation. God takes them off by his word and acts
of providence. Is not the witness of God alone more to be credited then the
witness of you al? Indeed Mr. Rutherford glories much in one of his witnesses,
whom he supposes to be the Author of the short Story. Let it then be taken for
granted that Mr. Rutherford is my lawful judge, yet he has no witness, (so far
as I know) but the Author of the short story, who is (...), conceales his name
against natures light, and has born notable false witness against me in that
he did accuse me of seducing a man, and leading of him into many wicked errors,
upon such a weak ground as I have showed: and his other witness is Mr. Thomas
Weld, both of them being parties in the cause. Will he now condemn me upon
this account before he hear what I can plead for my self? Is this righteous
judgment? Admit there be more witnesses, and Mr. Rutherford stand up as an
other witness (for so he is in this case) it is not the multitude nor Godliness
of the witnesses that makes their testimony true, but the conformity which is
between the testimony, and the thing testified. Is Mr. Rutherford certain that
what he reports is true? He knows very well, that mendacio annumeratur
asseveratio rei incertae pro certa, quamvis putamus esse veram. Mr. Rutherford
stands as it were upon the shoulders of the short Story-writers, takes his
bloody pen (as he calls it) into his hand, draws blood of many sound men in
judgment, the dear Saints, and servants of God, whose blood in the sight of
God is precious, and what they report he reports, and more too, with much
passion, and in most reproachful language, where I leave him to stand or fall
with them.

To conclude, this is the sum of my answer to Mr. Thomas Weld and Mr. S.
Rutherford; The true real cause of my sufferings, in my Estate, Liberty, Name,
Ministry: in my Self, Wife, Children, Family, under the name of heresy,
contempt of Authority, and sedition, was that doctrine contained in my first
three propositions, wherein I differed from some of my brethren about the
grounds of a special faith, and the order of evidencing a good estate, It was
of late attempted to bring me under new sufferings for delivering the same
doctrine in a Sermon which I preached at Boston at the Court of Election, and
it was objected, that I raked up the old matter. This true cause is silenced by
them both.

Certain of my brethren the Elders devised a cause against me (as I have showed
and can prove) differing from this in substance which they presented to the
Court, yet never brought it to public view, but makes use of it amongst
themselves, prejudicing the Court and their friends against me. This false
fained cause is published by the short Story writers and Mr. Rutherford follows
them. I commit the further clearing up of these things unto the Lord, who will
bring every work to judgment with every secret thing whether it be good, or
whether it be evil. To God only wise be praise through Jesus Christ for ever,
Amen.

A Postscript.
(...). What credit is to be given to the wittness borne against me by Mr.
Weld, and Mr. Rutherford will more evidently appear by these opposite
Testimonies which I do here annex.

Mr. Cotton in his answer to Mr. Baly Page 60. 61. Makes this report; Neither
the Church nor my self did ever look at Mr. Wheelwright either as an
Antinomian or Familist Many of us knew that he had taken good pains against
both, and in that very place where he was wont to preach; insomuch that one of
his hearers (who since joined to Mr. Gortons society) openly contested against
his doctrine as false, and Antichristian. And when Mr. Wheelwright, was put out
of this Country (though he be since restored) ye if he had cleaved to the
errors the companys fell into, he would never have refused their earnest
invitation, and call of him, to Minister unto them. They sent to him, and urged
him much to come to them to a far richer soil, and richer company then where he
lived: yet he constantly refused, and upon that very ground because of the
Corruption of their judgments: Professing often while they pleaded for the
Covenant of grace, they took away the grace of the Covenant.

To The Honored general Court now assembled at Boston, the Petition of the
Church, and Town of Hampton. 26. 2. 1654.
Humbly Shows.

THat whereas our Reverend Pastor M. John Wheelwright does deeply Suffer in his
name, as an heretical, criminous person, especially by two printed books: the
one written by Mr. Thomas Weld, the other by Mr. Samuel Rutherford, Which has
and will have a sad influence upon his person, Ministry, Family, Wife, Children,
and posterity for ever; and they seem to us chiefly to ground their charge upon
this Honored Courts proceedings against him, who censured him to Banishment
for Contempt of Authority, and sedition: and condemned him in a Court order for
seducing many of the people of New England into dangerous errors, by his
opinions, and Revelations, So that it was feared, that they would make some
sudden irruption against them of contrary judgment as they did in Germany.

Our humble request therefore unto this Honored Court is, that they would be
pleased to take into their consideration their several acts concerning him and
if it appear that he suffered further then cause required through any mistake,
that some course might be taken for the healing and reparation of his name.
Otherwise (we do conceive) that we are not long like to enjoy his ministry, and
presence amongst us: whom (to our best discerning) we have ever found,
orthodox, and sound in judgment, upright and blameless in life, and
conversation. Whose departure from us will tend to our great detriment both to
our inward, and outward man, if not destructive to our peace, and welfare. We
leave our request in the hands of your worships, for whose good guidance, by
Gods gracious presence we pray.

At a general Court held at Boston, 24. August, 1654.
THis Court taking into consideration the good service, and great use which Mr.
John Wheelwright has been, and is of in the Towns of Hampton, and adjacent
places and the earnest endeavors which that Town has used for his continuance
there amongst them, and hearing that on some acts which have passed from this
Court, that Mr. Wheelwright is by Mr. Rutherford, and Mr. Weld rendered in some
books printed by them as heretical and criminous; Now that they the said Mr.
Rutherford, and Mr. Weld nor any other by their means may be led into
misapprehensions of the said Mr. Wheelwright, we do signify that Mr.
Wheelwright has for these many years approved himself a sound, orthodoxe, and
profitable Minister of the Gospel amongst these churches of Christ of which he
now stands a Pastor in one of them. This is a true copy taken out of the
Courts Records.

Edward Rawson. Secret.

The Church and Town of Hampton testify that they have ever judged me
Orthodoxe, and The Honored Court for many years. Though the Court seem to
limit their approving Testimony to certain years: yet am I persuaded that they
are so Godly, and Conscientious, that they will not say that I formerly held
these corrupt opinions charged upon me by the short story which I have since
revoked. That from the beginning of my troubles they were fathered upon me,
without any just cause, my conscience bears me wittness and God is my wittness.

J. W.

The Names of Books printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of London:
and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange.
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors Own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the Seventeenth of John: wherein is
opened, The Union believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious
Privileges thereof. Besides many other Gospel Truths, there is also showed.

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel: 3 A Lifting up for
the Cast down, 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false
Apostle tried and discovered 7 The good and means of Establishment 8 The great
things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great Gospel
Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christ's
Priestly Office. 11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and Care of his
People under Temptation 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition. 13 Grace
for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural Impossibilities.
15 Evangelical Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, etc. 17 The Woman of Canaan.
18 The Saints Hiding Place, etc. 19 Christ's Coming etc. 20 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances 21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts
Twelve Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published;
1 Gospel Reconciliation, Or Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the World. Wherein is
Opened Gods exceeding willingness to be Reconciled to Man; And Gods sending his
Ambassadors to that End. From. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 2 2 The Rare Jewel of Christian
Contentment. 3 Gospel Worship. 4 Gospel-Conversation, 5 A Treatise of
Earthly-mindedness. A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness, and walking with God. 6
An Exposition on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of
Hosea. 8 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of
Hosea, being now complete. 9 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of
sin, on Job 16.21. 10 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1. 11 Of Hope, on 1 John 3.3.
12 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7.
Mr. Buroughs his fifty nine Sermons on Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. Are Printing

A Godly and Frutful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex.

Mr Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and Cure: Discovering the Leprosy
of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz. Self-denial and Faith.

Mr. Rogers his Treatise of Marriage.

The Wonders of the Loadstone. By Samuel ward of Ipswich.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod there.

Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology,
formerly published.
1 The Idea of Practical Physic. in twelve books, Viz. 1 The art to preserve
Health. 2 Of The preternatural disorder of man's body, and their Signs. 3 Of
Medicaments. 4 Of the art of Healing. 5 Of the general Cure of Diseases. 6 Of
External Diseases. 7 Of Fevers. 8 Of Head Diseases. 9 Of middle Belly
Diseases. 10 Of Lower belly Diseases. 11 Of Venomous Diseases. 12 Of Childrens
Diseases.

Written By John Johnstone, Doctor of Physic:
1 The Practice of Physic. 2 A Sure Guide to Physic and Chyurgery: That is to
say, The Arts of Healing by Medicine, and Manual Operation. Being an Anatomical
Description of the whole body of Man, In Six Books. And adorned with a hundred
eighty four Figures cut in Brass. 3 Veslingius Anatomy of the Body of Man. 4 A
Translation of the New dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of
London. 5. The English Physician enlarged. 6 A Directory for Midwives. 7 Galens
Art of Physic. 8 A New Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 9 A
Treatise of the Rickets, 10 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common
People. 11 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.
The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin.

THere be sundry Faults escaped in the printing (without any notable change of
the sense) which the Reader is entreated to correct.

That part of the Title, Free Grace maintained against Mr. Weld, late of
New England, and Mr. Rutherford, etc. is none of the Authors.

J. W.


