A FURTHER ACCOUNT FROM Colonel VVolesely, OF THE DEFEAT of the IRISH, Written
from Belturbat, the 14th of February 1690.
SInce I writ my last, a Gentleman is come hither from the Country of
Westmeath, who tells me he saw, after the Fight at Cavan, great numbers of
Soldiers all without Arms, having thrown them away in their Flight so, that the
Road and Ditches were filled with them; that he saw likewise a great many
wounded men, among whom were several Officers; that Brigadier Nugent was
mortally wounded, and that the Irish own the loss of 300 Men, and of 14
Commission Officers that were killed upon the place. He says there is a great
quantity of Hay laid up at Finagh, and that all the Horses in the Country were
pressed to carry the same to Cavan, but that the noise of this defeat have put
a stop to it. We have taken from the Enemy 4000 l. in Brassmoney.

Just now Sir John Lanier sends us word that he marched last Friday night from
Nury toward Dundalk, that passing by Bedloe Castle, in which there was an
Ensign with 34 Men, Colonel Leveson's Dragoons immediately stormed it, killed
10 of the Irish, and took the rest Prisoners, and burnt the Castle, in which
there was a great deal of Provisions; then they advanced to the back of the
Town of Dundalk Brigadier Steward marching at the same time with the Foot to
the other side of the Town, and burnt about 20 Houses, the Garrison keeping
close within their Intrenchment: After which they returned to Nury, with a
Booty of 1000 Cows, and 200 Garrones, having had a French Lieutenant killed,
and four or five Dragoons wounded.

Our Men showed in this, as in former Occasions, a very great forwardness to
engage the enemy, notwithstanding the inequality of their number, and gave new
Proofs of their Courages and Bravery, particularly Major General Kirke's Men.
The eight French Officers your Grace sent hither behaved themselves likewise
very well.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1690.


