Sir John Wintours Vindication from the Aspersion of Destroying the Ship-Timber
of the Forest of Deane.
WHereas it has been given out that the destruction of the Ship-Timber in the
Forest of Deane was long since plotted by Papists upon intelligence with the
Pope and Spanyard for the weakening of the Naval Force of this Realm, and that
in pursuance thereof, the said Ship-Timber, has been very much destroyed, and
Sir John Wintour has been, and is a principal promoter of the said design of
destroy ing the said Ship-Timber, by virtue of certain Letters Patents obtained
from the late KlNG (ot Blessed memory) whereby the greatest part of the Soil,
Woods, Underwoods, Tyrnber-trees, and other trees, of that Forest were granted
unto him. And whereas the tenderness of that so precious a Comodity to this
Nation as Ship-timber, with the visible destruction of the same in that
Forest, has made deep and deserved impression, in the minds of many
Honorable Persons, Members of Parliament, and others, to the great prejudice
and scandal of the said Sir John Wintour, he thought it his duty to vindicate
his Reputation, so foully aspersed thereby, and for the clear satisfaction of
the said Honorable Members, and others aforesaid, to publish this short
ensuing narrative concerning the same.

It may appear by the Records of the Exchequer, That from the first cutting of
Trees for the use of the Iron-works in the said Forest, which was about the
beginning of King James his Reign, till the time that the Earl of Holland held
the Justice seat for the said Forest, which was in the Year 1636. All the
several grants of the said Woods, and Iron-works of that Forest (excepting
some very inconsiderable quantities) were made under the Great Seal, to William
Earl of Pembrock, and after his death, to Earl Philip his Brother, and once for
the term of Twelve Years to the Lord Roberts, and under those Grants so made to
the said Lords, the said Woods and Ironworks, were respectively managed from
time to time, by several persons under the Rents, and Conditions, reserved and
agreed between them, and the said Lords.

The said Earl William was a person of that eminent great honor, wisdom and
integrity, for his Country, as also the said Lord Roberts, and the said Earl
Philip so opposite to Popery, or Spanish interest, that no prudent person after
information hereof, can suspect that any of their Lordships would willingly,
and for so many years together, by cutting the said wood and trees, patronise a
treasonable design against this Kingdom.

The aforesaid suggestion was alleged at the Justice seat, held by the Earl of
Holland as aforesaid, and in that consideration, and for the necessary
preservation of the said Ship-timber for the future; all the Grants of the said
Wood, and works then in being to the said Earl of Pembrock, or any under him,
were called in, whereof Sr. John Wintour had one, for two thousand five hundred
Coards yearly, and no more, which he had the n enjoyed but for six years, and
no longer; and special order was given for an exact Survey, and preservation of
all the said Woods and Trees, to persons of special trust and merit, together
which the sworn officers of the Forest, As appears by the Records of the said
Justice Seat.

Notwithstanding within one year after, or there abouts, the said woods and
trees with their roots and spray ( viz. bows) were granted withal the
Iron-works viz. four Furnaces, and as many Fordges to Sr. Bainham Throgmorton,
Sr. Sackvil Crow Knights; John Tailor, and John Gunning Merchants of the City
of Bristol, for the term of me one and twenty years, at twelve thousand Coards
yearly besides the said Roots and Spray as by the Records appears. Which yearly
proportion in less time then the said twenty one years, would have caused the
cutting down of every tree then growing in the said Forest, as evidently
appears, by a Survey taken the year after, (in virtue of his Majesty's
commission and instructions) by Sr. William Masters, Sr. Robert Cook, Sr.
Walter Pie Knights. Na^hanial Stephens, James Kerle then Constable of the said
Forest. Adrian May gentleman of his Majesty's privy chamber specially
nominated by his Majesty, Henry Steevens, Gent, and others.

If the cutting down of the said woods and trees afterward were such a
disservice to the Nation as aforesaid, it ought rather to be imputed to those
Pattentees, then to Sr. John Wintour, though Sr. John Wintour says this but in
discharge of himself; not that he would aspearse or impute any such unworthy
design to persons of honor and worth as they are.

For by the said Commission and Survey which remains upon Record, it appears
that the whole quantity of the Woods and Trees in the said Forest (the Lea
Baley excepted) was One Hundred Fifty Three Thousand Two Hundred and Nine
Coards of Wood or there abouts, and Sixty one Thousand Nine Hundred Twenty
Eight Tuns of Timber or there abouts, or which said quantity of Timber there
was but Fourteen Thousand Three Hundred and Fifty Loads that were Ship-Timber;
and that the Trees of that Forest, were generally decayed, and nor above Five
Hundred but what were past their full growth, as by the return of the said
Commission remaining upon record does appear.

The Consideration hereof moved his Majesty shortly after to issue a Commission
to Sir Charles Harbert his Surveyor General, John George of Cirencester,
William Morgan then Soliciter to his Majesty's Council of the Marches of Wales,
Jo. Smith of Nibley Esquires, and William Singleton Alderman of the City of
Gloucester with Instructions from the Lord Treasurer and Chancellor of the
Exchequer, to make an approvement of his Majesty's said Demesne Wastes and
Soil, which Commission and approvement was executed and made with much
exactness and diligence, according to Law, by the said Commssioners, assisted
by expert Surveyors upon oath, after sundry treaties and meetings (upon public
notice thereof given) with the Inhabitants of the several Parishes and
Commoners upon several viewes of the said Wastes and Soil.

The return of the said Commission is upon Record in the Exchequer, and
likewise the particular instrument of the said agreement signed by the said
Commssion ers, and Commoners (who were of the ablest and most substantial of
the said Parishes) was also returned thither, but not now to be found.

Not long after his Majesty issued a Commission with particular instructions
from the Lord Treasurer and Chancellor as aforesaid, to Charles Bridgman Esquire
one of the Verderours of the said Forest, John a Deane Gentleman, one of the
Regarders of the said Forest,

(...) Pett and John Ducy (two of the ablest and most reputed Ship-wrights of
that time, particularly deputed by the Commissioners of the Navy trom the
Trinity House,) and others with the assistance of Ship-Wrights of Bristoll, and
other the officers of that Forest upon oath to view all the Trees within the
said Forest, that contained any Timber in them fit for his Majesty's Shiping,
and to mark the same with a Stamp, especially such Trees as were fit to be left
growing for the future, to certify the number of such Trees, and the quantity
of Ship-Timber as aforesaid contained in them.

And by return of the said Commission remaining upon Record, there were marked
with the Crown and broad Arrow Nine Thousand Five Hundred and Ninety,
containing in them F^teen Thousand Three Hundred and Nineteen Loads of
Ship-Timber, expressing the particular numbers in each respective Woodwardship,
as also Nine Hundred Eighty Five young Trees fit to be left growing, containing
in them Six Hundred Forty Nine Loads of Ship-Timber, (the Trees in the Lea
Baley being no part of the said Survey).

Hereupon after mature deliberation and public discussion at the Council
Table, his Majesty granted under the Great Seal to Sir Jo. Wintour all the said
improved Soil, and all his said Woods and Trees within that Forest, in
consideration of Ten Thousand Pounds Fine, Eight Thousand Pounds advance of
Rent, Sixteen Thousand pounds Ye^rly for six Years, and the Fee Farm rent of
Ninteen Hundred fifty PoundsTwelve Shillings and Eight Pence for ever, having
first under the Great Seal Deaforrested the same: which Deforrestation with all
others of the like nature by his Majesty or any of his Predccessours was
confirmed by Act of Parliament 17. Carol. Which Patent of Deaforrestation by
the late King was taken from Sir John Wintour by General Desborow, or by his
appointment.

There is reserved in the said Patent to his Majesty, Fifteen Thousand Tuns of
Ship-Timber without paying for the same, with Proviso if there prove not to be
so much, that then Sir John Wintour was to pay Nine Shillings for every Tun
that should be wanting of the said quantity, and if there proved to be more
then the said Fifteen Thousand Tun, his Majesty was to allow the said Sir John
Wintour the like rate for such surplusage.

The like reservation upon the same terms was made for the young trees more
or leffe that should be left standing as aforesaid, wherewith Sr. John Wintour
was chargeable for the preservation of so many as were growing upon the Lands
improved and granted to him as above said, but not of these growing on the
4000. Acres set out for Common.

Note that a tun of Timber cut into Coard-wood is not worth by a great deal so
much as the rate abovesaid, so that such misconversion of Timber could not but
be a great loss to the Pattentee.

Moreover Sr. John Wintour was obliged by the said Pattent to grant to Sr.
Bainham Throgmorton, Sr. Sackvil Crow, John Tailor and John Gunning thirteen
thousand five hundred Coards of wood yearly, with two of the Furnaces and four
Forges for six years, whereby it appears that half of the wood in the said
Forest was to be cut down by them, though all seemed to be done by Sr. John
Wintour.

Sr. John Wintour incoppiced five thousand acres at least of the said soil for
future growth of wood and timber, which afterward was destroyed and burned by
some disorderly and unknown persons.

Sr. John Wintour enjoyed this Pattent but one year and a half, and in that
little time preserved and left lying upon the ground seven thousand seven
hundred ninty eight Loads, and twenty eight foot of Timber, as appears upon
record, which was more then had been preserved in all the cutting in that
Forest of twenty years before. Sr. John Wintour makes no benefit of his Patent
at the present, nor has done this nineteen years, since which time there has
been cut down about threescore and ten thousand trees, and in all that time but
two Ships built, and much of the Timber for the said Ships was taken out of the
Lea Baley which was totally excepted out of his grant.

If a better way can be thought on for the preservation of the Ship-timber
present or future, or that more will be given his Majesty, then what he is to
pay, or that a greater proportion of Common then the four thousand acres may be
allowed to the Country which in such case is to be discounted to the Pattentee.
Sr. John Wintour humbly offers to submit all his interest to the justice and
wisdom of the Parliament upon satisfaction for so much as he is bona fide out
of purss for the same, notwithstanding the profit that he might otherwise make
thereby.

August the 7^ 1660.

