By The King A PROCLAMATION
WILLIAM R.

WHereas His Majesty has received Information upon Oath, That the Persons
herein after Named have with diverse other Wicked and Traitorous Persons Entered
into a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, to Assassinate and Murder His
Majesty's Sacred Person; for which Cause several Warrants for High Treason,
have been Issued out against them, but they have withdrawn themselves from
their usual Places of Abode, and are Fled from Justice; His Majesty has
therefore thought fit (by the Advice of His Privy Council) to Issue His Royal
Proclamation; And His Majesty does hereby Command and Require all His Loving
Subjects to Discover, Take and Apprehend James Duke of Berwick, Sir George
Barclay, Major Lowick, George Potter, Captain Stow, Captain Walbank Captain
James Courtney, Lieutenant Sherburne, Brics Blair, Dinant, Chambers, Boise,
George Higgens, and his Two Brothers, sons to Sir Thomas Higgens, Davis,
Cardell Goodman Cramburne, Keys, Pendergross alias Prendergras, Bryerly,
Trevor, Sir George Maxwell, Durance, Fleming, Christopher Knightly, Lieutenant
King, Holmes, Sir William perlins, Rookwood, wherever they may be found, and to
carry them before the next Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, who is hereby
Required to Commit them to the next Goal, there to Remain until they be thence
Delivered by due Course of Law. And His Majesty does hereby Require the said
Justice or other Magistrate immediately to give Notice thereof to Him or His
Privy Council. And for the Prevention of the going of the said persons or of
any other into Ireland, or other Parts beyond the Seas. His Majesty does
Require and Command all His Officers of the Customs, and other His Officers and
Subjects of, and in the respective Ports and Maritime Towns, and places within
his Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, That
they, and every of them, in their respective Stations and Places, be careful
and diligent in the Examination of all persons who shall pass, or endeavor to
pass beyond the Seas; and that they do not permit any person whatsoever, to go
into Ireland, or other places beyond the Seas, without a Pass under His
Majesty's Royal Sign Manual, until further Order. And if they shall Discover
the said persons abovenamed, or either of them then to cause them to be
Apprehended and secured, and to give Notice, as aforesaid. And His Majesty does
hereby Publish and Declare to all persons who shall Conceal the persons above
named, or any of them, or be Aiding and Assisting in the Concealing of them, or
furthering their Escape, that they shall be proceeded against for such their
Offense, with the utmost severity according to Law. And for the Encouragement
of all persons to be Diligent and Careful in ^ndeavouring to Discover and
Apprehend the said persons. We do hereby further Declare, That ^hosoever shall
Discover and Apprehend the persoas above named, or any of them, and shall bring
them before some Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate, as aforesaid, shall Have
and Receive as a Reward, the Sum of One Thousand Pounds; which said Sum of One
Thousand Pounds, the Lords Commissioners of His Majestis Treasury, are hereby
Required and Directed to pay accordingly. And if any of the persons abovenamed
shall Discover and Apprehend any of their Accomplices, so ^s they may be
brought to Justice, His Majesty does hereby Declare, That every person making
such Discovery, shall have His Majesty's Gracious Pardon for his Offense, and
shall receive the Regard of a Thousand Pounds, to be paid in such manner as
aforesaid.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Twenty third day of February 1695/6. In
the Eighth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson Printer to His most
Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM, 1696.


