Wonderful and Strange NEWS FROM Scotland, BEING A true and full Relation of a
Person lately Deceased at the Town of Dumfreez, whose Corpse could by no Art of
Man, or Strength of Cattle, be Removed from the Place where it Lay.

And when the House wherein it was, was wholly Burnt down to the Ground, the
Body, Coffin, and Table whereon it stood, remained Whole and Untouched, and so
Continues to the great Astonishment of all Spectators.

Faithfully Communicated by a Person of Quality, in a Letter from the said Town
of Dumfreez. Dated September. ^8. 1673.

Great and Wonderful are the Works and Judgments of Jehovah; And who can find
them out? London, Printed for B. H. Anno Dom. 1673.

Wonderful and Unparralleld News from Scotland.
WHether those St pendious Operations of Omnipotency, which dim-sighted
Humanity admires by the Name of Miracles, and Infinite Wisdom made use of for
Confirming and Propagating Evangelical Truths in the In^ancy of the Ch^^ch, be
yet totally Ceased* is a Disp^te too Abstruse and Curio^^ to be Discussed (much
less Determined) by our ^e^er Pen: Yet this we must declare, that the ens^ing
Na^rative carries with it so much of Rarity and VVonder, that had we not been
well Satisfied in the worth and Credit of the Relaters we could not have
presumed to Expose it thus publicly to the World without much Caution and a
large Apology.

But being amply Convinced of the Truth of the thing as to matter of Fact, we
conceive it a Duty rather than Crime, to Divulg^ (...) Register so Eminent and
Signal an Accident (or rather Di^pensation of Providence) to the View of the
present Age an notice of Posterity: Not that we are Ignorant how Obnox^ous
generally (and sometimes for good Reason) s^^n Relations a^e to Suspicion and
Censure, and how ready those that Pride themselves in being counted mighty
Wits, as they make a Mock of Sin, are to turn the most dreadfu^ Judgments into
Scoff and Drollery; from such we may expect a Thousand Intorrogatives. As
wherefore? To what end? By what means? And how? could such a strange thing as
this come to pass, etc. But our Answer is as ready, that, Had we designed to
abuse the World with a Fiction, an ordinary Invention might so Artificially
have composed a Story, as might have been Plausible enough to Answer all the
Nice Scurtinies of their wanton Imaginations: But that is a Liberty we dare not
take, and only shall Nakedly set forth the Truth of the thing as it happened,
and leave each Reader to make his own Gloss or Comment on it afterward as he
pleases.

IN the Town of Dumfreez (Situate in Galloway, on the South of Scotland, near
the Marshes or Borders) there lately Dwelt an Ancient man, of an ordinary
Fortune, who in the second week of this last September, happened to fall very
Sick, his Distemper seemed to be only a violent Fever; nor was there any thing
Extraordinary in it, but this: That as he was Seized with it, he declared to
his Wife and Neighbors, that he should certainly Die of that Sickness, which
continually prevailing against Languishing Nature, soon persuaded them also to
be of the same Opinion. But the very day before he departed this Life, he
charged his wife to get him Buried within Three Hours after he should be Dead.
This his sorrowful wife little Regarded, thinking them only to be Extravagant
words that proceeded from the Distemperature of his Brain: which he obsorving,
Repeated the same Injunction several times, both to her, and diverse others of
his Friends; very solemnly adding, that unless they did so Bury him in that
short space, they should never be able afterward to bear away, or remove his
Body. They asked him often, what he meant? And why he should say so? But could
procure no Answer from him, but this, with many deep sighs, It would be so.

The Malignity of the Disease was now arrived to the height, that Nature
overpoured, could no longer-resist, so that on the 28th. of the said Month of
September last this poor Creature was forced to quit the Stage of this
Tran^itory Life; Dying in a calm and ordinary Temper, without declaring much
his hopes, or betraying any symptoms of despair.

His enfranchised Soul had no sooner quitted the Prison of his Body and was
wafted to Eternity, but his Friends remembering his Charge of being speedily
Buried, resolve to make a Truce with their Griefs, and not ^t still stupefied
with an unprofitable Sorrow, but rather execute as fast as they can his dying
Commands in that particular: To this purpose a Coffin is immediately sent for,
and the Corpse as soon as said forth put into it, being placed on a Table in a
Ground round, Neighbors are invited, and all preparation made to inter him
that very Night; but the three hours were Elapst, It being almost impossible to
provide all things in so small a time. At last the Company being met with
Charitable intentions to bear and Accompany the body to it is long home, in the
place Sacrated and set a part for that purpose, which was above half a Mile
distant, when they went to take up the Coffin. Behold! It would not stir, four
or five men confessed themselves too weak, and then the whole Company add their
helping hands but to no purpose, the Coffin seems fixed to the Table to grow
out of the Ground, rather than stand there, so that neither one nor the other
could by all their strength be removed, or stirred in the least.

This accident astonishes all the Company, who having wearied themselves to no
purpose, repair at night to their respective Habitations filled with
Admiration, and leaving the disconsolate Widow and her poor Children, in the
House equally ore whe^m'd with Grief, and affrighted with this new kind of
Prodigy.

Next day New Counsels were taken about carrying away this Corpse, Since the
Coffin could not be stirred, nor the Table moved by strength of Man, they
resolve at last to try what may be done with that of Cattle; and to come at it
conveniently are forced to pull down a wall and one side of the House, which
being done, they fasten several Teems both of Oxen and Horses to the Coffin
sometimes, and sometimes to the Table: But both remain still as fixed and
immovable as a Rock, and which was remarkable though the strength of the
Cattle broke, most of their Tackling, yet neither the Coffin nor the Table,
received the least prejudice.

They then essayed to open the Coffin and take out the Body, but that neither
could be done; so that at length dispairing of any success, they give over
attempting any thing further, but a ^^i^e^ the poor Woman and her C^ildren, to
get out of the House, and so ^eave it standing; which they did accordingly, and
carried all their moveable Goods to another House in the Town.

Thus the Corpse stood in the f^rsa^en Tenement for two or three days, and had
as many wondering Pilgr^ms to visit it, out of Curo^^ty* as Superstition in
Fo^eign parts carries to the Tomb of some Celebrated (...).

At last the Land Lord of the House who dwelt some Miles distant, hearing great
R^port of this Prodigy, came to see it; and fin^ing ^ll things as we have
r^lated, because his House by this means wa^ rendered Incapable of being
Tenanted (for who would willingly dwell in a Charnel House) and that it was
before old and ruinous, resolves wholly to demolish it, and build a new one in
the place, and that he might be rid of this unparalleld Tomb, concludes to set
the House on Fire, not do^bting but thereby the Coffin, Table, and Corpse would
together with the rest be so^n reduced to Ashes; but he promi^ed himse^f too
much, for when they had set ^he House all on Flames, and the same was wholly
Burnt down to the Ground. The Coffin and Table stood as before, whole firm and
untoucht.

Seeing all ways fail, some Friends of the deceased, after the House was Burnt
took the pains to cast up Earth about Table, and at last have covered the
Coffin with that Bank which yet can never hide the strangeness of the thing,
b^t that it will remain a wonder and a Rid^le to fu^ure Generations. And such
we leave it, without any impertinent di^qui^^tion after the Cause of so
Admirab^e Phen^^^non, or Saucy prying into the Eternal Doomsday Book of
Providence; which sometimes for Reasons only known to its infinite Wisdom
suffers wonderful things to come to pass, and often (as in the well known Case
of Lots Wife turned into a lasting Pillar of Salt) sets up amazing Monuments of
Divine Justice for Sin, to warn and deter others from such Crimes. Let not the
Reader busy himself so much in gue^sing what notorious off^nce could cause the
Infliction of so strange a punishment, or branding the Deceased Party with
harsh and unwarrantable (because uncharitable) Censures, as to forget his own
Duty, which is to become more Holy and more Humble, by such dreadful Examples.
And so to work out ^h^ Sa^vation with Fe^r and T^em^ling, That when himself
shall be Summoned by Death, however Providence shall dispose of his Body, His
Soul may be received into the Mansions of Bliss and Glory.

FINIS
IF the Reader doubts of the Truth of this Matter, He may Repair to these
Persons following,

Mr. Edward Crouch, Living in Cow-Lane. Mr. Humphry Eeds, Living in
Princes-street. Mr. Stephen Harwood, Living on the backside of the Exchange.
Mr. Edward Barker, Living in Dunnings-Alley, without Bishops-Gate. Mr. John
Ames, Living at Tobie's Coffee-house, near Pie-Corner.

