ELIXIR SALUTIS* OR THE Great Preservative O^ HEALTH CALLED BY SOME The
Never-failing CORDIAL of the World.

Being most pleasant and safe for all Ages, Sexes, and Constitutions, and may
be taken at any time of the Year; and in the Spring and Autumn is far beyond
Diet-drinks for most Distempers; and is so Universal, that I may justly say
(without Ostentation) it performs all the practical part of Physic, both
Preservative and Curative better than any other yet found out for the use of
man: And being kept close stopped, will hold good for many years.

Experienced by my Self, and thousands in this Nation within these three years,
whereof the Names of so many persons, of so good Quality, Reputation and Credit
are inserted in my Paper, as (in spite of Envy) will vindicate my Cordial
against any malicious Tongue whatsoever.

My Habitation being distant from London, I have left the whole management of
my business with Mr. Samuel Amy, next door to the Mortar in the Pall Mall.

The Price in London is Two shillings the half Pint Bottle.

Prepared by me Tho. Witherden of Bearsted in the County of Kent, Gent.

London, Printed in the Year, 1679.

THough I have not the impudence to brag of great Travels, long Journeys, many
Voyages, and what Wonders I have done beyond Sea; nor am ambitious to show
large Parchments, Broad-Seals, etc. nor sinistrously covetous of popu^^^
Applause; yet modesty will justly allow me so much confidence, (...) to tell
the World, that I have (for these many years) been my own Physician and
Patient, my Education and Learning correspon^^^^ to my condition of Body, which
from my Infancy being unhealthy, prompted me to a serious and continual study
of Physic, which by the blessing of God upon my own Industry, I have improved
to that degree, that having freed my self from many infirmities that long
troubled, or rather oppressed me, I have been willing to communicate freely to
others what I chargeably practiced upon my self, for having been long, often,
and vehemently afflicted with the Gra^el and Stone; I tried many Experiments
that gave some case to me (and afterward proved beneficial also to my ^^iends
and Neighbors; and at length Providence put into my ^^^d the Description and
Preparation of an Excellent Liquor ^obtained of an Eminent Person) by which
alone, with Gods ^^^ssing, I have recovered, and do enjoy so much Health; that
whereas formerly, for many years, I could neither ride nor walk without great
pains, and very bloody Urines, as is well known to all that knew me, I can now
do both; and have since recom^^^ded it to many Friends, which has been found
by all that ^^v^ a most Sovereign Remedy for most distempers they used (...)
for: But after some time, I understood that one Mr. Anthony D^^^ had exposed
the same to public Sale, which at first I did won^^^ at* but resolving to make
a narrow scrutiny in it, I traced it till (...) ^tred in the same Author with
me: Whereupon several times ^o^sulting with my self, and some good Friends,
knowing the real worth of the Thing, and the just reputation it has got in
several place under the Title of Elixer Salutis; I thought it my Duty, both for
my own and the Common Good, to make it more public, by ^^tti^g it out at a more
reasonable rate: That so many of the mean^^ sort which labor under several
Distempers, may more easily attain to a Remedy. I do sell the same for quantity
and quality com^^^^ded of the same Ingredients (and certainly more exactly
prepared) at five shillings the pint in the Country which he s^^^^ for six,
and so proportionably to greater or lesser Bottles. I told you in my first
Impression, that it was very probable that self-interest would prompt Mr. D^ffy
to calumniate me as an Impostor and a Counterfeiter of his Drink; and like
Diara's Crafts-men, would not scruple to vilify another man (by whom his gain
is pared off) to stitch up his own Reputation. And indeed I was not mistaken;
but he has done it so pitifully, that all understanding persons admire at the
folly of it, especially that he should have no more wit than to confess the
Receipt in his idle Pamphlet; only he tells you what great alterations he has
made in it by his great Reading and Studies. A very wonderful thing! that such
an illiterate Fellow should be able to add to such an Excellent Receipt! Will
not all persons stand amazed at such a sudden Metamorphosis of Modulus into
Medicus, of an Awl into an Urinal, etc. knowing that Nemo repent fuit
doctissimus; but if this great Student have made any alteration, whether or no
he has not made it worse, I leave others to judge. I shall not further trouble
my self with his impertinencies, let him say what he pleas^s: For my own part,
I am so well known to most persons of Quality; and others of good Repute in the
Country where I live, and by many worthy Citizens of London, that my Person is
above the prejudice of any malicious or detracting Tongue, where I am known;
and where I am not known, let the drink plead for it self and me. And that
which is called the Elixir Salutis, that it is the same with mine, I affirm;
and for the Truth thereof, I appeal to any judicious person who will but try
them both, and I will abide by his impartial Censure. And there are several
considerable persons already both in the City and Country so well satisfied in
it, that they have left off all others, and do now wholly stick to the use of
min^* and for others that through opinion or mere fancy esteem any thing the
better because it is dearer (as some such there may b^^ I shall desire them but
to try before they pass Censure on me or my Cordial, which is but just;
otherwise they are but vain and rash; but I hope I shall not meet with many
such; and if any do it through ignorance, I would have them remember the
proverb, Ne suitor ultra crepidam; which, lest those ignorant ones (if any such
shall be) should not understand, it is in English, Shooemaker, meddle not with
any thing beyond your Last.

This Cordial is of so transcendent a Virtue that scarce any Internal Distemper
(of whatsoever Nature whether Acute or Chronical, Continual or Periodical,
Simple or Complicated, proceeding f^o^ whatsoever Cause either Occult, or known
by the name of any of the First, Second or Third Qualities,) can escape its
force and ^a^y; and among all that have had it of me, I have not known two
persons disappointed in their Expectations: But the Constitutio^s of persons
are so different, that it is impossible the same Dose should serve all people;
therefore something must be left to the dis^^^tion of those that use it,
supposing them to know the temper of their own Bodies: Therefore where three
spoonfuls is prescribed, if the patient be laxative and easy to be wrought
upon, such may be^^^ with one or two spoonfuls, and increase the Dose as they
see occasion; and others that are costive, and of strong Bodies, may take (...)
spoonfuls; but however, it is so gentle and safe in its operatation, that no
great Error can be committed in the taking of it; and it has this rare
property contrary to most Physic, that it leaves the Body in a good condition,
without a binding quality after it. But I shall give those Directions that were
communicated to me, together with the description of the Cordial, and which I
have found by experience to be most beneficial upon several persons that have
had it of me, as I could give an Instance by setting down the Names of
hundreds; and I am well assured, that not any one that makes trial of it, will
repent it. But I shall not give the Reader so much trouble. But to satisfy the
world that Daffy has abused me, I have set down the Names of several persons
of good quality, most of them ^^ve had the trial of both; but finding most
benefit by mine, have done me that favor as to give me le^ve to insert their
Names, viz. (...) Nicolas Carew of Beddington in S^rrey, Dr. Laurence Womock,
(...) Deacon of S^f^^^^; Edw. Har^y of Adston in Northamptonshire, ^^q J^^n
Highlord at M^^^am, Esquire; B ^r. Det^^^k Esquire; Will. Maddox of Thurnham in Kent,
Esquire; Mr. Thomas Bret at Romny, Mr. Edw. Mason (...) Gr^^^send in Kent, Mr. John
Law, Mr. John Crisp, and Mr. Tho. M^riam at Maidstone in Kent. Mr. Will. Godfry
at Thurnham in Kent, Mr. R^b. Maddox at Summers-Key, Mr. Mat. White in St.
Thomas Apo^t^^^. Mr. Hen. Alford at the Rose and Crown in Grace Church-street.

Now I hasten to the particular Direction, wherein I shall not put the Readers
Intellectuals upon the Rack with a multitude of crabbed w^^ds picked from others
(my former Industry having freed me from ^^y necessity of soaring with borrowed
wings) nor shall I ransack t^^ pathological part of Physic to trouble them in
every Paragraph (...) particular enumeration either of Symptoms or Signs
Dia^n^stic; It were a superfluous vanity, but shall satisfy my self and them
with a brief, yet full declaration of what I know most material and beneficial
to them, and that in plain and familiar terms; for Ornari res ipsa negat,
contenta doceri.

The Method and Orders to be observed in the use of this Cordial.
For the Stone or Gravel in the Kidneys.
Take three spoonfuls last at night, and first in the morning, and an hour
after it take one draught of Posset Drink made with White Wind, or Ale if they
have it, and boil in it a few Marshmallow Roots; or for want of them, the
Leaves of Common Mallows, and sweetened with Sugar if they please; continue this
for two or three days, and then rest a day or two as they please.

Stone in the Bladder.
Take the same Dose of three spoonfuls morning and night, so long as your
strength will admit; and then rest a day or two, and then take it again, and
with patience continue the use of it; for this is not a Distemper for which a
Cure must in a little time be expected.

Exulceration of the Kidneys, or Neck of the Bladder, and for a Bloody Urine.
Take three spoonfuls night and morning for two days, and then rest two days,
and then take it every other day; and I advise them when Cows go to Grass, to
drink new Milk as often as they please, which is the Method I have used my
self, and found benefit by it: They must refrain Salt Meats, and Stale D^ink,
and Sharp Wine.

Dropsy.
If the Patient be of a strong Constitution, let him take four spoonfuls night
and morning four days together; then rest two da^^ and then take three
spoonfuls morning and night.

The G^ut.
Take three spoonfuls last at n^^ght, and first in (...) mor^i^^ co^^^nue it so
long as they find they can conv^n^^nt^^ (...) day, or longer if they can, and
then rest a day o^ two (...) ^^^^^w the same course again; If th^^ find that
they h^v^ not a go^d ^^^^stion of their Meat, then let them after the (...) ^o
4 d^^^^ (...) it (and resting a day or two) take two at nig^t (...) morni^^ ^^d
one spoonful an hour before dinner.

Cholick and G^iping in the Gut^.
When the Fit is upon the Patient, let there be given (...) spoonfuls, ^^^ch I
have not often known to fail; b^t if it co^, l^^ them ^e the same Dose six
ho^^^ after; and (...) (...) to t^ke of it morning and night for two or three
days, to ^^^^y off that Humor which caused those Obstructions.

Phthisick.
Take three spoonfuls night and morning for two or three days; (...) take one
spoonful morning and night, and an hour before dinn^^: I advise them likewise
to drink their Beer hot; and for those ^^^ can afford it, let it be sweetened
with Loaf-Sugar.

Scur^y.
Known by knots in the flesh, spots in the skin, and looseness of the Teeth:
Take three spoonfuls morning and evening for two days, then rest two days; then
take two spoonfuls morning and evening for two day^, and rest other two days;
and so continue that Method for some time, according to the patients own
discretion. It is (...) excellent Medicine for those that go Sea-Voyages, and
will (...) good in the longest Voyages.

Surfeits.
Take three in the morning, and three at night for three days* and whoever has
drunk bad Wine, or too much of good, let them take three spoonfuls over night,
and three next morning, and they will owe me thanks for my Advice.

Fits of the Mother, and Vapors from the Spleen.
Let the patient begin with one or two spoonfuls and so continue, o^raise the
Dose as they find their Bodies able to bear it.

Green Sickness.
According to the Age and Strength of the patient, let the patient take one,
two, or three spoonfuls morning and night, and use exercise, and there i^ no
question of a Cure, if it be continued for a little time.

Childrens Distempers.
Whether the Wo^ms, Rickets, the Stone, Convulsions, Gripes, Kings Evil, or any
other Distemper; the best Direction is, to leave it to the discretion of the
parents; and if the Child be young, to give it a small quantity mixed with some
proper Vehicle for the Distemper you give it for; but as I have used it to my
own Children with good success, I give a spoonful to one two years old, and two
spoonfuls to one of six; but for the exact Dose, the observation of the parents
will direct them.

L^s^ of Appetite.
Let two or three spoonfuls be taken morning and evening for two days, and then
intermit two or three days, and so take of it, or forbear it as they please. I
have known several reap great benefit in taking less than half a pint.

Consumption and bad Digestion.
Let them take one spoonful an hour before dinner, and another spoonful after
dinner.

Agues.
An hour before the Fit, take three spoonfuls; and six hours after take two
spoonfuls; and continue this Method according as the strength of the patient
will admit.

My Bottles are sealed with my Seal, being the same Coat of Arms as is on this
Paper, and are sold by these persons as follows. IN Westminster Hall, by Mr.
Will. Henseman, Bookseller. In the Strand near York-Buildings, by Mrs. Seward,
at the Flower-pot At Charing Cross by Mr. Trulock a Gun-smith. In the Strand,
over against Exeter Exchange, by Mr. Samuel Lownds, Bookseller. In
Bedford-street in Covent Garden, by Mr. Thomas Moody, Shoemaker, at the Queens
Head and Crown At Temple Bar, by Mrs. Fowkes at the Civit-Cat. In St. Paul's
Church yard, by Mr. Robert Cla^el at the Peacock, Bookseller. At Mr. Brew^^^
Cof^ee-house at Guild ^all. In Bart^^l^mew-Lane, by Mr. Kid at the Amsterdam
Coffee-house. In Swithin^s-Alle^, at Joes Coffee-House at the Blew-coat. In
Bishops^ate-street, by Mr. Richard Tooth, at his Coffee-house ne^r the Old
Post Office. At the Corner of Eastcheap, by Mr. Wright a Millener. In
Thames Street over against the Custom-house, by M. Rob. Smithers. At
Ratcliff-Cross, by Mr. Muckelt, at the Castle. At Billingsgate, by Mr. James
Town at his Coffee-house. At the Spur-Inne in Southwark, by Mrs. Turwit. At the
Christopher in Barnaby-street, Southwark, by Mr Chambe^^. Mr. John Hale, Barber
in I^y ^a^e Mr. Crag at his Coffee-house in Buckler^ be^ry. Mr. Henry Gard^ers
Coffee-house at St. Mary O^erie^, D^^k. In Piccadilly, by Mr. F^st^r at the
B^ar. By M^. Goodfellow, Grocer, against Somerset-house-gate in the Stra^d By
Mr. St^phen Alden



