By the KING and QUEEN, A PROCLAMATION, In Order to Their Majesty's intended
Coronation.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas We have resolved, by the Favor and Blessing of God, to celebrate the
Solemnity of Our Royal Coronation upon the eleventh Day of April next at Our
Palace at Westminster; And forasmuch as by Ancient Customs and Vsages of this
Realm, as also in regard of diverse Tenures of sunday Manors, Lands, and other
Hereditaments, many of Our Loving Subjects do Claim, and are bound to do and
perform diverse several Services on the said Day, and at the time of the
Coronation, as in times precedent their Ancestors, and those from whom they
claim have done and performed at the Coronations of Our Predecessor Kings and
Queens of this Realm: We therefore, out of our Princely Care for the
Preservation of the Lawful Rights and Inheritances of our Loving subjects, whom
it may concern, have thought sit to give Notice, and publish Our Resolution
therein, and do hereby give Notice of, and publish the same accordingly. And We
do hereby further signify, that by Our Commission under our great Seal of
England, We have Appointed and Authorized Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved
Cousin and Councellor Thomas Earl of Danby, President of Our Council; Our Right
Trusty and Entirely Beloved Cousin and Councellor George Marquis of Hallifax,
Our keeper of Our Privy Seal, Our Right Trusty and Right Entirely Beloved
Cousin and Councellor Henry Duke of Northfolk, Earl Marshal of England; Our
Right Trusty and Entirely Beloved Cousin and Counselor Charles Marquess of
Winchester; Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin and Councellor Robert
Earl of Lindsey, Great Chamberlain of England; Our Right Trusty and Right
Welbeloved Cousin and Councellor William Earl of Devonshire. Steward of Our
Household; Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin and Councellor Charles
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Chamberlain of Our Household; Our Right Trusty and
Right Welbeloved Cousin and Councellor Charles Earl of Shrewsbury One of Our
Principal Secretaries of State; Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved Cousin and
Councellor Francis Viscount Newport, Treasurer of Our Household; The Right
Reverend Father in GOD Henry Lord Bishop of London; Our Right Trusty and
Welbeloved Councellor Ralph Lord Montague, Master of Our Wardrobe; Our Trusty
and Welbeloved Sir William Dolben Knight. one of the Justices of Our Court of Kings
Bench: and Our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir John Powell Knight, one of the
Justices of Our Court of common pleas; or any three or more of them to receive,
hear and determine the Petitions and Claims which shall be to them exhibited by
any of Our Loving Subjects in this behalf, and We shall appoint Our said
Commissioners for that purpose, to meet, and sit, in the Painted-chamber of Our
Palace at Westminster, upon the 28th day of this instant March, at nine of the
Clock in the Forenoon of that day, and from time to time to Adjourn as to them
shall seem meet, for the execution of Our said Commission, which We do thus
publish to the intent, that all such persons, whom it may any way concern, may
know when and where to give their Attendance for the exhibiting of their
Petitions and Claims, concerning their Services before mentioned, to be done
and and performed unto Us at Our said Coronation. And We do ^ereby signify
unto all and every Our Subjects, whom may concern, That Our Will and Pleasure
is, and ^e do hereby straightly Charge all Persons, of what rank and Quality
soever they be, who, either upon Our ^etters to them directed, or by reason of
their Offices, or Tenures, or otherwise, are to do any Service at the ^id Day,
or time of our Coronation; That they do duly give their Attendance accordingly
in all Respects; ^urnished and Appointed as to so great a Solemnity
appertains, and answerable to the Dignities and ^aces which every one of them
respectively holds and enjoys; And of this, They, or any of them, are ^^t
to fail, as they will answer the contrary at their Perils, unless upon Special
Reasons by Our self, ^^der Our Hand to be allowed, We shall Dispense with any
of their Services or Attendances.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 16th day of March, 1688. In the First
year of Our Reign.
Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


