A Sermon, Preached at Edinburgh, in the Parliament House. November 17th. 1700
Before His GRACE, JAMES, Duke of Queensberry, HIS MAJESTY'S HIGH COMMISSIONER;
AND Many of the Nobility, Barrons, Burrows, Members of the High Court of
PARLIAMENT, BY David Williamson Minister of the Gospel, at West-Kirk.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Mosman, and are to be Sold at his Shop in the
Parliament-Closs, in the Year 1700.

Good Reader,
THE Author being urged, by several Persons of Honor and others, To Print his
Sermon, found it necessar to add a few things, He intended to have delivered;
but was prevented by a mistake of the Time.

PREFACE before Prayer
I would speak that word to this honorable Assembly, which Paul has Romans 10 1
My hearts desire and prayer to God for you all, is that you may be saved, could
I obtain onething of these present, to believe that there is a God, and that
the Scriptures are the Truth and Word of God; I would hope this should not be a
lost but blessed occasion. I have charity toward the most part, but fears of
some; For there is no age wherein Atheism and Prophanity have been more rife,
than in this of our time: Many saying in their hearts, with the Fool, there is
no God Psalm 14, verse 1. their corrupt and abominable Practices say, the fear
of God is not before their eyes: Their folly will be reproved, when they feel
what they fear not. We must not shun to tell you Gods mind from his Word, which
you would notice with Reverence, for by this word you must be all judged at the
last Day. John 12 48. The Prophet says, Psalm. 119 46. I will speak of thy
Testimonies also before Kings and not be ashamed.

Right Honorable, I will tell you what Binds us, God sends Jerimiah to Great
Men. and says Jer. 1.8 17. be not afraid of their faces for I will be with
thee to deliver thee says the Lord. Be not dismayed at their faces; least I
confound thee before them. I know not what the design of all may be in coming
here; but I have heard, I have read, I have known in experience some come to
hear a Preaching who might have been supposed Preaching proof, and to have no
good design, curiosity the best of it, and God fastened a nail of conviction in
their Consciences, and they could never loose the Grip, what the Lord will do
this day, I know not, but if the Lord would lay his word in about all your
hearts, it might give a lift to the interests both of Church and state, and God
even our God might dwell amongst us and bless us, and our Land yield her
increase. Be ware of drowsines lightness and wandering, and let us call on God
for his Countenance blessing and assistance.

A SERMON on
Luke 19.41. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it.

42. Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib: But Israel
does not know, my people does not consider.


I intend not to be tedious in Introduction. Explication, or Division of the
Words nor curious in Method, but to offer a few plain Truths; Both the Prophet
and our Savior speaks to the Rulers, and the people ruled, Isatah: 9, 16. The
Leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led of them are
destroyed, and our Savior says Matthew. 15, 14. The blind are Leaders of the
blind, and both shall fall into the Ditch. The Prophet Iasiah: in verse 2d
directs his Speech to the senselcis Creatures, (hear O Heavens, and give car O
Earth, The more to awaken and affect the Isrelites, his covenanted and
professed people, he challenges them as below the dullness of Bruites, that
acknowledge and obey their Owners who provides them, and in their Way shows
respect to their masters but my people Israel are more stupid than bruites;
they do not own nor acknowledge me. There is a sort of people in this
Generation, called Deists, but I call them Aitheists, who arrogat the name of
Witt's they cry down revealed Religion, despise their Souls, refuse
Instruction, reject a Savior, and deny future Rewards and Punishments, They
live like Beasts, and are worse than Beasts, they do not own and reverence
their Master; And I may say are worse then Devils, Jam: 2, 19. They believe and
tremble; It may be many here never believed, never trembled.

In that Text of Luke, our Lord foreseeing the woeful day of Desolation coming
upen Jerusalem: was affectionatly concerned with their deplorable condition,
and wept over them. And breaks out in this abrupt and emphatick Speech, If thou
even thou hadest known, or O that thou had known, or happy had thou been if
thou hadest known in this thy day, Id est that is the time of his preaching to
them which they slighted; they shut their eyes, and God Judicially plagued them
with blindness. To know fignifies here, to acknowledge, bend the Mind, lay to
heart, and improve for practice. By things belonging to their peace is
understood, things that belong both to their hapiness inward and outward Their
peace with God, peace in their Consciences, and peace with the Creatures

There be five things in their words. 1 That there are some things that belong
to a peoples peace, in all these respects. 2dly That we are bound to study a
heart affecting knowledge of these things. 3dly That the present time and day
would be thus improven. 4tly The advantage that redounds to these that thus
improve time. It would prevent Misery. It is employed that people smart for
neglect of time. 5tly. Slighting time, lossing the season, may never be
recovered again.

Doctrine. The point I offer is this, That it is the Interest of all who would
be approven of God and their own Consciences; and escape a challenge and Ruin,
to know and take to heart the things that belong to their peace, to their Souls
peace, the peace of the Church and Land. I will not insist to prove so evident
a point. I shall first speak a Word of Gods Peace, which is the Spring of all
other true Peace. 2dly Of these thing to be known, that belongs to the Souls
peace, to the peace of a Church and Land.

For the Peace of God I give these 6 Things.

1 it is not common to all, Its Christ's Gift and Legacy, to His peculiar
people, John 14, 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. 2dly It
is the purchase of Christ's Blood, Ephesians: 2d 13 14. Ye are made near by the
Blood of Christ. for He is our peace. 3dly It is a sure peace, Isiah 54 10 The
Covenant of my peace shall never be removed says the Lord. 4tly. It guards
the Believers heart and Mind in all cases. Phil. 4.7. 5tly Its the great end
and errand of the Ministry, 2 Corinthians 5 20 We are Embassaaors for Christ as
though God, did beseech you by us we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconeiled
to God. 6tly. They make a good Testament at Death, who are found with him in
peace at his Appearing.

It is a precious peace, prize it highly,i We may not want it, nor can we stand
under the Lords fade, be tender of it and afraid to loose the sense of it.

2ly I come to speak of things that belong to your peace, that ye are to study
the heart affecting knowledge off.

And 1st. What belongs to your Souls peace as Christians, 2dly. What belongs to
the Churches and Lands peace.

I begin with that, What belongs to the Peace of Believers as Christians: For
if ye be good Christians, ye will be the better Rulers. I confess the Sovereign
Lord, can make the Earth help the Woman. Rev. 12.16. Men of Earthly and Sensual
Minds and Designs, but these will not be fast Friends, when the Wind blows in
an oath erairt they alter Jehu made his Zeal a stirrup to mount the Throne.

I give you account of these things, That ye would study Haeart-affecting
practical. knowledge of, in order to your Peace.

I offer you Ten Heads here.

You must know God. 1. That he is, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe
that he is; This is the Fountain of all true Knowledge, and the Spring of all
true Peace and Comfort. 2ly. That we must know what He is, what is His Name,
what the the Word declares Him to be, Moses says, Exodus 33.18. I beseech thee
show me thy Glory And the Lord proclaims His Name, Exodus 34.6, 7. The LORD, the
LORD GOD, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and
Truth. Keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin,
and that will by no means clear the guilty. O what advantage redounds from
this, it relates to our Peace, and the right ordering of our Spirits, And
making the Stream of our Affections run in the right Channel; To know Him in
His Infinite Excellent and Glorious Perfections, They that know His Name
faithful and true, will put their Trust in Him, Psalm. 9.10. If we knew Him in
His Holiness, Power, Justice, and Love, then should we readily Fear, Love, and
Obey Him; If we knew Him in His Goodness and Mercy, it would draw out our
desires and delight after him, If we knew Him in His Soveraignity, then should
we acquiesce in all his disposings of our lote: If we knew Him in His
Omnisciency, that would keep our Hearts in aw: All these relate to our Peace.

2d. Head, We must study to know Christ, if we regaird our Peace; And first in
the Statelyness of His Person, Heb. 1.3. who is the brightness of the Fathers
Glory, the express Image of his Person, This is a sweet consideration, that we
have such a Noble Redeemer.

2. It relates to our Peace to know him in his Natures, God, Man, a meek
Mediator to deal between God and Man.

To know Him in His Human Nature, Flesh of our Flesh and Bone of our Bone, our
God who has right to redeem, and has paid our Debt in our Nature, he has
dignified our Nature, in assuming our Nature to a personal Union, with his
Godhead, he will never lay it down again Heb. 7.24. This Man continues ever.

Then we must know him in his Divine Nature Isah 7.14. Immanuel the Mighty God
Isah 9.6. I have laid your help says the Lord upon one that is Mighty Psalm.
89.19 he trod the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath alone, and speaks in
Righteousness mighty to save Isah 63.2.3. His Godhead sustaind the human
nature, that he sunk not under sufferings, and gives an infinite meriting value
to his sufferings by virtue of his Godhead he rose from the deed Rom: 1.4.

3. We must know him in his name, which is as an ointment poured forth Cano:
13: The Lord Jesus Christ, every letter sweeter than another Lord of Lords King
of Kings Rev. 17.14. This is a Quieting consideration, when we have many Lords
who would impose on our Consciences, we have one Lord and Lawgiver James 4.12.
No Law can bind the Conscience but what is consonant to his Law. Jesus O but
that has a sweet sound to a sensible lost Sinner. he gets his name from his
earrand, thou shall call his name Jesus said the Anegl, for he shall save his
People from their Sins thus he is the Prince of Peace, Isaih 9.6. Christ idest
anointed. it first imports he was Gods choice for a Savior Isah. 42.1. Behold
my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights, God never
spoke such a word of another, then it imports he was well furnished for all his
Offices anointed with the Oil of joy above his Fellows Psalm. 45.7 Full of Grace
and Truth, John 1.14. Having the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him
bodily, Coloss. 2.9. Holy Angels, have a fullness of sufficiency, enough of
Grace to serve themselves, but non to spare but Christ has a fullness of
redundancy, a running over fullness, for as many as have been at the Wells of
Salvation Isah. 12.3. These Five Thousand Years and more the Well is, as full
now as ever, his fullness being infinite it can not be deminished. 4ly We must
know him in his Offices 1st. As the Anointed Well qualified Prophet who has
compassion on the ignorant Heb. 5.2. And instructs with a strong hand, Isah. 8
11. We have weak hands, he is meek and lowly in heart Math. 11.29. We need not
scar: to learn of him, he has all the Treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Colos
2.3. He has the tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in season to a weary
Soul Isah. 50.4. he leads the blind by a way they know not, Makes darkness
light before them, Isah. 42.16. he has a prerogative that non else can pretend to
he teaches his People to profit gives an Ingine and capacity to take up the
Lesson, Isah. 48.17. he is the Master of Assemblies that fastens the nail in a
sure place Eccie; 12.11. Then secondly We must know him in his Priestly Office
1. as to his satisfaction who has paid a competent price for our Ransom 1.
Timoth. 2.6. he has obtained a discharge, In sign and token whereof it is said
Romans 4.24. he dyed, for our sins to pay our debt and rose for our
Righteousness. to prove the payment was accepted and accounts cleared else he
had not got out of Prison, thus Gods Righteousness is declared, that he is just
to justify them that believe in Jesus, Romans 3.26. having gotten payment of the
Cautioner, he will note rave it overagain at the Beleivers hands. O What a
cordial is this, to these weighted with the sense of guilt. Then as to his
Intercession, we have a friend in Heaven before us who is called the Angel,
have ing a Golden Censure with much incense that he should offer it with the
Prayers of all Saints upon the Golden-Alter which is before the Throne Revel.
8.3. He Compears before God for us, when Law, Satan, and Conscience, accuse, he
rises up and appears for the poor Sinner to answer what can be charged upon
him. Heb. 9.24 And this is sweet that he never losed a cause he took in hand
John 11.42, The Father hears him always he was never denied a suit. Then we
should know him in his Kingly Office a Glorious King Psalm 24.7. who choises the
Officers of his own house Ephesians. 4.-11. 12 he subdues and captivats Souls to
his obedience Cor. 2.10.4.5. he rules by his Word and Spirit and defends by his
power, and can dash the Pot-Shards in pieces that are his Enemies, Ps. 2.9. We
most receive whole Christ in all his Offices, if we be not ruled by his Law, we
cannot be saved by his death, Some will not have this Man to reign over them.
Luke. 19.14. 5ly we must know him in his Love 1st in the freedom of it. We have
nothing to engage his love, but much in us to provock his Loathing. He loved
Jacob freely Romans 9.11.14. 2ly. The speciallity of this Love in two respects
1st. in respect of the kind. Men chosen and loved, no fallen Angels Heb. 2.16.
he took not on him the nature of Angels, their execution was as quick as their
fall cast out of favor for ever. 2ly. in respect that he makes a choice among
fallen Men and loves not all alike all-though all be of the same mass. This
makes every Beleiver a wonder to himself and to say what wonder he made choice
of me, 3ly in the antiquity of it, from everlasting. every Beleiver is the
birth of eternal love before he made the Earth or the World; or laid the
foundations thereof his delights were with the Sons of Men Prove. 8.29. etc.
then in the duration of it his mercy and love is everlasting Ps 103.17. As it
had no beginning it knows no end whom he loves, he loves to the end outthorrow
Jo. 13.1. I have loved thee with everlasting loving kindness, Jerm, 31.3. and
we would know wherein his Loye appeared especially in his death which though it
was a painful shamful cursed death, yet was he a volunteer in it, not forced to
it, he had power to lay down his Life and power to take it up again. Yea he was
earnest to give a proof and vent his Love thus Luke 11.50. I have a Baptism to
be Baptized with meaning of his dath, and O how! am I straightened or pained till
it be accomplished, and Ps. 40. verse 8. I delight to do thy will. as if he had
said. Father I will not debate nor prig anent the Ransom of the Elect, I will
come in your will for what you can charge on them: I am willing to undergo, We
are ready to prig with him; so much we would do, but no more, so far we would
go in his way, and no further, if he had stood so in our matters, we had
perished eternally. 6ly. We should know the purchase of his Death. 1.
Justification, He has procured a Righteousness to cover us, and that is our
peace Romans 5.1. We have no covering of our own, but that which is too narrow to
wrap us in, Isa. 28.20. If we should walk in the light of our own Fire, and the
sparks of our own kindling, Isa. 50.11. We should lie down in sorrow. 2dly. He
has procured the Noble privilege of Adoption to all that embrace him, Jo.
1.12: which secures Gods Peace, Pardon and Love. 3dly. Sanctification, 1 Cor.
1.30. which is the Image of God, 1 Pet. 1.16. 4ly. Salvation is the purchase of
the Blood of God shed as man, Acts 20.28, does not the heart affecting
knowledge of all these tend to our peace.

3. Head. We must have the knowledge of the Spirit of Jesus, there is a
necessity for it Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Chist, he is none
of his. We must know him in his Influences. 1. His inlighting influences
revealing to us the deep things of God making us know the things freely given
us of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12. 2dly. In his comforting influences, he bears this
Style, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, Jo. 14.26. and Psalm. 94.19. In the
multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts shall delight my Soul. Then in
his Mortifying influences whereby he mortifies the Deeds of the Body, That our
Souls may live, Romans 8.13. how desirable is this to these wrestling with the
power of Lust. Then in his assisting influences, to the Exercise of all Graces
and Duties, He is called the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. The Spirit of
Holiness and Obedience, Romans 1, 4.5. The Spirit of Prayer and Mourning, Zecha.
12.10. The Spirit of wisdom and understanding, Council and might, the Spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, Isai. 11, 2: He makes Ordinances
Lively, without whose shining, they signify no more, than a Dyal where the Sun
shines not, it is he who by his power decides controversies as that. 1 Kings
18, 21, etc. We should crave and cherrish this Spirit, who is freely given to
the poor, as well as to the Rich, who seek him in earnest, Luke 11, 11. etc.

4 Head, We should know the Covenant of Grace in the Blessed terms of it, 1st.
To know it in its freeness, God was not hired to make it, no Money, nor price
required, only Hunger and Thirst Isai. 55, 1. Secondly, in the fullness of it,
all that the poor Sinner needs, Ephesians. 1.3. All Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly
places in Christ, all things pertaining to Life and Godliness, 2 Pet 1.3. And
what can be more desired. Thirdly, The Sureness of it, the heart affecting
knowledge of it tends to peace; First, No one promise shall fail, because He is
Faithful, he will not break his Covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out
of his Lips, Psalm 89, 33, 34. Josua 21, 45. Appeals to the People that there
failed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the House of
Israel; all came to pass it is a well ordered Covenant, and is a Cordial at
Death, David among his last words had this, 2 Samuel 23, 5. He has made with
me an Everlasting Covenant, well ordered in all things, and sure, and this is
all my Salvation, and all my desire. Secondly, It is sure, the Stock is in a
good hand, Jesus's Hand, the surity of the better Testament, we would soon have
played the Bankrupt, but Christ makes all good. 2 Cor. 1.20. all the promises
are in him yea and Amen. Thirdly. This Covenant smells the more of Grace, in
that Christ engages to help us; to do our part, Heb. 8.10. He puts His Laws in
the minds of his People, and Writs them in their Hearts. Ezekiel, 26.27 The
Lord Says I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them, Fourtly, consider the
influence that the knowledge of this Covenant should have upon our Heart and
Life, not to make us loose and wanton, but having these precious promises we
should cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.16. and 7.1. as you
tender your Peace get this bargain made, This is the first and best way to
peace, some spend their time tampering about duties, not putting a close to this
on every new emergency of trouble, They are in hazard to raze the Foundation:
It would be a strong Pillar of peace to have that to say I know my Covenanted
God is faithful and hates putting away. That is a brave word Isai. 44.5. One
shall say I am the Lords, another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and
another shall Subscrib with his Hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the
name of Israel, I know not if ye have taken time and lasure, to consider and
put this great matter to a point, upon reflection on your own sinful self
destroyed case, and the offer of Christ in Gospel terms to say it from your
heart and subscrib it with your hand, that you are and will be the Lords and
his Christ's, a back look of this I know has been a Cordial in a dying hour,
when they have thought upon the time, place, and manner of their Covenanting
with God, I wish you would all without delay lay, this matter to Heart.

5. Head. We should know the rule of the Commands, Gal: 6.16. As many as walk
according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy and upon the Israel of God,
first, we should know the Commands and extent of them first as to the object,
his Commands are exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96, they reach to all stations,
relations and conditions Secondly as to the subject they reach the whole Man,
Soul and Body, we must obey from the Heart, Romans 6.17. Thirdly we must know we
daily break the Commandments Jam. 3.2. in many things we offend all and every
breach deserves death Deuteronomy. 27.26. Rom 6.23. this tends to peace, chassing the
Sinner into a Mediator, the Prince of Peace who is the end of the Law for
Rightousness Romans 10.4. Fourtly as you regaird your peace, allow not your self
in the breach of any Command, say not it is but this, it is but that, if it be
a Sin, it is that which may cost your Life, and and may go betwixt you and your
part of Heaven, Psalms 66.18. if I regaird iniquity in my heart says he the
Lord will not hear my Prayer, and says Christ Math. 5.19. whosoever breaks
one of these least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called
least in the Kingdom of Heaven, we showld have equal respect to all the
Commands, Psalm. 119, 6, 6. 128, Fifthly, we should know the Command is in the
promise, there are many severe Commands and as many sweet promises, O how much
tends this to peace; says the poor Sinner he has Commanded us to love him,
and he has promised to Circumcise my Heart to love him Deuteronomy. 30.6. he has
Commanded me to fear him, and he has promised to put his fear in my heart; That
I may not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. he has Commanded me to repent mourn and
obey, and Pray, and he has promised his Spirit to all these effects Ezekiel.
26.27. Zechariah 12.10. he has Commanded me to believe, and he is the auther
and finisher of that Grace: So we must look from the Command to the promise and
turn the promise to a Prayer, God will turn it to a performance, who works in
hit People both to will and to do of his good pleasure Philip 2, 13. let us say
Lord give what thou Commands, and Command what thou will.

6. Head. We must know Graces, and duties Graces I call them as they come from
God, duties as exercised by us, and in the exercise of them, first we would be
fervent cordial and affectionate, the heart is the fat of the Sacrifice,
without which the Lord abhorrs it, Rom: 12.11. Be fervent in Spirit serving the
Lord, And David says. Psalm: 25.1. Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my Soul, and
Hanna 1 Samuel 1 15. Was a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit, pouering out her Soul
unto the Lord. 2dly. We should be frequent in performance of Duties. Psalms 62
8. Trust in him at all times. Proverbs. 28 14. Happy is the Man that fears
always. 1 Thessalonians: 1.15. Pray without ceasing, which imports 1st We should have
set Meals for prayer, David had three times a day for ordiuar, Psalm: 55 17.
Evening and Morning and at noon time of Day will I pray and call aloud, Danul.
7.10. Thrice a day was his use and Wont. David had his extraordinaries seven
times a day. Psalm. 119.164. 2dly. It imports we should have our hearts ay in
frame, ready to pray on all occasions. 3dly. That we should by frequent in
Ejaculations, which would hinder no Bussiness. 3dly. We should be denied to
Duties when done, when we have done all things which are commanded: We should
say we are unprofitable Servants, and have done but our Duty Luke 1710 a spice
of conceit spoils the Best Dutys, as the dead flee does the precious ointment,
Eccles: 10 1, Paul who abounded more in labors than others laid no strels on
them. Philip. 3 7 8. 1 Cor: 1510 There is no peace to be expected otherways.
4tly. We must know that it is not Conscience, but the Word of God, that is the
Rule of Duty. Isiah 8.10. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because they have nothing of light in them, it is
not what you think must order you that you have an Impulse of mind James and
John mistook themselves in this when they would have called for Fire from
Heaven to consume the miscourtious Sammaritants, it was not a good Spirit that
did bear in that motion upon them Luke 9 52, etc Therefore Christ rebuked them.

There are these particular duties you would exercise as you would have peace.
First you must be mourners and penitent as sure as I speak none will get peace
but who lay the foundation in sorrow, Isai 61.2. he Comforts all that mourn
Math. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted. Secondly
you would be in the exercise of Faith which works by love Romans 15.13. peace
and Joy comes by beleiving Habbac. 2.4. The Just shall live by Faith. Isai.
26.3. The Lord will keep his mind in perfect peace whose heart is stayed on
him, because he trusts in him. Thirdly, we should be in the excrcise of Love to
God, and Love to our Neighbor which is the Sum of both Tables, He that loves
not knows not God, For God is love 1 John 4.8. We should love all persons and
things that belong to God, We should love all men, with the Love of
Benevolence, the Saints with the Love of Delight. Psalm: 16.2. Had we this love
to God, and for His Sake love to one another: It would clear our Claim to two
great Promises, Rom: 8.28. All things work together for Good to all that love
God, even the Cross pays a Custom of Advantage to them, and Christ's says, John
14.21.23. He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him,
and will manifest my self to him, and we will come, and make our abode with
him. 4tly. We should exetcise our selves to Godliness, 1 Timothy: 4.7.8. This would
clear our Title to the Promises of this Life. and of that which is to come.
Which would yield much peace. 5tly. We should be in the Exercise of Heavenly
Mindedness, and have our Conversation in Heaven. Philip: 3, 20. And our
Affections above, Col. 3.2. The greatest Serenity is in the highest Regions,
Clouds and Storms are below. 6tly. We should be in the Exercise of a well
grounded hope, which would make us rejoice in Tribulation. Rom: 2, 3. This is
the Anchor of the Soul, that keeps the Vessel calm in a Storm. Heb: 6 19. The
Helmet or Headpiece, that wairds off the Strokes of Satan's smarting
Temptations, Ephesians: 6 17. 7tly. It conduces much to our peace to have the sense
of our Spiritual Poverty. Psalm: 9 18. The needy shall not always be forgotten,
nor the Expectation of the Poor perish for ever. And David says, Psalm: 40 17.
I am poor and needy but the Lord thinks on me, Math: 5 3. Blcssed are the poor
in Spirit. Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, The word is, Beggars in Spirit who
are put often to the throne of Grace for an Alms, Proverbs 1823 The poor use
Entreaties. Heb: 4 16. Through Christ we have Access with boldness. to the
throne of Grace, that we may sind Mercy, and obtain Grace, Philip: 4, 6.7 Who
make their Request known to God, get the peace of God which passes natural
Understanding to guard their Heart and Mind, and Hanna 1 Samuel 1, 15, 18 Who
pouered out her Soul to the Lord, went away and her Countenance was no more
sad. 8tly. We would study Sincerity in the performance of all Dutys, which
makes much for peace, both in the greatest Extremity of our Life, 2 Cor: 1, 9,
12. When they had the Sentence of Death against them, this was their
rejoyceing, the Testimony of their Conscience, That in Simplicity and Godly
Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom they had their Conversation in the World,
and it yields peace in the laft Extremity of Death: Ezekiah says, Isiah 38,
3. Lord Remember how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect
heart.

7 Head. We should know and consider some things, in Reference to Crosses, and
Afflictions, as we would consult our Peace. 1st. That they are covenanted
Mercies, and no token of Fead, but consistent with God's Loving Kindness, Psalm:
89, 30, to the 34. Psalm 119, 75. I know O Lord that in Faithfulness thou have
afflicted me, that quiets the heart; The Saints bear not the Cross alone,
Christ takes the heavy lift that makes the Yoke easy, Isiah 63, 9. In all our
Afflictions He is afflicted, and is still a Simpathser. 2dly. The Saints have
had their best days; under the Cross, as John when banished to the Isle of
Patmoss, Revel: 1.10. Paul and Silas were made to sing in the Stocks, Acts 16
24. The Lord cohses some in the Furnace of Affliction, Isiiah 48 10. There was
a Godly Minister in this Nation, I heard him say upon Deathbed his Suffering
times were sweeter to him, than his most solemn Communion Days. 4tly A well
improven Cross, is a piece of a Saints happiness, Psalm: 94.12. Blessed is the
Man whom the Lord chaftiseth, and teaches out of his Law, 5tly The Cross is
needful to prevent Sin Hosea 2: 6. To purge out and take away Sin, Isia 27 9.
To make us more like God in holiness, Heb: 12 10. To give us Errands to the
Throne of Grace, Psalm: 50, 15. And to make us walk in fear, and be watchful to
discover the Truth and Strength of Grace to stir up Grace to Exercise, in order
to the produceing of the peaceable fruits of Righteousness. Heb: 12 11. The
Lords design is to distinguish betwixt the Wilderness and Canaan, and that we
may Glorify His rich and free Grace, upholding and delivering us, and to make
us Instrumental to Comfort others. 2. Cor. 1 4. And to draw our heart
Heavenwards, to know these things tend to peace.

Head 8. We should know the way how the Lord brings in poor Sinners, to Christ.
first he kills, and then makes alive, wounds and then heals, Deuter: 32, 39, 1 Samuel 2 6. Hosea 6, 1. He convinces of the lost undone Self-destroyed Case, by
nature and course; a law work in some degrees passes on the Soul. Gal: 3 24.
The Law is a Schoolmaster to lead to Christ, thus the Sinner is made to
enquire after a Deliverer, Rom: 7 24 Who shall deliver me says Paul. 2dly. A
new light is broken up, that discovers Sin in its black Colors, smelling rank
of Hell and a Beauty in Holiness and discovers the Necessity, Excellency,
Willingness and Ability of Christ to save to the uttermost all that come to God
in him, Heb: 7 25. He is seen to be the Chief of ten Thousands, and altogether
lovely. Cantic: 5 10 16, Him has God the Father sealed John 6 27. Paul tells
us, he was sent upon this Errand to open peoples eyes and turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might
receive the forgiveness of Sins, and Inheritance among them, which are
sanctified by Faith. that is in Christ, Acts 26 18. Thus Sinners are called
from darkness to his marvelous light. 1 Peter 29. 3dly. Then the heart is
prepared by the Arm of Jebovah to receive the Impressions of Mercy in a through
Renovation, the stony heart is removed, a pliable melting frame is given. Hezek
26, 26. 4tly The Soul is brought over to give Consent to the Bargain, and to
take Christ on Gospel Terms, and say, Cantic: 2 16. My beloved is mine and I am
his: In all which the exceeding greatness of his power cyths, workinging in
them that believe. Ephesians: 1 19.

Head 9. If you would have peace, you must have a practical knowledge of the
ways these ought to walk in that come home to Christ, I fear many mistake it
first in the difioulty of it, some think nothing but they may go easily to
Heaven, and yet plump in to the Pit, lying down with a lie in their right Hand,
Isas 44.20. The Apostle says the Righteous are scarcely faved, 1. Pet. 4.18,
and Christ says the way is strait Matthew. 7.14. therefore we should suive to
enter in at the sttrait Gate; for many will seek to enter in, that shall not be
able. Luke 13.24. Secondly this way is mistaken in the Singularity of of it:
It Is not the common Road and Broad-Way, the whole World lies in Wickedness. 1
John 5 19. Be not conform to the World says the Apostle, Rom 12, 2. Follow not
the multitude to do evil says Moses, Exodus: 23 2. And Christ says except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharesees you cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 20. The Pharesees said John 7 48. Have
any of the Rulers of the Pharesees believed on him, and the Apostle says. 1
Cor. 1 26, Not many wise Men after the flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble
are saved, Blessed be God it is not said not any, but not many: Because Christ
has but few Friends and Followers among that Sort of People.

10. Head Who consult their peace, would have a heart affecting knowledge of
some things in reference to Death and Judgment. 1st. The certainty of it, it is
appointed for all Men rich and poor noble and ignoble once, and but once to
die, Heb 9 27 and after this to Judgment. There is no Discharge in that War.
Eccles: 8 8. 2dly To know the uncertainty of it as to time, place and manner,
that we may may be upon the Watchtower. Math: 24, 42, 43. 3dly It is our great
Concern, to be prepared for Death and Judgment: It is a Worlds-Wonder, that
many dye without strange Terrors, not being prepared for Death, yet many
graceless have no Bands in their Death. Pialms 73, 4. But sad is their
awakening, they are like a Man thurst out at a slit of a high Tower in a dark
night, we hear no din of the rich Gluttons Death, Luke 16 22 But the first news
after is, that in Hell he lift up his eyes, and cried O for a drop of cold
water, to cool my tongue for I am tormented, in this Flame.

Right Honorable and well Beloved, if peace of Conscience be your Concernment,
if to dye with Comfort be your Concernment, if everlasting Well and Woe be your
Concernment, if to be in Heaven, and to shun Hell be your Concernment, then
preparation for Death and Judgment, is of greatest and everlasting Concernment.
You have need to be ready and prepared, for Death will not wait one Moment for
your readiness; When that Messenger comes, there is no retaining of the Spirit.
Eccles: 8 8. It is vain then to wish, O for another hour! For another Day.

I will tell you what is the best preparation for Death and Judgment, it is to
live in Christ, and die in Christ Rom: 147. Gal: 2 20. 1st This is the way to
get the sting taken out of Death, and Death swallowed up of Victory, 1 Cor: 15
54 55. 2dly This is the way to be delivered from the fear of death. Heb: 2 14
15. 3ly This is the way to to be blessed in your Death, Revel: 14 13. 4ly. This
is the way to be made welcome to your Masters joy with his Blessing. Mash: 25
23 24.

Applications Right Honorable and well beloved, I earnestly beceech you, as
you regard peace wsth God, peace of your Souls, seriously to ponder in order to
practiece, all the aforementioned Heads, as your greatest Concernment: for the
laft of death and Judgment, I must tell you who are called Gods, ye must die
like Men Psalm. 82.7. And all lie down alike in the dust, and the Worms cover
you Job 21. 26. your dust will not be known from the Beggars. 2 Cor: 5 10. you
must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, the Word is be manefested,
and lajd open be fore him who judges without respect of persons. 2. Pet. 1.17
and if you dye without sound knoweldge and understanding though now you be in
Honor you will be like and worse than Beasts that perish Psalm. 49, 20. We
read of a King, Jerem: 22 18.19. Who died unlamented, and was buried with the
Burial of an Ass. You that now sit on Benches, must stand at the Bar that Day:
Satan has prevailed so far with many to put the Thoughts of Death far away, and
to obliterate the Belief of Judgment, making them more Atheist than himself,
James 2 9. The Devils believe and tremble. I remember near forty years ago,
when the Flood Gate of Prophanity was cast wide open in Scotland [and no shutt
to this Day] which paved the way to Prelacy, that gave too great Scouth to
Profane Inclinations: There was a profligate person of no mean quality, being
admonished by a noble Friend to mind Death and Judgment, for he behoved to
reckon for his Debauchery, he said if he thought on that he would go mad: But
these who will not hear Admonition, now and Conscience now will be tied to
endure his Reproof; who will tear them in pieces, when there is none to
deliver. Psalm: 50 21, 22. There will be a huge cry at that Day among these who
hold their heads high now; Kings of the earth, great Men, Rich Men, Chief
Captains, and mighty Men shall cry to the Mountains, and to the Rocks to fall
on them, and hide them from the Face, of Him that sits on the Throne, and from
the Wrath of the Lamb: For the Great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand. Revel: 2 15. etc. Your Character then will not cover you.
Faithful Ministers are despised by many, were we of a Soul betraying temper to
deal with people according to their hearts desire, to forbear right things, and
speak smooth things. Isiah. 30, 10. And flatter them to their Ruin; They would
embrace us, but because we warn plainly having our Souls at the stake. Ezekiel 34
Being tender of Gods Glory, their Souls good and our own, they hate us in doing
our Duty, and reproveing, which the Seripture expounds a kindness. Psalm: 141 5.
And it imports a defect of the rational Faculty and brutish temper to hate
reproof. Proverbs 12 1. What will such say in the Day of Visitation, when wrath
seases on them. If ever God bring you to a sense of your Condition, that word
will be verified by you. Proverbs 28 23. He that rebukes a man shall find more
favor afterward, than he that flatters with the tongue: I doubt not there are
in Hell this day, who are Cursing their Ministers that flattered them in their
Sins. I put two Questions to you, First, how will you answer for this, that ye
do that which ye condemn others, and Judge the Comitters thereof worthy of
Death. And enact Laws against Sabbath-breaking, Swearing, Drunkeness and
Uncleanness: you mock God, and are self condemned; Romans 1.32. and 2. 21.22.
Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not thy self, thou that
teach a man not to Steal, do thou Steal, thou that say a Man should
not commit Adultery; Do thou commit Adultery. Thou that abhorrest Idols; do
thou commit Saerilige: Secondly, how will any answer for this, that they Glory
in what they cannot endure, the name of drunkard, would thou be called by that
name, or the Swearer, or Whore-Monger; Would ye be content to have it Written
upon your Tombs, or dwelings: here Lies, or here dwells, the Drunkard, the
Swearer, or Whore Munger. The Lord tells there is a Day coming when People
shall know whose Word shall stand, his or theirs Jerem. 44.28.29. They shall
know that his Word shall stand against them for evil, I do here in the name
and and authority, of my Great Master Jesus, whose Ambassador I am. Warn and
Charge, all that hear me this Day, to compear before the Tribunal, and answer
to their charge for unrepented of Drukenness, Uncleanness, Fornication,
Adultery, Swearing Lieing, Perjury, Covenant Breaking, Testing or being Gallios
unconcerned in Gods Matters and your Souls; Sabbath Breakers, Prayerless and
you who have had any hand in the Late Persecution of Gods Servants and People,
make you ready make have, and strive to get accounts cleared by Christ's
Cautionry, I cannot set a Day, but it may be a few Hours, sist some of you
before the Judge: Think on it, be not abused when you come to Die by Carnal
Friends, or your own deceitful Hearts: I have known some when they have come to
die call for the Ministers, they hated and persecuted before, and cried out of
their Sins with tears. I have known others that neither they nor their carnal
Friends would suffer the Faithful to come near them, but the Montibank, who
sent them over the Border with the fig Leaf of a smooth absolution: O betray
not your own Souls, nor let others do it, thuart not your own Consciences to
please Men, as Pilate who found no fault in Christ, yet over the Belly of
Warning ordered to scourge and crucify him, to please Caesar and the people.
Right Honorable, There has not been a Session of Pariament, but before a next
some members have gone off the Stage, and some of the most Honorable for
quality and best for piety are gone within these few Years. it is hard to know
who goes next, make you ready, I must tesl you a wrong Step in Death can never
be mended Eccles. 11.13 In the Place where the Tree falls there it lies; What
ever changes may be in a Man's life, after Death there is none, but eternal well
or eternal woe.

Now there be several things we should know and consider in reference to the
peace of the Church and Land, and herein both Rulers and People should Act
their part.

First, we should have our hearts, affected with reflection on the crying Sins
of the Land, our iniquity like the Wind; has taken us away Jsai. 64.6. That of
Hosea may be applied 4. Chap. 1.2. The Lord has a controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no Truth nor Mercy, nor Knowledge of
God, in the Land, by Swearing and Lying, and Killing and Stealing, and
commiting Adultry; they break out, and Blood, touches Blood: And People become
impudent. As if they would give God a defiyance, they commit Abominations and
are not ashamed, neither do they blush Jerem 8.12. They despise a savior in
Gospel ordinances.

Secondly we should consider, that there is a dark and thick Cloud of wrath and
judgment, hanging over us, the Lord threatening as Liviticus 26.24. to heat the
Furnace yet Seven times more, have we not had sad Strokes, decay of Trade,
Dearth, Famine, Mortality of Man and Beast, and something of Fire and Sword. I
look upon all these as the beginning of sorrows if matters mend not amongst us;
Let us hearken to that word. Zephamach 2 1. 2. Gather your selves together, yea
Gather together a Nation not desired before the decree bring forth, before the
day pass as chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord, come upon you etc.

1, Therefore I would, press, 1. That ye wrestle with God by Prayer at the
Throne of Grace Psalm. 46.7. It Is said the Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of
Jacob is our refuge; whence got Jacob the new name Israel, he prevailed as a
Prince by supplication, let us cry mightily to God, that he would rent the
Heavens, and come down; Andthe Mountains flow down at his presence. Isai
64.1.7. That the Lord would come with healing to Souls and awaken the
Consciences of small and great, that are fast a sleep in damnable security. For
there are few that call on God, or stir up themselves to take hold of him.

2ly. Know it is our part to study, mourning and amendment, Lament. 3.40, 41.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord: Let us lift up
our heart with our hands, to God in the Heavens. Zechariah 12.13. Persons a
part, and Families a part mourning, that would be a Door of hope in the Valley
of Achor, Reformation and mourning, must begin at Persons, come to Families,
and spread through the Nation, then might we say as Ezra 10.2. Now is there
hope in Israel, concerning this thing.

3ly. Study Zeal and courage for the way and work of God, never be ashamed of
it. Be Zealous and repent says Christ Revel. 3.19. Be of good courage, lay out
your selves as you are called in your sphere to contend forth faith, inde

4ly. Study unity and love, and beware of undue contendings unite in what is
true and, good if ye bite and devour one another ye may be consumed one of
another Gal. 5.5. The beginning of strife is like the opening of Waters to
overflow. Proverbs 17.14. Therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled
with, I confess there is a lawful contending not only for truth, and the Faith
of the Gospel, but even for inferior things. Job 31.13. etc. having the Dread
of God on his Heart, admits his hirelings to offer their Grievances and reason
their cause, but the rise of debates would be examined, if from Pride and envy,
then confusion and every evil work, would be the consequence Jam. 3.16 there be
due, seasonable and right methods and measures, that would be followed, a
mistake in these may mar a very cleanly design, and in stead of bringing Water
to quench the Fire, may prove oil to encreass the Flame.

Abraham, his commendation will never die Genes. 13. who though he was Superior
and Elder than Lot, yet to avoid unseasonable contendings when the Canaanites,
were in the Land, yielded to Lot, whose choice proved his punishment: and if it
be no disparagement to the highest to condescend to these below them, even
supposeing a transgression it is their Glory to pass it over Proverbs 19.11.
far more is it the bound duty of inferiors to yield and not unmannerly to prig
with those above them, where, yiedling may be without manifest prejudice to
Truth and Peace, There be two things supposed to have influence on devision and
Faction, which is a work of the Devil, a work of the Flesh, Galat. 5.20. There
is a Defect and an Excess. First, a defect of singleness and sincerity, If Men
were al! single-Hearted, sincere, self-denyed, and soundly publick-Spirited,
they would meet unite, and close without clashing or noise. Secondly, there is
excess the excressence and knottisness of humor and interest that makes Men
uneasy and to dash upon, and grate one another, but these who lay the
fundation, and sow the Seeds of division; or are abatters of it, either in
Church or State, do the abominable thing which the Lord hates, Prove; 6, 16, 19,
And cannot be long hid. Nemo potest diu sustinere Personam fictam Prove. 26.26.
He that covers his hatred with deceits his wickedness shall be made known
before the whole Congregation, such marrs, Suites and Proposals to them, and by
them; being jealoused of mixed interests and and designs, which the simpler sort
cannot understand and discern. 2. Samuel 15.11.

Application, We may take up a Lamentation, and regrate there be few that know
the way of peace, Isai. 59.8. They neither desire nor apply themselves to know
these things. Hesea 8.12. I have Written to them says the Lord the great
things of my Law, and they counted them as a strange thing, how many live
without God, and without Christ in the World, and have lost the sense of God,
and pulss of Conscience, it were easy to prove the greatest part to be Fools,
and ignorant of these things that belong to peace. I shall give you sour notes
of a Fool, First he that prefers Husks to wholesome Food, as the Prodigal Luke
15. Secondly, he that wants senses to discern; and makes choice of a broken
Cistern, forsakeing the Fountain, Jerem. 2.12.13. 3ly. he that wants foresight
to provide for time to come Math. 25. The foolish Virgins had empty Lamps. 4ly
he that puts a Knife to his own Throat Prove. 8.36. he that Sins against me
says Christ wrongs his own Soul, all they that hate me love Death, there be
Four sorts of Persons that the Scripture proves, to be arrant Sots and Fools.
1st, the Persecuter God calls him a Feol who eats up his People, as they eat
Bread Psalm. 14.1.4. they know not God has discharged Persecution, and is
concerned in the wrongs done to his People Psalm. 105.14.15. 2ly The Lord
resents what wrongs are done to his People, as done to himself Acts 9.4. Saul
Saul why Persecutest thou me, They pierce Christ through the sides of his
Friends 4ly they are Fools because they are Prayerless and Scriptureless, they
call not upon the Lord Psalm. 14.4, they cast the Law behind their back, and
therefore they Persecute, Nehem. 9.26. 5ly they come Foul off with it as the
instances of Pharorh, Herod Haman. Darius, Courtiers. They proved all Fools in
the end Exad. 14. Esther. 8. Acts. 12. Dantel. 6. Secondly, the Proud Man he is
a Fool, he gets the same name with the Fool, 1. Tim. 6.4. the word, in the
Original, fignifies Smoke, which says the Proud Man is puffed up with Stinking
Air, First, he considers not that God has prohibit Pride, and that Pride
hinders many a good turn. Jerem. 13.15 and prompts to many an ill turn, the
Cursed Proud are from Gods Commandments. Psalm. 119.21. and the wicked through
the Pride of his countenance persecutes the Poor and will not Seek God Psalm.
102 4. Pride is the dead Flee in the A pothecarys Ointment, it spilt all the
Pharasies duties Luke 18. such Perclaim War against the God of Heaven and makes
him an Enemy 1. Pet. 5.5. it has brought many low, and proved them Fools in the
end Proverbs 16.18. Thirdly the Scripture makes the covetous Man a Fool, he
knows not that covetousness is a heinous transgression in Gods account, no less
than Idolatry. Col. 3.5. such Persons are abhorred of the Lord. Psalm. 10.3
Their temper hinders profiting under means, their care choacks the Seed of the
Word. Math. 13. They are in hazard of a sad surprise Luke 21.34. they hinder
their own, thriveing, There is that withholdeth more than is meet, and it
tends to poverty. Proverbs 11.24. He makes a Fools bargain, and losses-more
than he gains, when he losses his Soul. Math. 26.26. Luke 12.18.

The Voluptuous and Luxurious they are Fools, they are plagued and prove a
Prognostic of the evil of the last times. 2 Timothy: 3 4. They are dead while they
live 1 Timothy: 5 6. There pleasures are short lived like the crackling of Thorns
under the Pot. Eccles: 7 6. Heb: 11 25. There is a song to follow that will eat
out all the Rememberance of their former Joy. Isiah. 47 8. etc. Revel: 18 7 8
etc. Their way brings both poverty and pain, which they dream not of. Proverbs
21 17 23 29.. And they shall mourn at the last, Proverbs 5 11. When they feel
what they feared not, is it not for a Lamentation that the greatest part befool
themselves? 1st, how many grossly ignorant have their hopes to be saved: Yet
Isiah 27 11. The Lord says he has no favor for them, 2 Thessalonians: 1 8. Christ at
the Last Day will take, Vengance on them. 2dly. How many live in black Atheism
and Prophanity. Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Unclean and think to be saved, and
yet the Lord says because of these things his Wrath comes (on the Children of
Disobedience, and such shall be cast in the Lake, Revel: 21 8. 3dly. Many never
had a night Sense of Sin and Lostness, and yet hoped to be saved, whereas the
right hope of Heaven never lodged in him, who never saw he was in hazard of
Hell, John 16 9. Conviction is the first Step of turning to God. 4tly. Many are
altogether taken up with the World unconcerned in Gods Glory or their own
Salvation, and yet hope to be saved: Whereas the Lord says Philip 3 19, Their
end is Destruction. 5ly. There are some have got many Warnings, and heard many
Preachings and never were touched with any of them like these. Deuter: 29 19
20. When they hear the Words of the Curse, they bless themselves in their
Hearts, saving they shall have Peace, although they walk after the Imagination
of their own heart, and add Drukenness to thirst, But the Lord says He will not
spare His Anger, and Jealousy shall smoke against that Man, and all the Curses
that are written in this Book shall be upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
his name under Heaven, should not this his Alarm secure Souls; I will give you
one Mark of them, they love the flattering cheat who claps their head in their
Sins, and hates the Faithful searching Preacher, who is their best Friend.

But how comes it that people befool themselves and sets not their Minds to
know things that belong to Peace. 1st They are in the Visible Church, and enjoy
the common Benefits of the People of God, such may have Heavens door closed on
them. Math: 7 22 23. Some that heard Christ prophesre in their Streets, he
boasts them to depart. 2ly they paint A God all mercy and consider not that he
is just and tender of his honor they Shape A God to their own mind, that is as
well pleased with their way as they themselves the Lord says Psalm 50.21. 2,
these things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thought that I was
altogether such an one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order, before thine Eyes. Now consider this ye that forget God, least I tear
you in pieces, while there is none to deliver. He will draw up in Battle array,
the Sins of such, and every Sin as it were dipped in the Vinegar of his Wrath,
that shall pierce like a Dart through the Heart and the Liver. 3ly some dream
all will be well with them. for they thrive in the World, they have health and
wealth and credit. yet God may give thee thy Hearts desire in these things and
send Leanness to thy Soul, Psalm. 106. 15. 4ly some think if they Perish they
will have many marrows, It will be no ease to you to go to Hell in a throng.
every one there will kindle another Fire, and make it the hoter, Math. 13 30.
says Christ bind them in bundles and Burn them, pack them to together, the
Unclean, the Drunkard's, the Drunkard will curse his Companions that ever he
saw their Faces, so will the Whore-Munger and Harlot.

Would you have the tokens of these that know the things that belong to their
peace, and are made wise by Christ. unto Salvation. First, such are overawed
with apprehensions of God, he is their Fear, and he is their dread, Isai. 8.13
Psaim. 111.10. Genes. 39.9. Joseph was truly wise 2ly they who prize things
according to their worth, and and make right choice as Paul. Philip 3.72 8, who
counted all things lofs and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ his Lord; and David Psalm. 4.6.7. who preferred the lifting up of the
Lord's countenance on him to any other good. 3ly such will not prig with
Christ, but will Sell all for the Field, where the Pearl is Mat. 13 44. 4ly
such will manage time well, that is a note of a sound understanding to
consider the Latter end Deuteronomy. 22.29 so teach us to number our Days says Moses
Psalm. 90.12. that we may apply our Hearts to wisdom, Job was wise. 14.14 all
the Days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come. I know not when
I rise at Morn if ever I see another Day, it is wisdom to redeem time Ephesians.
5.15.16. we have no more time we can call our own but the present time this
Day, yesterday is not ours it is gone and will not return, and we are not sure
of to Morrow Proverbs. 27.1. we should the rather consider time because much
work lies undone, and slighting of time puts many to the Fools repentance out
of time, they who know what belongs to their peace will study sound obedience,
and reduce knowledge to practice, Psalm. 111.10. A good understanding have all
they that do his Commands John 13.17. If ye know these things says Christ,
happy are ye if ye do them, this is the best proof, a fruitful and shineing
conversation.

Now I would speak to all, Especially to Rulers and Judges, as you would
evidence your Knowledge and Consideration, of what belongs, either to your
Souls Peace, or the Peace of the Church and Land, there are some things you
would beware of, and some things you would have and do

1. Beware of Rigor Tyranny, and Oppression, or Inyeighing with bitterness
against People, where there is no cause, by inflicting punishment, either
unjustly where there is no Fault, or immoderatly, unseasonably and basely,
where there is a Fault, There is an obligation on Rulers, thus to make
Conscience of Dutys to inferiors, he Rules with most Comfort and Confidence,
who keeps most room in Peoples Affections; and weakens them not, and they are
most likly to be the Men of the Promise, to Build the Old waste places; to
raise up the Foundation of many Generations, to be called the Repairers of
Breaches, the Restorers of Paths to dwell in, who loose the Bonds of
Wickedness, undo heavy burdens, and let the Oppressed go free, and break every
Yoke, and ease People of just grievances, and impose not, nor continue, what is
forbidden or condemnemned, Isa. 58.6.12.

2ly. Be not too Credulous, Try before ye Trust, a near Relation may whisper,
what is dang rous and proves a snare 2 Chronicles. 22.3. Achasiach his Mother
councilled him to do wickedly. Saul hearkened to false deceitful Sclandarous
Doeg Psalm, 52. a great Persecutor of David, who had taken great Ventures for
him.

3ly. Beware of Self-seeking Baruch, Jer. 3.45. a Good Man is reproved for
seeking great things to himself, when the Lord threatened Desolation, Paul's
Complains Philip. 2.21. All seek their own things, and not the things of Jesus
Christ, this made Judas betray Christ, and that with a Kiss, and Pilate to
Crucify Him, It is a mark of dishonor and Brand of Infamy, Especially in Great
Men to be Self-Seekers, to live wholly to themselves, like the Grave, wherein
all that is gotten is buried, and nothing brought forth to public benefit; It
may be written on the Tombs of these, such a Man sought himself while he lived,
and lossed himself when he dyed: For this Self, dis spirits Men, making them
cold and cowardly in Gods Cause, and becomes a Master, for the Lords Cause,
shake off its Government, resist its Reasonings, disobey its Commands, follow
not its inclinations, to satisfy its Lustings.

4ly. Prefer not secular Affairs to the Lords, such were reproved. Hagai 1.
when the Lords House lay waste.

5ly. Beware of Pride and upliftedness of Spirit; The Lord laid the Pride of
Pharoch, Hamon, Herod, and the King of Assiria, True Wisdom humbles and
advances to Honor, Proverbs 15.33.

6ly. Overlook not persons of a dangerous complexion by cruel Indulgence, one
Achan, endangered the wholeCamp of Israel, such would be put out of Capacity to
hazard Church or State, I am not of the cruel temper of that Man, who exhortd
the Lords of Justiciary at Jedburgh. To dye their Scarlet Robs in the
Phanaticks Scarlet Blood.

We hear of some intending to address this Honorable Court, as if Men should
be exempted from Church Censure, who are Supinely negligent, Coutumacious,
Erroneous or guilty of Immoralities, We hope, they will not find a shelter in
this Honorable Assembly: They plead, that because they have qualified
themselves, and has a Protection of His Majesty that will exeem them: It Is
true, some of them have qualified themselves in process of time, at the end of
Days, as Cain brought his offering, Genesis 4.3. After several Years out-standing:
One more ingenuous than others, Confessed, he never intended it, till he lost
hope of the return of a New Patron: How dissaffected they are and how much they
foster the disaffected, who are their most Bon-Companions, and continue the
Schism is well known, and I fear they and some others are not that length in
Loyalty, that Ephraim was in Religion, to be a Cake not turned warm in the one
side, Hosea 7, 8. And that in this respect, many are a step out of the Road to
Heaven, If they have sworn deceitfully, and not spoken truth in their hearts, (
Psalm. 15.2. Psalm 24.4.) If their heart and hand, and heart and tongue have
not corresponded, they have taken Gods Name in vain, and such are reckoned Gods
Enemies, Psalm 139.22. It is a grievnace, that the Intrusions of such should be
tolerate, and then setting up Meeting Houses to mar Legal Establishments, and
especially where there are Legal Establishments: We hope this Honorable Court
will Redress it, as ye would not appear to cast down with one hand what ye
Build with another.

Positively as you would prove your understanding in these things that belong
to your Peace 1st. You would have a good foresight, and not be wilful in what
may be dangerous, Princes and Magistrates in their Resolutions and Purposes
would have a Reserve to change Measures on second Thoughts, especially in
secular Concerns; So did David when provoked by an unmannerly Clown, Nabal 1
Samuel 25. But in things concerning Gods Glory, Constancy is a Commendation,
David never changed his purpose to pay his Vows, Psalm. 66 13 14. And to build
the House of God, Psalm: 132 4

2dly. Study a right ordering of the State in Civil Affairs, for it will never
be well with the Church, if not well with the State, The wicked walk on every
side when vilest Men are exalted, Psalm: 12 8. When the Righteous are in
Authority the people rejoice, but when the wicked bear rule the people mourn.
Proverbs 29 2.

There be four Sorts of persons dangerous to Crowned-Heads to run them on
precipeces. 1sl. Sycophants and Flatterers as Achabs false Prophets, 1 Kings
22. 2ly, The Envious as Darius's Courtiers Daniel 6 3dly The selfish,
ambitious, and covetous as Haman. 4ly Heady and young Councillors like
Rehoboam who occasioned the Revolt, 1 Kings 12. It is peoples part to pray that
Kings make a choice of Favorites as Exodus 18 21. 1st Able Men for Greatness,
Courage, Resolution and Constancy of Mind. 2dly Men fearing God. 3dly Faithful
Men that love the Truth. 4tly Men hating Covetousness and Bribes, which blows
dust in the eyes of the Wise

3dly. It speaks understanding in Magistrates their care that Justice be
dispensed discreetly, speedily, expeding Causes [not fretting Spirits by undue
delays) Impartiality universally to all, resolutly, courageously, righteously,
exactly soberly and diligently, thus Judgment shall return to Righteousness,
and all the Upright in heart shall follow it. Psalm. 94 15. Good Laws which are
the Sinniews of Societies would be enacted the greatest perfection whereof
stands. 1st. In their conformity to the prime and Eternal Law of God. 2dly. In
their vigorous Execution, the failing whereof is a great Grievance, written
Laws are for direction, and the Living Law (which is the Magistrate) is for
action to see these Laws obeyed, and in your Laws it were very meet there were
a provision, with respect to the Sufferers of the late times, Especially the
most eminent of them, who have suffered in their persons and posterity, (...)
be a redress of Wrongs and injuries they have endured.

But Rulers would bend their Understanding and Consideration chiefly in their
care about Religious Concerns, to promote Piety and Zions Welfare. Psalm: 132
and 137 1st. By their Commands. Asa commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of
their Fathers. and do his Law and Commandments, 2 Cron. 14 24. 2dly By the
Example of their Persons and Familys as David and Joshua. 3dly By encourageing
and maintaining a pious and faithful Ministry, men according to Gods heart,
Jerem. 15 4ly. To promote the true Worship of God and abolish false Worship,
Superstition, and all Monuments of Idolatry, there are some in Scotland presume
upon an intolerable Innovation to make use of the Service Book which has no
edge, I have heard some of the hearers of it say it would be long before the
hearing of it would make a sore heart for Sin, This Church could never endure
it, nor durst Prelates in their greatest hight Adventure upon it: It is known
how much of it is copied out of the Popish Breviary; I will not comment upon
the Verdict of a great person who called that Service an ill said Mass, for the
ridiculous Absurdities and Falsities of it 1st They may be seen at large in
Baxters Life. 5tly. There would be a special Care to visit, and settle
Seminaries of Learning with pious and learned men. It is an old Trick of Rome
to poison these Fountains. 6tly. Magistrates would have a special care to
preserve the true Government in Christ's Church by Presbetry, which differs as
much from Prelacy as a stone Wall does from a Mud-Wall; We own this Government
to be of Divine Right, and for the Churches intrinsic Power and Privileges we
hold them of no secular power, but of Jesus Christ the head of the Church, and
owned as such in our Confession of Faith, which is ratified in Parliament; This
Government and the Power thereof depends not upon the Suffrages of Men which
are alterable, no Man's Will being a Standard in this Matter; It would import
Christ an imperfect King, if he had left it to Men's Arbitriment to come and go
upon, Moses might not alter a pin from the Pattern showed in the Mount, Exodus 25
9. And if Moses was faithful in the House of God as a Servant, much more Christ
as a Son, whose House we are, Heb. 3.6. Christ will not deny Caesar his due;
nor will he want his own, nor be pleased with the pairing of the Priveledges of
his Church, for the Liberty and Exercise of our Government, we have reason to
bless the Lord for the Countenance and Encouragement we have from our Gracious,
Christian, and Protestant King and we are hopeful he will not impair but
enlarge the same. It is true the Church exercised their power given of God some
hundreds of years before there was a Christian Magistrate to own her, which
power as far as we could reach we used in times of Persecution, and
Church Officers must use, when Magistrates are Enemies, but blessed be God we
are not under that Temptation. I have before other Sessions of Parliament
proven our Government in all respects founded on the Word of God, and most
answerable to the Ends of an established Ministry. To hold out the wild Boar
that would corrupt both Doctrine and Manners, and guard best against Vice and
Error, and keep Ordinances best from pollution, and the Church from Infection,
and we may venture the Trial as the Prophet did. 1 Kings 18. When the people
halted between two Opinions, doubting whether God was God or Baal was God, the
Prophet ventured the Matter upon this that God that answers by fire let him be
God, and he carried it, that it was acknowledged the Lord He was God, that did
bear Witness by fire from Hheven, and Baal was found to be but a dead and a
deaf God that could not answer the Expectation of his Worshipers. Now if the
Government which we own be not most witnessed to from Heaven by the Spirit in
his Operations of Conviction, Conversion and Consolation of Souls: Let God and
the World judge: Had we not been persuaded of these things, what fools had we
been to have suffered one year, let be so many Years severity on that Account.
I judge few in Scotland sober judicious and Inegnuous will spond their breath
against this Interest and if any, it is mostly these who indulge themselves and
love to be indulged in their Lusts, and loves Elbow-Room to Sin without Control.

Right Honorable and well-beloved ye would be wise to your selves to befriend
the Church in all her Concerns, for the Arks sake, God blessed Obededom in his
person, Family and Friends. 1 Cron: 13, You would be careful the Churches
Revenues be neither embazled misimproven or missaplyed.

That Rulers of all Ranks should endeavor knowledge and understanding to
discern Good and evil, rightly to time and circumstantiat Actions is clear Deuteronomy
1 13. Eccles: 8 5. And it is threatened as a Judgment when Princes are Babes in
Understanding Isiah 3 4 5 David prays for Understanding to Solomon 1 Cronities
29 19. And likeways Solomon for himself. 1 Kings 3 9. There be Three Reasons
why Magistrates should labor to have Understanding, 1st, The figure they bear
by their Office imported in their Styles, being called Gods, Saviors, Fathers.
Eyes, Pillars, heads of the Body and Overseers. 2dly. God severly threatens
Magistrates that misbehave, as being neither above Instruction nor Correction
if they fail. Job 12 21. He poures Contempt upon Princes and weakens the
Strength of the Mighty. Psalm 110 5. He strikes through Kings in the day of his
wrath Psalm. 76 12. He is terrible to the Kings of the Earth, he shall cut off
the Spirits of Princes.

3dly Because they are liable to many Difficultys and Dangers, great is their
Task, to know the State of the People, to repress the Insolences of the proud,
to minister Justice to all.

I would warn both Magistrates and people to know and watch against these
evilly which threatens both Church and State with Judgments, as namely, 1st
When Men loath not their own hearts for unprofitableness under Ordinances, but
weary of them

2dly. When Men professing the fear of the same God, are mutually contentious.
3ly Breaking of Vows to the Lord, not cleaving to his Ordinances. 4ly. Peoples
going to Ordinances, and not going to the God of Ordinances for the Blessing.
5tly. When Christ is not received in Ordinances, nor the Motions of his Spirit
cherished. 6tly When people are grossly profane in Talk and walk, and come to
that hight of Sin as to cast off all reproof, all Dread and Aw of God. 7tly
Peoples frequent, familiar, and needless haunting with persons perverse, in
Principles and Practices, whereby they partake of their Sins, receive of their
Plagues, and get a Snare to their Soul, Revel. 84. Proverbs 22 24.25. This has
been the neck-break of this Generation especially to the younger sort.
Companions of Fools shall be destroyed, Proverbs 3 20. Solomon says Eccles.
10 8. He that breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him, there is a hedge of a
six fold Prohibition. Proverbs 4 14 15. Enter not into the path of the Wicked
and go not in the way of evil Men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and
pass away: They who leap over this hedge may lay their account to smart for it.

I would add a few things people should know as their Bound Duty to Magistrates
1st. To pay them all due Respect and Honor. 2dly. All due obedience in the
Lord. 3dly Fidelity to their persons and Authority. 4tly Aid and Help. and that
1st. By Faithful Counsel and Advice when called, and the Discovery of secret
Enemies and Plots. 2ly By rich Rebates, without a grudge paying Custom and
Tribute, and giving all needful Re^^^^^^ for the Safety of the King, the
Security of the Government, the safety of the Common Wealth, which was long
since reckoned a Law above all Laws. 3dly. We should give Aid by our persons
both against Country Rebels and foreign Enemies, venturing our Lives for them
both in Peace and War. 2. Samnel 21 16: and 23 6. 4tly. By our prayers. 2 Timothy:
2 2. That we may live under their Government a peaceable and quiet Life in all
Godlyness and honesty, for Magistrates neither stand nor fall to themselves,
especially Sovereigns, because they are the Pillars of the Kingdom. Let me
smite King Saul but this once said Abishas and the Kingdom shall be thine, and
the Victory thine 1. Samuel 26.8. so said Achitopbel, let me Smite King David
and all Israel shall be gathered unto the and 2, Samuel 17.2.3. When Alexander
Died the Army was but on Man less, but it was compared by the wise, to the
Cyclops, which had its only Eye Bored out, the Supreme Magistrate carrys about,
not only his own Life, but the Life of Thousands depends on his safety, 2.
Samuel 18.3 2. Samuel 21.17. Thou shall not go forth any more with us to
battle, said the People least thou quench the light of Israel, for thy life is
worth a Thousand of ours.

Shall not our Hearts be enlarged in blessing of God, for our Gracious King;
whom he sent to be a deliverer, to save these Lands from Popery and Slavery,
and us also from Prelacie a yoke which neither we nor our Fathers were able to
bear, and shall not our Souls be lifted up in servant supplicatious to God for
him, in whose Safety the safety of the three Kingdoms is so much bound up, who
ventured his all for us, when we were upon the brink of Perishing, It is good
our part to beg of God, to give him a large and understanding Heart, and to
multiply blessings of all sorts upon him, blessings both of the right and left
Hand, to give him length of Days. and make him a lasting blessing, to those
Nations, to give hin both the upper and nether Springs, and that his Crown may
flourish on his head, and all his Enemies Clothed with shame, we are concerned
to Pray for the King, and Magistrates of all ranks. that they may be truly
religious, because of the power os their example to good or evil, their vices
pass current for virtues, and soon becomes a fashon, be their Commands never so
great, they Command most by their example

Exhort. My last Exhortation to you all Right Honorable and well Beloved, is
that ye acquaint your Selves with the Word of God, which makes the simple wise,
many of you are too great Strangers to it, some are branded Jerem. 10.6. the
Word of the Lord is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it, they mock
Piety and the Scriptures the rule of piety such are in the highest Class of
Sinners in the Seat of the scornful Psalm. 1.1. Which is rendered by the
Septuagint the seat of Pestilence, such are plagued in their Spirits, and are
the Plague of their Generation, and alas! too rife amongst us, God will make
their Bonds strong Ilas 28 22. he will cast a chain of his wrath about them,
which if mercy and repentance prevent not, will grip, and smart them to all
Eternity.

You would observe the Word in all the parts of it, 1. In the promises to
believe them, to encourage you to Piety and Virtue, such as these, Psalm: 84
11. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield, he will give Grace and Glory, and
withhold no good thing from them that walk uprightly, Jerem: 32 40. This is the
Covenant that I will make with you, I will never depart from you to do you
good, and I will put my fear in your hearts that you shall not depart from me.
Rom: 8 28. All things shall Work together for good to them that love God, and
are the called according to his, Purpose, 1 Cor. 3.22.23. whether Paul
Appollot, or Cephas, or things present or things to come, or Life or Death, all
are yours and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. 2. Corinthians: 6 16. I will
dwell in you and walk in you says the Lord, and I will be your God, and ye
shall be my people. Heb: 13.5. I will never leave you (...) forsake you. 2.
Observe the Commands to obey them, such as that to love God and His Truths.
Interest, and people for his sake, and to believe on the Name of the only
begotten Son of God, that ye may have Eternal Life. 1 John 3 23, 3 Observe
Heavenly Directions and Warnings to receive them, such as these, Luke 13 24.
Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for many will seek to enter in that
shall not be able. Heb: 12.14 Follow peace with all Men and Holieness without
which no Man shall see the Lord, whatever his Figure and quality be. 2 Pet: 1
10. Give Diligence to make sure your Calling and Election: It is a foul Shame
that men should content themselves with a groundless Conjecture as to Eternity,
whether they be saved or damned, they neither know nor care, and yet labor to
be sure of the meanest petty Interest in the World. 4. Observe the Reproofs of
the Word to improve them, for the Rod and Reproof gives Wisdom. Proverbs 29 15.
God reproves by the Rod by Dispensations, By Conscience, by his Spirit and his
Word, some will have none of his Reproof, which is a black Mark of approaching,
Smarting Strokes. 5. Observe the Examples of the word the good Examples for
Imitation, and the bad to shun them.

Good Examples. Enoch who lived three hundred sixty five years, and walked with
God. Genesis 5, 22, 2. Abraham who instructed his Children and Household,
Geuesis. 18.19. 3. Joshua who served God, and his House served God. Joshua
24.15. And it took nothing away from their Gallantry. 4. The Centurion
Cornelius who was a Devote Man and feared God and all his house. Acts 10.2.
5ly. Nehemiah, valliant for the Truth who rebuilded the Temple in dispite of
Fraud and Force, and was zealous for observing of the Sabbath. 6. Mordecas who
sought not his own but the wealth of his people, Esther 10 3 7ly. David who was
upright before God, Psalm: 18 231 A Man according to Gods own heart. 1 Samuel: 13
14. Who would have the Faithful of the Land to dwell with him, and suffered no
wicked person to be about him Psalm: 1.01.

For bad Examples to shun. 1. Beware of Cains, Genesis 4. Who first cast down
his Countenance upon his brother, and then slew him. 2dly Beware of Joabs
Example, who under the Covert of a courteous Salutation wounded Amasa to Death.
3dly Beware of the Examples of Pharoh, Haman, and Herod, who were Persecutors
of the servants and people of God, and all of them made a black Hinder-end.
4tly. Beware of Absoloms Example, who used his Politics to ruin his Father. 2
Samuel 15. O! that I were judge said he, I would see all Causes go right. 5tly.
Beware of the Example of Tobias and Sanballad, who under the fair color of
pretended Friendship, to concur in building of the Temple, sought to undermine
and ruin the Work of God, Lord think on them said Nehemiah, 6 55. etc. 6.
Beware of their Example that profane the Sabbath against whom the Lord
threatens to kindle a Fire, that shall burn up the places of Jerusalem, and
shall not be quenched. 7. beware of Hiel, his example who incurred the curse of
God, Joshua 6.26. made the People Swear both for the present and succeeding
Generationes, and to confirm their oath, by a Curse before the Lord, Intimating
that he does utter this not in a Passion, but by Divine Inspiration as appears.
1. Kings, 16.34. God would have the Ruins of the City of Jericho, to remain as
a standing Monument of his Justice, that who builds it, shall lose all his
Children in the work, the first born in the beginning, others in the progress,
and the youngest in the close of it: There is an instance of Divine predictions
and comminations fulfilled: Hiel, he would choice this place for his bulding,
not so much for his own advantage as out of contempt of the true God and of his
threatening, which he designed to convince of falsehood by his own experience,
and out of an ambitious desire to advance his own reputation and interest: by
his sad experience he found the truth of Gods Word, and how vain it was to
contend with him, he was made an eye witness of his Childrens untimely death,
as some observes, several Hundereds of Years after the threatening I warn you
all to beware of harboring any thoughts of Building the Jericho of abjured
Prelacie, which Scotland has been so Solemnly and frequently Covenanted and
sworn against, a weed that never agreed with this soil but always nipt the
tender and wholesome plants.

What losses, affronts, and smartings of Mind have many, had and some of no
mean Account endured in their Persons end Posterities who were abetters of that
Interest, I forbear to speak of all which I have observed near these Forty
Years, I well remember of two of no mean Account, who were among the chief
Contrivers of introducing Prelacy, and both of them in their dying had severe
smartings and horror of Conscience, one of them, the last Sabbaths of his life
would suffer none of his old Brethren to Preach in his Pulpit, but engaged
three honest men, who had some connivance for the time to Preach in his
Pulpite, and took the last of the three engaged, that whether he lived or died,
he should Preach the third Sabbath, there are living Witnesses of this at this
day, This Account I had from one of the Ministers, a near Relation of his own,
to whom he ackowledged, he went over the belly of his Light, and said to one of
the Contrivers; we could never set up Prelacy in Scotland unless B. Sanderson
should write a Retraction of his Book De Juramento, by which he was convinced
of the indispensible obligation and binding virtue of the Oath of the Covenant,
the Brother he then spoke to laid his Head to the wall, and sat silent for a
time, yet both of them thortured their Consciences and complied with the design
I wish all may beware of meddling with that which has given a Scad, and brunt
others, as by Arrows of the mighty, and Coals of Juniper, I would advise all,
that have leisure and are disposed without bias and prejudice in this point to
Read and peruse what it written by the R. Principals Rule, and Forrester, and
Mr. Jamieson, who wrote without consert, and hardly knew of one another
setting about the work, to Answer that great Champion for Prelacy Dr. Monro,
who appeared as if he would give a Defiance to the Armies of Israel, but they
have turned the Enemy in the Gate, and made him return ashamed, and it is
observable, that Mr. Jamieson a blind Man, who in the Worlds account might be
thought a stripling in comparison of the great Dr. Yet has he felled him in
the Head, and gone near to cut off the Golia's Head, with Golia's Sword 8
Beware of their Example who are compared to bruit beasts, haunting Harlots
Houses, Jerem. 5.7.8.9. shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this
says the Lord, shall I not visit for these things, I dread a vengeance from
Heaven, for the shameless abounding uncleaness of Scotland. A Whore is a deep
pit, who are abhorred of the Lord fall into it, and few or none return to the
path of life. Prove. 1.2.19. Prove. 22.14.9. Beware of their Example who has a
flying Roll of Curses broad and long following them to their Houses Zechariach.
5.2.3. etc. They are called Theives, and false Swearers, Oppressors are
greatest Theives, and Perjury is a great Sin in Scotland, there is an outcry for
frequent imposing Oaths in Civil Accounts it proves a suare to many and
occasions perjury its expected and desired it be Remeided, we look here and
there for causes of Disasters, and Thuarting and Crossing of honest Designs,
but let every one look in to their own bosom who is free to cast a Ston at
another, but I will tell you my Mind anent Gods great Controversy with
Scotland by three Scriptures which will Answer three Objections, Deuteronomy,
29.24.25. All Nations shall say wherefore has he Lord done thus unto this
Land, what means the heat of this great Anger, Then men shall say they have
forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their Faithers, the Children were
bound as Moses tells from the 10 verse down ward Wives and little Ones, and
these absent were under the Oath, what meant the three years famine in the days
of David 2 Samuel 21. It was breach of Covenant with the Gibeonites which they
obtained by a Cheat, yet was the Lord avanged for the breach of it three
hundred years after upon Saul's Sons, what meant the Lord to stigmatize
Zedekiach, as a (...) that should never thrive nor have a day to do well, It
was the breach of Covenant he swear to Nebuchadnezar, The Lord calls it his
Covenant his Oath, that he had broken, and he would recompense it upon his
Head, he did not willingly engage in this Oath Nebuchadnezar made him swear by
God. 2. Chron. 36.13.

10ly. Beware of their Example, against whom the Lord denounces a woe Habbac.
2.15.16. who press others to drink to Excess, a cursed Custom, for the Lords
sake forbear it henceforth.

Take warning all of you, and warn your Friends to flee out of the way of Gods
Curse, out of the way of wrath to come, which is the Hell of Hell, If you plump
into the pit when you have lien among the flames Millions of Years, It is ay
wrath to come, wrath to come, I Charge you all to think on it, and if not, I
take Heaven and Earth, the Timber and Stones of this House, and every one
witness against another, and your own Consciences which are as a Thousand
witnessess, I am free of your Blood: It is like when your eye strings are a
breaking, you will clear me and condemn your selves, Consider what I say, and
the Lord give you understanding in all things, Jerusalem was as dear to God as
Scotland is, had the Rulers and People known what belonged to their Peace, and
managed Gospel Oportunities, the City had not been Ransacted, nor the Streets
run with Blood, nor the Temple overthrown, and all come to wrack, O that
Scotland would take warning, we have our lesson by their dear bought Experience.

If there be any that fret, and have Heart riseing at what is said I am not
anxious, for I fear God, and have my Conscience to bear witness, I neither
designed to Irritate nor Flatter: I have a due deference to Men, in their
Respective spears in Subordination to God, but to no Man the greatest in
Competition with God, who is the alone Judge and Law giver to the Conscience,
who alone. can Save and Destroy the Soul: That this God, who is now your
witness and mine, and will at last be your Judge and mine, may by his good
Spirit Guide you in the Paths of Righteousness, for his Names sake, and be your
exceeding great, and Eternal reward, Is my Hearty Prayer, And to his Name
Father, Son, and Spirit be Eternal Praise.

FINIS.

