To the KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble Petition of Roger Williams of London Mariner, Your Majesty's most
Loyal and Dutiful Subject.
Humbly Complaining,
Shows unto Your most Sacred Majesty, That Your Petitioner having been
employed by one Edward Melish of London Merchant, to be Master of a small Ship
called the Valentine, of about 60 Tun, in the years 1672. and 1673. from London
to Fare in Portugal, and from thence to Newfound-land, to buy Fish, and to
carry the same to Oporto, and to come from Oporto to London: In which Voyage
Your Petitioner proceeded, but in his Return to London, was taken by a Dutch
Privateer, not far from the Downs; Afterward Your Petitioner was forced to pay
the Seamen their wages for the prosperous Voyages; Melish from time to time
promising to pay Your Petitioner; but not doing it in the space of near 3 years
time, Your Petitioner su'd him in the Admiralty for his own and Sea-mens wages,
amounting to near 200 l. Whereupon Melish exhibited his Bill in Chancery
against Your Petitioner, pretending breach of Orders; and that Your Petitioner
refused to give an Account of the Goods and Moneys wherewith he was entrusted
in the foresaid Voyages; and thereby, and by other false suggestions, he
obtained an Injunction to stop Your Petitioners Proceedings in the Admiralty
for the wages, till a hearing in Chancery; and after a tedious (and to Your
Petitioner a Chargeable) Proceeding there, the Cause came to hearing in
Easter-Term 1679. and the Lord Chancellor then decreed that Sir Samuel Clerk
Knt. one of the Masters of that Court, should inspect Your Petitioners Account;
which Account had been given in to Melish six years before, and no objection
made against it, till Your Petitioner su'd for his wages; And his Lordship also
decreed, that Your Petitioner should have his and his Sea-mens wages, but no
consideration for the long detaining it; yet that the said Master should make
all other just and fitting allowances on both sides, and what the Master should
report due to either party, should accordingly be paid; But as to Mellish's
pretended breach of Orders, his Lordship left Mellish to his remedy at Law, if
he should be so advised; and further declared, that if Mellish did not try it
that Terus, his Lordship would take it for granted, there was no breach of
Orders; whereupon Mellish brought his Action against Your Petitioner, for
refusing to go back from Oporto to Newfound-land, in September. 1673. and for
neglecting to put into some Port in the West of England, in his way from Oporto
to London, whereby the said Ship was taken; and laid his Damages to 2000 l.
though Your Petitioner gained for Mellish in the said Voyages above 1000 l.
more then his Losses; And Mellish having laid his Action in London, and brought
the same to Trial, and after appearing at Guild Hall several times, as if he
would try his Cause, he prevailed to have it put off diverse times, to Your
Petitioners extraordinary Charge, till such time as Your Petitioners Occasions
forced him Beyond Sea, and until Mellish had obtained a Jury of most Merchants,
some of them being Brothers to those to whom a considerable part of the Goods
in the Ship (when lost) were consigned, as afterward appeared; and some of
them were afterward of that remaquable Grand Jury that refused to find the
Bill against the Earl of Shaftsbury; yet very freely gave a Verdict against
Your Petitioner for 200 l. for refusing to go from Oporto to Newfound-land, and
for not putting into some Port of the West of England, though it was fully
proved the Ship was so rotten and decayed, that she was not capable to perform
the Voyage to Newfound-land, and that the Ships Rudder broke off, before Your
Petitioner got near the English Coast; and that when he came into the Channel,
the Wind blew so hard N. and N. W. that he could not possibly put into any Port
in the West of England, and no proof was made to the contrary.

I. Cause of Complaint.
And Your Petitioner further shows unto Your Sacred Majesty, that after many
motions made in the Common Pleas, where the Action was brought for a new Trial,
which is usual in such Cases; And though the Lord Chief Justice North (before
whom the Cause was tried) acknowledged that Your Petitioners Agents were
Out-solicited; and that if he had been of the Jury he would not have given such
a Verdict; yet he gave Judgment against Your Petitioner for 230 l. the 30 l.
being for Cost of Suit; and soon after Mellish obtained an Order from the Lord
Chancellor that the said 230 l. should be deducted out of Your Petitioners
demands before Sir Samuel Clerk; whereupon Your Petitioner exhibited a Bill
before his Lordship, to be relieved against the said Verdict, by having a new
Trial by an Indifferent Jury; And such Proceedings were thereupon had, that the
Cause was by his Lordships own Order set down to be heard on the 11th. of
January 1681. and ought to have been heard in course a long time since; but by
Mellish's Art and Skill it is hitherto kept off from hearing.

And Your Petitioner further shows unto Your Sacred Majesty, that during the
Transactions aforesaid, Sir Samuel Clerk inspected Your Petitioners Account,
and having made unjust abatements of what Your Petitioner paid for Fish for
Mellish at Newfound-land, though Your Petitioners Account is no way disproved,
and though Your Petitioner accounts for those Fish at far cheaper rates than
others have paid from the year 1672. till this time, as is most manifestly
proved; And the said Sir Samuel Clark did make Your Petitioner account to
Mellish for Your Petitioners own Fish, that Your Petitioner brought from
Newfound-land, as Fish caught by Your Petitioner at Sea, because Your
Petitioner could not at that time of day (being 8 years after) prove he bought
them for his own use, although Mellish's Factor proves Your Petitioner carried
from Faro to Newfound-land as much Wines and other Commodities as would have
purchased so much Fish, according to the Bargain made for Mellish; II. Cause of
Complaint.
and Sir Samuel Clerk abated considerably of the wages, thereby incroaching on
the course of Trials by the Common Law, as to what the said Fish cost at
Newfound-land, and how much Fish was caught, and how much wages Your Petitioner
and Seamen were to have by agreement; the same being all matters of Fact, and
tryable by Jury, in regard the Original Contract touching the same was was made
in England; And the said Sir Samuel Clark made Your Petitioner account twice
for the same things, and made such other unjust allowances, whereby not only
Your Petitioner and Sea-mens wages were wholly swallowed up, but Your
Petitioner was thereby made Debtor to Mellish in near 300 l. and about July
1681. Sir Samuel Clerk made his Report accordingly, and Mellish obtained an
Order that the said Report should stand confirmed, unless cause were shown to
the contrary; And it so happened, that before the time was expired for showing
cause against the said Report, Your Petitioners Agents had notice that one John
Rice that had been Your Petitioners Mate in the said Voyages to Newfound-land,
was come into England, having been a Captive in Sally for diverse years, so that
Your Petitioner could not have his Testimony since the controversy did arise;
III. Cause of Complaint.
Therefore his Lordship was petitioned that the said Rice might be examined, as
to what he knew touching the matters in variance, and in regard Sir Samuel
Clerk was not then in London; it was also prayed, that the Accounts might be
Transmitted to some other Master, and the report Reviewed and altered, if upon
Rice's Evidence there should cause appear for so doing, But his Lordship
refused to grant it; However, upon a Petition to the Master of the Rolls for
that purpose, it was by him ordered, that Rice should be examined, and that Sir
Samuel Clerk should Review his Report, and thereupon Rice was Examined, and
proved, that Your Petitioner paid for the Fish at New Foundland, according to
the rates in Your Petitioners Accounts; but the time for showing cause against
the confirmation of the said Report being near claps'd, and Your Petitioner not
having had the benefit of Rice's Testimony before the Master; Sir Samuel being
then in the Country, and it being denied by the Lord Chancellor, that the
Report should be reviewed by another Master; Your Petitioners Agents filled
Exceptions to the said Report, which were afterward set down to be heard
before the Lord Chancellor, and ought in course to have been heard on some day
appointed for hearing Exceptions, but by Mellishes procurement, the said
Exceptions came on to be heard upon a day appointed to Argue Demurrers which
was not expected; whereby Sir Robert Sawyer Your Majesty's Attorney General
being Your Petitioners Principal Council, happened not to be present, IV. Cause
of Complaint.
and his Lordship was made accquainted therewith; and entreated not to hear the
said Exceptions, in the absence of the said Sir Robert Sawyer; However, his
Lordship would hear them, by reason whereof there was not so good a defense
made for Your Petitioner, as otherwise might have been done: And his Lordship
did then confirm the said Report in most of the particulars excepted thereunto,
whereby Your Petitioner, and his Seamens Wages was still wholly swallowed up,
and Your Petitioner made a Debtor to Mellish in 282 l. which his Lordship
ordered should forthwith be paid to Mellish, together with Costs of Suit to be
Taxed by Sir Samuel Clerk, which perhaps may amount to 200 l. more. V. Cause
of Complaint.
And although 230 l. of the said 282 l. was the Money Recovered by the said ill
Verdict and Judgment thereupon, and the Cause to be Relieved against it, was
then ready for his Lordships hearing; and his Lordship both then and since, was
often defired to hear the same, or stop the Payment of the Money till it were
heard, there being Security given by Your Petitioner to abide the final order
of that Court, but his Lordship would do neither.

And Your Petitioner further shows unto Your Sacred Majesty, VI. Cause of
Complaint.
that the next day after hearing the said Exceptions, Sir Robert Sawyer moved
his Lordship, that the said Exceptions might be Re-heard, but his Lordship
refused it, and not long after Sir Robert Wright, one of Your Majesty's
Sergeants at Law, Paul Bows and Walter Williams of the Midle-Temple Barristers
at Law, and of long Practice, finding Your Petitioner was wronged by the
confirmation of the said Report; They Signed a Petition to his Lordship,
thereby praying the said Exceptions might be Re-heard, and certifying his
Lordship, that they conceived there was good cause to Re-hear them, but his
Lordship rejected the Petition, though it be his Common and almost daily
practice in other Cases, to Re-hear upon such Petitions: And though diverse of
the best Council in Your Majesty's Dominions have diverse times since gone about
to show his Lordship Reasons for Re-hearing the said Exception, yet he has
silenced them without hearing their Reasons, and i^ (...) ^g, (...) bidding
Your Petitioner Appeal to Parliament, by which proceedings Your Petitioner is
Injured above a Thousand Pounds, which amounts to almost his whole Substance,
and will be the utter ruin of himself and Family, unless aided by Your Sacred
Majesty.

Forasmuch as Your Sacred Majesty is the Fountain of Justice, in whom the
Supreme Judicative power of the Law resides, and to whom it appertains upon
Appeal, to Examine, Correct or Reverse Decrees in Chancery, and otherwise to
Relieve in Case of Delay or Denial of Justice in the said Court, either in Your
Sacred Person, or by Commissioners, to be Delegated by Your Most Excellent
Majesty, or otherwise as Your Majesty shall please to Order at Your Royal Will
and Pleasure.

Your Petitioner therefore does in all Humility Appeal in the premises to Your
Most Excellent Majesty, and does most Humbly beseech Your Majesty to Order the
hearing thereof in such ways and methods, as to Your Majesty in Your Royal
Wisdom shall seem meet for Your Petitioners Relief according to Equity and
Justice.

And Your Petitioner (as in Duty bound) shall ever pray, for Your Majesty's
Long and Prosperons Reign.


