These are to give notice to all that occasionally are concerned herein VIZ.
Booksellers, Stationers, Printers, Mathematisians, and Drawers Painters and
Tillit-painters, Herauld-painters, Printers of Calicooes, Silks and Leather:
either with Gilt or in several colors, Card-makers, Damaskers, Pin-makers, and
all other persons that use Wooden Prints for what use soever, fine or course,
viz. to beautify Books according to the method therein contained: also
Tillit-Moulds, Card-moulds, Card-marks, Pin marks and all manner of
Packing-marks, According to the fancy of the party requesting the same, these
are to let you know, that there is one that is a freeborn Subject, and a
Freeman of London and no Alian, by whom you may have your Prints exactly done,
according to your own fancy at reasonable prizes, directly according to your
own draught, or in case it be to furnish any new invention, or new translation
into our mother tongue out of any other language, whereby it is impossible to
attain any print to sit the same, by direction in writing from the owner, the
draught shall be drawn and the Print exactly done without either troubling the
owner to buy stuff or to charge him with plaining sitting and paring the same,
whereby the work may be a broad and good salem de before they light into the
hands of those;e that would counterfeit the same, which going through many
several hands, has occasioned no small loss unto many ingenious Booksellers
and Printers; Also all Stationers or Booksellers that please, may have several
forts of paper ready sitted for their sale, either in one two or more colors
at reasonable prises, with all sorts of flight frames for Coper prints, or any
sorts of large frames for Limned pieces that are done to life, and also boards
to paint standing Effegies to the life at the full height ready proportioned
according to the workmans direction.

Gentlemen and Artists; Although I am well known unto some particular persons
of Booksellers and Printers. Yet still I am unknown unto the greatest number
of you which caused me to make my self known unto you for these causes
following, viz. For the common good and your benefit, for it is wellknown unto
you all that time, age, and death, has worn away the very chiefest Artists of
this kind, of and in this our English Nation; for these causes as well as for
mine own benefit. I am bold to present you with these Bills, which if excepted
I shall remain your Servant John Willson.

The same party will either make or Te^ch others to make any Real Modal of
Waterwork; Either for public service or private secreation, viz. Fountains and
Rocks with Artificial Corral to run real water in themselves so long as the
water will keep svveet, of any form whatsoever, or draw any manner of draught
for the same whereby any person may see the effect of his own Intentions before
he be at vast chages with any manner of figure work: in what posture soever to
move upon enterchanges, on Rounds half Rounds quadern Rounds treanguler
diamonds and all sorts of squares, these to be moved by Clock-Work, Water-work,
wind or hand Ingine, with large Elevations of water perpendickuler upright six
or eight foot high in Gardens or else where, with meeting moving Cloudwork to
move by Clock-vvork in a freeze of VVainscot in many several forms: with the
several changes of Scenes to the parties fancy either in small Cabinets or in
larger forms as in Theaters and large bouths: with the making of the English,
Dutch, French and the much admired Italian figures with their making moving
and acting it is now about eight years since his Modols was shevved in the
Cities of London, Westminster, and Burrow of Southwark three years together
one after another. These with many other delightful pleasant and profitable
ingenious work with his twenty four years study and about fifteen years
practice therein with what his daily experience shall find out so long as God
is pleased to give him life is now dedicated unto all that please to take
Advantage of precious time and make use of him at reasonable prices. His
dwelling place is in Cock and Heart yard by the Queens-head Inn near St.
Margerets hill in the Burrovv of Southwark.

John Wilson Joyner (...)


