
The Wonderful Blazing Star: with the dreadful Apparition of two ARMIES in the
Air. The one out of the NORTH, the other out of the SOUTH, as in the Figure
above is represented.
SIR,
ON the 17th of Decemb^^ 1680 between 4 and 5 a Clock in the Evening, at (...)
(...)ward of Exon; I, and many more vewing this amazi^^ on a sudden in a clear
Sky, there appeared Two great Armies, on^ coming out of the North, whose Leader
had a Coronet on his head: the other from the South; and, as it seemed
furiously joined Battle and (...) little retreating, vigorously charged again
and thus continued almost an Hour, till at last there comes in a Reserve, and
joining with the Southern Army, forces the Northern back in Disorder, and so
Vanished. Several were so terrified with this Sight, that they swooned away:
This is as true as terrible, else I would not have troubled you with it.

This Account came from a Reverend Divine, who, with many more, was an
Ex-witness of it. And, in all parts of England, Scotland, Ireland, France,
Holland, Spain, Germany and Sweeden; nay, all over Christendom, this Comet has
been visible: the like never since the Creation, as far as can be gathered by
the best Historians ancient and m^dern; being placed in Mercury's Sphere, above
the Moon.

TWill be therefore very necessary that I remind you of the two latest
Exemplifications of Comets, the one in 1664 and the other in 1677. That in
1664. was a forerunner of most dreadf^^ ^^^pensations, as the Sweeping
Pestilence in 65. and the Swallowing Fire in 166^. The one falls fowl on
persons, the other on Habitations. The last in 1677. foreruns the most Damnable
Plot (the Quintessence of all Plots) that ever Hell invented: Now God has
lighted up another Torch to give us a new Warning, that being forewarned we
might be forearmed also, especially with those Arms of the Church, to wit,
Prayers and Tears (our Desperate Malady has not yet met with an Effectual
Remedy) lest those Matchless Mischiefs which are Imminent over us may not also
be Incumbent on us. There is certainly something more than ordinary God has
upon the Wheel, to lighten up such a Blaze as this in the very, depth of
Winter, which is a time Diametrically contrary to the very Nature of Comets,
for Cold and Moist Weather is altogether unapt to produce those dry Vapors,
whereof a Comet consists. A Winter Comet is therefore like Winter Thunder,
which is commonly called the Worlds Wonder: the proper time of engendring those
Meteors is Autumn, for in Springtime there is supposed to be too much Moisture
and too little Heat to congregate those Vapors, and in Summertime there is so
much heat as plainly Segregates and Disperses those Exhalations, but Winter
time is wholly opposite to their existency and quite contrary to the
constituting of them; Therefore this (...) and pr^^^ernatural sign must needs
signify some Extraordinary and supernatural (...) even some Sweeping, Swinging
or Scourging, yea some cutting or killing Dispensation for the ((...)) or
Apparition extraordinary had a threefold Resemblance: 1 Of (...) Broom, 2. Of a
Rod. 3. Of a Sword, ^. Of a large Broom or Besom, yet dread^^l to behold, by
its sparkling Aspect, as if God were coming to Sweep ^abylon ^^d destroy its
B^ats, with his dreadful Besom of Destruction, as he has promised Isa. 1. 14.
22. 23. It Is true, God has his [ Scopas purgatorias, as well as perdi^ias] his
Brushing as well as Crushing Besoms. The former is for S(...) which God brushes
only for its Ornament the latter is for Babylon, which God Crus^^s also for its
O^^rthrow. God grant this Unclean Spirit of Babylon may be Swep^ but of our
Land. Zach. 13.2. Even by his powerful Besom.

Of their final Cause.
MOST Philosophers agree, that Comets are the Ambassadors or Agents of a highly
offended Deity, and the Denunciators of Misery to Mankind: They are taken for
Heralds or Proclaimers of future Calamities and Miseries: It is a most certain
Truth, never yet did any Comet appear, but it was the Messenger of some Eminent
Calamity.

The Learned Dr. Swan agrees, that they are either a sign of Calamity or else
the efficient Cause of them: if a Sign of Calamity, then their end is to be
Monitors to Repentance.

Most true it is, That Comets were always looked upon as the Threatening Eyes of
Divine Vengeance, or the Tongue of an ireful and greatly offended Deity.

The Learned Fr^mu^dus concludes, That they are Signs, at the pleasure of God,
to terrify and amend Mortals.

The Earth in vain did never Gaze,
When Comets the Skies do Blaze.
Conclusion:
Notwithstanding the Vengeance which Comet threatens to Mortals; The Godly,
Up^ight sincere S^uls need not in the least concern themselves; but may be
joyful in the Lo^ when others shall be at their Wits End for fear: for it does,
with the Prophet Isa. 3.10. Say to the Righteous, That it shall be well with
him -- Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with him -- 1 Phil. 28. In nothing
terified by your Adversaries, which is to them an evident token of Perdition:
but to you of Salvation, and that of God.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey, 1681.


