A True and Exact RELATION of the late Prodigious Earthquake and Eruption of
MOUNT-AETNA, or MONTE-GIBELLO

As it came in a Letter written to His Majesty from Naples by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Winchilsea, His Majesty's late Ambassdor at
Constantinople, who in his Return from thence visiting Catania in the Island of
Sicily was an Eyewitness of that Dreadful Spectacle.

Together with more particular Narrative of the same as it is Collected out of
several Relations sent from Catania.

Published by Authority.

Dublin Printed, by Benjamin T^^k^, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and a^e to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castle-street 1669.

A true and Exact Relation of the late Prodigious Earthquake and Eruption of
Mount-AEtna, or Monte-Gibello, as it came in a Letter written to His Majesty
from Naples by the Right Honorable the Earl of Winchelsea, His Majesty's late
Ambassador at Constantinople, who in his Return from thence visiting Catania in
the Island of Sicily was an Ey-witness of that Dreadful Spectacle. Together
with a more particular Narrative of the same as it is Collected out of several
Relations sent from Catania.
May it please your Majesty.
IN my ^^yage from Malta to this place wherein I have used all the diligence
the Season has given me leave, I touched at the City of Catania in Sicily, and
was there most kindly invited by the Bishop to ledge in his Palace, which I
accepted, that so I might be the better able to inform Your Majesty of that
Extraordinary Fire, which comes from Mount-Gibello 15 miles distant from that
City; which for it is horridness in the Aspect, f^r the ^ast quantity thereof,
(for it is 15 miles in length and 7 in breadth) f^r it is Monstrous Devastation,
and quick progress, may be termed an Inundation of Fire, a Flood ^f Fire,
Cinders and burning-stones, burning with that Le^^ as to advance into the Sea
600 yards and that to a mile in (...) I (...)* And that which (...) (...) Sea
(...) in (...) Moment in some ^lac^ or other, caus^ng a great and horrible
(...) and ^i^sing in the Sea; And thus more and (...) after it, making a ^^^m
f^^n^ation in the Sea it s^^f. I stayed (...) from nine a cleck in Saturday
morning, to S^^^n was m^^ning, (...) M^untain of (...) with ^^d^rs ^ad
ad^^^^ced into (...) 20 yards at least in several places; in the middle of this
fire, (...) burned in the Sea, is has formed a passage like to a River, with
it is Banks on (...) side ^cryst o^ and C^a^^y, and in this Channel (...) the
greatest quantity of (...), which is the m^st liquid, with (...) of the same
comp^s^tion and ^^nders all red hot, swimming upon the (...) a great wa^^^tude;
from this (...) of fire d^^h proceed under (...) great (...) the st^n^s which
are generally three fatham high all (...) C^untrey, where it burnt and in other
places much more, there (...) or Ritul^^s of this liquid matter, which
communi^^^^^ (...) and beat into all parts m^re or less, and m^l^s the st^nes
and (...) by fit in th^se p^a^^s wh^^e (...) them, ^ver and over (...), where
it meets with Ricks or H^^^^s of the some matter (as (...) are) they melt and
go away with ^b^ fire, when they find other (...) s^^^ns, they turn them to
L^^e (...) A^^es (as I am informed) The ^^mp^s^tion of this fire, st^nes and
^^nders, are Sulphur, Nitre, Quick-(...) or, So^-A^^^^^^, Lead, I^on, B^ass,
and all other Metals. (...) motes (...) regularly, ^^^fia^^tly (...) bil^; in
some places is has (...) the Valley's, Hill, and the Hilis that (...) not high
are now ral^^^. When it was u^ght I went u^^n two T^^ers in diverse places,
(...) ^^^ld pl^^nl^ (...) (...), as we judged, the fire to begin to ^^un from
the Mountain i^ a (...) lion, the flame to ascend as high and as big as ^^o of
the highest and greatest Steeples in Your Majesty's (...) and (...) up great
st^nes into the Air^; I could see the River of f^re descending (...) mountain
of a terrible fiery or red (...) ^ur, and st^nes of a p^l^r red, to swim
th^^^n, and to be, some as big as an ordinary Table. We could see this f^re to
more in several other places, and all the Country c^^ered with f^re, ascending
with ^^eat ^lames in many places, smoking l^ke to a^^i^lent furnace of I^on
(...), ^^king a ^^ise (...) the great pieces that f^ll, especially th^se which
fe^^ (...) the Sea. A Ca^a^^er of M^^ta, who lives there, and (...) the River
was as liquid where is Issues out of the (...), and (...) a T^r^ent with great
v^^l^nc^, and (...) ^^re or (...) ^^th^^ deep, and as b^^ad, and that no stones
do sink therein. I as^ure Your Majesty (...) ^an ^^press how terrible it is,
(...) the Art and (...) the world (...), or divert that which (...) burning
(...) C^^ntrey. In (...) days time (...) has destr^^^^ the habitation^^
(...), ^^^seur made two bills ^f ^ne, 1000 pa^es b^^b a p^ec^, and (...) is
f^^r w^^^es in c^m^ass, as your Majesty will see by the dra^^ (...) that ^^ale
the (...) send Berewith; It was the best I could ^et, but has nothing ^f^ the
p^^gress into the Sea, the confus^on was (...) great in the City, which is
almost surrounded with mountains of fire, that I c^uld not get any to draw one,
but I have taken care to hate one sent after me f^r T^ur Majesty: ^f 10000
persons which inhabited Catania 3000 did only R^main, all their Goods are
carried away, the Cannons of Brass are removed out of the Castle, some great
Bells taken d^wn, the City Gates walled up next the fire, and pr^paration made
all to aband^n the City.

That night which I lay there, it rained Ashes all ^ver the City, and ten miles
at Sea it t^oubled my eyes, this fire in it is pr^gress met with a ^ake ^f f^^r
miles in c^mfass, and it was not only satisfied to fill it up though it was
four fath m^d^e^, but has made of it a mountain.

I send also to Your Sacred Majesty a Relation in Print which the Bishop gave
me, wherein the beginning is Related, and several curious passages. I most
humbly beseech Your pardon for the hindering Your Majesty so long from Your
better Employments; And I beseech you Great Sir ever to believe I ^oo^ and
Revencece Your Person above all Expressions, for I am,

Naples the 27th of April 7 of May, 1669. Your Majesty's most obedient, most
humble and most faithful Subject and Servant. Win h^^^ea.

A particular Narrative of the late dreadful Earthquake and Eruption, as it is
collected out of several Relations from Catania.
MOunt-AEtna, or Monte Gibello, a Movntain so renowned throughout the world for
its height and greatness, but much more for those prodigious Flames, Smoke and
Ashes, which it has cast out from the top of it, whilst the other parts are
continually (even in the midst of ^ummer) covered with Snow, has been for many
Ages observed once, or sometimes oftener, in the space of about fifteen ^ea^s,
to throw up more than ordinary flames, with much ^m^ak and stones, and great
quantity of ashes; which (though terrible to the neighboring Towns and
Villages) was yet wont (...) little time to abate of its fury, and prove but
seldom more ^^^^rous to the Country near it, than by communicating largely
(...) ^shes, which though for the present it did somewhat incommodate them,
they had afterward a considerable compensation (...) the product of their
Lands, which by this means were ^endred more fruitful.

But on Friday the 18th of March, 1669. the Sun was observed before its setting
to appear of a pale and dead color, which (being contrary to what it ever
before appeared to us) struck no small terror into the Inhabitannts, all
objects appearing also of the same color, with a palness received from that of
the Sun. The same night happened in this City, as well as the whole Country
here abouts, a terrible and unusual Earthquake, whose strong and unequal
motions, joined with horrible roaring from Monte Gibello, exceedingly frighted
the Inhabitants, but was so extraordinary violent in the Country adjacent, that
the people were forced to abandon their Houses, and to fly into the Fields to
avoid the danger threatened them from the falling of their Houses. The Village
of Nacolosi was of all others the most dreadfully handled by this furious
Earthquake, the Houses and other Buildings being shaken all in pieces, and
buried in their own ruins; the poor people (who had preserved their lives by a
timely flight, with such little of their Goods as their hasty fears would
permit them to carry out with them) continued a night or two in the Fields,
beholding with grief and astonishment the ruin of their habitations. But
observing that by these violent concussions the earth begun to open in several
places, and to threaten them with inevitable ruin, they fled, though with much
trouble and amazement to this City. These shakings of the Earth being so
frequent and violent, that the people went reeling and staggering, with much
difficulty supporting one another from falling, insomuch as what with their
want of sleep, the pains they were forced to take in traveling, and the great
Terrors imprinted on them by what they have seen and suffered, they appeared at
their arrival in this City, as so many distracted people, wholly insensible of
what they did.

The dreadful convulsion of the Earth was immediately followed on Monday March
11th about ten at night, by three terrible eruptions much about the same time,
and at a little distance one from the other.

The said Eruptions was observed there on the side of Monte Gibello, about two
miles beyond the Mountain, called Montpileri, with a terrible noise it threw
its flames with much fury and violence about a hundred yards in height, its
noise not roaring only inwardly from the belly of the Mountain as before, but
violently cracking like peals of Ordnance or Thunder, from the side of it
throwing out vast Stones, some of them three hundred pound weight, which being
as it were shot through the air, f^l^ sseveral miles distant from the place,
whilst the whole air was filled with Smoke, burning Cinders, and Ashes which
fell like a flie^y Rain upon the Country.

In the mean time issued from the side of this prodigious Moun^^^^ a vast
torrent of melting and burning matter, which like an ^^^^dation drowned, as in
a flood of fire, the Country on this (...) of it.

This burning River ran down upon the Mountain Monpileri, ^^ich, opposing us
direct course, it divided it self into two ^^^^ams, which encompassed the said
Mountain, one of them ta^^^g its way by La-Guardia, the Convent of St. Anne,
and Mal^^^^^; the other by the Towns of Monpileri and Falicchi, which in (...)
ho^rs were wholly destroyed and lost, not so much as any sign (...) them
remaining, with several lesser Villages and Farms, and (...) them the famous
Image of the blessed Lady of the Annuncia^^^ which though highly reverenced
throughout the whole ^^land, esteemed the wonder of Sicily and the whole world,
and (...) which the people with much devotion resorted in pilgrimage (...) the
remotest parts, was also swallowed and consumed by (...) dreadful Torrent.

This fiery and burning Deluge immediately spread it self to a^^^^ six mile in
breadth, seeming to be somewhat of the color (...) ^elted and burning Glass,
but as it cools, becomes hard (...) ^ocky, and every where in its passage
leaves, Hills and Pyra^^^s of that matter behind it.

At the same time monte Gibell^ from it is top raged with dread^^^ ^lames, which
with its noise and concusions of the Earth still ^^^tinuing, added not a little
to the terror of the People, who (...) with ^^^es and lamentations about the
City and Country, en^^^ting nothing but to be swallowed or consumed by ^ire,
having (...) other apprehensions but of of death and a general conflagration.

The two torrents of Fire came forward, destroying all things in their way, and
by Wednesday, march 13th, had one the West side branched it self into several
streams, and overran Cam^^ ^^tund^, St. Pie^^^ and M^^torbianc^, with La
Potielli and St. Antoni^^: And on the East-part ruine^d the lower part of (...)
and Le Placchi, taking its way toward this City.

On Thursday the 14th the wind came East-wards, (...) day fell abundance of
Rain, which abated not the prog^ the Fire, which on the East Side had from
Mascaluc^^^ made (...) way to St. Giovanni di Galermo, the lower part whereof
is destroyed, and passing on seemed to threaten this City on the o^e side, as
did that on the West Side the other.

As the Fire approached, the religious every where appeared with much devotion,
carrying in procession their Relics, especially those of St. Agatha, the
famous martyr of Catania in which they reposed no small confidence, followed by
great multiutdes of people, some of them mortifying themselves with Whips and
other signs of penance, with great complaints and cries, expressing their
dreadful expectation of the events of those prodigious fiery inundations.

Whilst the people were thus busied in their devotions, and astonished by their
fears, news was brought to the magistrates of the City, that a considerable
number of Thieves and Robbers had taken the opportunity of this general
distraction to make a prey of the already distressed people, and that they had
murdered several of them for their goods, and that it was to be feared that
the City of Catania it self might run some danger from the great numbers of
them which were about the Country, and from thence took their opportunities to
get into the Town; whereupon consultation being had for the prevention of
farther mischief from them, the Commander of the Castle was ordered with a
considerable number of Horse and party of Spaniards to secure the Country and
City against those Robbers, who immediately sent out several parties with his
Provost Marshal, with order to seize on all suspected persons, and such as were
not able to give a good account of themselves* and for such as were taken in
the fact robbing, to execute them by martial law, without any farther trial,
and accordingly caused three pair of Gallows to be set up up for their speedy
execution, one before the Gate, D^ A^^, a second in the marketplace, and a
third before the Gate D^ll^ D^cima, setting strong Guards before the Gates of
the City, and causing all suspected houses to be searched, an account to be
given (...) of all Lodgers, and such persons to be secured as could any (...)
^all under a suspicion.

The poor people out of the Country being by this prodigious (...) stripped out
of all then esta^e, and reduced to great ex^^^mity, fled most of them for
refuge and relief to this City, with (...) lamentation, moving the charity of
the magistrate, which (...) readily inclined to give them the best assistance
they were (...); and the Citizens, moved by their complaints and sufferings,
(...) opened their doors, filling their houses with as many of (...) distressed
people as they could possibly receive, the Bishop (...) all persons of quality
and estate contributing largely for their ^^port, till better order could be
taken for the disposing of ^^em.

The City of Messina also, and several other Cities informed of (...)
extrao^dinary calamity, sent hither large supplies of provasi^^s, ^ffering
their best assistance to thi^ place in case of extremity.

All the Elements seemed at this time to make war against us, ^^d to conspire
together for the punishment of the Inhabitants, the Air was c^ntinua^ly dark^ed
with clouds and smoke agitated (...) great and violent winds, and oftentimes
showred down great (...) insomuch as the Sun from the beginning of these
erupti^^^ very seldom appeared to us, and when it did (with extraor^^a^y
pa^e^e^^) for a little time only, and (as it were abhorring (...)dreadful a
spectacle) soon hid its face again under a thick cloud.

The Sea ran much higher than it was wont to do, and by its ^^traordi^a^y
roaring, and in some places overflowing its banks, ^^ded not a little to our
constern^ion; the Land every where (...) with Thieves, insomuch, that till by
the extraordinary (...) taken by the magistrates and officers several
executions was (...) upon such as were apprehended in the fact, no person was
(...) to (...) abroad without danger of his life, whilst the fire by (...)
prodigious overflowing of the mountain threatened to take possession of them
all.

On Friday the 15th, the stream of fiery matter which destroyed the lower part
of St. Giovanni di Ga^lermo, divided it self into two parts, one of its
branches taking its way toward M^sterbianco, the other threatening the City of
Catania, but this last was observed to move with more slowness than before,
having in twenty four hours time ^carcely gained one mile.

On the 30th being monday, the to^^en^s being still seen to draw nearer and
nearer unto this City, the Senate and monsegu^^r Cam^uchi, the Bishop of this
place, followed by all the Clergy, Secular and Regular, and an infinite number
of people went in a solemn procession out of this City to m^nte di St. S^phia,
carrying out with greatest devotion their choi^est Re^icts, and upon a^ Altar
e^ected in view of the mountain, exposed them, where they celebrated mass, and
used the exorcismes accustomed upon such extraordinary o^ca^ions, all which
time the mountain ceased ntr as before with excessive roaring to throw up its
smoke and flame, with extraordinary violence, and abundance of great stones
which we^e carried through the Air, some of them falling within their view
though at ten miles distance from the eruption, the ashes which proceeded from
thence were scattered in great abundance, as well on this City as on the Country
ad^acent, every where i^ the Fields with Cinders, and the heat of the s^id
Ashes destroyed the gra^^, which obliged the people to drive away their Cattle
to a futher distance, which would otherwise have perished for want of food.

There streams of ruin daily crept nearer and nearer to this City, but b^
unevea and irregular motions, according as it was more or less supplied from
its foundation. But on Wedne^day the 20th we perceived that that branch of it
which seemed most to threaten this City from St. Gi^vanni de Gale^mo wa^ wh^lly
extinguished, and that which bent its course toward M^ste^ ^ia^^^ ran but
slowly, and gave us some hopes that its fury was also near spent; but the other
torrent which had before over-thrown M^^terbianco continued its motion with as
much violence as ever, being in breadth above a musket shot over, but in
p^obability ^ould not easily overflow to the West-wards, which was defended by
its rocky situation: Another branch which ^an by S^^^^ Pietro was observed to
be much larger than the rest, and ^^s ^^^eam more quick and active, but meeting
with some ^pp^^^^on (...) its way, it made some stop, only sending out a
R^v^let toward the Eastward about three of four yards wide of its mo^^ (...)
active matter, which directed its course toward a small village about a furlong
distant from its main stream; another branch threatened Campo R^tund^, but bent
its course Westwards toward the Farm of Valcorrente, where its fiery body was
scattered ^^to several deep and rocky places, without any considerable da^age.

About this time we had hopes that the violence of this eruption had been over,
the mountain not throwing out its flames (...) that violence as before, and its
noise and roaring in a great (...) ceased.

Those who at nearest distance took a view of the mountain, in^^^med, that the
top of it was fallen in; the mountain supposed (...) want near a mile of its
former height, that the largest of the ^ouths from whence these fiery streams
were vented, was about (...) in compass, but the view of this dreadful
inundation ^^^^ied so much terror in it as they were not able to express, from
all these mouths were vomited Rivers of a thick and fiery sub^^^ce stone and
metals melted, whose depth was various, according to the several places it
filled in its passage, in some places four, in others eight, twelve or fifteen
yards and upwards, its breadth in ^^me places, (...) miles, in others much
more, its flame like that of (...), and its motion like that of Quicksilver,
advancing ^^dina^^ly very slowly, unless where it was provoked by the ad^^tion
of a fresh torrent or some considerable descent; wheresoever it passed it left
large heaps of its congealed matter, with ^^ich it covered and burnt the earth,
melting the walls of Castles and Houses, throwing down and consuming all before
it, nothing ^eing yet found able to resist its force, nor any thing able to
^^ench burning, water being observed rather to add to its fury, wheresoever it
had passed, it had left its dreadful marks behind it, ^^velling some Hills and
raising others, so much changing the Sci^^ations, that not the least trace of
any place or Town remains, nothing being to be seen but confused heaps of
ragged Stones, which yielding a noisome fume, strike terror and astonishment
into all that behold it.

On Friday the 22th the mountain roared with much loudness, and threw up from
it is mouths a vast quantity of matter, which formed two large hills higher and
larger than that of Monpilori, with a large bank of the same matter to the
Eastward, sending down a violent stream of its liquid matter toward Malpasso,
much enlarging the former Current, and passing thence to Campo Rotundo, and
Santo Pietro completed the Ruins of those Towns, ^^iving furiously toward
M^^^^^^ianco, the other stream by Santo ^^^^^nni de ^^^^^^o being wholly
diverted and extinguish't?

From this time till the 25th the mountain continued silent, but then it burst
out again with more force than ever before, its noise much louder, like Pele^
of Ordnance, and so forcible and lasting as for 24 hours it caused a shaking
and trembling in our buildings, the Air so filled with smoke and Ashes as
darkened the face of the Sky?

The Birds and Foul about this time, either through want of food or illness of
Air which was corrupted with the noisome smells arising from these burnings,
were observed to lie dead in all places?

On the 28th the grand Current was advanced near the City as far as the old
Capucins which struck so great a terror into the people that most of them left
the City, only some Officers remaining with such persons as were under their
command, who have secured and sent away the magazin, and all the Artillery from
the Castle.

A later Relation from Catania bearing date the 27th of April, gives us this
farther account, viz.
The dreadful Inundation from monte-Gibello having destroyed many Castles and
Towns: with an infinite loss and utter ruin to the Inhabitants, arrived lately
with a renewed force at Most^rbianc^, which it has wholly ruined, from thence
passing unto Albanelli in 4 days space destroyed all the Gardens and
Vineyards, with sixty three thousand Vines?

On Wednesday April the 16th with an Impetuous fiery Torrent it came toward
St. A^iell, where all the remainder of the Inhabitants of this City we^e
Spectators of it, which resembled a Rivers of melted and burning brass about 30
else wide, running with ^^^^ness to the Arch of Marcus Marcellus a famous piece
of (...), and passing under it ruined about 6 else of it, which was (...)
breadth of the Current in that place, from thence it ran to Mad^nna d^
Monserrato which is wholly destroyed, then falling (...) to M^^^nna d^le Gratie
it entered in at one Gate and passed ^^^^^gh another, without any considerable
hurt, and running ^^^ough the Gate Dell^ D^^^ma filled all the Plain Di Schiara
^i^a (...) it was above 6 else deep, then taking its way toward the ^^^wark on
the Sea side, under the Castle of this City, it ran (...), two else deep into
the Sea, in which (to the great wonder of (...) that saw it) it has made it is
progress a mile in length, and as (...) in breadth, and is drawing toward the
gate of the Channel, ^^^ch gives us great apprehensions least it may that way
invade ^^e City it self; Nor is there less danger on the side Deltindaro ^here
there runs a great Torrent of the same active matter, which ^^awes near, and
seems to threaten the Walls, and is in that place (...) a mile in breadth,
having overflowed and destroyed all the (...) from the gate Della Decima as
far as Madonna delli (...)

List of the most considerable Towns and place Ruined and destroyed by the
dreadful Earthquake and Eruptions?
The Towns of Padaro and ^re Castagne, the greatest part dest^^yed by the
Earthquake?

^^e Towns of Le Guard^^, Malpasso, Campo R^tund^, La (...), St. Pietro,
M^sterbianco, Mon^pileri, L^ A^^^^eiata, Fali^^b, Pla^^h^, wholly overflowed
consumed and lost in this fiery Inundation, with all the lands belonging to
them, no footsteps of them remaining?

The Towsn of Mos^^lu^ia, and St. Gio^^onni de Galer^^, ^uined ^n part.

The large Gardens and Vineyards of Albanelli, over-flown and destroyed

The famous piece of Antiquity of Marcus Marcellus much ruined.

Madonna d^ Monserrato destroyed, besides many Castles, Farms and other place,
which have run the same fortune, whose names were for brevity past over.

FINIS.

