A Word to all Christian Families In SCOTLAND. Being an Earnest Exhortation to
an Holy Life.

Recommended to be left in Families.

portrait

By D. Wilson.

Edinburgh, Printed by James Watson in Craig's Closs, on the North-side of the
Cross 1700.

A Word to all Christian Fami^^^^ In SCOTLAND.

Being an Earnest Exhortation to a Holy (...) OR THE Only Deliverer from
Eternal Death and Destru^^^^^

Wherein is plainly laid down the great (...) of speedy Repentance; with the
wretched (...) of a Sinner, and the blessed state of a Sai^^ Showing how the
one (after Death) will (...) cast forever into the dreadful Flames of Hell-^^^^
and the other will be received up into Hea^^^ to celebrate Eternal Hallelujahs
to the Lord (...) Lords, who sitting at the Right hand of his F^ther will
shortly come to Judge the World.

Likewise some Pithy Arguments to perswa^^ Men to close with Christ.

Being very useful for every poor Sinner t^ practice and make use of in these
sinful, wicked* and backsliding Times.

Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, drink of the Waters of Life, and he
that has no Money, come buy and eat freely. Matt. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World.
By D. Wilson.

Edinburgh, Printed by James Watson in Craig's Closs, on the North-side of the
Cross 1700.

A Word to all Christian Families: BEING AN Earnest Exhortation to a Holy Life,
etc.
LUKE XIII. 5. (...) tell you, nay; but except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise
perish.
IN the first Verse of this Chapter, you have the sad piece of this News that
was told Jesus, concerning the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with
their Sacrifices. ^^r. 2. you have our blessed Savior's Answer to ^^is News:
Says he unto them; Suppose ye that ^^ese Galileans were Sinners, above all the
Galileans, ^^^ause they suffer such things? I tell you nay: but ^^^^pt ye
Repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And yet ^^^^her, ver. 4. Or those
eighteen upon whom the (...) Siloe fell, and slew them; think you, that they
(...) sinners above all men that dwebt in Jerusalem? (...) you, nay: but except
ye Repent, ye shall all ^^^^wise perish, This former part of the Chap^^^
contains the Sermon of Repentance that (...) preached by our blessed Savior.

^epentance is a pure Gospel Grace; it comes (...) Jesus Christ: He has
purchased by his ^^^od, that repenting Sinners shall be saved, The Doctrine I
shall raise from these Word^

That it is a great Duty incumbent upon Christians, to Repent, and turn to t^^
Lord: Or, it does highly concern a P^^ple whom the Lord visits with ^^^
Judgment, to strive to turn to him (...) Repentance, and Faith in Jesus Christ
Repentance, and Conversion is the only way (...) Salvation. I need not stay to
open the Text (...) you, and to prove it by Scripture. For if th^^ be a Man
or Woman that do believe (...) Word of God, then thou believe, that
wi^^out Repentance none can be saved, as the (...) has it: But I say unto you,
Except ye Repent, ye (...) all, likewise perish. Well then, what say th^^
Sinner? Do thou believe, or no? Thou (...) either confess that this is true;
or say plai^^^ that you will not believe the Word of God: (...) once you are
come to that pass, there is but (...) hopes of you. Look to your selves as well
as (...) can, for it is like you will not be long out of (...) You would be
ready to fly in the face of him (...) give you the lie: And dare you give the
lie (...) God? If you will not believe the words of (...) blessed Savior,
whose will you? And does no^ (...) say, That except ye Repent, ye shall perish?
He d^^ not say you may perish, but you shall; nay, th^^^ is no doubt of it: Let
God be True, and every M^^ a Liar: Christ has spoken it, Luke 10.12. I (...)
unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom at (...) day of Judgment, than
it shall be for that People (...) Nation that believe not these Words of our
Savi^^^

Use 1. Is this a Truth, That Repentance is the ^nly way to prevent the
Judgments of God that ^ang over our heads, because of our Sin? Then ^^rst of
all, I would entreat you, observe the cur^ed nature of this cursed thing called
Sin; you ^ee Sin must be repented of, or we shall all perish ^^r we shall be
damned: Sin will utterly destroy ^oth our Bodies and Souls. I think it is one
of ^he hardest things that is, to understand the ^eadly Poison that is in Sin:
Sin is that which ^^e Lord hates. The Soul that Sins shall surely die* ^his was
the old Law: But the Gospel of Christ ^^ith, Repent and forsake your Sins: Or,
Repent and ^^lieve and you shall be saved.

Use 2: Is Repentance the way and means to ^^event a People or Nation from
perishing? ^hen from hence you may learn the Excellency (...) the Usefulness of
that Grace of Repentance. ^h? What an Omnipotent Grace is this? It is a ^race
that can do any thing with God. This ^race of Repentance can redeem our
mortgaged ^^essings; it can make us a happy People, Jer^^^. 18, 19, 20: I have
surely heard Ephraim be^^aning himself thus: Thou have chastised me, and (...)
^as chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the ^^ke: Turn thou me, and I shall
be turned; for ^^^u art my Lord my God. Surely after I was tur^^d, I repented,
and after I was instructed I smote ^^on my Thigh: I was ashamed, yea even
confound^^ because I did bear the reproach of my Yonth. (...) Ephraim my dear
Son? Is he a pleasant Child? (...) since I speak against him, I do earnestly
remember him still: therefore my Bowels are turned for h^^ I will surely have
Mercy upon him, says (...) Lord. From hence you may observe, That ^^penting
Sinners are exceeding precious in (...) sight of the Lord; his Heart is turned
towa^^^ them. Oh! what an excellent Privilege ha^^ (...) penitent Heart with
God! My Beloved, h^^ can you live without such a Grace? Your (...) want it,
your Families want it; and the ^^^^tion stands in need of it: The greatest w^^^
this day in Scotland, is a broken Heart.

Use 3. Is Repentance the only way to prev^^^^ Judgments? Then from hence
gather, T^^^ when God either has his Plagues upon a P^^ple, or continues
threatening his Judgment^ ^^ward them, it is a sign that those People (...) very
guilty of Impenitency. If God threa^^^^ thee, O Scotland, to give thee up to
hardne^ (...) Heart, and blindness of Mind: Does Go^ (...) it at this Day? They
say (O Scotland!) (...) an impenitent People at this day. O Scot^^^^ this is my
Charge against thee: You have (...) stiff-necked People. O Edinburgh! (...)
long shall the Lord wait upon thee, before (...) will repent! What can you
expect but that (...) will yet visit Scotland with his Judgment, (...) be
humbled and heartily repent us of our (...) It Is for Sin that the Nation
mourns. (...) Swearing, Whoring, and Sabbath-brea^^^^ Schism, and Disobedience
to Magistrates, (...) Day in Edinburgh! O you sinful Generat^^^ this your
requiting of God for all his ^^^cies? Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord O
ye foolish and unwise! What say ye? Will you Repent or not? This is my Question
which I have to ask you this Day, Will you Repent? Do not flatter your selves
about Matters of so ^reat concernment as your immortal Souls. Con^ider this, (O
Sinners) if you will repent, then ^ou may live happy in the Land of your
Nativi^y, and go to your Death Beds in Peace: But if ^ou will not repent of
your Sins; then, I say, ^ou must (instead of Blessings) expect nothing ^ut
Curses.

It is plain that God is angry with you; for God would never have sent so many
Judgments after one another. Once more: Will you re^ent, or will you not? If
you will not, your Sins ^e at your own Doors. Do not think it is a hard
Question, when I ask you to repent; but con^^der there are two places where
there is no re^enting; the one is in the Grave, the other in ^ell. It were a
vain thing for me to go to the ^ates of Hell, and cry to them, Repent; for ^he
Day of Grace is past, and their Doom is ^assed upon them. I do verily think,
that there (...) more sorrowing in Hell for Sin, than there is ^^is Day in
Scotland, but their Sorrow is not a ^^nctified sorrow. If the damned in Hell
were ^elivered out of Hell, they would sin again; if ^^ey lived eternally, they
would sin eternally. ^ut I am not a speaking to Men in Hell, but to ^ou Sinners
in Scotland.

1. I say unto you, Repent: Because Jes^^ Christ has commanded you under great
Pena^^ties, if you do not. Consider a little (O Sinner who it is that calls for
Repentance: It is not but the great God; it is Jesus Christ; and doub^^ less
Christ would never have pressed you to the Work, if it were not necessary. He
says un^^ you, Repent; and says again, If you do no^ your Sins shall not be
blotted out. Woe be unto th^^ Man or Woman that repents not, better were that
he had never been born, that he ha^ never, seen the Light: The Parents that
ba^^ thee, they may Repent that ever thou were bo^^ It would grieve your
Parents to see you ca^^ried to the Gallows to be hanged: And will not much more
grieve them, to see you ca^^ Body and Soul, into everlasting Burnings, the^ to
be tormented with the Devil and his Ang^^ for ever.

2. Repent, for Christ has encouraged y^^ with many precious Promises: He will
heal (...) your backslidings, and love you freely; thou^ your Sins be as
Mountains, he will make th^^ as Mole Hills; though as red as Scarlet, he (...)
make them as white as Milk.

But some will object, and say, This is a h^^ work. What! shall we always go
with Tears our Eyes? What will God give us for our (...) ward?

Ah, poor Sinner, fear not, do not quest^^ your Reward: For as sure as God is
true, so (...) thou shall have Christ, Heaven, and Glory, (...) ^appy for ever.
Sinners, methinks it should ^^e you to quake, to think how God will deal (...)
you at the great and dreadful day of Judg^^t, when he shall say, 'Take him
Devils, ^^d him hand and foot, and fling him into ^^erlasting burnings; where
shall be weeping, ^^d wailing, and gnashing of Teeth. Oh, it is a ^^dful
Sentence, to be adjudged to Everlasting (...); and look for it Sinner, if thou will not re^^t, these are the Words that thou shall hear ^^ist pronounce
against thee, Depart from me, I (...) you not. And thou may be sure (O
Sinner) ^ou art not with Christ, thou must be with the ^^il, thou must be
either in Heaven or Hell. (...). Repent, because the Lord has long wait^pon
you: How long has God stood at the ^^^rs of your Hearts, wooing and beseeching
(...) to Repent? How long (O thou proud Man Woman,) has God called unto thee?
How ^^n has he knocked at your hard Hearts? (...) you would not let him in.
Oh, thou grey^^ded Sinner, God has long waited on thee, ^^ay be, ever since
thou was Fifteen or Sixteen ^^rs of Age, to see if thou would repenr, (...)
2.4. Or despisest thou the Richess of his ^^odness, and Forbearance, and
Long-suffer^^^ not knowing that the Goodness of God ^deth thee to Repentance?
There is not a ^^ssing that thou have from God, but it has (...) writ upon it,
Repent of thy Sins. Will thou ^^^k of this? when God puts the Bread into (...)
Hands, he says unto thee, Sinner, Take this Bread, Eat, and Repent: And when
God the Cup of Beer into thy Hands, he says ^^thee, Sinner, take this Cup of
Beer, and ^^pent: When thou risest in the Morning, says unto thee, Sinner,
take this Suit^^ Clothes, put it on, and Repent: Every M^^^ that thou receivest
from God, calls to thee Repentance.

4. If you will Repent, and leave your S^^^ God will not be angry with you. My
belo^^ you have heard the Parable of the Prodi^^ Son, who when he had spent
all, he retur^ home to his Father's House: So, my Belo^^ God is your Father,
but you are Prodigals: the Sin you have committed against him, is ^^^digality.
But let me tell you, if you are ^^^ling to come to God's Feet, he will take
about the Neck: If you are willing to for^^^ your sins, God is willing and
ready to pa^^ your Sins, though you have been a wicked, bellious, and sinful
People; yet if you will (...) to the Lord, he will turn to you.

5. Repent, because the Lord sends Messenger unto you, for to entreat you to
^^pent. Woe be unto you, therefore, if ^^neglect this great Salvation. You
know, th^^ was one main Reason why God took away Prophets and Ministers from
Jerusalem, bec^^^ they would not hearken to their Messeng^^ as you may read,
Mat: 23:37:38:39. O ^^rusalem! Jerusalem! thou that killest the (...) phets,
and stonest them that were sent unto (...) How often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye
would not? Behold, your Houses are left unto you ^esolat. For I say unto you,
ye shall not ^^ee me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed ^^^s he that comes
in the Name of the Lord. ^^ay very well apply this to Edinburgh: Oh! ^^w often
would the Lord have gathered you, ^^^en as a Hen gathers her Chickens? but
(...) would not. What say you now, Scotland? (...) Edinburgh! will you Repent?
Or will you not? ^^ill not all this that has been said, prevail ^^th you?
Alas, I am heartily sorry, to see ^^at nothing will prevail with you, but the
^^ames of Hell! Oh, then you would say, Oh! we had but hearkened unto the voice
of God's ^^essengers, that were sent unto us, to call us (...) Repentance.

6. O Scotland! Repent to day, and turn to ^^^e Lord: O delay not an Hour
longer, time ^^^a precious Jewel, more worth than the whole ^orld, and if Time
be once lost, there is no ^^gaining of it. O fall down upon your Knees, and
bless God that you have yet the Light of ^^e Gospel, and that you have time
left to se^ure your Souls, and get an Interest in Jesus Christ.

First, Consider how dreadful it will be to you, when you come to die, if you
do not Re^ent and turn to the Lord, while you are in health. O how will you cry
out, when your Hour of Death approaches, when you (...) all the things of the
Earth fail you, and (...) their leaves of you for ever. All your out^^^^
Enjoyments, Parts, Parentage, Birth, ^^^ding, Wealth, Crowns, Kingdoms, (...)
Diamonds, Houses, Lands, Wife, Child^^^ and Friends, when once your Breath is
gon^^ these are gone, Prove: 27.24. Hear now (...) you that are given to
pleasure, that feast ^^^^selves in doing evil; you that put far from (...) the
Day of the Lord; you that say, It is (...) enough to Repent, when we come to
die. Fools, How do you know whether God give you Repentance then, or no?

Sirs, I beseech you, Repent, while it is (...) led to Day; for you know not
whether (...) shall live till to morrow.

O consider with a trembling Heart, (...) much depends upon this Repenting, and
^^^ing to God; namely the gaining or lo^ing (...) dear and precious Soul,
gaining or losin^ (...) God's Favor, the Fruition of God, the (...) of Heaven,
or the Torments or Sorrows of (...) depend upon it. Poor Souls, I pity you
(...) my very Heart, to see how ignorant you ar^ (...) so great Concernments;
you Eat and D^^^^ Sleep, Lie, Sell, and get Gain in the Wo^^^ but little do you
mind to accumulate Heave^^^ Treasure, to get your sinking Souls safe a-sh^^^^
You consider not the evil day: Woe be unto (...) that is alone in Life, and
alone in Death, (...) has no Christ to befriend him, or stand by hi^ (...) day,
that comes to lie down in his Grave, ^^^hout Peace or Pardon, without hearty
Con^^^^ion, without Repenting of his Sins: And ^^ll rise again, and stand at
the Bar of God's ^^ice, without an Advocat to plead for him. (...). And Lastly,
Try your Repentance by (...) word of God; see whether it be true Re^^^tance, or
no; for the Devil has many ^^^eats: search your own Hearts, to see whe^^^r
those Sins you formerly loved, be now ^^ed and shunned by you.

Make ready for the other World; think upon the other World, think upon Death
and ^^^gment: Death, that King of Terrors, will, (...) long, terminate your
Days, and then all (...) Opportunities will be gone for ever. Let (...) ask
you, as in the presence of the Great ^^ge of Quick and Dead, at whose Tribunal
(...) must all shortly stand, and (giving an Ac^^^nt of your Deeds) be either
received up in^^ Heaven, or plunged into Hell. I have some ^^^ries to ask you.

First, Are not they in a very happy Conditi^^ that (Repenting) turns to the
Lord with (...) whole Hearts; living a Life of Grace, and (...) preparing for
Death, for fear of losing ^^^r own Souls, being in a hazard of losing ^^ven?
Romans 8.7. Ps. 37.37.

^^condly, Do you believe that Death will (...), and that Sin, that cursed
thing, will (...), and that the Gase of all impenitent Sin^^^^ at the Hour of
Death will be sad and terrible and desperate? Let me say to all (...) there is
not a Night you ly down in your but you run a very great hazard, if Death (...)
call, and you not ready, you must go, th^^ you are ruined to all eternity,
though y^^ damned for ever, Mat. 25.10, 11, 12,

Thirdly, Can you cheerfully entertain^^ thoughts of Death, and Judgment, all
hard hearted Sinners, that have not Repe^^ Suppose the dreadful Judge should
at th^^stant send Death with the Names of Five Six of you in a Writ, or
Forehead, and (...) should say, You, and you, this Man, and Woman, must go
along with me; I ha^ceived a Command from the great and te^^ God, who has the
Power of Death Hell, to bring you this Day, or Night, (...) the Judgment Seat:
I have often warne^^ by sending my Deputies this Ten or T^^^ Years. Every
Grave, and Coffin you seen, was so many Imitations of my co^^^ Now, says
Death, I am come, see my this Dart must kill thy Body, and send th^^ into
Eternity, I command you this mom^^ bid adieu to this World, Luke 12.19, 20. can
you think of your dying, and the W^^ burning, the Trumpets sounding, the Corpse
raising, and standing at the (...) God's Justice, and not fear and tremble^^
that have not Repented: you, So^^ Daughters of Pleasure, did you consider^^
horror and astonishment dogs you at the ^ich will inevitably come upon you, as
Tra^^l on a Woman with Child, you would no (...) unto God, depart.

Fourthly, And lastly, Oh, what a killing (...) amazing sight will Christ's
coming in the ^^uds be, to all that either deny his coming, or ^^d not prepare
for it by speed Repentance: ^^s Incarnation was terrible, Mat. 2: 3. His
^^ucifixion was more terrible, Luk 13.44, 45, (...) 47, 48. But his judging the
World at the ^^eat Day, will be most terrible, then shall the sibes of the
Earth mourn, Mat: 24.30. And (...) shall cry to the Rocks to fall on them,
(...) 6.15.16. When they shall see so many ^^ousands, and Millions of Men and
Women ^^gged down to that burning Lake of Fire and ^^mstone, there to be
tormented for ever: How ^^l they then cry, Oh that we had Repented, ^^y will
howl for vexation of Spirit, and in the ^^erness of their Souls wish that they
had ne^^ heard of a Christ; that they had been born ^^ong Heathens, or never
had a Being, or en^^ed a Life of Pleasure upon Earth. How (...) the wretched
Sinner beat his Breast, pluck ^his Hair, tear his Bowels, crying when he is
(...) Hopes, Oh that I had now no Soul, or that (...) immortal Soul were
mortal, that I might not ^^ormented in these dreadful flames for ever: ^^ll,
Sinner, you see what your Doom will be, ^ou do not Repent; but if you Repent
un^^nedly, and be the Servants of the Lord, (...) Saints and Mourners in Sion,
lift up your Heads; and Hearts; for you belong to a^^ Place, and a better
Country, viz Moun^^ and to the City of the Living God, the ^^venly Jerusalem,
and to the innumerable pany of Angels the General Assembl^ Church of the
Firstborn, which are (...) in Heaven, and to God, the Judge of (...) to the
Spirits of just Men made perfec^ to Jesus the Mediator of the New Co^^ and to
the Blood of Sprinkling, that sp^^ better things than that of Abel, Heb. (...)
23, 24. And know that you are almos^ within the hearing of those heavenly (...)
Eternal Triumphs, and Halleujahs of Sa^^ glorious Angels in your Fathers House,
there shall be Fullness of Joy, and P^^ for evermore, Ps. 16.11. As the Sinn^ be
afflicted with Everlasting Forments Saints shall be crowned with perpett^^ dems
of Joy.

Consider what I have spoken, and (...) give you understanding in all things,
(...) you, Nay: but except ye Repent, ye shall wise perish.

FINIS.

