THE DECLARATION OF WILLIAM and MARY, KING and QUEEN of England, France and
Ireland, To all Their Loving Subjects in the Kingdom of IRELAND.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas it is incumbent upon Us to take care of, and preserve all Our Subjects
within Our Dominions, of what Persuasion soever in Matters of Religion; And We
being highly sensible of the Miseries Our Kingdom of Ireland is, and may be
exposed to, by the Forces there raised and kept up, under pretense of Religion,
at the Instigation of Romish Priests, and by the Influence of Foraign Councils,
in Opposition to Us and Our Government; And being desirous to prevent the
Calamities and Destruction, that must fall upon Our People in that Kingdom, in
case Our Forces, now ready to enter the said Kingdom, (which We doubt not, but
with Gods Help, may be sufficient to reduce it to due Obedience) shall proceed
to Effect the same: We do hereby Declare and Promise to all Our Subjects
whatsoever within that Kingdom, Full and entire Pardon and Indemnity for all
things by them Acted, Done or Committed, by Virtue or Color of any Authority,
of pretended Authority within the said Kingdom, and a full and free Enjoyment
of their respective Estates, according to Law, (...) upon Notice of Our Royal
Will and Pleasure, signified in this Our Declaration, they shall lay down their
Arms, and retire themselves to their respective Habitations and Places of
Abode, at, or before the tenth Day of April next, and there shall peaceably
behave themselves, and live as good Subjects ought to do.

And We do hereby further Declare and Promise to all Our Subjects of the Romish
Church, that hitherto have not taken Arms, or that shall upon Notice of this
Our Declaration lay down their Arms, and retire and live as aforesaid, That
they shall for the future have all the Favor for the private Exercise of their
Religion, that the Law allows, and we can now grant to them; And that we shall
speedily call a Parliament in the said Kingdom, and therein promote a further
Indulgence to them.

And We do hereby further Declare, That if notwithstanding this Our
Declaration, any of Our Subjects shall continue in Arms in Opposition to Us,
that we shall then think Our Selves free and clear of all the Blood that may be
Spilt, and of the Destruction and Misery, which by reason thereof may be
occasioned; And We shall look upon Our Selves to be justified before God and
Man, in Our Proceedings by Force and Arms against them, as Rebels and Traitors;
And such We do hereby Declare all those to be who shall Act as aforesaid,
against us and Our Authority, as is herein expressed: And that the Lands and
Estates of all such as shall, after Notice of this Our Declaration, persist in
their Rebellion, or be in any wise Abettors thereof, and which by Law will be
Forfeited unto Us, shall be by Us distributed and disposed to those, that shall
be Aiding and Assisting in reducing the said Kingdom to its due Obedience.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 22th, Day of February, 1688. In the First
Year of Our Reign.
London Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's. And Reprinted at Edinburgh in the Year 1689.


