THE Athenian Society Unvaild: Or, their Ignorance and Envious Abusing of the
QUAKERS Detected and Reprehended.
THE Prediction of the Blessed Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live Godly
in Christ Jesus shall suffer Persecution, has been the perpetual Experience of
the Church of Christ in all Ages; only with this variation, that their
Sufferings have been sometimes after one manner, and sometimes after another;
one while Life, another Liberty; and very frequently Estates have been the
Prizes that an innocent and harmless Life have cost their Owners: The Truth
hereof is attested, not only by History very Ancient, but also by some so very
Modern, that it is not yet past Memory. But when all these in good measure
have, by God's Providence and a Government's Favor, been stopped, then the
same Spirit, frequently in the same Members, and sometimes in others, has
labored to blacken and misrepresent those they could not destroy under the
Pretext of Law. This is the present Case; it is but a little while since, that
Liberty and Estate were the common Rates which we called Quakers (with many
others) were made to compound at (if I may so speak) for our Innocence and
Conscientious Scruples. But the mildness and gentleness of the present
Government, has so signally gone beyond that of some of their Predecessors,
that they have not only recommended these excellent Qualities by their
particular Example, but also by the Authority of a Law, which is remembered by
us, with true Gratitude and Thankfulness. Now the Advantage of so Noble an
Example, one might think should have been sufficient, if not to sweeten, yet to
chill the most virulent Spirits, and more especially yours, who call your
selves the Athenian Society; and have made so many Offers at a Reformation, by
the pubick Pretenses you have made, to encourage some and advise all to the
furtherance of it: These, it is true, have been your Pretensions, but your
Practice is no other than the Transcript of the Preface to the second Volume.
Jesuits Maxim; who you say were they, that by their Disguises and false
Pretenses were the first Promoters of the many unhappy Differences that are now
among us, both in Church and State. Now what is odious in them, can it be
lovely in you? Or what is against the Peace of Government in them, can it be
otherwise in you? Surely no: For Crimes lose not their Nature when they only
change their Agent, nor is Satan at all the more Holy for being in an Athenian,
or in one called a Christian: The Truth of this you have sufficiently evinced
by the Falsehoods and Abuses which you have so liberally bestowed both upon
Communities and particular Persons. And yet you are the Men, who at your
appearance by this Name, promised to use in your ensuing Design, much Christian
Candor and Modesty; and not to Preface to the second Volume.
widen the Breaches, but to avoid either Practices or Disputes that might tend
thereto: And further, that you would answer no obscene Questions, nor any whose
Answer should be an Abuse to particular Persons: With more to the same purpose,
which I could here recite, were it as necessary as it is easy. But I shall
here pass it over, as well as your other Contradictions and Nonsense, of which
we have generally notice once a Week by the London Mercury; for my Design is,
herein chiefly to instance in those Answers of Questions, which were the cause
of the Letter I sent you, (which I shall set down anon) to which, though you
promised an Answer, yet have not given one, unless Queries and Impertinency may
deserve that Name; by detecting your Falsehood and Lies, and also something
concerning John Whitehead, whom by Name you have abused in your Buffoonry. But
I have observed that in defiance of your Rules, in breach of your pretended
Charity, and contrary to Morality and to true Christianity, you have seemed
glad of an opportunity to be abusive toward us in particular, as will plainly
enough appear, by your Answer to a Question in Vol. 3. N. 8. q. 6. Whether it
be lawful for a Christian to Swear? To which you, not content to deliver your
Answer in the Affirmative only, have stigmatized all as silly Enthusiasts who
believe the contrary. Now as this Answer of yours did cause, so your Promise
that you would fairly Answer any Objections that were made to your Answers, did
encourage the sending of a Letter to you soon after; wherein among other
Things, were the three following Queries.

1. Whether since the very end of Christ's coming into the World (as is
testified) was to take away Sin and finish Transgression, he did not thereby
supersede the very use of all Oaths? 2. Whether if Men did cooperate with the
Assistance that Christ Jesus lends, and obey the Precepts he has given, they
might not thereby attain the end of his coming? 3. Whether there is any
positive Command in the Gospel, enforced by words more comprehensive, full
positive and pertinent, than this of Swear not, etc.

To these you have not returned any Answer, as by your forementioned promise
you were obliged, but still proceed further to abuse and belie us, in such
Instances as your own Eyes and Ears, if you ever employed them to read or hear
our Principles from our selves, must needs convince you of (for you say you
have used them herein:) From whence the Inference is very easy, that your
Disease is Malice, because your Assertions are directly contradictory to what
has been at all times Spoken and Written by our Friends: But if you have not
read or heard from our selves, what you have asserted to be our Belief, then
what Abatements are to be made from the Malice of your Charge, must be added to
the Impudence of it, in that you are of those, who said, Report, and we will
Report it; which shows you to be neither more Christian nor less Wicked; this
will best appear by the Charge it self. Where in Vol. 3. N. 23. q. 4. you
affirm the Quaker's Opinions to be dangerous and detestable (as indeed they
were, were it true, that you afterward affirm) that they speak contemptibly of
the Bible, and will by no means allow it to be God's Word; that they have
turned the most Sacred Truths therein contained, into jejune Allegory; that
they speak not very Honorably of our Savior, deny the Trinity, and many, if
not all, embrace the other Socinian Dream, of the Soul's Sleeping till the
Resurrection: And afterward in Vol. 4. N. 30. q. 1. The Quakers have been e're
since their rise, looked upon as the Jesuits, By-Blows of the Jesuit; that they
deny the plenary Satisfaction of Christ, and rest on their own Merits; that
Fanaticism, Enthusiasm and Infidelity together, make up the Creed of the
Quaker, they being a Compendium of almost all sorts of Heresies; who deny the
Satisfaction and Divinity of Christ, as also his Humanity; nay, deny Angels,
Spirits, Heaven and Hell, and the Existence of Souls after Death.

Here is the Complex of your Lies and Slanders, freed from the profound
Nonsense and palpable Ignorance, wherewith you have formally interlarded each
of the above cited places; but of each I shall give an Instance. First in the
23. N. q. 4. where you say -- But if there be any of 'em who have left their
first Principles, and are degenerated into Christianity. What! think you
Christianity to be worse than our Principles? For Degeneracy is, I think, to go
from better to worse; or if this be to Frolic with Words, it is a very odd way
of doing it. Of your palpable Ignorance, let this be an Instance, where, in N.
30. q. 1. you ask, How they have the Face to pretend to what they never had,
Christianity, when they were never Christened? Now, if by Christning you mean
Sprinkling a Face with Water, I am sure it is contradictory to that of the
Apostle, who signifies, That true and saving Christianity consists, in having
the Conscience sprinkled from dead Works, to serve the Living God: Which cannot
be purged by any such external Operation, but only and alone by the Spirit of
God in Man. By this time, I suppose, it will be thought sufficiently reasonable
that we clear our selves, or that you should prove these your Assertions, which
that you might do the last, was the occasion oth' Letter, which (in that you
call your Answer, in V. 5. N. 29. and which I shall consider anon) you call an
angry one, and not agreeable to the Precept of Turning the other Cheek; to
which I must tell you, that it is sufficiently known to have been our constant
Practice, to bear the Smitings, the Buffetings, the Wastings and the
Plunderings, which Men of your Spirit and Temper have inflicted upon us under
the pretext of Laws, whilst in use. Under all which Sufferings, God did by the
Sheddings forth of his Spirit, so comfort our Spirits, that we can say in
Truth, we took joyfully the Spoil of our Goods and Imprisonment of our Bodies,
for his Name sake, and can also forgive them that did it; only desiring for the
worst of them, as for you, That you may come to see the Evil you have done by
these your Lies and Scandals, and turn from them by a sincere and hearty
Repentance; that so your Sins may be forgiven, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the Lord's Presence. But notwithstanding all this, should we be
silent to these your Lies, it might be construed a joining with you against
that Holy Truth, of which we are Professors, which we cannot do; but must
herein clear it from your Calumnies. And the Jews might have told John the
Baptist he was angry, when he calls them a Generation of Vipers: The like they
might have told Holy Stephen, when in Act. 7.51, 52. he calls them,
Uncircumcised in Hearts and Ears, Resisters of the Holy Ghost, Persecutors of
the Prophets, Betrayers and Murderers of the Just One. They both speak Truth,
and its warmness was justified by its occasion. And now to show that the
warmness of this Letter, bears no proportion to the occasion you have given,
and that I have not requited you with Vinegar for your Gall, I shall here give
the Copy thereof; but without your frothy and abusive Parentheses: Which is as
follows.

The Copy of the Letter I sent them.
Athenians,
AT, and since, your appearing in the World (by this Name) your repeated
Protestations of Christian Candor and Modesty, in answering such Questions, as
were fit to be answered, and total Silence in such as were not; did make the
Ingenuous of either Sex (however distinguished) willing to further what might
be of Service to the Public: But your notorious Prevarications have
sufficiently shown, that what was intended for your Encouragement, and others
Service, you have only made use of as a Ladder to climb higher than others,
whereby you might have the hateful opportunity of abusing what, and whomsoever
agrees not with you; and that by Aspersions so palpably gross and false, that
it needs not the Judgment of an Athenian to Vnvail you.

The present Ease and Felicity which we, called Quakers, do with others, find
under the happy Influence of a mild and generous Government (which Happiness,
we do with all Duty and Gratitude thankfully acknowledge and remember) has so
far buried the late Distractions, Waste and Plunderings, that they are hardly
now to be met with but in History. And that this Peace and this Felicity might
be perpetual, the Wisdom of the Nation has been so Latitudinarian (to use your
disdainful Expression) that among other Things, in an Act for that very purpose
made, they have framed what they there Call, and what truly is, a Christian
Profession or Confession; the Owners and Subscribers of which, as they are the
King and Queens Lieg-Subjects, so they are Christians in Belief,
notwithstanding all your Buffoonry and wilful Lies.

I shall only at present enumerate the Heads of your several Scandals and
Abuses, which in your Preface to the 3. Volume, you say you took so much
Pleasure in Composing: The first is Vol. 3. N. 8. q. 6. where you tax the
paying of Obedience to a positive Command of Christ with Enthusiasm; but this
being Language too kind, you do with the next opportunity, in N. 23. q. 4. of
the same Volume, assert upon your own Knowledge, our believing a number of
portentous and monstrous Opinions, you there number up, and which here we do
utterly deny, and ever did, declaring such your Assertion to be False,
Scandalous and Malicious; hereby requiring you to make your Assertions good, or
to be accounted, what you truly are, that is, the worst of Incendiaries; which
Title, to convince the World, does peculiarly belong to you, you have in
another of your Mercuries, Vol. 4. N. 30. q. 1. pretended to draw a Parallel
between Quaker and Papist; but with such known Falsehood, that there is now
hardly any Person, who pretends to much less Reading than your witty selves,
but knows it to be no other than a Malicious Lie; which plainly shows, that
notwithstanding the noisy Offers, which you in your Mercuries make at a
Reformation, your selves have not advanced the first Step toward it: And in
the last-mentioned Question, where you pretend to consider them asunder, you
have done it so unlearnedly, as well as falsely, that perhaps it needs not the
strength of a Champion to foil you, who have fallen from the forms of Civility
as well as Christanity, in that you have falsely belyed and accused your
Neighbors.

You are not to suppose that this comes in the manner of a Question, which you
may not think fit to Answer; for it is hereby declared, That if you do not,
within some reasonable time, give the World clear Proofs of your Assertions, in
the Places and Answers above-noted, you shall be exposed, and your Falsehood and
Baseness detected, not only by the Verbatim hereof in Print, but by a more
particular Answer to each of your many Lies; I call them by this Name, which
you affirm to be the detestable Opinions which we hold, and indeed do not, nor
never did.

December. 22. 1691.
By one who is in Scorn called a QUAKER.

By this it appears that its end is, either that you would prove your
Assertions or retract them; but instead of doing either, in that which you call
your Answer, you have only shown a little more ill Nature, and a great deal of
Impertinency, in running so very wide from the Mark as you have done; by making
your foolish and false Harangues, without proving any thing; and all this with
a design (to use your own words) to preserve those of your Communion, by
showing them what Principles you say we really hold. But if you have no better
Preservatives, than these palpable Lies, you need not wonder that People,
coming to the Knowledge of that self evident Principle, of the Light, Grace or
Spirit of God in their own Hearts, do then leave you and your refuge. And here
I must observe, that to evade the proving your Charges and to prevent any
closer Answer, you endeavor to amuse the Reader and frighten us, by asking 10
Questions (if at least they all deserve that Name) in which you think there is
so much Acumen, that they touch us to the quick; and all these to be answered
Catagorically, or else the worst is to be taken pro Confesso. Now to Questions,
on which so great stress is laid, the Reader will very naturally suppose, they
ought to be very pertinent and very weighty; but I must inform him that in this
present case it is far otherwise, as will appear plain enough by repeating them;
and which are as follows.

1. Whether they all generally own the Scriptures to be the Word of God? 2.
Whether they own Jesus Christ to have been God equal with the Father from all
Eternity? 3. Whether they own the Holy Spirit to be God; and that in the Holy
Trinity, there are three Persons and one God blessed for evermore? 4. Whether
they hold their boasted Light within to be this very third Person, or only
their own natural Reason? 5. Whether they partake of either of the Sacraments
in their Congregations; or whether they do not absolutely neglect both Baptism
and the Supper of the Lord? 6. Whether they believe Angels, or any Immaterial
Spirits besides the Soul of Man? 7. Whether they believe the Existence of the
Soul after Death and Resurrection of the Body, and Reunion of the Soul
thereunto at the day of Judgment? (Now the terrible ones) 8. Who was your first
Founder? 9. Did they Quake and Tremble or no when they first came into England,
and the reason thereof? 10. Where may we find their Creed or an Act of their
Religion? And whether it is not altered in several particulars since their
Rise, though but of so few Years standing?

These are what you vainly and falsely set to measure Christianity by, but they
cannot do it; because some of them are Antiscriptural (which yet you call your
Rule) and others so ridiculous that they could not be asked, by a Man truly
Christian; so that if I should not refer you to any Answer to these (for you
would not have it now done de Novo, but by the Testimony of our Authentic
Writers) your mighty Threaten would signify nothing; for it remains for you to
prove your Assertions, they being denied by us; and though at pleasure you throw
by your own Rules, yet you must not pretend to do so, by the continual Rules of
Debate and Discourse. But the trouble hereof being as small, as your
expectation can be great, I shall for this once do it; when I have first
acquainted you, That though you pretend to be more Athenian than the Senate of
the Nation; yet it will hardly become you to pretend to be more Christian than
it: And if so; then, since Malice or some such Humor has spoiled your Memory,
I will take leave to acquaint you, that in an Act made 1689. Entitled, An Act
for exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects, etc. there is something
which upon the Authority of Holy Writ, as well as their own, is called a
Christian Belief, and was made on purpose for us, called Quakers, as by the Act
appears; and is as follows.

I A. B. Profess Faith in God the Father, and Jesus Christ his Eternal Son the
true God, and in the Holy Spirit one God blessed for evermore; and do
acknowledge the Holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament to be given by
Divine Inspiration. This having been at all times (as it now is) our hearty
Belief, you might have spared your three first Queries, which are not so
Scriptural: To your fourth query, read Geo. Keith of Immediate Revelation not
Ceased: To your sixth and seventh, read Sam. Fisher, in a Treatise, Entitled,
[Some certain hidden Spiritual Verities revealed:] And likewise for Answer to
many of them, you may read The Christian Quaker, written by Geo. Whitehead and
Will. Penn: And lastly, both to these and the rest, read Rob. Barclay, in his
Apology for the true Christian Divinity, in which you will find a distinct
Account of our Principles, and that they are consonant to Holy Writ, right
Reason and pure Antiquity; for which reason it is, that our Principles are not
changed nor indeed can be, they being preserved by the Spirit of God in us,
with which there is no Variableness nor Shadow of turning: And many more (would
I be prolix) I could number up, but here being enough, and more than is needful
in this occasion, I shall stop. Now in these cited Authentic Writings you may
find (as I have said) not only more than enough to Answer your Queries, but
also the Truths therein contained, so clearly delivered, that were ye honest
enough to confess it, you would say there is much less of the Jesuit in them,
than there appears to be of their Nature in you, as is evident by your gross
Lies and Abuses; which that I may not forget and you run from, by that Evasion
which you pretended to fear in us; I shall here put you in mind, That
whatsoever you shall say hereafter, cannot be looked upon to have any Weight,
unless you either prove or retract these your bold Affirmo's; which are hereby
returned upon you as your Lies, viz. You affirm, 1. That the Quakers rest on
their own Merits. 2. That they deny Heaven, Hell, Angels and Spirits. 3. That
they believe the Soul to sleep in the Grave until the Resurrection. 4. That
they deny the Divinity and Humanity of Christ. 5. That they deny the Scriptures
to be the Word of God (or given by Divine Inspiration.) And 6. that Fanaticism,
Enthusiasm and Infidelity, do make up the Quaker's Creed. If you pretend to
prove them, it is expected that you do it from our Selves, or our own Writings;
but if you cannot, let it hereby appear how fairly you have merited the Title
of Incendiaries, which yet you're loath to own; but it being your due, you must
be so accounted, in that you're Disturbers of the Public Peace, which never
had more mortal Enemies, than those, who under the mask of Religion have
labored to foment civil Broils, by the mutual Aversions which their false and
noisy Clamours have too frequently procured. But in this Instance, the Peace is
thus far secured, that if you do neither retract, nor prove your Assertions,
your Abuses being cast upon a People, who return not Evil for Evil, are not
therefore bound to return an Answer to every impertinent Scrible, this not
being written either from Humor or mercenary Interest, is not designed to be
repeated whereby to trouble my self or others, who will hereby sufficiently
understand your baseness, in your general Lies and Abuses, as now they shall
your abusive handling of John Whitehead, who is belyed by your Querist (if at
least it were not your selves) and both abused and belyed by you in Vol. 4. N.
30. q. 2.

Now here had been a fit opportunity to have put in practice that Rule of
yours, which was, not to Answer any Question, whose Answer might be an abuse to
particular Persons. But you, considering it was a Quaker, did dispense with it,
tho you exposed your selves by rallying upon a Lie, in which there is so much
obscenity, that it puts me in mind of a certain Altar which was at Athens,
erected to Rous Archaeologiae Atticae, lib. 1. p. 34.
Injury and Impudence, and upon which I find not only the Ancient, but also the
Modern Athenians, do sometimes Sacrifice, as will sufficiently appear by the
fulsom Stuff with which the last cited Answer is filled. But first, your Query
is false in fact, and John Whitehead did never so boast, as that affirms, of
his Fatness; nor was he ever forced when in Prison, to feed on Bread and Water,
nor was he ever 3 yards about the Waste, nor is his Wife near that size: Now
before you went thus to rally, and be merry with the reputation of a Family,
sure you should have taken as good Caution not to have been deceived, as you
have sometimes required to the Attestation of an Experiment in Art, or Casualty
in Nature, in which you have sometimes required more than the Name of the
Relator; which if you cannot produce in this Instance, let it be supposed your
selves were the Querist, and so guilty both of the Lie and the Abuse; which
being so particular, take John Whitehead's Answer as follows.

A few Questions for Answer, to the Authors of a Scandalous, Impertinent Paper,
Entitled, The Athenian Mercury, Vol. 4. Numb. 30.
1. WHether such Persons as by their Words or Actions, say, Come let us Smite
him or them with the Tongue, Report and we will Report it, do not as much as in
them lies, endeavor to stir up a new Persecution? And whether herein they do
not symbolize with the worst Heathens and Papists, who used to cloth the
ancient Christians in ugly Shapes, and painted Devils upon them, that they
might be the readilier devoured by wild Beasts, and burnt to Death by the
wicked Hands of cruel Men?

2. Whether great blindness of Mind has not happened to such Men, as do look
upon the People of God (in scorn called Quakers, who are at the greatest
distance from Popery of any People in the World, professing Christianity) to be
the By-Blows of the Jesuits, and Symbolizers with the Papists; for which if ye
have no better Proof, than that heap of Lies and Slanders which follow, in your
Answer to the first Question, then consider if Justice and Truth do not require
you to repent of your Wickedness, and acknowledge you have followed blind Guides
to your own hurt, and thereby wronged both your selves and your Neighbors?

3. Whether we have not by the Word of our Testimony in open and public
Assemblies, and the many Books spread up and down the Nation, sufficiently
cleared our selves from those foul Imputations ye would cast upon us; so that
we need not multiply Answers to every vain impertinent Scribler, our Principles
and Practice being manifest to the Witness of God, in the Consciences of sober
People that know us; which is a Refuge sufficient for us, against such silly
Blasts of Envy?

4. Who is the Man, and where does he dwell, that dares affirm, he heard John
Whitehead boast of such a Miracle as your 2d Question affirms? That when he was
fed in a Prison with Bread and Water, he fatned on it so as that he was 3 yards
or more about the Waste; for I do positively deny that ever I made any such
boast as your Query affirms; and I further say, that I was never under those
Circumstances in a Prison, as to be confined to Bread and Water; and that I
was never of that bigness, but that a Girdle of less than 4 foot would have met
about my Waste; and therefore that monstrous prodigious Lie, of my being 3
yards about the Waste (there being many hundreds of VVitnesses to the
contrary) is turned back upon you, with that false suggestion, that his Wife is
near as spacious as himself; and all those Slanders and scornful frothy
Insinuations that follow thereupon, in your Answer to your second Query, which
are as the Smoke of the bottomless Pit, and thither must descend, and into the
Lake must be cast all those that love and make Lies, except they repent:
Therefore prize your time, and do no more so wickedly: This Friendly Admonition
is given you by one that can love his Enemies,

John Whitehead.


This is his own Letter, which you are desired to Answer; with which I shall
end, when I have told you, That plain and positive Proof must make good your
Charge, Repentance must make you honest Men, and the continuance in your
Crimes, will make you as Incorrigible as those Beasts, which serve for Emblems
in your Buffoonry: If you cannot do the first, the way to avoid the last is by
the middlemost; which that you may, is the desire of him who can forgive
Enemies, and is in scorn called a

Quaker.

London: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-yard in Lombard Street, 1692.
Where the Books abovementioned are to be had.


