TWO SERMONS Concerning Nature and Grace. Preached at WHITE HALL, APRIL, 1699.

BY E. YOUNG, Fellow of Winchester-College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON: Printed by W. Bowyer, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

TO THE Honorable Auditory IN WHITE HALL, At whose Request these SERMONS Are
Published, The AUTHOR Dedicates them with all Respect, And his humble WISHES
for their Eternal Welfare.

SERMON I.
St. MATTHEW. xxvi. 35. Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet
will I not deny thee.


THE Words bespeak us to contemplate a Just and Dutiful Resolution; made by a
Man that had both as much Conscience to engage him in what was fit, and as much
Courage to execute what he had engaged in, as any other of Mankind must ever
pretend to. And yet this Resolution was not kept, it failed very disgracefully:
And my chief Purpose at this time is to enquire into the Causes, How it came so
to fail. In order to which, it will lie in my way to premise somewhat more of
the Character of the Person.

Peter (we know) was a Man of Precedence, and Above the rest of the Disciples:
And he was likewise one of such Virtues and Qualifications, as seem to have
recommended him to that Precedence, more than did the Advantage of his Years.
He was a Man of real and tender Goodness: And this is sufficiently evident from
that Passage at his first Admission to our Savior's Acquaintance (St. Luke 5.)
when being awakened by the miraculous Draught of Fishes, and knowing that the
Author must necessarily be from God, he fell down at his Feet, and broke out
into this humble and pious Reflection, Depart from me, for I am a finful man, O
Lord! The Censure indeed expresses him a sinful Man; but so to censure himself,
implies more effectually than any thing else could, that he was a Good Man: And
though the Words -- Depart from me -- carry in them the Face of Fear, yet he
who heard them, and knew the Heart of the Speaker, found that they carried in
them a greater measure of Desire; for Peter was not willing to be rid of his
new Guest, but only longing to be made more worthy of his Conversation.

He was a Man of great Love to his Master, and of no less Zeal for his
Religion: Of which, from among many, I shall take one Instance out of St. John
6. Where, upon the Desertion of several other Disciples, our Savior puts the
Question to the Twelve, Will ye also go away? Then (says the Text) Peter
answered him, Lord whither shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. An
Answer so wise and faithful, so evidencing his confirmed Choice of the Better
Part, that God seems to have rewarded him for it with the Grace of an immediate
Revelation; the Matter whereof follows in the next Words: For thus runs the
Text, Lord whither shall we go? Thou have the words of etenral life: And then
it follows -- And we believe, and are sure that thou art Christ, the Son of the
living God. Now if we look into St. Matthew. 16.17. we see there what our Savior
pronounces concerning this very Confession, (viz.) Blessed art thou, Simon
Barjona, for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which
is in heaven. That our Savior had the words of eternal life, Peter was able to
deduce from the Principles of Natural Reason; because Reason was able to judge
from the Internal Characters of his Doctrine, That it was worthy of God, and
accommodated properly to advance Humane Nature to eternal Happiness: but for
all this, Reason could not infallibly determine that the Messenger of his
Doctrine was therefore the Messiah, the: (...) the Son, that is, the eternal
Son of the living god. To know this, needed a new Illumination: And this
Illumination (I say) it seems God vouchsafed him at that instant, as a Reward
of that Faith and Choice which he had then declared.

In a word -- Peter was a Man of Sincerity, Firmness, and Constancy: And for
this we need no farther Testimony than that of our Savior, in conferring upon
him the Symbolical Name of Cephas, i. e. a Rock.

Thus much of his character being premised, I may be bold to affirm of this his
Resolution in the Text, That it was as Honest a one, that is, both as Just in
the Matter, and as Sincere in the Intention, as ever was made by any of
Mankind, or ever shall be made to the End of the World; and yet this Resolution
miscarried, and ended only in the Shame of the Resolver: For after that Peter
had declared so stoutly -- Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny
thee -- yet he faintly and Coward-like denied his lord, without any such Trial
as the imminent fear of dying.

Imagine we now what may have been the cause of this miscarriage, and the
defeat of so good a Resolution in so good a Man. His Character will not suffer
us to imagine he made it in a braving Dissimulation: No, himself proved himself
sufficiently in earnest, by his subsequent behavior in the Garden; where he
drew his Sword against a whole Band of Men, and thereby made it appear that he
had less concern for his own Life, than he had for his Master's Safety.

Would we know then how this Resolution came to be abortive? The Reason was
purely this -- Peter grounded it upon too much Confidence in Himself; he never
doubted of himself, but that he had power to perform that which he did so
honestly resolve; and this was the (...), the original of all his failure.

He resolved honestly, I say; but none may presume to say he resolved wisely:
For his Lord had just admonished him of his peril of Lapsing, ( v. 31.) All ye
shall be offended because of me this night: To which Peter answers confidently,
Though all should be offended, yet will not I be offended: To check this Trust
in himself, our Savior rejoyns -- That He in particular should lapse in a
manner more scandalous than all the rest; Verily I say unto thee, before the
Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice: But Peter looking upon this Monition no
farther than as it implied a Reproach to his Faith, and his Love, and his
Courage, he summons them up all to form this final Resolve, Tho I should die
with thee, yet will I not deny thee.

But where was his Wisdom, where was his Reflection in the mean while? It
should have been remembered that he who precaution'd him was the Searcher of
Hearts, and needed not that any should testify of Man, because he knew what
was in Man. And therefore in Wisdom Peter ought rather to have distrusted his
own Heart, than the Judgment of his Lord, when he suggested that his Heart was
deceiving. It ought to have been remembered that his Lord had said before --
Without me ye can do nothing; and therefore Peter in Wisdom should not have
presumed Ability in himself; but instead of this have implored Ability from
him, whence all humane sufficiency is derived -- Lord, leave not me! that I may
not leave thee! Lord, strengthen me by thy Grace that I may not deny thee, and
then I shall not deny thee. In this method he had been secure, and prevented
his shameful fall. But instead of this, he builds a Resolution upon his own
Strength; and our Lord, to rebuke him, did no other than leave him to his own
strength to perform it; and this was in effect the same as to leave him under
the necessity of not performing it.

For this is the main Lesson that this instance teaches us, (viz.) That Man
when he is left unto himself, is purely weak and insufficient to any thing that
is good.

These two Points are evident in Peter's Case. 1. That he did not rightly know
himself when he made his Resolution. And 2. That the Defeat of his Resolution
taught him, that notwithstanding all his particular Graces and Endowments, he
was not able to do any thing as he should do, without God's actual Assistance.
And therefore, for our present Instruction, I shall draw these two Observations
from the Case. 1. That it is Hard to know our selves. And, 2. That to know our
selves Truly, is to know that we are (and that in our best Estate) weak and
insufficient of our selves to do any thing that is good.

1. It is hard to know our selves.

By the Knowledge of our selves I intend not the Knowledge of our mechanic
Frame; to know by what Ligaments our Soul is united to our Body; or by what
mediating Correspondencies they act mutually upon one another; to know in what
manner Sensation, or in what Remembrance is performed; what Springs set our
involuntary Motions a-work; or what Influence our Will communicates to those
that are voluntary: To know this is not simply Hard, but impossible; and it
ought to mortify the Pride of any Man's Understanding, to consider, That the
smallest of the Parts we are composed of, and the least of those Acts we are
always conversant with, which we see minutely, and live by their being done, do
yet escape and surmount our Comprehension.

But if the Knowledge of this part of our selves be impossible, one thing we
may infer from the benignity of Providence, That likewise wise it is not
Needful. It would not conduce any thing to the Happiness of Mankind, to be
better acquainted with the Philosophy of our Beings: nor do we suffer any thing
from the Ignorance of it. The Soul acts as orderly in those that never Enquire,
as in those that pretend to determine the chief place of its Residence: and our
Pulse beats as well when we think not of it at all, as when we think of it
never so wisely.

But the Knowledge here intended is the Knowledge of our Moral Selves; of our
state in respect of Virtue; whether we really choose to follow that which is
Good, and what Firmness there is in our Choice; whether we make Proficiency in
Religion, and whether there be Sincerity in our Pretenses; what is the state of
our Wills, Inclinations, and Desires; all which the Prophet Jeremy means by the
word Heart, when he thus pronounces concerning it, The Heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Who can know it? Not a
second; not any one without us; this we are sure of. But this is not all: We
our selves can hardly know that Heart which we carry in our own Breasts: Its
Propensions are retired and dark; and it is not easy to guess whether the Bent
of our Affections will carry us at any time, when their respective occasions
offer. Now to be ignorant of our selves in this respect, can never be of an
indifferent importance. If we know not our selves, be sure we shall neither
disapprove our selves, nor mend our selves; nor will natural Pride fail to take
hold of the occasion; that is, To make the best Interpretation of that which we
least discern: And so the more Ignorant we are of our selves, the more we shall
come to be Opiniative and Conceited.

What false measures Men may take of themselves, we are advertised in a
remarkable Instance, Rev. 3. where our Lord speaks of the Laodiceans in these
words, ver. 17. Thou say I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need
of nothing; and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. Now was not this a Judgment of themselves wonderfully
erroneous? Would one think it possible that any Man should not be able to
discern between Riches and Poverty, Sight and Blindness, being Clothed and
being Naked? We may justly think it impossible in the Literal Sense; but how is
it then in the Moral? Is it possible for a vicious Man to think himself Godly?
Is it possible for the Churl to account himself Liberal? for the Sensual to
account himself Heavenly-minded? for the Negligent to account himself Devout?
Is not this equally hard? And yet the Prophet Isaiah suggests, Chap. 32.4. that
when the Eyes of them that see are dim, the Churl may account himself liberal;
and so in the rest: That is, When ounce indulged Affections have imposed upon
the Understanding, and darkened the Soul, and Men are thereupon content to take
up with false Notions, and to judge of themselves by false Rules, they may come
to esteem themselves Good, though they are absolutely Evil: They may think well
of themselves for some casual Acts of Virtue, though in the mean time they live
under the Habit of contrary Vices; They may account themselves Religious even
while they are Carnal, Worldly, and Immoral: And yet to be Religious, and at
the same time to be Immoral, implies as great a Contradiction as is to be found
between Riches and Poverty, Sight and Blindness.

But this indeed is a Deceit so gross, that it cannot pass upon an honest and
considerate Mind: And therefore I shall produce some others, that are more
refined and subtle, and such as may escape the Observation of a more scrupulous
Enquiry into our selves. For example.

1. Even when we do well, it is hard to discern from what Principles we act;
whether from the Fear and Love of God, wh ich certainly sanctify; or from
external Considerations, which sanctify not at all, but yet may occasionally
produce Actions of the same appearing Goodness.

When our Savior entertained those that came to hear him with the multiplied
Loaves, and fed their Bodies as well as their Souls (St. John 6.) what a hearty
Confession did they break forth into, ver. 14. This is of a truth that Prophet
that should come into the World. How sedulously did they follow him? What pains
did they take to be with him? How did they repine at the missing his
Conversation but a part of a day? Could any one believe but that these were
Disciples mature and steady? and prepared to confess their Master at the peril
of their Lives? I question not but they believed as much of themselves; and
looked upon themselves as influenced altogether with the Spirit of Religion:
And yet no sooner did our Savior give them one just and gentle Rebuke,
reproaching them for being more affected with his Loaves than with his
Doctrine; and instructing them that God's Truth ought not to be followed
mercenarily; But he discovered their Feeble, their Cheat, till then unknown
even to themselves, and made them discover it to all the World; for it is said
(ver. 66.) They took offense at it, and went back, and walked no more with him.
And thus it always falls out, when Virtue happens to be attended with Temporal
Advantages, as Reputation, Favor, Fortunes, and the like; we can hardly tell,
without farther Experiment of our selves, whether we regard Virtue for it self,
or only for its Advantages; or whether it be Piety, or simple Appetite, that
sets us a-work.

2. It is hard to discern between a Religious State and a Religious Humor; a
Religious State, that is founded steadily upon the Grace of God, and a
Religious Humor, of outward Accidents, and is as desultory and mutable as the
Cause from which it springs.

How often does it happen, that Men upon the Success of Affairs, and Ease of
Circumstances find their Hearts filled with Expressions of Thankfulness to God,
and Charity to all the World; and yet upon the change of Circumstances they
immediately sour both toward God and Man? Now if such Men shall estimate
themselves during the Religious Mood, how is it possible but that they should
be deceived in the Opinion of their own state? There is but one way possile to
prevent their being deceived, and that is the bringing themselves under the
Probation of the voluntary Cross, to the Offices of Mortification and
Self-denial: But then how hard is it moreover to persuade Men that they are
obliged to this officious Probation?

3. It is hard to free our Judgment from those Prejudices and extreme Mutations
which it is subject to receive from the different Crasis and State of our
Animal Spirits. Thus sometimes, when the Body is vigorous and gay, it shuts out
that measure of Fear which is necessary to make us wise; and it suffers us not
to see that Sin we are guilty of, and that lies at our door: And on the other
hand, When the Spirits are dejected and low, they often let in such an Excess
of Fear as betrays the Succors of Reason, and makes Men cruciate themselves
with the Apprehensions of Sin, even where there is really none. And hence we
have sometimes seen it come to pass, That a Cordial Medicine has quieted a
Mind, and set a grieved Conscience at rights: Which Effect could not possibly
proceed from That Cause, but upon the present Supposition, (viz.) That our
Judgments are apt to be imposed upon and misled by the various Influences of
our Body.

4. To judge of our selves without Proof and Trial, is the sure way to be
deceived; and yet it is hard to discern what is the right Method of Proving our
selves, and what is our proper Trial.

What a fair Progress had that Man in the Gospel made toward the Kingdom of
God, who told our Savior, That he had kept all the Commandments from his
Youth? Nor did he tell it in Hypocrisy; for it is said, that our Savior loved
him; which could not have been but for the Truth of what he told: and yet this
Man could not bring himself over the Difficulty of parting with his Estate, and
becoming a Disciple, though he were promised the Recompense of Treasure in
Heaven. How many have born up commendably under all the Pressures of
Afflictions, and at last sunk in a Calm, and given themselves up vanquished to
the Enticements of Prosperity? Men of Courage, but not of Caution! And how
many, on the other hand, have lived commendably in good Fortunes, and at last
quitted their Virtue lest their Fortunes should be worsted? Men of Caution, but
not of Courage. Thus, I say, No man can make a hasty Conjecture at what is his
Proper Trial. But,

5. When we have proved our selves, and so may know our selves; yet still it is
hard to own our selves for such as we have proved our selves to be.

For when we have proved our selves to the bottom, as we may do by the Doctrine
of the Scripture, and our own Experience, we shall find our selves to be mere
Weakness and Emptiness, and without Power in our Selves to do any thing well.
Now though this be a Truth, than which the Word of God delivers none more
plainly, nor can our own Experience attest any one more convincingly; yet there
lurks in us a natural Pride, which makes us perfectly averse from Believing it.
We love to imagine our selves Great; insomuch that we hate to know our selves
otherwise; and had rather suspect and find fault with the Glass that represents
us under a diminishing form.

And this was properly Peter's Case: He had been told with the rest, by his
Master, That without him he could do nothing: But this was a Lesson he had no
Stomach to retain. He would not doubt but that his Will was in his own Power,
and that his Executing Faculties were under the Power of his Will; so that what
he had Courage to Resolve, he had likewise Ability to Perform: And this fond
Opinion exposed him to that shameful Denial which followed upon it.

After I have asserted that it is Hard to know our selves, I am far from
countenancing the (...), the belief that we cannot know our selves: This is a
Notion fruitful of Mischiefs: It is a Notion that hinders both Proficiency and
Amendment; that is contrary both to Faith, and Hope, and Consolation, without
which Religion can have neither Fruit nor Root.

Know our selves we Must; God requires it; and therefore besure know our selves
we May: Nay, the Truth is, we may easily know our selves, if we take the right
Method to do it. For the common Obstacle of Self-Knowledge is this; That when
we go to examine and look into our selves, we look through the wrong End of the
Glass: We seek for Greatness and Excellencies wherewithal to please our selves;
and from this Prospect we are sure to reap nothing but Deceit: But let us turn
the Glass, and look patiently upon our Litteless and Defects, whereby to humble
our selves, and this Prospect will certainly make us wise: For Humility is the
True Knowledge of our selves; and he that knows himself to be nothing-worth,
knows himself well. Which brings me upon my second Proposition; (viz.)

That to know our selves Truly, is to know that we are (and that in our best
Estate) absolutely weak and insufficient toward Good.

Goodness is a Lesson which simple Nature gives us not Capacity to learn. For
since the stream of our Affections naturally runs to Ill, say who it is that
can Turn that Stream. Quis potest facere mundum de immundo, says Holy Job, Who
can make himself clean since he is born unclean? If our Nature be sinful,
though it must be changed, yet we cannot change our Nature: He that makes us
better, must be a superior and better Agent than our selves.

It Is true, that though we are orn Ignorant, we can make our selves Skilful; we
can acquire Arts and Sciences by our own Diligence and Study: But the Case is
not the same in respect of Goodness. We can acquire Arts and Sciences, because
we lie under no Connate Indisposition to that Acquirement; for Nature, though
it be corrupt, yet still it is curious and busy after Knowledge; but to
Goodness we have naturally an Indisposition that is Invincible: Lusts within
and Temptations without set up such a firm Confederacy against it, as we are
never able to surmount in our own Strength. And therefore it is evident, that
in order to save Mankind, the Holy Spirit vouchsafed to engage in the Work of
Sanctification, as well as the Eternal Son did in that of Redemption, from the
Beginning of the World.

When we do well, it is the Assistance of God that improvers us to concur in
the Act; He removes the Hindrances; He restrains our opposing Lusts; He moves
our Will, and draws us to it: And though because of the subsequent Concurrence,
the Act is graciously imputed Ours, that so we may be entitled to the Reward;
yet still the Power is God's. Hereupon it is that the Apostle arguing against
that mischief that necessarily follows upon Humane Confidence, thus expresses
himself, 1 Cor. 10.12. (...) etc. Let him that thinks he stands take heed
lest he fall. Upon which Text a Critic of Name has given his Opinion, That the
Participle (...) is Redundant, and has no peculiar Signification, because the
Sense of the Place is no more than this, Let him that stands take heed least
he fall. But it seems to me rather that this Criticism is Redundant, and that
(...) has not only a Signification there, but the most Emphatical one that can
be imagined: For take notice, That he that thinks he stands in Goodness,
does but think so: For no Man stands in Goodness; he is only upheld and
supported there, and graciously kept upright: Wherefore he that thinks he
stands, is for that very Reason more obnoxious to fall. And that the Apostle
means no less in that place, let him be his own Interpreter, Romans 11.20. where
he expresses the Manner how even the best of Men do stand (viz.) Thou stand
by Faith. Now he that stands by Faith stands not by Himself; because Faith is
properly a Recumbency or Rest upon another. But to make the matter clearer, the
Apostle illustrates it by a Resemblance ( ver. 17.) wherein he instructs us,
That a Good Man stands, as the Branch of a wild Olive does, when it is grafted
into the Good Olive Tree; and that is, not in its own Virtue, but in Virtue of
the Root; and such a Root as is naturally not its own. It is Remarkable that
the Apostle, in that Passage, calls a Bad Man a Wild Olive Tree: a Wild Olive
Tree; not barely a Branch, but a Tree; which having a Root of its own, supports
it self, and stands in its own Strength, and brings forth its own Fruit; And so
does Man in respect of the wild and sour Fruit of an ill Conversaction: He is a
Tree; has a Root of his own, and Sap and Vegetation, and Seminal Fruitfulness,
and Power to bring it forth: But in respect of Good, he is only a Branch; and
all his Fruitfulness, and all his Support, depend upon the Influence and
Communications of God. You may see both the Doctrine and the Illustration of
it, yet more fully expressed by our Savior in the beginning of the 15th Chapter
of St. John.

We may therefore look upon Sampson as a Common Emblem of the Dispensations of
Grace; and all Men are fortified in their Soul after the same manner that he
was in his Body. (For Example:) His Strength lay not in his Sinews, but was
extrinsical, in his Locks; though thence communicated to his Sinews: And so our
Moral Strength lies not in our Soul; for let Reason and Conscience be never so
well awakened, and our Will never so well inclined, and Practice and Custom
contribute all they can; yet still our Soul has no stock of Strength intrinsic
to it self, by which it can sustain it self. Let the Supplies of Grace be once
cut off, as it happened to Sampson's Locks, and (that moment) the Best become
weak as other Men.

Philosophy deceives us in respect of Religious Habits: There is no Habit of
that kind difficultly movable from the Subject, by reason of any Strength that
Practice introduces into the Subject it self: Our Facility of Acting
Religiously, is both acquired and maintained by the Grace of God; and that
Grace being once suspended, the Habit sinks in an instant. Hezekiah was an
excellent Man; scarce is so much said of the Piety of any Man in Sacred Writ,
as of his; and yet upon a sudden, in a Transaction with the Ambassadors of
Babylon, he behaved himself both vainly and profanely; insomuch that (the Text
says) Wrath came upon him for it; and by that Wrath he was sensible of his
Fault, and thereby brought back again to his former Integrity. Now to let us
understand how such a disagreeing Failure came to find place in the course of
such an excellent Life, the Holy Penman has taken care to tell us expressly (2 Chronicles. 32.34) that in that matter of the Ambassadors, God left Hezekiah to
himself; to try him, and to prove what was in his heart; that is, To show him
to himself. -- The very same was Peter's Case, How Pious was he in the House?
How Courageous in the Garden? And yet in the Hall both a Coward and a Traditor?
Now the Reason of all was -- Because his Master had, for that Interval, left
him to himself: For the Text says, that When the Lord turned, and looked upon
Peter, that is, looked upon him with an Operative Compassion, Peter recovered
his Strength; and exerted it in an immediate Repentance, and held it
perseveringly to a glorious end. -- Lord, what is Man? what is he without thee?
The Lord has told us plain enough in these Instances, What he is; Even a thing
of naught.

Let us imagine a Man to be Swimming, and because he could not Swim without it,
to be supported by the Chin; To make such a Man sink, there needs no dipping
him, no laying Weights upon him, no hampering or entangling his Limbs; withdraw
but the Hand, and he necessarily sinks of himself. And in like manner, To make
to Best Man fall, there needs no doing him any Wrong; no wounding his
Faculties, no maiming his Judgment, no perverting his Will, no inflaming his
Appetites, no heightening his Temptations: Let God barely withdraw his
Supplies, and leave him to himself; that is, Permit him to the Power of his
Natural Affections (which Affections Grace only convers and restrains, it never
extinguishes during the course of this Life:) I say, Let a Man in the firmest
state of Virtue be barely permitted by God to the Power of his Natural
Affections, he necessarily sinks into the Level of Common Impotence without any
other Influx.

This View of the State of Lapsed Nature I have drawn chiefly from the Doctrine
of the Gospel. Not that I suppose the Notice of it to be confined to that part
of the Scripture: For as it is a Truth that was always of Importance to be
known, so we have little reason to believe but that it was known by the Church
of God in all Ages from the Beginning.

In the Books of the Prophets, Nature's Insufficiency of Good, Isa. 26.12. Isa.
55.1. etc.
as likewise the Free Overtures of Grace to help it out, are plainly testified.
And yet more plainly in the Psalmist; where all the Offices of the Holy Spirit
conducing to Sanctification (as Cleansing, Guiding, Helping, Renewing,
Comforting, Strengthening, Establishing) are mentioned as expressly as in the
Gospel.

In the Writings of Moses, the Necessity of God's Assistance of Sanctification
is delivered with formal Evidence: For after that God had institude
Circumcision as a Symbol of Purity, and had told the Israelites withal, That
the true Discharge of their Duty toward him consisted in the Moral
Circumcision of the Heart; i. e. In taking off their Love from the World, and
placing it in the highest measure upon God; lest they should fail of their End,
through Ignorance of their Means, and set about this great Work in Confidence
of their own Ability, he thus instructs them, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart and with all thy soul. Now what plainer words can be used to
express, That although they stood obliged to love God with all their heart, yet
of Themselves they were not able to work out this Issue; but that God was
always ready to assist them to do it.

The Striving of God's Holy Spirit with Men for their Conversion, Genesis 6.3.
is spoken of a a known and received Truth before the Flood. And whereas it is
said of several of the Patriarchs, That they walked with God; Genesis 5.22. Genesis
6.9.
the Expression with God must reasonably be interpreted to signify With God's
Assistance, as well as According to his Will.

Farther than this -- Had I leisure to gratify the Curious, I have large room
to make it appear, That this very Doctrine was familiarly espoused by the Wise
Men among the Heathen. Who, as they found by Conscious Experience That it was
as little in a Man's Power to make himself Virtuous, as it was to make himself
Fortunate; and as they likewise thought it suitable to the Goodness of God to
take Care of Man's Greater Good as well as of his Lesser, so they espoused this
Belief of God's assisting Men to Probity of Manners, as a Truth deducible from
the first Principles of Reason. Accordingly Plato delivers it as a Rule
received from Socrates, and laid down as a Fundamental in his Morality, That
Virtue was, (...) a Divine Distribution; and that Education, Precepts, Example,
and Practical Diligence, were only partial Advances toward it; but that the
State was god and finished by the Concurrence of God. And what can be more
express, and withal more venerable, than that of Seneca, when he says, Nulla
fine Deo men's bona, No Soul can be Good without the Divine Assistance.

But I have asserted my Point from a better Authority; and therefore thought it
fit to engage no farther in this way of Proof, as being supperfluous in a
Christian Auditory.

Having then offered This as the True Prospect of the State of Lapsed Nature;
the next thing I purpose is a Vindication of this State from such Cavils as the
Rash, and such Complaints as the Weak, are apt to conceive against it. And this
I intend for the Subject of the following Discourse.

SERMON II.
St. MATTHEW. XXVI. 35. Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet
will I not deny thee.


IN a former Discourse upon this Text, I offered the Scriptural View and
Account of Lapsed Nature; from whence it fully appears, that no Man is
sufficient either to be or to continue Good in his own Strength.

Which is a Doctrine directly serving the Two great Ends of Religion: viz. To
exalt the Glory of God; And to beat down all Pretenses of Humane Pride.

But as all Truth is abusable, so we may be aware that many espouse this very
Truth the more freely, only that they may the more freely form it into an
Apology for careless Living. For Example, thus they argue: Our Nature is
indisposed, perverse, and insussicient to Good; therefore, How miserable is our
Condition, thus to be maimed before we were born, and made guilty before we
knew how to act, and obnoxious for doing that which we cannot help? How
unaccountably fatal was the Indiscretion of our First Parents, which gave
occasion to this Disorder? And how unfortunate their Posterity, to whom it is
derived? Why did not God, with more appearance of Compassion, redintegrate our
Nature after the Fall, and restore it to its Primitive Uprightness? How much
better had his Service been provided for by this Method, and Man more happily
prevented from his Displeasure? Which Displeasure of his we cannot now avoid,
unless it be by his own Act; whose Actings are not supposable to be at our
Discretion. Now it is certain that all such kind of Arguings are profane, and
tend to nothing but the Dishonor of God, and the Support and Countenance of
Vice in the World: And therefore to obviate these Mischiefs, and to carry on my
Contemplation to its proper Usefulness, I am obliged to enquire into the
Reasons -- Why the Wisdom and Goodness of God thought fit to leave Mankind
under this present state of Weakness and Insufficiency. From which Enquiry I
shall show, 1. That what God Chiefly intended thereby was, To oblige us more
strictly to live in a perpetual Dependence upon himself; And 2. That such a
Dependence (put in Practice) will effectually cut off all possible pretenses of
humane Complaint.

My first Business is, to enquire into the Reasons why the Wisdom and Goodness
of God thought fit to leave Mankind under this present state of Weakness,
Insufficiency, and Disorder.

We must allow, That God could have immediately reformed that Disorder, which
was brought upon our Nature by the First Disobedience; He could have checked it
in its first Authors, and not suffered it to be propagated to their Posterity;
but in the mean time it would be much too bold, for any one to say that this
would have been the Better Method: For it is certain, That in things proceeding
from God, that which Is, is always Best; though we sometimes cannot penetrate
into the Reasons that make it so. But as to the present Instance, we may (with
Reverence) penetrate into its Reasons, and such as must be allowed of. Ex. gr.

1. Who can think but that when Sin had got footing in despite of God's
Command, it was fit he should leave some Testimony of his Displeasure against
it? Now let me say at present what I will prove afterward, (viz.) That all the
Weakness and Disorder that remains upon our Nature (if its Mischief be not
farther extended by voluntary and chosen Malice) amounts to no more than such a
Testimony of God's Displeasure against Sin.

There are some who believe, That all the Wast and Cragginess, and other
seeming Deformities which appear upon the Face of the Earthly Globe, were
occasioned by the violent Concussions that happened at Noah's Flood. Now should
such be asked a Reason why God did not restore his Work to its original Beauty,
they would think it sufficient to say, 'Twas fit it should stand so
Monumentally, to deter future Ages from the like Provocations: And give me
leave to say, it was fit that That Disorder which Sin in its first Beginnings
brought upon our Nature should be left there; as a Monument of Caution against
that Sin which occasioned it; and which, if farther complied with, will bring
on Disorders much more deplorable than any we now feel.

Indeed it may be objected, that there is a great disparity between these two
Issues, Disorder left upon the Face of the Earth, and Disorder left upon the
Frame of Man: For the Earth feels no Misery from the Deformity of its Surface;
and when a Man looks upon the most craggy, squallid, or barren Parts of it, and
reflects withal, that it is a Monument of God's Displeasure, he may receive a
wholesome Instruction against Sin, but no Temptation to Sin from such a
Prospect: Whereas the Disorder left upon us, is that whereby we suffer; It is
the Fountain of our Misery, and our continual Temptation; and so runs us upon
that Displeasure whereof it gives us Warning; and therefore we Justly complain
of its Continuance.

This may be an Objection, and I confess it were of weight, had God left Man
helpless under the Influence of this Disorder; and if, as we have propensions
to Sin, so we laid under a Necessity of following those propensions: But when
it is considered, that at the same time God has convenanted for Grace to be our
Remedy; and that he himself will give unto us whatsoever we want in our selves;
the Objection (as popular as it is) appears to be fallacious; and (more than
that) a Calumny against the Goodness of God.

For what Reason have we to complain of Natural Blindness, if God vouchsafes to
be our Eyes and our Sight? Of Natural Impotence, if He will be our Defense and
Support? Of Captivity to Lusts and Passions, if He be our Redeemer, and will
set us free? Now God is faithful, who has promised to be All This unto us: and
therefore if we complain, the Reproach of our Complaint must return upon our
selves; and accordingly we shall find that They complain most of the Corruption
of Nature, who would rather enjoy its Corruption, than use the appointed means
to have it reformed.

2. The Goodness of God and his tender Care of humane Welfare, is more
abundantly manifested in this our present state of Weakness and Infirmity.

God made the first Man Upright; that is, in a state wherein he could be good
in virtue of his own Abilities: which is the great difference from ours, that
we pretend to repine at. But if God at this time, though he do not make Man
upright, yet vouchsafes to nurse, guide, and train him to such a state of
Uprightness as himself will be pleased withal; Who can say but the Issue is the
same to Man? but moreover, the Care and Attendance upon him is infinitely
greater.

If a Lord give his Servant an entire Estate, he discovers a kind and liberal
Mind in so doing; but if (instead of this) he shall make daily Visits to him,
and from time to time provide him with what is fit; none can doubt but that in
this Method he discovers a more constant and unwearied Love? It was a
remarkable Proof of God's Favor to the Israelites, when by his Donation and
Conduct he brought them to possess the Land of Canaan; but for all this, we
must acknowledge that his Favor to them was more conspicuous to the
Observation both of themselves and others, while he daily took care of their
Meat and Drink, and indeficiency of their Clothing in the naked and barren
Wilderness. And this is an exact Emblem of our present Case. How daily, how
minutely, how incessant, is the Vigilance and Provision of God for Man in this
state of Infirmity? Were any thing Laborious to Omnipotence, and could there be
more and less of Pains, where all things are easy; I might say that God takes
more pains to save any particular Soul, than he did to make, or does to govern
the Universal World. He made the World by the Breath of his Command; and so he
governs it: for it has no power to resist. But where he has placed an Elective
Power of Resisting, There to watch over that Power, to attend every Motion of
our Hearts, to check every Evil, and to cherish every good one; to encourage it
into Act, to reward it with Complacency, to propagate and establish it by
Supplies of that good Principle which first set it a-work; to feed, and lead,
and drive, and discipline his Flock, to retrieve the Wandering, to wait upon
the Tender and Weak, and to carry the Impotent upon his Shoulders (as he is
pleased to symbolize his Care of Man under the Comparison of the good
Shepherd;) This is a Series of Care and Attention as well as Love, which the
Economy of whole Nature besides does not require.

This indeed is the most amazing Contemplation that can enter into our
Thoughts, and which made Holy Job break out into those words of Wonder, Chap.
7.14. Lord what is man that thou should magnify him, and that thou
should set thy heart upon him? and that thou should visit him every
mornning, and try him every moment? This is the wonderful Goodness of God
toward Man in his present state; and this indeed is the only Title that every
Man ought to value himself upon; even this, That God values him so much; but
still to be more humble, because he can so little deserve it.

3. A Third Reason why the Wisdom and Goodness of God thought fit to leave us
under this state of Infirmity, in this; (viz.) That he might thereby oblige us
more strictly to live in a perpetual Dependence upon himself. And this is that
Reason I shall chiefly insist on, and proceed to show what is the Nature and
what the Fruits of this Dependence upon God.

There is a Dependence upon God which we may call Passive, because it relates
not to any Act of our Choice or Will; for we must depend upon him whether we
will or no.

We must depend upon God for our Life, and for every moment of its Continuance.
For let us love Life never so much, we cannot continue it to any Term or Period
beyond God's Pleasure and Term or Period beyond God's Pleasure and Designation.
I mean not that God has fixed a fatal Period to every Man's Life. The Notion of
Fate diminishes from the Honor of Providence: But I mean that God, for the
very Manifestation of his Providence, suffers not humane Life to wear out and
determine according to the ordinary Laws of Nature; but takes the Measures of
it into his own arbitrary Disposal, and either extends or shortens it as he
sees fit. We may observe of all other Creatures, that Nature governs the
Measures of their Lasting; that (abating Violences) their Period is generally
uniform, and they wear out their Thread of Life in proportion to that strength
of which it is spun. But Man seldom wears out his Thread, it is for the most
part suddenly cut off; and Men die, perhaps in equal numbers every Year,
through the whole Interval from the Cradle to nature Old Age.

Again, We depend upon God for all the Event and Success of our Undertakings:
And this is another Instance which God has selected to his own Disposal, and
exempted from the ordinary Laws of Nature, on purpose to give Testimony to his
Providence in governing the World. For undoubtedly, it is but suitable to
Nature's Law, That the Race should be to the Swift, and the Battle to the
Strong; That the best Contrivances and Means should have the best Success. And
yet it often falls out otherwise in the Case of Man; where the wisest Projects
are defeated, and the most hopeful means are controlled; and Time and Chance
happens unto all: Time and Chance, i. e. At sundry Times sundry Events fall
out, which they who look no farther than the Events themselves, call Chance,
because they fall out quite contrary both to their Intentions and their Hopes;
though at the same time, in respect of God's Providence overruling in these
Events, it were profane to call them Chance, for they are pure Designation.

I may add farther, That we depend upon God for all our Actions: For since our
Life depends upon God, and Life is our sole Capacity of Acting, it must follow,
That in respect of this Remote Causality All our Actions depend upon God. Yet I
do not say that our Actions do so depend upon God, as that we need his
immediate Concurrence to all we do; or that we cannot exert any Motion or
Sensation without his actual Assistance: Because the Allowance of This would be
atended with several absurd Consequences. For, 1. Supposing our Actions to be
Evil, the imputing God's Concurrence to such, would be a Reflection upon his
Holiness. And, 2. Supposing our Actions to be Indifferent; yet, to say that
God's actual Concurrence is necessary to such, is no other than a Disparagement
to his Workmanship; for it implies an Original Defect in his Creature.

To illustrate this matter by the Compositions of Art: It is the End and Design
of a Watch to move, and by that Motion to distinguish Time: Now suppose an
Artist should make a Watch of never so curious a Figure, but yet such a one as
that its Index would not move unless he that made it obliged himself to the
perpetual Attendance of his Finger; what would our Censure be of such a piece
of Work?

To Move, to Fell, to Perceive, to Deliberate, Resolve, and Execute, are
Actions for which Man was designed; his Nature, Station, and Duty, charge them
upon him: Now if we suppose Man not able to discharge those Functions and
Offices for which he was designed, without the perpetual Attendance of his
Maker, how can such a Creature be cleared from the Imputation of an Original
Defect?

There is indeed another sort of Actions in respect of which this Objection
will not lie. All our Actions, so far as they are morally Good, depend so
immediately upon God, that they require his actual Concurrence to the doing of
them: And yet this does not imply an Original Defect in Man, but only a Fall
from that Original Perfection wherein he was first made. And why under this
state of Man's Depravation, the Divine Wisdom chose rather to aid and support
him by a perpetual Attendance, than to redintegrate him to his primitive
Strength; is the particular Case whereof I am now assigning the Reasons.

I Have spoken hitherto of our Passive Dependence upon God, our Dependence of
Necessity; which therefore, as such, can carry no Virtue in it: And yet it is
the immediate matter of our Active Dependence, so that one Turn of our Will can
change our Necessity into Virtue. Ex. gr.

We depend upon God whether we will or no, whether we think of it or no; But
then let us depend upon him Intentionally, Willingly, and we do That that is
properly Religious, and what God will both Accept and Reward.

To induce us thus to husband our Necessity; and improve it wisely into Virtue,
let us consider on this manner -- We depend upon God for our Life and Being,
and why should we not choose to do so? For, did we depend upon Nature for it,
Nature might give us a long Life, but she could not give us a good one; and
then what would it be of Advantage to us that we have lived? Whereas now the
same God that gives either a long Life or a short, can make each of them to be
an equal Blessing.

We depend upon God for the Success of our Undertakings; and why should we not
choose to do so? Did we depend for it upon our own Wisdom and Strength, by the
same Rule, Every one that could overpower us or out-wit us, had it at his
Discretion to defeat and undo us: Whereas under the Disposals of God we are
guarded against these Issues of Common Enmity; and either our Undertakings are
sure to succeed; or else, what is better, we are sure to reap Advantage from
their Disappointment; so long as our necessary Dependence upon God is
sanctified by a pious Resolution to depend upon him willingly, and to resign
our selves to his Disposals.

We depend upon God for our power of Acting: And why should we not choose to do
so? since the same God that supports us in the power of Acting, is only able to
regulate and conduct what we do to our Advantage; without which Issue, our
power of Acting must sink and degenerate into a bare power of doing our selves
harm.

But the principal Object of our Dependence is still behind; and that is,
Good's Grace, in order to our Sanctification, and to enable us to discharge the
Offices of Religion and Virtue.

To look and seek to God for this, is the main business of our Dependence;
because Grace is the Chief of all God's Benefits: So great a Benefit is the
Grace of God, that there is no other Good in Comparison of it; no other Good at
all without it.

And therefore it is that our Savior when arguing the Certainty of God's
Paternal Love, from the Love that is generally observable in all Natural
Parents, he thus expresses himself, Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil know how
to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more will your heavenly Father
give (give what? give good gifts; so the Antithesis requires, and so one would
think the Expression should run: but instead of this, it runs thus How much
more will your heavenly Father give) the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?
Implying, that the Holy Spirit is equivalent to all other good Gifts; nay, as
much exceeding them, as the Love and Power of God exceeds that of Man.

And therefore however we may of esteem Long Life and Prosperous Fortunes, yet
so indifferent are they in the Event, That God bestows them without any
Indication either of his Love or Hatred (as that Passage of Solomon is to be
interpreted Eccles. 9.1.) For God bestows them not only upon the Good, but upon
the Evil and the Unthankful; upon those that seek them not from him; upon those
that do not acknowledge them as received at his hands; and finally, upon those
that are never the better for having received them; as will appear at the
adjusting of Accounts.

But on the other hand, sanctifying Grace is a Pearl of greater Price than to
be cast away upon the Regardless. This is a Certain Benefit and a lasting Good;
and therefore God disposes it upon another sort of Condition (viz.) to them
that ask him; i. e. to them that wisely estimate, and worthily value, and
earnestly desire this excellent Gift.

And indeed when we consider the Duty of Prayer, qualified with those
Circumstances that the Holy Scripture does require, (viz.) That it must be
Instant, Fervent, Importunate, Violent; we may conclude that Prayer it self is
as certain a Proof of the Communications of Grace, as it is a Means to procure
them: For if we must pray Instantly, Fervently, Importunately, Violently, what
are the Things we must pray for in this manner? No worldly Need can justify
such a Desire: Our Desire of Life or any of its Accommodations, in such a
measure, would be Immoderate, Impatient, and Sinful; and therefore it is that
Submission and Resignation is prescribed to our Requests in respect of all
these things: Grace therefore is the only Blessing that can be worthy such a
measure of Importunity: This alone we may desire instantly, and with Impatience
of Denial, and yet not exceed: Grace is that Kingdom of Heaven that suffers
Violence, and the Violent take it by force.

In this Office of Prayer, and in an Endeavor of Christian-living suitable and
comporting with it, (without which Comportment the Efficacy of our Prayers must
necessarily be voided;) I say, in there two Offices of praying for God's Grace,
and walking in the Road of God's Grace, consists the Practice of our Dependence
upon him. The Fruits whereof I shall next enquire into; and show that through
this Dependence upon God (which our present Weakness and Insufficiency
enforces) Man reaps greater Advantages from his present State, than could have
been looked for, had he been restored to the State of Primitive Perfection.

And to prove This, it will be Argument enough, if I show that Man has now
Provision made, 1. For a safer Virtue; and 2. For a more commendable Virtue;
and, 3. For a more excellent Reward than otherwise he could have had.

1. Man has now Provision made for a safer Virtue than Adam had when he was
first formed. Adam was left in the hands of his own Counsel; And so the Author
of Ecclus. tells us, Chap. 15.24. where he says, God made Man (...) from or in
the beginning, and left him in the hands of his own Counsel, etc. For if we
interpret this Text to mean, that Man has Counsel, Wisdom, Liberty or Strength,
to choose and pursue all that is necessary to Godliness, I am sure it can be
applied to no man since the Fall: and this the whole Current of Sacred Writ
makes demonstrable.

But Adam was furnished with such degrees of Perfection, that it was fit be
should be left in the hands of his own Counsel. But withal, we know that Adam
fell under his own hands; and after he was once fallen, after he had darkened
his Soul, weakened and poisoned his Nature, by giving up Reason to the power of
Appetite, he must necessarily have sunk under the dominion of Sin, he must
necessarily have grown more and more indulging, careless, desperate, and
without thoughts or power of Repenting, (as the Case of the fallen Angels was)
had it not been for the Grace of that Covenant which was founded purely upon
the occasion of his Fall. For all the subsequent Power that Adam had to please
God, and to walk as a Man converted from the error of his way from that time
forward, issued not at all from the Strength of his Nature, as if Recovered by
the means of Reflection; Nature was as much indisposed and insufficient to
produce such a Reconciling Change in him, as it is at this Day in any of his
Posterity.

And accordingly we may observe from the History, That before the New Covenant
was pronounced and ratified in the Promised Seed, there was no footstep of
Repentance that appeared either in Adam or Eve; but merely a shifting off their
Crime, as if in Design to preclude their Repentance; and therefore it appears
that all the subsequent Power that Adam had whereby to Repent, and to please
God, did issue purely from the Succor of that Grace which God vouchsased him
in Compassion to his new-contracted Disorder; and upon which he might now rest
for the Course of his future Obedience, with much more Security, than he could
upon his former Native Perfections. Now to argue home to my Purpose.

Let us suppose that after Adam had fallen, yet (this notwithstanding) God had
ordained, that Original Uprightness should have equally descended upon all his
Posterity; yet we must allow that any one of his Posterity, though born with
the same degrees of Uprightness that he was, might yet have been foiled by the
Wiles of the Tempter, and so have fallen as well as he did: Now had they so
fallen (I mean fallen only personally and for themselves) had they so fallen,
and in the mean while the Covenant of Grace not been founded (as it was only
founded upon the Account of the Propagation of Sin) how could any such have
ever recovered to that State from which they fell, or indeed to any Degree of
Acceptance with God? Their Case must have been as desperate as that of the
fallen Angels was before; they would have was now made natural to them; and
aimed at nothing more than to enjoy the Pleasures of farther Depravation.

Whereas on the other hand, according to the present state of things, and for
the succor of our Nature as it is now infirm, there is a Provision made
through the New Covenant for a safer adherence to Virtue; and such a Provision
as every Christian may have the Benefit of; unless it be in the case of
affected Slothfulness, and wilful Indulgence in Sin.

Sin indeed may more easily make its first Breaches upon us, by reason of our
Present Infirmity; either through Ignorance or Surprise; but it cannot get
Dominion over us without our own deliberate Option: For, it is an express
Gospel-Promise against the Power of Sin, that It shall not have Dominion over
us; against the Power of the Devil, that Greater is he that is in you, than he
that he that is in the World; against the Power of Temptations, that God is
faithful, who will not suffer us to be Tempted above what we are able; against
Discouragement from the Pretext of our Infirmities, that we may do all things
through Christ that strengthens us; and in case of falling, We have an
Advocate with the Father, and a Propitiation for our Sins: by means whereof,
the Favor of God may be Regained, and that Principle of Grace Recovered, upon
which (as upon a new Stock) we may grow good again, and to an entire Acceptance.

And now say, How could the Safety of humane Virtue be better provided for? Or
in case we want Virtue, of whom can we complain?

But, 2. The present state of our Nature, weak and depraved as it is, gives Man
the Opportunity of a more commendable Virtue.

From the state of greater Uprightness and Order of Mind, and Composure of our
Affections, we might expect more elevated Thoughts, Conceptions more worthy of
God, Acts of Adoration more steady and affectionate, and a Discharge of Moral
Duties less obnoxious to Error and Interruption: But in the mean time the
present state of our Deficiency has no Reason to complain; when it is
vouchsafed thus much of Indulgence, that the most abrupt Groanings of an humble
Soul, pressed with Infirmities, and wrestling with Temptations, and thence
feelingly imploring the Assistance of God, is a more acceptable Sacrifice to
him, than any Hymns that the most exalted Understanding can dictate, or any
Office that the most composed Affections can perform.

Now Thus it is, and This is the Reason of it, (viz.) Because all the Notion we
have of humane Virtue is this -- That it is a Conflict maintained by Rectified
Reason against the lower Appetites: according to which Notion, the Holy
Scripture calls the Christian Life a State of Warfare. Now as Affections and
Lusts do make the Opposition, and occasion the Conflict, so it cannot be
doubted, but that they give the great Commendation, if not the very Being, to
our Virtue. To kill a Passion, to subdue a rising Motion of Anger, Hatred,
Pride, or Carnality, is the worthiest Oblation we can offer to God; and the
more of these we have to subdue, the more we have to offer: When I am weak,
then am I strong, says the Apostle; and thus we may interpret him -- The more
Infirmities there are in our Nature, the more eminent Opportunities we have to
be Conquerours in the Christian Conflict.

Wish therefore we may, that Virtue were more cheap, or more easy to us; but
we ought to remember, That at the same time we wish away that which gives
Virtue her best Title both to present Commendation and future Reward.

Which is another Advantage of our present State, (viz.) that it makes way for
a more Excellent Reward.

To dispute whether Adam, if he had not sinned, should at some Period of his
Earthly Life have been Translated into Heaven, and there united to God in his
Eternal Enjoyments, were only to be wise above what is written: If we will
confine our Judgment to what is written; Nothing appears there, but that the
Promise of Heaven was made in Christ alone, whose Undertaking for Mankind
commenced purely upon the Occasion of the Fall.

And if we observe the Order of that solemn Prayer which our Savior makes for
his Disciples and the succeeding Church, Joh. 17. where ver. 17. he prays, Holy
Father, sanctify them by thy Truth; and after this, in a distinct Request, at
ver. 24. he says, Father, I will that they whom thou have given me be with me
where I am: We may reasonably argue from This, That the utmost Sanctification
humane Nature is capable of, carries in it no Pretensions to Heaven, but that
This is a Title that rises simply from the Compact of our Lord's Mediation.

It is manifestly evident from frequent Passages of Holy Writ, That (although
not simply Bliss it self, yet) the highest degrees of Bliss are annexed to the
Doctrine of the Cross; to Afflictions, Sufferings, and Self-Denial; none of
which had had any Place or Occasion, had it not been for the Depravation of our
Nature: For their End is perfectly Medicinal, and designed to correct that
Depravation, and to bring us to the Virtues of Patience and Humility; Virtues
which we are naturally averse from, and yet they are necessary to reform and
sanctify our Nature.

Now if Afflictions, Sufferings, and Self-Denial, are the things which are said
to work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, and yet
all these Methods of Discipline draw their Usefulness from the very State of
our Corruption; it cannot be denied but that this present State of ours does
give occasion and make way for a more excellent Reward than Man Vndepraved
could ever have hoped for.

What Room is there then for complaining of our Condition? What for Reviling
Our first Parents? What for Censuring the divine Disposal of Things? Our Nature
is burdened with Weakness and Disorder, but it has its Remedy in a Religious
Dependence, which is able to turn all to Advantage. And therefore to do right
to this Contemplation, we ought to close it with Acknowledgment and Wonder --
Oh the depth of the Riches of the Wisdom and Goodness of God!

To whom be Glory, etc.
FINIS.
SERMONS Preached by E. Young, and Sold by Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head
in S. Paul's Churchyard.
A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, on Easter Day 1693.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, at
Guild Hall Chapel, Febr. 4. 1682.

A Sermon Preached at Salisbury on Sunday July 30. 1693. Being the Time of the
Assizes.

A Sermon Preached at the Assizes held in Winchester, July 11. 1695.

Two Sermons Preached at Winchester Assizes: The first on Feb. 26. 1694. The
last on July 14. 1686.

Two Sermons Preached at White Hall. The first on Sunday April 15. The second
on Sunday April 22. 1694.


