Certain Reasons why Tanned Leather ought not to be bought and sold again in
this Kingdom of England not wrought and converted into made Ware, nor in any
other place than open and public Fairs and Markets by the Law appointed.
FIrst, Because the Law made in the first year of King James against the said
Offense is still in force, and was made (no doubt) to prevent many great evils
and mischiefs that might arise thereby; and amongst others such as are herein
after mentioned.

2. Because the said offense tends greatly to the deceit and abuse of the Kings
Subjects in general, for that thereby much Leather insufficiently tanned has
been and may be put into, and vented in Wares made of Leather, whereby the
Kings Subjects have been, are, and may be greatly deceived and injured.

1. In the price they pay for such Ware, it being not worth half so much as
they give for it, because it will not do half the service as that which is good.

2. In their health, for that Boots and Shoes made of such Leather cannot but
take in wet; whereby many have and may get cold and sickness, to their great
grief and loss (yea, and to the peril of their lives) especial to such as are
of weakly constitutions.

3. The oftener Leather is bought and sold before it is made into Ware, the
dearer the Kings Subjects must pay for the fame in Ware.

Secondly, This Offense tends very much to the hurt and damage of all
Arrificers that work and convert Tand Leather into made Ware.

1. For that hereby Leather has been, is, and will be (if not prevented,)
engrossed and regrated, so that they that work and convert it into Ware have
been, are, and will be forced to buy it at ^econd and third hand; whereas the
Law provides they should buy it at the first hand of Tanners in open Fairs and
Markets, after it has been there lawfully searched and sealed.

2. By means of this Offense of selling Tanned Leather so contrary to the Law,
Artificers that convert Leather into made Ware (especially Shoomakers) have
been, and may be cheated by those they employ in making their Ware; for that
Leather being sold ^n private places, Journy-men Shooemakers have oftentimes
bought bad and insufficient Leather, and put into their Masters Wares instead
of their Masters good Leather, selling and using their Masters good Leather to
their own advantage, so cheating both their Master and his Customer that buyeth
such Ware, thereby also ruining their Masters Trade, which abuse (was not) nor
could be so frequently committed, till Leather was sold in private places so
contrary to the Law.

3. By means of selling Tanned Leather in private places contrary to the Law
many persons that keep no open Shops do buy bad and offal-Leather, and make
Ware thereof selling the same not in any open Shop, Fair or Market, but do
carry them up and down to private houses, thereby evading the penalty for bad
Ware, deceiving those they sell to, and spoiling the Trade of such as sell good
Ware in open Shops and Markets.

4. By means of this Offense Artificers that convert Leather into Ware
(especially Shooemokers) have been raised much in the prices for making of
their Ware, which must needs make them dearer to the Buyers.

Thirdly, By this evil practice of selling Tanned Leather so contrary to Law,
open Fairs and Markets appointed for selling of Tanned Leather are greatly
lessened and decayed, and in great danger to be quite lost and ruined (if not
timely prevented) and the necessary and useful Trade of Tanning much
impoverished and discouraged.

1. For first, by the frequencie of selling Tanned Leather in Shops and private
places, there is brought little more than half so much Leather to many open
Fairs and Markets (especially to the Morket of Leaden Hall London) as commonly
was accustomed before.

And of some sort of Leather not one part of ^^urty is brought to the open
Fairs and Markets, but carried from Tanners Yards to their houses and shops
that sell the same again; being also never searched and sealed, nor sold in the
Markets, as the Law requires.

2. Hereby Artificers and converters of good Leather into Ware cannot have good
Leather of that sort for their Money in the Markets, but are forced to buy such
as they can get of them that ingross it, at the second or third hand.

3. Hereby many Artificers being kept from buying in the Markets, diverse
Tanners who tan good Leather and sell it in the Markets are oft-times forced to
lay up or carry home some sorts of good Leather for want of Chapmen to buy it.

4. By this means several persons that buy tanned Leather to sell again to them
that work and convert it into made ware, do oft-times agree together to buy
that Leather that comes to the Markets at such low rates as they please
themselves (knowing that Artificers that should buy it in the Markets) are so
engaged to them, that they cannot or dare not buy any but of them in their
houses and shops, and that the Tanners must sell it them at such low rates, or
carry it back again many miles to their great charge and loss; and having thus
gotten and engrossed it into their hands do inhance the price to those that buy
it of them again.

Objection. If tanned Leather may not be sold but in open Fairs and weekly
Markets, how shall the poorer sort of Artificers, that work and convert Leather
into Ware be supplied with such quantities as they need and are able to pay
for?

Answer. First, No doubt but this matter was well weighed and considered by the
King and Parliament that made the Law against the said Offense; and if there
had been a necessity of selling Leather otherwise than in open Fairs and
Markets, they would not have made a Law against it; but did (no doubt) upon
experience of the evil consequences thereof make the aforesaid Law against it.
2. Since the making of the said Law, and before this evil practice has been
used, it cannot be denied but is well known that the poorer sort of Artificers
were supplied in open Fairs and weekly-Markets with such quantities as they
needed and could pay for.
For first, diverse Tanners in all open Fairs and Markets cut many Hides of
Leather into several pieces selling it in pieces there, each piece being
searched and sealed to prevent deceit, as the Law requires; and so some do
still, and others would if such Artificers did come to buy it in the Markets.
2. In Leaden Hall London is appointed two Markets weekly for selling of tanned
Leather whereby all may be supplied. 3. It is altogether unreasonable that the
conveniencie of a few should be an occasion of so great loss and damage to the
whole Kingdom in general. 4. The Law provides that no Wares made of tanned
Leather should be exposed to sale by any but in their open shops, Fairs and
Markets, that such Ware may be liable to be searched, whether well made and of
good Leather, and if any cannot keep an open shop, they may make new Ware for
such as do, or mend old work as many do. 5. Neither is it just or reasonable
that any Interlopers and Ingrossers should get away the profit and livelihood
of the Tanners, and such as work and convert tanned Leather into Ware, nor yet
inhance the prices of such Ware to the damage of the Kings Subjects by their
engrossing and regrating of Leather. Lastly, This evil practice has already
discouraged and much hindered the livelihood of such as tan Leather well and
sell it in the Markets according to Law, and encouraged only both such Tanners
and Ingrossers that deceive the Kings Subjects so contrary to Law.


FINIS.

