Strange and Wonderful News from GLASGOW IN SCOTLAND,

Being a full and true Account of A Terrible Earthquake That happened there on
Thursday the 10. of this Instant July, attended with Whirlwinds, and great
Gusts of Thunder and Lightning, the which continued for the space of half an
hour, to the Amazement (and not only so) but also damage of the Inhabitants.

ALSO An Account of some Prodegies seen in the Air at the same time, the which
were most Dreadful and Remarkable to the beholders.

With an Impartial Account of the present Affairs in that Kingdom; as it was
imparted by a Gentleman of worth living in the place aforesaid. With many other
circumstances herein Recited.

London, Printed 1679.

Strange and Wonderful News from Glasgow in Scotland, etc.
STrange and wonderful are the Works of an Omnipotent God, whose boundless
Power commands both Sea and Land, stills the winds, and tames the raging
Waves, at whose Rebuke the Heavens fly, the Earth does tremble, and the
Mountains melt, and with his looks he dries the deep; Justice and Judgment are
before his Face, and yet his Mercy Triumphs over his Power. A God so great and
good, what Mortal can but with Reverence Adore him: How loath he is to crush
Rebellious man, and like an indulgent Father, shakes his threatening Rod, but
yet forbears to strike the weighty blow; for Portants and Prodegies so often have
been seen of late in these Dominions, that they have almost lost their Names,
and are become but common things; but amongst all the numbers that appearance
made to signify in Characters the Divine will of Heaven to those Rebellious
men, that dare unlawfully resist Anointed Power, striving contrary to the will
of the wise Creator of their Mundine frame, to inovate in Church and State
Affairs, by Rapines, cruel Murders, and the like, wherefore Heaven thought fit
in time to curb their Infolencies, and by loosening the Foundation of the
World, to shake them out, and drive them thence, the which may be conjectured
by a terrible Earthquake; with several strange and wonderful Prodegies, the
which appeared on Thursday the 10th of this instant July 1679. at Strevin
Lansdown another place in the West of the Kingdom of Scotland, where the Rebels
Camp was before their defeat by his Majesty's Army, under the Command of his
Grace the Duke of Monmouth, the certainty of which were attested by several
credible persons Inhabiting these places, and communicated by a Letter from one
Mr. Williams a Gentleman in the City of Glasgow, to his Friend in London, the
manner thus, That on Thursday the date aforesaid, about five of the Clock in
the Afternoon, the Skies began to darken, and thick Clouds overspread the Face
of Heaven, whereupon such dreadful Volleys of Thunder and streaming flashes of
Lightning discharged from broaken Clouds, attended by fearful Storms of Hail
and Rain, that people from all parts were forced to take shelter in Barnes,
Houses, and other convenient places they could first procure; the which Storm
or Tempest lasted for the space of two hours without intermission, tho being
sometimes more violent than others; the Hailstones being of such magnitude,
that they broke and shattered many Glass-windows to a considerable damage; as
likewise the Tiles falling off the Houses in several places, the Mortar that
supported them being loosened by the violence of the Tempest, at which inletts
the wet poured in at the Roofs of the Houses; during this violent Storm, to
complete the Scene, and make it appear more dreadful, the Basis of the Earth
began to heave, as if all Nature had been oppressed with some ponderous pain,
upon which the tottering Fabrics began to Dance, and Dishes both Puter and
Earthen, betook themselves to motion as if they had been animated, and leap
from off the Shelves, Stools, Chairs, and other Utonsils in the like Posture,
whilst in the Streets, the Tiles that did before but drop one by one, now fall
as thick in comparison as Hail, so that people durst not go out of their Houses
for fear, but some doubting the substantialness of their Buildings, desperately
ventured with their Wives and Children abroad, rather trusting to the Fury of
the Storm, than to their Dancing habitation: The dreadful motion continued near
the spare of half an hour, in which space it gave three several onsets very
furious and strange; no sooner was it over, but the Storm of Thunder, Lighning,
and Hail, began by little and little to abate, the which no sooner done, but a
great bright Cloud arising from the North-West, and coming forward before the
wind amain, and still as it came, seemed to open as with two folding doors,
from whence exceeding brightness issued forth, and at every such disclosing,
several strange shapes appeared in it, as at first the perfect Figure of a Man's
hand, with a Scepter, the shape of an Horse, the perfect date of this Year 79,
and several other strange things, and Representations; for at every Opening
there was a several Scene, and a darting brightness; it continued so to do till
it descended our Horison at South-East: before this Tempest, Earthquake, and
Prodegy happened, several people that were abroad in the Field about their
occasions, do affirm, That they heard a noise in the Earth like the Bellowing
of a Bull, and now and then certain VVhirlwinds whistled about with unusual
force and violence; and others affirm, they heard swift voices in the Air, but
in that they might probably be mistaken by the whistling of those sorts of
Collateral Winds, called as before, VVhirlwinds, the which keep no certain
Point nor Compass, but fly in a Body carelessly, and were by the Ancients taken
to proceed from the bad Influence of some malignant Star. And thus much Sir
concerning what I thought to give you an Impartial Account of, for the
confirmation of which, I could incert many credible Attestators, but it is a
thing so generally known, that I think there is little need of so doing. Sir, I
rest, yours to serve you,

J. W.
Glasgow July 11. 79.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Have thought fit to acquaint you farther, concerning the present Posture
things are in here, after the late overthrow the Rebels received near Hamelton
Park, by his Majesty's Forces, under the Command of his Grace the Duke of
Monmouth (who behaved himself very Gallantly in the Action, gaining the
Applause of all his Majesty's true Subjects in this Kingdom; they scattered and
disperced themselves, some taking shelter in the VVoods, from whence they were
Ferreted by Lieutenant Colonel Doglas, others flying cross the Country in such
Confusion, and dispe^rcing themselves, throwing away their Arms for fear of
being discovered, that they can never be able to make Head again, especially by
reason of the prudent care his Majesty's Counsel and Ministers of State have
put in practice for their security for the future. We have an Account, that
several of the Grand Rebels are fled the Land to avoid pursuing Justice; and
all things at present are in a very good Posture.

And now I have thought fit to advertise my Reader of certain Philosophical and
Astrologick Opinions concerning these and such kind of Elementary violences as
to the natural Cause, but we being Christians, must always acknowledge a
Supernatural Intendency from the Divine Prerogative. First then, as to the
natural cause Philosophers aver, that Thunder and Lightning are caused by hot
Exhalations attracted into the Superior Regions by the heat of the Sun, but
being of two gross and humid a Body to join AEtherial or Celestial Fire, it is
repulsed by the Beams of the Stars, and descending to its Center (the Earth)
with impetuous Violence, often finds opposition by reason of the great Mass of
Waters that are sustained by thick Clouds in the Air, and when it does, it
plunging into its opposite Element, forces its way, and rends the Clouds to
Attoms, and send forth great Glares of Lightning, the which though it appear
before the noise of the Thunderclap is heard, yet both at the same instant
issue, but the sight being more quick of motion and piercing, has the first
Prerogative, whereas the hearing comes oblique and wandering, by reason of the
turnings and Motions of the Spears, and thus much of Thunder and Lightning.
Hail is congealed from the solid Bodies of water hanging in the Air by the
continual reflection of the Sunbeams; for note, the Sun has not so much Power
in the Airy Region, as it has on Earth, by reason of its Repercussion, etc.
Earthquakes are caused by heat and cold (two contrary Elements enclosed in its
Bowels) still striving with each other for th Maistry. Wind and Fire chasing
each other, and not getting yent, force the Earth to Groah, Tremble, and Quake
in a fearful manner; so that it many times opens and swalloweth up great
Hills and Mountains, Towns and Cities into its vast Abiss, as at this time
where several Famous Cities stood, there appears now nothing but standing Pools
of Water. And again, several large Islands have been puffed out of the Sea, as
the Islands of Rhoads and Selos, as also many thousands have lost their lives
by such manner of Earthquakes, as Josephus that Excellent Historian recounteth,
That in the Reign of Tygranes King of Armenia, by an Earthquake 1200000 Jews
perished: And that in the Reign of Tiberius Emperor of Rome, 12 Cities in Asia
fell in one Night by an Earthquake. As also in our Modern times there happened
an Earthquake in the Realm of Portugal, the which continued for the space of 8
days, in which time in Lisborn, the Metropolitan City of that Kingdom, it
Ruined 1200 Houses, and destroyed many People, such are its dreadful Effects,
to which we can only say it is the Lords doings, and therefore mavelous in
our Eyes.

FINIS.

