The CASE of the Honorable William Ward Esquire Son and Heir Apparent of the Right
Honorable Edward Lord Ward, John Levett, Gent. and Mary his Wife: Humbly
Offered to the Consideration of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled.
SIR Thomas Brereton Baronet (a man weak of understanding) being seized in Fee
of, and in several Manors and Lands in the County of Chester, was, when
surprised with drink, in May 1666, prevailed upon by John Warren, Esquire a
Barrester at Law, to execute a Deed of Settlement, which he had for that
purpose drawn, and wherein he named himself, and his Father (amongst others)
Trustees, whereby the Estate of the said Sir Thomas was settled to the use of
himself for life, remainder (as to a great part thereof) to Theodosia his Wife,
for her life, remainder as to the whole, to the Issue of his body, remainder
(for want of such Issue) to Nathaniel Booth, and the Heirs of his body,
remainder to the right Heirs of the said Sir Thomas for ever, with power of
Revocation at any time, during his natural life, by paying of 12 d. to the said
Trustees, or any of them, or to any other person or persons, for their use,
with intent, purpose, and declaration to revoke the same, or the Uses,
Limitations, or Estates thereby limited, created, or appointed, or any of them;
and should also by his Act or Deed in writing, under his Hand and Seal,
executed in the presence of two or more credible Witnesses, revoke the same,
then the same to be void.

Sir Thomas sometime after the execution of this Deed, taking consideration
thereof, and what he had done thereby, resolving that Settlement should not
stand, but to revoke the same, took the Deed (which then he had in his own
custody), tore of his Hand and Seal from off the same, declared it void, and
flung it into the Fire, with desire to burn and destroy it; but Warren being
present, snatched the same out of the Fire, carried it away with him, and kept
it till after the Death of Sir Thomas, soon after whose decease the said Warren
combining with the said Nathaniel Booth, to defeat the Apellants (who are the
said Sir Thomas his Sisters, Children, and his Heirs at Law) of the said
estate, sets up the aforesaid Deed, and pretends the same was not revoked
according to the strict Letter of the Proviso therein for the purpose
contained. Howbeit, Warren well knows, that Sir Thomas in his lifetime, to
wit, on the 10th of Feb. 1670, conceiving and apprehending the Settlement
aforesaid to be void, did execute one other Conveyance, drawn by him the said
Warren, whereby part of the Lands settled on his Lady for her Jointure, were the
same which were settled on her by the aforesaid Cancelled Deed, and sold other
part of the Lands, so settled as aforesaid, unto him the said Warren, and
others; and ever after his cancelling the said Deed, did upon all occasions,
whilst he lived, declare the Settlement thereby made to be void to all intents
and purposes, that his Estate after his decease, should go to his right Heirs,
and to no other person whatsoever; sent several times to the said Warren, to
desire him to send him the said Cancelled Deed, to the intent he might by
perusing thereof, know whether any other Act (by the Proviso therein contained)
were requisite by him to be done, for the more effectual making void of the
same; and often times the year before his Death, demanded it himself of the
said Warren before Witnesses; asking the reason why he delivered it not after
so many times sending for? That so he might revoke the same in such manner, as
by the Proviso therein contained was required, in case the Cancelling thereof,
as aforesaid, were not sufficient for that purpose. To whom Warren replied, by
asking Sir Thomas, why he troubled himself for the Deed, when he knew he had
destroyed it, by tearing of his Hand and Seal, assuring him, That it was a void
Deed, and promised to deliver the same when he could find it? With which Answer
Sir Thomas rested satisfied, believing what he said to be true: which he the
rather gave credit unto,

Because the said Nathaniel Booth was so well satisfied, that the said
Settlement was void, that he himself several times after the Cancelling
thereof, and not long before his Death, solicited him to Seal new Deeds, for
settling the same Lands to the same uses mentioned in the said cancelled
Conveyance, offered him money so to do. Which Sir Thomas refused to execute,
adding, that the said Booth should never be a, farthing the better for his
Estate; avoided as much as he could his company for above a year before his
Death, would never trust himself with him alone, because he once before
attempted to do him some mischief, for refusing to execute some Deeds which he
had prepared ready for his sealing.

Mr. Booth finding himself thus disappointed, that he could no way prevail with
Sir Thomas to make any new Settlement for his advantage, did in April 1673,
procure a Letter from the Kings most Excellent Majesty, to the said Sir Thomas,
wherein the King desired him to settle a part of his said estate on the said
Booth; which Letter being brought to him by a Noble Lord, Sir Thomas after a
due consideration thereof, returned his Answer in writing to his Lordship;
wherein he writ, that he hoped His Majesty would not impose any such thing upon
him, or enforce him to give his estate away contrary to his own inclinations;
adding, that he had nearer Relations than the said Mr. Booth to take care of.

About four Months after, to wit, in or about the Month of August, 1673, Sir
Thomas being sick, Mr. Booth came to visit him, and demanded to know his
positive resolution, whether he would settle any part of his estate upon him,
or not? To which Sir Thomas replied, that he had long before given Answer to
that matter, and would give no other, save only, that neither he nor his should
be one farthing the better for his estate: and immediately after the said Mr.
Booth was gone, Sir Thomas caused a Memorandum of such his Answer to be entered
into his Almanac; as also, that the Cancelled Deed in VVarrens hands was void,
that he had often sent for it, but could not get it; and made two persons then
present, subscribe their Hands as Witnesses to the said Memorandum.

Sir Thomas resolving not to trust himself near the said Warren any longer,
left Cheshire, went to a Lawyer in Worcestershire (to whom he was a stranger),
gave him instructions to draw a Settlement for him of all his estate then
unsold, named the Lands, the Trustees, and to what Uses, and directed the
making his Will, nominated his Lady to be his Executrix. And in all these
instructions Mr. Booth not so much as mentioned; but Sir Thomas falling ill,
had a mind to return to his own House in Cheshire, and did not execute the
same. But the draft of his Will was brought to him, and he approved thereof,
and declared that he would come and perfect the same with the Settlement at the
Lawyers house, but dyed before the doing thereof.

Sir Thomas afterward on his Deathbed declared, that all his estate should go
to his Heirs at Law, and to no body else; and that the aforesaid Warren had
got the Cancelled Deed aforesaid into his hand, which he executed when he was
in drink; that he had long since tore off his Hand and Seal from the same, and
that it was void, and he had oftentimes sent for it, but could never get it;
but if ever he lived to go into Cheshire, he would run his Sword into the Rogue
VVarrens guts if he did not deliver it: and this not above seven days before
his Death, which happened in January 1673, at the Lady Dudlyes House in
Staffordshire.

Sir Thomas likewise declared at his departure from his House, that it was a
great trouble to him, that he must be forced to go dye out of his own House to
save his estate; for that Warren had been with him, and brought some Bottles
of Sack, and told him, that he and Mr. Booth would come the next day and visit
him, and drink them out; no sooner was he gone, but Sir Thomas told his Servant
that the said Warren and Booth designed him a visit the next day, and to make
him drunk, and get some Settlement of his estate from him; but he would prevent
them by going to the Lady Dudlyes before they came; which accordingly (though
very ill) he did do; with which when they came, they were greatly surprised,
and very angry thereat.

And the said Warren at the Funeral of Sir Thomas, confessed he had preserved
the Deed of Settlement of his estate for the said Mr. Booth, which Deed he
declared Sir Thomas had sealed, but afterward Cancelled, and thought thereby
he had made the same void, but was mistaken; adding, that Sir Thomas had often
endeavored to get it from him; but he kept it, and put him off with excuses,
making him believe it was void, and that he had lost it, which Sir Thomas
believed; but now he would set it on foot for Mr. Booth.

Some years after the Death of Sir Thomas, the Lady Theodosia his Relict, gave
the Appellants notice of the pretended Deed aforesaid, and that the Respondent
Booth intended to make Claim thereby, but declared that she knew the same was
surreptitiously gotten from Sir Thomas, and that he thought by Cancelling
thereof he had made it void; and although she had a greater estate thereby,
than by her last Deed, yet she would not claim any thing under the same for the
Reasons aforesaid.

The Appellants heteupon as Heirs at Law to Sir Thomas, exhibited their Bill in
Equity against the said Nathaniel Booth, and one John Brereton, to discover the
said Deed, and the Contents thereof, and to have the same delivered up, or
otherwise destroyed.

To which Bill the said Nathaniel Booth put in his Answer, set forth the said
Deed; and that Sir Thomas had executed the same, but afterward had torn off
his Hand and Seal, but had not thereby made the same void, he not having
exactly pursued the power of Revocation to him therein reserved; Therefore
claimed an estate Tail in the Lands in question, after the Death of the said
Dame Theodosia.

But the Defendant Brereton by Answer, sets forth, that there was such a
Settlement, as aforesaid made by Sir Thomas, who afterward cancelled the same,
and declared it void, and always thought it to be so; and therefore he
disclaimed any Interest or pretense to the Annuity given (and settled upon) him
for his life by the said Deed; and that the Plaintiffs as Heirs at Law ought to
enjoy the same.

Their Answers being put in, Issue was joined, Witnesses examined, Publication
past, and the Cause coming to Hearing the 18th day of February, 1678, before
the Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England, his Lordship
notwithstanding all the matters aforesaid, and many others of the like nature
were fully proved, yet contrary to all Equity, dismissed the Appellants Bill;
when as in Justice he ought to have Decreed the aforesaid Settlement void, and
to have granted a perpetual Injunction against the Respondent Booth his
Proceedings thereupon. By which Dismission, the Appellants being agrieved, they
humbly Appeal from the same, to this most Honorable House, the Supreme
Fountain of Justice within this Kingdom, Praying to be heard, to the intent
they may receive Relief agreeable to the Justice and Equity of their Cause.


