THE HISTORY Of the late English Rebellion, Deduced from its first Flame in
1640. And continued to the Quenching thereof by His Majesty's happy
Restoration, 1660. BY W. Y.

To which is Added Fundamentum Patriae: OR, Englands Settlement Being A View of
the State Affairs in this Kingdom, Since His Majesty's Restoration, to the
year, 1665

London, Printed for Tho. Rooks at the Lamb and Ink-bottle, at the East End of
S. Paul's; who makes and sells the best Ink for Records, 1665.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE Reader.
THis brief Relation was composed Chiefly out of the Authors own observation of
the transactions in these late sad times. Many things are purposely omitted
(especially in the former part) for brevity sake, which otherwise might have
been inserted. For his intentions at first, were to leave it in the Register
book of his Parish (in which he first began it) for the use of his successors;
but it growing too big for that design, he drew the rest down in papers to the
coming in of General Monck, and the happy Restitution of King Charles the
Second to his Throne. He has endeavored herein to set down nothing but truth;
and hops he has not much failed therein: However, if any errors or mistakes
be, they are not wilful, and (possibly) not much material. His purpose only is
to set forth the stupendous mercy of God in raising up a temporary Savior
(such a one he accounts General Monck to be) for the deliverance of this sinful
Nation, from an oppression or slavery as bad as Egyptian; and from a confusion
no less than Babylonish. If God may have the glory, by an humble
acknowledgement and real thanks to be given him by the people of these
Kingdoms, it is all the Author expects or desires.

A Brief View of the late troubles and confusions in England, begun and
occasioned by a prevailing faction in the Long Parliament.
ANNO 1640. Novem. 3. began the Parliament, 1640.
called the Long Parliament, (we may truly term it the Black, or the Bloody
Parliament) that involved the three Nations in blood, and destroyed the King,
the Parliament it self, and three Kingdoms.

The King in the beginning of this Parliament, had for the security of the
Subjects in their Persons, Liberties, and Estates, passed many and several Acts
of grace, (to the no small diminution of his Royal Prerogative) more than all
his Predecessors Kings of England, from the Conquest downward, had ever done;
and all this to remove from them all jealousies and fears.

After this in May, 1641.
1641. he gives way at the great and pressing importunity of the House of
Commons, to the Condemnation and Execution of the Earl of Strafford, a loyal
Subject, and a most able and accomplished counselor, as any Prince in
Christendom ever had. The King was very hardly moved to yield either to his
attaindor or execution, as not being satisfied in conscience, of any guilt or
crime in him, deserving such punishment; but yield at length he did (though
with much reluctance) to satisfy the importunity or the people, and indeed at
the request of the Earl himself; who desired Jonah-like, to be cast overboard,
thereby to appease the violent rage of a tempestuous people. The truth is, this
Nobleman, as also the Archbishop of Canterbury (afterward Anno 1644.) were
merely sacrificed to the malice and revenge of the Scots.

In August following, the King goes into Scotland, to compose differences
there, between himself and his Subjects of that Kingdom: which done, he returns
again to London, and is there received with exceeding joy and triumph of the
people, in or about the beginning of December.

The House of Commons to welcome his Majesty home, instead of giving him thanks
for the many gracious Acts he had lately passed, they present him with a
Remonstrance, Dec. 15. laying open all the miscarriages and misfortunes of his
whole Government, from the beginning of his Reign, even to that present; and
this they publish, contrary to his express desire, to the whole Kingdom;
whereby they gave occasion to the people, to conceive jealousies and suspicions
of a malignant party about the King, still carrying on their own designs, both
against Religion, and the Laws of the Land.

After the publishing of this Remonstrance, fears and jealousies increase among
the people; the vulgar rabble in and about London, frequently flock down to
Westminster, with Petitions and clamours, against the Bishops and Popish Lords,
and disaffected Members (as they termed them) in the House of Commons, and no
redress could be had against them, though the House of Lords and the King
himself had moved the House of Commons to declare against them. The truth is,
they were favored and countenanced under hand, by some Members of that House.

The King to avoid the danger of these tumults, withdraws from Whitehall to
Windsor; from thence afterward to Newmarket, and so by Cambridge into the
Northern parts; and thence to York.

The Parliament soon after his removal from Whitehall, petition Him, at
Newmarket, and elsewhere, for the Militia, to have it put into such hands as
the two Houses shall think fit; but he denies them: telling them that the Law
has settled it in Him; that to divest Himself of the power of the Sword, is to
bereave Himself of power to protect his people, and support the Laws. This
Petition was much insisted on by the Parliament under pretense of fears and
jealousies; but the King absolutely and p^remptorily denies it.

The King by several journeys comes to York, in the beginning of the year 1642,
and there he settles His Court. Soon after his coming ^^to those parts, he was
denied entrance into Hull by Sir John Hotham, when he offered to go into the
Town but with twenty persons attending Him; The King thereupon fearing, lest
the same armed force that kept Him out of Hull, might surprise His Person at
York, he entertaines a guard of the Gentry of that County. This by the house of
Commons is Voted a levying of War against the Parliament, though they
themselves had long before, three times as many of the Trainedbands of the
City, to guard the houses daily.

Many Petitions, Answers, and Declarations, passed between the King and
Parliament, during his Majesty's being at York, wherein it is evident to all
understanding men, that the King had the better cause, and was more able to
maintain it by the pen, and by reasons and arguments, than the Parliament was;
for the truth is, his Declarations, and Answers to their Messages, Petitions,
and Propositions were unanswerable.

But words and writings not being sufficient to compose these differences, they
proceed from words to blows: About July, they Vote that the King is seduced by
evil and Malignant Counselors, and thereupon they Vote an Army to be raised
under the Command of Robert Earl of Essex; the pretense is for King and
Parliament, against these Malignant Counselors; but they accuse or name none
in particular.

The same year, Aug. 24. the King sets up his Standard at Nottingham,
commanding all men who were bound to assist him by virtue of their Tenures, to
repair unto him. ^643
But at Nottingham there being no great appearance (though Essex his Army was
at that time listed, and formed ready to march) his Majesty marches with those
few Forces he had to Leicester, Worcester, Shrewsbury, and so upon the borders
of Wales, gathering an Army; Essex all this time marching after him, and
pursuing him.

After some little conflict at Worcester, wherein the Kings Forces under the
conduct of Prince Rupert, and Maurice had the better, the two Armies meet at
Edgehill near Keynton in Warwickshire, where the first Signal Battle was
fought between them, with great loss and slaughter on either side: The Kings
standard being taken, yet recovered again; his General the Earl of Lindsey
slain; but the King had the better, keeping the field all night; and Essex
Retreating with his broken Forces to Warwick-Castle, and from thence soon after
with a few horses to London: This Battle was fought on Sunday October. 23. and
the Guns were heard all that afternoon to Thetford in Norfolk.

The King presently after enters Oxford, and fortifies it, and marches to
Reading and Windsor, and so toward London; The Citizens arming and sending
forth all the power they could make against him. At Branford he encountered them
about Novem. 12. and beat the party that opposed; but fearing least he should
be surrounded with their numerous Army of Citizens, he Retreated back to
Windsor, and. Fortifying Reading, he marches back to Oxford; but about the
latter end of the year Reading is besieged by the Parliaments Forces, and the
Governor Sir Arthur Ashton being unhappily wounded with a brick falling from a
Chimney beaten down by a Canonshot, the Garrison is yielded upon composition by
Colonel Fielding.

Anno 1643. The Kings Forces prevail in the West, 1643
under the Command of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Richard Grenvile and others,
beating out the Earl of Stamford who commanded there for the Parliament. The
Earl of Newcastle for the King grows very strong in the North, beats the Lord
Fairfax in several Encounters, and takes in all places of strength, except
Hull, into which the Lord Fairfax had fled. The Queen lands at Bridlington with
arms and ammunition out of Holland; she marches by Nottingham, and so to
Oxford: The King the mean time takes Bristol; thence he removes and summons
Gloucester, which refusing to yield, he sets down before it. The terror of
Newcastles Army affrights Norfolk, and the Associated Counties, in so much as
many of the Parliament side are preparing to fly beyond sea for their
security. But the King setting down before Gloucester, and Newcastle before
Hull, wasted their Armies, and trifled away their time; whereas had they joined
and marched directly up to London, all had lain prostrate at their feet. The
King lay so long before Gloucester, that Essex had raised a great Army for the
relief thereof, which Army appoaching, the King arose and marched off; Essex
relieves the City, and pursues him; they encounter at Newbury, where the King
was worsted, and lost many gallant men. Newcastle in the mean time lay before
Hull, till the Earl of Manchester, besieges and takes Lyn in Norfolk, until
Lincoln and many other places were reduced to the Parliament, with much loss to
the Kings party.

The same year the Parliament treats with the Scots for their assistance
against the King, and the better to engage them, they impose the Covenant
(framed in Scotland) upon the whole Nation, for putting down of Bishops,
changing the whole Frame of Church Government in England, and Ireland with
Doctrine, Discipline, and worship to that or Scotland; the Scots accordingly
come in with an Army of 20000. or thereabouts, in winter they besiege Newcastle
upon Tyne, and at length take it. Mean time the Forces of the Association
besiege Newark upon Trent a Garrison of the Kings, and much straiten it; Sir
John Meldrum, Sir Miles Hobart, and Sir John Palgrave commanding the forces
against it. But in their march, toward the latter end of the year, when they
every day expected the surrendering of the Town, Prince Rupert comes suddenly
upon them with a party of Horse (his body of foot being three or four miles
behind) assaults and surprises the Besiegers, disarms them all, and so relieves
the Town. Many of the Soldiers, and some Commanders were plundered and stripped,
contrary to Articles, for which the Kings party were afterward served in the
like kind.

Anno 1644. The Earl of Essex, 1644.
and Sir William Waller were sent forth with two Armies, to pursue and take the
King. The King fortifies Oxford, and lodging the rest of his Artillery in
Dennington Castle, with a light Army he takes the field; Essex goes toward the
West then mostly in the Kings possession; Waller understanding which way the
King was marched, pursued him. At Cropdie Bridge in Oxfordshire, a place of
advantage, he sets upon the Kings Forces, but is himself beaten and routed;
this was about the latter end of June.

Waller being thus defeated, the King follows Essex into the West, drives him
by degrees as far as Lestithrell in Cornwell, and there coops him up. Essex
takes the Sea in a Boat, and leaves this Army to capitulate for themselves.
The Horse under the Command of Sir William Balfore, break through the Kings
Quarters, and get away; the Foot commanded by Skippon capitulate for their
lives, leaving their Arms, Ordnance, and Ammunition upon the place, September. 4.
and taking an Oath not to serve any more against the King, which nevertheless
many of them presently after broke. The King after this hard service, marches
back with his Army leasurely, and at Newbury, is assaulted by the broken Troops
of Essex his Army, assisted by Manchester and Cromwell, commanding the Forces
of the Association. A sore fight there was in the night, with much loss to both
parties: The King gains the Town, and the next day, or the day after, takes his
Ordnance, and Ammunition from Dennington Castle in the sight of the Enemy,
without opposition, and so marches with them to Oxford. This Summers service
lost the credit of Essex, Manchester, and Waller, they were never employed
after.

But in the mean time, while Essex and Waller were thus employed against the
King, the Scots with the assistance of the Associated Counties, and other of
the Parliaments Forces, had so far prevailed against the Earl of Newcastle and
his Army, as they had besieged him in York for many months: Prince Rupert with
a great Army out of Lancashire and the parts adj^cent, to his relief: Upon the
Prince his approach, the Be^^egers rise in disorder, and are ready to break and
run. The Prince thought it not enough to relieve the City, but would also beat
the besiegers, and setting upon them, July 14. they Rally and beat him; a great
slaughter there was, not less than seven thousand slain of both parts, but
most (they say) of the Princes party. The Earl of Newcastle, in discontent at
the Prince his rashness, quits the place and all his Command, and with some
others of note, leaves the Kingdom. York soon after is again besieged, and Sir
Thomas Glenham undertakes the defense of the place, but at length was forced to
yield upon honorable terms.

Anno 1645. 1645.
The beginning of the year the Parliament new moulds their Army. By a
self-denying Ordinance (as they termed it) they cast out Essex, Manchester, and
Waller, and all others that were Parliament Members, both Lords and Commons,
only Oliver Cromwell one of the Burgesses for Cambridge is dispensed with. Sir
Thomas Fairfax is made Captain General, Cromwell his Lieutenant General;
Skippon also has a great command amongst them, and many of Cromwels kindred
and Relations have great employment and commands in this new modelled Army,
most of Essex his Officers being laid aside.

In May the King marches out of Oxford with a very good Army, and takes.
Leicester by assault, about the latter end of the month, having then also a
very considerable Army in the West, about 15000. (as was reported) under the
command of Goring, who at that time besieged Taunton.

After the taking of Leicester, the King was requested by Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, and the Northern Gentlemen to march Northward for the Relief of
Pomfret Castle then straightened by the enemy: But receiving intelligence that
Fairfax intended to besiege Oxford, he marches against him, hoping if he could
defeat their new modeled Army, all other places and forces would easily be
reduced. At Naseby in Northamptonshire the two Armies meet on Saturday, June
14. where at the first encounter the King had much the better, his Right Wing
of horsemen Defeating and Routing the Left Wing of the Parliaments Army,
wounding Skippon, and taking Ireton ( Cromwels son in law) prisoner. But the
Left Wing of the Kings Army, consisting most of Northern Horsemen (and they
discontented) at the first Encounter were broken, turned head and ran; the King
did what possibly could be, riding up and down the field to stay their flight,
and Rally them, but all would not do; and the Right Wing of Horse were so far
engaged in the pursuit, as they could not timely and orderly Retreat to succor
the Foot. The Horse being thus routed and defeated, the Foot were not able to
stand; but after some little resistance and slaughter, yielded themselves
prisoners, four or five thousand of them. The Kings Coach, and in it his
Cabinet, with Letters and Papers taken; all Arms, Artillery, Bag and Baggage
lost; the King himself hardly escaping to Leicester, and from thence that night
to Ashby de la Zouch.

This was the fatal battle of Naseby: for after this, the Kings affairs never
prospered, but Town after Town was taken, and in all encounters the Kings party
was worsted, all the West parts by degrees taken in that Summer, and the Queen
and Prince forced to fly beyond sea.

Anno 1646. Oxford the Kings chiefest Garrison was besieged, 1646.
and much straightened. About Ascension time, the King in a disguise got out of
the City, came as far as Downham in Norfolk, and from thence went to the Scots
Camp, lying ^n siege before Newark, and to them his native Subjects he yields
himself, hoping by their means to make some better terms with the Parliament.
They used him civilly and respectively, gave notice to the Parliament of his
yielding himself to them (having made use of his Authority for the present
surrendering of of Newark) and from thence carried him to N^wcastle, a Garrison
then in their possession, where he remained all that year, and from thence gave
Order to several other Garrisons, as yet holding out for him, to surrender to
the Parliaments Forces upon honorable terms.

At Newcastle he remained all that summer, and afterward upon Treaty between
the Parliament and Scots Commissioners, the Parliament paying them 200000. l.
in hand, and securing as much more to be paid. And promising (as the Scots
affirm) to treat the King honorably, and not to do any violence to his Person;
they deliver the King up to the Parliament, and quitting Newcastle, and the
rest of the Garrisons they held in England, they departed with their Army into
Scotland.

The King from Newcastle was removed to Holdenby, 1647.
a house of his own in Northamptonshire; there he is kept an honorable
Prisoner, attended by some Commissioners of Parliament, and a slender Guard of
soldiers; none of his own servants are permitted to wait upon him, nor any of
his Chaplains or Ministers of his Opinion, though he earnestly desired it in a
Message to the Parliament; but they force upon him Presbyterian Ministers, of
the Parliaments Opinion and appointment: These would not suffer him to
celebrate the Feast of Easter, as being against their Directory of late
established.

This summer the Wars being finished, all Garrisons surrendered, and the Kings
Forces utterly subdued, and forced to compound for their estates, taking an
Oath never to bear Arms against the Parliament, they take a resolution to
disband the Army, sending some part of it into Ireland, against the Papists
still in Arms there, and only to keep 5000 Horse and Foot in England, to
preserve the peace of the Kingdom, against any risings that might happen.

The soldiers fearing the Wars would cease, and their trade decay, began to
Mutiny; first they pick quarrels against the Parliament, and at once impeach
eleven of the Members of the House of Commons, all rigid Presbyterians, as
enemies to the Army, and desire they may be secluded the House: They Act now,
not as Souidiers, but as Commonors and Freemen of the Nation, pretending to
stand for the Native Rights and Liberties of the people. And to carry on their
designs the better, the common Soldiers, who began the work, choose their
Agitators, (as they termed them) two or more out of every Regiment, to
represent their grievances to the General and chief Officers of the Army: And
in conclusion they peremptorily refuse to disband, or to send or go any of them
into Ireland, till all their grievances were redressed, and their desires
satisfied: But all this (ye must know) was underhand countenanced (if not
contrived) by Cromwell and some principal Officers of his Faction.

And because the Parliament had made themselves sufficiently odious, by keeping
the King under so strict guards, denying him the attendance of his Chaplains,
and the use of the Common prayer book, and tendering such harsh Propositions to
him, both in relation to himself and his party, that had already suffered so
much for his sake; The Soldiers to ingratiate themselves to the people,
pretended much for the King, and for his restitution to his Throne and
Government, upon fairer terms by much than the Parliament would afford him.
And suddenly by a party Commanded by one Cornet Joyce, they seize upon the King
at Holdenby, June 4. in the night, and bring him into the Armies quarters, then
about Newmarket or Cambridge. The General would not suffer him to pass through
Cambridge, lest the Scholars, more than ordinarily addicted to him, should
make any disturbance, but brought him a more private way to his own house at
Newmarket. There he rested somewhile, and the Gentry and people of all sorts
equitable dealing (as supposing their cases had been ours) and a spirit of
common love and justice, diffusing it self to the good and preservation of all,
will make up the most glorious conquest over their hearts (if God in mercy see
it good) to make them and the whole people of the Land lasting friends. These
are their very words in that Declaration; and I have noted them the rather, to
see how quite contrary to these specious professions, their after-Actings
within a short while, were.

The Army removes to several quarters, and the King along with them. They treat
him honorably, in respect of what the Parliament had done: they allow him the
attendance of his Chaplains, and the use of the Common Prayer, denied him by
the Parliament; some Noblemen and Gentlemen of his party, are permitted to come
to him. The General obtaines of the Parliament, that he may see his children,
then under the custody from several parts, had access to him, and many came and
were cured of the Kings Evil by him. The Soldiers were highly magnified by the
people, for their civility and specious pretenses to the King.

From Newmarket the Army removed to Saint Albans, and the King with them, his
Majesty being lodged at Hatfield house, there they pretended great matters for
him, and Cromwell (especially) in private gave him great hopes of his
Restitution. From thence June 23. they publish a Remonstrance of their good
intentions toward the Kingdom, and to the King especially: Amongst other
passages in that Declaration, this is one, They profess they do not see how
there can be any peace to the Kingdom firm and lasting, without a due
consideration of, and provision for the rights, quiet, and immunity of his
Majesty's Royal Family, and his late partakers: and herein (say they) we think,
that tender and of the Earl of Northumberland, upon promise of the General,
that they shall return again. Proposals are made to him by the Army, far more
moderate than the Propositions lately tendered to him at Newcastle. All things
are carried by the Army, as if they really meant his Restitution, upon very
reasonable terms. And most certain i^ is, that Cromwell gave his Majesty very
faithful promises of restoring him upon more moderate terms than either the
Parliament or Army proposed.

But ye must know, while these things were in agitation, about the later end of
July, there fell a great difference between the Parliament and Army, insomuch
as the Army were jealous that the Parliament and City would have brought the
King to London, upon his own terms. The occasion was thus:

The Militia of the City of London, had been settled by an Ordinance o^ May 4.
1647. in the hands of such of the City, as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council, had nominated and approved: The Army about the 20 of July, require of
the Parliament, that Ordinance may be repealed, and the Militia of the City
settled in other hands, such as the Army might confide in; and accordingly in a
thin house, the Militia was changed, without any Objections against the persons
formerly entrusted, or acquainting the Mayor or Common Council with it, to hear
what they could allege in their own behalf. The City startled at this sudden
and unexpect change of their Militia, calling a Common Council, they resolve to
petition the Parliament for restoring their Militia, as formerly settled, in a
full house, and accordingly July 26. the Sheriffs, and some Common Council men,
present their Petition; which Petition the same day within a few hours after,
was seconded by another of the Apprentices, to the same effect, and wherein
they claimed that the ordering of the Cities Militia, was the Birthright of
the City, belonging to them by several Charters confirmed by Parliament, and
about one thousand Apprentices, (yet without any arms) came down with this
Petition.

The House of Lords upon presenting these Petitions, were pleased to grant
their desires, revoking the Ordinance of the 23 of July, and reviving that of
the fourth of May. The debate stuck longer in the House of Commons, but about
three of the clock in the Afternoon, they passed it; The Apprentices staying in
and about Westminster Hall and the Parliament door, till the Vote was passed;
and then all or the most part withdrew and went to their homes.

The Apprentices being departed, some disorderly persons instigated thereunto
(as was probably thought) by diverse Sectaries and Adherents to the Army, to
make the business more odious, and to give the Army occasion to quarrel with
the City, flocked again to the Parliament door; and the Speaker having
adjourned the House, the chair, and there kept both him they compelled him
again to return to the Members in the House, till they had passed a Vote, that
the King should come to London to treat.

The Mayor and Common Council still assembled, hearing of this disorder, sent
down the Sheriffs immediately with such strength as they could for the present
get, and pacified the tumult, sending the Speaker safe to his house; and
published Edicts to prevent the like. This tumult happened July 26. being
Monday.

The House met again next day, being Tuesday, sat again, and Acted quietly;
and because the Fast was the next day after, they adjourned the House till the
Friday following, the Lords having formerly adjourned to that day.

On the Thursday following, the day before they were to meet upon the
adjournment, the Speaker with about forty of the Members, secretly withdrew to
the Army then at Windsor, complaining of an horrid force put upon the House.
The rest of the Members, at least 140, meeting on the Friday morning according
to adjournment, finding neither Speaker, nor Mace, and understanding upon
inquiry, whither he was gone, they chose a New Speaker, and get another Mace,
and set again; and the like did the Lords, whose Speaker also was fled upon
the same account: both (as it was conceived) either inveigled, or threatened by
the Army, that they might have the better pretense of quarrel against the City
and Parliament. I have related this passage the more particularly, that it may
be compared with the force afterward put upon the Parliament, by the Army
themselves, upon the King Trial.

These things thus passed at London between the Parliament and City, highly
incensed the Army, who now take upon them, to be Supreme Umpires over the
Nation; they entertain and countenance the fugitive Speakers and Members, and
they and the Council of the Army, set together in consultation, engaging to
support one another in this quarrel against the members (as they termed them)
at Westminister, and the City.

Mean time the Parliament call in the eleven impeached Members, secluded
hitherto upon the Armies accusation; they revive the Committee of Safety, they
give power to the City by several Orders and Ordinances, to list and raise
Forces to appoint Officers and Commanders, to issue out Arms and Ammunition,
for the defense of the Parliament and City, against all that should invade
them. Mass^y, Pointze, Birch, and other reformadoes that had formerly done
great service for the Parliament when Essex was General, are now employed as
chief Commanders for the City. The Army on the contrary drawing together all
their Forces, and endeavoring to raise the Trained bands in the adjacent
Counties, prepare and intend to invade and subdue that Rebellious City.

The City thus prepared for defense, were nevertheless, for preventing the
effusion of blood, willing to have accorded with the Army upon any reasonable
terms; and to that purpose sent several messages to the Army; but all would not
do, no terms of reconciliation or peace would be granted, unless they would
submit themselves, and the Parliament, wholly to the power of the Army; which
upon the point they did; for in conclusion they agree and yield, To desert both
Houses of Parliament and the impeached Members: To recall their Declaration
lately published, Relinquish their Militia, deliver up all their Forts and line
of Communication to the Army, as also the Tower of London, with all Arms and
Ammunition therein; to disband all their Forces, and turn all their new-made
Commanders and Reformadoes out of the line, to demolish all their works, and to
suffer the Army to march without opposition through the City.

These imperious conditions of the Army, were calmly submitted to by the
tame-spirited Citizens: And thereupon, the Army brings in the fugitive Speakers
and Members, and seat them again in their authority; Fairfax receives the
solemn thanks of the House, the common soldiers two months pay for their good
service and valor, and a day of Thanksgiving is appointed, to be solemnly kept
for this great deliverance: and Fairfax made General of all Forces, both in
England and Wales, and Constable of the Tower of London: All this was done,
Aug. 6. 1647.

Soon after the General, Lieutenant General, and the whole Army, with their
train of Artillery, march in triumph through the City of London; And from that
day forward, both City, Parliament, and whole Kingdom, are subject to the Army.

Not long after the restitution of these fugitive Members, all Votes, Orders,
and Ordinances of Parliament, made in their absence, are declared null and
void: The eleven impeached Members of the House of Commons, have leave granted
them to go beyond Sea, and they must think they are favorably dealt with:
Seven Lords that sat in the upper House, in the absence of the fugitive
Members, viz. The Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, and Midlesex; the Lords Berkly,
Willoughby, Hunsdon, and Maynard, are impeached of high Treason, and committed
to the black Rod, for levying of War against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom.
The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and diverse Citizens, are likewise impeached of the
same crime, and committed to the Tower; diverse members also of the Commons
House, are under accusation and examination, as countenancers and abettors of
the late tumult. But all these impeachments and accusations, in time vanished,
and came to nothing; only the Army Faction was by this means strengthened and
encouraged, and the other party as much quelled and discouraged; so that
thenceforward all Votes propounded, were passed or not, according to the temper
and disposition of the Army. The Parliament became wholly subservient to the
Armies designs, as will plainly appear in the ensuing Story.

Meantime the King continues still under the power of the Army, removes and
passes from place to place as they remove their Quarters: But now having made
the Parliament wholly for their turn, he is removed nearer London, to Hampton
Court: there he had much freedom, and abundance of people continually resorted
to him. At Hampton Court he receives Propositions from the Parliament, Septem.
7. the same in effect that were tendered to him at Newcastle, in July the year
before. The King in answer, desires that the Parliament would take into
consideration the Proposals of the Army, of August 1. 1647. as more moderate,
and more conducing to satisfy all interests in the Nation.

Things thus standing, and the King remaining still at Hampton Court, a Faction
of Seditious people called Levellers, sprung up in the City and Army; some of
the chiefest whereof were Lilburn, Overton, VVyldman, and others, people of a
turbulent and heady temper. These frame a writing, called the Agreement of the
people, tending to the alteration of the whole frame of Government of the
Nation. They style the House of Commons in their Petitions, the Supreme power
of the Nation; they bitterly declaim and rail against the House of Lords in
several Pamphlets. These at first receive some check from the House of Commons;
and one of them (a soldier) is by the Council of War, condemned and shot to
death at VVare: but yet they increase more and more, and grow more in^o^^nt
every day, being (as is w^^ probably thought) countenan^^^ underhand by some in
the Parliament, and by some great Officers in the Army, to promo^^ their own
ambitio^s ^e^^gns. At length about November. 9. or 10. Cromwell sends word to the
King by Colonel Whaley who had the Guard or him, that those kind of people
were grown very numerous in the Army, that he feared they had some malicious
design against his Majesty's person, and he doubted it would not be in the
power of the Officers of the Army to protect him, and therefore advised him, by
timely withdrawing himself in private, to provide for his own security; A
Letter of Advertisement also from an unknown person in London to the same
purpose, was sent and delivered to his Majesty, intimating his danger, and
wishing his Majesty were at his or any Loyal Subjects House in London:
Whereupon the next day in the Evening, November. 11. his Majesty with a Servant
or two only, conveyed himself secretly from Hampton Court, into the Isle of
Wight.

In that Island commanded one Colonel Hamond, as Governor there for the
Parliament; a kinsman he was of Dr. Hamonds, that famous Divine, and (I think)
the Kings Chaplain; insomuch as the King might expect some more then ordinary
civility from him. Hamond presently gives notice to the Parliament of his
Majesty's coming thither, and upon order from the Parliament, takes him into
custody at Curesbrook Castle.

The King also upon his departure from Hampton Court, had left upon the Table a
Letter or Message to the two Houses of Parliament, signifying the cause of his
withdrawing himself, and also his readiness to concur with them in all things
just and reasonable, for the settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace. And
had further soon after his arrival in the Isle of Wight sent another Message or
Declaration to them, wherein he offers, First, Concerning Religion to establish
the Presbyterian Government for three years, and then afterward to establish
Church Government in such a manner as shall be concluded upon by the ^ssembly
of Divines, with the addition of twenty Divines to be nominated by his Majesty.
Secondly, For the Militia he offers a them wholly by Land and Sea, during his
whole Reign, so as after that, it man return entirely to the Crown. Thirdly,
For the arrears of the Army, he will undertake, if he may have the benefit of
Sequestrations from March last, and compositions to be made before the
conclusion of the Peace, and the Assistance of the Clergy, and the arreares of
the Rents of his own revenew, that were yet behind; to pay 400 thousand pound
within eighteen months; and if that will not do, then to make sale of forest
Lands for raising the rest. Fourthly, He gives them power to dispose of the
great Offices ^f State, as also to nominate and appoint his Privy Counselors
during his reign. Fifthly, For the Court of Wards, if it cannot be regulated
without being a grievance to his Subjects, he is willing to abolish it, for a
valuable compensation. Sixthly, He offers to recall and null all Proclamations
and Declarations against the Parliament, and all Indictments against any person
for adhering to them, or acting by their authority; and to pass an Act of
general pardon and Oblivion to all his Subjects whatsoever.

Those and some other things he offers by that Message of November. 17. and for
all other things, he desires they may be debated and composed in a personal
Treaty, between himself and the two Houses of Parliament at London: Which
personal Treaty the Scots Commissioners soon after desired to be assented to,
and held forth his Majesty's offers to be very just and reasonable.

But to this Message of his Majesty the two Houses return answer, by sending
him four Bills to sign and confirm under the great Seal of England. 1. To
settle the Militia by sea and land, both in England and Ireland, in the two
Houses of Parliament for ever; with power to raise what Forces they please; as
also what moneys they thought good, upon the Subjects, for support thereof,
thereby divesting the Court wholly of the power of the Militia. 2. To justify
the proceedings of the Parliament in the late War, and to make void all Oaths,
Declarations, Proclamations, and other proceedings against the Parliament. 3.
Against all Peers lately made or to be made without consent of both Houses of
Parliament. 4. For the adjournment of the Parliament from place to place, as
the two houses should think fit. These Bills being assented to, and confirmed
by his Majesty, they will yield to treat with him concerning the rest of the
propositions i^ the Isle of Wight. Which propositions I must further tell you,
were such as the Scotch Commissioners declared their dissent upon them, before
they were sent.

The King apprehending these four Bills especially in the way they were penned,
not only destructive to Monarchy, but to the peoples liberty, refuses to
confirm them; yet in a message or writing to the Houses, gave his reasons
against them.

Whereupon the House of Commons presently Vote to make no more addresses to
him, but to settle the Kingdom without him: and further by the same Vote, they
make it high Treason, for any person whatsoever, to send any Message or Letter
to him, or to receive any from him, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament. This was about the beginning of January.

The House of Lords would not be drawn suddenly to pass these Votes; diverse
argued strongly against them; and the House was equally divided about the
question; but within three or four days after, the Army sending solemn thanks
to the House of Commons for their passing these Votes, and drawing down some of
their Forces to garrison Whi^e^all and the Mewes, it turned the Scale in the
House of Lords, and they also passed those Votes.

Soon after the passing of these votes of Non-address, discontents grew high in
all parts of the Kingdom; And the common people especially in the parts about
London, were wonderfully oppressed, and even eaten up with Freequarter. The
Commissioners of Scotland withdrew and went home, and with the assistance of
Duke Hamilton, formerly imprisoned by the King, and lately set free by the
Parliament, called a Parliament in Scotland, wherein they resolve ( Maugre the
Kirk) to raise an Army for the delivery of the King.

The beginning of this year 1648, 1648.
was full of discontents. The Welchmen were the first that appear in Arms under
the Command of Poyer Ponel, and Laugherne, formerly for the Parliament, holding
out Pembroak Castle against the Parliament, and defeating a party of 2500 that
were sent against them. The Lord Inchequen, that was President of Munster in
Ireland, declares against the Parliament, and joins with the Marquess of Ormond
for the Kings interest; for which the Parliament imprison his son, a child of
eight or nine years of age, that was Borded and went to School at Thistleworth
near London. Petitions came from many Counties of England, and from the City of
London, requiring a Revocation of those Votes for Non-address, and desiring a
Personal Treaty with the King, and his future settlement.

These Petitions being slighted, and many Surrey Gentlemen wounded by the
Soldiers, at the Parliament door, and in Westminster Hall, and some slain
outright for presenting their Petition, the Kingdom grew into a general flame.
Tumults arose in many places, as at Norwich, April 24. where the
Committee-House was by accident blown up, that part of the City exceedingly
shatte ed, and above 100. people slain. At Bury in Suffolk, where the Town was
held out some days by the meaner sort of people, against the Troopers. In
Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire, and other places, so that the Troopers were
posted from place to place to subdue tumults; and as fast as they subdued them
in one place, they brake out in another.

The Kentishmen rise up in arms, to the number of ten thousand, and possess
themselves of some strong Castles; They in Essex also, under the command of Sir
Charles Lucas and others, second them, and seize upon the Committee for the
County at Chelmesford. Pomfret Castle is taken by stratagem, and a great party
of the Kings possess it, and command the whole Country round about. Many (if
not most part) of the Navy revolt, and setting Raynsborough their late made
Admiral on shore in a Cockboat, they go to the Prince; with whom also joined
the Lord Willoughby of Parham and others, so as the Prince had a matter of
thirty or forty ships, one and other under his command at Sea. The Scots under
D. ^amilton, invade the North, by the way of Carlisle, with an Army of fifteen
thousand, besides a party of English (about 3000) under the command of Sir
Marmaduke Langdale.

All this time the Parliament are consulting about Propositions to be sent to
the King, as also of the place and manner of a personal treaty with him, which
was desired by the Londoners and most of the Kingdom to be had at London. Thus
the time was spun on, and the Summer well-nigh spent, before they could agree
upon terms for a personal treaty; and at length it was resolved to be in the
Isle of Wight.

In the mean time, while the Parliament thus defer the Treaty, Cromwell is
first sent into Wales, to subdue them; where he found work enough for most part
of the Summer: Fairfax is sent against the Kentishmen, where though he were
worsted at Rochester Bridge, and lost many men, yet at Maidston he had the
better, got the Town, and dispersed them. Presently after five thousand of the
Kentishmen, under the command of the Lord Goring Earl of Norwich, being denied
passage through London, transport themselves over the Thames, and so into
Essex, where after some skirmish about Bowbridge, with some of the Parliament
Forces, they march to Rumford, and so to Chelmesford, and join with the
Essexmen at that time there Rendezvouz'd. Fairfax pursues them with all
expedition; they march to Colchester, but were scarce set down in the Town,
before Fairfax with his Army was at their heels. A sore fight there was in the
Suburbs, June 13. the next day after their coming into the Town, a thousand men
and more slain upon the place, most of them of Fairfax his party. Had they of
Colchester pursued that days victory, it is probably thought, they might
easily have destroyed Fairfax his Army. The Kings Party fortify the Town,
hoping the Gentry of Suffolk and Norfolk will come in to their assistance:
Fairfax on the contrary, by degrees begirts the Town, forcing all the Country
thereabout both Essex and Suffolk to assist him against it.

During the siege of Colchester, the Duke of Buckingham with Lord Francis his
brother, the Earl of Holland, and the Earl of Peterborough, appear in Arms
with five or six hundred Horse at Bamsted Down in Surrey or thereabouts; where
they would soon have increased, had they not been suddenly surprised by a party
of the Army out of London; the Lord Francis was slain, and the rest scattered;
Buckingham escaped, but Holland was soon after taken at St. Neots in
Huntingtonshire, cowardly yielding himself without resistance.

The Scots mean time lingered and came on slowly, insomuch as Cromwell having
subdued them in Wales, he marches immediately from thence into Lancashire, and
at Wiggon and Preston defeats them, taking Duke Hamilton prisoner, basely
yielding himself in his Chamber, Aug. 18, 19. From thence he pursues his
victory into Scotland, even to the City of Edinburgh, where he is highly
applauded and magnified by Argile and the Churchmen, who were always against
this engagement of Hamilton.

Colchester after this, pressed with a long siege, and pinched with hunger, at
last yields to Fairfax upon very hard terms, Aug. 28. where the very same day
that they entered the Town, they caused Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle
(too gallant men as ever England bred) to be shot to death in the Castle Yard:
All the rest of the Nobility and Gentlemen of quality, were carried away
Prisoners.

The Treaty with the King is at length begun: a fixed number of days are at
first appointed; that expired, a fortnight more is added, so that upon the
finishing of the treaty, a little before all was concluded, Cromwell returns
with his victorious Army out of Scotland. The Army fearing the Parliament would
agree with the King, and re-establish him in his Throne (though the conditions
were extreme hard on his side) they first publish that shameless vile
Remonstrance at Saint Albans, November. 16. 1648. wherein they declare their
resolutions to question the King for his life, as the Capital Enemy, or grand
Delinquent, to bring him to trial. They prefix a time for the appearing of the
Prince now beyond Sea, to answer for his crimes; and in case he refuse to come
in and submit to a trial, to banish his person as a Rebel and Traitor, and
confiscate his estate.

This Remonstrance was sent to the House of Commons, with a Letter signed by
Fairfax the General, (whom Cromwell abused and made his Stale in all this
action) to take it speedily into consideration, as a matter admitting no delay:
But the Commons laying it aside, and making the more speed to conclude with the
King upon the Treaty, voting his concessions satisfactory, so far as to be
ground of peace; Suddenly on Tuesday, December. 5. A Party of the Army seize
upon the Members of the House, whom they conceive to be opposite to their
design; They imprison many, and seclude and deter more, in all to the number
of above two hundred, leaving about sixty or seventy (if that) in the House,
and those either Army men, or devoted vassals to Cromwell and his faction; these
vote the Kings concessions not satisfactory, and thereupon break off the Treaty.

The Army then presently seize upon the King in the Isle of Wight, they remove
him in the night from Caresbrow Castle to Hurst Castle in Hampshire, an
unwholesom place, standing two or three mile into the sea, upon a very narrow
neck of Land: there they closely imprison him, and soon after obtain a Vote in
their new modeled House of Commons, to bring him to trial. The Lords refusing
to consent, they proceed without them, and draw up an impeachment against his
Majesty, by the advice of one Dorisley, an outlandish Doctor of Law, and that
many years before, had been History-Reader in Cambridge, preferred thither by
the Lord Brooks, to read that Lecture by him first founded, but soon after
silenced and put out by the Vice Chancellor and Head of the University, for
seditious Doctrine by him there delivered, against Monarchy.

For the Kings Trial, they a^point seventy or eighty Persons the most of them
Army-men (all o^ them his mortal enemies) to be hi^ Judges: the Judges of the
Land and most eminent Lawyers refusing to join with them, or assist them, they
appoint one Bradshaw a poor petty-fogging Lawyer, but of an audacious, impudent
forehead, to be President of their high Court of Justice, so they call it,
(more properly their Court of high injustice.) The King is brought from Hurst
Castle to Windsor, about Christmas, where they would not allow him a Minister
to keep the Festival with him. From thence they bring him to White Hall and
Saint James about the tenth of January by water. And there afterward, being
brought four several times before their pretended Court of Justice, where he
every time refusing to answer, and disclaiming their authority, offering to
give his reasons, but they refusing to hear him, at last Saturday January 27.
he is condemned to the block, and his head cut off on a Scaffold erected before
his Palace gate at White Hall, on Tuesday following, January 30. to the
unexpressable grief and sorrow of all true English People. And thus perished
the best, the wisest and the most Religious King that ever England had.

The House of Lords that had basely complied with the Commons, and supported
them from the beginning hitherto against their King, because they would not go
along with them in this last most wicked act, are kicked off by a Vote. The very
same day that they voted the abolition of Regal Government, February 7. 1648.
they voted down the House of Peers, as useless, inconvenient, and an hinderance
to the proceedings of Parliament, a just reward for so ignoble, degenerous
spirits.

And because great Personages, li^^ great Trees in a Forest, seldom (...)
alone, to complete the Tragedy, wit, in a few weeks after, they impea^^ Duke
Hamilton General of the Sco^tish Army, and the Earl of Hollan^ as also the Lord
Capel, and Lord G^^ring taken in Colchester, and some others. None of these
feared to b^ questioned for their lives till now, for they yielding, had
quarter given them. But an high Court of Justice mus^ not be set up for the
King alone; They mean to go the same way to work with others: the Law taking no
hold of them, they will make a Law that shall; and therefore the like Court is
erected again, for the trial of these Lords and others; though the same
President sat not, yet others did, that had the same power.

All that were accused, were condemned, but Goring being a Gentleman of no
great fortune, and never before engaged against them, found mercy at their
hands; Capels great estate drove on his ruin. Hamilton and Holland are
observed to have suffered deservedly, because they had played on both parts,
sometimes for the King, and otherwhiles against him, as affairs changed: The
poor spiritness of the rest is observed, in cowardly submitting to their
pretended authority; only the stout Lord Capel (so Lilburn calls him) would not
in the least buckle to acknowledge them a lawful judicatory, but after the
example of his Royal Master, denied their Anthority, and when he came to suffer
(which he and the other did, March 9.) he took his death with a most resolute
and undaunted courage, not only to the admiration of all men, but even to the
very terror of his enemies; they that neither loved him nor his cause, yet
highly commended him for his courage and magnanimity, and as much despised
Hamilton for his timorous baseness, using all means possible to save his life;
but all wou^^ not do; much confidence he repos^ in Hugh Peter's, that Clergy
Mountebank, who at last betrayed him, as himself had formerly betrayed the King.

After the King was thus put to death, and the Government changed into a
Commonwealth, a new Sea^ and new Coin being made, this Piece of the Parliament
that put the King to death, governed the Nation till April 20. 1653. what time
they were thrown out forcibly by Cromwell, (being then their General) and his
Army Officers, to the great content and rejoicing of the People.

But in the mean time presentiy after the death of the King, the Scots
proclaimed the Prince, King of Scotland, by the Name of Charles the second.

Ireland was almost all revolted soon after the death of the King; 1649.
only the City of Dublin held out for the Parliament: But Cromwell going over
thither about September 1649. in less then a years time reduces that whole
Kingdom to the obedience of the Parliament, driving the Natives for the most
part out, and cooping up the rest in the Western parts of the Kingdom.

Scotland having (as is said before) proclaimed the Prince King; they received
him into that Kingdom and crowned him at Scone the first of January 1649. 1650.
whereupon the Parliament having reduced Ireland, they resolve to send an Army
into Scotland about June 1650. Fairfax upon this lays down his Commission, and
Cromw ll is made Captain General in his stead; He marches into Scotland with a
great Army, where he lay a long time before he could engage the Scots to fight;
insomuch as the English were in great distress for provisions, and had been
famished or forced to return long before, had they not encamped near the sea,
and had the sea free and open to them. At length the Scots set upon them at
Dunbar, but were defeated and routed; at least 10000. of them slain and taken
upon the place; all of the Presbyterian party, and such as had formerly engaged
in England for the Parliament against the King: An hundred Ensigns at least are
taken, brought up to London, and hung up in triumph in Westminster Hall: and
which is remarkable, great numbers of those Soldiers, that at their coming
into England in 1643. had heathenishly profaned the Cathedral Church of
Durham, were now brought prisoners, and lodged i^ the very same Church, shut up
together, and fed like swine, with root^ and other trash, so that with hunger
and cold, and stench, lying there a long time, most of them perished; some of
them acknowledging the just han^ of God for their sacrilegious proph^ness
committed in that place: this is a certain truth, reported by credible persons
living near and in that City: And thus our Brethren the Scots were in part paid
for their brotherly assistance.

But Cromwell has not yet done with them; he stays still after the battle of
Dunbar, and pursues his victory: he presently takes Leith and Edinburgh, and
afterward that strong and impregnable Castle, called by the Scots the Maiden
Castle, because never before conquered: Nor can I say it was now conquered by
Cromwell: He took it not by ^ssault, nor yet by hunger, but as is credibly
reported, surrendered by the treachery or cowardice of the Lord (...) that
commanded there in chief.

This Cast e being taken, Cromwell enlarges his conquest all over the South of
Scotland, from Leith and Dunbar on the East, to Glasco and Air in the West,
without any great resistance. But the City and Castle of Sterling held out for
the King, together with the Fife, (the fertilest part of the Kingdom) and all
the North of Scotland, from Endinburgh Frith Northward: the Scots being now
grown so wise, after their beating at Dunbar* as to take and call in to their
assistance all the Kings party, both Scots and English, whom formerly they
rejected under the notion of Malignants and Cavaleers, putting the Earl of
Montross most barbarously to death, who landed in Scotland a little before the
Kings coming thither, and whom if they had entertained, might possibly by the
blessing of God, have prevented their being beaten at Dunbar, being a man of
extraordinary experience, conduct and courage in war, exceedingly beloved of
all the Royallists in Scotland, and one that had formerly with an handful of
men, done incomparable service for the King. But the Presbyterian Scots were as
bitter against the Kings party, as they were against Cromwell and his army, and
would have the glory wholly to themselves and their Covenant, in restoring the
King: that thereby they might the better advance their Covenant, and carry on
their pretended work of reformation both in Scotland and England.

Cromwell and his Army lay long in Scotland, after Dunbar fight, 1651.
and did little, not able to advance any further. At length toward the latter
end of July, he gets over Edenburg Frith, and lands his Army or a considerable
part of them in the Fife, with a great loss and defeat to the Scots, who
resisted: The King soon after quits Sterling, and suddenly marches away in the
beginning o^ August, with an Army of about eleven thousand horse and foot into
England, by the way of Lancashire; and forcing his way at Warrington bridge,
against a party that opposed, he comes by easy marches without resistance to
Worcester ( Massey being with him) hoping the Presbyterians in those parts, and
about Gloucester, would generally have risen, and joined with the Scots.

The Parliament upon the first intelligence of his entrance into England, arm
all that possibly they can against him, publishing a Proclamation against him
and all his adherents as Rebels and Traitors, and forbidding all men upon pain
of high Treason to join with him, or to aid or assist him in the least. Cromwell
also pursues him out of Scotland, with as great a part of his Army as he could
well spare; at Worcester all forces assembled against him, meet; there they
fought, and the Kings party in conclusion is beaten; the Scots (they say) many
of them, refusing to fight at all. The King in a disguize very hardly escapes;
yet it pleased God, that at last he got safely out of England, many of the
Scottish Nobility, and some of the English, being taken prisoners, and kept
long after in the Tower of London. This fight at Worcester happened September. 3.
1651. a remarkable day for Cromwels Victories.

Scotland after this, is with little difficulty, wholly reduced to the
obedience of the Parliament; and Garrisons maintained in several places, even to
the utmost Northern Coasts; and they who formerly would not be subject to their
King, are now enforced to submit to Cromwell and his Faction.

Afterward in Anno 1652. 1652.
the Parliament falls out with the Hollanders, many fierce and bloody battles
were fought at Sea, with great loss on both sides; in one of which, Admiral
Dean for the English, and in another, Van-Trump, for the Dutch, were slain.
The Hollanders have the worst in conclusion, so that at last they sue for peace
and obtain it.

But some while before this peace was concluded, 1653.
Cromwell being now grown great with his Victories in Ireland and Scotland,
having subdued both these Kingdoms, upon the twentieth of April 1653. he
suddenly and forcibly turns out the Parliament, who had for four years, and as
much as from January to April, since they put the King to death, with bloody
cruelty and heavy oppression, governed the Nation.

The Parliament being thus turned out, Cromwell and his Army Officers take upon
them the government of the Nation: They presently impose six Months Tax, and
erect a new Council of State, ( Bradshaw who formerly for his good service was
President, is now not so much as a Member of the Council.) Cromwell soon after
calls a Convention, of about an hundred and twenty persons, picked out by
himself, out of the several Counties of the Nation, most of them inferior
persons, and of the Independent and Anabaptistical faction. These were summoned
by particular Warrants or Tickets in paper, under his own hand only to meet at
Westminster, and consult fort settling the Nation.

Being met according to their summons, July 4. ^653* in the Commons House of
Parliament, and having chosen them a Chairman or Speaker, Cromwell comes in
amongst them, and pulls a writing out of his pocket, thereby giving them the
supreme authority of the Nation: upon this they presently vote themselves to be
a Parliament, and to requite his courtesy, they vote him to be a Member of
their Parliament.

Thus being seated in Authority, they make an Act for six Months Tax, at the
old rate of 120000 li. a Month; and another Act concerning marriages,
appointing Justices of Peace to marry, and none other marriages to be valid or
lawful: In the same Act, they ordain a Register to be kept in every Parish, in
which is to be set down all births and burials, not so much as mentioning
Baptism, as a thing in their opinion at least not necessary: thus they lessen
and diminish the use and authority of Ministers, whom they intended by degrees,
to take wholly away.

In order whereunto, they had a design to take a way Tithes; but the Ministers
of London, being called to allege what might be said in defense of them, by
their Counsel learned in the Law, and by Arguments out of Scripture, they
opposed so strongly, as that debate was laid aside for the present. But that
failing, they had another device, namely by an Act, in one day, to have
unbottomed all Ministers in England, and to have locked up the Church doors, (as
some affirmed) and then afterward, to have taken in whom they had thought good,
which may probably be conceived, should have been only such as would have
renounced their orders, if not their baptism.

Things being carried so high and in such a frantic manner, the more moderate
among them weary of the work, and fearing they should rather bring things into
further confusion, then settle any thing, they repair to Cromwell the General,
desiring him to take again into his hands his Writing or conveyance of the
supreme power; whereupon he presently dissolves them: but some of the
Anabaptists refusing to obey, and continuing still in the house at their
prayers, he sent Soldiers who pulled them out, and locked up the doors against
them December. 12. 1653.

This Schismatical Convention, called by some the little horn, being thus
timely and happily outed; Cromwell upon the sixteenth day of the same month,
having by advice of his Army Officers and Council of State, framed an
Instrument of Government, presently after printed and published, consisting of
forty two Articles (and therefore by some called his forty two string'd fidle,
by others the Magna Charta) takes upon him the Government of the three Nations,
as Supreme Magistrate, under the Title of Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland. And sending for the Commissioners of the great
Seal, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, with the Judges of Law, and the
chief Officers of his Army, (Proclamation thereof being made in London) he is
solemnly installed in Westminster Hall, taking an oath to govern according to
that Instrument and the Laws of the Land, though nothing could be more
repugnant to the Laws then that Instrument was.

According to that Instrument, 1654.
he calls a Parliament to begin September. 3. 1654. though it fell out that year
to be Sunday, accounting the day auspicious, by reason of his two great
victories upon that day, at Dunbar and Worcester. This Parliament was not to be
chosen according to the ancient manner, two in a County and two in a
Corporation, but ten, eight, six, more or less in a County, according to the
proportion of it, and the small decayed Corporations (as Thetford and Rising in
Norfolk, and the like elsewhere) were wholly left out. There were also added to
the Parliament, Thirty Members for Scotland, and as many for Ireland, chosen or
nominated from thence; so as it was a Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland; whereof as before, he had made himself Protector.

It is probable the Protector foresaw that little or nothing would be done by
this Parliament; and therefore to make sure work, he and his Council, (besides
this Ordinance for his style and Title, for the issuing o^ Writs, and for
Law-proceedings, t^ go according to that Style and Title and some others of the
like nature made in the beginning of his government immediately upon the
Change) I say besides these, before the Convening of this Parliament a very few
days, he publishes by Authority o^ himself and his Council above twenty
Ordinances (as some reckoned them,) which were observed as valid Laws; and
amongst them, one remarkable one, for the Ejecting of Ignorant, scandalous and
insufficient Ministers by any five, or more of the Commissioners therein named:
and by which in a quarter of a years time, they ejected many Ministers
(especially in Norfolk) out of their livings; scarce one of twenty that were
accused or complained of, but were ejected; And this was done (I suppose) to
gratify the Anabaptistical and Independent party, who hitherto beheld Oliver
with an evil eye, since he was Protector, looking (as they thought) too like a
King.

The Parliament convened according to appointment at Westminster, September. 3.
they presently question the Protectors Authority, though he had at their first
meeting, in a very large speech, presently after printed and published,
magnified the same, as if he had been called to the Place, by the concurrent
and universal consent of the whole Nation. It is true they consented, because
they could do no otherwise, being forced thereunto by his armed power.

To silence and suppress this question, within a few days after their sitting,
he enjoins a Recognition or acknowledgement of his power, by a particular
subscription of every one of the Members, before they were admitted to enter
the House any more: and such as would not subscribe, were forcibly secluded by
a guard of Sould^ers; but at last all or most of them subscribed.

No sooner were they set again, bu^ they fall in hand with the Instrumen^ of
Government, examining it in every particular; and the Protector suffered them
to go on without interruption. They would have been content to have made him
Protector, but they would not allow of the Instrument of Government in all
things.

Ye must know by the way, that one Article of the Government was that the
Parliament called and convened, must sit five months (if themselves think good)
and during that time, the Protector had not power to dissolve them; but
afterward at any time he might: It was further ordained, that whatsoever Acts
they made and tendered to him, if he did not consent within thirty days, or
satisfy them to the contrary, they were to be Laws valid and binding, without
him. To conclude, they spent so long time in tuning the instrument, that just
at the five months end (counting precisely twenty eight days to a month) the
Protector calls them together, tells them he thought they had been asleep,
having not of a long time heard from them; That they had sat long and done
nothing, and therefore tells them they may repair every one to his several
home. Thus they are dissolved with a kind of jeer, January 22. 1654.

But I must tell you, the Parliament would not tender him any Bill to pass,
nor receive any Laws from him, till such time as they had regulated the
Government of the Nation, and confirmed his authority upon him. The truth is,
they thought him not to have power to enact Laws, till themselves had given it
him: And therefore they would have nothing pass, till altogether were done and
finished.

After the breaking up of this Parliament, it was generally thought, w^ should
never have had any more in h^^ time. For the Protector betake himself to other
Methods of government.

That y^ar 1655. 1655.
he institutes h^^ Major General: He divides the who^ Kingdom into seven
Provinces o^ Cantons; (three, four or five (mos^ or fewer) Counties in a
Province. And over every of these, he placeth^ Major General with his Deputy,
an^ sufficient Authority, not only in Military affairs, but also in
Ecclesiastic^^ and Civil; none came amiss to them (...) they would meddle in
all, upon occasi^^ on or complaint: Especially i^ Church Affairs, they take
upon them the sovereign power; they put out silence and inhibit what Ministers
the please, by virtue of the late Ordinanc^ against scandalous Ministers, and
other orders and private instructions to them from the Protector and his
Council. They will not suffer any ejected Minister to teach a School either
publicly or privately; to pray, or preach, or to perform any Ministerial duty
in any Church or private Family; in a word, they would have starved them, if
they could, denying all means of livelihood to them and theirs.

And because diverse ejected Ministers, had during the sitting of this ^ast
Parliament, and soon after, commenced suits in Law for the recovery of their
Livings, and had gotten (some of them) damages against their Intruders, and had
hopes of recovering the possession of their Livings: and some of them had
already got into possession by Law: The Protector publishes a Proclamation,
thereby strictly commanding them to quit their possessions, and to release all
judgments ob^ained, and further inhibiting all At^ournies, Lawyers and
Advocates, to ^ommence or prosecute any Suits ^or, or to plead in the behalf of
such Clients; And all Judges are likew^^ inhibited, to admit of any such
Ac^^ons or Pleas in any of their Courts. A^^ which, was apparently to deny the^
the benefit of the Law, (which is t^^ highest Act of Arbitrary and Tyran^^
power that can be) and consequent^^ to condemn that Authority as illeg^^ by
which they were first ejected.

Furthermore upon occasion of a risi^^ in the Spring, by some of the Kin^ party
in the West, he not only pr^^ceeds against Col. John Penruddock, a^^ diverse
other Gentlemen, by Capit^^ punishment; but he decimates all the Cavaleers or
Gentlemen of the la^^ Kings party, that had been in ar^ for him, all over
England; that is, (...) enjoins them to pay yearly the ten^^ part of their
whole Revenue, notwit^ standing their former Compositio^ made for their
Estates, and their P^^dons sued out as the Parliament (...) enjoined, and also
the late Act of O^livion, anno 1651. And this Deci^^tion was put in execution
by these Major Generals.

And in this Government, he much resembled the Turk: Himself like the Grand
Signior, ruling by sole command, had his standing Army (as a guard for his
Person) answerable to the Janissaries; and his Major Generals representing the
Bashaws in their several Provinces; And besides these, he had his Auxiliaries
lately set up in every County; viz. certain Troops of horse, and Companies of
foot, armed and ready upon all occasions, maintaining and finding their own
horses and arms; for a constant yearly salary, the horsemen had 8 li. per
annum, and the foot 3 li. and these were upon any occasion to be drawn forth,
and march in a few hours warning.

Anno 1656. 1656*
The Protector calls another Parliament, according to the lade mode, ten in a
County, etc. These convene at Westminster, Sept. 17. Upon their first meeting,
man^ of the Members of several Counti^ were excluded, because they had bee^
somewhat busy and active in the Parliament before. This exclusion (...)
Members being noised abroad, man^ that were not yet gone up, went not a^ all,
lest when they came there, the^ should be excluded and sent hom^ again. There
were in all about sevenscore or more that absented themselves, or were secluded
the House b^ order from the Council of State; an^ yet not any reason alleged
against them. They represent the injury t^ the House, but find no redress; the
House dare not offend the Protecto^ by admitting their Fellow Members.

This Parliament thus purged an^ garbled, was for the Protectors turn^ he gave
them leave to sit almost tw^ five months without dissolving or adjourning*

About the beginning of the next spring, 1657.
there is a project set on foot by some in the House for making the Protector
King: First a petition or remonstrance from many of the City desireing it, was
presented by an Alderman of London to the Speaker, sealed up in a box.
Afterward a Bill is prefered for it: the House are very forward in the
business; only the Protectors pleasure is not known. They very humbly and
solemnly petition his Highness to accept of it; as an honor not only merited by
himself, but much inducing to the settlement of the Nation. But he makes
strange at it, gives them thanks for their good affection toward him and the
public; yet desires time to consider of it, before they press him to a
resolution.

Mean time the Independents and Factious people fast and pray, to avert the
judgment that is like to fall upon them, in having a King. Some great
Commanders in the Army, and many of the common-souldiers express their dislike
of it; amongst whom Lambert, the Leiutenant-General, is the chief, conceiving
it a bar to his ambitious hopes. It is more then probable, the Protector
himself thirsted after it, and that the design was first hammered in his own
forge; for Thurloe his Secretary openly promoted it, and (as it was said)
brought in the Bill. But when the Parliament made their second address to him,
he modestly denied it, yet he gave them thanks for their good affections to him.

This Parliament sat from the 17. of September, to the 26. of June. And then by
an Act entitled The humble Petition and advice, they constitute him Protector,
and give him power to nominate his Successor, which was all one as to establish
the Government in his Family: They erect another House of Parliament, in place
of the Lords, for which they could invent no other name, but The Other House.
It was to consist of a number of persons not exceeding seventy, nor less then
forty, all chosen or nominated by the Protector, and to be called particularly
by Writs, as the House of Peers were wont to be: They also ordain some other
qualifications for future elections of Parliament men; and appoint an Oath to
be taken by the Protector, and by all successive Protectors: and also another
Oath by all the Members, both of the one and Other House upon their entrance
to sit in Parliament. Some other things they ordain in that Petition and
advice, for settling the future Government. All which the Protector ratifies and
confirms, by giving his solemn assent in those words, the Lord Protector does
consent.

Further in that Act, they limit him so far, as not to impose any Tax or
payment upon the People, without their consent in Parliament; and in lieu
thereof, they give him 35000 li. a month by way of Tax for three years to come,
from June 24. 1657. besides the Excise, Tunage and Poundage, the Customs, all
the Crown lands that were unsold, and all Forfeitures, Penalties, and other
accidental Emoluments that the Kings of England were wont to have; amounting in
the whole to Thirteen Hundred Thousand Pounds per annum; for so much they
promised to settle upon him forthwith, as a certain standing Revenue, besides
land Taxes. This done, he does not dissove, but only adjourn the Parliament, to
the 20. of January following.

But in the mean time soon after their adjournment, the Protector Cashiers
Lambert his Leiuetenant-General, and Hacker Colonel of his lifeguard, and some
other Officers of his Army, who were conceived to be averse to the business of
his Kingship; which gave men cause to conclude, that he stil^ thirsted after
the Kingly dignity, as indeed it is more then probable he did.

And here let me tell you, there goes a story very credibly and confidently
reported by some persons knowing and well-affected to the late Protector, That
he, when he was a boy, and going to school at Huntington, where his father
dwelt, dreamed one night thar he should be King, and Ruler over all the Kingdom
of England, but afterward he should be hanged. This dream he tells to his
fellow schoolboyes, and by that means it came to his Masters ear, who lashed
him soundly for it. How near the former part of his dream was fulfilled,
appears by this story; and how justly he deserved the latter part, I leave it
to others to judge?

Against the meeting of the Parliament by adjournment, he sends out his Writ,
for summoning the Members of his other House. Some ancient Peers of the Land he
summoned, as the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Manchester, the Lord Say; I
cannot say, whether or no the Earl of Sali^bary was one, because he seldom
wanted a place in the House of Commons* Others, some of them, were Gentlemen of
quality in several Counties and of good repute, but the most o^ them were of
his Army-men, or o^ his alliance, that had married into his Family. Amongst his
Army-men, there were Pride the Dray-man, Hewson the Shoemaker, Barksted the
broken Thimble-maker, and others the like, all Colonels of his Army; and
Lambert also to gratify: him, is made one of his Peers; and Haselrig, that was
a great stickler against him in all Parliaments, is another. There is a
Catalogue extant of them all, and therefore it is needless to repeat them.

When the time came according to the Adjournment, January 20. the Nobility
though called, disdained to appear: Many of the Gentry absented themselves, yet
some of all sorts (except only the Nobility) enough to make a competent number,
appeared. Some that were called to his other House, were elected for the House
of Commons, and chose that place, rather then the other House; Sir Arthur
Haselrig (always an enemy to the King, and no friend to the Protector) was one
of the number: The House of Commons would by no means digest that other House,
nor own them; though some messages were sent to them, yet would they not
vouchsafe them any answer.

Besides this, there was another business set on foot in the House of Commons,
that touched the Protector very nearly; and that was their tampering with the
power of the Militia: The People were to pay the Army, and it was thought just
by many, that the Parliament should have command of them. And it was suspected,
had they sat but a little longer, that the Army, or a considerable part of it,
would have adhered to the Parliament. To prevent this mischief, that was (...)
working, the Protector suddenly a^^ unexpectedly dissolves them, Febr. ^^ with
this word of comfort (nevertheless) to his other House, My Lords, ye are Lords,
and shall be Lords.

The Parliament thus again dissolved in discontent, things rested as formerly,
though not without much murmuring and secret discontent, both in the Protector
and People.

About the latter end of August, ^658.
or the beginning of September, the Protector dyed; having lain somewhile in a
very sad condition, with extreme pain and torment in his bowels. Some strongly
fancy, that be died on Tuesday, Aug. 30. what time was the most furious,
violent wind, that ever happened in the memory of man. And its very probable
that he died that day or soon after: but it was given out, and commonly
reported, that he dyed on Friday, Sept. 3.

His Funeral was a great while deferred, his body embalmed and kept above
ground many months together, with mourners continually attending his corpse,
and meat carried up and served on his Table, as if he had been the greatest
Prince in Christendom, and afterward he was interred with as great funeral
solemnity, as ever any King of England was interred, and his Hearse or Statue
set up after the manner of Kings, and a most most magnificent Monument erected
for him.

It is worth the remembering, that about a year or two before his death, he made
a new broad Seal, with the Arms of England, viz. a Saint Georges Cross,
quartered with Saint Andrews Cross for Scotland, and the Harp for Ireland, and
his own Coat in a little Escutcheon in the midst; his Helmet and Mantle, with a
Crown imperial, and a Lion puissant for his Crest, and and the supporters a
Lion and a Dragon: the Motto underneath his Ar^^ Pax quaeritur Bello. And this
inscrip^^^ on about, Sigillum magnum Reipub^^^ Anglioe, Scotiae and Hiberniae:
On the other side, himself on Horseba^^ richly trappered, as the King Seal
(...) wont to be; and the Inscription abo^^ it, Oliverus Dei gratia,
Reipublicae A^^gliae, Scotiae and Hiberniae Protector.

And though he usually coined (...) money, yet I have seen some piec^ of
Silver, of an half crown bigne^^ with his Arms (as before) on the o^side, and
his Picture crowned with ba^^ on the other side, and the former I^scription. In
these respects so near (...) approached to the Royal dignity sure I am, he
assumed more power and authority, then ever any King^ England did.

The Protector before his death, h^^ according to the fore-mention^ Humble
Petition and Advice, a^pointed his eldest Son Richard Cr^^wel, to succeed him
in his place; an^ accordingly immediately after his Fathers death, he was
proclaimed in London, and soon after all over England.

The Independents, Anabaptists and other Sectaries, were not well pleased at
it; they had rather have had Fleetwood in the place, who had married the late
Protectors Daughter, Iretons Widow; for Richard had formerly been reputed a
kind of a good fellow and a Royallist, and never was in Arms against the King,
as all the rest of his Fathers Family and Allies had been.

Richard soon after calls a Parliament to begin at Westminster. Jan. 27. not
according to the Inst^ument of Government, but after the old way, two in a
County, etc. Before the calling of the Parliament, and after, congratulatoty
Addresses are made to Richard, from most Counties, Cities and Corporations of
Note in England, extolling the merits of his heroic Father, expressing their
joy for the succession of such a Son, and promising to adhere to him withal
faithfulness and loyalty. In some of their Addresses, they compare the Father
to Moses, and the Son to Joshua, the Guiders and Conductors of Gods People out
of Egyptian thraldom, with other the like blasphemous expressions. Richard
receives these Addresses with as much gravity, as they were tendered with
humility; so that no man could imagine, but that he was most firmly fixed in
his Throne; And Lilly the States mercenary Prognosticator, assures it, from his
Astrological Predictions of that year.

At the opening of the Parliament Jan. 27. he makes a Speech to both his
Houses, wherein he minds them of his just and lawful Title to the Government,
not only by the wonderful Providence of God, but by the disposition of the
Laws: he tells them, h^ had convened them together for important affairs of
State, for the honor and safety of the Nation; willed them to take into
consideration, the necessity of the Navy and Army, whom he commends for their
patience and obedience, to the best Army in the world: some other things to
this purpose he commended to them, and told them in conclusion, that they
should find him ready and willing to concur with them in any thing for the good
of the public; and to deny them nothing that was just and fit; And that if
this were not an happy Parliament, it should not be his fault. And all this
(says the Book) was spoken with so gracious and Princely a deportment, as has
gained this opinion amongst the wisest Hearers, that he deservedly holds the
place of Supreme Magistrate in these Nations.

Thus the Parliament began, and great hopes there were of good agreement
between the Protector and the People: and doubtless he for his part, would have
given them leave to ha^^ settled the Nation as they though^ good, both for
Religion and Civi^ Government. But still the other House, though called as
formerly, an^ many of them convened, would no^ down with the Commons; they
would not in the least own this new made House of Lords; sit they might, if
they pleased, but little or nothing they had to do: for the Commons would never
impart any thing to them, nor indeed have any inter course with them. A pitiful
company of Peers they were, and accordingly regarded.

But Richard and the House of Commons agreed very well; he was willing to leave
all to them; And there being a very great number of young Lawyers in the House,
that gaped for preferment, they were willing to give him power enough: too much
as many suspected.

Ye must know, that in all Parliaments since Olivers time, there was a faction
of men in the House, called Commonwealths men, that were for a free State (as
they called it) and against a single Person. These were such as had purchased
the Lands of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and those belonging to the late King,
Queen, and Prince; And they feared, that these Lands might be at one time or
other restored, unless the Government were again settled in the way of a
Commonwealth: for a single Person they thought might possibly come to be a
King. With these also concurred all such, both Parliament Men and Armymen, as
were highly guilty of the Kings Trial and death. And all these together, had a
great influence upon the Army. These generally were disaffected to the
Protector.

The Army also ( Richard having never been a Soldier) were very desirous to
have a General of their own choice with power to place and displace what
Army Officers he thoug^^ fit. Fleetwood the Protectors Br^ther in-law, or
Lambert aims at the place; To effect their design, they with the Commonwealths
men i^ Parliament, as Haselrig, and Vane* Scot and Weaver, and others the like*
make a Faction in the Army against the Protector. The Commanders o^ the Army
that were of this Faction had frequent meetings at Fleetwood Lodging at
Wallingford House (...) whereof Richard had notice, and might have suppressed
them in time, by some chief Officers that were of his part who offered their
assistance thereunto* but being loath to hazard the effusion o^ blood, he let
things rest, hoping (perhaps) they would not have proceeded a afterward they
did.

Fleetwood soon after advises him t^ adjourn the Parliament, 1659.
but he re^^sing, they come to him, and force h^^ to send a Writ to dissolve
it; Th^^ was about the latter end of April, 1659.

The Parliament thus suddenly dissolved, the Soldiers were at a loss what to
do; at last they resolve, after a solemn Fast had among themselves (as their
manner was) to call in that piece or tail of the long Parliament, (that
Cromwell and themselves had broke up and cast out six years before, April 20.
1653.) to return again to the exercise of their trust, as they termed it;
expressing their Repentance for that action, and desiring to return again into
the good old way. Lenthal the Speaker, and some others of that company, being
then in and about the City, very gladly accept the motion; they thought long to
be again in authority. They call together all their Fellow Members that they
could get, and had much ado to make forty, though they took two of them out of
the Gaol, viz. the Lord Munson and Henry Martin, who were Prisoners there upon
executio^^ Being thus got together upon Saturday aftenoon, May 7. the Speaker
with the rest, enter the House, and set again as a Parliament; publishing a
Proclamation or Declaration, to let the People understand, how by the wonderful
providence and mercy of God, they were again restored to the exercise of their
trust, being (as they call themselves) Asserters of the Good old Cause, etc.

The Monday following, Mr. William Prin a Bencher of Lincolns Inn, and many
more Members of the Long Parliament, that were secluded upon the Kings Trial,
December 1648, met together at Westminster, and went to the House-door,
demanding admission to sit with the rest, but were denied entrance, and kept
out with armed guards. Whereupon he writes a Book called his Narrative, wherein
he declraes at large their manner of demanding admission, and in what manner
they were forcibly kept out, and very solidly pleads the Kings cause against
their Commonwealth. And another Book he writes and publishes at the same time,
entitled, The good old Cause, wherein he manifestly proves, by twelve
undeniable Arguments, that that which they termed the good old Cause, was far
worse, more destructive both to Church and State, to Religion and the
Commonwealth, then the Gunpowder Treason. And though he openly owned and
avowed these Books, setting his name to them, yet they never returned the least
answer to them, nor questioned the Author: But these Books thus seasonably
published, gave a deadly blow to their good old Cause, though the operation of
it was not so presently discerned.

The Parliament (those few that were) being thus got in again, they presently
depose the Protector, and alter the Government from a sin^^ person to a
Commonwealth. Th^^null all honouts conferred by the late Protector, so that
many are in a^ instant unknighted, whom Oliver before had honored with that
dignity Richard himself but the other da^ Lord Protector of England, Scotlan^
and Ireland, and his Highness at every word, is now in the language of the
Parliament but Richard Cromwell Esquire for by that. Title they wrote to him to quit
his Lodgings, and remove^ from White Hall: and his Excellency Lord Henry
Cromwell, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, is now no more the^ Mr. Henry Cromwell;
All Olivers venerable House of Peers, have now i^ an instant lost their
Lordships, and an^ the same that formerly they were; s^ great a change is
effected in an instant Only Fleetwood and Lambert are st^^^ termed Lords in the
Parliaments fir^^ Declaration, May 7. and there wa^^ cause for it; for the
Parliament w^^ what they were by their means.

And now all mouths are open in an instant, against the late Protector Oliver,
reproaching him as the worst of Tyrants and Usurpers, tearing his Hearse or
Statue in pieces, defacing and pulling down his sumptuous Monument, that was
but a few weeks before at a most vast charge, set up in Westminster.

The Parliament were more obliged to the Army, then they were to the people,
for putting them again into Authority; for the people had had more then enough
of them, for almost two seven years before. Oliver never did so much good for
the Nation, nor had more thanks from the people, then when he and his Army had
turned these men out, as before is said, April 20. 1653. And therefore they
thought it concerned them, rather to gratify the Army, then to please the
people. To this end, not long after their re-installment, they impose a Tax of
twelve months, to be paid (...) manner altogether. That 35000 l^^ month which
was not to be paid (...) the Act that imposed it, till Midsu^mer, 1660. and
that quarterly, th^^ command to be paid in presently between Lammas and
Michaelmas, 1659* intending (as its probable) as soon a^ that was paid in, to
impose another the like payment upon the people.

After this, about July, they pas^ an Act for settling the Militia, and i^ was
sent down into the several Counties, to be presently put in execution* but the
Army (as it was thought) no^ relishing this design, it was soon after laid
aside.

This year about the beginning of August, there was a rising in Cheshire,
Lancashire, and the parts adjoining, under the command of Sir George Booth, Sir
Thomas Midleton, and other Gentlemen in those parts; they declare for a free
and full Parliament to be elected by the People. It was commonly reported, the
design was general, laid all over all England, and thus it was carried on
chiefly by the Presbyterian Party. But Cheshire and the parts adjacent, were
the first that arose; in other places attempts were made, but they were
suppressed.

Sir George Booth had taken Westchester both Town and Castle, and was reported
to be very numerous. And therefore upon the first intelligence thereof, Lambert
is sent out against him, with an Army of six or seven thousand men, and a train
of Artillery; and forces from all quarters are appointed to draw to him, so
that all meeting, he had a very great Army. Sir George Booth's party, seeing
other Counties so slack, begin to faint and forsake him; Lambert marching
toward them, is opposed by some forces at a narrow pass, but presently all are
routed, and Sir George himself, and some others are taken and brought prisoners
to London: this happened about Aug. 20.

This design so strongly and universally (as was reported) laid, and so soon
defeated and disappointed the Parliament themselves, and all men thought them
cock-sure. They begun to resolve to submit themselves to the yoke of their old
Taskmasters, seeing no other remedy; And the Parliament went on with their
work, in settling the Nation in a Commonwealth way; intending after that was
established, to proceed severely against Sir George Booth and his party. They
began already to sequester his and other men's estates; for many they say were
engaged in the plot, all over England: and the City of Westchester they quite
dis-franchised.

But observe what followed. Lambert and the Army were so heightened at this
success, and the Parliament (as they thought) so much obliged to them, for
restoring them into their power, and preserving them in it, as they thought
whatsoever they demanded, would not have been denied them. Thereupon in their
return to London, they take a resolution by unanimous consent of the Officers
and common Soldiers to require to have a General of their own Election, either
Fleetwood or Lambert.

The Parliament having intelligence hereof, resolve the contrary; calling to
mind, how six years before they had been served by Oliver, who then was their
General: and therefore they thought it not fit any more to entrust so great a
power in any one man's hand, least he should do as Oliver had done. And
therefore they resolve and vote, to put the power of the Army into the hands of
seven Commissioners, whereof about two or three (at most) were Army-men, and
the rest Members of the Parliament.

This Vote of theirs highly discontented the Army, and Lambert especially; the
business came to that height, as about the tenth or eleventh of October, their
forces were draw out on either side at Westminste^ Some Regiments for the
Parliame^^ under the command of Haselrig, Mo^ly and others; and other Regiment
for the Army, under command o^ Lambert, Desborough, Berry and other Colonels,
and ready they were t^ charge one another. The Council o^ State interposing,
prevented blood shed, but could not appease or satisfi^ the Army. At length the
Army became Masters, and turned out the Parliament, October 13. whom but a few
months before, they had placed in authority.

But the Parliament did prudently and stoutly in one thing; when they saw
whereto they must, that the Army would turn them out, a day or two before (
October. 11.) they made an Act presently after printed and published, That it
should be high Treason in any, to impose, assess, collect, levy, or pay any
Excise, Customs, Tunnage and Poundage, or any Tax or Tallage whatsoever, from
that 11th day of October, but what should be imposed by the consent of the
People themselves in Parliament.

This was a stumbling block to the Army-men; it hindered them somewhat from the
raising of money for the present; but had things succeeded according to their
mind, they would soon have leapt over it, and raised what moneys they pleased.

The Parliament thus casheerd by the Army, the next thing they do is to provide
places for themselves. Fleet-wood is made General, Lambert Lieutenant General,
Desborough is made General of the horse. And they provide a place for Monck
also, who at present is Governor of Scotland; him they will make Major General
of the foot. This for the Army.

For the government of the State they must take time to consider of that. But
some things they lay for grounds and principles. 1. They Will free the people of
the burden of Tithes (and in time perhaps of Ministers too) that has been a
design all along since the Army gave Law to the Nation. 2. They will perhaps
have a kind of Parliament, but not of the choice of the people; for the people
(say they) are grown generally so corrupt, as they are not fit to choose their
own representatives; but must be left to the godly. In stead of an House of
Lords they will have a standing Senate of Army Officers and such like godly men,
which shall have a Negative voice in all Parliamentary consultations. These and
some others, as I concluded out o^ some of their books, were their design.

But the truth is, though much consultation they had, and some progress they
made in framing a Government yet could they make no work of it, they could not
agree of any. Only thus for the present exigence of affairs, the establish a
Committee of Safety, consisting mostly of Army Officers, and some Members of
the late Parliament, that since the dissolution thereof, had sided with the
Army, whereof Sir Henry Vane was one.

But that which spoiled the sport, and gave check-mate to their new intended
Government, was a business in Scotland. Monck (as I touched before) was
governor of that Nation, and had been so in all these changes, almost ever
since Oliver took upon him the Protectors place. They had provided Monck a
place among them, (so courteous they were) but they were not so prudent as to
consult with him about breaking up the Parliament.

And therefore upon the first intelligence of these things, Monck in Scotland
declares against their proceedings. The soldiers here (without expostulating)
presently arm against him; insomuch as their forces are upon their march
toward Scotland, from Norwich and the parts thereabout, upon the 29th of
October the Parliament having been broken up but bare sixteen days before;
Monck seeing them thus on the forehand with him, entertains them with a Treaty;
Commissioners are appointed on both sides, and furnished with instructions;
mean time Monck takes and fortifies Barwick upon Tweed. The news comes that
they are agreed, and that both parties have unanimously declared against the
interest of Charles Stuart, (so they commonly call the King) which caused much
rejoicing amongst the Armies adherents; but this soon after proved to be
false: Monck at the return of his Commissioners, is not satisfied in some
particulars; Nevertheless soon after, he desires another Treaty, which was
held at Newcastle; during which time he calls a Convention of the Estates of
Scotland, who (as it was reported) not only approved this his undertaking, but
assisted him in it.

The Treaty at Newcastle, after some time spent therein, had no better success
than the former; They could not, or at least wise Monck would not agree. But
Fleetwood notwithstanding gives intelligence to his adherents in Norfolk, that
they were so far agreed, that if they should grant what Monck insisted upon,
it would be no whit prejudicial to them.

While these things were thus acting, it pleased God there happened a great
frost, and after that so deep a snow, as the like has not been known of many
years, both for the greatness and continuance of it. Monck was all that time
with his Army at Barwick and thereabouts, never advancing farther into England
than Alnwick. Lambert and his Army having much impoverished Yorkshire and those
parts, what with Taxes and Free Quarter, were now about Newcastle, quarterred
in a barren cold Country, and not able to march by reason of the hardness of
the weather.

In the mean time I must tell you, from Lambers first advancing against Monck,
the Londoners had been solicited by Fleetwood and the rest, to join with the
Army; but they utterly refuse it, though they liked well enough the turning out
of the Parliament. About the beginning of December, the Apprentices and some
others Petition the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen; the soldiers interpose;
whereupon there is a great hurliburly in the City, and some blood is shed, a
Captain (they say) being slain; but by the means of the Major, the tumult is
appeased. Fleetwood upon this occasion, to curb the City, and prevent any
risings hereafter, sends in a considerable part of his Army; they take and
fortify four houses in several parts of the City, whereof Gresham College was
one; these they strengthen with soldiers and Grenades, and threaten to fire
the City in case the Citizens should stir.

While these things were thus carried at London, Haselrig and some Army
Officers, that from the first had adhered to the Parliament, got into
Portsmouth about December the third; and there joining with some chief Officers
of the Navy, declare openly for the Parliament against the Army; And because
the City of London would not join with them, (for they liked the Parliament as
thus constituted, as ill as they did the Army) they with a considerable part of
the Navy under the command of Lawson then Admiral, (who had a little before
deserted the Army) block up the Thames; this was about a week before Christmas.

The City thus blockt up by Sea, and Garrisoned with Fleetwoods soldiers by
Land, were in a sad condition: but for all this they would neither declare for
the Army nor Parliament, but still desired to have a free Parliament of the
election of the People; to which the soldiers forced by necessity and want of
money, at last consented; b^ with such qualifications, as had the^ been
observed, would have rendere^ the Parliament wholly subservient o^ the Armies
interest; And the Committee of Safety had by a Proclamation summoned the same
to begin a^ Westminster, January 24.

But the Parliament now commonly called the Rump, (and so I shall hereafter
term them) taking the opportunity of this difference between the City and
Army, made a shift to mee^ together, (a competeur number o^ them (about 40.)
and to crowde again into the House, December 26. late in the Evening by
Torch-light. But lest the Londoners should join with the Army, and oppose,
they promise upon their first fitting, either to call in the Secluded Members
by the 6th. of Jannuary; or else to issue out Writs for filling up the House by
new Elections. To pacify the Army, they pass a Vote of Indemnity to
Fleetwood, Lambert, and all rest of the Army, both Officers and Soldiers, for
what was past, in case hereafter they demean themselves quietly; which Vote
they are glad to accept of, not being able farther to oppose.

But I must tell you, that before this, they had endeavored what they might,
in all the Counties, to raise money for the supply of the Army, but could not
get any considerable sums. The Gentlemen in the Country, that had been laid
horses by virtue of the late Act for the Militia (which was first set on foot
by the Parliament on July last, but laid aside soon after for fear of
offending the Army) these they now rate at 10 l. for every horse; yet rather
than fail they would have taken fifty shillings. Some that were faint-hearted
compounded at so low a rate, and paid; but many refused: And of them that
compounded, the most part would never pay a penny. This was about the beginning
of December; and some money by this tri^ they got, but not much. About the same
time also, they sent forth warran^ for one months Tax, assessed for Drums and
Colors, etc. by virtue o^ the said Act, but this in many place^ was never
paid, and in most place^ though rated, yet not paid. So tha^ the want of money,
was the maine thing that broke their design; the soldiers about London,
mutining and growing insolent against their Commanders for want of pay: some of
them falling to that party that adhered to the Parliament, and others offering
their service and assistance to the City, whom they thought best able to
entertain them; so that it came to that pass before the Rump got in, that
Fleetwood had little or no command of his soldiers in and about the City. And
this gave another advantage to the Rump to crowd in.

Being got in as before is noted, The Citizens of London are yet jealous, that
they would not according to their promise, call in the secluded Members, nor
fill up their House by new Elections. And therefore they fortify the City in
several streets and places of access with chains and posts to prevent the
sudden incursion of horses; For now they feared the Rump Parliament, as much or
more than formerly they did the Army: this was about the beginning of January.

And indeed within a few days after they discovered their intentions; the Rump
was so far from calling in the secluded Members, as they passed a Vote that
never any of them should sit again: and in stead of filling up their House by a
new election, they are about contriving an Oath of abjuration, whereby to force
men under a penalty to abjure the King and all the Royal Line or Family; but
this Oath stuck long in debate, and at last would not pass amongst themselves.

But notwithstanding the Rump was thus got into possession, and likely (...)
nough to hold it, Lamberts Army b^ing at the news of it quite broken a^^
dispersed, himself secretly departi^^ from them at Rippon, and posting (...)
London to accept his Vote of Indem^nity. Monck advances with (...) Army,
marching on slowly, and w^ come to Newcastle about the sixth (...) January
without the least opposition.

The Rump likes well of it, hopi^^ by his assistance to quell the City, wh^^ as
yet stood at distance with them, an^ had in a sort fortified themselves against
them. The Londoners on the contrary, entertain hopes, that b^ Moncks coming,
the Parliament might be enforced, notwithstanding their former Vote, either to
call in the Secluded Members, or else to fill up the House with new elections,
either o^ which would have satisfied them, and one of which they resolved to
insis^ upon. All expectations on either side, are upon Monck, but no man knew
certainly what his intentions were.

The Rump had from the first intelligence of Moncks advancing, after Lamberts
Army was disbanded and broken, sent two of their Members ( Robinson and Scot)
to wait upon him, or rather indeed as Spies to watch and observe him. The City
of London had also sent their Sword Bearer as far as Newcastle, to congratulate
his coming, and to tender the respects and affections of the City to him. He
receives him courteously, returns hearty thanks to the City, but nothing
satisfactory of what they expected: so that hitherto, and long after he marched
hooded in allusion to his name; no man could tell what to make of him, nor what
his design, or the end of his coming was, but men guessed and hoped, according
as their opinions and desires were: but the Rump both now, and long after, were
as confidently assured of him, as of any man within their own walls.

Passing through Yorkshire he is (...) norably received by the Lord Fairfa^^
and the Northern Gentlemen, w^^^ had not many days before contrib^ted much to
the reducing of a part of Lamberts Officers and Soldier that had possessed
themselves of York.

While Monck was there, diverse o^ the Yorkshire Gentlemen were very desirous to
understand his intentions, an^ to that purpose, requested Sir Henr^ Cholmely
one of their number, to go t^ him and talk privately with him; which he did,
and had conveniencie of discours^ with him. At his return they were bi^ with
expectation, and demanded o^ him what he thought of the General He told them he
thought he was like the Peace of God; they asking why? he answers, because he
passes all understanding. This I was credibly informed of by a Yorkshire
Minister, living in those parts.

Coming along all the way to Saint Albones, he receives several Addresses from
all or most of the Counties of England, all importing their humble desires,
that either the Secluded Members might be called in, or that the House may be
filled up by new elections, that so one way or other, they might have again a
full and free Parliament; the want of which they apprehend to be the cause of
all their late sufferings, and frequent changes of Government, to the
oppression of the people, and high dishonor of the English Nation. He receives
them all courteously, treats them civilly, but for answer tells them, That he
was but a servant to the Parliament, and that only in a Military capacity; that
it became not him to interpose in Civil affairs; that the Parliament he doubted
not, would do them right, and satisfy their just desires: That for the calling
in of the Secluded Members, the Parliament had already given judgment in that
point, and they ought to acquiesce therein; But for the filling up the House,
he told them it was now under deb^^^ and doubted not but they should receive
f^^ satisfaction therein; and therefore (...) exhorts them to attend with
patien^ the determinations of the House, an^ not by any unseasonable
importunit^ to disturb their Counsels, which might be a means to delay their
satisfaction and the settlement of the Nation, which (said he) was now
intended, and rea^^ to be effected.

From Devonshire also (though fa^ remote out of his way) he receive^ the like
Address (one of the first tha^ were tendered to him) wherein afte^ complaint
made of their greivances* they earnestly desire the calling in o^ the secluded
Members. But to them (being his Countrymen, and some of them near allied to
him) he returns by way of answer, a courteous Letter; wherein amongh other
things he tells them, that the calling in of the secluded Members could not
safely be yielded to, most of them being known to be Assertors of Monarchy; He
gives them several Reasons, showing, that as the case of affairs now stood,
Monarchy was utterly inconsistent with this Nation: That a Republic or Free
State was the only Government, wherein the several interests of the Nation,
both Ecclesiastical and Civil might be best preserved: And therefore in the
conclusion, he desires them that by their impatiencies they would not obstruct
the Parliaments consultations, otherwise (says he) our peace will be so much
the longer a stranger to us, and we thereby made a prey to our selves and
foreign enemies. This was from Leicester, Jan. 23. and soon after this Letter
was printed and published by the Parliament Intelligencer.

Thus giving fair and plausible answers to all such as addressed themselves
unto him, he marches along and comes to Saint Albones about the latter end of
January; where still Addresses are made to him out of Suffolk, Norfolk and
other places, which receive the like answers that others did. But these
Addresses (ye must know) were also tendered to the Parliament, though some that
tendered them, were clap^ by the heels for their pains (as the Berk-shire
Gentlemen) and others threatened; whereas Watermen o^ London, for a
congratulatory Address made to them at the same time, received the solemn
thanks of the House.

While he was at Saint Albones, some Aldermen and Common Council men, are sent
to him from the City o^ London, to congratulate his coming and court him; but
are returned as formerly, with thanks for their respects.

From Saint Albones he removes t^ Barnet, where he makes a stay, refusing to
come to London, until Lamberts Soldiers were out of the City Mean-time Saint
James's House is appointed for his Lodging, and the Custody of the Park is
voted to him, to hold during the pleasure of the Parliament, with some other
like honors, a magnificent Reward for such an undertaking.

The Soldiers that were late Lamberts, being voided the City, Monk and his
Army marches to London, on Friday, February 3. and is lodged at White Hall, at
whose coming, there is great joy and triumphing all over the City.

On Wednesday following, Febr. 8. The City continuing still in their
refractoriness and opposition to the Parliament, they meet in Common Council,
and there pass a Vote or Order, Not to pay or levy any Taxes, until such time
as they may have a full and free Parliament: For hitherto you must know, the
Rump had not agreed upon qualifications for filling up the House; and many
thought they never intended it; but only to establish themselves in perpetual
authority.

Upon this Vote or Resolve of the Common Council, the Rump are highly offended,
and send a strict order to Monk to march the next day with his Army into the
City; To pull up their chains and posts, to break down the gates and portcullis
of the City; to imprison forwith in the Tower diverse Aldermen and Commoners,
that were conceived to be chiefly active in passing those Votes. This command
of theirs, Monk executes next day, Febr. 9. to the great terror and amazement,
not only of the City, but of the whole Nation and Kingdom, when they heard the
report of it: All hearts are saddened, and now most men conclude, that Monk is
not the man designed of God for the delivery of this oppressed Nation.

The Gentlemen in the several Counties that had subscribed and tendered their
Addresses and Declarations, begin now to fear their own Stakes; there being in
some of their Declarations, expressions against paying taxes without a free
Parliament: It had (I must tell also you) before this, been moved in the House,
that those Gentlemen that tendered these Addresses, might be sequestered; yet at
that time, it was carried in the Negative. They had cause to fear also, that if
they intended at all to fill up the House by new Elections, they would impose
such qualifications, as should exclude all such Gentlemen in all Counties, as
either subscribed or delivered these Addresses: and so the greatest part by far
of the Gentry of England, would be made incapable of serving their Country, and
consequently the filling up of the House by such a choice, as would then be
allowed, would be but a means further to enslave both themselves and their
Posterities.

For these and the like considerations, they had some thoughts and resolutions
in most Counties (as it was reported) to second their Addresses or Declarations
with Arms, thereby to vindicate their Native Rights from the oppression of a
Combination of Tyrants, who had a long time usurped the supreme power of the
Nation, and were now perpetuating that usurpation upon the freeborn people, to
their utter slavery and oppression. And it was verily conceived, that had not
the face of affairs suddenly changed, by Monks unhooding himself, the whole
Kingdom would soon have been put into a general flame of combustion: for the
City of London, by this late affront, were rather incensed than awed: though
their Gates and Portcullesses were broken, yet their hearts and courages
remained entire, and were the more confirmed and hardened: and had the Counties
unanimously risen, it is like the Londoners would not have sit still: for the
whole Kingdom was generally exasperated against the Rump; and the dispersed
soulders of Lamberts Army, not knowing where to quarter, nor how to live, might
probably be thought willing to adhere to any party, that were in a capacity to
entertain them with pay.

The Rump (as it is conceived) by putting Monk upon that base employment, of
being their City-Scavenger, had a design not only to terrify and curb the
City, but also to make Monk and his Army odious and irreconcilable to them,
whereby they might engage him hereafter more firmly to themselves.

Monk having thus executed the Commands of the Rump, he is troubled in his mind
at it. And upon Saturday following, Febr. 11. he draws his Army into Finsbury
Fields, and sending for the Lord Mayor and some of the chief Citizens, he had
some discourse with them: And presently after, he writes a Letter to the
Parliament, as from White Hall, wherein he tells them, that he had done their
commands, though not without some regret; never any such thing having in all
these late troubles, been done to that City, so eminent for the assistance and
adherency to Parliamentary Authority; He minded them, that the end of his
coming and first undertaking, as appears in his Declaration, was not only to
preserve them in their present power, but to vindicate the liberties and
privileges of Parliaments, with the Native rights and freedom of the people;
That he observed that some persons impeached of high Treason, were yet suffered
to sit in the House: That Lambert, Sir Henry Vane and others, persons of
dangerous principles, and highly guilty of the late dissension of the Army, and
of the horrid force put upon the Parliament, were yet suffered to be in and
about the City: That though they had voted the continuance of the settled
maintenance of Ministers, yet they were now upon contriving of another
engagement that would force many of the most conscientious of them, from the
enjoyment of their Means: That there had been too many oaths already imposed
upon the Nation, and that they had more need to mourn for the breach of oaths,
than to impose new ones. And that he observed, that those men were most forward
to impose oaths, who made least conscience of keeping them: He minded them also
of a Petition of dangerous consequence, that they had lately received and
countenanced from the Fanatic party. These and some other grievances he
complains of, and then adds his humble desires, that they would by Friday
following issue out Writs for filling up their House by new Elections, with due
and reasonable qualifications; And that they would put a certain and speedy
period to their present sitting, whereby the People may enjoy the benefit of
successive Parliaments, which is (says he) the undoubted right of the English
Nation. And in the pursuance of these things, he will not fail to stand by them
and assist them to the utmost of his power with all fidelity. To this effect
(as I remember) was his Letter signed by himself and the chief Officers of his
Army, as from White Hall, Febr. 11.

This highly pleased and rejoiced the Londoners, and made full satisfaction for
the former rigidity done them: Monk herein granting the full of what they
formerly desired or expected from him. It was as great cause of joy to the
whole Kingdom, as to the City. All that Saturday afternoon, there was Ringing,
and Bonefires, and triumphing, till twelve of the clock at night, and feasting
Monks Officers and Soldiers with wine and good cheer; nothing was too dear for
them At Norwich and in all places of the Kingdom, at the first report of the
News, there was the like rejoicing and triumphing, in hope of a free
Parliament. So much was the Rump in the affections of the people, as they
desired nothing more than to be rid of them.

Soon after Monk had thus declared himself, and joined with the City and whole
Kingdom in their just desires, The secluded Members (who a great many of them
had been all this time in and about London) addressed themselves to him: he
desires a conference to be had between them and some of the Rump: they meet ten
in number of either side, to argue and debate the business: One challenging
admission as Members of the House, and unjustly before excluded: the other
refusing to admit them, unless they will confirm all that was done since their
exclusion as just and lawful, or at leastwise engage (as themselves had done)
against a single Person or House of Lords. Two several meetings they had about
this debate, but could not agree.

A day or two after, Monk calls the secluded Members alon^, and demands of them,
if they were still firm an^ constant in their resolution of not e^gaging
against a single Person; the^ answer him, yea; and that they are immovable in
that resolution. Whereupon he calls them altogether, a matte^ of fourscore of
them (almost twic^ the number of those that sat) goe^ along with them, and
puts them into the Parliament House, to sit with the rest of the Members, Febr.
21. being Tuesday: having first delivered t^ some of the Rump, a paper written
t^ prevent mistakes, wherein he declares That after several debates had between
them, he had now received fuller satisfaction from those worth^ Gentlemen that
were secluded formerly: But he yet expressed his own private opinion and
judgment, to be for a Commonwealth or free State, an^ gave some reasons for
it.

The secluded Members being thu^ restored, who had for eleven years an^ more
been k^pt out from dischargin^ their trust, there is great rejoicing and
triumphing again both in London and all parts of the Kingdom, with Ringing and
Bonefires making, etc. but some of the Rump upon their restoring, (it is said)
withdrew and would sit no more.

Presently after their restoring, they vote Monk to be General of all the
forces of England, Scotland and Ireland, Sir William Waller (one of the
secluded Members, to be Leiutenant-General, and Rossiter a Lincolnshire
Gentleman, (and one that had formerly served the Parliament) to be General of
the Horse. They constitute Montagu to be Admiral at Sea, instead of Lawson; and
they appoint a new Council of State. Soon after they make an Act for settling
the Militia of the Kingdom, together with some Acts concerning Ministers. And
taking order for calling of a new Parliament to convene at Westminster, April
25. they dissolve themselves on Friday the 16th of March.

And thus by Gods great blessing we have lived to see an end of th^^ unhappy
long Parliament, that ha^^ been the cause of misery and calamit^ to these three
late flourishing Kingdoms, for these nineteen years an^ more last past. And all
this brough^ to pass without one drop of bloodshed, by the prudent and politic
conduct of General Monk, who with (...) small Army (an handful of men i^
comparison) not past four thousan^ foot and eighteen hundred horse, and those
not very well accommodated (...) marched from Berwick through the heart of
England, to the City of London without the least opposition, an^ at length
gained the power and command of that opulent and potent City: Lamberts Army
being at leas^ twelve or thirteen thousand men, wel^ horsed and well appointed,
breaking in pieces and mouldring away in (...) moment; the Troops and Companies
marching from place to place where they might find quarter, till afterward
most of them (their Officers cashierd) were received and listed under the
command of General Monk.

Afterward by degrees he purges his Army, putting out all Anabaptists,
Quakers, and other Fanatics, both Officers and common Soldiers, as they are
or can be discoverd, both in the Army and Garrisons, and places others in their
steads. Overton a fifth Monarchy-man, who pretended to hold Hull for the Lord
Jesus Christ, was yet notwithstanding commanded to surrender it to Mr. Charles
Fairfax, a Yorkshire Gentleman, which accordingly he did: and the like was done
in all other Garrisons, the Army-men displaced, and Gentlemen of the Country, or
other confiding persons put in their steads.

Soon after the putting in of the secluded Members, Lambert is committed to the
Tower: Haselrig, Scot, and others are under examination, but dismissed, upon
their promise or e^gagement to demean themselv^ peaceably.

Lambert not long after finds means to escape out of the Tower, and about the
middle of April, or soon after, appears in Arms about Northampton in the head
of a party, many of the cashierd Officers and Soldiers of the Fanatic and
discontented party, being got together. And it is generally conceived, that all
the Anabaptists Quakers, and other factious people in all parts of the Kingdom,
had a design to have risen and joined with him, had he not been timely
suppressed. But Colonel Ingoldsby being sent against him with a party, he
surrounds them all, (being not above five or six hundred); whereupon most of
the common Soul^iers come in, and yield themselves; and Lambert with some
Commanders are taken upon the place, without a stroke striking, only a scout of
Lamberts (they say) was slain. Colonel Okey and some others escaped by flight.

Lambert being thus taken, is brought to London together with Colonel Cobbet,
Major Creed, and young Haselrig, Sir Arthurs Son. These were all brought up in
a Coach through Hide Park; on Tuesday, April. 29. what time there was the
greatest general Muster of Citizens that ever was seen in or near London: Of
trained men and Auxiliaries there were at least twenty thousand (some say
thirty thousand) men in Arms; Some of the Nobility, and many Gentlemen of
quality trayling pikes voluntarily amongst them. The Prisoners brought through
the Army, and sufficiently hooted at, they afterward drove the Coach under
Tyburn, and there made a stand. This was done (I s^^pose) to mind them of
th^^^ destiny, or at least of their dese^^^ and to disgrace them, who ha^^ so
long time insulted and d^mineered over the Nobility, Ge^try and Commonalty of
the Kingdom. A just reward to use the^ uncivilly, who had so barbarously abused
both King and People.

The Parliament according t^^ Appointment, began at Westmi^ster, April the
twenty fifth, the House of Commons being electe^ and called by Writs, issuin^
out in the name of the Keepers o^ the Liberties of England, by a^thority of
Parliament, (a Titl^ invented presently upon the chang^ of the Government from
a Monarchy to a Commonwealth in the year one thousand six hundred for^^ eight)
the Lords and Peers of the upper House taking their places by virtue of their
birthrights and ancient dignities.

Soon after the sitting of the Parliament, there arrived at London, the Lord
Mordant and Sir John Greenvile with a Declaration from his Majesty, as also
several Letters. One to the House of of P^ers; another to the House of Commons;
a third to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London;
and a fourth to General Monk, to be by him communicated to the Council of
State, and to the Officers of the several Armies under his Command: which
Declaration and several Letters from his Majesty, were presented according to
their several directions, May the first.

In his Declaration, he offers (...) 1. A general Pardon to all of a^^ sorts,
excepting only such as the Parliament should think fit to except: provided,
that they sue ou^ their Pardons under the great Sea^ of England, within forty
daye^ after the publication thereof.

2. He offers a Liberty to tender Consciences for matters of Religion so far
forth as the Parliament should think fit; and to consent to such an Act as the
Parliament for that purpose shall tender to his Majesty.

3. For the sales and purchases of Lands made since these late troubles, he is
willing to leave it to the determination of Parliament, whom he presumes best
able to provide for the satisfaction of all such as are concerned therein.

And Lastly, he promises full satisfaction of Arrears to all Officers and
Soldiers of General Monck's Army, and to receive them into his service upon as
good pay and conditions, as they now enjoy. This was the sum of his
Declaration, published at Breda, April 14. 1660. in the twelfth year of his
Majesty's Reign.

This Declaration together with his several Letters aforementioned, were
highly accepted. The Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, after the reading
of them, cried out unanimously, God save King Charles; and presently took down
the Commonwealths Arms that hung in the Guild Hall, and (as they say) brake
them in pieces, ordering the King Arms to be hung up in their place, and gave
solemn thanks by their Recorder to his Majesty's Messengers.

The Lords received their Lette^ by the Lord Mordant, with the li^^^ joy and
loyal affection. The Hou^^ of Commons having read their Le^ter and the
Declaration, voted (...) satisfactory; and presently vote^ the Government of
the Nation t^ be in his Majesty, as the rightful an^ undoubted heir of the
three Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland; They ordered also (...)
Committee to meet for drawing up a Letter of thanks to his Majesty for his most
gracions Declaration: And to Sir John Greenvile who delivered the Letter, they
gave five hundred pound as a gratuity to buy him a Jewel.

Both they and the Lords further ordered, that six of the upper House, and
fifteen of the House of Commons should be forthwith sent to his Majesty, to
invite and attend him into to England. Montague the Admiral at Sea is commanded
to wait upon him, with a Squadron of Ships, and fifty thousand pound is ordered
for his Majestjes expenses, as also ten thousand pound to the Duke of York, and
five thousand pound to the Duke of Gloucester.

The Letter also and Declaration to the Army, gave no lesser satisfaction both
to the General, Officers and Soldiers; they all unanimously owning his Majesty
in an high degree.

On Tuesday the eighth of May, the King was solemnly proclaimed in London, with
the greatest expressions and acclamations of Joy that possibly could be; and
the like was soon after done in all Counties, Cities, Corporations, and inlet
Towns all over England. No King ever coming to his Throne, with (...) great
satisfaction and rejoicing of the People; thereby giving an eviden^
Demonstration to the world, that i^ was not the People of England, not the
Parliament or Representative^ of the People, but only a factious and seditious
party, encouraged and supported by a perfidious and traitorous Army, that
murdered the late King, disinherited his children, and overthrew the ancient
Fundamental and well constituted government of the Nation, turning it from a
Monarchy to a Commonwealth; and thereby occasioned these horrid confusions, and
frequent changes and reelings of Government, that afterward ensued, to the
high reproach and dishonor of the English Nation. For no sooner were the
People and Parliament of England, by the mercy of God, delivered from the
vassallage of an imperious and domineering Army, and put in a condition of
freedom, but they presently return to their Allegiance, and call in the
undoubted Heir of the Crown, submitting to his Government, with the greatest
cheerfulness and rejoicing that could be imagined.

And thus God who only does wonders, has wrought wonderfully for this sinful
Nation, turning our Captivity, as the Rivers in the South, smoothly, gently,
calmly, without any tumult or torrent, after so many horrid confusions, as we
have lain under for so many years together, even to the wonder and
astonishment, not only of our selves, but of all the Neighbor Nations round
about us; who must needs acknowledge in our behalf, (as was sometimes done in
the case of Israel,) that the Lord has done great things for them; and we must
needs with the Israelites answer, by way of echo, Yea the Lord has done great
thing for us already whereof we rejoice, Psalm 126. The People of England were
never conceived or reported to be so much against their King, as now they
manifestly appear to be for him; even all of all sorts, but such only whose
guilt makes them desperate, like Cain, thinking their wickedness greater then
can be forgiven. And here for a conclusion, we may fitly and truly (in a sense)
take take up that saying of the Psalmist, and apply it to the present occasion:
The same stone which the builders refused, is become the headstone of the
Corner: This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

To the same God be Glory for his great and Glorious Work. May 21. 1660.
FINIS.
Books printed for Robert Gibb^ at the Ball in Chancery Lane.
STemma Sacrum, The Royal Progeny, by Giles Fleming, Minister o^ Waddingworth
in the County of Lincoln.

Epinicia Carolina, or an Essay upon the Return of his sacred Majesty, Charles
the second; by S. Woodford Gent. quarto.

The blessed Estate of them that die in the Lord; by Tho. Manton Minister of
Covent Garden, preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Jane Blackwell, Wife of Elidad
Blackwell.

An hundred choice Meditations Divine and Moral; by Henry Tubb M. A. of Saint
John's College in Cambridge.

Sensuality dissected, or the Epicure's Motto, opened, censured, improved,
preached at the Kentish Feast.

The Saints Gods precious Treasure, being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Darcy Wyvil Esquire Eldest Son to the truly honorable Sir Christopher VVyvil.

The Excellent Woman a Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Scot.

The vanity of glorying in the flesh, in a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Kingswel Lucy Esquire These four Sermons all preached by Tho. Case Minister of
Saint Giles in the Fields, and may be bound in one volume in 120.

Fundamentum Patriae: OR, ENGLAND's Settlement: BEING A VIEW OF The STATE of
AFFAIRS In this Kingdom, Since his Majesty's Restoration, to the year 1665.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Rooks, at the Lamb and Ink-bottle at the East End
of S. Paul's. 1665.

A Brief View of England's Settlement, after the Troubles, and Confusions,
began, and occasioned by the Prevalent Faction of the Long Parliament, being
the National History continued from the Restoration of His most Sacred Majesty
King CHARLES the Second, to the beginning of the year 1663.
THe face of Things began to look toward a settlement upon General MONK 's
auspicious closure with the City of LONDON; 1660. Apr. 25.
and fairer hopes of Peace appeared upon his restoring the Secluded Members,
and their Votes for their own dissolution, and the speedy calling of a Free
Parliament: but when, according to appointment, it began at Westminster on
April the twen^^ fifth, the House of Commons being electe^ and called by Writs
issued out in the Na^^ of The Keepers of the Liberties of ENGLAND by authority
of Parliament; a^^ the Lords and Peers of the Vpper-House r^suming their
ancient Birthrights, and hereditary Privileges; the Expectations of (...)
men, as well as Their Desires, who wishe^ well to the Prosperity of the Nation,
was that its settlement would be most surely an^ steadfastly founded in the
Restoration (...) their Native Prince, His now most Sacre^ Majesty, to those
His undoubted Prerogatives, and Rights, which hitherto He ha^ Himself been
unjustly kept from by rebellious Usurpation, and for the maintenan^^ whe^eof,
and the Subjects just Liberties, H^^ Royal Father had fell a blessed Martyr,
an^ glorious Sacrifice. While this restori^^ the King was, in all wise Patriots
opinion the oneliest Expedient, and surest Founda^^ on for settlement of the
Kingdom, other wise now drawing on to a fatal Period, an^ almost breathless;
yet so general a stain o^ Delinquency had sullied the face of the who^^ Nation,
what by rebellious Actings, unwo^^ thy Compliances, or cowardly Submission that
they thought it needful at the fa^^^ time to restore the King His Crown and
Dignity, and be by Him restored in Blood themselves. So formal an Attainder did
the Parliament pass on the Nation's late rebellious Enormities. And this made
way for consulting how to procure from His Majesty at His return for all former
misdeeds His Gracious Impunity. But the Royal Favor prevents them suddenly by
a Declaration sent from Breda by the Lord Viscount Mordant, and Sir John
Greenvil (now Earl of Bath) accompanied with a Letter to the House of Peers;
another to the House of Commons; a third to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of LONDON; a fourth to General MONK, to be by him
communicated to the then Council-of-State (whereof he was a Member) and the
Officers of the respective Armies under his command. The Royal Declaration, and
these Letters were, according to the Directions, and Orders, which they had
received from His Majesty, presented severally on the first of May following.
May 1.
The substance of all which, and the general applause and acceptance they met
with respectively from the whole Body of the Nation, being given you in the
former part of this History, it shall suffice in brief therefore here only to
say, that the issue a^^ product of the general joy thence conceiv^^ was, that
the House of Lords thereon Res^ved upon eight Lords to join in a Comm^^tee with
the like number of Commons, (...) take into consideration such things, as mig^^
orderly tend to the good and necessary en^ of obtaining the King's return again
u^^ His People, whereby the Breaches might made up, and a firm Peace settled;
and wit^ all to frame a Letter of Thanks and A^^ knowledgment to His Majesty
for His G^^cious Letter and Declaration. The Comm^^ on their part appointed a
Committee (...) the same ends also, and having ordered (...) John Greenvil 500
l. to buy him a Jewel a^ Testimony of the respects of that Ho^^^ to him, and as
a Badg of Honor for brining them so Gracious a Message from (...) Majesty, it
was left to the Council-of-St^^^ to see it paid; and referred by a Committ^^ to
the City to consider how 50000 (...) might be speedily raised, and presented
(...) Majesty, and a further sum to gratify (...) Army; May 2.
who on the day following present their General MONK an Address in t^^ name of
themselves and their Brethren, (...) stifying their compliance with, and
sub^^sion to the products of the Parliame^^ Counsels, and their acquiescency in
His Majesty's Declaration.

On the third of May also General Mon^ague, May 3.
and the whole Fleet under his Command, having received and read a Letter
di^ected to General Monk and himself, together with His Majesty's Gracious
Message, and His Royal Declaration, submitted unanimously.

This new face of the public Affairs caused Easter-Term to be adjourned till
Quin^ue Pasche, which was on the eighth of this Month of May. The day before,
May 7.
King CHARLES the First his Statue, which had ^een thrown down by the violent
and traite^ous Defacers as well of the living Patterns, ^s the senseless
Monuments of Monarchy, was set up again in Guild-Hall-yard, and a^ew restored.
And about this time the Gene^al Convention in Ireland declared their
De^estation of the unjust Proceedings against ^is late Royal Majesty King
CHARLES the first in the pretended High-Court-of-Justice.

And now, after so long domestic Trou^ies, besides those foreign ones, which
the Vsurper's Policy had involved the Nation ^n, to secure his own single more
then the ^ublick Interest, the voice of Peace and Gladness seemed to be
returning again to the English Borders; while, besides t^^ hopes of an home
Tranquillity, a daily ^^crease of Trade was expected both Inwa^^ and Outward: a
mutual discharge of P^^soners both on our and the Spanish part being agreed on,
and signed by the Lord G^neral MONK, and the Marquess de Car^cena; and
accordingly the Spanish Prisone^ were on the tenth of May discharged from
Chelsey-College, May 10.
and the Commissioners f^^ the Admiralty and Navy Ordered to p^^ the rest of
the Agreement in speedy exe^^tion. But, His Majesty being not yet act^ally
returned, and that Faction, whose Inte^^ests at first involved the Nation in
bloo^ still endeavoring to keep it so, rath^^ then to admit His most Sacred
Majesty (...) those Rights, and Privileges, the then R^presentative Power of
the Nation had d^clared His; since the horrid guilt of the^ Crimes, and
Treasons, did make them d^^ spair of ever obtaining either Pardon, (...)
Impunity, though from the meekest a^^ mildest of Kings; the Lords and Commo^^
Assembled in Parliament, to prevent tho^^ Tumults, Riots, Outrages, and
Misdemea^^ ours, which might be attempted by su^^ unquiet and discontented
spirits, to the d^^turbance of the Public Peace, and the ^^menting New
Troubles, did on Monday, May the seventh, by Proclamation Order, May 7.
and Declare, That all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Constables, and
other Ministers of Public Justice, that were in Office on the twenty fifth day
of April, 1660, should be continued in their respective Offices, and exercise
the same in the King's Majesty's Name, and Style, and use their best
endeavors to suppress, and prevent all Riots, Tumults, unlawful Assemblies,
and Misdemeanors whatsoever against the Laws and Peace of the Realm, and all
Treasonable and Seditious Words, Reports, and Rumors against His Majesty's
Royal Person and Authority, and proceed against all Offenders therein according
to Law and Justice. And for the better enabling them to effect the same, all
Military Officers, and Soldiers, and all others, were by the same Proclamation
enjoined to be aiding and assisting to them therein. The Civil Magistrate being
thus empowred for the preserving the Public Peace, now in so fair a way of
settlement, from infringement by any Insurrections whatever; and the Military
Forces of the City-Trained-Bands and Auxiliaries appearing both so numerous and
unanimous at their Rendezvous in Hide-Park, on Tuesday the twenty fourth of
April last pa^^ where they were drawn forth according (...) an Order of the
Council-of-State; and th^^ Commissioners for attending His Majest^ both from
the House of Lords, the Common^ and the City, with their several respecti^^
Answers to His Royal Letter, and humb^^ Thanks for His Gracious Declaration,
being nominated and agreed on, and Present provided to be sent by them to the
KING and His two most Royal Brothers, JAME^ Duke of YORK, and HENRY Duke (...)
GLOUCESTER: on Tuesday, May the eighth, May 8.
His Sacred Majesty, with the greatest signs of Affection and Loyalt^ from
Persons of all Degrees, Qualities, an^ Sex, was solemnly Proclaimed in the
Citie^ of London and Westminster, according t^ the ancient Ceremonies; and,
within (...) short time after, all the rest of the Kingdom over, with the like
Demonstrations either of a joyful Acceptance, or a quiet Submission at least,
and Acquiescency. And now the next Votes of the Houses were (wh^^ the regular
course of Affairs it self dictated) for His speedy return to the Parliament,
an^ the executing of His Kingly Office. An^ by other Orders in the interim the
Arms o^ the Commonwealth veil in all Courts of J^stice, and other Public
places both at Land and Sea, and give place to the Ensigus Royal; the Ministers
likewise, who hitherto, either for fear, or disaffection, had discontinued, and
left off that solemnest piece of Apostolic and Primitive Devotion of praying
for their Lawful Magistrate and Sovereign, were now enjoined in their Public
Prayers to pray for the KING's most Excellent Majesty by the Name of Our
Sovereign Lord CHARLES by the Grace of God of Engl^nd, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. and for the most Illustrious Prince
JAMES Duke of YORK, and the rest of the Royal Progeny; while Dr. Matthew
Griffith, and several others, who had been before secured for promoting and
preaching-up the Regal Interest, were discharged, and set again at liberty. All
Proceedings whatever in all particular Courts of Judicature, and elsewhere,
were next Ordered to be in His Majesty's Name: and a Committee appointed to
consider of the Manner of His return, and to prepare all things necessary for
His reception; which was afterward referred to the Council-of-State.

On Thursday, being the tenth of May, May 10.
both Houses kept a day of solemn Thanksgiving for the deliverance of the
Nati^^ from that Oppression, that it had so lo^^ groaned under; which being
performed a^cording to the ancient Discipline of the Church of England, and His
Majesty prayed-for in public before them according (...) their late Resolves;
the Commons afte^ wards, both Houses being sat, Ordere^ That those Opprobrious
Badges, known (...) the name of the Scotch Colors, which the Usurper had
caused to be hanged up i^ Westminster Hall in memory of the Defe^ given the
Army under the Command (...) Duke Hamilton on the seventeenth of A^gust 1648,
should be forthwith taken down which was done accordingly. Then, having passed
Instructions for the Commissioners, who were to carry the Letters to H^^
Majesty both from the Lords and Commons which were together with the Letters
delivered to Denzil Hollis Esquire (one of the Commissioners from the House of
Commons, and since by His Majesty's especial favor, on April the twentieth
1661 created Baron Hollis of Ifeld) on the eleventh and twelfth the said
Commissioners, together with those from the City, began their journey toward
His Majesty, whose Names (...) here insert for the preservation (as f^r as
^^mellies) of that Honor, which was then justly done to Persons so happily
instrumental in the settling both of the King's Person, and the Kingdom's
Peace. For the House of Lords went the Earls of Middlesex, and Warwick, with
the Lord Brooks, Lord Viscount Hereford, and Lord Barkley: Dr. Charlton was
appointed their Physician. The House of Commons was represented by the Lords
Fairfax, Bruce, Falkland, Castleton, Herbert, and Mandevil; to whom were added
Sir Horatio Townshend, Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper, Sir George Booth, Sir John
Holland, Sir Henry Cholmley, and the forenamed Denzil Hollis Esquire. The
Commissioners for the Honorable City of London, were Sir James Bunce Baronet,
Alderman Langham, Alderman Reynardson, Alderman Brown, Sir Nicholas Crisp,
Alderman Thompson, Alderman Frederick, Alderman Adams, Recorder Wild, Alderman
Robinson, Alderman Bateman, Alderman Wale, Theophilus Biddolph, Richard Ford,
William Vincent, Thomas Bludworth, William Bateman, John Jews, Esquires, Major
Chamberlain, and Colonel Bromfield. May 11, 12.
Of the Commissioners of the Lords and Commons part began their journey on the
eleventh, and the residue set forward in a costly Brigandine on the twelfth; at
what time those (...) the City began in Coaches their progre^^ also. Sir John
Greenvil, having taken hi^ leave of both Houses, his Excellency, and the City,
had returned a day or two before, to attend the service of His Sacred Majesty.
These being thus dispatched on their Message, the two Houses next care was for
the securing the Public Peace until His Majesty's arrival, or that His
Pleasure were farther known. To which end also the Council-of-State was very
diligent in the Commitment and Examinations of all Persons, who seemed any way
disaffected: while some Magistrates also, known Abettors of, and Actors in most
of the Vsurper's Counsels, and whom the Declaration of May the seventh
aforementioned had continued in their respective Offices, were as earnest and
busy herein, as the most truly Loyal; hoping perhaps, that, if they could make
a discovery of other men's guilt, it would be a sufficient Atonement for their
own former Delinquency. But the prudent Parliament taking into their
consideration the preparing Bills in order to the making and drawing up of an
Act of Oblivion, which His Majesty promised, in His Declaration from Breda,
that He would pass with the Royal Assent for all but His Father's Murderers;
they, having first heard the whole Proceedings of that pretended Trial read,
made an advised progress in the Exemption of those blackest Traitors from all
Impunity. Yet, while they intended the Exemplary punishment of the Actors and
Designers of so horrid and execrable a Barbarism, as the Murder of His late
Majesty was, they proceeded cautiously withal, to prevent new dangers, and
disturbances, which might arise from a jealousy thence enkindled in the
breasts of others, whose Actions or Compliances might, if not remitted, and
forgiven them by the Royal Clemency, render them likewise criminal. Of this
sort some few, both in the City, and other the remoter parts of the Nation, had
about this time attempted some Bustle, and designed some mad kind of private
Rising; having provided Saddles, and Arms, to furnish out those Horses they
could feloniously catch napping at Grass, or burglarily fetch out of the Owners
Stables. So certain is it, that n="*" 1 Samuel xv. 22.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft; and that there is a complication of all
Crimes else, where Treason is Head and Leader. But this was but a shallow
Design, and truly fanatical; the vigilance of the Council-of-State over the
City, and of those other Honorable Pers^nages the respective Countries were
for the ^^^sent put under, and entrusted with, pr^^ ^^^ting them both in the
one place, an^ ^^e other. Another party of them, wh^ either had received of
their fellow-Traitor^ as the reward of their Treason, some portion of the Crown
or Church Lands; or els^ by a just Providence were suffered to purchase at low
and under-rates a Canker to their whole Estates, as a worthy guerdon o^^ their
sacrilegious Covetise, seeing the Stream bent against them, and the Tide
retiring from their Mills, bethought themselves of acting more politickly then
the others that were the madd^r did, to hazard their lives by a new Rebellion
for to secure to themselves Es^^^ ^o unjustly gotten: but held it the be^^^
^art of Prudence, to make Hay rather w^^^ the Sun shone; and accordingly fell
to d^^astation of the Woods and Timber, the committing of Waste, and other
illegal practices, in those Houses, and on those Lands, which they did for that
present time enjoy, but knew e're long they must unwillingly part withal. To
redress which Grievances, and remedy so injurious Actings, a Military Power was
not so proper as some wholesome and timely Orders of Parliament: which the
House of Lords did ^ssue out, to put a stop to the demolishing, defacing, or
committing Waste, in any Houses, or Lands, belonging to the King's Majesty; and
that no Wood, or Timber should be felled, and what was already felled, and
remained there, should not be thence removed, until the pleasure of both
Houses were further signified concerning the same. Whereunto the Commons also
on the seventeenth of May concurred, May 17.
until further Order came from His Majesty.

And now they seemed at some leisure to proceed in the Bill of Assessments,
which appeared to be of highest necessity at that present. But, amidst that
Debate, one Resolve passed them, though not of so absolute a public
concernment, yet doubtless of very great Piety, Charity, and Justice; yea, and
I may add Prudence too: for, since the Exchequer was now anew to be sanctified
(as I may say) and restored to its primitive use of supplying the true and
lawful Sovereign, it was highly fit, that it should be purged first from their
sacrilegious defilements, who had indeed made it sacred, but, in that same
sense, as the Heathen Poet termed their beloved Gold so. And this the Commons
on Friday May the eleventh effected, May 11.
whereby they voted back the repayment thence of seven thousand nine hundred
seventy and eight pounds eight shillings and nine pence; which, being former^^
collected under pretense of the relief of the poor Protestants in Piedmont and
Polan^ the rapacious Talons of the late-chase Harpies had wrested from the
hands of the Treasurers (wherein it was entrusted for the charitable purpose)
and brought in thithe^ to manage, and back the prosecution (...) their own
Designs. As if they could no^ abuse the People's well-meant charity hig^
enough; unless what they so freely had co^tributed to the supply of those, who
distr^sedly survived those foreign Massacres, we^ diverted and turned into a
Subsidy rather (...) hasten and help forward one at home: whi^^ they should buy
with their own mon^ their own destruction at the hands of th^^ Janissaries. Well
therefore might that H^nourable House, when they Voted, that o^ of such moneys,
as should come into the said Receipt of Exchequer upon the moie^ of the Excise,
2000 l. per mensem should b^ repaid, until the whole were satisfied; an^
whatever remained of the said moneys, (...) collected for the relief of those
distress^ Protestants, in the hands of any Sheriffs, Collectors, should not be
diverted by returns thither, but paid into the respective Treasurers for the
same: Well might they then Declare withal their detestation and abhorrence of
the diversion of the said money from the Charitable uses, to which it was
originally intended.

And, since Charity begins (as we say) at home, at this time, when they
tendered so much the condition of the distressed Protestant abroad, upon the
season (...) Address of the Commissioners for the (...) ^^^dom of Ireland to
them, showing that, since His Majesty neither in His Gracious Letters, nor
Declaration from Breda, had taken notice of that Kingdom, brought to great
distraction and disorder by the late bloody Rebellion, and therefore standing
in need of some to heal their Breaches, they humbly craved, that the two Houses
would be pleased to grant them their assistance and concurrence to the King's
Majesty, for the calling and holding a Parliament there, for the resettlement
of that Kingdom: both Houses agreed to offer it as their Desire to His Majesty,
that a speedy Convention of Parliament might be there had for the set^ing the
distractions of that Nation; the Members whereof they desired withal might be
Protestants, both Peers and C^^mons.

But, having thus dispatched Commissioners to entreat His Majesty's return,
an^ taken all possible care, that it might be (...) peace, it was fit next to
provide for His reception, which a Committee of Lords w^ appointed to consider
of; who by seve^ Orders empowred the respective House-k^^pers of the Palaces
Royal to require all (...) habitan^ (...) Lodgers (except his Excellency the
(...) General Monk) to quit the abode therein, in order to the fitting a^^
preparing them for His Majesty's entertai^ment. And indeed the stench of the
R^bellion had so infected them, that it w^^ but necessary to cleanse and air
them, e^^ they trusted His Royal Person amidst the Infection, which had
polluted the very Wa^ and Fabrics: insomuch, that the ne^ trimming was not
more for decency, the necessity-sake.

And, that they might not (when clea^sed) want their Furniture, some throug^^
fear of guilt, and some to make their pea^ up, and others out of pure and
unspott^^ Loyalty, made daily Discoveries both of ^^veral sums of public
money, that we^^ concealed, and His Majesty's Goods, whi^^ had been embezzeled
during the Rebellion.

In the interim the only Thing of remark was the great Joy, and Acclamation,
that was expressed every where in the respective Cities and Market Towns at His
Majesty's being solemnly proclaimed therein; insomuch, that, when the
expressions thereof by the public Bon-fires, beat of Drums, flourishing of
Colors, Volleys of Shot, and the like, are considered, it must needs be
acknowledged for the most universal joy, the Nation ever did, or could express:
and the Bells rang every where such happy Changes, that, while some tolled His
Majesty in, others chimed His welcome, and the Saints-bell minded all People to
perform their Devotions for His welfare and prosperity; so that England might,
if ever, now justly be termed the ringing Island: while Ireland, which had
sometime before submitted in their Civil Power to His Majesty, and acquiesced
in the sense of the English Parliament, came in with that Army to make up the
consort and melody, by their professing all ready obedience to the Commands and
Orders of his Excellency General Monk; so that even that Brigade, who but
lately before under Lambert would have sold the Bells of all Churches as
useless, having b^^ter bethought themselves, find them no^ necessary, and
themselves lay an helping hand to raise them, to declare their conte^^ and
satisfaction in His most Sacred Maj^stie's happy Restoration.

The King in the mean while, togeth^^ with His Brothers, the most Illustrious
Princes, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, contin^ed with their Sister the
Princess Royal (...) Her Palace in Breda: where hearing of the approach of Dr.
Clarges, who went ov^^ thither to wait on his Majesty with His Brother his
Excellencie's Letters, and willin^ to do him a particular Honor for his
Relation's sake, and his own desert in being Instrumental in the ^^te so happy
Change, H^ sent the lord Gerard, with other Gentle m^^ of ^^^^ted-chamber, and
several Cou^^^^^ (...)-Officers, with their Coaches and Retinue, to receive
him; upon who^ after Audience He conferred the Honor o^ Knighthood.

And now when the other parts of Europ^ perceived, that the late-distracted
Englan^ was come to her Senses again so far, and quit of that Frenzy, which her
late Quack Reformers had put her in, and was willing to become a Patient under
the Royal Physician, it was observable, that Heathen Persia did not alone adore
the rising Sun, but Western Christendom too had a spice of that Devotion:
while Spain and France congratulate His dawning Glories, and attend Him by
their public Ministers, which appeared to be but His Par-helii; and the
States General, like the lesser Celestial Luminary, by their public Addresses
and Respects to Him, sought to be enlightened by the communication of His
splendor, and to feel from Him that cherishing warmth they had always found
under the English Protection. Thus while the English Court (for that takes
denomination still from the Residence of the Royal Majesty) was by Foreigners
frequented daily, and they considered the order and discipline thereof, and the
deportment of the English there, they quickly found, that the genuine Character
of a true Englishman was thence to be taken, and neither from the exorbitant
Faction, nor Rebellion.

The Commons in England in the interim proceeded in the Bill of Oblivion, and
Ordered, that John Bradshaw, Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, and Thomas Pride,
deceased, should be attainted of High Treason for murdering of His Majesty's
Father of ever-blessed Memory: and the late S^^cretary Thurloe, that right hand
of Usupation, was committed to the custody of the Sergeant-at-Arms upon an
accusation of High Treason; while all Books, Writings, and Records, that any
way related to the Public, were taken into safe possession, to prevent the
embezelment thereof; but that they might give light in the revealing and
discovery of the late Mysterious Cabal of Rebellion. At the same time also they
appointed Alderman Langham to provide Robes of Ermin, and Alderman Viner (...)
Crown and Scepter for His Majesty: while others by Order furnished Silks,
Velvet, Linen, and whatever else was judged convenient for His Royal use. And,
among the other Preparations for His return, the Galleries and Chapel at
White Hall, whose Fabric, as well as the Devotions formerly used therein, had
suffered an Alteration under the Usurper, was restored to its pristine order
and beauty, and its Innovations quite extirpated. Nor did the Maces, those
Ensigns of Honor, formerly as venerable in this Nation as the Fasces among the
Romans, want now any longer the restitution of the reverence due to them, and
those formal Causes, which made them so, the Signature of the Royal Arms and
Crown: of which Make two were by Order prepared; the one for the House, the
other for the Council-of-State: who made good use both of that, and the Power
they were entrusted with to conserve the Public Peace, in securing, and
committing whoever had been active in helping on the Nation's former miseries,
or were endeavoring to procure new disturbances; the seizure and commitment of
which Persons by them was all approved of by the House; who likewise, to
prevent the earthing of such Foxes, Ordered several Castles, and
Fortifications, which might be most in danger of a surprizal by a Rebellious
Party, to be dismantled, and demolished; and among others (with the consent of
the Earl of Worcester, and the Lord Herbert, the Proprietaries thereof)
Chepstow-Castle was slighted, and the Ammunition thereof disposed of by his
Excellency.

Other Orders the Houses passed still daily of smaller concernment, yet such as
the necessity of the Times required; while the main of their Business was the
preparing Bills for the Acts of Oblivion, and Assessment of 70000 l. per
mensem, and 400000 l. to be raised by Poll, for His Majesty's use, and in
order to the payment of the Arrears of the Army and Navy, and the other
pu^^lick Debts of the Nation: for which En^ while they debated often in Grand
Commi^^tees how to raise that money, it was but necessary Vote, that passed
against the transporting Bullion (which we our selve so much needed) without
the especial leav^ of the House.

The City in the interim were diligent i^ keeping their own Peace within
themselves* and chiefly busied themselves in several temporary Affairs in order
to the receiving and entertaining of the Royal Presence at Hi^ return: and all
Things, as well as Persons seemed to tend to Him-ward, as their proper Center,
and place of Rest; while the General, and what other Members he should desire
to accompany him, had the leave of the House to attend Him at His Landing.

The English Commissioners in the inter im arrive at the Hague, where the Earl
of Oxford delivered the Message to His Majesty from the House of Lords, Denzil
Hollis from the Commons, and the Recorder of London from the City: at which
time the King conferred the Honor of Knighthood with the Lord Gerard's Sword
on all the City-Commissioners. And now the States General treated and
entertained Him with ^he greatest expressions of Joy imaginable; and had
Audience several times of Him, to Whom they addressed in French, and He
^nswered them in the same Language. But, ^o complete their Entertainments of
Him, and as the last Expressions of their Affections to Him, ere He took leave
of their Country and Shipping for England, they received Him at a stately Feast
in a large Room all lined with Glass, wherein a Canopy of State was hung over
His head, with Crowns of Bays decked with Oranges, and Crystal Candle-sticks
standing round the Room. The State thereof was great, and highly magnificent,
befitting the Personages of such great Princes, as were regaled thereat: where
His Sacred Majesty sat at the upper end of the Table, His Royal Aunt the Queen
of Bohemia on his Right Hand, and His Illustrious Sister the Princess Royal on
His left; the Duke of York at the Right Hand of the side of the Table, the Duke
of Gloucester at the left, and next him the Prince of Orange. The States of
Holland supped bare together with His Majesty. One of the Courses was served up
in Gold-plate, which was afterward presented to the King, being valued at
threescore thousand pounds. The Royal Banquet was flang on (...) Ground, after
which was variety of Mu^^ Fire and Waterworks, with several vo^^ both of great
and small Guns, the rep^^ whereof was carried from one Port to a^^ther
throughout all Holland. And, to (...) a farther satisfaction to His Majesty,
t^^ presented to His Royal Cousin the Pri^^ of Orange a full Confirmation of
all ^^nours, and Profits, which His Father (...) ever enjoyed. And, for a final
Comp^^ment, they presented the King with a B^^ which cost seven thousand pounds
sterli^^ and Table-linen to the value of a thousa^^ pounds, and six hundred
thousand Gild^^* This Royal Treatment of the States be^^ over, and accepted
with as great a kind^^ by His Majesty, as it was given by the^ He made choice
of eighty Gentlemen to (...) of His Lifeguard under the command of t^^ Lord
Gerard; and, Monday and Tuesd^^ following being spent by the Duke of Yo^^ as
Lord High-Admiral of England, in g^ving Orders to the Fleet for His Majestie^
Reception, and the transporting of all His Retinue; May 23.
on Wednesday ( May 23.) His Sacred Majesty, the Queen of Bohemia, the Princess
Royal, the most Illustrious the Dukes of York and Gloucester, and the Prince
(...) Orange, went aboard General Mounta^^ in the Ship formerly named the
Naseby, ^^t now new-named by His Majesty the Royal-Charles; where, after a
repast, the Queen of Bohemia, the Princess Royal, and the Prince of Orange
having taken leave of His Majesty, they set sail for England; the King in the
Royal-Charles, the Duke of York in the London, and the Duke of Gloucester in the
James (formerly called the Swift-sure) at which time the Speaker likewise was
new-named the Princess Mary. When, prosperous Winds filling those Sails, which
conducted that Bark, that bore the British Caesar, and Great Britain's Fortune,
May 25.
they came on the Friday following within sight of Dover about three of the
clock in the morning. Of which his Excellency the Lord General Monk being
advertised by an Express, he made such speed from Canterbury to kiss His
Majesty's Hand, and tender Him all the dutiful respects of a Loyal Subject,
that he arrived at Dover about one of the clock the same day. But, when His
Majesty, with His two Illustrious Brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloucester,
and many of His Nobles landed, about three in the afternoon, at the Beech near
the Pier, it was admirable to behold the Best of Kings account it no diminution
of His Majesty condescend to the embracing of the (...) deserving of Subjects,
and the most-deser^^ Subject modestly to decline the suspicio^^ any ostentation
of Merit on his part f^^^ the Best of Kings: while his Excelle^^ kneeling with
an humble prostration be^^ Him, was taken up by His Majesty wit^ affectionate
Kisses, and Embracements, (...) it had been a Courtesy of Favor, and (...) of
Duty, which was done Him by His S^^ject; with whom he walked up toward (...)
Coach, a Canopy being carried over (...) Head, and a Chair-of-State by Him.
(...) which Passage the Mayor and Aldermen^^ Dover met Him, and made their
duti^^ Address by a short Speech unto Him; wh^^ being ended, Mr. Redding, their
Minist^^ presented Him with a large Bible with Go^ Clasps, a Gift, suitable to
his Ministeri^ Profession. Being come to His Coach, H^^ Majesty and His Royal
Brother the Duke (...) York took one end, the Duke of Glocest^^ and his
Excellency the other, and the Duk^ of Buckingham the Boot; all being attended
by several Coaches with six Horses, and many on horseback. About two miles
from Dover the King took Horse, the Dukes Royal on His Right Hand, and the
General o^ ^is left bare-headed; after whom follow^d the Duke of Buckingham and
several of ^^e Nobility and Gentry uncovered: in which progressive posture they
arrived at Canterbury; where His Majesty met the Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder
thereof, who, after a Speech made to Him, delivered (...) Gold Tankerd for a
Present: after which ^hey conducted Him to the Palace, where He rested until
Monday, May 28.
and then set forward on His journey for London.

But, in the intermediate spaces of all this Glorious Reception, many signal
Honors were conferred on several Persons by His Majesty, according to the
merits of their Actings for His Restoration. But most remarkable was His
conferring the Honor of being Companion of the most Noble Order of the Garter
on his Excellency the Lord General Monk; at what time His Majesty Himself put
the George on him, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester the Garter; all Three
jointly testifying thereby the great sense and esteem They had of his Loyalty,
and those succesfull Endeavors of his for their Return and Restitution. For
the greater Solemnity of which Ceremony (as much as the inconveniences of Time
and Place would permit) His Majesty made the Earl of Winchelsea and the Lord
M^^^^ Knights thereof likewise: his Excellen^^ ^^ing made withal
Captain-GENERA^^ all the Landforces, Garrisons, Forts, (...) Castles in
England, Scotland, and Irel^^^ and Master of the Horse to His Maj^^^ Mr.
William Morris, a Devonshire Ge^^^man, and related to the General, and (...)
great Confident in the menagery of (...) great Affair of bringing in His
Majesty, (...) then also by Him Knighted, made on^^ His Principal
Secretaries-of-State, and to ^ther with his Excellency, the Earl of
So^^^hampton, and Sir Anthony Ashley-Co^^^^ sworn of His most. Honorable Privy
C^^cil. Besides whom, in respect of the p^^cular Services performed to His
Majesty (...) late by each of them, Edward Massey (...) (commonly called
Major General Mass^^ John Robinson Esquire Alderman of the ^^ty of London,
(...) Harvey, (...) Stufeley, Sir Edward Rossiter, Sir Ph^^^ Howard, and Sir
Robert Paston received (...) Honor of Knighthood.

The House of Commons in the interi^^^ were debating concerning the public
A^fairs of the Kingdom, when they received (...) Letter from His Majesty,
signifying His (...) ^ent to be at White Hall on the Tuesday f^^lowing ( May
29.) by twelf of the clock, when He appointed the Lords to meet Him there.
There were at this time also several Bills depending before them; as, 1.
Concerning Excise and Customs, which way they might most advance the Trade of
the Nation, 2. For continuance of Process and Judicial Proceedings, 3. For
confirmation of the Privileges of Parliament, Magna Charta, etc. 4. For keeping
a perpetual Anniversary for a day of Thanksgiving to God for his great Mercy
and Blessing to our Nations in the happy Restoration of His Majesty; and that
the twenty-ninth day of May should be set apart for that purpose. But of these
I shall give a farther Account, when they came to be passed as Acts at the
concluding of that Sessions of Parliament. An Ordinance in the mean time passed
both Houses for the Assessment of 7000 l. per mensem for three months, to
commence from the twenty-fourth of June following. Three Proclamations also
passed them: one, instead of a Declaration, concerning the Irish Rebels;
another against Jesuits, Seminaries, Popish Recusants, etc. and a third for
preventing of Forceable Entries, and to preserve the peace of the Kingdom. And
at this time that most notorious Ch^at of all Cheats, the late- States
Butter-Print, call^ by them the Great-Seal of ENGLAND being in the custody of
the late Commiss^^ners, was brought into the House, and the^ broken at the
Clerk's Table, and then re-^^livered to the Commissioners as their Fees.

On Monday, May 28.
the twenty-eight of May His Majesty, with His two Brothers, an^ the rest of
His Court, set forward from Canterbury, and came into Rochester abo^^ five of
the clock in the afternoon: where H^ was entertained by Francis Clark Esquire
in the House of Colonel Gibbon his Tenant* whence, after a little repast, He
went t^ Chatham, to view the Royal Sovereign, and the rest of His Ships: and,
after He had vouchsafed to receive the Entertainment of a Banquet from
Commissioner Pet, He returned to Rochester, where He supped, and graciously
received at the hands of the Colonel a very dutiful Address, signed by him,
and all the Officers of his Regiment, in behalf of themselves, and the
Soldiers in it under their Command: and having rested there that night, the
next morning He bestowed the Honor of Knighthood on Francis Clerk and William
Swan Esquires, both Gentlemen of that County; and having courteously accepted a
Basin and Ewer from the hands of the Mayor of the said City betwixt four and
five a clock in the morning, being Tuesday (the most fortunate propitious day
in the week for His Majesty, as having been voted, proclaimed, and reducted
thereon) and the 29th of May the Anniversary of his Nativity and Restitution,
departed thence the Militia-Forces of Kent lining the way, and the Maidens
strewing Herbs, and Hours, and the Towns he passed hanging out white Sheets.
Being come to Dartford, the Officers of the several Regiments of Horse,
presented an Humble and Loyal Address to him, declaring their cheerful
Readyness to Sacrifice their Lives in defense of his Sacred Person and most
miraculously restored Government: none of the least wonders in this conjunction
of so many suspendious changes of things and persons.

At Black Heath, the Army was drawn up; and His Majesty passed by the head of
every Division really expressing his Esteem of them, which was answered by loud
acclamations. About one a clock His Majesty having been met with a party of
Gentlemen Volunteers under the most Loyal Sir John Stauell, all clothed in
white Doublets completely armed, arrived at St. Georges Fields where the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen were in a Tent ready to receive Him, attended with 600 of
the prime Citizens i^ Velvet Caps, and Gold Chains, on horseback; The Sword
being there delivered him, he returned it. Knighted Sir Thoma^ Allen the Mayor.
After a short repaste the King proceeded into Lond^n by South-warke, and ^ver
the Bridge ^o Temple-barr^ the S^r^^^s being (...) on (...) ^^^e with stan^i^gs
^or the Liveryes, and lined o^ the other with the ^rayned Bands.

This Epitome will ^ot allow a full description of all the Glories of this most
Magnificent and joyful Cavalcade; nor expres^ the particular Gallantry of
those Troup^ which made an Illustrious part thereof, under the Cornet of Sir
John Robinson, S^^ Richard Brown, which consisted of the choice, young
Gentlemen of the City, (...) of several of the Nobility, viz. the ol^ Earl of
Cleveland, the Earl of Northam^ton, the Earl of Norwich, the Earl of
Lichfield, now Duke of Richmond, and the Lord Vicecount Mordaunt, all of them
Riders, Persons of Quality and Gentry of the Kingdom.

Much less is it possible, with all the advantages of Humane Eloquence, to
express hose ecstasies of joy and delight which ransported the minds of all the
spectators, and raised their Souls into the exal^ations of their applauses; it
must suffice to instance only and mention only that which influenced all the
serene brightness which encompassed the Kings Person, before which rode the
Lord Mayor bearing the Sword, and more immediately the Duke of Buckingham, and
the Lord General, on both sides of the King rode his two Royal Brothers,
which order had been observed, since the first overture of the Restitution as
well in Holland as here.

In this Princely Equipage, and with millions of loud Vive le Roys, he arrived
in the Evening at his Palace of Whitehall, made ready for the reception of its
so long absent and most desired Master; and ascending into the
Banqueting House, (which parted last with his dear and blessed Father, and
first enterteined his Royal self, as if it would officiously excuse or deplore
to him, the violence and villainy that had been acted there) was wellcomed there
with a very Loyal and Pathetick speech, by my Lord of Manchester, who with the
Peers as Speaker, and Sir Harbottle Grimston as Speaker to the House of
Commons, then also present attended Him, which for brevity sake I am
constrained to omit; but amends shall be made the Reader by the reciting his
Majesty's most gracious words, in answer to the same, being the first Public
verbal expression of Himself to his Kingdom, and deserve to be recorded for
ever.

My Lord.
I AM so disordered by my Journey, and with the noise still sounding in my
Ears, (which I confess was pleasing to me; because it expressed the Affections
of my people) as I am unfit at the present to mak^ such a Reply as I desire;
yet this much (...) shall say unto you. That I take no greate^^ satisfaction to
my self in this my change * then that I find my Heart Really set to endeavor
by all means, for the Restoring o^ this Nation to their Freedom and
Happ^nesse: And I hope by the Advice of m^ Parliament to effect it. Of this
also yo^ may be Confident, That next to the Honor of God, from whom
principally I sh^^^ ever owe this Restoration to my Crown, (...) shall study
the welfare of my People; An^ shall not only be a true Defender of the Faith:
but a just Assertor of the Laws and Liberties of my Subjects.



Th^s passed, the King retired to supper, and soon after to his Rest, where it
was time he should find it after so many difficulties and turmoils in the world
for twenty whole years together; while the City begun afresh their Labor of
joy, and ended that long wasting conflagration of 3 Kingdoms by their numerous
Bonfiers, which continued all night, and yielded not their flames but to the
rising Sun.

The Court now at last appeared in its due Splendour, the Nobility of England,
and after them the Gentry severally addressing themselves to the congratelating
his Majesty's and their own Felicity, which Complements were made more public
by Addresses signed by the chief of all the Counties in England, and afterward
printed to expiate and revenge those rank and sordid impious flatterers,
communicated in a more vulgar way to the late Userpers. Soon after, several
Treatments were given his Majesty at the Houses of the Nobles: and many other
Gentlemen, who had deserved well of the King, were Knighted by Him; whose names
must be referred to the Heralds-Office.

Wednesday May the 30th the morrow of the Restitution, the Dukes of York and
Glaucester took their Places in the House of Lords, and the next day after, the
King himself came thither by water; and completed the Illustrious Assembly. He
wa^ rowed by water in the Brigandine which brought him aboard the Charles from
Holland: the Yeomen of the Guard (commanded by the Earl of Norwich, who ha^
settled them a little before his Majesty's return) making a Lane, the Heralds
a^ Arms in their rich Coats, with the Mace^ and the Lord General before Him;
Bei^^ s^ated in his Throne, the Commons we^^ called, to whom the King in a most
ob^^ging speech pressed the Act of Oblivio^ from the Concern, and Obligation of
(...) promise from Breda, and then signed some Bills, one for Confirmation of
the Prese^^ Parliament, by reason of its undue Constitution, as not being
called by the King writ (the Times not admitting it) another for an Assesment
of 70000 l per me^sem for 7 months from the 24 of June, (...) third for an
Assessement of 400000 l b^ poll etc. a fourth for the continuance (...)
Process and judicial Proceedings, that no^ suit might or should abate by
reason of the States of the late Usurper^ stirrs, but that the Law should
proceed, notwitstanding: and then returned to Whitehall, where he chose his
Privy Council, whose names then were as follow: Their Royal Highnesses the
Dukes of York and Glaucester, Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England,
Earl of Southampton, Lord Treasurer, Lord Roberts, Lord Privy Seal, his
Excellency the Lord General Monk, Earl of Lindsey, Lord High Chamberlain of
England, Marquess of Ormond, Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, Earl of
Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of the Household, Marquess of Dorchester, Earl of
Northumberland, Earl of Leicester, Earl of Berk-shire, Earl of Portland
deceased, Earl of Norwich deceased, Earl of St. Albons, Earl of Sandwich, Earl
of Anglesey, Earl of Carlisle, Lord Viscount Say and Seal deceased, Lord
Wentworth, Lord Seymour Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Lord Hollis,
Lord Cornwallis deceased, Lord Ashley Cooper, Lord Berkley, Earl of Lowerdale,
Sir George Carteret, Sir Charles Compton, Mr. Secretary Nicholas, and Mr.
Secretary Morris, to which have been since added, Prince Rupert Duke of
Cumberland, the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Middlesex, Christopher Lord Hatton;
The King next took care to supply his Courts of Justice, which had been
profaned and perverted so long, for the Chancery the Lord Chancellor Hide, for
the Rolls the Lord Culpepper, (who soon after dyed; and the place was Conferred
by the Kings Favor on Sir Harbottle Grimston) for the King's Bench Sir Robert
Foster, Sir Thomas Mallet and Sir Thomas Twisden, since added Sir Wadham
Windham, for the Common Pleas now is placed Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Lord Chief
Justice, Sir Robert Hide, Sir Thomas Territ, Sir Samuel Brown. In the
Exchequer from the said Sir Orlando, now Sir Matthew Hale Sir Edward Atkins, Sir
Christopher Turner Sir Jeoffery Palmer the Kings Artorney General, Sir Heneage
Finch Solicitor General, Sir John Glynne and Sir John Maynard Sir William
Wild his Majesty's Sergeants at Law.

This Honorable Restitution of the Law was further signatized by a formality
that declared the Force it had recovered, for the Parliament thought not
themselves nor the people of England freed from that guilt and penalty, (which
the Times had contracted) by their ready and cheerful submission to, and
acknowledgments of his Majesty's just Authority; unless they lay hold on his
Majesty's Grace: according to a strict Clause in his Majesty's gracious
declaration from Breda, and therefore resolved; That the House does declare
that they do in the Name of themselves and all the Commons of England lay hold
on his Majesty's gracious Pardon mentioned in his Declaration with reference to
the excepting of such as shall be excepted in an Act of Pardon, which
Declaratory vote was presented to the King by Mr. Denzill Hollis as a privy
Councellor, and his Majesty was graciously pleased to signify his readiness; to
make good his Princely promise, and gave direction for a Proclamation, till the
Act should be furnished to that purpose.

And if the innocent, and such who deserved well for their Constant and now
manifested Loyalty: thought his Majesty's Grace needful to their acquitall
from other men's crimes, the nocent were more pressingly concerned to free
themselves from the punishment due to their own, and with which they had so
afflicted the integrity of others; And therefore this serpentine Generation
came licking the dust, and winding themselves into the favor of this his
Majesty's most Royal Indulgence, and to be secure from the future danger of
the past Treasons: got most of their particular pardons (especially the great
getters of the Faction) exemplified under the great Se^^ of England, not daring
to abide the discriminating judgment and justice of the Parliament, who had
desired his Majesty (...) issue forth a Proclamation, commandi^^ the murderous
crew of the High Court (...) Justice to render themselves within 14. day and
had under the consideration of the A^^ of Oblivion several qualifications of
other persons to be excepted out of it; an^ hereupon, Colonel John Hutchenson
an^ Mr. Francis Lassely members of this Parliament, humbly petitioned the
House; an^ confessed their guilt: and the Attifices use^ to engage them, and
their hearty sorrow for it: and were thereupon only dismisse^ the House, and
sined a years value of their Estate to the King. The like discharge wa^ given
to Luke Robinson, a great Rumper but no Regicide; after he had confesse^ the
same convictions as to his former practices, which passage; together with the
seizure and imprisoning of Maj. G. Harris^^ in the Tower, by order of the
General Council of State, was before omitted. Hugh Peter's was likewise taken
in Southwark, a^^ Mr. Thomas Scot seized in Flanders, as the Solicitor in the
High Court of Justice, Mr. Cook was in Ireland, which Kingdom had by their
Commissioners presented the King and the Duke of York with a considerable sum,
and all 4 committed to the Tower, to awayt the doom and recompense of their
monstrous Treason: of which presently a very brief account. The King was most
graciously pleased to accept of an Entertainment from the City at Dinner in
Guild Hall, where he was most magnificently received by several Pageants; with
the Liveries being placed to welcome him as he passed thither: Here he Knighted
2 worthy and deserving persons and none else but those, the Chamberlain and his
Son old and young Sir Thomas Player.

In the mean while the King to Honor his Restitution, and those eminent
Services had been done him therein, advanced the renowned General to the
Degree and Dignity of Duke of Albemarle, which Duchy is in Normandy; and was
the ancient Title of some Princes of the blood Royal, and was extinct in the
reign of Henry the fourth and Earl of Torrington, a Town famous by my Lord
Hoptons encounter there with Sir Thomas Fairfax, and which acknowledges some
Patrimony and Estate of his Family; and Baron of Potheridge his own seat and
place of Nativity in the County of Devon Beauchampe and Teyes, by all which 3
b^ has just right of Peerage in the 3 Kingdoms, whose rescuer and deliverer he
was July the 13 he took his place in the House of Lords, attended by the whole
House (...) Commons (who had formerly voted hi^ the Kingdoms thanks for his
redemption of us from slavery) and introduced to his place by the Duke of
Buckingham. Near the same time General Montague who commanded the Fleet, was
created Earl of Sandwich; Viscount Finchingbrook his own famous Mansion in
Huntingdon-shire, and Baron St Noets took his place likewise in the House of
Peers; The Marquess having lately been made Duke of Ormond was created Earl of
Brecknock: and so made an English Peer; the Earl of Lindsey was made Lord High
Chamberlain, and the Earl of Southampton Lord High Treasurer of England, the
Earl of Manchester and Lord Roberts Lords Chamberlain and Privy Seal. The Lord
Jermin was made Earl of St Albons, and now sent Ambassador extraordinary to
France: whence not long after as also from Spain by the Prince de Ligne, came
a most splended Embassy by the Count de Soissous a Prince of the blood of
Savoy; The same grand Complement came from Denmark, Sweden, the most places of
Christendom, which rang with the wonderful news of our Peace and Happiness.
Nor was his Majesty's Honorable sense of, and Regard of his State less more
conspicuous then his Piety to the Church, which he now designed to retire with
himself to her former Rights and Dignities, having sadly experimented that
presagious saying of his Grandfather: No Bishop No King, and therefore as soon
as the Parliament had finished the Act of Oblivion: and in good part healed the
stated form by cutting off some of the Corrupt Members thereof, such were all
the Kings Judges who were excepted from pardon; and rendering others less
Criminal to the number of 20 (such were Hazelrig, St. John, the Speaker
Lenthal; Nigh, and Goodwin the Minister, Barton of Yarmouth, and most of the
Major Generals) dead in Law and retrenching the charge of the Kingdom by
disbanding the Army, and raising infinite sums to effect and accomplish it; the
Commissioners for disbanding, being Mr. Pryn, Mr. Scawer, Collonell King, and
Sir William Doyley who finished the affair to the great satisfaction of the
Soldiery: the King giving them over and above a weeks (...) as a Donitive of
his own; and this gr^^^ affair seemed wholly referred for this tim^ as a main
Felicity of his Majesty's Empir^ Which the Usurpers would have perpetu^^ted as
a standing Militia to tyrannize o^^ us and our posterity: and by entering (...)
with a due gratitude toward God to b^ paid him, on the happy Anniversary of
(...) great and miraculous day, May the 29. t^ all succeeding Ages; by Acts and
Statute to those purposes: The King took the remaining care of the Church as
most religiously became again to herself, and appointed the 20th of September
for the Translation of the Right; reverend and Excellen^ Prelate Dr. Juxon the
Bishop of London, to the Archbishopric of Canterbury: which was performed with
very great solemnity, and presently thereupon several new Bishops were
Consecrated in the Abbey a^^ Westminster, and the vacant Diocesses supplied: a
Catologue of both which here follow.

Doctor Will. Juxon Lord Archbishop of Canterbury 1660, consecrated Bishop of
London 1633. Dr. Accepted Frewen Lord Archbishop of York 1660. Dr. Gilbe^^
Shelden Lord Bishop of London 1660. Dr. John Couzens Lord Bishop of Durham
1000. Dr. Brian Duppa consecrated Bishop of Chichester 1638, of Salisbury 1640.
of Winchester Bishop Lord Almoner Prelate of the Garter 1660, he being deceased
1662, Dr. Morley was translated to that See 1662 Dr. William Peers Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells 1632. Dr. Matthew Wren (released from a 20 years imprisonment
in the Tower by G. Monk) Lord Bishop of Ely 1638. Dr. Robert Skinner Lord
Bishop of Oxford 1640. Dr. William Roberts Lord Bishop of Banger and Sub
Almoner 1637. Dr. John Warner Lord Bishop of Rochester 1637. Dr. Henry King
Lord Bishop of Chichester 1641. Dr. Humphry Hinchman Lord Bishop of Sali^b^ry
16^0, now of London 1663. Dr. George Morley Lord Bishop of Worcester 1^^0, now
of Winchester 1663. Dr. Sanderson Lord Bishop o^ Lincoln 1660 deceased, Dr.
George Grif^^th Lord Bishop of St. Asaph 16^0. Dr. William Lucy Lord Bishop of
St. David's 1660. Dr. Benjamin Laney Lord Bishop of Peterborough ^660, of
Lincoln 1663. Dr. Hugh Loya lord Bishop of Landaffe 1660. (...) R^^^a^^ Stern
Lord Bishop of Carlisle 16^0. Dr. Brian Walton Lord Bishop (...) Chester 16^0
deceased, Dr. Fern succeeded 1661 also deceased, George Hall 1662, present
Bishop there of, Dr. Gilbert Ironside Lord Bishop of B^stoll 1660, Dr. Edward
Reynolds Lord ^^shop of Norwich 1660, Dr. William N^cholson Lord Bishop of
Glaucester 1660, D^ Nicholas Monk brother to the Renown^^ General, Lord Bishop
of Hereford 166^ deceased 1661, Dr. Herbert Crofts in the See. Doctor John
Hacker Lord Bishop^^ Coventry and Litchfield 1663.

Note that Dr. Hinchman is newly ma^^ Bishop of Peterborough in place of Doct^^
Laney, Dr. Earl Bishop of Worcester; (...) thence to Salisbury, Dr. Skinner
from O^ford in his place to Worcester: and Doct^^ Creighton Bishop of Oxford
this year 1663.

But in the juncture of this pious Resol^tion, it pleased God to afflict the
King, h^^ Family; and the whole Kingdom with the most lamented death of his
vounger brother, the most noble Prince Henry Duke (...) Glaucester (a name
unfortunate to the Royal Race) by the Epidemicall decease (...) the small Pox,
which shortly after Dece^ber 26th. snatched away the most Illustrio^^ Lady, his
Sister Mary the Princess Roya^^ widow to the deceased Prince of Aurang^^ who
came over to visit the King and the Duke both Princes of a very great and
ob^^ging virtues, which may be injured by the worthiness of our mean
lamentations, and the loss thereof to be judged by the magnitude, that it was
designed by Heaven as an equal allay and balance to that extraordinary
grandeur of hIs Majesty's Restitution.

During this sorrow for the noble Duke, who deceased Sept. 13. a greater and
more just Parentation obliged his piety, and justified the importunate cries
and demands of his Subjects for justice against those inhumane murderers of
his Father; all his great actions hitherto had tended and directed only to the
future settlement of his people, and were the effects only of his prudence and
wisdom, as he was Pater patriae, the Father of his Country; there was a like
necessity of reviewing the past time, with the effects of his Justice and Duty,
as he was filius Regis the Son of a King, whose blood was yet unexpiated, and
polluted the Land, and was feared to have exacted that immaculate victime of
the noble Duke, instead of a more due and proper sacrifice so long delayed, on
the 9th. of October. Therefore by virtue of his Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
directed to several of the chief Nobility, as the Duke of Albemarle, and more
of the Lords of the Privy Council, and great Officers of State; the Lord Mayor
and Judges, the said Commissioners met at Hicks Hall, Sir Orlando Bridgeman,
President of this illustrious Judicature The Counsel for the King, were Sir
Jeoffery Palmer, Sir Heneage Finch, Sir Edwar^ Turner, the Duke of Yorks
Attorney, Sergeant Keely, and Windham, etc. The grand Jury being sworn, Sir
William Piercy, Baronet, their foreman, the rest of the Knights and Esquires of
great estates; the Indictment was opened largely and learnedly by Sir Orlando,
it was founded on the Statute of 15 Edward the 3. by which it was made Treason
to compass and imagine the death of the King; which done, and the Indictment
found, Mr. Thomas Lee brought in the names of the witnesses, 42 in number; the
chief of whom was Sir William Clark, who wrote short hand at the High Court of
Justice, Mr. Masterson a Minister formerly of their party, Col. Hunks, etc.

On the 10th. of October. the same Court by Adjournment, sat at Sessions house
in the Old Bailey, to arragin this pretended mock High Court of Justice, as many
of them as had been seized, or had rendered themselves upon the Proclamation
(some 16 upon the Kings return, having fled the Kingdom) who were to be
respited from Execution by a clause in the Act of Oblivion, after much debate
upon the favourablest construction of that Proclamation, which another Act of
Parliament should appoint it. The Names of those that were arraigned, were in
order thus, viz. Sir Hardress Waller, William Heveninghaem, and Col. Harrison,
Isaac Pennington, Henry Martin, Robert Tichburn, Gilbert Millington, Owen Roe,
Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop, John Carew, John Jones, Thomas Scot, Gregory
Clement, and John Cook, Edward Harvey, Henry Smith, John Downs, Vincent Potter,
Augustine Garland, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyne, James Temple, Peter Temple,
Thomas Wayt, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtell; and after all William
Hewlet, supposed to be the Executioner. At their Trial their main and only
defense was the Authority of the Parliament, which constituted them an High
Court of Justice; Harrison and Carew being fifth Monarchists urged the Light
men then; and the public necessity of their proceedings, and their success in
and accomplishment of it for their justification, and divine approbation. For
further particulars the Reader may refer himself to their Trials Printed at
large.

They were all of them after a fair hearing condemned, and those that had been
seized before the Proclamation, thus executed: Harrison on Saturday the 14th of
Oct. about 8 in the morning, was according to his Sentence drawn upon an Hurdle
from Newgate (with a fresh color in his cheeks) to Charing Cross, and within
the rails hanged upon a Gibbet with his face toward White Hall, and cut down
alive, and quartered; his members set upon the gates of London, and his head
upon the Southeast end of Westminister-Hall: On the 16th Master John Carew was
executed there in the same manner, but his body the King was pleased to give at
their intercession to his Friends: On the 17th. John Cook and Hugh Peter's were
drawn and quartered in the same manner and place; their quarters set upon the
gates; Cooks head on the Northeast side of Westminster Hall gate, opposire to
Harrisons; Peter's upon London bridge, October 18th. Thomas Scot, Gregory
Clement, Adrian Scroop, and John Jones, were executed in the same place and
manner, and their heads and quarters set upon the gates of London: And lastly,
on the 19th. Col. Francis Hacker and Daniel Axtell, were drawn and quartered at
Tyburn; Hackers body was given entire to his Friends, but Axtells was set upon
the gates, and his head as a mark of his active treason at the Court of
Justice, and parbling the Parliament, at the furthest end of Westminster Hall.
All of them died obstinately, and impenitently, Hugh Peter's excepted, who died
like a fool. The rest as is before mentioned, were reserved till the Parliament
should dispose of them, by an Act to that purpose, and remanded to the Tower of
London, from whence they came, and the the next year brought to the Bar of the
House of Lords, to show cause why sentence should not be executed, who pleaded
the Proclamation; but no determination has yet been made concerning them,
only their Estates by virtue of an Act of attainder were seized to the use of
the King.

Notwithstanding this fresh Instance and Example of il divine vengeance upon
Rebels and Murderers, a pert sort of men, of the same principles with
Harrison, and those other Regicides, as if their evil Spirits had been doubted
on them, conspired and attempted the like horrid, but more audacious Villainy.
These were wild fifth Monarchists, who having vainly calculated the imaginary
personable reign for this juncture of Time, made two most frightful
insurrections in London, January the 6 and the 9th. The first in the night,
when they met at Saint Paul's, and being discovered there, forced there passage
at Aldersgate, where they declared for King Jesus, and their Masters upon the
Gates, and after some vain opposition marched to Cainwood, and being driven
thence by the Generals guards, returned for London: The second in the morning
by break of day, where from Bishopsgate wandering up and down the streets, they
came to Woodstreet intending to let out the Prisoners; but after a sharp
conflict were worsted, and pursued ( Venner and Hodgkins their Leaders, being
wounded and taken, and Tufney and Crag two other chieftains killed upon the
place) and more of them taken by the Postern by Moregate; their number in all
not exceeding forty. But such was their confidence and assurance that they said
in their traitorous Declaration, That if they were deceived, 'twas God that did
deceive them: applying also the Story of Gideon to this their impious and
rebellious exployt. Seventeen of these being taken, and arraigned for Treason
in levying War against the King; thirteen of them were found guilty, and the 16
and 21 of January executed; Venner and Hodgkins were drawn, hanged, and
quartered in Colemanstreet, over against their meeting house (where instead of
prayers they fell to imprecations) and their heads and quarters set upon the
Gates of London; the rest were only hanged, and their heads set upon
London Bridge.

To pursue this tract of Divine vengeance to a conclusion: on the 30th. day of
January, being the twelfth anniversary of their flagitious and monstrous
parricide acted upon our late Martired Sovereign, the Carcases of Cromwell,
Ireton, and Bradshaw, having been dug out of those graves they usurped in
Hen. 7. Chapel at Westminster, were thence conveyed to the Red Lion in
Holborn, and there put into three sledges and drawn to Tyburn, where they
hanged with their faces toward White Hall from ten in the morning till Sun
set, multitudes of people visiting the solemnity of the Spectacles; and being
then cut down, were inhumed under the Gallows, and their Heads set upon the
middle of Westminster Hall, above the ordinary height of Ambition. In the
close of the year died Sir Authur Hazelrig, Prisoner in the Tower of London;
and the Marquess of Arguile one of their Accomplices in Scotch Treason, was
arrested here by the Kings command, and sent into Scotland to receive his
reward thereof; the Earl of Middleton being made his Majesty's Commissioner for
that Kingdom, following him thither soon after.

Just after the Execution of those Regicides in October, the Queen Mother, who
had been absent out of England 16 years, returned hither again: now She had
heard her Husbands blood was vindicated, and her own and Childrens Honor
restored by the glorious Act of Justice: She brought over with her her
youngest Daughter the Princess Henrietta, who was born at Exeter, June 1644.
and being brought to Oatlands after the expiration of the War, was conveyed
thence by her Governess the Lady Dalkeish into Holland, and so to France: Their
stay here was very short, by reason of that contagious disease of the small
Pox, which had newly destroyed the Princess of Orange, and seemed to threaten
the health of this young Lady: His Majesty at there departure accompanied them
to theit Shipping; in which time fell out that furious onset of the aforesaid
fifth Monarchists. This beautiful Princess is now Married to Philip Duke of
Orleans and Anjou, only brother to the French King. A little before this,
December. 20. the Free Parliament which had done so much in so short a time
toward the peace, happiness, and settlement of the Kingdom, was now like fair
and summers fruit ripe for dissolution, at which time the King in his parting
from them, gave it the Epethete of the healing Parliament, which it will retain
to last Posterity. A Parliament was at this time called in Scotland, and
another summoned for Ireland, and a third in intention for England, to whose
glories and triumphs the beginning of the next year does wholly own it self,
and which for brevity sake must be but transiently viewed.

Anno Domini 1661.

And the fine ray of that splender directs us to Windsor, where His Majesty
renewed the most Noble Ceremony of the Instalment, and Investiture of the Order
of the Garter, the most honorable Companions whereof to rectify a former
mistake in this Treatiseare h^re mentioned: Charles the Second, etc. Sovereign
of the order, James Duke of York, Charles Lodowick Prince Elector Palatine,
Frederick william Prince Elector of Brandenburgh, Rupert Count Palatine of the
Rhine, Edward Count Palatine of the Rhine, William Prince of Orange, Bernard
Duke of Espernoon, Charl^ Prince of Tarante, William Earl of Salisbury, Thomas
Earl of B^^kshire, Algernoon Earl of Northumberland, James Duke of Ormond,
George Duke of Buckingham, Thomas Earl of Southampton, William Marquess of
Newcastle, George Earl of Bristoll, Gaspar Count of Martin, George Duke of
Albemarle, Edward Earl of Sandwich, Aubrey Earl of Oxford, Charles Duke of
Richmond and Lenox, Montague Earl of Lindsey, Edward Earl of Manchester,
William Earl of Manchester. This solemnly was performed, April 16. this year,
and the sullied obscured Glories of the Order recovered to its pristine Luster
and Brightness.

Next entered His Majesty's most Magnificent Coronation on Saint Georges day,
April 23. whereon he passed from the Tower to his Court of White Hall, through
the City of London; and next day to Westminsterhall by water, and thence in a
stately Procession to the Abbey to be Crowned. To the Celebrating of which two
days, and the serenity thereof between a rainy Season, for a Month before and
after, this discourse can be no way competent, and must withal reverence to
this sublimest Grandeur that England ever beheld, refer the Reader to the
Narrative and Sculptures, that were published on this stupendrous occasion, by
Authority: only mentioning that as usual at such at such Solemnities (though
never such a number) there were made Seventy Knights of the Bath* and for a
further Honor of this great affair, Edward Lord Hyde was created Earl of
Clarendon, Arthur Lord Capel Earl of Essex, Thomas Lord Prudenel Earl of
Cardigan, Arthur Lord Annesley Earl of Anglesey, Sir John Greenvile Earl of
Bath, Groom of the Stool, Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle, Denzill Hollis Lord
Hollis of Byfield, Sir Frederick Corwallis Lord Corwallis of Eye in Suffolk,
SIr George Booth Lord Delamere, Sir Horatio Townsend Baron of Lyn Regis, Sir
Anthony Ashley Cooper Baron of Winterborn St. Giles, John Crew Baron Crew of
Stene.

This Admiration of English Gallantry was scarce past our sight, when a new
pomp invited our almost dazzled sight with the formermost August and glorious
Triumph. The King at the opening of the Parliament, which he had summoned
according to his promise to sit down on the 8th. of May, went thither with more
then usual state, and calling the Commons to the House of Lords, declared his
Reason of calling them thither, and particularly told them of the Confidence he
had in them, as being most of them known to him, that it would prove a happy
Parliament: in conclusion He acquainted them with his revolution of Marrying
the Infanta of Portugal, which match had been transacted here by Conde
Francisco de Mello, the Ambassador from that King, and concluded in certain
Articles then transmitted to that Kingdom, and so bid them choose their Speaker.

Sir Edward Turner was the Person chosen, and forthwith both Houses voted their
Thanks to His Majesty for his prudent choice: ^eer the same time arrived here
the Kings Aunt, the Queen of Bohemia, who deceased the February following, and
was buried with her Royal Ancestors in Hen. 7. Chapel: The Marquess of
Montross, as soon afterward the noble Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle
were reinterred in great state at Edinburgh and Colchester; and the Marquess of
Argyle, Master Jushrey and Captain Gittan, enemies to the immortal Montross,
Executed at Edinburgh, and as a complete expiation of all those Scotch
combustions, recited by those men and their fellows, the solemn League and
Covenant was burnt by the Hangman in London, reversed all the Kingdom over soon
after. The Earl of Sandwich with a Fleet, was sent to attend the Queen at
Lisburn, now saluted by that name by Sir Richard Fanshaw the Kings Ambassador,
and thence to sail to Algier to repress those Pirates, where happened a Fight
in there very Harbor, but of no great moment; whereupon the Earl leaving Sir
John Lawson to block them up (which at last forced them to terms) departed for
Tangier (and thence for Lisburn) which was now delivered by virtue of the
Treaty with Portugal to Sir Richard Stainer, the rear Admiral who surrendered
the Government soon after to the Earl of Peterborough.

The House returned the Consideration of the punishment of some guilty persons
in the matter of the Kings death not under Condemnation; namely the Lord
Monson, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, with Robert Wallop, and Master
Phelps the Clerk of the Court of Justice, and ordered them to be drawn on the
Thirtieth of January next, from the Tower through the City to Tyburn, with
roper about their necks and so under the Gallows, and back again; to forfeit
their Estates, and suffer perpetual imprisonment, which was accordingly
executed.

On the 30th. of July the Parliament adjourned to the 20th. of November, having
passed two Acts, one for Regulatihng Corporations and displacing of ill
affected Officers, the other Repealing the Statute of 17 Car. 1. against the
Prelacy, and the Bishops Jurisdiction in things Civil; by virtue of which the
Lords Spiritual after the Adjournment took their places in the House of Lords.
Episcopacy was also established in Scotland near the same time, as a little
before in Ireland, where Sir Charles Coot made by the King Earl of Mountrash,
not long after died; as the King had appointed the Duke of Ormond to be Lord
Lieutenant of that Kingdom.

On the 27 of November one John James was executed at Tyburn for treasonous
Speeches, and Sir Henry Vane, and John Lambert, Esquire, sent for from the
Island of Scylly to their Trials.

Anno Domino, 1662.

This Year begins with the seizure of Col. Okey, Berkstead, and Miles Corbet at
Delfe in Holland by the loyal industry of Sir George Downing the Kings Resident
there, whence they were conveyed to the Tower, and brought to the Kings Bench
Bar, and arraigned upon the Act of Attainder, for compassing the Death of the
King: Their ^lea was they were not the same men mentioned in the same Act; but
the Jury finding them, they were sensured as Traitors, and executed accordingly
April 19. at Tyburn. The King was pleased to return Colonel Okeys body, which
was buried in the Tower; Berksteads Head was placed on Traytors-gate in the
same Tower.

This Kingdom had been in a longing expectation of the Queens arrival; but
through cross winds the Royal Charles having been sent a good while before for
her own transportation, but the cold season of the Spring, and cross winds
before and in her passage had much retarded it, but at length May the 19. after
a Months sailing the Royal Bride landed at Portsmouth, having been met at Sea
by the Duke of York, who saluted Her in His Majesty's Name. On the 20th. of May
the King arrived there Post, and was privately Married and after some
refreshments of the Queen, for her voyage had much indi^posed Her, brought Her
with universal acclamations by Winchester and Farnham t^ Hampton Court, whence
on the 23 o^ August with a nevral Triumph the Lord Mayor and Companies in their
Barge^ with Streamers and Pageants attending Her, She was conducted to
Whitehall.

Before the King went for Portsmouth He Prorogued the Parliament to the 18th.
of February, and among many other passed these observable Acts, viz. An Act for
preventing the Mischiefs and Dangers, that may arise by certain Persons called
Quakers, anc others refusing to take lawful Oaths. An Act for ordering the
Forces in the private Counties of this Kingdom, wherein it is declared, That in
His Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the Supreme Power, Command, and Disposal of
the Militia, is, and ever was the undoubted right of the King and His Royal
Predecessors, and that both and either Houses of Parliament cannot nor ought to
pretend to the same, etc. An Act for the Uniformity of public Prayers and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies, and for
establishing the form of of making, ordaining, and consecrating Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons; by which Act after the 24 of August, all Ministers were
bound to conform, and renounce the Covenant, or lose their Benefices. Against
the effect of this Act the Presbyterians labored hard, and petitioned the King
and His Council, but were so answered by the Lord Bishop of London, that their
suit was repulsed; whereupon many of them at the aforesaid term quitted their
places, and were the unhappy occasion and instigators of theirs to do the like,
upon confidence of having their own wills for a Law, to the impoverishing of
many families. An Act for distribution of 60000 pounds amongst the truly Loyal
and indigent Commission Officers, and for assessing of Officers, and
distributing the money thereby raised for their further supply. An Act for the
relief of His Majesty's loyal Poor, and maimed Officers and Soldiers. An Act
for establishing an Additional Revennue upon his Majesty, his heirs, etc. for
his better support, and two shillings yearly for every Chimney, Hearth, or
Stove. An Act for abrogating the Attainders of the Earl of Straford. Another
Act passed the Session before, against Armed or Arming like multitudes and
numbers of Petitioners, which are not to exceed seven or eight at most: by all
which most prudent and wholesome Laws they have obviated the like evils of the
late times, and set us right as we were this time thirty years.

This Trinity Term, Sir Henry Vane and Colonel Lambert were arraigned before
Sir Robert Foster in the Kings Bench: the first for imagining and compassing
the Death of the King, and usurping the Kings Authority; and the other for
Levying War against the King in Middlesex, Cheshire, etc. Sir Henry pleaded the
Authority of Parliament very peremptorily, and troubled the Court; but Lambert
behaved himself very civilly and respectfully, which procured him his Reprieve.
Sir Henry died very peevishly and frowardly by the Axe on Tower Hill: Whither
his Treachery had brought the Earl of Strafford.

Several Forces of Horses and Foot were sent from hence and Dunkirk, under the
command of the Earl of Inchiqueen and Major General Morgan, to assist the King
of Portugal against the Spaniard, which have done very good service this last
Summer: and in October Dunkirk was returned to the French King, for the Sum of
500000 Sterling; a little before which time, the Walls of several Cities and
Towns that were eminently disloyal in the late War, were dismantled,
particularly Gloucester and Coventry.

A traiterous Plot was now discovered, which had been hatched by some Grandees
of the late Rebellion, but acted and carried by some Puny's thereof; Eight of
which being apprehended in December, for the City had watched in Arms half a
year together, were tried at the Old Bailey and condemned, and six of them
executed, viz. Thomas Tongue, George Philips, James Hind, Francis Stubs, John
Swallow, Nathaniel Gibbs.

Anno Dom. 1663.

Having promised a continuance of these Affairs to the beginning of this year,
some short Notes shall be added for a conclusion. The Parliament at their
re-assembling in Feb. having had some jealousy of the Papists prevalency, for
a Toleration by the Kings declaring those kind sentiments he had of their
Services to the ^rown: in his Declaration of the 26 of December, His Majesty
took occasion to explain himself otherwise, and thereupon the House returned
His Majesty thanks, resolving to prepare Laws at his desire to hinder the
growth of their Doctrine. This debate continued a great while with much heat
and alterration, and was the only business and discourse of the Times: The
Popish Priests not ceasing their endeavors, and giving cause of caution, and
provision of remedy against their encro^^hments; so that at last, the King at
the i^^^^ce, and by advice of the Parliament, emitted a Proclamation commanding
all Popish Prie^^^ to depart the Kingdom, to the very great s^tisfaction of all
His Majesty's Subjects. This Saint Georges day the Duke of Munmouth and the
Prince of Denmark, were created Knights of the Garter in the places of the Duke
of Espernoun, and Prince Edward of Nassaw.

A Plot was now discovered in Ireland, the Conspirators being Pers^^s of the
late Faction, who intended to surprise Dublin Castle, and the person of the
Lord Lieutenant, and declared according to the Covenant; but the Plotters were
seized themselves, and three of them, viz. Colone Edward Warren, Master
Jephson, and Lieutenant Thompson, executed for their treason; by which all
things were quiet there as well as in Scotland; where the Lairo Warreston was
lately hanged for his forme^ Treason, by an Act of Attainder.

The Parliament of England having debated, and prepared many other necessary
Acts for the advancement of the Peace and Plenty thereof, His Majesty came to
the Parliament and signed them: among the rest An Act for Trade, which being
for the Subjects benefit, thanks was returned to the King: An Act for four
entire Subsides to be paid at two several payments: there was An Act prepared
for the better observation of the Lords Day; but it being mislayed, the King
soon after supplied it with a Proclamation of his own to the same effect,
commanding his Declaration against Debauchry, which was so well resented at his
restitution, to be read again in the Churches. When these Acts were passed, he
Prorogued the Parliament to the 16 March; and the same day passed away to
Tunbridge, where his Royal Consort the Queen was then drinking the waters
there; and after a fortnights stay, returned with her to Whitehall* where
having rested a fortnight, His Majesty and his Royal Consort began their
Progress to the Bath; The right pious Learned Father in God, Gilbert Bishop of
L^nd^n, was Translated from that Sea to the Arch-Episcopacy of Canterbury; the
right reverend Father Humphrey Translated from Sarum to London: 1664
His Majesty having Progress from Bath to Bristol, and from thence to Oxford,
returned to London, being abundantly satisfied with the Loyalty and affections
of His people.

A Plot against the King: the Government of Church and State was now hatched by
the spawn of the late Regicides and Sectaries, without any sense of our late
misery, or now happy Peace and Settlement, or of His Majesty's reiterated and
unparalled Acts of Grace and Clemency; or the exemplary Justice done upon
some former like-traitors: The Scene of this was in the North, but the design
was in most parts of the Nation; by Gods providence timely discovered and
prevented, there being found guilty at York Assizes Two and twenty, whereof
seventeen executed at York, three at Leeds.

Anno Domini, 1664.

The Lords and Commons of Parliament met at Westminster, according to
Prorogation, His Majesty having made a gracious Speech (imparting His
resolution to maintain Religion and Laws established) passed two Bills; One Act
for holding Parliaments in three years at least; And for repeal of an Act
Entitled, An Act for preventing the inconveniences happening by the long
intermission of Parliaments; The other for preventing abatements in Writs of
Error upon Judgments in the Exchequer.

The Committee of Trade reported to the Parliament, that the several wrongs,
dishonors, and indignities done to His Majesty by the Subjects of the
united-Provinces (by invading his right in India, Africa, and elsewhere) the
damages, affronts, and injuries done by them unto our Merchants, are the
greatest obstructions of a foraign Trade, and that His Majesty be moved
speedily to redress the same; The House then resolved they will with their
lives and fortunes, assist His Majesty against all opposition whatsoever; This
being twice read, the Lords concurred (His Majesty taking great content in
their zeal they express for the advancement of Trade; it being the primum
mobile of the Nations happiness) His Majesty and his two Houses agreeing
touching their defense, and maintaining of the honor, interest and prosperity
of the English Nation, made a gracious Speech to both Houses, approving their
care and labor for the public. Sir Edward Turner Speaker, in an elegant
Speech, represented to His Majesty the humble Thanks of the House for His
Majesty's acceptance of their endeavors, together with the Heads of several
Bills ready for His Majesty's royal assent, insisting on the injuries and
depredations done by the Dutch to the Crown of England; and His Majesty's
Subjects being damnified by them to the vallue of 800000 l.

His Majesty at the same time passed several Bills; One for The preventing of
Seditious Conventicles (of most immergency for the peace of Church and State)
Another For Preventing disturbances at Sea. An Act against deceitful Gaming;
and several other private Acts. And after that Prorogued both Houses to the 26
of August, declaring it was his royal purpose not to call them together, till
November.

His Majesty sets forth a Proclamation to recall and prohibit his Seamen
from the service of any foraign Prince, or State.

The unwelcome news from Tangier of the loss of the Earl of Tyvot (a person of
known valor and loyalty) who with a small number was by Gayland (General of
the Moors) lying in ambuscado in the Woods beyond the Jews river with his whole
Army set upon, most of the party being cut off, his Majesty lost a brave
Commander, and a good Subject. But the town and works ^re to Gayland
impregnable; that place ^ince being made invicible, the Mould being finished,
his Majesty's Forces have in their enclosure 400 acres of land.

The Duke of Ormond, Lieuteaant of Ireland, was received by his Majesty and
Court with honor and love, leaving the Lord Ossery Deputy.

His Majesty (in his royal wisdom) thought fit to equippe two Fleets for the
maintenance of the honor and interest of the English Nation, sending some of
the Privy Council to the City of London upon this extraordinary occasion, to
borrow 100000 l. which was presently granted with all willingness, and
forthwith paid by the care of the most prudent Magistrate, Sir Thomas Player,
who has rendered himself so serviceable a Subject to his Majesty's Interest,
and the Cities trust, that it cannot be enough remembered, what care and pains
he has taken in former Loans (and with what exquisite speed the whole Army and
Navy were paid of) whose early and late care by punctual and speedy complying
with payments (under God) prevented mutining, saving his Majesty and the
Kingdom many thousands by his expedition in that great work. A days pay of the
Army and Navy, and Interest of the Lo^^ of the Arrears, amounting to a vast
Su^^ per diem. It is observed this Genleman^^ of such known worth, that his
being Tr^^surer is inducement enough to many C^^^zens to bring in their Cash
for the service^^ his Majesty, before they know what secur^^^ they shall have
assigned for it.

The Hollanders by their preparati^^ since, do prosecute their former violen^
and encroachments: his Majesty found (...) necessary to put his Navy into a
prese^^ equippage; and for the more effectual ca^rying on the work, his Majesty
propos^^ to the City of London the Loan of 100000 (...) more, which was
provided with alacrity.

Never Prince did so personally conce^^ himself for the good of his Subjects,
b^ his surveying and expediting his Fleet b^yond our own or our neighbors
expect^tion: the like Fleet having not been ^o^^ not in the whole world,
furnished wi^^ those Commanders, the very remembran^^ of whose valor and
success, is a great satisfaction to our hopes.

His Majesty for encouragement of Co^manders and Seamen in his Service, ha^^
set forth a most Gracious Declaration, The in liew of every lawful Prize at
the rate of 10 s. the Tun, 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. every piece of Ordinance to be
divided according to the usage of the Sea, all as free pillage above the
Gun-deck, and ten pounds per Gun for every man of War, which they shall
either take, sinck, or destroy, to be shared as aforesaid; and therein is
several provisions made for the sick, wounded, and maimed, their widows, and
the children of impotent Parents of such as shall happen to be killed in the
service; with other gracious provisions and encouragements therein exprest^ so
that to the immortal Honor of his Majesty, there is nothing wanting. No design
of this nature did ever carry along with it so many notable concurrences of
advantages; To complete all, his Highness the Duke of York (Lord High Admiral)
himself in actual service is on board the Navy (a person who makes it no less
glory to be a Soldier, then a Prince) has put such a vigor into the seamen,
that they long for nothing more then Action, under whose conduct they promise
themselves both honor, success, and victory.

The Great God of Sea and Land bless our Fleet, and make us thankful for all
his mercies and blessings, and especially for our happiness in our King, who is
a wise and most gracious Prince as ever people had: The consideration of his
gracious love to the City of London, and the Cities duty and love to the King,
does make my heart rejoice, to see the City so willingly lending and readily
paying all taxes and duties. I have observed that a Citizen of London, that is
not really worth above 100 l. pays at much as a Gentleman in the Country that
has 100 l. per annum, and that all manner of Assessments and Benevolence, is
far more readier, and I believe willinglier paid here in London, then in the
Country: For instance, the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, has not paid in to his
Majesty's Exchequer one penny of Assessments. Country Gentlemen, you cannot but
know that the City of London does their duty to their King so freely well, that
^he Country draws but half the draught they ought to do as Subjects: Yet you
have not common charity for them: a Citizen of London having an estate with
you, is sure to be loaded to ease you: As you are good Subjects let it be so no
more: For in the beginning it was not so.

FINIS

