A DISCOVERY, To the praise of God, and joy of all true hearted Protestants, of
a late intended plot by the Papists to subdue the Protestants.
Being a true Copy of a discourse between William O Conner a Priest, and Anne
Hussy an Irish Gentlewoman: as it was brought and confirmed by oath in the
Parliament House.


Printed Anno, 1641.

A True Copy of a Letter written from a man in Ireland, to his friend in
England
SIR,
I Could not omit to write unto you, to give you to understand of a miraculous
deliverance, which the Lord in mercy has vouchsafed unto the poor Protestants
in this Kingdom, which you may perceive by the Proclamation enclosed; for I
have not time to relate the whole story, or bloody Tragedy, which was untended
against us: The execution should have bin on the Saturday, which was discovered
on Friday night, by a man of Sir John Glatworthy, an Irish Knight, but one of
your House of Commons, and this day being the Sabbath, has bin the
troublesomest day that ever I saw in all my days, mixed with joy and sorrow;
joy for our our gracious deliverance, and much perplexed by fears of our
approaching enemies, expecting every hour when the City should be surprised,
that for my part and many others, have had but little rest day and night for
these two days, but how many more it is only known to God; the Enemy has in
the North parts of this Kingdom, taken two Lords Castles, and two Towns, one
of them of great strength and much munition in it, and as it is verily
believed, they do still increase in great multitudes: here is taken a Lord,
and diverse others of note, and others the number of forty, which are safe in
Prison, and hope of many more: the Lord is called the Lord Maguere, and the
Papists make it a Religious War which they had no cause to do, for they have
had a long time as much liberty as we have had if not more; but their father
the Devil has set them upon this damnable act I hope to their utter ruin in
this Kingdom, if the Lord in mercy open our Kings eyes, and your Parliaments
hearts to take pity upon us, for no hope of Reformation is to be had here,
for they are ten for one of us through this Kingdom a^ is verily believed. I
have bin so employed Day and Night these two days, that I can hardly write
thus much unto you, but desire your prayers and all good people for us, and
when more is discovered, if the Lord preserve me with life, you shall hear
farther from me, in the mean time pray for us all.

Your loving friend W. B.


