UNDER GOD; Humbly Desiring His BLESSING to this Famous and Wonderful
Never-failing CORDIAL DRINK OF THE WORLD, The Great PRESERVER of Mankind. A
SECRET Far Beyond any Thing YET KNOWN TO THE WORLD. Never Published by any but
by me Thomas Hind G. in London, Most Approved and Admirable for its EXCELLENT
VIRTUES AND USES.
To be satisfied of the Truth, Pray Read this PREFACE.

This is to give notice to all Persons, That they may not be deceived by the
bold and injurious abuses of several Pretenders, started up of late, (since the
publishing of my Bills) which does now most falsely lay claim to the Practice of
this my Never-Failing-Cordial: and to prevent further fraud of these several
Counterfeits; I have with full power ordered and confirmed my Eldest Brother
Mr. John Hind to be my successor, and the faithful true preparer of my Cordial
as my own self; and to dispose and put to sale my Cordial as he shall approve
and see fit, (and for the general Benefit of all) he does sell it at his own
house, as at the end of my Bills will fully direct you, and the Price of each
Bottle; (And is sold no where else in YORK.)

And that you may know (that I Thomas Hind am the true Author) I would fain
know of these three New Upstarts, [If they would be the true Authors] where
were they, their Books or Bills of the GOUT, and other Distempers, before I
Published mine? * But that they cannot produce, etc. Therefore, I have, for
prevention of all Pretenders and Counterfeits, set my Seal on my Bottles, being
the Wounded Hind with T. H. encompassed in a Laurel, that none may be Deceived
by taking the Wounded Hind with S. W. encompassed in a Laurel, (which I
declare to be none of mine) but a New Upstart, as the other Pretenders
mentioned in my Directions: Therefore look well to the Seal on my Bottles; for
the Counterfeiting of it is daily Attempted to the Displeasure of many that has
been Deceived, and brought into great danger thereby. And though my Bills and
Directions are now Counterfeited, and set forth in Books and Bills to Deceive
the People; yet notwithstanding, if they have it at my trusty Friend Mr. John
Hindes House, they * cannot be deceived.

But of late one boldly takes upon him to make use of my Cures in the words of
my Bills and Directions, and sets them forth in his own Name, and wilely under
the Notion of the People, and injurious abuse of my Name, so disgorge
inveterately his designed malice, spite and envy, with close and great deceit
against my successful Proceedings, and great Cures attested by the People, and
not only so, but wilfully inventeth what he will, and uses endeavors to
defame me too, and this to draw his purpose about, by amusing the People, to
bring a reputation on his Liquor, by maligning of my Never Failing-Cordial,
which is above the Malice of a Libeller, where I am known, and where I am not,
let my Cordial plead for it self and me, -- against such known new Upstarts,
that would, if possible, Assume the Body of the Dead.

** As for his near driven shift, with hardy Brazen Brow, to say most
impudently that he taught me, and that my Cordial which I sold in the Country,
I bought it of him, etc. ( can be proved notorious false) for it is impossible
that such an Illiterate Fellow could teach that [which himself never knew] or
sell me that, which he could never make, Or I to Justify his false
Transactions, that has filched the very words of my Cures out of my Bills and
Directions, and falsely sets them down, as his (own) etc. -- and thus he has
Posted himself as a Mark, that all that Runs may Read a Libeller (a Fellow of
no Value) not worth the answering, for he finding his Forgeries not at all
Credited, has bodly presumed to Print them with Allowance (which is since
proved false to his face) so it is like he may hire Vouchers to Swear he is the
Man right or wrong, as well as Impudence, to employ such desperate Hectors of
the Quill, as value not to Stab any man's Reputation for half a Crown.

My laborious Travels in diverse foreign Countries, and great pains above
Twenty years is truly well known, and how curiously inquisitive I was in the
great concernment of Health, as now effectually appears, etc. But these
Juggling Impostors does falaciously pretend, by setting forth a Book ^alled
ELIXIR SALUTIS, the choice Drink of Health, or Health-bringing Drink:) under
the color of my Cordial, * which was never heard or known of before, (till
several Years after I published my Bills (...) now they do most Audaciously
aver, to be the true Authors of my Cordial, (but it is all in vain) for the
thing like the thing, is not the thing it self, to work the effect intended,
etc. for my Cordial, through the Blessing (...) does powerfully prevail to
effect the Cures my Bills mention, * as does daily appear by the Peoples
experience; -- therefore I shall not observe the barking of those that hireth
others for gain, to say they are C(...) of such and such Distempers, etc. as
some Mercenary persons, by their juggling Counterfeits, has presumed by their
subtilty to beguile many)

THis Cordial is so agreeable to NATURE, that it performs all its Operations as
Nature would have it, as if She had fitted to her Self, or found out Mediums to
Reduce all her Extremes to an equal Temper; It being fitted to all Humors,
Ages, Complexions, Sexes, and Constitutions. For if any Noxious Humor offend
the Noble Parts, This Great Preserver will so Highly Fortify Nature, that it
will not admit any Enemy to enter; and he or she that keeps this Inestimable
Jewel by them, May bid farewell to former Ways they used, and will save them
that Great Expense of Charge.

THis Great Preserver, or Never-Failing-Cordial does Cure the GOUT, for it
Stifles it in its Birth, as true Experience has Found: Extracting out of all
parts of the Body, those Crude and Viscous Humors, which are the Spawn and
nourisher of it, and does free the Joints of all other Diseases, to Admiration.

Dissolving the Stone and Gravel; a better REMEDY CANNOT BE, For when it is
Congealed, it brings away the Sand and Gravel soft as Butter or Fine Flower
under your Finger; and not only so, but does destroy the Original Cause: It
Never fails to Cure the Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys Ulcerated, that
sends forth water like Blood, and * wonderfully Cleanses the Reins of all
Foulness and Imperfections, and forces Urine.

It Restores all Languishing Natures, and Melancholy drooping Spirits, Curing
the Hypocondriack Melancholy; and do^^ most Powerfully Oppose all Black and
mixed Humors, as the Grand Enemy to Nature: for it is continually drawing them
out of the Veins and Arteries into the Stomach, and from thence sends them
away, (after that) Nature Rejoices.

It pursues the SURFEITS from place to place; and though the BODY be swelled
up, in two or three days time it will raise them out of their Beds, and set
them on their Feet again: It takes away the Scurvy out of the Body Root and
Branch; and the Dropsy to Admiration, and all other Distempers that join with
it. This is an Excellent Cordial for those that dwells near the Seaside, or
goes long Voyages: neither Sun, nor Frost, can hurt it, for it will keep good
several years.

It takes away the Head ach, Dizziness, and Swimming in the Head, or Megrim;
Convulsion-Fits in the Head, Swooning away in their Night-Sleep, Though
Afflicted for many years.

It helps bad Digestion, Pain, or any stoppage of the Stomach, and shortness
of Breath: It Causes a good Appetite, and Defends the Head From all Vapors
which ascend from the Mother and Spleen; and is a most certain Remedy against
the Cholick, or any griping of the Guts, and stays Vomiting.

It takes away all Pains from the Heart, and Perfectly Cures those that are
stopped with Flegm^ as Choked, and Stifled in their Sleep for want of Breath.

It gives Ease to Ancient People of the Tissick, but Cures those that are not
too far gone.

THis Harmless and Pleasant Cordial is so great a Friend to all Women kind,
that they cannot have a Richer Jewel bestowed upon them, as Relating to their
Health, than this; That will not fail to Clear them from Obstructions, sitting
and inabling them for Conception, and after Delivery or Miscarriage, though in
danger of Death, it is an effectual Remedy.

It does Cure The Green Sickness of all sorts in a little time: * This is that
which will not Fail but bring them to a Virgin-Blush, Upholding Nature in Her
Strength and Vigor, Making the Visage well Colored, the Breath Sweet, the Body
Lusty.

And those that does Visit the Spaw for their Recreation in the Summer Season,
let them be sure to Prepare their Bodies with this Cordial according to the
Directions, and it will clear the passages, and carry off the Malignant
Crudities. The like they must do when they go home, to clear their bodies of
that which may be left behind.

It does free the Liver and Spleen of all Obstructions, and so by that means
helps the Fits of the Mother and Spleen; It is good for Nurses which give
Suck, for it will Cleanse their Blood, and Cause good and Wholesome Milk; It
Cures the Rickets in Children, by opening the Obstruction, and many other
Scurvy Diseases.

It bursteth, and perfectly destroys Worms in those that are of Years, and
almost over-gone with them, bringing away the skins of half a yard, and near a
yard long, As has been Proved.

It helps sore and Rheumy Eyes, it stays all Rheums that fall from the Head
upon the Lungs: It perfectly eases all Coughs, Colds, and Wheesings, and cures
Consumptions if not far gone, and likewise the Yellow Jaundies.

It keeps a clear Passage between the Head and Heart, * and will not Admit of
any Noxious Humors to annoy the Noble Parts: It will keep off those Frightful
Fears and Griefs from their violent seizing on the Heart, enabling a Weak
Person to make wonderful Resistance, by taking away the sharp Humors, which
they may see come away: A Happy Riddance.

It takes away the Extreme Burnings in the bottomes of the Feet, and Palms of
the Hands, which so sore Afflict the Heart: Those that are too hot, it cools;
and in them that are too cold, it increases Heat and Strength, by taking away
the Cause, as the Direction at large do show.

To Conclude, it highly Exalts the Generative Virtue, Restores Radical
Moisture, * Cleanses and Strengthens the Vessels in both Sexes.

I need not Name Particulars.

FOR, in a word, it is that which Stifles most Diseases in their Birth, or Kills
them in their Strength, keeping all Sexes in their Pristine Health; who will
Admire the Effects, and confess it to be a Rich Treasure in time of Need, which
will not fail them (under God;) For it does most * wonderfully Purify the
whole Body of Man, so that few Diseases, (Gods appointed time being not come)
is able to withstand it: For most Distempe^^ are subject to its Innocent and
wonderful Operation. Did the World but know it, * they would Highly Esteem it a
speedy Friend to HEALTH, Truly deserving the due Praise of all Men. And
(through the goodness of God) by long Traveling, I purchased with a great Sum
this Pearl, and Inestimable Jewel, (as I did many) but this is the best that
ever I heard of among them all. And through the Earnest Defire of MANY that
have Importuned with me so far, for to Publish it, (though I need it not for
Gain:) For I have a Competent Estate otherways to live on, without the Practice
of this.

But out of an Hearty Design of Promoting the Health and Common Good of All.

Who may and would be helped, I have set forth this, to inform the wonderful
Effects that have been wrought by this Cordial Spirit, and abundantly Testified
at large by many, which this Bill cannot contain, to give all sorts of Persons
full satisfaction of its Innocent and wonderful Operation in the whole Body of
Man; but for brevity sake I have here omitted.

And (to satisfy the Curiosity of some) I do faithfully promise all Persons,
That my Cordial is not made by any Chemical preparations; neither is it
offensive to Nature, as some does boldly affirm, to hold up their particular
interest, etc. -- but this my Cordial is so safe, and so truly prepared, and
does Taste so Pleasant, * That the least Child may take it, Sick or Well,
Winter or Summer. I have inserted nothing but what my Cordial will not fail to
Cure, AS EXPERIENCE HAS FOUND upon Men, Women, and Children, and does find
true to the End. And to prevent all doubts, that you may be certain and fully
assured never to be deceived by any dangerous Counterfeits, I have with full
power ordered and confirmed my Eldest Brother Mr. John Hind to be my
Successor, and the Faithful true preparer of my Cordial as my own self, and to
dispose and put to sale my Cordial to whom he shall approve and see fit. For he
was the very first that ever sold it, from the very first time that ever it was
Made, for he and I only knew, etc. and after that, the juggling deceivers crept
in. But to prevent the prejudice of many Poor Creatures languishing under
grievous Distempers, that they may not be brought into great dangers by unknown
cheating trash, as has been affirmed to me by several Persons. And with
prodigious impious impudence, does not only Counterfeit my Bills and Directions
in Print, but the Seal on my Bottles too, therefore to prevent the great deceit
of such Notorious Counterfeits. * I do assure the World, that THOMAS HINDES
Famous and Never-Failing-Cordial Faithfully prepared, is no where else to be
had, but at Mr. John Hindes House on the Pavement, at the sign of the Hand and
Pen, and no where else in York, at Six shillings the Pint Bottle, and Three
shillings the half Pint Bottle. And if you have it at the abovesaid House, you
cannot be mistaken, but may be assured it is right, and at all times shall have
it as pure and good as out of my own hands. With Directions at large in Print
for the Use of it, and for the Convenience of all to save Charges, and bid
farewell to their former ways for ever. A Happy Riddance, and a Blessed Remedy.

Soli Deo Gloria.
London, Printed for the Author, with Allowance, 1678.


