A commendation of Rabbi Rubens orginal seking Ebrew Gospel from Albion to be
kept for Posterity by the LL. care:

A monument against a son of Belial: who hindered the proceeding of a most
glorious cause: to call the curse of Jews and Gentiles to light upon him.

1611* December. 2.

I mentioned R. H. in a commentary upon the Apocalypse a libeller in the depth
of Atheism, who libelled that the Jews Epistle, which some of your Lordships
saw sent from Byzantian Rome, or Constantinus town, to London, and bade send
it thence for Basil to me: He libelled that I feigned the matter. Here upon I
have complained to God and the world in many the highest degrees. The very Jew
praised God, that from the ends of the Earth he heard the praises of the
Eternal*, and said: from Esaias he looked to hear that, from the ends of the
earth. How honorable and how thankful English have been I can tell: that all
the Gold they gave me was so liquide: that I could pour it into mine ey, and
see never an whit the worse. All foreign towns of my stay yea Popish, would in
my faith geven content to dye with them. The highest slauunder that ever could
be in the world was this: that I should forge a Jews letter seking Ebrew
Gospel from us. They had triumphed: that Christ, and Princes would not presently
kill such an Athean vilain. The false accuser by Moses must be in place: and
after conviction the judges: not geving right. But judges are not to take
notion of the Party without accusation and proof. The libeller has hindered
now fiften years adva^tage to have cleared the Gospel in Ebrew from Albion
over all, and has stird many to rave against Ebrew institutions in steed of
thanks: that many say, the Jews time is not yet come. And some vow their
children to my course of Ebrew: and requested all my Ebrew Library that when I
am dead, they may mark my hand how I marked Thalmudiques. An hundredth years
hence this matter may come into spech. And because the libeller must be
confuted by the very original of the Jews Epistle, I have sent your Lordships
that: to be kept in the Kings Library for ever: Pasted with an Arabique book:
that the few leaves being a lone should not be wasted. I doubt not but your
Lordships in an honor geve^ to your country in so high an argument, will see
that the Jews original shall be kept as any the best records. And if the
libeller can be found out, and proved who he is: I doubt not but your
Lordships will wish the Eternal curse of God, upon the libeller for Athean
villainy: and not upon your selfs for countenancing the vndeserving in highest
degree of badnes.

Your Lordships, (...) H. BROVGHTON.


