A True and Perfect ACCOUNT Of the Discovery of a Barbarous and Bloody PLOT
Lately carried on by the JESUITS IN IRELAND, for the Destroying of the Duke OF
Ormond His Majesty's Lord Lieutenant there.

Sent over in a LETTER from DUBLIN, to a Friend in LONDON. And confirmed by
several Persons of Quality in that Nation

With Allowance.

Reprinted 1678.

A True account of the Discovery of a Barbarous and Bloody PLOT lately carried
on by the JESVITS in Ireland. etc.
SIR,
THE Massacres and Murders committed by the Instigation and Incitement of
Popish Priests and Jesuits, are so many, so barbarous and Horrid; that they
cannot but minister Astonishment to any sober Christian that lays them to
heart. For who can consider without amazement and confusion, that they that
style themselves the Society (and would be esteemed the followers) of the ever
Blessed Jesus, who is the Prince of Peace, should be the only Boutefeus, and
Authors of Strife and Contention in every place, where once they get but
footing? And the Prime instigators, Contrivers and Actors of all those Bloody
Massacres and Butcherly Cruelties that have been perpetrated upon the Stage of
the Word, on the account of Religion, since the days of Ignatius Loyola their
first Founder? Can any man choose but be confounded, to think that those men
should take upon themselves the Title of Christians, all whose practices are so
diametrically opposite to the Precepts of true Christianity? Christianity
commands us to bless them that curse us; but these men curse even those
princes, under whose Government they draw their Breath: Christianity commands
us to return good for evil; but these men return evil for good: Christianity
commands to pray for them that despitefully use us, but these men have
despitefully used and barbarously Murdered those that never harmed them.

Again, the precepts of Christianity enjoins us to provoke one another to love,
and to good works; but these Sons of Satan (for his work, they do, and
therefore his Children they are) provoke their simple and deluded Proselytes to
Murder, Treason, and Rebellion; which last Instance they have too evidently
made appear. I doubt not, Sir, but you remember, that about the year 1663,
there was a discovery of a certain Design against the Life of our Lord
Lieutenant (which was then his Grace the Duke of Ormond, as you know he is now)
and the subversion of the Government, and Firing the Castle and City of Dublin,
etc. And for this, one Colonel Jephson and some others were Arraigned
condemned, and executed here. This Jephson had a Son (whose name was Joseph
Jephson) who was sometimes after his Fathers death put an, Apprentice here in
Dublin, where he was brought up in the Protestant Religion, and had his
Education in a Civil Family.

This Person the Jesuits resolved to make a Proselyte to the Roman Church, and
then doubted not but he would be fit for their purpose, and that they might the
more easily gain upon him; they first screwed themselves into his acquaintance,
and pretended a great deal of Love and kindness to him; by which means he
entertained a good opinion of them: and the more to indeer their acquaintance
to him, and ingratiate themselves with him, they also offered to help him to a
Wife; which was indeed the only way to gain him: And these Factors for Hell had
provided one for him, against whose Wealth and Beauty he could make no
Exceptions and therefore readily accepts of the Match. And now when Jephson
thought upon nothing but being Married, there was a difficulty started that he
was not a ware of, which was; that this Gentlewoman had made a Vow never to
Marry any person but a Roman Catholic; and therefore he must either lose his
Love or Change his Religion: In this doubtful case he repairs to his old
Friends (the Jesuits) and tells them what Obstructions he met with, and
desires their advice; which you may easily guess, was to change his Religion:
For now they open themselves to him, and tell him that the Salvation of his
Soul was as well concerned therein, as the obtaining of his Mistress; and
therefore advised him to hesitate no longer about it; giving him several other
reasons to sway him to take their advice but whether it were the force of their
Reasons, or the desire of obtaining his Mistress, that prevailed with him most,
I am not able to determine, though I rather think it was the latter: However it
was, he renounces the Protestant Religion, and declares himself a Papist; and
now the Gentlewoman may Marry him, and yet not break her, Vow: In expectation
whereof, he addresses himself to her, and gives her an account of his
Conversion, (as he termed it.) But the young man found himself extremely
deceived, for their arose another Remora much more insuperable than the former.
For he having declared himself a Papist, they now thought themselves sure of
him, and were resolved in the first place to have their designs upon him; and
now an opportunity, as they thought, presented it self.

For you must know the Jesuits in Ireland are carrying on the same design as
those in England; and because the Killing of the Lord Lieutenant (which it is
strongly presumed they designed) was a difficult and hazardous undertaking,
they agreed to make this Novice Jephson the Instrument of it; a Young and Rich
Wife they knew was the Bait that drew him to change his Religion; and they were
resolved upon the same account to draw him in to commit this Execrable Murder.

And therefore when Jephson urged that he might be Married, seeing he was
become a Romanist, they told him that he was too hasty: For he must first do
something to assure her of the truth of his Conversion. They told him that he
had done very well to come into the Bosom of the Mother Church, out of which
there was no Salvation; but yet till he had done some noble and Meritorious Act
to confirm his Faith, they should hardly believe his Conversion to be real.
They told him also, that now there was an opportunity presented it self, wherein
he might do God and the Church very great Service, and save his own Soul
besides; and that was, in avenging his Fathers Blood upon the Duke of Ormond:
Adding, that God and Nature seemed to have ordained him for that very work; and
that his Father must expect no Redemption from Purgatory, nor himself any hopes
of obtaining his mistress, till he had effected it; (this is confidently
reported to have been the method of the proceedings.)

Though this proposal did at first startle the Young man; yet either overcome
by their persuasions, or out of a desire of Revenge, or (which I rather think)
in hopes to obtain his Mistress, he resolves upon this desperate Attempt; which
was to be done, as it is said either by Shooting the Duke out of a Garret
window, as he went to Christ-Church, or in the Crowd going back* or in his
Closet, or by Dogging him when he went privately abroad, and then to dispach him
by Shot, with a Horse well Mounted to bring him off.

But after the heat of his first Resolution was a little over, the hazard and
difficutly of the Attempt did somewhat discourage him; and then it pleased God
to open his Conscience, (which was not yet quite seared,) and let him see his
own rashness in undertaking to commit so Execrable a Wickedness, and the subtle
Delusions of the Jesuits in alluring him thereto.

In this perplexity of Spirit, full of Grief and Distraction, he applied
himself to a worthy Magistrate of this City, to whom he discovered what I have
here acquainted you with. Adding, that the names of the Jesuits which put him a
upon it, were Pluncket and Pourn; whereupon they were immediately seized upon,
and carried to Prison in order to their Trials.

I hope Sir, this Letter will not seem troublesome to you, since by it we may
see, that let men lay their wicked designs as deep as Hell, yet our gracious
God (to whose all seeing eye nothing can be hid) daily discovers them, and
brings to light these hidden works of darkness; I hope God will preserve our
King, Church and State, and cause all wicked contrivers of Mischief to be taken
and snared in the works of their own hands. This is the daily Prayer of Sir.

Your most Humble and most Oblidged Friend and Servant N. A.
Dublin, Jan. 10th. 1678.

