1. May. 1690.
An Account of the Original of Judging according to Equity, and how Erroneous
Judgments in Equity have been Rectified, Agt ye jurisdiction of ye Lords.
Humbly Represented to the King, Lords and Commons; in Parliament Assembled. In
Order to a due Establishment. Bract. L. 3. f. 107. Fleta. cap. 17. l. 16.

NOne but the King, and such as are delegated by him, can or ought to Judge in
any Temporal matter.

Such as sought relief in former times in Cases of Equity were Suitors to the
King himself, who being assisted with his Chancellor and Council, Archeon 59.
did mittigate the severity of the Law in his own Person.

Afterward the King being willing to ease himself of that trouble; Archeon 62,
and 63.
by delivery of his Great Seal to his Chancellor, he delegated to him or the
Keeper of the Great Seal, his own Regal and Extraordinary Pre-eminence of
Jurisdiction, in Civil Causes; for mitigating the Rigor and supplying the
defects of the Common Law, when extraordinary Circumstances required it, but
this was very sparingly made use of by the Chancellor and Keeper in former
times, and men were oftentimes releived in Cases of Equity, as Brook says,
Brook Parliament 33.
by Act of Parliament, whereof you may find Presidents in the Parliament Rolls
hereafter mentioned, viz. 5 R. 2 n. 62. 3 H. 5. n. 17. 3 H. 5. n. 44. 9 H. 5.
n. 11. 37 H. 8. n. 26.

If the Chancellor Erro'd formerly his Decrees were reviewed, not before
himself alone, but some of the Judges sat with him, most times in the
Exchequer Chamber, as appear^ by the Year Books and Reports following, viz. 37
H. 6. f. 13. ibidem 35, and 36. 7 E. 4. f. 15. 22 E. 4. 67. 27 H. f. 15.

But whether the Chancellor in the Cases last mentioned did take the Judges to
his Assistance of his own accord, or by the Kings Order it appears not by the
Books, but it appears that of later times the Decrees of the Chancellor were
Reviewed by Judges and others by Order and Commission from the King, as appears
by the Authorities following, viz. 4 Instit. f. 85. where you may find, Vi. 2.
Anderson fo. 163.
that Sir Moyle Finch Petitioned Queen Elizabeth against a Decree in Chancery
in the 42. and 43. years of her Reign, and she referred the matter to all the
Judges of England, and upon their Opinions, being Certified into the Chancery,
the Decree was Reversed, and there the Lord Chief Justice Cook Cites 4 Cases
more that about that time were referred out of the Chancery to some of the
Judges.

There be also several Orders entered in the Register's Books of Orders in
Chancery, that appear to be made by virtue of the Kings refference from
Chancery Decrees to the Judges, as follows, viz. 21. Junii 2 Jac. 1. Inter
Chamberlain and Bubb, 24. No. 3 Car. 1: Inter Barker and Unwin, 12. No. 7 Car.
1. Inter Penington and Holms, 15 Car: 1. Rot. patent. 23: n. 5. indors. a
Commission to Review a Decree in Chancery between Harvey and Langham in there
Inrol'd.

Of late Years we find that Erroneous Decrees in Chancery and other Courts of
Equity were reviewed by Appeals to the Lords in Parliament, and it is worth
while to see how and when that Course first began.

In the Year 1621. Sir John Boucher preferred a Petition to the Lords Entitled
thus, Lords Journal 3. of December. 1621. 19 Jac. 1,


To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled.

In that Petition he complains against the Lord Keeper for an over hasty
determining of his Cause, and refusing to hear his Evidence, whereby, as he
alleged, he had not Justice done him, and the Petition concludes in these
words. The Petitioner does therefore in all Humility Appeal to your Lordships,
etc. Humbly desiring that your Lordships would be pleased to hear and Judge the
same.

Upon Reading of which Petition it was referred to the Committee of Privileges
to consider whether it were a formal Appeal or not.

Afterward the Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Lords Journal 10. December 1621.
the first of the Commit of Privileges Reported to the House, that diverse
Lords of their Subcommittee appointed to search for Presidents, had made Report
to them, that they could not find that the word Appeal was usual in any
Petition, and that the Ancient and Accustomed form of Petitions brought to that
House were, To the King and his Great Council. However they thought sit the
matter of the complaint should be heard, which was accordingly done, as to the
charge against the Lord Keeper for his over hasty hearing the Cause and
refusing to hear the Evidence, but as to the merits of the Cause it was not
heard; although Sir John Boucher earnestly begged it.

In 1624. I find several Petitions of Appeals from Chancery to the Lords in
Parliament, May 28. 1624. 22 Jac. 1.
one whereof was a Petition of one William Mathews, against a Decree obtained
by George Mathews, and upon hearing, their Lordships reversed the Decree;
whereupon George Mathews Petitioned their Lordships in nature of a Plea to
their Jurisdiction, setting forth, that he was informed by his Council, that it
had been the course of that Honorable House to Reverse Decrees, but by Bill
Legally Exhibited; and upon consideration had of that Petition their Lordships
waved their own reversal, May 29 1624.
and directed that the Lord Keeper should become an humble Suitor to the King
for a Commission to review that Decree.

And all the other Appeals in that Parliament that I could find were Referred
back to the Chancery or to Arbitrators to endeavor to end, and none determined
by the Lords sa I could find.

From that time to the beginning of the Wars, about 1640, and 1641, I find
nothing of Appeals to the Lords in Parliament, but in those troublesome times
they were again received, but how Legally is not for me to determine, but this
I will say, that before their Lordships can Examine Errors in Judgments at Law,
there must be the Kings leave for a Writ of Error for that purpose, and the
Writs of Error are their Lordships Commissions; but I know none they have to
determine Appeals from the Chancery no more then from the Prerogative Court,
which they pretend not to but, have disclaimed it.

(...) I find that the Lords were formerly Judges in Parliament in particular
Cases, by the Kings assent as appears, 4 E. 3. n. 1. and in the same Year n. 6.
it was assented and Agreed by the King and all the great Men in full
Parliament, that the Peers of the Realm should not be driven for the future to
give Judgment on any other but their Peers, nor have power so to do for the
future, and n. 16, and 17, of that Parliament Thomas of Berkley, Rnt. was tried
before the King in Parliament by a Jury of 12 Knights and acquirted: and 25 E.
3. n. 10. the Record of the Judgment against Sir William Thorpe was brought
into Parliaament, as the Record says, before the King himself who took the
Advice of all the Lords, but I think the Judgment was the Kings and not the
Lords.

1 H. 4. n. 79. It is declared by the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, by the Kings
Command, that all Judgments appeartain'd to the King and Lords unless in
Statutes, etc. but I cannot find how the Lords in Parliament came to be Judges
there in any Cause between Party and Party, without the King, or without his
Assent, or the Assent of his Chancellor, or one whom the King puts there to
Execute the Office of the Chancellor, who is the Kings Representative in the
House of Lords in his absence, as appears 10 R. 2. n. 6. and by the several
Actions by him done by the King Authority, as Prorogueing and Dissolving the
Parliament, so that the Chancellor or he that executes his place in the House
of Lords by the Kings Commission is not barely a Speaker of the House of Lords
and no more, and to be wholly Ruled and Governed by the Lords, but he is
Answerable to God and the King for all Judgments there given, as being
entrusted to represent the King who is the supreme Judge.

In Judgments heretofore in Parliament, the Advice of the Judges was followed,
and the late Lord Hollis, the Champion for the Jurisdiction of the Lords in
matters of Appeals, Hollis's Case stated, f. 22:
to justify the reasonableness of that Jurisdiction says, That the great
Officers of the Kingdom are part of that Body, who in all reason, says he,
should be knowing Men; the Chancellor of England is always their Speaker, who
is commonly a person skilled in the Law, and says he further, they have all the
Judges of the Land to be their Assistants, with whom they Advise, and by whose
Advice they are guided in difficult points, and I think all points in Law are
difficult to Men not skilled in the Law, and there he Cites Flourdew's Case, 1.
H. 7. where the proceedings upon Writs of Error in the House of Lords are
showed, Jenkins Lex Terre, f. 55.
and there it is said, Sen^scallus cum dominibus Spiritualibus and temporalibus
per concilum Justiciariorum procedent ad Errorem Corrigendum.

The King is sworn to Judge justly, and so is the Chancellor obliged to take
the Oath of a Chancellor though he be a Peer, and though the Lords upon Trial of
a Peer give their verdict upon honor, yet I do not think that any Reason why
if they are made Judges in other Cases, they should not take the Oath of a
Judge.

The King Judges by his sworn Judges who are his Council in matters of Law, and
they are called to the House of Lords not at their Lordships pleasure, Cook. 1.
Inst. f. 110.
but they are called thither by the King's Writ which tells us to what end they
come there in these words, Quod intersitis nobiscum and cum caeteris de
Concilio nostro super premissis tractaturi, vestrumque Concilium Impensuri.

Amongst the Petitions of the Commons in Parliament 1 R. 2. n. 87. it was
prayed that no Suit between party and party be determined before any Lords or
others of the Council, but before the Justices only which was granted by the
King.

I think this was an Act of Parliament according to the manner of Enacting in
those times, and that the Lords in Parliament are the Kings Council, and are
often called his Great Council.

The Judges in a course of mere Law are obliged to judge according to Law, and
in a Course of Equity according to Equity; but in both Cases the matter of fact
whereupon both Law and Equity does arise ought by the Law of the Land to be
tried by Jury of 12 Men, unless in some few Cases, yet the Courts of Equity
have determined matter of fact without Jury, which is very inconvenient.

It is objected by those that would not have the Judges Opinions regarded at
all in Judgments in the House of Lords, that they may be corrupted, which I
admit; but if any such thing appear, such Judges may be disp^ac'd and honest
Men put in their places, as sometimes Parliaments are factious, but that does
not justify the King to make Acts without a Parliament, yet he may. Dissolv a
Factious Parliament and call another by whose consent he may make Acts, and so
corrupt Judges being displaced, the King and Lords may be advised by honest
ones.

It may therefore be worthy consideration whither it be secumdum Legem and
Consuetudinem Parlamenti for the Lords to Reject the Opinion of the Judges (as
of late has been done) both in matters of Law upon Writs of error, and in
matters of Equity upon Appeals; in which last, such Regard ought to be had to
the Law as not quite to overthrow it, though by reason of some Circumstances in
some cases the Rigor of the Law may be moderated, and some small deffects of
the letter of the Law supplyd by Equity in Cases within the meaning thereof,
and therefore he can never be a good Judge of Equity that is not well Skilled
in the Law: and if it were otherwise, since Equity overrules the Law, we had
better take Advice of Honest Gentlemen tha^ spent all their Lives in Hunting
and Hawking and other pleasure, and never Conversed with, nor understood the
Gibbrish of Law Terms, nor the noise of Westminster Hall, then to give any
Eminent and well read Lawyer 5: or 10: or 20: Guinneys for his Advice; for the
Judgment of the first sort is most natural and therefore most like to suite
with the Judgment of the Lords if they neglect the Advice of the Judges. And to
perpetuate Affliction, such Judgment must now be the last resort according to
some Opinious, for so they would have the Judgment of the Lords, though the
King nor his Representative be no party nor consenting thereto, and that if
they Err it is not to be rectified by themselves nor by Act of Parliament,
though our Law Books say, that Parliaments may Err and do err oftentimes, and
their Errors may be rectified in another Parliament, or another Session, as
appears Bro. Error 68 Crompton f. 12. L. Hollis's Case stated, f. 65.

The whole Parliament of the 21 of R. 2: and the Authority thereby given was
repealed for this principal Reason amongst others, because there was a Clause
therein, that no person should attempt to revoak any Ordinance then made, Cooks
4. Instit. f. 44.
which restraint, says the Lo d Chief Justice Cook, was against the
Jurisdiction and power of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and
unreasonable: What then will be the Consequence? If a Judgment in the House of
the Lords is so perpetually final, be it ever so Eroneous, that it cannot be
rectified by themselves nor by Act of Parliament. And pray what becomes of the
Kings supremacy, if the last resort of all be in the Lords alone without the
King.

I may boldly say there is nothing so great a grievance as the Male
Administration of Justice, and therefore nothing more becoming the Commons of
England in Parliament Assembled (who are the grand Inquest of the Nation) then
to endeavor to preserve to the People the due course of Administration of
Justice, and to endeavor to restrain all Usurpation upon our Laws and
Liberties by whomsoever it be, by their open declaring and voting against it,
and Addressing to the King, our Supreme Head and Governor, for a Regulation,
and in particular, to desire His Majesty to grant Commissions to the Judges and
some others of Ability and Integrity to Review Decrees in Courts of Equity as
formerly was the practice, and as now is used, to Review Decrees in the
Prerogative Courts; and to desire the Lords in Judgments in their House to
takeand have due Regard to the Opinion of the sworn Judges, and that if at any
time any thing should happen to be unreasonably done or advised by them,
through oversight, misinformation or otherwise, or if a Case should happen
against Reason for which no Releif may be had by the oridinary Course of Law of
Equity, the same may be helped by the whole Parliament consisting of King, Lords
and Commons, in whom the Legislative Power Resides, and who, all together, are
Superior to the Lords alone in their Judicial Capacity, and may supply their
Deficiency, as was lately done in the Case of Roberts against Bodvil and Winn,
the said Roberts having been in Chancery a great while, endeavoring to set
aside a Will, and from thence Appealed to the Lords but could not effect it but
By Act of Parliament, which may be seen in the Parliament Rolls, 18 Car. 2. n.
9.

Vir bonus est Quis? Qui Consulta Patrum qui Leges Juraque servat.

