THE Accomplished Sea-mans DELIGHT, CONTAINING,

1. The great Mystery of Nature demonstrated by Art, as the Flux and Reflux,
Increase and Decrease, Access and Recess, Ebbing and Flowing of the Water of
the Sea.

2. The Closset of Magnetical Miracles unlocked, the properties and secrets of
the Loadstone revealed, serving not only for Sea Affairs, but also for
Travelers by Land.

3. Directions for Seamen in distress of Weather, also the right use of the
Magnitical Needle, and how to Manage the Sailing Compass, and the rest of the
Instruments of Chiefest Use in the Art of Navigation.

4. The Resolver of Curiossities, being a profitable Discourse of Local, as
also of the swift Motion of the Art of Navigation. Of the due proportion to be
observed in the Building of Ships, likewise rare Inventions of several Engons:
With a perfect Discovery of other admirable Mathematical Secrets, and for their
clearer Explaination, are Adorned with most significan and proper Figures.

First Read, then after that despise
Thy Prejudice, and be more wise.
LONDON, Printed for Benj. Harris, at the Anchor and Marinor in Thredneedle
Sreet, over against the Royal Exchange, 1686.

Licensed,

October the 10th, 1685. Rob. Midgley.

THE Accomplished Sea-mans DELIGHT, etc.
THough the Psalmist tells us, that the Lord has Founded the Earth upon the
Seas, and Established it on the Floods, Psalm. 24.2. Because for the more
Commodious living of Man and Beasts, he hat^ made a part of it higher then the
Seas, or at least restrained their Incursion upon it, so as now they make but
one entire Globe; yet because the Waters in the first Creation covered the Face
of the Earth, I will begin with them. The mother of Waters, the great deep,
has undoubtedly lost nothing of her ancient bounds or depth, but what is
impaired in one place, is again restored to her in another. The Rivers which
the Earth sucked from her by secret Veins, it renders back again with a full
Mouth; and the Vapors which the Sun draws up, empty themselves again into her
Bosom, according to that Expression of Du, Bartas.

The purest Humor in the Sea, the Sun
Exhales in the Air: which there resolved, anon
Returns to Water, and descends again,
By sudry ways into his Mother main.
Her motion of Ebbing and Flowing, and of high Springs and dead Neapes, are
still as certain and constant as the Changes of the Moon and Courses of the
Sun: Her native saltness, and by reason thereof her strength, for the better
supporting of Navigable Vessels is still the same, so likewise the Rivers, the
Daughters thereof, either hold on their wonted Courses and Currents, or what
they have diminished in one Age or place, they have again recompensed and
repayed in another. Because things move and are changed (without which such and
so great matters could not well be disposed) we are to think the Earth does not
always remain in the same state, without addition or diminution; neither yet
the Water, as if they were always boudned within the same lists, especially
seeing their mutual Change is natural and kindly, but rather that much Earth is
turned into Water, and contrariwise no less Water into Earth; it is not then to
be wondered at, if that part of the Earth which is now habitable was formerly
overflowed with Water, and that again which now is Sea, was sometimes
habitable; as amongst Fountains some are dried up and some spring forth afresh,
which may also be varifyed of Rivers and Lakes, wherewith accords that of Ovid,
Met. 15.

Vidi Ego quod fuerat quondam seti disima tellus Esse Fretum.
What was firm Land sometimes, that have I seen
Made Sea, and what was Sea made Land again;
On Mountain tops old Anchors found have been,
And Seafish shells to lie far from the main.
Plains turned to Vales by Waterfalls, the Down
By overflows is changed to Champain Land;
Dry ground e're while, now moorish seen does drown,
And Fens again are turned to thirsty Sand.
Her Fountains now has Nature opened,
Their shut up springs which first did flow amain,
By Earthquakes Rivers of sin issued,
Or dried up they have sunk down again.
Nor in one place perpetually to tarry,
All things in every Age for ever more do very,
And Nature changes still the course she once begun,
And will her self undo what she of Old has done.
Which though it be true in many, yet those great ones of Indus and Ganges, and
Danubius, Rhenes, and Nylus, are littie or nothing varied from the same courses
and currents which they held Thousand of years since, as appears in their
discriptions by the Ancient Geographers; but above all methinks the constant
rising of Nylus continued for so many Ages, is one of the greatest wonders in
the World, which is so precise in regard of time, that if you take of the Earth
adjoining of the River and preserve it carefully, that it come neither to be
wet nor wasted, and weigh it daily, you shall find it neither more nor less
heavy till the seventeenth of June, at which day it begins to grow more
ponderous, and Augmenteth with the Augmentation of the River, whereby they have
an infalible Knowledge of the state of the Deluge. This Mr. George Sandys
reports, and Alpinus a Physician names it as a common experiment. Whereas
heretofore mention has been made of the Sea and flowing of Waters, and diverse
other motions, it may be convenient to add hereunto the sayings and writings of
the most expert Learned Person Fredericus Delphinus, Doctor of Arts and
Physic, and public professor of the Mathematical Sciences in Padua, touching
the flowing and reflowing, or increase or decrease (otherwise also named access
and recess) that is, coming and going, or ebbing and flowing of the Water of
the Sea. Which flowing and reflowing, some do also name, the false rest or
quietness, or inordinate motion of the Water of the Sea. And albeit diverse men
have Treated of this Subject, yet forasmuch as some of their writings are
somewhat too dark, and not easy of Men to be understood, I have thought
necessary, partly out of their Writings, and partly by my own Industry, more
clearly and largly to Treat thereof, that the same may be the better understood
of all men.

Therefore for the more easy understanding of these two manner of motions of
the Water of the Sea, following the moving of the Sun and Moon, to the moving
of the Primum Mobile. The first moveable, is first to be known, that
wheresoever a man is on the Earth, his Horizon ever cutteth or divides the
Heaven to him into two halfs, and the one half of Heaven is ever above his
Horizon, and the other half beneath, and whereas in the half of a Sperical or
round Body, are contained two quarters, two shall ever be above his Horizon,
and two beneath; those that are above the Horizon, are called diurnall or day
quarters: and they that are under the Horizon, are called the Nocturnal or
Night quarters. Of these four quarters of Heaven, are two of which is made the
flowing or increase of the Water of the Sea: and other two in which is made the
flowing or increase of the Water of the Sea: and other two in which is made the
flowing or decrease of the Sea. The quarters in the which is made the flowing,
is the quarter which is from the East to the South above the Horizon, which is
the quarter of the day access, or increase of the day: and the quarter opposite
or contrary, which is from the West to midnight under the Horizon, which is the
quarter of the night access. The quarters in which is made the reflowing or
decrese, is the quarter which is from the South to the West above the Horizon,
which is the quarter of the recess of the day: and the quarter opposite, which
is from midnight to the East under the Horizon in the quarter of the recess of
the night.

Secondly, Is also to be known, that there are in Heaven eight points of the
flowing and reflowing, or increase or decrease of the Sea: of the which, four
are strong, and four are weak, two are weak for the flowing, and two for the
reflowing; weak for flowing, are the points of the East and West, which are the
beginning of the two quarters of flowing: weak for reflowing, is the point of
the South or Midday, and the point of Midnight, which are the beginning of the
quarters of reflowing: and these four are distant the one from the other, by a
quarter of Heaven. Of the strong points, two are strong for flowing, and two
for reflowing. Strong for the flowing, is the middle point between the East and
the South, being distant from the East 45 degrees, and from the South likewise,
and the middle point between the West and Midnight, in the night quarter of
flowing, being distant from the West 45 degrees, and from Midnight in the same
manner. Points strong for the reflowing, is the middle point between the South
and West, in the day quarter of the reflowing, being distant from the South 45
degrees, and from the West likewise: And the Middle point, between Midnight and
the East, in the quarter of the night reflowing, being distant from Midnight 45
degrees, and from the East likewise. And as the weak Points are distant one
from the other by a quarter of the Heaven, so are also the strong Points
distant the one from the other by a quarter of Heaven, to them that have a
right Horizon.

Thirdly, It is to be known, that besides the aforesaid eight Points, to such
as have a right Horizon, there are many other Points equipolent or of equal
virtue. And such are all the Points of Heaven, equally distant from the four
principal Points of Heaven; which four principal Points are, the Point of the
East, Point of the West, Point of the South, and Point of Midnight, or from the
four strong Points of Heaven, which is all one, yet in quarters of contrary
operation; for all such Points are equipolent or of equal virtue in moving of
the Water of the Sea: but in a right Horizon it is otherwise, as shall appear
hereafter.

Fourthly, We are also to take notice, that the Sun and the Moon every month
are together in one sign, degree, and minute. And this so being, is called the
conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. From thence for the space of eight days,
or thereabout, the Moon is departed from the Sun, by her proper motion by a
fourth part of Heaven: and this departing is called the first quarter of the
Moon with the Sun. From thence about fourteen days, or near upon, she is
departed from the Sun another fourth part of Heaven, and so by the half of
Heaven: and this distance is called the opposition of the Moon with the Sun, by
the full Moon. From thence to 21 days, or thereabouts, she is departed from her
opposition with the Sun or Full moon by another fourth part of the Heaven,
coming toward the Sun: and this distance is called the second quadrature of the
Moon with the Sun, and then the Moon is distant from the Sun by a fourth part
of the Heaven, as it was distant in the first quarter, and so comes near to
conjunction with the Sun. From thence at 30 days, or thereabouts, the Moon is
again in conjunction with the Sun as she was at the first.

Fifthly, and lastly, We are to take notice that the Sun and the moon, both
together every natural day (which is the time of 24 hours to the moving of the
first moveable) are the causes of flowing and reflowing, or the increase or
decease of the Water of the Sea twice. The declarations premised, and well kept
in memory, Let us declare how the sun and moon both together every natural
day, to the moving of the first moveable, are the causes of the flowing and
reflowing of the Sea. For if all these declarations are well kept in memory,
and especially the quarters of the Heaven in which is the flowing, and the
quarters of Heaven in which is the reflowing, and which are the strongest
Points for the flowing, and strong Points for the reflowing: These (I say)
being kept in memory, all the narration of the moving, and false quietness of
the Sea shall be clear and manifest. For the further Illusteration of what
has, or shall be said hereafter, I have thought fit to insert this following
Figure.

A Figure showing the beginning of the day increase at the Sun rising, and the
beginning of the day decrease in the Midday, and the beginning of the Night
increase at the Sun setting, and the beginning of the Night decrease at
Midnight.

chart depicting the Sun and Moon's effect on water levels through a full day.

THe Figure is so plainly demonstrated, that we need not to make any stop for
it, but to proceed.

First of all therefore (as touching the flowing and reflowing of the Sea, to
the moving of the first moveable, it is to be known, that when the sun and the
moon, are joined together, which conjunction is called Novilunium (that is) the
new moon, when they are moved to the moving of the first moveable, from the
East to the South, because the virtues both of the sun and moon are united
together, and both these Luminaries are moved continually in the moving of the
first moveable by the quarters of the day flowing, which is from the East to
the West; the day flowing or increase of the Sea is continued; and while they
move from the South to the West, because they are moved continually by the day
quarter of the reflowing, the reflowing still continues; and while they are
moved from the West to Midnight, because they are then moved by the quarter of
the night flowing. The night flowing is again continual, and while they are
moved from midnight to the East, because they are then moved by the night
quarter of reflowing, the night reflowing is again continual: and thus twice
in the natural day is the flowing or increase, and twice the reflowing or
decrease of the Water of the Sea.

It is again secondarily to he known, that when the moon after her conjunction
with the sun, by her proper motion is departed from the sun toward the East,
according to the order of the signs, going toward the first quadrature of sun
(which the Italian Pilots call 41 quartirone) ever before the moon by her
proper motion come to the first quarter, which is the distance of the moon from
the sun toward the East, according to the order of the signs, by a quarter or
fourth part of the Heaven; when the sun is so much above the Horizon of the
East part in the quarter of the day flowing, how much the moon is under the
Horizon in the same part of the East in the quarter of the night reflowing,
because then the sun is so much distant from the strong point of the flowing
above the Horizon, they are equipollent and of equal virtue, therefore then is
neither flowing nor reflowing of the Water of the Sea, but the Water seems to
stand: which the Venetians call L' aqua e' stanca. But when the sun by the
motion of the first moveable, comes near to the strong Point of flowing, which
is above the Horizon in the day quarter of flowing, the moon by the same motion
of the first moveable, departs so much from the south Point of the reflowing,
which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of the reflowing, coming
toward the weak Point of the East flowing, then is the moon in the strong
point of reflowing, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of the
reflowing, the reflowing is weakened, and the flowing is fortifyed: And then the
Water of the Sea begineth to flow. And how much more the sun approaches to the
strong point of flowing, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of
flowing, so much more the moon is departed rom the strong Point of the
reflowing, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of the reflowing,
approaching to the weak Point of the East flowing, and therefore the flowing
continues. But when the sun by the motion of the first moveable, comes to the
strong point of the flowing, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of
the flowing; then the moon is departed from the strong Point of the reflowing,
which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of reflowing, and is made near
to the Point of the Eeast flowing, and therefore the flowing yet continues.
But when the moon shall come to the weak Point of the East flowing, she then to
the moving of the first moveable, is moved by the day quarter of flowing,
approaching to the strong Point of flowing, which is above the Horizon: and the
Sun, because it is distant from the moon less then a quarter, shall likewise be
moved by the same day quarter of the flowing, and approaching to the weak Point
of the south reflowing: and therefore because both are moved by the day quarter
of flowing, approaching to the strong Point of flowing, which is about the
Horizon: And the sun, because it is distant from the moon less then a quarter,
shall likewise be moved by the same day quarter of flowing, approaching to the
same weak Point of the south reflowing: and therefore because both are moved by
the day quarter of the flowing, the flowing shall continue. And when the sun by
the moving of the first moveable, comes to the weak Point of the reflowing,
because then the moon is nearer the strong point of the flowing, which is above
the Horizon, then the sun to the strong Point of the reflowing, which is above
the Horizon in the day quarter of the reflowing, the flowing shall continue.
And when that the moon shall come to the strong point of flowing in the day
quarter of flowing, the sun shall not yet be in the strong Point of the
reflowing in the day quarter of the reflowing, because the sun is distant from
the moon less then a quarter, but will come to it: and then the moon shall
depart from the strong point of the flowing, and shall be less distant from it
then the sun from the strong Point of reflowing, and therefore the flowing
shall yet continue, until the sun be so much beyond the South toward the West
in the day quarter of reflowing, how much the moon is on this side the south
toward the East in the day quarter of flowing: And then the sun shall be so
much distant from the strong Point of flowing, which is above the Horizon,
beyound the South in the day quarter of the reflowing; how much the moon is
from the strong Point of the flowing, which is above the Horizon, before the
South in the day quarter of flowing: and incontinently the sun and the moon
shall be equipolent or of equal strength, and therefore shall be no flowing nor
reflowing as we have said before.

And when the sun by the motion of the first moveable shall come to the strong
Point of reflowing, in the day quarter of reflowing, the moon by the same
motion of the first moveable, shall be departed so much from the strong Point
of flowing in the day quarter of flowing, coming toward the weak Point of the
South reflowing: and then the moon shall be more distant from the strong Point
of flowing, then the sun from the strong Point of reflowing. And so the sun
shall be stronger than the moon, and therefore then shall begin the reflowing,
and shall continue according aa the sun shall approach to the strong point of
the reflowing, in the day quarter of the reflowing: and the moon shall be
departed from the strong Point of the flowing, in the quarter of the day
flowing. And when the sun shall come to the strong Point of the reflowing the
moon shall be departed frem the strong Point of the flowing, in the quarter of
the day flowing. And when the sun shall come to the strong Point of the
reflowing, the moon shall be departed from the strong Point of the flowing, and
therefore the reflowing shall continue, And when the moon shall come to the
weak Point of the South reflowing, the sun shall be departed from the strong
Point of the reflowing, in the day quarter of the reflowing, coming toward the
weak Point of the West flowing: yet shall the sun be less distant from the
strong Point of the reflowing, then the moon from the strong Point of the
flowing, and therefore the reflowing shall yet continue. And when the sun shall
come to the weak point of the West flowing: yet shall the sun be less distant
from the strong Point of the reflowing, then the moon from the strong Point of
the flowing, and therefore the reflowing shall yet continue. And when the sun
shall come to the weak Point of the West flowing, the moon shall be near to the
strong Point of reflowing, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of
reflowing, and shall be less distant from it, then the sun from the strong
Point of the flowing, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of
flowing, because she is distant from the Sun less then a quarter of the fourth
part of Heaven: therefore the reflowing shall yet continue, until the Sun
shall be so much on the Horizon on the W^st part in the quarter of the night
flowing, how much the Moon is above the Horizon in the same part of the West in
the day quarter of reflowing. And because then the Moon shall be so much
distant from the strong Point of the flowing, which is under the Horizon in the
West part, in the night quarter of the flowing, as the Moon from the strong
Point of reflowing, which is above the Horizon in that part of the West in the
day quarter of reflowing: then the Sun and the Moon shall be equipollent (that
is) of equal strength and virtue, and so shall there be neither Floowing nor
Refloowing.

But when the sun, by the moving of the first moveable, shall come to the
strong Point of the Flowing, which is under the Horizon in the night quarter of
the Flowing; the moon by the same moving of the first moveable, shall be
departed as much from the strong Point of reflowing, which is above the Horizon
in the day quarter of Reflowing: and then the sun shall be less distant from
the strong Point of Reflowing, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of
Reflowing, and then the sun shall be less distant from the strong point of
flowing, in the night quarter of flowing, then the moon from the strong Point
of reflowing, in the day quarter of reflowing, and therefore the sun shall be
stronger than the moon: and then again shall begin the flowing, and shall
continue (as is said before) until the sun be so much beyond midnight toward
the East, in the night quarter of reflowing, how much the moon is on this side
midnight, toward the West, in the night quarter of flowing, and the sun shall
be so much distant from the strong Point of reflowing, as the moon from the
strong Point of the flowing: and then incontinently the sun and the moon shall
be of equal strength, and there shall be neither flowing nor reflowing.

But when the Sun, by the moving of the first moveable, comes to the strong
pont of the reflowing, in the Night quarter of reflowing, the Moon by the same
moving of the first moveable, goes back and is departed as much from the
strong point of the Flowing, in the Night quarter of the Flowing, coming to
the weak point of Midnight reflowing: and then the Sun shall be less distant
from the strong point of reflowing, in the Night quarter of the flowing, and
then shall the flowing be weakened, and the reflowing strengthened, and the water
of the Sea shall then begin again, the reflowing shall continue (as is said
before) until the Sun be so much above the Horizon on the East part, how much
the Moon is under the Horizon on the same part of the East: and then the Sun
shall be so much distant from the strong point of the flowing, which is above
the Horizon, in the day quarter of the flowing, how much the Moon is from the
strong point of the reflowing, which is under the Horizon, in the Night quarter
of the reflowing: and then the Sun and the Moon shall be again of equal
strength, and there shall be neither flowing nor reflowing.

Then daily (that is to say, in every natural day) shall return the like change
to this aforesaid, until the Moon by her proper motion, shall come to her
first quadrature with the Sun, which the Pilotes and Venetian Mariners call it
quartirone, (as I said before) and when the Moon shall come to her first
quadrature with the Sun, then when the Sun shall be in the weak Point of the
East for the flowing, the Moon shall be in the weak Point of Midnight for
reflowing: and then the Sun shall be so much distant from the strong Point of
the flowing, which is above the Horizon, on the East part, in the day quarter
of the flowing, how much the Moon is from the strong Point of reflowing, which
is under the Horizon of the same part of the East, in the Night quarter of the
reflowing: and so the Sun and the Moon again shall be of equal force and power,
and there shall be but small flowing, increase or diminishing. And when the Sun
by the motion of the first moveable, shall come to the strong Point of the
flowing, which is above the Horizon, on the East part, in the day quarter of
the flowing, the Moon by the same motion of the first moveable, shall come
likewise so much to the strong Point of the reflowing, which is under the
Horizon on the same part of the East, in the Night quarter of the reflowing:
and continually to the Diurnall or Day motion, the Sun shall be also much
distant from the strong Point of flowing, which is above the Horizon, in the
day quarter of the flowing, how much the Moon is from the strong Point of
reflowing, and continently the Sun and Moon shall be again of equal power,
until the Sun by the moving of the first moveable, shall come to the strong
Point of flowing, which is above the Horizon; and then likewise the Moon shall
come to the strong Point of reflowing, which is under the Horizon, because
these Points are distant one from another by a quarter of Heaven, as the Sun
and the Moon are distant from themselves by a quarter of Heaven, and when the
Sun by the motion of the first moveable, shall depart as much from the strong
point of the reflowing, which is under the Horizon, coming toward the weak
point of the East flowing, and the Sun shall be continually distant so much
from the strong point of flowing, which is above the Horizon, how much the Moon
is from the strong point of reflowing, which is under the Horizon, until the
same come to the weak point of the South reflowing: and then the Moon likewise
shall come to the weak point of the East flowing. And the Sun and the Moon
shall be all this while of equal strength, and incontinently there shall be
neither flowing nor any notable reflowing, and shall be after the same manner
while the Sun is in the motion of the first moveable, be moved from the South
to the West, because then the Moon by the motion of the first moveable, shall
be mo^ed from the East to the South: and likewise while the ^un shall be moved
from the West, to Midnight, because then the Moon shall be moved from the West
to Midnight. And so in all the time of one revolution of Heaven, which is one
day natural of 24 hours, the Sea shall neither flow nor reflow sensibly, but
shall seem to stand, because the Sun and the Moon in all the time of that
revolution of Heaven, shall be ever of equal power, without any notable
difference. And this chances about the eight day after the conjunction ^f the
Moon with the Sun. And the false quietness of the Water of the Sea, of which
the Venetians use this manner of saying, Da gliotto a Juove L' Acqua non si
mo^e. From the eight day to the tenth the Water moves not. When the Moon shall
be departed from the Sun, beyond the first quadrature, going toward her
opposition with the Sun, when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on the
East part, in the day quarter of the flowing, how much the Moon is under the
Horizon in the same part of the East, in the Night quarter of the reflowing,
the Sun shall be so much distant from the strong point of the flowing, which is
above the Horizon, in the day quarter of flowing, departing from it by the
motion of the first moveable, and coming to the weak point of the reflowing,
how much the Moon is from the strong point of the reflowing, which is under the
Horizon, in the Night quarter of the reflowing, coming to it by the same motion
of the first moveable: and then the Sun and the Moon shall be again of equal
power, and there shall be neither flowing nor reflowing. And when the Sun by
motion of the first moveable, shall come to the weak point of the South
reflowing, the Moon by the same motion of the first moveable, shall approach or
come near as much to the strong point of the reflowing, which is under the
Horizon, in the Night quarter of the reflowing, then the Moon shall be nearer
to the strong point of the reflowing, which is under the Horizon, in the Night
quarter of the reflowing, then the Sun to the strong point of the flowing,
which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of flowing, because the Moon
shall be stronger then the Sun: And according as the Sun by the motion of the
first moveable shall approach to the weak point of the South reflowing, the
Moon by the same motion of the first moveable, shall approach as much to the
strong point of the reflowing, which is under the Horizon: and so the reflowing
shall continue until the Sun come to the weak point of the South reflowing.
And when the Sun by the motion of the first moveable, shall depart from the
weak point of the South reflowing, and shall be moved by the day quarter of the
reflowing, approaching to the strong point of the reflowing, the Moon by the
same motion of the first moveable, shall depart as much from the strong point
of the reflowing, which is under the Horizon, in the Night quarter of the
reflowing, and she shall be also moved by the quarter of the reflowing, as the
Sun coming to the weak point of the East flowing, because the Sun and the Moon
are distant between themselves more then by a quarter of Heaven: and so both
shall be moved by the quarters of reflowing, and therefore the reflowing shall
continue, until the Sun shall be so much beyond the South, toward the West,
in the day quarter of the reflowing, how much the Moon is on this side the
South, toward the East, in the day quarter of flowing. And then the Sun shall
be so much distant in the strong point of reflowing, in the day quarter of
flowing, departing from it by the motion of the first moveable, toward the
West, how much the Moon is from the strong point of flowing, which is above the
Horizon in the day quarter of the flowing, coming to it: and so the Sun and the
Moon shall be of equal force, and then shall be neither flowing nor reflowing.

And when the Sun by the motion of the first moveable, shall be departed from
the strong point of the reflowing, which is above the Horizon, in the day
quarter of the flowing, coming to the weak point of the West-flowing, the Moon
by the same moving of the first moveable, shall approach as much to the strong
point of flowing, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter of the flowing,
then the Sun to the strong point of the reflowing, which is above the Horizon
in the day quarter of flowing: and then the Moon shall be nearer to the strong
point of flowing, then the Sun in the strong point of reflowing, in the day
quarter of reflowing: and so the Moon shall be stronger then the Sun, and then
shall begin the flowing. And as the Sun shall continually be departed from the
strong point of reflowing, so the Moon continually shall approach the strong
point of flowing, and the flowing shall continue. And when the Sun shall come
to the weak point of the West flowing, the Moon shall yet move by the day
quarter of the flowing, because the Sun and the Moon are distant one from the
other more then by a quarter of the Heaven: and then the Moon shall be nearer
the strong point of flowing, in the quarter of the day flowing, then the Sun in
the strong point of flowing, in the quarter of the day flowing, then the Sun to
the strong point of the flowing, which is under the Horizon, in the Night
quarter of the flowing, and therefore the flowing shall continue. And when the
Moon shall come to the weak point of the South reflowing, the Sun shall pass
the weak point of the West flowing, approaching to the strong point of the
flowing, which is under the Horizon, in the Night quarter of the flowing, and
then the Sun shall be nearer the strong point of the flowing, which is under
the Horizon, in the Night quarter of the flowing, then the Moon to the stronger
point of the reflowing, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of the
reflowing, and so the Sun shall be stronger then the Moon and therefore the
flowing shall continue.

And when the Sun shall come to the strong point of flowing, which is under the
Horizon, in the Night quarter of the flowing, the Moon shall not yet be in the
strong point of reflowing, which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of
reflowing, because the Moon is distant from the Sun more then by a quarter of
the Heaven, and therefore the flowing shall yet continue, until the Sun be so
much under the Horizon on the West part, in the Night quarter of the flowing,
how much the Moon is above the Horizon on the same part of the West, in the day
quarter of the reflowing: and then the Sun shall be so much distant from the
strong point of the flowing, which is under the Horizon in the Night quarter of
the flowing, coming to the weak point of the Midnight reflowing, how much the
Moon is from the strong point of reflowing, which is above the Horizon, in the
day quarter of the reflowing coming to it: and therefore the Sun and the Moon
shall be of equal strength, and then shall be neither flowing nor reflowing.

Afterward when the Sun by the motion of the first moveable, shall be distant
from the point of the flowing, which is under the Horizon on the West part, in
the Night quarter of the flowing, coming toward the weak point of Midnight
reflowing, the Moon by the same motion of the first moveable, shall approach
much to the strong point of reflowing, which is above the Horizon, in the day
quarter of the reflowing coming to it. And so the Moon shall be nearer the
strong point of reflowing, then the Sun to the strong point of flowing, and
therefore the flowing shall begin, and shall continue in manner (as is said)
until the Sun be so much beyond Midnight, toward the East, in the Midnight
quarter of reflowing, how much the Moon before Midnight toward the West, in
the Night quarter of flowing: and the Sun shall be so much distant from the
strong point of reflowing, in the Night quar^er of reflowing, going backward
from it toward the ^oresaid weak point of the East flowing, how much the Moon
is from the point of the strong flowing, in the Night quarter of the flowing
coming to it: and then the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force, and there
shall be neither flowing nor reflowing.

And when the Sun by the motion of the first moveable, shall be departed from
the strong point of reflowing, under the Horizon, which is in the Night quarter
of reflowing: then shall the flowing begin, and continue in like manner
aforesaid, until the Sun be so much above the Horizon on the East part, in the
day quarter of flowing, how much the Moon is under the Horizon, on the same
part of the East, in the Night quarter of reflowing. And because the Sun shall
be so much distant from the strong point of flowing, which is above the Horizon
in the day quarter of flowing, coming by the motion of the first moveable,
toward the weak point of the South reflowing, how much the Moon is from the
strong point of reflowing, which is under the Horizon, in the Night quarter of
reflowing, coming by the same motion of the first moveable toward it, they
shall be of equal force, and so shall be neither flowing nor reflowing. And in
this manner, the flowing and reflowing shall continue in every natural day,
until the Moon shall come to her opposition with the Sun.

And when the Moon shall come to her opposition with the Sun, then the Sun
shall be in the weak point of the East flowing, the Moon shall likewise be in
the weak point of the West flowing: and then shall the flowing begin, and shall
continue as long as the Sun shall be moved to the moving of the first moveable,
from the weak point of the East flowing, by the day quarter of the flowing, to
the weak point of the South reflowing. And the Moon then in all this time,
shall be moved likewise to the moving of the first moveable, from the weak
point of the West flowing, by the Night quarter of flowing, to the weak point
of the Midnight reflowing: and then the flowing shall cease, and the reflowing
begin, and continue as long as the Sun is at the moving of the first moveable,
and shall be moved from the weak point of the South reflowing, by the day
quarter of reflowing, unto the weak point of the West flowing, and the Moon
also in all this time shall be moved likewise to the moving of the first
moveable, from the weak point of the Midnight reflowing, by the Night quarter
of reflowing, unto the weak point of the East flowing: and then the reflowing
shall cease, and the flowing shall begin again, and shall continue as long as
the Sun shall be moved to the motion of the first moveable, from the weak point
of the West flowing, by the Night quarter of the flowing, unto the weak point
of Midnight reflowing. And then the Moon in all that time, by the same moving
of the first moveable, shall likewise be moved form the weak point of the East
flowing, by the day quarter of the flowing, unto the weak point of the
reflowing: and then the flowing shall cease, and the reflowing begin, and shall
continue as long as the Sun, by the moving of the first moveable, shall be
moved from the weak point of Midnight reflowing, by the Night quarter of the
reflowing, unto the weak point of the East flowing. And then the Sun in all
this time, by the same motion of the first moveable, shall be moved likewise
from the weak point of the South reflowing. And then the Moon in all this time
by the same motion of the first moveable, shall be moved likewise from the weak
point of the South reflowing, by the day quarter of the reflowing, unto the
weak point of the West flowing, and then the reflowing shall cease.

And when the Moon shall pass her opposition with the Sun by her proper
motiong, goin to her second quadrature with the Sun, then when the Moon shall
be so much above the Horizon, on the East part, in ^he day quarter of flowing,
how much the Sun is under ^^e Horizon on the same part of the East, in the
Night ^uarter of the reflowing, because then the Moon shall be so much distant
from the strong point of flowing, which is above the Horizon in the day quarter
of flow^ng, how much the Sun is from the strong point of reflowing, which is
under the Horizon, in the same part of the East, in the Night quarter of
reflowing, then the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal power, and there shall
be neither flowing nor reflowing. And when the Moon by the motion of the first
moveable, shall be departed from the strong point of flowing, which is about
the Horizon, in the day quarter of flow^ng, coming toward the weak point of
the South reflowing, the Sun by the same motion of the first move^ble, shall
approach as much to the strong point of reflowing, which is under the Horizon,
in the East part ^n the Night quarter of reflowing, then the Moon from the
strong point of flowing, which is above the Horizon, to the South part of the
East in the day quarter of flowing, and the reflowing shall begin and continue.
And when the Moon by the motion of the first moveable, shall come to the weak
point of the South reflowing because the Sun and the Moon are distant from them
selves more then by a quarter of the Heaven, and then the Moon to the moving of
the Moon by the moving of the first moveable, shall be moved by the day quarter
of reflowing, coming to the strong point of reflowing, ^in the day quarter of
reflowing, and so the reflowing shall continue.

And when the Moon shall approach to the strong point of reflowing, in the day
quarter of reflowing, the Sun shall approach to the weak point of the East
slowing, in the Night quarter of reflowing, and shall be further distant from
the strong point of flowing which is above the Horizon, in the day quarter of
reflowing, then the Moon from the strong point of the reflowing, which is
likewise above the Horizon, in the day quarter of reflowing: and so the flowing
shall continue, until the Moon be so much beyond the South, toward the West,
in the day quarter of the reflowing, the Sun before the South, toward the
East, in the day quarter of flowing, and then the Moon shall be so far distant
from the strong point of reflowing, in the day quarter of reflowing, how much
the Sun from the strong point of flowing, in the day quarter of flowing: And so
the Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force, and there shall be neither
flowing nor reflowing. And when the Moon by the motion of the first moveable
shall approach as much to the strong point of flowing, in the day quarter of
flowing; then because the Sun shall be near to the strong point of flowing, in
the day quarter of flowing, then the Moon in the strong point of reflowing,
which is in the day quarter of reflowing, the flowing shall begin and continue
according to the Moon, to the moving of the first moveable, shall be departed
from the strong point of reflowing, in the day quarter of reflowing, coming
toward the weak point of the West flowing: and the Sun shall also approach the
strong point of the reflowing, in the day quarter of the flowing coming to it.

And when the Moon to the moving of the first moveable, shall come to the weak
point of the West flowing, the Sun yet by the moving of the first moveable,
shall move by the day quarter of the flowing, because the Sun and the Moon are
distant one from the other more then by a quarter of Heaven, and the Sun shall
be more near to the strong point of the flowing, in the day quarter of flowing,
then the Moon to the strong point of reflowing, in the day quarter of
reflowing, and therefore the flowing shall continue.

And when the Sun shall come to the weak point of the South reflowing, the Moon
shall be under the Horizon, in the West part, in the Night quarter of the
flowing, which is under the Horizon in the Night quarter of the flowing, then
the Sun to the strong point of the reflowing, which is above the Horizon, in
the day quarter of reflowing: and therefore the flowing shall yet continue,
until the Moon shall be so much under the Horizon, on the West part, in the
Night quarter of flowing, how much the Sun is above the Horizon, on the same
part of the West, in the day quarter of reflowing. And then the Moon shall be
so much distant from the strong point of flowing, under the Horizon, in the
Night quarter of flowing, coming toward the weak point of the Midnight
reflowing, how much the Sun from the strong point of reflowing is above the
Horizon, in the day quarter of reflowing coming to it: and so the Sun and the
Moon shall be of equal strength, and then shall be neither flowing nor
reflowing.

And when the Moon by the motion of the first moveable, shall be departed from
the strong point of reflowing which is under the Horizon, on the east part of
the Night quarter of reflowing toward the weak point of the East fllowing, the
Sun by the same moveing of the first Moveable, shall approach as much to the
strong point of flowing, which is under the Horizon on the West part in the
Night quarter of flowing coming to it: and then because the Moon shall be more
distant from the strong point of reflowing, then the Sun from the strong point
of flowing, then shall begin the flowing because the Sun shall be stronger then
the Moon. And how much more the Moon shall be distant from the strong point of
reflowing, in the Night quarter of reflowing, so much more the Sun shall
approach the strong point of flowing, in the Night quarter of flowing, and so
the flowing shall continue. And when the Moon shall come to the weak point of
the East flowing, the Sun shall yet be in the Night quarter of flowing, because
the Sun is distant from the Moon more then by a quarter of the Heaven, and the
Sun shall be nearer to the strong point of flowing in the Night quarter of
flowing, then the Moon to the strong point of reflowing, whith is in the Night
quarter of reflowing, and so the flowing shall continue until the Moon be so
much above the Horizon on the East part: And then the Moon shall be so much
distant from the strong point of flowing, which is above the Horizon in the day
quarter of flowing, departing from it by the motion of the first Moveable
toward the weak point of the South reflowing, how much the Sun from the strong
point of reflowing, which is under the Horizon in the Night quarter of
reflowing, coming to it by the same motion of the first Moveable. And then the
Sun and the Moon shall be of equal force, and there shall be neither flowing
nor reflowing, and the first disposition shall return again, and such flowing
and reflowing, shall continue every natural day in this manner, until the Moon
shall come to her Quadrature with the Sun.

And when the Moon shall be in the second Quadrature, then the water of the
Sea, shall neither flow nor reflow, but shall seem to be at rest, as it was in
the first Quadrature, in the which, in the whole revolution of Heaven, the Sun
and the Moon were ever of equal strength for the causes declared: for the same
are the causes of the second Quadrature, which are also of the first, and is
above 21 Days. And this quietness or stay of the water of the Sea (as is said
before) the Venetians call it, Acqua de feel, and use this saying: Da Vent' uno
a' Venti' de, L' acqua non vane su, ne giu, from the 21. to 22, the waters
goeing neither up nor down.

And when the Moon by her proper motion shall pass this second Quadrature,
proceeding to her conjunction with the Sun, then the Moon shall be distant stom
the Sun, less then the fourth part of Heaven, then when she shall be distant
from the Sun, less then fourth part of the fourth part of Heaven. And then when
she shall ^e so much above the Horizon the East part, in the day ^uarter
flowing, as the Sun under the Horizon on the ^ame part of the East, in the
Night quarter of reflow^st, then the Moon shall be so much distant from the
^trong point of flowing which is above the Horizon, in the Day quarter of
flowing, coming to it by the first motion of the first moveable, how much the
Sun from the stronger point of flowing, which is under the Horizon in the Night
quarter of reflowing, going from it by the same motion of the first moveable
toward the weak point of the East flowing: And then the Sun and the Moon shall
be of equal power, and there shall ^e neither flowing nor reflowing. And when
the Moon by motion of the first Moveable, shall come to the strong point of
flowing, which is above the Horizon in the Day quarter of flowing, the Sun by
the same motion of the first Moveable, shall depart as much from the strong
point of reflowing, which is under the Horizon in the Night quarter of
reflowing, toward the weak point of the East flowing, And then because the Moon
shall be less distant from the strong point of flowing, which is above the
Horizon, in the Day quarter of flowing, then the Sun from the strong point of
reflowing, the Moon shall be stronger then the Sun, and therefore then shall
begin the flowing: and how much more the Moon shall approach to the strong
point of flowing, so much more the Sun shall be distant from the strong point
of reflowing, approaching to the weak point of the East flowing, because the
Moon shall yet be in the Day quarter of flowing, for that she is distant from
the Sun less then a fourth part of Heaven, she shall be less distant from the
strong point of flowing, which is above the Horizon, in the Day quarter of
flowing then the Sun from the strong point of reflowing, which is under the
Horizon in the Night quarter of reflowing, therefore the flowing shall yet
continue.

And when the Moon shall come to the weak point of the South reflowing, the Sun
shall be above the Horizon in the Day quarter of flowing, and shall be nearer
the strong point of flowing, then the moon to the strong point of reflowing,
which is above the midday (or the South) in the Day quarter of reflowing,
because the Sun is distant from the Moon less then the fourth part at Heaven,
and therefore the flowing shall continue the Moon be so much beyond the South
toward the west, in the Day quarter of reflowing, how much the Sun is before
the South toward the East, in the Day quarter of flowing: and then the Moon
shall be so much distant from the strong point of reflowing, in the Day quarter
of reflowing coming to it by the motion of the first Moveable: and so the Sun
and the Moon shall be of Equal force, and there shall be neither flowing nor
reflowing, And when the Moon shall by the Motion of the first moveable, aproach
to the strong point of reflowing in the Day quarter of reflowing, the Sun by
the same motion of the first Moveable, shall go back and depart as much from
the strong point of flowing, in the Day quarter of flowing; and then the Moon
shall be nearer to the strong point of reflowing, in the Day quarter of
reflowing, and so the Moon shall be stronger then the Sun, and therefore shall
begin the reflowing, and the flowing and reflowing shall continue in the same
manner as is said.

When the Moon departs from her Conjunction with the Sun, and is not come to
her first Quadrature with the Sun, as is between the Conjunction and the first
Quadrature, and when the Moon shall come to her Conjunction with the Sun, then
again all the dispsition before declared, shall return in all points in like
manner as is said, Therefore this motion of the water of the Sea, whereof we
have spoken, is a motion following the motion of the Sun and Moon to the motion
of the first moveable, for if you shall well consider that we have said of the
flowing and reflowing (that is) increase and decrease, for access and recess of
the water of the Sea, you shall understand that the beginnings of such flowings
and reflowings, and likewise the rest and quietness, chance diversely in the
hours of the Day and of the Night: for they come not always in the same hours
of the day as is manifestly known to such as observe such flowings and
reflowings, or else false rest and quietness of the Water of the Sea. And
therefore by what is written does appear that the Water of the Sea has motion
of flowing, once in the Day and once in the Night: and likewise of reflowing
once in the Day and once in the Night.

It is manifest also that the flowing does not always begin at the same hour
of the Day or Night, but at diverse hours: and likewise of the reflowing.

Also the time of flowing or reflowing, proceeds inordinatly when the Moon is
in her Quadratures with the Sun, that is, in the first or second.

There chances sometimes great increase of Waters, sometimes less, that is,
when the Moon shall be in any other place from the Sun besides these four that
is in the Conjunction, or Opposition, or her first Quadrature or second with
the Sun.

And as are sometimes increases of Waters, greater or lesser, even so are the
decreases in the like manner, the greatest concourses and Motions of Waters are
when the Moon is in Conjunction with the Sun, and also the greatest flowings
and reflowings. Likewise in Opposition of the Moon with the Sun, and the
greater then in the time of the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. For the
superior bodies, by their motion and light, give their influence to these
inferior bodies. And so much more as they have of Light, so much more and
stronger they work: and because in opposition of the Moon with the Sun, the
moon is full of Light, and her Light is toward us, therefore it is reasonable
that then should be caused greater flowings and reflowings, then in her
Conjunction with the Sun. Nevertheless, because that in her Conjunction with
the Sun and Moon are both unite together, and their virtues, therefore also are
great decreasings and increasings of waters, because both their Virtues are
Unite, as I have said, but yet greater is the Opposition then in the
Conjunction, for causes before rehearsed.

The Moon being in her Quadrature with the Sun, the Water of the Sea has no
determinate time of flowing or reflowing, and then are the less concourses of
Waters, and least flowing and reflowing. Such motion of the Sea the Venetians,
as we have said, call it de feel: and then the Water of the Sea has no
determinate beginning of flowing or reflowing, but is moved inordinately in a
diverse manner, sometimes coming, and sometimes going, the cause of this
diversity is, because the Sun and the Moon, wheresoever they shall be in
moveing to the water equally, or as it were unequally, have contrariety in
whatsoever point they shall be: For in whatsoever point the Sun shall be, the
Moon shall be in the point of opposite Virtue, contrary to the place of the
Sun, or near.

And when the Moon shall be without the said four places, then the Water of the
Sea shall begin to come or go. And when the Sun and the Moon shall be in equal
points of Virtue of the quarters of contrary operation, the concourses of
Waters shall be so much the greater, in how much the Moon shall be nearer to
her Conjunction with the Sun, or to the Oposition: and so much the less in how
much the moon shall be nearer to her quadratures, likewise the flowings and the
reflowings shall be so much the greater, for if the Moon shall be between the
Conjunction with the Sun and the first Quadrature, then the Moon to the moving
of the first moveable does follow the Sun in his rising, and then shall be the
beginning of the day flowing, of the day after the rising of the Sun, about
three of the Clock, or before, that is, when the Moon shall be so much above
the Horizon on the part of the East, in the day quarter of flowing, how much
the Moon is under the Horison on the same part of the East, in the Night
quarter of reflowing because then the Sun and Moon shall be of equal force,
because they shall be in the points of equal Virtue in the quarters of contrary
operation, and the beginning of the Night flowing shall be in the Night, after
the setting of the Sun (that is) when the Sun shall be so much under the
Horizon, on the same part of the West, in the Day quarter of flowing, how much
the Moon is under the Horizon on the same part of the West, in the Day quarter
of reflowing: and the beginning of the day reflowing shall be in the Day after
noon when the Sun shall be so much after noon and the Day quarter of reflowing,
how much the Moon before Noon, in the day quarter of flowing: and the beginning
of the day reflowing of the Night, shall be in the Day after Midnight (that is)
when the Sun shall be so much after the point of Midnight, in the Night quarter
of reflowing, how much the Moon shall be in the Night quarter of flowing. And
if the Moon be in the first Quadrature and the opposition, the Moon yet in her
rising follows the Sun, and then shall be the beginning of the Day following,
in the day nfter Noon, about evening (that is) a little before or after, that
when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on the part of the West, in the
Day quarter of reflowing, how much the Moon is above the Horizon on the part of
the East, in the Day quarter of flowing, and the beginning of the Night
flowing, shall be on the Day before Day (that is) about Morning, before or
after (that is) when the Sun shall be so much under the Horizon on the part of
the East, in the Night quarter of reflowing; how much the Moon is under the
Horizon on the part of the West, in the Night quarter of flowing: and the
beginning of the Day reflowing, shall be in the Day before Noon, when the Sun
shall be so much before the point of Noon, how much the Moon after the point of
Midnight, in the quarter of the Night-flowing, how much the Moon is after the
point of Noon, or Mid day, in the day quarter of reflowing. And if the Moon
shall be between the oppsition of the Sun, and her second quadrature with the
Sun, then the Moon in her rising goes before the Sun, and then the beginnings
both of flowings and reflowings, are in like manner as they were when the Moon
was between the Conjunction and the first quadrature. For the beginning of the
day flowing shall be in the day quarter about three of the Clock, before or
after (that is to say) when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on the
East part in the day quarter of flowing. And the beginning of the night flowing
shall be in the Night, when the Sun shall be so much under the Horizon on the
part of the West, in the Night quarter of reflowing, how much the Moon is under
the Horizon on the part of the East, in the night quarter of reflowing: But the
beginning of the day reflowing, shall be in the day, afternoon, when the Sun
shall be so much after the point of the South, in the day quarter of reflowing,
as the Moon before the point of Midnight, in the Night quarter of flowing. And
the beginning of the Night reflowing, shall be in the day, when the Sun shall
be so much after the point of Midnight, in the Night quarter of reflowing, how
much the Moon is before the point of Noon, in the day quarter of flowing. And
if the Moon shall be between the second quadrature, and her conjunction with
the Sun, then the Moon also in her rising shall go before the Sun: and then
shall be the beginning of flowing and reflowing, in the same hours, as they be
when the Moon is in the first quadrature and opposition: because the beginning
of the day of the day flowing, in the day after noon about evening, before or
after, when the Sun shall be so much above the Horizon on the part of the West,
in the day quarter of reflowing, how much the Moon is under the Horizon on the
same part of the West, in the night quarter of flowing: and the beginning of
the night flowing shall be in the night, about morning, before or after, when
the Sun shall be so much under the Horizon on the part of the East, in the
night quarter of reflowing, how much the Moon is above the H^rizon in the same
part of the East, in the day quarter of flowing. But the beginning of the day
flowing, shall be on the day before noon, when the Moon shall be so much after
the point of midday, or the South, in the day quarter of reflowing, how much
the Sun is before it in the day quarter of flowing, and the beginning of the
night reflowing, shall be in the night before midnight: that is, when the Moon
shall be so much after the point of midnight, in the night quarter of
reflowing, how much the Sun before the point of midnight, is in the night
quarter of flowing. And hereby it appears, that as well the flowing as the
reflowing of the Water of the Sea, begin (as we have said) not always in the
same hours of the night, for the beginning of flowing is either in the
beginning of the day, or the beginning of the night, which chances, the Moon
being in conjunction or opposition to the Sun, or is before day, from the
mornings toward the day, or from the day, until four of the Clock, or
thereabouts; or is before evening, toward the evening Tide, and from thence to
the Cock Crowing, or thereabouts: which chances when the Moon is between her
conjunction or opposition with the Sun, or any of the quadratures. The beginning
of the reflowing is either at noon, or at midnight, as when the Moon is in
conjunction or opposition with the Sun, or is before noon, or after, or before
midnight, or after, as when the Moon is between her conjunction or opposition
with the Sun, and any of her quadratures. It is apparent also, that sometimes
the Water of the Sea does not determinate or certain beginning, neither order of
flowing or reflowing, which chances, the Moon being in her quadratures with
the Sun. It is manifest also, that all flowing of the Water of the Sea, is
caused by respect to the Horizon, on the part of the East or West. And every
reflowing by the respect to the meridian, or to the point of midday, or
midnight. Here also is to be considered, that all that is said, are most
certainly true in a right Horizon, but in an oblique or side Horizon, they
sometimes fail, as shall be said hereafter following.

It happens (as I have said) that the Water of the Sea does sometimes wander
or decline from the order already prescribed, yet commonly, and for the most
part keeps the due order. Such manner of declining is after two sorts, for
there is either disorder or error in the hour of the beginning of the motion of
the flowing or reflowing, or in the midst of the motion: (that is) that they
have greater or lesser courses then at other times, or otherwise greater or
lesser increases or decreases: the error coming in the hour of motion, may
proceed from the causes; as by reason of the situation of the Region, or by
reason of the Bodies supercelestial, or by change of the Air.

By reason of situation of Regions, chances diversity only in the hour of the
beginning of the flowing, because the beginning thereof has respect to the
Horizon, or is by respect to the Horizon: for in the beginning of reflowing is
no diversity or error, because the beginning of the reflowing, is by respect to
the Meridian Circle. Again, by reason of the situation of the Region, diversity
happens thus, that is, that either the Region is under the Equinoctial
Circle, or without it. And if it be under the Circle, because they have a right
Horizon, and the days there are always equal with nights, at all times of the
year.

That we have said of diverse hours of the beginning of flowing is certainly
true: But Regions distant from the Equinoctial, because they have a winding or
slope Horizon, in them the beginings of flowings are, as in Regions under the
Equinoctial, only in two times of the year: that is to say, in the Spring time,
or Equinoctial Vernal, and in the time of Autumn, or Equinoctial Autumnal,
that is to say, about the midst of the Month of March, and about the midst
of the Month of September: But in other times of the year, or from the Vernal
Equinoctial, by the whole Summer, until the Equinoctial Autumnal, it is
otherwise, because the beginning of the day flowing, if the flowing be before
noon, that is, about the morning, or shall be later then it ought to be: that
is to say, more of the day then is in Regions under the Equinoctial, and that
is, because that in such Regions the day begineth sooner, or the Sun rises
sooner, then in the Regions which are under the Equinoctial: for the declining
of the obliqe or side Horizon (although these Regions be under one and the same
Meridian) and if the beginning of the day flowing be after noon, that is about
evening, then such beginning shall be sooner then it is in Regions under the
Equinoctial (that is to say) in fewer hours of the day, because that then the
Sun faleth later then in Regions which be under the Equinoctial; but the
beginning of the night flowing, if it be before midnight, it is sooner in the
said places or Regions (that is to say) in less time of the Night, or in less
time after the setting of the Sun, then in the Regions under the Equinoctial:
because that then the night begineth to them afterward. And if the beginning of
the night flowing be after midnight (that is) toward the day, it shall be
later (that is) of more hours, or more near the day, then is in Regions under
the Equinoctial, because the Sun rises sooner to them, then to those that are
under the Equinoctial. And this diversity grows so much, that sometimes it
chances to see two flowings in one day, and none in the night: which happens
from the inequality of the days, with their nights. For in how much the
Artificial day shall be longer then his night, so much diversity and error
arises more evidently. Therefore in the longest days of the year, such
diversity shall appear manifestly. But from the Equinoctial Autumnal, by all
Winter, until the Equinoctial Vernal, it is contrary: because the beginning of
the day flowing, if it be before noon (that is) about the morning, then shall
it be sooner then it should be (that is to say) in fewer hours of the day, then
it should be in a right Horizon: for then the day begineth later, or the Sun
rises later to them that have a winding or crooked Horizon. And if such
flowing shall be after noon (that is) about evening, then the beginning of such
flowing shall be latelyer (that is) more toward the evening, or nearer to the
setting of the Sun, then in Regions which are under the Horizon; for in a side
or crooked Horizon the night is sooner, and the Sun falls sooner then in a
right Horizon. Also, the beginning of the night flowing, if it shall be before
midnight, it shall be later and more in the night, then in Regions under the
Equinoctial; because then the night shall sooner begin in the crooked Horizon
then in the right, because the Sun first falls in the crooked Horizon, then
in the right. And if the beginning of the night flowing shall be after midnight,
that is, toward the day, then such beginning of flowing in the crooked Horizon
shall be sooner, (that is) more before the day, or before the rising of the
Sun, then shall be in Regions which are under the Equinoctial. And such
diversity grows so much, that sometimes shall be two flowings in the night,
and none in the day. And this chances from the inequality and increase of the
night above his day, for in how much the night shall be longer then his day, so
much the more grows such diversity, and therefore such diversity shall appear
greatest in the longest night of the year; wherefore by the aforesaid, it is
manifest, that how much the nearer we shall be to the Equinoctial, so much the
less shall appear the diversity in the hour of the beginning of the flowing of
the Water. And how much the Sun shall be nearer to the standings or stayings of
the Sun (called Solititium) or the longest days, and longest nights, so much
greater and more certain shall be the diversity, and shall appear more
manifestly. Furthermore, diversity happens by reason of the Heavenly Bodies,
and Error, not only in the beginning of flowing, but also of reflowing.

For when any of the great and Luminous Stars (as are Venus and Jupiter) shall
be above the Sun or Moon, they help them in moving of the Water of the Sea: and
therefore by this means also, they leave their due order. Likewise (as we have
said) by reason of the change of the Air, oftentimes chances diversity and
error in the beginings of flowing and reflowing: for the violent disposition
of Winds vehemently blowing, as well near as far off, removes the Courses of
Water from their due order, sometimes hastening the flowing, and sometimes the
reflowing, and sometimes staying and slacking them likewise.

There chances also, error in the midst of the motion of Waters; for as well
courses of Waters, as also flowings and reflowings, sometimes keep not the due
motion. For (as it is said) the disposition of Winds may either increase or
diminish their Courses. Moreover, the straitness and narrowness of places, by
reason of the Islands and Mountains, cause great Concourses and Diversities in
many places. For when the Sea is straiter or narrower, there is the strongest
course, as about the Island Euboes, Nigropontis, and between Cicilia and
Calabria is greatly observed. Such straits hinder the increase of Waters,
because less quantity passes thereby, and therefore there the flowings and
reflowings are less. And hereupon it happens, that in the Ocean Sea are
greatest flowings and reflowings, because there are no straits which may hinder
or stay the courses of the Waters; and by that means they have their full and
free course, and in more certain order: But in the Mare Mediteraneum it is
otherwise, for whatsoever Water of the Ocean enters therein, or comes forth,
passes from the West by one only narrow strait; and therefore it cannot in the
flowing be greatly filled, neither in the reflowing be greatly emptyed. And so
consequently the motion of the motion of the Sea proceeds not in certain
order.

The Closset of Magnetical Miracles Vnlock'd, or the properties and secrets of
the Lodestone Revealed, serving not only for Sea Affairs, but also for
Traveling by Land; for moveable Dyals, for the more ready and exact
Chorography in any Country; the Plotting of any Ground, the following of a
Mineral Vein; as also useful for Pioners and Diggers of Mines, etc.
NExt to the Inventions of Printing and Guns may be added the Mariners
Compass, of which Bodin thus Confidently speaks, Cum Magnete nihil sit
Admirabili us in tota rerum natura, usum tamen ejus plane divinum Antiqui
ignorarunt: Though there be nothing more admirable then the Lodestone in the
whole course of Nature, yet of the Divine use of it were the Ancients ignorant:
and Bl^ndus, certum est Navigandi cuxilium Priscis omnino fuisse incognitum: It
is certain that the help of Sailing was altogether unknown to the Ancients. And
Cardan a Man much versed in the rarities of Nature, inter ceterum rerum inventa
admiratione primum digna est ratio Nautica pyxidis: Amongst other rare
Inventions, that of the Mariners Compass is most worthy of admiration. By
means of it was Navigation perfected; the Lives and Goods of many thousands
have been, and daily are preserved: it finds out a way through the vast Ocean,
in the greatest Storms and darkest Nights, where there is neither Path to
follow, nor Inhabitant or Passenger to inquire: it points out the way to the
skilful Mariner when all other helps fail him, and that more certainly though
it be without reason, sense and life, then without the help thereof all the
Wisards and Learned Clerks in the World, using the united strength of their
Wits and Cunning can possibly do: by means of it are the Commodities of all
Countries discovered, Trade, Traffiqe, and Humane Society maintained; their
several forms of Government and Religion observed, and the whole World as it
were made one Commonwealth, and the most distant Nations fellow Citizens of
the whole Body Politic.

This wonderful Instrument we have described by several Authors, but for the
reason thereof, I say with Acosta, Let others search but the causes of this so
wonderful an Instrument, and pretend therein I know not what Sympathy, I for my
part as often as I look upon it, I cannot but exceedingly admire, and most
willingly praise the Power and Providence of God.

Whether it were known to the Ancients or no, some doubt is moved, as of all
things else there is: but herein, in my Judgment, without any sufficient
reason. For can we conceive that so rare a device and of so singular use could
be known to Aristotle, Theophrastus, Fliny, Dioscorides, Galen, and that we
should no where in any of their Works find the least mention of it. Surely, I
for my part can never believe it, neither can I be persuaded that so precious
and useful an Invention could possibly be entertained and commonly practiced,
and yet lost out of the World as if it had never been; but that indeed it was
not practiced, appears by this, that the Ancients, when by a Storm or Mist they
had lost the sight of the Lights of Heaven, they had no remedy to fly unto; as
Blondus says; Nullum C^to Nullitus obscurato a Magnete aut alio instrumento
petebatur auxilium, when the Heaven was darkened with Clouds, they had no
assistance from the Lodestone or any other instrument. As Virgil has it in
his 5th Aeneid.

-- Clanumque affixus et haereus
Nunquam amittebat oculisque sub astra tenebat.
The Helm he held, and never it forsook,
But on the Stars his Eyes did ever look.
Says the Poet, as long as the Stars appeared; but when they were Bemisted,
they then wandered they knew not whether. As Virgil has it again in his Third
Aeneid.

Tres adeo incertos caeca caligine soles,
Erramus Pelago, totidem sine sidere Noctes.
On Sea we roved three days, as dark as Night,
Three Nights likewise, not seeing Starrie Light.
And in St. Paul's Coasting Voyage by Sea, when that they had lost the sight of
the Sun and the Stars, all hope that they should be saved was taken away.

A great doubt presents it self to us, which is about the time and Author of
this Invention, when and by whom it should first be found out and set on foot.
Doct. Gilbert our Countryman (who has Written in Latin (...) Large and
Learned discourse of the properties of the Lodestone) seems to be of the
Opinion that Paulus Venetus brought the Invention of the use thereof from the
Chinese. Osorius in his discourse of the Acts of King Emanuel, refers it to
Gama and his Countrymen ^he Portugals, who as he pretends, took from certain
Barbarous Pirates roving upon the Sea; about the Cape of good hope. Coropius
Becanus likewise thinks he had great reason to Entitle it upon his Countrymen
the Garmans, in as much as the 32 Winds upon the Compass borrow their Names
from the Dutch in all Languages. But Blondus, who is therein followed by
Pancerollus, both Italians, will not have Italy loose the praise thereof,
telling us that about 300 years ago, it was found out at Malphis or Melphis, a
City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Province of Campania, now called Terrae
di Lavoradoe; but the Author of it the one names him not, and the other assures
us, he is not known: yet Salmuth out of Ciezus and Gomara confidently Christens
him with the Name of Flavius, and so does ^u Bartas in those excellent Verses
touching this Subject.

We Are not to Ceres so much bound for Br^ad,
Neither to Bacchus for his Clusters Red,
As Signior Flavio to thy witty Trial,
For inventing of the Sea-mans Dyal;
The use of the Needle turning in the same,
Divine device, O! admirable frame,
Whereby through the Ocean in the darkest Night
Our huge Carracts are conducted right,
Whereby we are stored with Trouchman, Guide and Lamp,
To se^rch all Corners in the watery Camp.
Whereby a Ship that stormy Heavens have whorl'd,
Near in one Night into another World,
Knows where she is, and in the Card descries
What degrees thence the Equinoctial lies.
It may well be then that Flavius the Metuitan, was the first Inventor of
guiding of a Ship by turning the Needle to the North: But some German
afterward added to the Compass, the 32 Points of the Wind in his own Language,
whence other Nations have since borrowed it. But surely great pity it is that
the Author of such an Invention, is not both more certainly known and more
honorably esteemed. He is better in my judgment to be enrolled and ranked
amongst the great Benefactors of the World, then many who for their supposed
Merits of Mankind were Deifyed amongst the Heathens, So that it may be said of
the Inventor, Exegit Monumentum aere pereunius
Regalique sicu Pyramidulum aeltius.


Questionless those of former Ages were for want of this knowledge so ignorant
of the Art of Navigation that they ingraved non Vltra on Her^les Pillars, that
the Nations about Po^tus, thought no Sea in the World like their own, and
doubted whether there were any other Sea but that only, whereof it came that
Pontus was a word used for the Sea in general, that the Egyptians, held
otherwise a witty people, used to coas^ the shores of the Red Sea upon Raffs,
devised by King Erythrus: And in the time of the Romans, the Britains our
Ancestors had a kind of a Boat (with which they crossed the Seas) made all of
twigs and covered with Leather, of which Lucan the Poet.

Primam cuna salix madefacto nimine parvam
Texitur in puppim, casoque iduta ivenco
Vectoris patiens, tumidam superenatat aumem.
Sic Venetus stagnante pado fuscque Brittanus
Navigat Oc^^no:
The moistened Osyer of the hoatie Willow
Is Woven first into a little Boat,
Then clothed with Bullocks hide upon the Billow
Of a proud River Lightly does it Float,
Under the Waterman.
So on the Lakes of overswelling Poe,
Sails the Venetian, and the Britains so
On the outspread Ocean.
And to the like purpose is that of Festus Aviennus.

Navigia junct i^ semper (...) ^ellibus,
Curioque vastum saepe percurrant salum.
Of stiched hides they all their Vessels had,
And often through Sea, in Leather, Voyage made.
But that which is more observable is, that the Jews were so unskilful in this
Art, as they commonly called the Mediteranean Sea, the great Sea; not being in
those times, as it seems, much acquainted with the Ocean. And though the
Phenicians and Carthaginians, the Tyrians and the Sydonians, are much renowned
in Histories for great Navigators; yet it is thought by the Learned, that those
Voyages they performed, was only by coasting, and not by crossing the Sea.

-- Haec aestas quod f^ta negarunt
Antiquis totum p^^tuit sulcate carinis
Id Pelugi immensam quod circuit Amphitrite
This age what fates to former times denied
Through the Vast Ocean now in Ships do ride.
Says Fracastorius, and Acosta, Equidem Navigationem altissimo Oceano
commissam neque apud Veteres Lego, neque apud illis aliter Oceanum Navigntum
puto quam a nostris Mediterraneum. That the An^ients adventured themselves into
the Main Ocean; neither do I read it in any of their Waters, nor do I believe
that they otherwise sailed over the Ocean, then we do now over the
Meditterranean Sea, and it should seem they undertook not their longest Voyages
without Oars, which the Scripture implies in that undertaken by Jonas, where
the Mariners upon the rising of a Violent Tempest were constrained to use
their Oars.

The perfection then of this Art, seems by God's Providence to have been
reserved to these later times, of which Pearo de Medona, and Baptista Ramusio
have given excellent Precepts. But the Art it self has been happily practiced
by the Portugals, the Spaniards, the Holland^rs, and our own Nation, whose
Voyages and Discoveries, Master Hacklait has collected and reported in several
Volumes, enlarged and perfected by Mr, Purchase, and it might be wished as well
for the Honor of the English Name, as the benefit that might thereby redound
to other Nations, that his Collections and Relations had been Written in
Lattin, or that some Learned Pen would be pleased to turn them into that
Language. Among many others in this kind, the Noble spirited Drake may not be
forgotten, who God being his Guide, Wit, Skill, Valor and Fortune his
Attendants, was next after Magellanus that Sailed about the World. Whereupon
one writ these Verses unto him.

Drake Peregrati novit quem terminus Orbis
Quemque semel Mundi vid it uterque Polus:
Si tacean homines facient Te sidera notum
Sol nescit commitis imemor esse sui.
Sir Drake whom well the Worlds end knew,
Which thou did compass round:
And whom both Poles of Heaven once saw,
Which North and South do bound.
The Stars above will make thee known
If men here silent were:
The Sun himself cannot forget
His Fellow Traveller.
P. Columbus, being in the company of some braging prating fellows, amongst
other of their fooleries they fell upon him, and said he had done nothing but
they could do. After he had patiently heard them, he called for an Egg, and
asked which of them could make it stand upon one of the ends, they said they
could not do it; why then says he I can, and breaking one of the ends, he fixed
it. Why said they this we can do, yes verily says he without doubt, this is but
an easy enterprise, yet this you could not do till you have seen me first do
it.

For the better breeding, continuance, and increase of Pilots amongst us, it
would doubtless be a good and a profitable work (according to Mr. Huckluit's
honest Motion in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Lord Admiral) if any Man who
has the means, had likewise the mind to give allowance for the reading of a
Lecture o^ Navigation in London, in imitation of the late Emperor Charles the
Fifth, who wisely considering the rawness of the Seamen, and the manifold
Shipwracks which they sustained in passing betwixt Spain and the West Indies,
established not only a Pilot Major for the examination of such as were to takes
charge of Ships in that Voyage, but also founded a Lecture for the Art of
Navigation, which to this day is read at the Construction-house at Sevil; the
readers of which Lecture have not only carefully taught and instructed the
Spanish Mariners by word of mouth, but have also published several exact and
worthy Treatises concerning Marine causes, for the direction and encouragement
of Posterity: and namely these three, Alonzo de Chanez, Hieronimo de Chanez,
and Roderigo Zamerum, and to this purpose it was a commendable work of Mr.
Gelibrand Reader of Gresham-Colledge for the improvement and advancement of the
Art of Navigation published a most excelent Book of Logarithmes.

But to return to the Sobject we have now in hand, concerning the nature,
powerfulness, and strange pro^erties of the Lodestone are such, that the more
they ^re known, the more they are justly admired in their most Lively
expressing that infinite power and goodness of God, who Created so precious a
Jewel for the profi^able use of Man, and for the enlarging and setting forth of
his lory. Into the search of which admirable and secret Virtues, my self for
the space of some years ^ave made a strict Inquiry, partly by Reading of other
men's Writings, and partly by my own Industry and ^ractice: whereby what I have
collected and found, his little Treatise will show.

I do acknowledge that the wonderful property of ^he body of the whole Earth,
called the Magnetical Vir^ue (is most admirably found out, and Learnedly
discoursed by Doctor Gilbert, Physician to the renowned Queen Elizabeth, of
happy Memory) Is the ^ery true Fountain of all Magnetical Knowledge, for ^ll
our later Authors have but borrowed from this Countryman of ours. And though
certain properties ^f the Lodestone were known before his time, yet all ^he
reasons of those properties were altogether unknow, and never before revealed
as I take it to the ^ons of men. And although as yet many do doubt and
mistrust the Earth it self has no such Virtue, I do nothing wonder at it,
because before I read his Learned Works, and had tried many of his Experiments
with my own hands, and had confered with great Travelers, and perused the
observations of our chiefest Navigators, both for the Variations and
Declinations, I never be^ieved it my self. But this I may truly affirm, that
searching with diligence his first fine Books, and mak^ng Trial of those
Propositions which I judged to be of Importance, I always found the main drift
touching this point, constant and agreeable to the diligent Observations of
many men of Experience; although in some other matters of the Lodestone his
Experiments and mine did sometimes disagree. But concerning his sixth Book
Entreating of the motion of the Earth; I think there is no Man living further
from believing it then my self, being nothing at all persuaded thereunto, by
reasons of other men, which he alleges, and as little or less (if it were
possible) by those his Inventions, endeavoring to prove the motion of the
Earth by the Earths Magnetical Force and Virtue. Amicus Socrates, Amicus Pla^o,
sed Magis amica veritas is the only cause why I do embrace his judgment in the
one, and refuse it in the other, in matters of this nature following this Rule.

Nullius addictus inrare in Verba Magistri. Reader be pleased to pass by this
digressiion, we are to return hearty thanks to God, who has revealed unto the
weak Knowledge of Man, now toward the end of the World, this admirable
Treasure, before unknown, of his powerful Creation, by effect so plain unto the
meanest Capacity: and that out of a base contemptible and dead a Creature, as
it seems to be, and yet filled with such excellent wonderful Virtue, that all
the Gems of the World have not the like; neither if it were wanting, could they
supply the want thereof, or countervaile the Benifit that it brings to the Life
of Man.

Clandian (a Famous Poet) well near Twelve-hundred years since, says as much
commendations of the Magnet, when as yet the Sereditical or Iron drawing
Properties was only known.

-- Lapis est cognomine M^gnes
Decolor, Obscurus, nilis, etc.
And again.

Sed Novasi nigri videas miracula suxi,
Tuno superat pulchros cultus, et quicquid E^i^
Indus Littoribus rubra scrutatur in alga.
But what would he not have said, had he seen the Closset indeed of all
Magnetical Miracles Unlocked, and in so glorious a manner set wide open, as now
it is at this day, had he had Load-stones of diverse forms, but especially round
ones: also such Versory Needles fitly framed, and Artificially placed upon
their Pins and other Implements, as are prescribed; wherewith being furnished,
he might still see the Truth of them in things themselves, for these skills
must be Learned, ex rebus ipsis non solum ex Libris, and withal there are
several Figures and Diagrams which cannot be understood, but by the help of the
Mathematics, and good Traveling in the Magnetical Practice.

To be short, of all that I have set down in this Treatise, my request is, that
the Reader will admit nothing but that which shall be confirmed by good Reason
or undoubted Experience. And I purpose God willing, to tie my self as strictly
unto this Rule, as ever any Man did that has Written of the like Argument,
making it even a matter of Conscience to deliver any thing herein, for
certainty, that my self shall not know to be sound. And so by this means I
shall neither abuse the Reader with any untrue assertion, nor injure so certain
and so excellent a Knowledge, with any doubtful or reproveable Conclusions.

It is a common Proverb, that in Stones; Woods and Herbs, consists great
Virtue: which saying is doubtless most manifest by the daily experience of the
Lodestone, found in sundry parts of India; some will have it to be found in
Spain, by one Named Heraeleon (as Hicander says) where, in the time of his
keeping of Cattle, the Iron Nails of his Shoos and Pike of his Staff cleft
fast to the Stone. Of these Magnets are five sorts or kinds, as Soracus
writes: One of Aetheopi^ another of Macedonia, a third in Echio of Boecia, the
fourth at Troades of Alexandria, the fifth of Magnesi^ Asiae. The difference of
the stone is, whether it be Male or Female. The next difference is in Color:
for that which is found in Macedonia and Magnesiae, i^ ruddish and black, and
of Female kind, and therefore without Virtue. The worst of Magnesia Asiae is
white, and attracteth not Iron, it is like unto a Pumice stone. Some approve
those for the best which are Blew, of a Heavenly color. That of Aethiope is
most praised (and as Pliny says) is sold for the weight in Silver. This is
found in Zimri, a sandy Region of Aethiop^ where is also found Haematites
Magnes, of Bloody color, appearing like Blood if it be ground, and also like
Saffron, which in drawing of Iron is not of the like virtue to the Haematites
Magnes. All these are reputed good Medicines for the Eyes, each of them
according to their Portion, and do especially stay the Epiphorus (that is) the
dropping and watering of the Eyes; and also being burnt and made in powder,
they heal Burnings. Not far from the same place in Aethiopia, is a Mountain
which produces the stone called Theamedes which puts from it, and refuses
Iron. I have often proved the virtue and power of the Lodestone, by the Needle
which is in some Dyals, by the attraction there of, moving it self from side to
side, and round about. And as we shall hereafter more fully show, although the
stone were under a Table, yet does the Needle being above the Table, naturally
follow the moving o^ the stone. It is therefore (for this we only insert by the
bye) if there be great virtue in Stones, Woods and Herbs. It has also been
proved that the Ships Compact with Iron Nails, Sailing by the Sea of Aethiope
and by a Tempest driven to Land, to certain Capes or Lands ends, have by these
stonas either been drawn to the bottom of the Sea, or else the Nails being
drawn out by the Virtue of the stone, the Ship has falen in a thousand pieces.
And therefore the discreet and wary Cantabrians, expert Mariners Sailing by the
Ethiopian Sea, frame their Ships with Pins and Hoops of wood, to prevent the
danger that might chance on the same occasion.

This stone is known by color, virtue, weight and equality, the best color is
said to be like pure Iron, shining, mixed with Indian or Heavenly color, and
is in a manner like Iron Polished. This stone is also often times found in
Norway and Elua, and in certain Regions of the North, and is brought from
thence to certain Regions in Normandy and Flanders. The experience of the
virtue of the stone, is easy, for it attracteth to it a great weight of Iron,
It is judged to be strong, and the heavier also the better. By equality it is
judged, if it be alike in one substance and color: but if it be unequal with
chapes (as we shall hereafter express) together with hollow places indented,
having red spots here and there, it is unapt not so fit for the Art of
Navigation, or of continual Motion. It represents the similitude of Heaven,
for like as in Heaven there are two points immovable, ending in the Axle-tree
of the Sphere, upon which the whole Frame of Heaven is turned (as may be
experienced by the Art that Crystal and other stones are Polished) even so the
Lodestone reduced into a Globious or round Form, laying thereon a Needle or
any other like Iron, then which way soever the Needle turns and rests,
thereby is showed the place of the Poles; and that this may be done more
certainly, it must be often times attempted, and the Line showed by the Needle,
must be observed, for such Lines shall cut the one, the other in two Points, as
the Meridian Circles join together the Poles of the World: but of this also,
more shall hereafter he said. This shall for the present be only instanced.

depiction of a stone that is used in a compass

That if the round stone (as is said) be found in the place which often times
draws Iron, if then the point do exactly appear, part of the broken Needle
must be laid upon the sin, and be so often by little and little transposed,
until the Style or ^in be Perpendicler, or Plummet do directly fall upon the
stone, for there on the contrary part, by like manner shall be found the other
Pole. A. shall be the true point, and B. the false.

Load-stones, let them be of what parts soever of the World, have the self same
general directive property. I mean, of showing the North and South, and also
the self same Points respective, declining or dipping under the Horizon. They
do likewise agree in their variations, and each one will draw Iron, and
likewise one another. Every Lodestone, of what form soever it be, has either
actually or potentially two points, the one Northern, the other Southern.
Actually, if either by casualty (if it so fall out) or by ^ndustry the stone be
fashioned, that those two oppo^^e points be eminent or perspicious therein:
Potenti^lly, if that either the stone be flat, and but thin in the dimension of
the North and South though broad otherwise, for so shall the virtue of the
stone be dispersed to the extreme parts thereof, in the Edges round about; or
if fit have two opposite points in any concavity, then will the stone show in
the eminent Border or Edge of that concavity only a confused dull force, and in
the concavity very little or nothing at all. That stone is also well
proportioned for touching which resembles an Oval form, and has his due
points in his ends, and is void of any bunch or concavity; for the general form
of a stone being good, every concavity is a diminishing of his force, and every
bunch is a superfluous Burden; Insomuch that my self have had experience of a
stone, that of substance was very good, and of weight was three and twenty
ounces, but of disordered form, it therefore took away twelve ounces from him,
and yet diminished not one jote of his force. And this I did in a stone that
was all of like force, but if it be one that is intermixed of diverse substances
(as many such there are, and those easily discovered by their color) you may
sometimes take away three quarters or more of his substance without diminishing
any thing at all of his virtue: we have already said the Iron color is best:
very black or white seldom proves good; gray indifferent: the mo^^ white is in
any stone, so much the ^^rse. Th^^e are certain that are of an Iron color,
m^^gl^^ (...) of which (...) are good and some bu^ (...).

(...) w^y you may prove whether a Magnet be go^^^ (...) the (...) is by (...)
a^ Iron with the bare st^^e; that other by giving more or less virtue to a
Knife, on any thing to lift Iron the third is if it will with good strength
move a Magnetical Needle a pretty good distance off, and readily alter the ends
of the Needle without touching them, making the North South, and the South
North: the two latter do never fail, but the first does diverse times. And very
certain it is, that whatsoever stone does most stronly impart his force to a
Knife, or move a Needle with quickness, the power and lifting up of Iron is
such a one, will mightily be increased with a Cap. For this is generally the
nature of all Magnets, that if there be two of different quantities, and of
equal strength in lifting up Iron, the greater will give the stronger touch,
and move a Magnetical Needle farther off, although the lesser will take as much
Iron, or something more than the greater. And again, suppose there be a
Lodestone of a pound weight, that being fitly armed, will take up four pounds
of Iron, and not above, if you divide him into very small pieces, you shall
find of them, being orderly used, that will lift up twenty times his own weight
and a great deal more, if they be very small, as of three or four Grains
weight; and yet where the great one will give a touch unto a Knife for to take
up four ounces of Iron, and will move a Magnetical Needle three Foot off; this
little one will not give a touch to a Knife to take up a Needle, nor move a
Magnetical Needle four Inches off; that as a Magnet is diminished in substance
(I mean a Magnet of a regular for it) so does he loose in his virtue and
touching and increases in his small (...) for lifting ^p Iron, ^hereby it is
manifest that these two properties (...) jointly together in the (...). and
here hence it is that many (...) ally set in ^ings (...) a great piece (...)
^he great one (whose par^icie^^ they are) (...) great one, should do the (...),
namely to take in so many times their own weights. Also very often it is seen,
that Magnets being of like form and weight, but of diverse kinds, the one will
take up more Iron of himself without the Cap, and yet the other give a far
stronger touch; but then, if you do fit both of them accord^ngly with Caps, he
which gave the stronger touch, will take up more Iron then the other. The
principal ^orce of the Lodestone well proportioned, passes in (...) direct
Line from the middle of his substance, being (as it were) a center, through his
two ends or points, which are the imaginary likes of his chiefest force, from
which center, there isse infinite others also through all parts of the
superficies of the stone on either side, between the two extreme points of the
middle, all which on either side of the middle, being of one nature and
property, in respect of their touch are exceedingly different in strength, for
that still waxes less and less as it approaches, continually nearer and
nearer the middle, where at length in the middle, between the two ends, it
utterly faints and comes to nothing. The Lodestone communicates his
property to the Iron or Steel that is touched with it, so far forth, as the
Iron or Steel which is touched, has the ability to receive, and so that good
skill in the touching be observed, Steel is far better then Iron, and receives
a far strongen touch, and much more effectual. The purer Steel, so much the
better; and if it be Iron, the purer likewise the better, always regarding that
both of them be very smooth and clean, and have their due temper. The principal
property in common use, is the showing of North and South in the Horizon, with
the appendants thereunto belonging, which is more apparent, more strong, and
more commodious in the Iron and Steel, that is touched, then it is in the stone
it self, because the substance of them may be filled and cut away, and drawn
into any form that we like or approve of our selves, which the substance of the
stone will not permit, The Lood-stone is of such a nature, that every piece
broken off and separated from the whole, has all the properties of the whole,
the same several points North and South, and ability also for the touch, like
in kind, though not of equal power, according to the quantity and proportion of
the Piece, and the part of the Stone that it is taken from, and this property
in a meaner sort has touched the Needle and the Wyar of a compass also.

That one stone may draw another, lay the one upon a board or box in the Water,
that it may freely float and hold another in your hand, If then the North part
of the stone, which you hold in your hand, you turn toward the South part of
that which floateth in the box, or otherwise the South part to the North, the
floating stone shall turn toward your hand, and if contrariwise, you turn the
like part to his like, that is to say, the South part to the south, etc. the
floating Stone shall fly from you. By this experiment certain Physicians are
confuted, who dispute on this manner, If Scemmonea draw unto it choler, by
Similitude or Likeness of Nature, Ergo, much more should one Magnet draw
another, rather then Iron: So that what they assume falsely we have now taught
to be true. The like judgment is of the long slender Iron which is rubbed with
the Stone; For if in the Water it be laid on a light piece of Wood, or a straw,
or such like, so that it may freely float upon the Water, the one end of it
shall turn to the North, and the other to the South. And if holding the Stone
in your hand, you turn his North point to the South extremity or end, or
contrariwise, the Stone shall then draw Iron, but contrarily, if you turn the
like part to the like, (as is aforesaid) it shall fly from the Iron and drive
it away.

polarized stones in water Impossible Impossible


polarized stones in water Natural:


The reason is, that the agent does not only endeavor to make the patient
like it self, but also in such a manner to unite it with himself, that of them
two be made one, as may appear by this reason. Take the same Magnes A D. of
which A. signifies the North point, and D. the South. Divide the Stone into
two parts, A B. and C. D, put A B. to the Water as is said, and by this means
you shall see A. turn to the North, and B. to the South. For the breaking or
dividing of the Stone (as we said) diminishes not the Virtue thereof, so that
it be Homogenie, that is, all parts alike. Take therefore A B. for the patient,
and C D. for the agent, then whereas the agent, in the best manner it may,
works to conserve the order of Nature, ^t is manifest that D. cannot draw C,
the South: For although they could by that means be joined, yet should not so
be made one of them two, the parts remaining in their Virtue: For if A. should
remain North, then D. should be South, which is certain to have the powers of
the North.

depiction of the earth's magnetic fields

Neither contrariwise shall C. draw A. for both are Northly, and so should B.
be the North which first was South, and D. in like manner: For so should the
order of Nature be inverted. It remains therefore that A. shall naturally
draw D. and B. shall draw C. for so every way shall remain of equal strength.
Some ignorant Men were of opinion, that the Virtue of the Lodestone was not
derived from Heaven, but rather of the nature of the place where it is
engendered, saying that the Mines thereof are found in the North, and that
therefore ever one part of the stone extends toward the North. But they
surely are ignorant that this stone is found in other places whereof it should
as well follow that it should extend it self to other and diverse parts, as to
the North; which thing is false, as is well known by common experience, For it
ever Moves to the North in whatsoever place ^it be. Neither is it to be
believed, that the North-Star of the Mariners is the Pole: For as much as that
Star is without the Meridian Line, and but twice within one revolution of the
Firmament. But whereas the Marvelous Virtue of this Stone depends of Heaven,
who would believe that only two points thereof should so turn themselves, and
that rather every part of it should not incline to some like part in Heaven, as
may thus be proved. Let the Stone be brought into a Spherical round form, as
is said, and the Poles being found, let it be turned upon two pins, or Turners
instruments, and there be pullyshed, until it be on every part of equal
heaviness, which you may well find by often proving: For that part that falls
down is heaviest, which done, frame in a Meridian Circle with the Horizon,
wherein fasten two other pins on which it may easily move, and divide the Poles
most exactly to the Poles of the World, the which if it come well to pass,
rejoice that then you have found one of the greatest Miracles of Natural
things. For you shall by this means see the Ascendent, the place of the Sun,
and the like, etc. at every Moment. But if it fall not out according to your
desire, you ought not to impute that to the Art, but to your own ignorance and
negligence, For if you execute and perform all things duly and aright according
to Art, you need not to doubt the success.

How these Instruments by this Stone may be framed, by the which may be found
the Azimuths of the Sun and Star (that is to say, Vertical Circles) it shall
not here be necessary to show, forasmuch as the same is easily done by the
Mariners Compass, or by the Box with the Magnes or Lodestone enclosed, and
floating above the Water, with a pin erected, and in the uppermost part divided
into 360 parts, after the manner of Astronomy.

That you may easily find out the chief points of any Lodestone of what form
soever, you must make a respective or declinatory Needle, of an Inch or
thereabouts in length, and giving him his touch, fasten him by the Axis upon a
little forked stick, or any thing like it, that the Needle may have free scope,
then offer the Stone (as we said before) near the Needle, turning of it round
about, and immediately you shall see the North of the Needle (as it is as yet
commonly called, because it points toward the North) point directly unto the
true North end of the Stone as soon as it comes near unto it, and as you turn
away the end of the Stone, the Needle will point somewhat toward it, till the
South end of the Stone approaches (as we have in part declared) for then will
the Needle wheel about the Axis, and point directly with his South, and to the
South of the Stone. But if you hold the Needle near to the Stone, in such sort
that it cannot turn about at liberty, then the force of the Stone may soon
change the properties of the ends of the Needle, that the one point which was
North shall become South, and that other which was South shall become North,
yet the thing it self is easily discerned: for the Northerly end will always
hang lower.

depiction of a compass with a needle curving under the pressure of magnetic
force

And wheresoever the Needle, being held nearer to the stone, does stand
parrallell unto it, not inclineing with either end toward the stone, there
directly, under the middle of the Needle, the North and the South properties of
the stone do divide and part themselves. This matter is much better performed
with a small narrow Lodestone of half an Inch (more or less) in length,
having in the ends his due points of North and South and wrought over with
silk of two colors from the middle to each end; as for Example, Yellow and
White; that part which points over to the North let it, be wrought over with
White, and the other with Yellow. Then if you hang that in the middle by a fine
silk thread, and apply it to any other Lodestone, the South end of the one will
readily find out the North end of the other; and contrariwise, In like manner,
with this Magnetical Instrument you may see two pretty conclusions. The one if
you touch a knife with the end of a forceable Lodestone, whether it be North
or South, and hang this wrought on by a silk thread in the middle, that it may
hang freely, the one end will crave toward the point of the knife, and the
other will not abide it. The other is, if you hang it end long, with the true
North end, right over the North end of a forcible Lodestone, or with the South
end over the South end of the other, you shall see that it will in no wise
(being let down) come unto the North point of the Lodestone, but will
(contrary to Phylosophycal Principles, that heavy things should tend directly
downwards) by the means of the Silk Thread, swim or wheel the end of the
Lodestone in the Air: yea, and lift it self somewhat upwards, rather then
perpendicularly light down upon it; yea, that it will do although you place a
Plate of Silver or Brass, or any such thing, between the stone and it self.

The second way is to take a Thread of a common Sowing Needle, and touch the
point of it with the North end of a Lodestone whose points you would find out,
holding the Needle about an Inch from it, and in turning the stone about, you
shall presently see the Needle point to the North end, when by your turning it
comes near. The contrary effect ensues, if you touch the point of the Needle
with the other end of the stone, wherein you may behold that ancient conceived,
and of late years maintained opinion of the contrariety of the Lodestone and
the Theamedes to be no otherwise then a contrary property of one and the self
same Magnes.

The third way, is to break off the point of a Sowing Needle half an Inch or
longer (if the stone be good) but not above a quarter of an Inch (if it be a
base stone) lay it upon the stone, and move it to and fro upon the superficies
thereof (being smooth) with the Needles point forwards, and as it comes near
any of the two points of force, it will raise it self more and more: but being
brought unto the point it self, it will stand there strait upright; if the
stone be ragged, this cannot be practiced, otherwise of all other it is the
most certain way. Now whether it be your North or South end the effect will
soon declare.

The fourth way is, that you having an ordinary Dyal, or a Sailing Compass, or
any Magnetical Needle standing on a sharp point, hold near thereunto the stone
^^^ning it in your hand, then will the North end of the Needle (I mean the end
that points to the North) respect the true North point of the stone.

The fifth way is also, if you touch a common so^ing Needle (the longer the
better) and put it through a little piece of C^^k not bigger then may well bare
it up, so that by the means thereof it may swim in a Basin of Water, the same
if you offer the stone unto it, will show the like effect. And here it is to be
remembered, that none other way whatsoever will more readily or truly define
the Magnetical Meridian. And therefore as it is very requisite for many
purposes, that every Traveller by Land, but more especially by Sea, should
always have (if he may) an aequinoctial Dyal with him, so would I not with that
any of them should be without some Sowing Needles, touched with a good stone,
which will both serve the proper uses of Sowing without impairing their touch
(for it is open Air and Rust that are the greatest Enemies thereof) and at any
time with a piece of Cork or a dry Stick in the Water the Magnetical Meridian
may be seen; a matter though mean and trivial in show, yet between whiles of so
great importance, that it may serve to save many men's lives.

A sixth way is also, if you prepare a little round Lodestone of a quarter of
an Inch Diameter or thereabouts (but it must be a very good one) having his
Poles marked and sitted in such manner, that it easily turn about in a little
Frame according to the following Picture. The like also in his manner will come
to pass, if you have a small declinatory Needle in a frame, in this manner,

depiction of two magnets

Then by moving it in his Frame all over the stone the North Pole of this will
find the South of the other and likewise will the South, the North of the great
one; for it is not in outward show one Magnet and another, as is between a
Magnet and a Magnetical Needle, the contrary ends of the Magnet will covet in
their motion to meet together, but the end of the Needle which turns North,
will come unto the North of the stone: For in very truth it is the South point
of the Needle, even as the Magnet it self being placed in a Wooden Dish in
Water, will turn with his North end to the South, and with his South end Dish
and all, toward the North. The like effect will also follow if you hang as
aforesaid a small Lodestone in the middle of a small Silk Thread, and that it
may freely turn without impediment, according to its nature; but this property
it will show quicker or flower, according unto the goodness of the substance
and fitness of the form. The best form for this purpose is the extended ^^all,
having his Poles precisely in the ends. If his Poles be some pretty distance,
the one end toward the East of the stone, and the other as much toward the
West; this stone in his length will not point to the Magnetical North and South
(as otherwise he would) but unto some other point of the Horizon yea, following
this experiment in this manner, you may make him stand in any one Point of the
Compass: only you ought to abridge the stone in his length that he may ^ome
somewhat nearer to a circular form, so that is diameter of North and South
(being through the Magnetisme of the Earth, the cause of this motion) ^ay be so
much the longer in comparison of the Mass of ^he stone, and consequently more
effectual. After the ^ke manner you may so touch the Wyars of a Com^ass, that
the Flower de Luce of the fly, stand unto what point of the Horizon you
please, although the ^iameter of the Wyars do still remain fixed under the
Flower de Luce, and the South point of the Card.

Finally to conclude this point with some Magnetical Delights, if you touch two
Sowing Needles in a contra^y manner; that is, the point of the one Northrely,
and ^he other Southerly, and set them with their Corks the one at the one side
of a Basin of Water, and the other at the other, you shall see them, as
quickened with Vital Spirit, even so to move the one end toward the other, at
the first fair and softly, but when they draw near they will rush together (as
it were) with a kind Violence, the point of the one striking precisely at the
point of the other, you must place the Needle, whose point is ^ouched for the
North on the South fide of the Basin otherwise the heads and not the points
will run together; a thing far more worthy of admiration, then all the self
movers of any Dadalus or Archita^ Tarentinus, and more strange to behold then
the Connection of ^ron Rings combined by Virtue Magnetical, whereat St.
Augustine so much, and that justly, did wonder.

Another excellent and secret conclusion upon this stone, pretended to be found
out in these latter times; ^s, that by touching two Needles with the same
stone, they being severally set so as they may turn upon two round Tables,
hanging on their Borders the Alphabet written Circuler wise, if two Friends
agreeing upon the time, the one at Paris, the other at London (having each of
them their Table thus equally fitted) be disposed upon certain days and at
certain hours to confer, it is to be done by turning the Needle in one of the
Tables to the Alphabet, and the other by Sympathy will turn it self in the self
same manner in the other Table, though never so far distant: Which conclusion
if infallibly true, may likewise prove of good and great consequence: howsoever
I will set it down as I find it described by Faminanus Arada, Lib 2. Prolus 6.
in imitatton of the Style and Vain of Lucretius.

Magnesi genus est Lapidis mirabile, cu^si
Corpora ferrisue plura stilo admoveris, inde
Non modo nim notumque tratiant que semper ad Vrsam,
Quis lucet nicina polo se vertere tentent,
Verum etiam mira inter se ratione, modoque
Quotquot eum Lapidem tetigere stiti simul omnes
Conspirare situm motumque vide bis in unum.
Vt si forte ex ti^ aliquis Romae moveatur
Alter ad hunc motum quamvis sit disitus long,
Arcano se naturai foedere vertat.
Ergo age quid si scire notes qui distat amicum
Ad quem nulla accedere possit Epistola, sum
Plunum Orbem patulumque notas, Elementaque primo
Ordine quo discunt pueri, describe per oras
Extremas Orbis, medioque repone jacentem
Qui tetigit Magneta stylum, ut versatilis inde
Litterulam quumcunque velis co^ingere possit,
Hujus ad exemplum simuli fabricaveris Orbem
Margin descriptum, munitumque indice ferri,
Ferri quod motum Magnete accipit ab illo,
Hunc Orbem dissessurus sibi portet Amicus;
Conveniatque prius quo tempere, quiesue diebus
Exploret stylus an trepides quid ve indice signs.
His ita compositi, si clam cupis alloqui amicum
Quem procui a Te Te terrai distinet ora
Orbi adjunge manum, ferrum versatile tracta,
Hic disposta vides Elementa in Margin toto
Queis opus est ad verba notis hunc dirige ferrum
Litterulesque modo hanc modo et illam euspride tange
Dum ferrum per eas iterumque ster^mque rotando
Componas singulatim sensa omnia mentis.
Mira fides long qui distat cer^it amious
Nullius impulsu trepidare volubile ferrum
Nunc huc, nunc illuc discuere conscius tuaret
Observatque stoti ductum sequiturque legendo
Hinc atq hinc Elementa quibus in verba coactis
Quid sit opus sentit ferroque interpret discit
Quin etiam cum stare stylum vide^, ipse vicissim
Si quae respondenda putat simili ratione
Litterulis very tactis rescribit amico,
O Vtinam haec ratio scribendi prode^t asu
Cautior et citior properat Epistola, nullas
Latronum veritae insidias fluviosque Morantes
Ipse suit princeps manibus conficeret rem
Nos s^boies scribarum emersi^ex aequere Nigro
Consecratemus calumum Magnetis ad aras
Thus Englished.
The Lodestone above all other Stones has this strong property,
If sundry steels thereto, or Needls ye apply,
Such force and motion thence they draw, that they incline
To turn them to the Bear which near the Pole does shine.
Nay more, as many steels as touch that Virtuous Stone,
In strange and wondrous sort conspiring all in one,
Together move themselves, and situate together:
As if one of those steels at Rome bestirred, the other
The self same way will stir though they far distant be,
And all through Natures force and secret Sympathy:
Well then if you of ought would fain advise your Friend
That dwells far off, to whom no Letter you can send;
A large smooth round Table make, write down the Christ-Cross-Row.
In order on the Verge thereof, and then bestow
The Needle in the midst which touched the Load, that so
What note soever you sift it straight may turn unto
Then frame another Orb in all respects like this,
Describe the Edge, and lay the steel thereon likewise
The steel that from the self same Magness motion drew;
This Orb send with thy Friend what time he bids adieu:
But on the days agree first, when you mean to prove,
If the steel stir, and to what Letters it does move.
This done, if with thy Friend thou closely would advise,
Who in a Country of far distant from thee lies,
Take thou the Orb and Steel which on the Orb was set,
The Christ-cross on the edge thou see in order writ,
What notes will frame thy words, to them direct thy steel,
And it sometime to this, sometimes to that note wheel,
Turning it round about so often till you find
You have compounded all the meaning of your mind;
Thy Friend that dwells far off, O strange! does plainly see
The Steel to stir, though it by no man stired be,
Running now here, now there: He conscious of the Plot,
As the steel guides pursues; and Reads from note to note;
Then gathering into words those notes, he clearly sees
What Is needful to be done, the Needle Truchman is:
Now when the steel does cease its motion; if thy Friend
Think it convenient answer back to send,
The same course he may take, and with his Needle write,
Touching the several notes, what so he list indite.
Would God, Men would be pleased to put this course in Ure,
These Letters would arrive more speedily and sure:
Nor Rivers would them stop, nor Thieves them intercept;
Princes with their own hands their business might effect:
We Scribes from Black Sea escaped, at length with hearty Wills,
At the Altar of the Load would consecrate our Quills.
Of this devise, how two absent Friends might confer^at a great distance,
Viginerius in his Annotations upon T. Livius, speaks somewhat in the 1316
Column of ^his first Volumne; as namely, that a Letter might be Read through a
stone Wall of three Foot thick, by guiding and moving the Needle of a Compass
over the Letters of an Alphabet, written in the Circumference. But the
certainty of this conclusion I leave to the experiment of such as please to
make trial of it; but to pursue our present design, There is not any one error
that breeds a greater confusion in Magnetical Knowledge, then the mistaking
of the right understanding o^ the true North and South ends, as well in Magnet
themselves, as also in Magnetical Bodies; whosoeve^ therefore will take a
little pains to understand this well shall free himself from many intricate
difficulties in the argument, which otherwise must needs befall him wherein
some having Limed themselves, have fallen into many errors, every one still
begetting another worse than himself. All those which Write before Doctor
Gilbert did name that end of a Magnet which being placed in a Wooden Dish, and
set to swi^ in Water, would turn and settle it self (as we have said toward
the North, the North end of the Magnet and the other the South end. And even so
did they o^ all Dyal Needles, Compasses and Magnetical Bodies. But Doctor
Gilbert not for any new fangled innovation or self conceit, but upon good
reason and firm demonstration, avoucheth and proves the contrary, and clearly
shows, that the former vulgar assertion seriously defended, tends to the
overthrow of all Magnetical Philosophy, by undermining of (as it were) the
whole frame thereof; and yet in common speech the old Rule may hold Loquendum
cum vulgo sentiendum cu^ sapientib^^. For it would seem a strange speech to a
Mariner to tell him that his Flower de Luce were become the South point of the
Compass, and yet this assertion is most true and certainly that it is the North
end of every Magnet and Magnetical Body, that being placed in a thin Wooden
Dish in Water, or any Magnetical Needle upon his Pin, which seteth it self and
points to the South, and it is the South end which points to the North. For
proof hereof, take these words of North and South in whether of the two former
significations you please, and make trial thereof in any two Magnets, or any
two Magnetical Bodies, so placed that they may freely turn according to their
natures, and you shall always see a natural inclination of the contrary ends of
the one to the contrary ends of the ^ther, as of the South end of the one to
the South end of the other, and reciprocated of the South of the one ^o the
North of the other; but the ends of the one in the other will always fly from
those of the like denomination, as the North end of the one from the North end
of the other, and the South end of the one from the South end of the other.

For as much then as all Magnets themselve, and all Magnetical Bodies (being so
placed as that they have their free motion) compose themselves Magnetically
toward the Poles of the Earth, it must needs be that it is the true natural
South end of the Magnet or Magnetical Needle, that points toward the North
of the Earth: And it is the true natural North end of the Magnet or Magnetical
Needle that ponteth toward the South of the Earth, because the contrary ends
do affect one another, and each of them do naturally fly, the one end of the
one, from the end of the other, which is of like denomination unto it self: for
Example, in this following Diagram of the whole Magnet, E A. is supposed to
note the true natural North end thereof, and B. the South end.

depiction of a magnet

This Magnet being placed in a Wooden Dish, swiming in Water, freely must, and
will, of Magnetical necessity, with his true North end, A. settle himself so,
that A. must point toward the South of the Earth; and the South end, B.
toward the North of the Earth, because all Magnets and Magnetical Bodies do
naturally affect, the one the contrary end of the other, and do avoid and fly
from their ends of denomination.

Now for a further consideration of these properties, suppose that you will cut
a piece of this Magnet Meridionally, viz. C D. manifest experience will show,
that C. which did in nature participate with A. in the entire Magnet. E. as
being both of the true North part thereof, now being separate will not abide
it. In like manner D. of the other end of the little one, will not abide B. of
the great one, with whom being entire in nature, he did participate, as being
both the Southerly parts of thr entire Magnet, E, and that because the ends of
like denomination of any two Magnets, do naturrlly fly the one from the other.

But here you must be ware of an error, which some have unhappily entangled
themselves with all: who beholding of the aforementioned discord (as between A.
and C.) wrongfully supposed, that if both these Magnets, the greater and the
lesser, were conveniently placed to swim in the Water, the little one would not
with his end C. point unto the South of the Earth, as it did in the Magnet,
being entire; where it was a part of the true North end, but would point quite
contrary. There is no manner of any such alteration, but that both of the great
one and the little one) and all alike, that are cut Meridionally one from the
other) will absolutely point the very same way which the entire one did in each
of them from the division, as you may guess by the two pricked Lines, parallel
to the Meridian (or Axis) A. B. of E. the entire one, and the disagreeing of
these ends is only within the Orb of their Forces, both their general
pispositions toward the Earth ever continuing one, and the disagreeing of
their ends is only within the Orb of their own forces, and they will (with
very little help or none at all) conform themselves in such sort, that the one
end of them will join it self end long unto the other, at their contrary ends,
and point the same way both of them, the which they did at the first in the
entire one. If you touch the end of any Magnetical Needle upon A, being the
true North end of the Magnet, the end of the Needle will become a true South
end, and will point unto the North of the Horizon: if you touch it upon B, that
will become a true North end, and will point unto the South of the Horizon. And
the like will it do if you touch it upon C, as when you touch upon A: and upon
D, as when you touch it upon B, although in both these not so strongly; so that
Doctor Gilberts assertion does not gainsay the Mariners opinion, that his
Flower de Luce should not still remain the North point of his Compass, only he
shows which end of the Magnet it is, which does give him that Virtue; namely,
that it is the true North end; so that if you hold the true North end of the
Magnet near unto the Flower de Luce, it will come unto him; if you take away
the Magnet, it will come unto the North of the Horizon. If you will divide a
Magnet not Meridionally as in the former Example, but depiction of a magnet
aequinoctial, as in this by the picked Line, C. D. A. being still the true
North end, and B. the true South end, and A. B. being the Meridian Line, or
Axis of the stone: if you set these divided several pieces assunder, that they
may swim within the Orb of their forces, they will affect to join themselves
in the very place where they were divided, as also in the ends, A. unto B. by
the former reason of contrary denomination. And if you place them a swiming
without the Orb of their Forces, A. and B. will still yet retain their former
natures; and even so will it fall out, if you make your division in any other
place of the Magnet, toward either end parallel unto the Equinoctial of the
Magnet.

The stone being brought to his perfect form, you must have a mould made of
Iron, of the same proportion in every respect, and equal in all his dimensions,
then setting your stone aside, let your Workman frame and fassion his caps,
and sit them upon his mould as if it were the stone; thus shall you be sure to
preserve your Magnets from many dangers, very incident to rude handling; and
having so done you may set them on the stone it self, amending any small faults
without indangering the stone, either with bruisings or knocks; for the
thickness and largness of the caps, there can be no general rule prescribed,
but it must be left to the trial and ingenious discretion and dexterity of the
Workman; as also for the handsome fastening either by Soadering or Reveting of
them with Latin plates to the caps, to keep them in their places fast and firm
and steady, according as you see in the Ticture of a stone armed with single
caps.

depiction of a magnet

The double cap^ are (...) two square or round knobs, prominent and (...) out
of the single caps (as near as may be) at right angles (...) the Axis of the
stone, agreeable to (...) form, which as fashioned by a very skilful (...) man
of Winches^er, one depiction of a magnet that for all manner of fashioning,
cutting, soadering, ^peecing, and capping of Load stones, was the most equisite
that I have known. I find that the use of the double capping is chiefly for
admiration, in taking up a greater quantity, more by the one half than the two
several ends could do each by it self* as if each end will take up half a
pound, being capped in this manner, that each prominent end may lay hold upon
the Iron fitted in this manner, it ought to take up a pound and a half and
more: the reason whereof is this, because the Magnet in touching any one end of
a fitting piece of Iron or Steel, does (...) ^^^se the virtue of that end which
touches the (...) ^^to (...) ^^^ched end, but also the (...) ^^r^ue to the
other (...)

depiction of a magnet

Now therefore in this position, both ends of the Magnet being applied unto the
two ends of the Iron, these two contrary forces strive in this piece of Iron,
the North to repel the South, and the South the North so that each force is
driven nearer his own end, and becomes there so much the stronger then
otherwise it would be. For proof whereof, take a little narrow square piece of
Iron, of the length of the capped stone, and join it in the midst with Copper
after this manner.

depiction of a magnets

A. i^ supposed to be a ^^ng square, on a square like piece of Iron, in length
fitting the two double caps of a Lodestone.

B. a long square piece, the ends Iron, the middle Copper, and D. least of all.

If you apply the Lodestone unto A, he will hold A. very strongly; but if you
put any of the other three pieces under A, that it may touch any of them, he
will not by any means lift it up. If you apply the Lodestone unto B, he will
take it up very weakly, and C. somewhat more strongly, but D. strongest of all
these three, yet not comparable to the strength wherewith he takes up A.
Aagain, although the Lodestone take up B. but weakly, yet if you place B. upon
A, he will take them up both very strongly; yea more, place B. upon C, the two
upon D, all three upon A, apply the Lodestone upon B, being the uppermost, and
he will lift them all up very easily.

The cause thereof is, when a Lodestone with his double cap is placed upon A,
the force of both ends striving in that piece of Iron paralellwise unto the
Axis of the stone, the North and South forces are driven more closely unto
their proper ends. But B. (because of the immediate Copper) there cannot be no
such close driving of his forces unto their proper ends, as was in A: and
therefore the Lodestone lifts up B. but only as if his two ends were two
little loose pieces of Iron, hanging in the Air, and the intermediate Copper a
burden upon them. But by placing B. upon A, A. in the manner (as it were) of a
Bridge, joyneth the two ends together in their former combats, and the two ends
of B. forasmuch as they are, but (as it were) two loose pieces of Iron hanging
in the Air, the two forces of the Lodestone North and South, distinctly and
severally pass thorough them downwards into A, which i^ could not do if it had
been one entire piece of Iron: and so all those four pieces, being placed one
upon another, so that A. be undermost, whether directly or side-ways, the
Lodestone will easily lift them all up, and not otherwise.

When a Lodestone lifts up Iron at one end only, the virtue of a stone is
infused into the whole body downward of that Iron, if it be not very long.

But when by means of the double caps, both ends do lift Iron jointly together,
he infuseth very small force downwards into the body of the Iron that it
lifts up: for the forces of both ends are so striving in the Collateral Line
of the Iron, parallel to the Axis of the stone, that whereas a good Magnet
lifting up at one end, will entend his virtue downwards twelve or fourteen
Inches, in applying both ends unto the Iron, by the means of the double caps,
he will not extend his force downwards the distance of one Inch, nor with any
strength the distance of half an Inch, as in this former Example.

If a Magnet will lift at one end a pound of Iron, fasten you half an ounce of
Iron unto four ounces of Wood, or any other substance saving Iron, and he will
never take it up, because his virtue can only pierce that half ounce, and has
no power to enter the other substance; and that small portion of virtue,
contained in the half ounce, cannot hold up the other strange substance. But
this very same Magnet, by the means of double caps, laying hold of a piece of
Iron fitted for that purpose, and of the fashion, being but half an ounce, may
very well and readily take up three pounds of any base for magnets other
substance whatsoever that is fastened unto it, because that the whole force of
the stone being employed in the strife of the contrary ends, in the Iron
paralellwise, unto the Axis of the stone, each end apprehends and lifts up
this piece of Iron and a great portion of any other substance that is fastened
to it, and his whole force being employed herein, all his former vigor,
upward, downward, end-long, is (as it were) fettered and imprisoned, that
until you loose him of these fetters, he is not able at one end to take up one
quarter of that which he did before.

Pliny in his natural History writes, that Dinocrates that Famous Architect
Builder of Alexandria, at Ptolomies command began to vault a Temple with
Magnets, that there might seem to hang in the Air the Image of his Sister
Arsinoe, made of Iron for that purpose: but both Dinocrates and Ptolomie dying
in the mean space, that enterprise ceased. Neither indeed (if the both had
lived) could it ever have come to pass by that means, by reason of two
impossibilities: the one is, that by the force of the Load-stones, nothing can
so hang in the Air, but that it either must touch the stone it self, or some
other intermediate substance between it and the stone, that bareth it from
coming to the stone it self. For Example, lay two or three Needles upon a
smooth Table, put a Silver or Pewter Plate upon them, and upon that Plate a
Lodestone, then lift up the Plate aloft with the Lodestone lying still upon
it, and you shall see the Needles hanging indeed in the Air endlong, and if you
move the stone about the Plate, following still underneath, but evermore
touching the Plate, which is the intermediate body, which keeps them from
coming to touch the stone, which otherwise by their natural inclination very
speedily they would do. But as for the Image of Arsinoe, how had it been
possible for it to have touched at once, mediately or immediately, so great a
number of Load-stones, whereof the pretended Vault must needs have consisted?
the other is, that such a multitude of Magnets would nothing but confound the
one the others forces, so that one of them alone being solitary and severed
from his company, might show more force than all the insociable society could
do each one hindering the efficacy of the other. Much like a Team of many
Horses, where every one drawing his several way, might soon with disordered
stretching tire himself and his fellows, but never move the Load one jote from
the place. Insomuch as one (and possibly the worst) would do more good alone,
where he might orderly and freely use his own strength, then he and all the
many of them could do, being joined together in vicinitie of bodies, but
extremely distracted through contrarity of courses.

The only way to perform such a design (if it were worth ^he doing) would be to
prepare one mighty great Lodestone of excellent goodness, which having his due
proportion, after an extended Ovall form, should be fitted with double caps,
and so placed in the Roof of a Building, that his Axis be parallel to the
Horizon: in this manner (out of all doubt) a fair large Image might be held up
very strongly by such a Magnet, let the stuff or substance thereof be
whatsoever (howbeit the lighter the better) so that there be fastened to the
uppermost part of the Image a small piece of Iron, according prepared and
placed for the two prominent ends of the double caps of the stone, to lay hold
thereon. But enough hereof.

In the caping of the Magnets, this general rule is to be observed, that they
ought to be made of the finest and softest Iron, and not of Steel: the weight
also, which the Magnet takes up, should be of the like Iron, and not of Steel
(as aforesaid) for although Steel at the least retains Ten times as much
virtue as Iron, when it is once separated from the stone, can do; yet as long
as there is any contignity between the stone and them, he holds Iron more
stronger than Steel. Both which differences in either of them, by manifest
experience are certain, and seem to proceed from notable fastness and closeness
in the Steel above the Iron; by means whereof the Magnetical Virtue does longer
and more forcibly continue in that than this: even as fire more mightily
possesses, and for a greater space abides in stone, or any such firm or solid
matter, then in Wood or Straw, or the like thin and hollow substance; and
therefore those Compass makers, that make the Wiers of their Flies for Sailing
Compasses of mere Iron, ought not by any means to be suffered; for to gain
Twopence in a Compass (and scarcely that) they intollerably abuse those that
Travel by Sea, to their great danger and mischief.

To cement and piece Load-stones, for your Simmon do thus: take the fine
powder of Lodestone, half so much powder of New-brick made very small and
subtle, one part of Burgundy-pitch, half so much of Rossen, a small portion of
unwrought Wax: mingle all these together very well upon a soft Fire, and make
the whole Mass in little Roules. Now when you will cement a stone, do thus:
heat the two pieces of the stone very hot, and likewise the Simmon, then struck
the places as you will soder, over with the Simmon very thinly, and join them
somewhat hard together, letting them so stand until they be cold, and you
shall have it fully as strong, as if it were an entire stone it self, and not
to be severed by great heat of Fire. In piecing of the Load-stones, there must
be great care taken to the nature of the Lodestone in general, and also to
those particular pieces which you would join together. The Lodestone in
general (as it is showed before) that his force issues (as it were) from a
center in the middle of the stone, to all the superficies whereof universally,
but most strongly unto the Poles from the middle, one way the stone is all of a
Northly nature, and all of it Southly the other way. For Example.

depiction of a magnet

A. is the North end, B. the South end of a stone. D. the middle. Suppose you
cut off a piece at C, then shall D. be no more the middle, but it shall be a
part of the North of the stone, and the middle is removed nearer B, and the
virtue of the North and South does not now divide it self at D. (as it did
before) but D. is now become a part of the North end of the stone, which it was
before in this Example following, let there be two Load-stones, the one longer
than the other, depiction of a magnet the North of both noted with A, the South
with B. the middle of the shorter, where the North and South properties do
part, is C. Suppose you will fasten these two with Simmon, the end B. of the
shorter unto the end A. of the longer, so shall these two become one
Lodestone, and not one C, which was the middle (where the North and South
properties did part) in the little one, is now become a part in the North end
in this conjoined stone, but also even B. it self, which depiction of a magnet
was in the short one the very South Pole, is now in this become part of the
North portion, the middle of this (where South and North properties do part)
being in E. and these two Magnets which had each of them two points, the one
North and the other South, being joined together, have but only two points in
all, the one North and the other South. Moreover if you have two Load-stones
(for example) of like goodness, about four Inches a piece in length, having
their North and South points duly at their ends, if you cut off at either of
their ends half an Inch, and conjoyn them with the contrary of the great ones,
they will presently have contrary properties to that which they had before; so
that a Needle touched before that would turn North, being now touched in the
self same place will turn South, showing that the virtue of the two ends does
always proceed and extend it self from the body of the whole Lodestone, and
from the whole, shows it self most forcibly (as aforesaid) in the ends; and
either of the Load-stones will be in his perfect goodness, as at the first. If
you think good to set two Load-stones together in such a manner, that you will
have the Augmentation only in thickness and not in length, then do thus: if
they be both of one length, grind them so that they may join close the
broadside of the one, agreeable with the broadside of the other, having North
upon North, and South upon South, as in this Example.

depiction of a magnet

A. must be joined upon A, (...). upon B: but if you join the two so, that an
A. ^^^eth upon B. you may spoil the N^^ ^^gnet, by ^^founding of his forces.
Notwithsta^^^^^ ^f you (...) to join them in length only, not in thic^ (...)
indeed must you combine B. and A, and not A. and A, nor B. and B, least here
also you incur the former inconveniences of confusion of forces. To take
another example: suppose a Magnet to be long and somewhat round, smaller at one
end than at the other, the smaller end to be the North signed with A, the other
South signed with B; let the Magnet be divided long-ways into two equal parts,
through both the Poles A. and B, and let one of these halfs be placed upon a
piece of Glass or a smooth depiction of a magnet Table; certain it is, that if
you do offer to touch A. of this, with A. of the other, this A. will turn away
from that, which (the stone being entire) it did join with before: or if you
offer B. unto B. it will do the like. And no marvel, for in the case of
touching A. with A, or B. with B. what else in effect do you, but intend to
join the two halfs at length, and that at like ends? a thing directly repugnant
to the principles of Magnetical Philosophy. But let me admonish you, to put the
rounder side of the stone downwards, next unto the Glass, that it may turn the
quicker: yet if the stone be excellent it will do the same also upon the flat
side. Moreover if you place these two halfs, the one upon the other precisely
as they were at the first, they will agree very well, because they are as one
and the self same Magnet. But if you place them the one swarning from the other
at either end, then will A. of the one, turn ^^out to B. of the other; because
they are now as two ^everal and diverse Magnets. For the better conceiving
^ereof, you are to remember, that every part of a Lodestone (being a half or
any other) being once di^ided from the whole, is (as Schoolmen call it) totum
^ntegralo, a whole Lodestone by it self, utterly diverse and estranged from
that whole, whose part before it was, and therefore retains distinctly in it
self, all the properties of a Lodestone, though not so strongly as the whole
had, when as it was joined thereunto.

In Load-stones there is a part truly said to be divided from the whole, when
the points of that part or ends, or Poles, and so, by necessary consequence,
the Axis and Equator, in which the universal frame of Magnetical power
consists, have a position diverse from the Poles or points of the World. For
this cause, in the last example the one half A, B. being supposed to swarve
from the other half B, A. at either end, must needs presently be divided from
it, and now cannot be pars integri, but is of necessity totum integrali, a
several and absolute Magnet of it self, and so by an essential property common
to all Magnets, coveteth with his point A. the contrary B. of that which is
under it. Wherefore like as exact agreement is between two Mathematical
Figures, when being applied together, the extremes of the one, do precisely
fall upon the extremes of the other, each upon his correspondent extreme, and
it is made one therewith: even such is the perfect composition or setting
together the parts of a Magnetical Body, and namely of those two equal parts
before exemplifyed, you must so join one upon another, that the two extremes or
ends be always of the same nature Northly or Southly, in both parts; and that
by the due application of the parts, the two Northly ends being united and
become one, as also the two Southly after the same manner. But if these parts,
being of equal length, be joined longwise, the North of the one unto the South
of the other; those two ends that were (being now no ends, but the just middle
of one Magnet) have lost their properties which they had when they were ends.
For those properties, by this Union are abolished, but their other ends still
reserve their former and stronger virtues of North and South; and so according
to Magnetical nature, one Magnet shall have but two Poles, the North and the
South. Again, if you will piece two Load-stones together in thickness, the one
of them being longer than the other; then you must either cut the longer that
it may be fit in length unto the shorter, or else piece the shorter in such a
manner as is before described, that he be equal in length to the longer, and
whatsoever disorderly parts perhaps shall be in any of them, they may, even
after they are cemented, very well be ground away. Also if there be holes or
dents, with little pieces of Load-stones cemented (their points being observed)
they may be filled up, without any manner of damage or deformity, no more then
if there had not been any such at all. And after this Method you may (with
labor and industry) of many Magnets, make one huge, and of what form you
please. And although the Magnets of this body, Magnetically compact (as I have
here showed) were never so many in number, yet the whole will have but two
principal points, the one the North, the other the South, even as if it were
one natural Lodestone, and all of them will contribute their forces unto these
two points; so that if there were twenty of them, being after this order
cemented together into one body, the whole would have but two points, but if
you will place them in a Vault, according to a Masons Trade, they will have 40
points, twenty North, and as many South, and will work the like effect in
drawing Iron, as (to use the former gross similitude) if a Teeme of Horses were
set in their Traces contrary the one to the other, the one to pull one way and
the other anorher. As for the Turks Mahomet, hanging in the Air with his Iron
Chest, it is a most gross untruth, and utterly impossible it is for any thing
to hang so in the Air by any Magnetical power, but that either it must touch
the stone it self, or else (as we have said) some intermediate hoby, that
hinders it from coming to the stone, or else some stay below to keep it from
ascending, as some small Wire that can scarcely be seen or perceived.

The manner to know the one Pole from the other, which of the two points
aforesaid may answer to the Pole Artike or the North Pole, is found in this
manner depiction of a vessel a large Vessel is to be filled with Water, in the
which cause the stone Magnes to be laid upon a light Board, not deep, much like
the covering of a Box, so nevertheless that the two points found in the stone
may lie equally elevate in the said Box; and so by virtue of the stone, the Box
shall be moved to the place where the Meridional Pole shall exceed toward the
South, and the other opposite to the North and shall rest there, and thus shall
it be easy to discern, which of the Points answers to the Pole Articke, and
to the Pole Antartike, so that any means first the places of Heaven be known.

Concerning the Magnetical force of the whole body of the Earth, I have
selected these experiments to prove it.

Take any piece of solid Earth that has some toughness ^o hold together, and
will abide the fire, as any sort of Clay or Brick (which sometimes was Clay)
fashion it in such manner that it be uniformly extended toward both ends (the
Orall or Long Figure is fittest for our purpose) put it into a Fire of
Charcoales, increasing the heat by little and little, and at the length with
often blowing, make it as thoroughly red hot as you can: let it remain so for
the space of half an hour or more, that thereby all the superfluous moisture
may be consumed, and adverse qualities separated from it, then take it forth,
and let it cool it self, being first set North and South with either end
answerable to the variation of the place, not parallel to the Horizon, but
elevated answerable to the Latitude as near as you can. Certain it is that this
piece of Earth thus ordered, will sensibly show you that it has true
Magnetical Virtue. But here before I proceed any farther, I must deliver unto
you a necessary observation: There are two sorts of Attractions (as they are
commonly called) the one Magnetical, the other Electrical. The Magnetical has
always a special respect to the North and South points (as we have often said)
of the Magnet or Magnetical Body. The Electrical Body has no manner of respect
to any one point of the Electrical Body, more than another: and by this
difference these two kinds of Attractions are easily discerned: as also by this
look what end of the Magnetical Needle the one end of the Magnet does draw, the
other will chase away; but the Electrical Body draws alike at all ends. And
Thirdly after this manner, lap this Electrical Body in a Paper and it will draw
nothing to it at all, but interposition of Brass or a stone Wall within the
Orb of the Magnets virtue, does nothing weaken the same, or hinder his effect
toward his peculiar object. Notwithstanding (to speak properly) Attraction
appertains only to Electrical Bodies, because the whole Attractive virtue is
only in the Electrical Body it self, and nothing as in the thing that is
attracted. The Attraction (commonly so called) of the Lodestone is rightly to
be termed, Concursion, Confluence, or Coition, because it is the running or
vigorous meeting together of two Magnetical Bodies, having a mutual Inclination
the one with the other, or by any other name, bearing the like sense. For the
true knowledge thereof, being but lately as a stranger arrived amongst us, for
common use.

( Quem penes arbitrium est, et jus et Norma Loquendi, has as yet scant suited
it, with a convenient Name to express this property; so that Magnetical
conclusion is never but between two Bodies, such as both of them are
Magnetical; as of one Lodestone with another, or of a Lodestone with Iron or
Steel, or Iron Oar if it be prepared, or between two pieces of Iron or Steel
thac are Revived with a Lodestone; for indeed the Lodestone can but revive
and multiply Magnetical force in a Body that naturally has it in some measure
before: but cannot infuse it into any thing, that before is utterly void of it,
as of Mettalls in Iron and Steel, and not in Gold, Silver, Brass, etc.

Electrum in this Argument is named that which is either Amber in substance, or
at least of the quality and that Amber being ^ubed, has an attraction to take
up Moats, Feathers, Straws, and other small things the which property is also
in ^eate, Brimstone, Hard-wax (if it be smooth) and in infinite other things,
both natural and compound; all which because of that quality in this Argument
are termed Electrical Bodies, and their taking up of things is called
Electrical Attraction, having only a slender resemblance, ^ut no truth of the
Magnetical Quality.

But that above mentioned piece of Earth, prepared in such a manner as is
before prescribed, will by Magnetical Concursion show it self to be a true
Magnetical Body. For the one end of the Magnetical Needle will covet toward
the one of the prepared Mass, and fly from the other. And contrariwise also,
though it will do both but weakly, not with power comparable to a natural
Lodestone, yet as truly as that. That end which cooled toward the South, will
draw the true North end of the Needle, and that end which cooled toward the
North will draw the true South end of the Needle. If so be that as yet you will
have another in fallible Argument, do thus; mark what end draws the North end
of the Needle, afterward put the new made Magnet into the fire again, and when
it has been glowing for the space of half a quarter of an hour, take it out
and cool it, being placed with that marked toward the North, most assuredly
that end now will draw the South end of the Needle, and the North end of the
Needle will shun it, which before approached unto it, the reason hereof is,
because the first having abolished all the former. Magnetical quality of that
Mass wherewith it was in a contrary position affected in the former cooling,
now leaving it apt and fit to receive any new Impression: which presently it
takes again either regularly, if in the cooling it be placed with the ends to
the North and South, or (if it be placed otherwise) confusedly, by the
Magnetical force and virtue of the whole body of the Earth by regular and
confused, this is the meaning. Take any lump of Earth, or any Brick-bat ordered
in this manner, certain it is that this ^ump of Earth or Brick-bat has some
Magnetical virtue therein, yet so feeble and weak, that our sense cannot
discern it, because of the unfitness of the form, and the confused dispersion
of that weak force, through the whole body thereof. Then suppose you will bring
either of these into an extended Ovall form, which is apt (as before I have
said) for any body Magnetical to show his force, yet this will help it nothing
at all of it self, as you may easily make experience in every Lodestone. For
if you take a Lodestone of a confused form, it is not enough to bring it into
a convenient Ovall, except with diligence you reserve the points of the North
and South in the two ends thereof, for if you leave the points in the sides,
you spoil it with this Ovall form. For the stone will not lightly be of one
quarter of the force, as it was before; for the Ovall form gives it no virtue,
but it is the fittest for it to show the uttermost of that strength, which of
it self it had before, if you observe the due points, and not otherwise. But in
this Earth and Brick it is not possible to find the due points in such a manner
as you may in a Lodestone, because of the weakness of the Magnetical force
therein contained. And therefore you cannot bring that into a regular Ovall
form, and by the Fire take away the confused Magnetical force, and all other
perverse qualities thereof, that being by nature a Magnetical body in his
cooling before specified, receiving presently by that unresistable power of the
Earth, his Magnetical virtue, according unto that form, and will regularly have
his due points precisely in the ends, without any confusion. Johannes Babtista
Porta writes, that he did make trial of the way that Paracelsus has set down
for to increase the virtue of a Magnet; Namely, to heat him red hot in the
Fire, and to quench him in the Oil of Crocus Martis: and Babtista Porta says,
that he found it a detestable falsehood. But says he, he is so far from
increasing his virtue, as that (being once red hot) he loses all his own,
past all recovery. But for all this that he says, I doubt whether Paracelsus
be justly reproved or not, for by my own experience I know that the heating of
a Lodestone until it be red hot, does weaken a Lodestone, but takes not
away all its force; and in my trial hereof, I found a very manifest proof of
the Magnetisme of the Earth, which I thought necessary to insert in this place.
I have made this trial of fragments of Magnets in diverse kinds, and likewise of
diverse kinds of Iron Mines which are next in degree to the Magnets; Namely,
after this manner, Heat him in the Fire by little and little (for fear of
breaking) until he be red hot, then take him out and let him cool, then mark
(with Chalk or what you please) those parts that respect the North and South,
and you shall find those marked places, the North and the South Poles of the
Magnet. Put him into the fire again, until he be red hot, and cool him
contrarily, and you shall have the contrary effect. Therefore if Babtsta Porta
did make his trial with a Lodestone very long in form, and chanced (for Doctor
Gilberts mystery of the Magnetisme was not then revealed) for to cool him in
his Oil of Crocus Martis with his ends East and West, the Axis of the stone
being then overthwart in the middle, it were no marvel, though it found no
force in the ends. And I do not think it impossible, but that Paracelsus way
may do some good rightly used. Doctor Gilbert writes, that some Iron Mine
will affect a Magnetical Needle, as it is of it self, being unprepared by fire:
but as yet I never could find any such, but this I have often tried, that it
being of no manner of Magnetical virtue of it self, no more then a Flint stone
unprepared by fire, being made red hot and cooled, is presently impregnated
with very apparent Magnetical virtue, according to the situation that he is
cooled in, and although you heat and cool him often, and diverse ways, he will
still keep his virtues, according to the situation of his cooling. And some
Iron Mines I have found, which being but in this sort prepared, have had as
strong force as some natural Magnets have had; it is the goodness of the
Lodestone joined with a fit form that will show great force: For as a very
good form with a base substance can do but very little, so the substance of
the Lodestone be it never so excellent, except it have some convenient form,
is not availeable. For example, an excellent Lodestone of a pound weight and
of a good fashion, being used artificially, may take up four pounds of Iron;
beat it into small powder, and it shall be of no force to take up one ounce of
Iron; yea I am very well assured, that half an ounce of a Lodestone of good
fashion, an^ of like virtue, will take up more then a pound will do being
beaten in powder. Whence (to add to this by the way) it appears manifestly,
that it is a great error of those Physicians and Surgeons, which to remedy
Ruptures, do prescribe unto their Patients to take the powder of Lodestone
inwardly, and the small filling of Iron inwardly: suppose here that the
Magnetical drawing should do great wonders, whereas they consider not that the
stone being dissolved into powder, every little particle of the dust has two
points contrary, the one drawing to, the other repelling and putting from; and
so being thus confounded by a contrary working, does much more harm then good
with his Magnetical quality. As for the astringent and drying property of the
Lodestone, I leave them to the diligent observation of those that are skilful
in Physic: but to return to our purpose, and to allege this also, besides the
manifest proof, if the Earth were not by Nature a Magnetical body, the
aforesaid mentioned piece of Earth were not by Nature a Magnetical body, the
before mentioned piece of Earth could not receive from a Lodestone any
Magnetical power: but most certain it is, and by many undoubted experiments
confired, that it will evidently receive a Magnetical power from a Lodestone:
therefore it is manifest that the Earth is by nature a Magnetical power: but
most certain it is, and by many undoubted experiments confirmed, that it will
evidently receive Magnetical power from a Lodestone therefore it is manifest
that the Earth is by nature a Magnetical body. Farthermore, as amongst all the
Mettalls, Iron does imcomparably more resemble the Earth in substance then any
other does; it likewise does participate more with the Earth in quality, and
principally in the Magnetical peculiar property hereof, as notorious experience
declares; yea every piece of Iron Oar, being naturally (as Doctor Gilbert
shows) a Magnet, although of feeble force, and all Magnets being a kind of an
Iron Oar, is the very cause, that only Iron or Steel, and no other Metal is
capable of that virtue, Namely, to have that revived and multiplied by the
vicinity of a Magnet, which at the first in some measure was originally in it
self, as it is aforesaid; it is also well known, that the Magnet is a stone
most commonly of invincible hardness, nothing inferior to any Iron or Steel of
the excellentest sort; notwithstanding sometimes we see of them that are
nothing, but a dry lump of Earth, and yet of those also some are stronger in
virtue, than diverse of the hard stones are: which Earthly Magnets, if a man
assay to bring them into fashion by grinding on a Grinding-stone (according to
the common use) they will consume into very Mud in the Water. Now (to draw
toward an end of this matter) albeit that the Magnetical virtue be most
eminent in the Magnet, as in the precise and perfect subject thereof: yet it is
the self same quality, in a meaner degree, evidently to be perceived in every
piece of Earth, prepared and ordered (as is aforesaid) yea, although it be not
cooled with his ends North and South, that it may take its Magnetical force
from the virtue of the Earth, for if you cool it with his ends but East and
West, and set two Load-stones in the cooling, the one at one end and the other
at the other end, it will receive a sensible and apparent Magnetical Virtue,
according to those points of the Lodestone that were applied unto it; namely,
that end which was next to the South point of the Lodestone will have a North
property, and that end that was next the North point, will have a South
property; yea, if you set the North part of two Load-stones to each end, both
ends of this new made Magnets will have a South property; and contrariwise if
you apply the South ends of two Magnets, both his ends will have a North
property; and those properties before mentioned will show themselves
Magnetical, because whether end of this new Magnet draws any one end of a
Magnetical Needle, the same will cause away the other: which is proper only to
Magnets and Magnetical Bodies. After the like sort, only by application of two
strong Load-stones by the force of twenty four hours you may alter the points
of any base Lodestone, which you would, and make them both North and South as
you please: so that the Lodestone that you would alter be but base in quality,
and not great in substance, and that the other be of a reasonable bigness and
good strength. And this virtue by such an application of two Load-stones I have
often found effectual in new Brick lately taken from the Kill without any
farther putting into the fire at all, and although it be against the nature of
the Lodestone to have both his ends naturally of one virtue, that is to say
both of them of a North property, or both of them of a South property: yet here
is to be understood, that it is the forcible violence of the strong ones, being
applied jointly to each end of the weak, that do chase the contrary property of
the weak one into the middle thereof; and therefore if you divide this weak one
in the middle, then both those ends which being joined together in the middle
(where no Lodestone can show any virtue) being now disjoynted and become both
ends, will presently show a contrary property (according to the Magnetical
Nature) unto the other two ends.

We shall discourse next of continual motion. From the beginning of the World
all natural Philosophers and Mathematicians, with great expense and labor,
have attempted to find out a continual motion or moving, yet unto this day have
few or none attained to the due end of their desire, not knowing the virtue of
this stone, depiction of a compass for there cannot be a continual motion found
by any other means, then by the Magnet, in this manner, make a hollow case of
Silver after the fashion of a concave Glass, outwardly labored with the
curious Art of Graving, not only for Ornament, but also for lightness, for the
lighter that it is, so much the more easier it shall be moved, neither must it
be so pierced through, that such as are ignorant of the hidden Secret may
easily perceive it.

The form of the stone is Represented in this following Figure.

The Form of the Stone.


I must have on the inner side certain little Nails and Denticles and small
Teeth of Iron of one equal weight, to be fastened on the Border or Magnet, so
that the one be no farther distant from the other, then is the thickness of a
Bean. The said Wheel also must be in all parts of equal weight, then fasten the
Axletree in the middle, upon the which the Wheel may turn, the Axletree
remaining altogether immovable. To the which Axletree again shall be joined a
Pin of Silver fastened to the same, and placed between the two cases in the
highest part, whereon place the Lodestone. Being thus prepared, let it be
first brought to a round form, then (as is said) let the Poles be found: then
the Poles untouched, the two contrary sides being between the two Poles, must
be fyled and polished, and the stone brought in a manner to the form of an Egg,
and somewhat narrower on those two sides, least the lower part thereof should
possess the inferior place, that it may touch the Walls of the case like a
little Wheel.

setting up the the lode-stone at sea

This done, place the stone upon the plain, as a stone is fastened in a ring,
with such Art, that the North Pole may a little incline toward the Denticles,
to the end, that the virtue thereof work not directly his impression, but with
a certain inclination give his influence upon, the Denticles of the Iron. Every
Denticle thereof shall come to the North Pole, and when by force of the the
lode-stone at sea Wheel it shall somewhat pass that Pole, it shall come to the
South, which shall drive it back again; whom then against the Pole Artick shall
draw as appears. And that the Wheel may the sooner do his office within the
cases, enclose therein a little Calculus (that is) a little round stone or
pellet of Copper or Silver, of such quantity, that it may commodiously be
received within any of the Denticles: then, when the Wheels shall be raised,
the pellet or round weight shall fall on the contrary part. And whereas the
motion of the Wheel downwards to the lowest part, is perpetual, and the fall of
the pellet, opposite or contrary, ever received within any two of the
Denticles, the motion shall be perpetual, because the weight of the wheel and
pellet ever inclines to the center of the Earth and lowest place. Therefore
when it shall permit the Denticles for to rest about the stone, then shall it
well serve to the purpose. The middle places within the Denticles ought so
artificially to be made hollow, that they may aptly receive the falling pellet
or plummet, as the Figure above declares. Thus I have written as briefly as I
could of the admirable and wonderful and incomperable virtues of the Lodestone.

The Sea-mans Director, as well in distress of Weather, as also at his leisure
times of Recreation, how to make a right use of the Magnetical Needle, how to
manage the Sailing Compass, and the rest of the Instruments of chiefest
concernment in the Art of Navigation.
HAving already discoursed of the virtues of the Lodestone, as we are very
unwilling (for to divide such dear friends, we next shall Treat of the
Magnetical Needle.

The variation of the Magnetical Needle, being aptly fitted and placed upon his
pin, is nothing else, but the swarving of the pointing of the same in the
Horizon, from the Meridian line there, the portion of the Horizon intercepted
between the true Meridian line and this pointing, shows of what quantity the
variation is, and gives it his name, to wit, which way it lies, either
Easterly or Westerly, and it is observed by either end of the Needle as you
please.

In times past men observed only by the North end of the Needle, because they
understood not that the Lodestone has a South virtue, as well as a North; and
therefore did touch their Needles and Wyars of their Compasses always for the
North only, leaving those ends of the Wyars bare, that they might be refreshed
with a new touch at any time afterward: but the other ends they covered, not
knowing that they were also apt to receive as forcible a virtue from the
Lodestone for the South, as the other for the North. For the right
understanding of the variation, which is necessary dependants, we must use the
means of two circles, the one of them I will call the Magnetical Almicanter,
the other is already known by the name of the Magnetical Meridian.

This Magnetical Almicanter is a circle parallel unto the Horizon, whose center
is the Vertical point, and is described by the distance between the Vertical
point, and the nearer Pole of the Earth; the Magnetical respective pole, or
(which is all one) the Pole of the Magnetical Meridian, is a point in the
Magnetical Almicanter, as the variation of that place contains in the
Horizon, but always it is the contrary part of the true Meridian; that is, if
the variation of the South part of the Needle be Easterly, the respective Pole
is Westerly: but if you observe with the North end of the Needle, the
respective Pole and the variation are both one way in all our Northern
Climates. If the variation of the South point of the Needle be Westerly, then
is the respective pole so many degrees in the said Almicanter Easterly, and
therefore always of the same height with the true Pole above the Horizon. For
since all great circles of the Globe do necessarily cut one another in two
points into two equal parts: these two therefore must even do so in the Zenith
and Nadir, by the very definition; so that these two points (the Zenith and
Nadir) are always alike common to them both, as well unto the true, as unto the
Magnetical Meridian.

Where-hence it follows necessarily, that always the one half of the
Magnetical Meridian is on the East side, and the other on the West side of the
true Meridian, the common Zenith or Nadir evermore keeping their equal
distances from the Poles of the one of them, as they do from the other. For
Example, suppose the common Zenith to be in the Equator, you Sailing East or
West, as long as there is no variation, there is no Magnetical Meridian, there
are no Megnetical Poles, but those of the World. But as soon as Sailing still
under the line, you do find a variation, it is the Magnetical Meridian, that by
his swarving from the true Meridian of the World, in the Horizon shows the
quantity of the variation, and gives it also the denomination of Easterly or
Westerly, and his Axis is the line of variation. But suppose the common Zenith,
to be in any parallel, between the Equatour and the Pole, then is it not the
Axis, but some other Diameter of the Magnetical Meridian, which shows the
variation of the Horizon; and the Magnetical Meridian ever more cutteth just so
many degrees of the Magnetical Almicanter on the one side of the true Meridian,
as the same Magnetical Pole is distant from the same Almicanter, on the other
side of the true M^ridian from the Pole of the World. And this is to be
u^^erstood in correspondent manner, as well of the South Hemisph^re, as of the
North.

The respective Magnetical M ridian (where any variation is) is a circle that
pa^^eth by the Vertical point of the Nadir, and both the respective Poles,
crossing the Horizon at right Angles in the points of variation, of which
circle the line of Variation is a Diameter, but where there is no variation the
true and Magnetical Meridian^ are both one and the self same, and so in the
like manner are there Diameters. Those circles and Poles are termed respective,
because that in every place where any variation is, the Magnetical Needle does
respect them, as well in the pro^erty of direction, as of that of declination
or inclination. For thus also very well it may be termed, by the property of
direction, and I do mean with Doctor Gilbert, the Horizontical motion of the
Magnetical Needle, by the declination or inclination. I mean the descending
(and as it were) the sinking motion of the Needle under the Horizon, in his
proper Azimuth or Magnetical Meridian; but if there be no variation, the Needle
always points to the true Meridian of the Earth, and toward the Poles
thereof, in both those properties. The true Poles of the Earth, which are those
two points equally distant from each part of the Equinoctial of the Earth, are
always the self same. The respective Poles alter with every Horizon, where
there is any variation, but never out of the forenamed Almicanter of that
place. The cause of the differences of the respective Poles and Meridians from
the true Poles and Meridians, and so of all Variations, are only two; the chief
and most general is the vastness of the Ocean Sea, by moistness whereof the
Magnetical collateral force of so much Earth as it covers, is much hindered
and dulled. And by what means the next great continent has more power over the
correspondent end of the Magnetical Needle, then otherwise it would have if all
were alike, one entire continent; and therefore causes the directive property
of the Needle somewhat to swarve toward that way, which is that which we call
variation; but yet the vastness of the Ocean does not hinder the declination of
the Magnetical Needle, because the hanging consists but in length and breadth,
and not in the depth. For although in comparison of a Pond or River, the Sea is
said to be of a wonderful depth, yet if this depth be compared with a
Semidiameter of the Earth, it bears a very exceeding small proportion,
nothing at all to hinder the mighty magnetical declinatory force of the whole
Earth; for the greatest depth that ever any man of skill esteemed it at, was
not above two English ^iles, at the uttermost, when as daily experience makes
it manifest, that a great continent will show his Magnetical collateral force,
by causing a variation, above 200 miles off from the place, and therefore
Doctor Gilberts fear in that point I take to be needless, supposing a variation
of declination. The second cause of variation is any great mountainous Region,
Easterly or Westerly from you, it will cause the Needle sometimes to swarve
that way. But variations of this kind are but of small continuance, and in
Sailing subject to sudden alteration; yea many times quite contrary from
Westerly to Easterly, and afterward back again within short space, as our
first Famous Pilot Stephen Borough found by his experience in his discovery of
the Scythian Sea Coast, between the North Cape of Finmarke and Vaygates; the
reason whereof ought heedfully to be regarded, which is that the Magnetical
force of the whole Earth, does (as in all Magnets) show it self most strongly
in the two poles thereof, and in the places which are under them: but always it
must be remembered that all the force they have must issue out of the whole
Terrestial body, as it does likewise in all Magnets out of the body of the
Magnet: and therefore in any part of the superficies of the whole Terrestial
body. It is impossible that any variation be above 90 degrees, because the
virtue of the whole can never be overswayed by the imperfection of a part, and
especially of so small a part is any one portion of the Ocean is in his very
superficies, in respect of the body of the whole Earth: yea I am verily
persuaded, that there never was nor never will be any Variation, by any good
observation found to be so much as 90, neither any show of so great variation
any where, except it be very near unto either of the poles, where there is
small credit to be given to the observing of any variation: for the variation
being (as before said) the difference of the pointing of the Magnetical Needle
in the Horizon, from the true Meridian, for as much as in places near the pole,
there is no manner of certainty of either of these, it is not possible to find
the variation if there be any. The reason whereof is this, no man may Travel in
those Seas, but whilst the Sun abides on that side of the Aequatour, whereby
they have continual day, and by that means are secluded from any help of the
Stars; neither if they might be seen, would they bring any great help. For the
difference of height in many hours is so small, that by a large Instrument a
diligent observer with great pains will hardly find the Meridian Line, all the
Meridians thereof coming so near one to another, and meeting in the Pole, and
their Horizon being in a manner parallel to the Aequinoctial. As for the
Horizontical Magnetical Needle, to show their pointing in the Horizon as they
were wont to do, they coming into the Climate may say Fuimus Troes. Their
direction is as it were giddy and uncertain, and when their center comes unto
the pole it self, it is quite vanished away; for from thence all the points of
the Horizon are only South, if it be at the South pole, and North from the
South, and therefore in that place the Instrument of declination is far more
sure then the Horizontical Compass. And as in the poles themselves there is no
direction at all, so of necessity near unto them it must be a very confused
direction. Those two places that are called the poles, have no strength of
themselves (as aforesaid) but as it is contributed unto them of the whole. As
in a Magnet, if you break off a piece of a contrary end, the end that is lest
will be according to that proportion diminished in his strength, and the polar
piece, and the polar piece that is broke off (be it never so little) will have
two poles as well as the great, so that the two parts will have four poles, two
of them North, and two of them South. Put this little piece that was broken off
in his place again, and then each piece will loose one of his poles at the very
same instant, and the whole will have but two poles, the one North and the
other South, as at the first. Again, if you cut off of one side a piece of the
Lodestone, that is brought into a round of an Ovall form, having his poles
marked in their due places at each end, presently both ends will be abridged of
part of the force which they had, and the poles themselves will be removed unto
the other side, from the places that were marked, and those marks will stand
but for idle ciphers in comparison of that they were before. Again, take a
Magnet of an old or an extended Ovall form: I do still exemplify in these,
because they are of all others, as I have often admonished, for all Magnetical
proof the most excellent forms, and set marks on the two poles, take a fine
Needle, or any straight small Wyar, and set it on the Equinoctial (mean thereby
the middle, between the two ends of the stone) then will it point directly
toward each pole, if the stone be sound without any flaws, or any other gross
substance (as may be) intermingled with it: and if you thrust this Needle
toward either end, according to his own direction, he will trace you a circle
right over both of these marked poles, which is the true Meridian of the stone.
But if this stone has on either of the sides any imperfection, when the Needle
comes to the edge or brink thereof, it will swarve somewhat toward the
sounder side, and will point to neither of the true poles. And if a circle be
drawn according to his pointing, as he stands still in that place, this shall
be a respective Meridian of that stone, proper unto that place, and the poles.
The respective poles differing from the true Meridian of the stone and his
poles. Now if you thrust the Needle farther toward the end, upon the brink of
this imperspection, it will not point (as before) but either further off, or
nearer to the true poles, and will give his direction for a new respective
M^ridian, and new respective poles, and in such manner infinitely, if you place
the Needle in the middle of this imperfection, equally distant from the sound
parts, then will it indeed point toward the end of the stone, and the
consequence hereof is the main reason, and that toward the midst of the
Ocean; and likewise of any great continent there is no variation. Thus may you
especially in a round Lodestone (as in a lively example) see the true causes
of all the variations that are in the whole World, reckoning as much space as
the Ocean covers, to be some imperfection in the body of the whole, in
respect of the Horizontical motion of the Compass. For the evidence of the
truth hereof, let a man examine generally the variations of the most expert
Navigators (although by reason of the diversities of the sets of their
Compasses, and unfitness and unapt handling of their Instruments, they seldom
times agree amongst themselves) observed in the Atlantic Ocean, from the
Aequatour unto the parts of Norway, all along the East Coast, from the Meridian
of the Azores, so as far North, as hereunto has been discovered, and he shall
find the ordinary practice to testify the truth hereof, as also after the same
sort from the Aequatour Southward, unto the streights of Magellan, and all
along the back side of America in the South Sea: on the East Coast on the Cape
of Bona Speranza, and he shall perceive the like agreeement, but in Sailing
from the cap of Bona Speranza, farther farther Eastward that sometimes they do
find it otherwise, the cause is the different manner of the situation of the
South, as yet undiscovered continent. And whereas in the midst of the
Atlantic Ocean, about 30 Leagues West from the Azores, they find no variation
at all, no mervail thereof; for it is about the middle distance between the two
great Continents of America and Ours.

Wherefore the round Lodestone is significantly termed by Doctor Gilbert
Terrella, that is, a little, or rather a very little Earth; for it represents
in a little small model (as it were) the admirable properties Magnetical of
the huge Globe of the Earth; herein also we may behold the reason why the
Magnetical Needle varieth least in the Aequinoctial, and most toward the pole,
and in the poles themselves gives no direction at all: for proof hereof, take
a Needle and place it on the Aequinoctial of the stone, there you shall see
stand equally balanced and very strongly, so that if you turn him from the
direction, as soon as you let him go, he will presently again turn to it. The
reason is, because each pole does equally strengthen his correspondent end of
the Needle. Move this Needle toward either of the poles, then does the nearer
pole strengthen his end of the Needle; but the farther (because of the
distance) cannot do the like unto his, but very weakly, and this Needle will
not stand any more equally balanced (as it did in the Aequinoctial) but that
end next to the pole will couch down, and the other will rise up, for on the
North side of the Aequatour, the true South end is predominant, and on the
other the North end has the Mastery. And that this is also in the Earth it
self, all our late Travelers confirm unto us by their daily experience, and
all the very Artizans and Needle-makers must needs be daily witnesses of it. As
for Example, let any Workman in our Climate make a Needle for a Dyal, when he
has fitted it and placed it on the pin, that it may stand thereon equally
balanced and parallel to the Horizon, touch it with the Lodestone, then
presently that which points toward the North will hang down; yea (although
you touch only with the South end) and will not stand as before, the touch
equally balanced and parallel to the Horizon: except that you cut or file
somewhat from that end that hangs down, or else add a piece of Wax or some
other thing to the other end of the Needle to counterpose it, and make it stand
equidistant as it did at the first setting on: and this is a thing very
certain, that is, the Northerly descent of the Needle, will be more or less in
all places of Northerly Latitude: in the greater Latitude the more, and in the
lesser Latitude the lesser. But if any Traveller carry this Needle beyond the
Aequatour in the like Latitude Southerly, that end which is downwards in the
Northerly, will rise Southerly, and the other sink down even as much: and the
nearer you Travel toward either pole, the more that end which points toward
the pole will tend downwards: this is most certain in every Dyal Needle, but a
great deal more appears in a long one then in a short one; we cannot find
that the property of direction by the Magnetical Needle has been unlargly
practiced (for Sailing) above 300 years. And as for the property of declination
under the Horizon, thereby to show the Latitude by the Instrument thereunto
belonging, it is as yet a very new come Guest into the World, born and bred
with us in England, and except it had been in exceeding few men's hands, yet
much used, much less come unto his perfection. But this is not to be marvailed
at because it is not above 60 years old; neither is it to be wondered at if any
Critical Fellows do contemn and deride it, forasmuch at either their want of
knowledge, or of patience, will not give them leave truly to consider of it.
But what Navigatour, or rather Nugatour whatsoever contemns it, shall be sure
to repent if ever he comes to his right wits to consider what it is that he
has contemned. And although the Needles for direction and declination do
differ much in their shapes, each from the other, yet the properties are both
one and the same. For the Needles for direction do decline (as aforesaid) as
far as the unfitness of their form and place will permit them: and the
declining Needle will not work, but only in his Magnetical Meridian, which
himself will find out, if you turn the Instrument about, until the Needle show
his least declination under the Horizon, and there do play up and down, and
stop in the end of the same place again. But if you would have a Needle fitted
to show both his properties, do thus, cause a Needle to be made about six
Inches long, even and smooth, saving that he must be a little bigger in the
middle, then instead of an Axis (which declinatory Needles have) let him have a
small hole drilled precisely in the midst, and this hole being very small,
let it be somewhat wider outward on each side then in the midst (which our
Workmen call Sinkboared) where it must be left very sharp, even almost as the
edge of a Knife: put through this hole a small Virginal Lattin Wire, and fit
the Needle so that it hang precisely even upon this Wire, instead of an
Axletree: then touch him with the Loadstone, and you shall presently see the
end that should point toward the North, decline or bend down to his due point
of declination, if it be placed in the Magnetical Meridian, and set a little
piece of Wax or any other thing upon the contrary part for a counterpoise in
that the Needle may stand parallel with the Horizon, then if you stand at right
angles with that Virginal Wire, it is certainly in the Magnetical Meridian, so
that hanging in this counterpose, if you turn about the Wire until the Needle
do make right Angles with it, then does the Needle by his directive virtue
point unto the Magnetical Meridian Line. Take off the counterpoise, then it
shows the declination; so that one and the self same Needle in the same place
only, by taking off, and putting on a little piece of Wax, shows plainly both
those properties of directions and declinations, and in like manner every
inclinatory Needle will do, if the points of his Axis be sharp, and held in his
box parallel to the Horizon, he will show both those properties of direction
and declination: a fine piece of Cork or Leather, or any Tough substance may
serve this Needle for a counterpoise in all Latitudes by thrusting it toward
the center in the less Latitudes, and toward the end in the greater, and I
think it not impossible, but that a skilful Geometrician may so graduate the
one half of such a Needle, that it alone with its counterpoise, may be a means
to give a probable conjecture for the Latitude of any place whatsoever.

It will be very convenient in the next place to make a discovery of the
Errors committed in making and touching Magnetical Needles and Wyers of
Sailing Compasses, and to give advise for the true and right making and
touching of them.

First, The Wyers that are commonly made both with us, and in foreign
Countries, are of so base and drossie Iron, not apt or sufficient to receive
the tenth part of the virtue that fine steel Wire could do.

Secondly, The ends of the Wyers are for the most part not filed smooth nor
^itted even together upon the Axis of the file; by means whereof the touch of
the stone is more dully received, and the standing of the file more uncertain,
the Magnetical force not being in the true Axis thereof.

Thirdly, Their manner of touching the Wyers is altogether pitiful and
ridiculous. For with a Lodestone having a point (for seldom times they have a
stone so well fashioned, that both points are eminent) that touches the North
(and such a one though he be but weak is preferred amongst them before another,
though much stronger that touches to the South) they rub to and fro those ends
of the Wyers, which they would have stand Northerly. Wherein what do they else,
but play as it were fast and loose, not considering (as the truth is indeed)
that every touch from the ends of the Wyers to the center of the Fly
withdraws back again that force, which the contrary touch did give them, and
therefore seldom give they above one quarter of that strength, and sometimes
not so much, which otherwise with the very same stone they might do, if they
ordered all things as they should: yea, I am infalibly assured (for I have had
certain experience of it) that with the same stone you may give fully as much,
and rather more force, touching in such sort as immediately shall be declared
on the upper face of the Fly: over against the Wyers (the Card being between)
then they do by touching the very Wyers themselves after their wonted fashion:
whenever therefore a Needle is to be touched, besides the goodness and
quantity, you must have a regard to the form of your stone, namely, whether it
has both the North and South points eminent and forcible, or only the one, for
if it has both, begin your touching near the middle, pressing the true North
point, before specified of the stone all along from thence, unto the North
pointing end of the Needle; Iterating those touches four or five times, always
making some stay with the stone at the end of the Needle. But if the stone have
but one forcible point, then if it be the true North, begin your touching at
the South pointing end of the Needle, pressing it all along to the North end,
Iterating this four or five times, and thence once or twice only from the
middle to that end, if the stone has but the South point, touch the Needle
accordingly from the other end; for even as the virtue of the stone it self is
semidiameter having his beginning (as before is mentioned) in the center of the
stone, even so the force which he imparteth to the Needle, is in the nature of
a Semidiameter in the middle of the Needle. Insomuch that a Needle being
touched from the middle into the other end of the Needle, so that the stone be
good, and the Needle but of a reasonable convenient size, as you may evidently
try in every Knife of ordinary goodness and length. But a plate of Steel made
at both ends alike, according to the form here above described, is much better
to show this effect. For when the Blade of a Knife is of fine Metal, the Halft
being of course Iron, and also of diverse form and temper, it is not any way
capable of the like force as the Blade is, which is the reason that if you
touch the Blade of an Iron Hafted Knife from the halft unto the point with a
Lodestone, it will at the point take up its competenth weight, touch it back
again to the uttermost part of the Have it will take up little or nothing: try
the like with such a plate or steel, and you shall find it take up fully as
much at the one end as it did at the other: but if you bring his touch to the
middle, it will take up little or nothing at the other end, and nothing at all
in the middle it self. The reason hereof is depiction of a needle for a magnet
this, the Magnet gives his force (secundum Mensurum recipientis) according to
the capacity of that which receives it, and that evermore after his own
nature, which is to have his force strong in his ends, and none at all in the
middle, if you touch the blade from the middle, with either end of the stone,
the other end of the halft will immediately receive and show the contrary
quality: even so also will it come to pass if you make proof with any
Magnetical Needle, although that his force will be faint and weak in comparison
of the other. And in your touching you must observe that in pressing with the
stone from the middle of the Needle unto the end, as you bring your hand
backwards to iterate the touch, you must lift your hand somewhat high, and not
bring it backwards, close to the Needle, ^or that would diminish the strength
of the touch. But if that end of the Needle be also touched with the other end
of the stone, in the manner as I have before rehearsed, then, shall he at each
end be a great deel the stronger, and the contrary fainter forces shall recoile
and settle in the middle of the Needle, where they can nothing at all disturb
the motion thereof. We shall next discourse of the touching with a Lodestone
capped or without a cap, by caping is meant the placing of two pieces of Iron
handsomely fitted and fastened upon the two points of the stone, for Iron for
this purpose is better then steel. And likewise concerning the weight that is
to be lifted up, it is better to be made of soft Iron then of Steel, and the
stone will lift more thereof, as long as there is a contiguity: but if the Iron
and the Steel be separated from the contiguity of the stone, the Steel will
always carry at the least ten times more virtue then the Iron, as it is before
mentioned. Now whether it were best to touch the Wyers with a Magnet being thus
capped, or with the bare Stone it self, some there be that make a question; I
have been told by one of great skill and practice, that he found by experience,
the Compass touched with a capped stone, not to receive his force so well as
the other, and the party coming to me when he was to undertake a long Voyage,
to have his Compass touched, requested me in any wife to do it with the bare
stone: but yet I think it very good that this be confirmed by more than one
man's experience before it be believed, because by some error he might possible
mistake the matter. Sure I am that the capped stone gives somewhat more virtue
in his touch, and by all experience that I have made, I find it to continue as
firmly and as long; howbeit I refer my self herein to the trial of others also.
A man may therefore touch the Wyers with the bare stone, and then with the same
being capped, or contrariwise to be surer of the greater force, and yet if any
shall imagine the difference of the strength of the touch, to be according to
the taking up of Iron with the cap or without it, he is very much deceived; for
I have often tried them both, but never could see the touching strength of the
Needle to be increased half a quarter more with the cap then without it;
whereas I have always (especially if the stone were very good) found that the
stone will lift ten times as much Iron: yea, a great deel more (and sometimes
twenty times) with the cap (if it be artificially fitted) then he is able to do
without it.

Some, who would seem to be of great skill, have imagined that the best way to
add strength to a Needle, is with a Hammer to give some strokes to the point of
the stone, thereby causing Litrages (as it were) or Beard, to hang down from
it, and that the Needle in his touching, taking some part of that with him,
should have the stronger touch. But they that so suppose deceive themselves
therein; for a Beard is nothing else, but ^he fine dust of the stone, hanging
together by virtue ^hereof: which being separated from the stone (al^hough it
were a right good one) is not able any whit ^t all to turn a Needle of it self.
The trial is soon made by this means, let them take off that beard from the
stone with a stick, and lay it upon the end of a Nee^le not touched, and they
shall find in it no force at all, ^ay it is hurtful to the Needle, for it
gives a superflu^us burden for a small time, and cannot but incumber ^is
action, by reason that every one of those little par^els of dust (though beaten
out at one end) has also ^or its small quantity both a North and a South
virtue. And therefore marreth as much as it makes at either and of the Needle.
The proof hereof is manifest, if ^ou put off that dust or beard upon a paper,
and hold a ^oad-stone under it, for as you turn toward the paper ^he North or
South of the Stone, so will every one of these particles in like manner turn it
self, showing ^hereby a double nature.

The Compass Needle, being the most admirable and useful Instrument in the
World, is both amongst ^urs and other Nations for the most part so bungerly and
absurdly contrived, as nothing more. And therefore as I have treated of the
nature and use of the Magnet, I have thought good also to employ my best
endea^our, to advance this noble Instrument toward its highest perfection,
being the principal thing by which the worthy effect of the Magnet is made most
profitable unto Mankind, herein five things are to be conside^ed, the substance
that it is made of, the form, the weight, the capitell, the pin it stands
upon: the substance in any wise ought to be pure Steel and not ^ron; for most
assuredly Steel will take at the least ten times more virtue than Iron can do,
but especially if it has its right temper. And that is this, heat it in the
fire until it be past red hot, that it be whitish hot, and quench it in cold
Water suddenly, so is it Brick in a manner or Glass it self, and is at that
time incapable of the virtue of the Lodestone. Then must you, laying it upon a
plain Table, warily rub with fine Sand all the black color from it, if before
you put into the fire you anoint it with black Soap it will scale white it
self, the^ heat a Bar of Iron well near red hot, and holding one end of the
Needle with a small pair of Tongues, lay the other end upon the hot Bar, and
presently you shall see that end turn from a white to a yellowish, and
afterward to a bluish color, then take that end with your Tongues, and do
the like to the other, thrusting it forwards upon the Bar until the color of
the whole Needle become bluish; then throw it on a Table, and let it cool it
self; and so is he of the excellent temper, and most capable to receive the
greatest power from the Lodestone. If this seem too curious, especially for
some fashions of Needles, then use but the Hammer hardening (as Workmen call
it) which is well near as good. As concerning the form, diverse men are of
diverse minds, some use a kind of a square one, others a Loop (I mean an
extended Ovall form) and this is most common; but now a days a narrow straight
plate (being somewhat broader in the middle) is in great request: of these I
hold the Loop or Ovall form (if it be well made) to be the best, which is, that
if it be Steel, his ends be welded together, having a Lattin narrow plate,
issuing from the capitell unto the middle of the two sides of the Loop, and
there rivited, and riviting, if it be handsomely shoulered in by the Workman,
is better than soadering; because having fitted the Lattin plate, bearing the
capitell unto the Loop, you may first put your Loop into his temper, and then
rivet this unto him afterward, which otherwise would be spoiled in the fire,
and the wide Loop is better then the narrow or the straight plate, and that for
two reasons. The one is because, as in a Magnet it self, the force that is in
the whole body, shows it self most strongly in his two Poles, even so, this
being a Magnetical Body, does the like in his ends, which are his Poles: and
the end of a wide compassed Loop, (being longer than of a narrower) of the same
length, in the Axis, must needs contain so much the more Virtue; The other
reason is, because it supposes the Fly in his Circular Motion, more equally
balanced then the other: and therefore were it not for some other
Inconveniences, a true Circle were best of all, which that except you mark the
two places, that you would have for the North and South, very curiously, you
shall never give him the right touch; yea very exceeding hardly, although that
you do mark them; and also the Lattine Stay, that holds the Capital would be
exceeding long, and a superfluous burden; but the best form of all (as I take
it) in all respects is this, A true Circle, having his Axis going out beyond
the Circle, at each end narrow and narrower, unto a reasonable sharp point, and
being pure Steel as the Circle it self, having in the midst, a convenient
Receptacle to place the Capital fitly in.

This Circle must have four very small holes drilled through it, equally
distant each from the other, for the four Cardinal Points; and in both the two
Points, that issue without the Circle, being for North and South, of equal
distance between the Circle and the end of the Point two more; if it be a large
one, otherwise one is enough, according to the following Figure. And this
Needle is most fit to be used for the Observation of the Variation without any
Fly, as I will hereafter show.

base for compass

Whenever you will set this Needle unto the Fly, you must put the Capital
through the Center of the Fly very precisely, and placing the Points of the
Diameter where you will have them, thrust little small pins through the upper
place of the Fly, and those smal^ holes in the Needle, the heads of the pins
will show you (if the Fly be larger then your Needle) at wha^ Point your
Needle stands, and bowing the body o^ your pins, (being thrust through those
little holes) close to the Card below, will keep it steady at that place, and
from warping also. And so four pins at the four Cardinal Points will serve the
turn.

Again, If you please to place this Needle upon the upper end of the Card
according to Stevinius thorough the Center, in the bottom of the Fly, and the
Needle placed and fastened on the top, or upper face of the Card.

But if you will have a Magnetical Needle to serve only for one size of a Fly,
the best way is, instead of the two pins in the end of the Axis, to have a
couple of little half Staples, and a Flower-de-Luce on one of them, as you see
in the Loop revitted there. That ^in turning about the Needle, they may still
keep the Fly close unto it, and so fasten it upon a Skrew upon the Capital,
wheresoever you please.

As for his weight, it must be according to his largeness, and the weight is
one principal cause, the very large Compasses are unprofitable. For the weight
of the weight of the large Card, and the heavy Needle, pressing upon the pin,
will cause the Motion of the Fly to be dull and uncertain; and therefore let
the Pasteboard be no heavier then you must needs; and for the size of six
Inches Diameter of your Paste-board, and a Needle of that length. I know that a
Needle of half an Ounce weight, and half a quartern at the uttermost, (if a
good Workman have it in hand) will be fully sufficient of what Form soever.

The Capital ought to be Lattin, and Hammer-hardned, well and truly boared, not
too shallow, but of a good convenient depth and wideness at the bottom, fit^ing
the pin it stands upon at the top.

The Pin ought to be either of Lattin or Copper, and not of Steel or Iron, as
some suppose, for they are very subject to rust; and the Steel, especially by
long use, will wear a little hole in the top of the Capital, and ^y that means
the Compass becomes dull, and they hardly if ever will find the reason of it;
for the hole will be very small; and entering a very little way in, and yet
disturbeth all. Moreover in any wise there must be always an especial diligent
Care had of fitness between the Capital and the Pin, otherwise all things
appertaining to the Compass are nothing worth. This Pin must be very firmly
fixed in the just Center of the Box, and the bottom marked, that whenever you
take it off to sharpen the Pin (which use will make blunt) you may set him in
the same place again.

As I have said, that in a Magnet it self, the Virtue is in the whole body, and
shows it self most forcible in its Poles; even so likewise our Compass
Needle, being a Magnetical body, shows his force in his ends, which are his
Poles, although that force does proceed out of the whole body of the Needle;
which I have now thought good to make apparent by an evident Demonstration: I
caused my Workman to make a Needle of a Loop Fashion, eight Inches long, or
Oval Form, in all respects fitted to be set to a Fly, saving that there was
but one Inch or a little more at each end of the Steel, all the intermediate
part between the two ends being of Brass: These two ends I did touch with the
North and South ends of a very good Magnet: and whereas in a true Magnetical
Needle, I should have had but two points, the one North, and the other South,
this Mongrel yielded me six, the two ends adjoining to the brass of contrary
natures unto the sharp Points, and would no more do the Office of a Magnetical
Needle then a wooden stick, because the Virtue was not in the whole, and so
communicated unto the two ends, but each end was a Total of himself, being
separated, and as it were divorced, the one from all communication with the
other, by that intermediate brass: the which being taken away, and the two
Forks joined together for that length, presently he became one perfect true
Magnetical Needle, and the Virtue of those four confused Points, which ere
while was lost in the Forks, will presently be found in the two sharp ends, and
now in his natural Seats.

Both these ends of Steel were fastened to the Brass, and then that Needle had
no Magnetical Motion; but being taken off and joined together, they presently
(without any further touching of them) became a true Magnetical Needle.


To conclude this discourse of the Compass of the Needle, the needle that is
still working upon his Pin continually, will keep his force the better, then
that which otherwise laid up, although there be no doubt of the other, for a
man's whole Age, or longer, if it be of good Metal, and kept from open Air and
Rust, but especially of any Lodestone. There is no better way of keeping from
rust, then by varnishing him, although it be but with a drop or two of
Linsed-Oyl alone, the Needle that is continually upon his Pin, is still
strengthened by the Magnetical power of the Earth, setting himself always
toward the Poles thereof (which the other cannot do) and needs only to have
his pin sharpened only now and then: the which of all the faults incident to
the compass, is most easily and safely amended. And yet if it be not very well
looked unto, it disturbeth all the operation of the Compass more then any
other. And diverse wrong themselves in being too busy in often touching their
Compas^es, the fault being in this which no touching can amend.

I have thought good to conclude this short Treatise with a little additament
to the ordinary Sailing Compass, fitting him thereby to be answerable to the
several here prefixed, as also with a comparison of the several uses of the
Horizontical and Inclinatory (...) let the glass of the inner box of the
Compass be of good thickness and strength, (but yet clear and even) the^e that
come from Venice for Looking las^es before the Soil be set on are the best, if
any Man may have them large enough. Let this Glass be very well fitted unto the
box and simmoned underneath upon the should'ring of that bears up the Glass,
with a mixture of Wax, Turpentine, Sallet-Oyl and Rosin mingled together: or
with any other simmon as you shall think good; above upon the Glass ^et there
be a Ring of thin Pastboard, of the breadth of the Should'ring underneath, in
like manner simmoned on: then must you have a circle of Lattin about the
breadth of the Pastboard Ring, of convenient thickness for strength, which must
be divided into degrees: this circle must have a plate of Lattin, of half an
Inch-broad or broader, according to the largness of the circle for strength,
that must cross over the midst of the circle, cut out of the same place with
the circle, or else soadered with Silver soader: this must have a line all
along the midst of it, and a little loop at each end cut through the two ends
of the loops being precisely in that line. Lastly, you must have a moveable
Ruler with two long folding sights, of about the Semidiameter of the circle in
the breadth above half an Inch: the one of them must have a flit through the
length thereof, of about a quarter of an Inch broad, as you shall think
convenient, and two little holes, the one in the top, and the other in the
bottom, just in the middle of it, to fasten a string, having a very little bead
to slide up and down upon it. And this sight must be of thicker stuff then the
other; for otherwise because of that which is cut out it would be overpoised by
the other, and so the box would swarve toward the other; and the sights must
each of them have a little notch in the midst of the top of them: this Ruler
must be fastened (but yet so that he may turn about) in the middle of the cross
plate most precisely in the center of the circle, his ends cut, that he may
show the Fiducial Line in the divisions of the circle, the other sight needs
to be but a plain plate, having a line in the middle, from the top to the
bottom, being the very same in substance with that which we call the compass of
variation; although in all things easier performed with this, then with that.

The Compass being thus fitted, place the circular Needle upon his pin alone,
without any fly. For, being disburdened of the Card, he will show his virtue
the more strongly, and being of the right form, he will balance himself
sufficiently.

Place the circle upon the Glass and Past-board; in such a manner that you may
turn the circle round about, very close and even, within the brim of the box.

When you will set the same unto the Compass, turn the circle about, until
thorough the Loops of the middle stay or plate, you see the Axis of the Needle
right under the Fiducial Line of the middle stay, then holding the circle so,
turn the moveable Ruler with the stringed sight toward the Sun, until the
shadow of the string fall upon the Fiducial Line of the moveable Ruler, for
then does the end of the Ruler, among the degrees, show the true place or
azimath of the Sun from the Magnetical Meridian, so that two observations
necessarily arise from hence, the one in the Forenoon, the other in the
Afternoon, thus made, with the several heights of the Sun, being one and the
very same, half the differances of those places of the Sun, from the Magnetical
Needle is the variation.

If a man have no exact Instrument to take the height of the Sun, he may make
some reasonable shift, by setting the middle bead toward the top of the
string, that it may in the Forenoon cast a shadow upon the Fiducial Line of
the Ruler; and marking that place with Ink or Black-Lead, in the Afternoon
attend, until the shadow of the bead (the bead remaining still where it was
full upon the place) for then shall you have that same height, if you will take
the amplitude of the Suns rising or setting, set the circle, and turn the Ruler
as before, until the shadow of the string do fall upon the middle Line of the
other sight. Then does the end of the Ruler show how far the Sun rises or
sets from the Magnetical Meridian.

When you will take the Amplititude of the rising or setting of any Star, you
must use the help of another, to hold the circle over the Needle (as before)
and so you turning of the Ruler, until you see the Star in his rising or
setting, through the two notches on the tops of the sights, then does the end
of the Ruler show your desire. The like is to be done in observing any cap, or
the tendings of any Land for the description of any Coast.

The Horizontical and Inclinatory motions of Magnetical Needles are both of
them but one and the same effect of the Magnet or Lodestone, the making of the
Horizontical or Dial-Needle, it is amongst our Artificers very well known and
trivial, only they are to be put in mind that they do always make them of pure
Steel and not of Iron. But as for the making of Inclinatory Needles, it is a
very curious piece of work: it must be of pure Steel, and in his right temper,
the Needle and Axis must be as right Angles the one with the other, and must be
so hanged on the two ends of his Axis, that he be very pliant for his motion,
and that before (he have his touch) he be so equally balanced, that the one
end be not one jot heavier then the other, for if it be, all the rest is in
vain.

When you will use the inclinatory Instrument, thus you must do, hanging by his
little Ring, turn him about until he make his least declination (or
inclination) under the Horizon of the Instrument: for then is he just in his
Magnetical Meridian, and there shows his due point, the which otherwise he
can never do. But here I must forewarn you of two great errors published in
the contriving of this Noble Instrument. The one is, that he would have a
little box with a Horizontical Needle fastened unto the bottom of the
Inclinatory Instrument: for to direct the Instrument unto the Magnetical
Meridian; and by his picture of the Instrument his distance should be but a
little more then an Inch, whereby it is impossible but that the one Needle must
needs disturb the other, so that neither of them can show a right, yea,
although they were six Inches assunder and more, where the little box will give
little direction for that purpose: and besides that, it is altogether
unnecessary, because the Instrument will find the Magnetical Meridian, by the
least declination of the Needle (as is before showed) under the Horizon,
without the help of any other. The other error is this, that he would have
that end of the Needle prepared to hang toward the North, to be framed
somewhat higher then the other, as it is usual in Horozontical needles; what
Workman soever observes this Direction, I will assure him, that he shall loose
his labor, and as soon may he wash a Blackamore white, as to make such a
needle as that turn. The reason is, because it is only the Magnetical Virtue
that works this effect, the which over-weight, in the either end of the
needle (in this Motion) does utterly overthrow.

For Horozontical needles in our Northern Climates, it is necessary; but for
inclinatory needles, it is utterly untrue in all Climates of the whole World
wheresoever. The Motion of the Horozontical needle, is naturally stronger then
the Inclinatory, for two causes, the one is, because his Motion is only
side-ways, the which is the easier for the Magneaical Motion to work in, then
that which is up and down, and there is no difference which way you place the
Box wherein he stands, so that it be parallel to the Horizon; whereas the
Inclinatory Motion is in a Vertical Circle up and down, and must stand only in
his Magnetical Meridian to perform his Office. The other cause, is because of
the Diversity of their placing in their Boxes; for the Horizontical needle
stands more fitter for his Motion, being placed with his Capital upon the
point of a sharp Pin, than the Inclinatory can do, being placed upon the two
ends of his Axis, although never so near the Points: But yet he will do very
well if he be rightly fitted? and for Navigation under either Pole (if there be
any passage that way) it is the only Instrument of the World, for where the
Horozontical needle (or Compass) fails, he is strongest, for the nearer the
Pole, the stronger he is in his ^otion; contrariwise, it is with the
Horozontical needle or compass, for he is strongest at the Equinoctial, and of
no force under the Pole.

The reason whereof is this, under the Equinoctial the Horozontical needle
stands parallel unto the Axis of the Earth, and is equally strengthened for
his Motion with the two Poles of the Earth; but under the Poles, he stands
cross-wise at right Angles with the Axis, his Center representing the very Pole
of the Earth it self; so that the Equinoctial, and the Horizon being there all
one, if the needle should have any Horozontical Motion there, it must needs be
an East or West Motion parallel unto the Equinoctial, directly contrary to
Nature, and to all Magnetical Doctrine.

Yet at the Pole the Inclinatory needle is at his chiefest strength, framing
himself to be in the same direct Line with the Axis of the Earth it self: so
that the Vicinity of the nearest Pole of the Earth, holds his convenient end
of the needle most strongly, being nothing at all hindered by the adverse Pole,
to affect the upper (or other) end of the needle: The which all other
Scituations either more or less it does, and especially under the Equinoctial,
where each Pole affecting his convenient end of the Inclinatory needle, it must
stand very untowardly and unsteadily for that Motion; although most strongly
for the Horizontical if you place him accordingly.

Where hence it follows, that near the Equinoctial Large Compasses, and small
Inclinatories are fittest; and near the Poles large Inclinatories, and small
Compasses are best, for look unto what Motion the Magnetical force is weakest,
the smaller Instrument ought to be applied.

And moreover, forasmuch as the Magnetical Revolution of the Inclinatory
needle, about the Globe of the Earth makes his Motion for the difference of
every alteration of Latitude to the Equinoctial, far more large and easier to
be discerned, then it can be near the Poles; therefore (as we have said) a less
Instrument will serve the turn there: and because that near the Pole, his
Motion for differences of Latitudes are exceeding small, and hard to be
discerned: Therefore very large Instruments Inclinatory are there to be used,
especially because the Magnetical strength of the the Needle for that Motion,
is there so strong and steady, that it makes some Recompense for the slowness
of his moving; and therefore I suppose that three in Diameter, will serve near
the Equinoctial, and fifteen near the Pole.

And because this great one may be the less cumbersome, you may cut off the
Circle at forty and five Degrees of each side of the Zenith and Nadir of the
Instruments, and yet leave the needle scope enough, for all the Latitudes
between sixty Degrees and the Pole; and for the steady standing of the
Inclinatory Instrument at Sea, you may do thus; about the middle of the
Instrument (or rather somewhat above the middle) let there be two round Pins of
Brass, about three quarters of an Inch long, issue out; and in a Box of a
sailing Compass, the miner Circle being taken away, make of each side two half
round notches in the outer Circle, and place the Instrument upon those two
Pins, the which must have toward their ends, little Circles cut in; that they
slip not out of their rings that they are placed in; then will this Instrument
stand as steady even at Sea, as the sailing Compass will do; for the Motion of
the miner Circle is performed by the turning of those two Pius in their
notches, and the outer Circle is common unto them both, always remembering that
you hang some pretty weight on the bottom of the Instrument, to make his Motion
more certain: If the shadowing of the box hinder your sight from discerning of
the Point that the needle stands at, it is soon helped with the light of a
little wax Candle put down unto it; and yet this you ought to understand as
aforesaid, that the Horozontical and Inclinatory Motions are but one and the
self same Effect of the touch of the Lodestone, and one and the self same
needle will very well perform both Motions; namely, the Inclinatory needle, not
the Horizontical, because his placing upon the Pin makes him very unfit for
the Inclinatory Motion. But the Inclinatory needle resting with one point of
his Axis (the points of his Axis being very sharp) in his little hole, his box
being placed parallel to the Horizon, will perform the Horizontical Motion very
well. For being placed with the sharp point of the Axis in that hole, it is all
one in effect, as the Horizontical is with his Capital on the sharp point of
his Pin, but that the one is upward, and the other downward, and yet either of
them being as fit for that Motion, as the other.

Herein now appears the wonderful Wisdom of our God, in limiting his Times
and Seasons, for the Revealing of these wonderful Properties for the use of
Men, in the poor stone of the Magnes; namely, that (as some will have it) above
3000 years after that it was known and wondered at in the World, for lifting up
Iron; (for it was said to be, I know not upon what account, esteemed as an
Antiquity in Plato's time) the use of the Horizontical needle was not known in
common use, much above 200 years since; and very few years after, (yea scarcely
till of late) the Inclinatory has been in any common use: And who is there
that can behold and consider both these uses, viz. both to show the Quarters of
the World (as East, West, North and South, etc.) And also the Latitude of
place; to know both these in any place of the World, be the Heavens never so
much over-cast with Clouds; who is he I say, that can behold these two
admirable and precious uses performed, even with the turning of an hand; the
which, neither the Grecian Philosophers, nor the fine-witted Romans, nor the
Persian Magi, nor the Indian Cymnosophists, could find out with all their skill
and cunning, but he must needs say with that Kingly Prophet, O Lord, our Lord,
How great is thy Name through all the Earth? Who has set thy Glory above the
Heavens? He has made of one blood all Nations of men to dwell on the face of
the Earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the bound of
their habitation that they should seek to him.

If any shall have a mind to quarrel or write against that which I have so long
studied, and spent my time in; chiefly to comfort my Mind, and to be refreshed
in the Light of Truth, which is the food of the Soul, mixed with incredible
Delight: I shall desire that they will deal so fairly with me, as not out of
their fond Curiosity to nibble upon the Twigs and utmost Branches; but let them
do their worst strike at the Root or Body of the Tree, or at leastwise some of
the principal Limbs thereof: In the mean space, I have no more to say but this;
Whosoever thou art that read this Discourse, where thou art assured, go on
with me; where thou art in doubt, search with me; where thou do acknowledge
thy Error, recall me. Some per chance will conceive, that in writing such
secrets and wonderful Subjects, something may be amiss, some things may seem
superstuous or impertinent, although the dreadfullest Cynick or Crittick of
them all, cannot call them unprofitable or unpleasant: The pains is mine, and
if it be over done, done I am sure it is; If I have (in some men's Opinions)
said more than enough, the wiser and experter sort of men will think that there
is but enough said to serve the turn.

The Resolver of Curiosities, a no less admirable then profitable Discourse of
Local, as also of the Swift Motion of the Art of Navigation, of the due
proportion to be Observed in Building of Ships, of the Artificial Inventions of
several Engines; with a perfect discovery of other admirable Mathematical
Secrets.
AFTER the Art of Navigation was found, every man began to challenge to himself
the Dominion of the Sea, and to make War as on the Land.

Minos (as Strabo writes) first found out the Art of Navigation, and was
thereof (as writes Diodorus Siculus) appointed by Saturnus to be Admiral of
the Navy: and therefore the posterity afterward ascribed to him the government
of the Sea, and named him the God thereof. But most bestow this honor upon
Neptune. After whom the Cretenses were ever esteemed most expert in this Art.
But (as Pliny writes) Boats were first Invented, and in them was the first
Sailing in the Islands of the Red Sea, under King Erythra. As also Quintilian
witnesses, saying, If none had proceeded further then our Predecessors, we had
nothing in the Poets above Andronicus, and nothing in the Histories above some
peculier Chronicles of the Ancients, and we had yet have Sailed in Troughes or
in Beats. Others have ascribed this Invention to diverse of other Nations and
Persons: as to the Trojans and Myssans in Hellespo^: some write that the
Ancient Britains made Boats of Leather or Hydes, and sailed with them in the
Ocean. Pliny writes that Danus was the first that brought a Ship into Egypt
out of Greece. Some also give this honor to Mineru^. But most rightfully, the
Invention both of the Ship and the Art of Navigation, is ascribed to Noah, who
(as writes Eusebius) was long before Neptune or Danus. For doubtless (says
he) the Ark of Noah was none other then a Ship, and the first and only exemplar
of the building of all other Ships or Vessels of Sailing. Aso the most Ancient
writer Berosus the Chaldean (as writes Josephus) calls the Ark of Noah a
Ship. The same Josephus also says, that the Nephews of Noah, departing to
Inhabit diverse parts of the World, used many Ships, etc. Long after Noah the
Tyrians were counted expert in the Art of Navigation: and after them, diverse
other Nations. For whereas no Art is so perfect, but may receive increase,
therefore it follows that this Art has been greatly augmented and brought to
further perfection by the witty Inventions of Posterity, even unto our Age. And
amongst all other curious Inventions pertaining to Ships, the Mariners Compass
is most admirable. Some notwithstanding have been found, who have thought this
Invention Ancient. Levinus Lemnius in his Third Book and fourth Chapter de
occultis Naturae Miraculis seems to doubt of it. An hoc Instrumentum Nauticum
Miraculis superioribus seculis extitit, an nostro id aevo excogitatum: whether
this Instrument of Navigation were in being in former Ages, or found out in
later times, I cannot certainly define. Now that which chiefly causes them to
make a doubt thereof, is those words of Plautus, Hic ventus nunc secundus est,
cape modo versoriam: where, by Versoriam, Lemnius would have us to understand
the Mariners Compass, and then adds, quanquam ut Opinor hoc pixidicula nostro
jam tempore mages exculta sit, Elimata, Expolita, omni^que exactius demonstret,
as in the same Chapter he speaks of Printing. But for Plantus I dare say he was
never guilty of such a meaning: Turnebus by Versoriam understanding the Rope
with the Sail, others the Rudder, with which the Ship is turned: neither of
which are impertinent or improbable, so as there is no necessity of applying it
to the Mrriners Compass. Stephen Pasquier in his 4th Book and 23th Chapter of
his Recherches of France brings it up as high as the times of St. Lewis by the
Verses of one Hugh de Bercy, who lived in his Reign, and as he pretends plainly
describes it; but whether the words are so plain as he makes them, or whether
they were published by some other since Bercy, but in his Name, is very
uncertain, especially since no Poet or Historiographer contemporary with him,
or more Ancient then he, are found to make mention thereof; and yet Lewis dyed
not much above 300 years since. Pineda the Spaniard in his Lib. 4th de rebus
Solomonis for the more commodious placing of Tharshes in Spain, is confident
that it was in Solomon's time, making his universal wisdom and deep insight into
the nature of all things, the principal ground of his opinion: But Solomon's
wisdom though it were universal and deep, beyond all the Children of the East,
insomuch, as God gave him Latitudinem cordis, a large Heart, as the Sand on the
Sea shore, yet was it finite and limited as well in things natural as
supernatural. I doubt not but Adam in the State of his Integrity knew more then
Solomon, and yet I dare not pronounce him Omniscious, that being an attribute
(as is likewise Omnipotency, Ubiquity, and Eternity) individually proper to
the Godhead, and incommunicable to any created substance, though mearly
incorporeal, whether they be the damned or the blessed Spirits. If then the
Holy Angles, if Adam in Paradise knew not all things; nay, if the Son of God
himself, as he was Man, confesses himself to be Ignorant of some things, why
should we then think it strange to affirm, that Solomon knew not all things. If
there be such a secret as the Artificial Transmutation of other Metals into
Gold, (which by the experiments of many is confidently avouched) it is more
then probable that he was Ignorant of it; for had he knew it, he needed not to
have sent his Navy to Ophir or Tharshis for Gold; as likewise had he known the
secret of the Loadstone, his Navy needed not to have spent three years in going
and coming, neither should his Mariners have needed to have craved the
assistance of the Tyrians and Sydonians, as Pilots for the better conducting of
them in their Voyage. I conclude then that either Solomon knew not this secret,
or if he knew it he put it not into practice, or if he put it in practice, it
was since lost and recovered again, which to me seems the strangest of all.

Now to the Authority of these three, who plead for the Antiquity of this
Invention, may be opposed thirteen, and those in Learning nothing inferious,
maintaining it to have been an Invention of latter Ages, unknown to the
Ancients, as Acosta, Mariana, Maluenda, Gomara, Turnebus, Pancirollus, Salmuth,
Lillius, Giraldus, Cardan, Bozius, Bodin, Ramus. And to these might be added
many more, were I ambitious in mustering up of Names, or did the cause require
it. For questionless this our Age may not only seem to contend with the
Ancients, but also for many goodly Inventions of Art and Wit, do far exceed
them, not to speak of all the marvelous Inventions of our times (as we have
already discoursed of the Mariners Compass) much also might be said of the
invention of Printing, and making of Guns, Fireworks, and of sundry Artificial
Fires, of such marvelous force that Mountains of most hard Rocks and Stones are
not able to resist their violence, that neither the Spirit of Demogorgon, or
the Thunderbolt of Infernal Pluto can do the like. What should I here speak of
the wonderful Inventions of Fattalio in his Book de Art Majori: or of any
other whereof Vanucius Peringocius writheth in his Book Entitled Pyrotechnie.
As touching which terrible inventions, and the like, although men are of
Opinion that they were Invented by the Instigation of the Devil, for the
destruction of Mankind: yet others weiging the matter more indifferently, think
that the Invention of Guns has been the occasion of the saving of many men's
Lives, because before the Invention and Use of them, men were wont to lie a
long time a battering of Walls, Towns, Castles, but in short time it comes to
hand, strokes, with which the Aries, Onagri, Catwpulta, or Balistae, Engines
of the Ancients) which I know not very well how to English, they being grown
for the most part out of use) are no way comparable, nec ulla ex part, huic
conferendus est antiquus Aries, veres inferiores habebat, et difficilus ad
muros adigebat, says Patricius, the Ram anciently for Battery, is in no sort
to be compared with this Engine, it has less strength, and more difficulty
there was in bringing it, and applying of it to the Walls: And Bodin in the
like purpose, (though herein perhaps he jump not with Lipseus in his
Poliorcetica) omitto Catapulta Veterum et antiqua belli termenta, quae si cum
nostris conferantur sanc pueritia quaedam Ludricra videri possint: I pas over
the Engines of the Ancients, which being compared with ours, are rather
Childish toys then Instruments for War. And Lipsius himself calls it, Geniorum,
non hominum inventum, an Invention of Spirits and not of Men. Such is the force
(as we have in part said) of these Modern Engines, that they not only destroy
Men, but cast down Walls, Rampires, Towers, Castles, Cities, and shake the
Tallest Ships into shivers, there being nothing that comes within their reach
that can stand them. It was a piece almost of Incredible bigness, which by
Mahomets command was employed against Constantinople, ad quem trahendum
adhibantur septuaginta juga boum, et his mill viri, as witnesses Chalcondilus
in his Eighth Book de Relus Turcicis, for the drawing of which were employed
seventy Yoke of Oxen, and two Thousand Men. It is true there is nothing more
mischievous to Besieged Cities, and so there is nothing that helps them more
for the chasing away of the Beseigers; it being so for the most part in all
things, which either the Art or Wit of man, or God and Nature has framed, that
the more helpful they are being well used, the more hurtful are they being
abused: then Fire and Water there are no things more commodious to the Life of
Man, yet is the Proverb true, that when they are once enraged, and pass their
bounds, they become Merciless, Good Servants, but bad Masters. The Tongue is
said by Aesop to be the best and worst Meat that comes to the Market: for with
it we both bless God and curse Men, says St. James. And Iron by Pliny is
rightly termed, Optimum, possimumque vitae instrumentum, the best and worst
Instrument belonging to Man. But sure it is that God in his Providence has
reserved this Engine for these times, that by the cruel Force and terrible
Roaring of it, Men might the rather be deterred from assaulting one another in
Warlike and Hostile manner; I am of Opinion (as I have already expressed) that
since the invention and use thereof, fewer have been slain in the Wars then
before. Neither does it serve (as is commonly objected) to make Men Cowards,
but rather hardens them. For he that dares present himself to the Mouth of a
Cannon, cannot fear the Face of Death in whatsoever shape it present it self.

Howsoever some have not been wanting, who would bear us in hand that this
Invention is not of Latter times, but Ancient; among whom Sir Walter Raleigh is
one, who in his History of the World, Lib. 1. Sect. 7. refers not only the
Invention of Printing, but of Guns too, and Ordinance of Battery to the
Indians, grounding himself herein upon the report of the Portugals: and hereby,
says he, we are now made to understand, that the place of Philostratus in Vita
Apolony Fianei, is no Fable, though expressed in Fabulous words, when he says,
that the Wisemen which dwell between Hypthesis and Ganges use not themselves to
go forth to Battle, but that they drive away their Enemies with Thunder and
Lightning. But herein I can say nothing, choosing with Camerarius, potius
credere quam cum-molestia experiri, rather to believe it, then to endure the
hazard and trouble of it to make the trial of it. Others refer it to
Solmoneus, as witnesses Levinius, induced thereunto by these Verses of Virgil
Aneid. 5.

Vidi and crudeles, dantem Salmonea paenos,
Dum flammas Jovis, and sonitus imitatur Olympi.
Quatuor hic invectus, equis ac Lampada quassans,
Per Graium populos, mediaque per Elidis urbem
Ibat Ovans; divum fibi poscebat Honores
Demens qui Nimbos, and non imitabile fulmen,
Aere and Cornipedum cursu simulabat equorum
I saw Salmoneus there endure
Most cruel Pains, and great;
For that he dared the Flames of Jove,
And Thunder counterfeit.
In Chariot drawn with Horses four.
Shaking a fiery brand
Through midst of Elis Town he rode,
And through all Grecian Land
Triumphing wise: and to himself
Audaciously did take
Honors Divine. Mad frantic man
That did not inlye quake;
With Horn-foot-Horses, and brass Wheels
Joves Thunders emulate,
And Lightnings impossible
For man to imitate.
But Servius in his Commentaries concieves, that this imitation of Thunder was
by driving his Chariot over a brazen Bridge; and if he used an Engine, it seems
to have been rather for Rattling and Terror, then for any real Effect. And
whereas great Ordinance exceed Thunder, this was such that it came far short of
it; And therefore as Rota has well expressed, the Poet calls it.

-- non imitabile fulmen. But this I leave as a very uncertain ground for the
ancient Invention of this Engine. Petarch and Valturius upon better show of
reason (as they conceive) refer it to Archimedes, found out (as they pretend)
by him for the overthrow of Marcellos Ships at Syracuse Siege. But it were
strange that both Plutarch and Livy, who have written largely of his admirable
Wit and wonderful Engines; and particularly of the Siege of that City, should
among the rest forget this rare Invention, and yet more strange, that the
Romans upon the taking of the City, should not take it up and make use of it:
Nay, as Magius (who has written a Chapter to this purpose, to refute them who
refer this Invention to the Ancients) has observed; neither Heron, nor Pappus,
nor Athenens, nor Biton in their Manuscripts of the Mechanics (for printed
they are not) have described any such Engines, nor Aegidias Romanus, (who lived
and wrote in the Reign of Philip the fair King of France) about the year 1285)
where he treats purposely of Warlike Engines and Instruments: yet remembers not
any such thing. Brightman in his Exposition on the Revelation of St. John,
tells us that by the Fire, and Smoke, and Brimstone which in that place are
said to have issued out of the Mouths of the Horses, are to be understood, our
Powder and Guns now in use, and that of them St. John prophesied, But how these
are said to issue out of the Mouths of Horses, he does not well express, nor I
think well understood.

The Common Opinion then is, that this device was first found out by a Monk of
Germany, whose name many Writers affirm to be deservedly lost; but Forcatulus
in his fourth book of the Empire and Philosophy of France names him Berthold
Swartes of Cullen, and Salmuch Constantine Anklitzen of Friburg: Howsoever they
all agree that he was a German Monk, and that by chance a spark of Fire falling
into a pot of Niter, which he had prepared for Physic or Alchimy, and causing
it to fly up, he thereupon made a Composition of Powder, with an Instrument of
Brass or Iron, and putting the fire to it found the Conclusion to answer his
Expectation. The first public use of Guns that we read of, was thought to be
about the year 1380. as Magius, or 1400 as Ramus, in a battle betwixt the
Venetians and Genoways, fought at Clodia Fossa, in which the Venetians having
from the Monk belike, gotten the use of Guns, so galled their Enemies, that
they saw themselves wounded and slain; and yet knew not by what means, nor how
to prevent it, as Platina witnesses in the Life of Vrbane the sixth. And
Levalla in his second Book and 34th chapter of his Ellegancies, (which as
himself testifies) he wrote in the year 1438. says that the Gun grew in use not
long before his time: his Words are, Nuper inventa est Machina quam Bombardum
vocant, The Engine which they call the Gun was lately found out. And Petarch
who lived some time before him to the like purpose in his 99th Dialogue of his
Remedies of both Fortunes, though therein I confess he seem to cross himself,
Erat hac pestis nuper rara, ut cum ingenti Miraculo cerneretur: This pestilent
device was lately so rare, that it was beheld with mavelous great
Astonishment. Yet (...) have seen the Copy of a Record, that great Ordinanc^
were brought by the French to the battery of a Castl^ or Fort called Outhwyke,
near to Callico, and then in the possession of the English, the first year of
Richard the Second; of which Fort, one William Weston was Captain, and being
questioned in Parliament for yielding up the Fort, he did in his excuse
allege, that the Enemies brought to the Battery thereof, nine pieces des
grosses Canons, par les quelles, les mures, and les Measons da dit Chastel,
Junen rentes, and percusses en plusiens Lieux. of great Canons, by means
whereof the Walls and Houses of the said Castle were in diverse places rent in
sunder, and sorely battered; and in another place he terms them huge most
grievous, and admirable Ordinance; nay more then so, I am credibly informed,
that a Commission is to be seen for making of Saltpeter in Edward the thirds
time, and another Record of Ordinance used at that time, some twenty years
before his Death; by all which it should appear, that either the Invention of
Guns was sooner than it was commonly conceived, or that our Nation and the
French had the use of it with the first: Howsoever it is most clear, that at
leastwise in these parts of the World, this Invention was not known till in
latter Ages. But to continue our discourse of Engines and ingenious Inventions,
used and invented for the Glory of God, against the Tyranny of Turks and
Infidels, for the Defense of his People; we may rightly say of them, that they
were the Gifts of God, as were the Inventions or Art of them that either
builded the Temple of Jerusalem, or the Ark of God: And yet is it there written
of these Artificers, that God gave them the Spirit of Knowledge and cunning in
such Arts. And therefore I think it may be also said without offense, that the
Knowledge of Archimedes, and other men of such commendable Inventions, are the
Gifts of God free, and not bound to any Nation or Person.

Besion, that excellent Geometrician of our late times, who was master of the
Engines to the French King, Pub^ished a book in Print, concerning the Forms and
Pour^raicture of sixty Engines of mavelous strange and ^rofitable device, for
diverse commodious and necessary ^ses, of which forasmuch as three of them, that
is to ^ay, the '54, 57, and 60. are Engines chiefly pertaining to Ships, I
shall in their due place discourse of them. My next design shall be to treat of
the Proportions of Local Motions, wherein to the most expert in Learning, I
shall show the Errors of Aristotle by Words and Demonstrations, and that
modestly, for I repute Aristotle for the chief of Philosophers. Yet for that it
is ^umane to err, he also might sometimes fail. In the handling of which
Demonstrations, I shall not so apply ^y self to Philosophers, as not to
descend, so as to inform the Mariner, that he may learn many proper
Conclusions from thence most necessary for his Know^edge, and afterward
proceed to other rare Mathe^atical Secrets of other Engines, and of the most
swift Motion by the Art of Navigation.

First of all, before we shall touch the point of De^onstra^ion of Proportions,
of Motions Local; we are ^o take Notice that of Bodies being of one and ^he
same ^ind, the like and self-same is the proportion between Quantities, which
is also between Heaviness or Light^ess, either simply or in respect to other,
it makes ^e matter it is enough, that among them whose Pro^ortions we shall
consider by Quantity, among the same ^kewise we shall understand by Heaviness
and Light^ess, etc. Let there be for Example two bodies of ^ead, and uneq^al.
As A and E. of the which the Bo^y A, shall be trible in Qu^ntity to the Body E;
for of (...) the Multiplications of the Body, let no man be de^ived: for many
have thought the Sphere to be Du^^icate, when the Diameter is Duplicate, which
is a ^^eat Error, as appears in the 15. of the 12th of Euclide. For there is
showed that the Proportion of two ^pheres the one to the other, to be as it
were the Triplicate Proportion of the Diameter of the greater Sphere, to the
Diameter of the less; likewise also is showed in the 37. of the 12th, of solid
Bodies, Like and Equidistant Superficies. Furthermore, Albertus Durerus
speaks sufficiently of this in his 4. Book of Geometry, teaching the
Duplication of Cubus, etc. For then the same Body A, shall exceed the Body E,
in heavyness in triple Proportion. Note therefore the Weight A, and the Letter
B, and E, be signed F. and conceive in mind the Body A. to be divided into
three equal parts, that is to say, C, D, G, of the which parts, H, I, K. now is
it manifest for the Presupposition, that every part of C, D, G, in equality
shall correspond to the Body E. and shall weigh by common diagram showing
center of mass for systems of objects of porportional sizes Science, equally F.
which if it were not, every part of A should not be reputed Homogeny, or all of
one like substance with the Body E, and so should it repugn with the
presupposed. Therefore, forasmuch as H, I, K, together, is equivolent to B,
only by common Science, shall be also (by the 7. of the 5th) B, to F. the same
that is H, I, K. to the same F. but the Weight of H, I, K. is triple to F. by
which reason the Proposition is manifest.

I will now make Demonstration how Bodies of the self-same, or one kind and
Figure, equal or unequal one to the other, in the same midst or mean, by equal
spa^^, be moved in one or self-some-time; the which is against Aristotle, and
all other Philosophers, that have not yet seen this Proposition. Aristotle
first, in the 4th of his Phisickes Cap. de Vacuo, where he intends to show,
that if Vacuum or Void be granted, Moving or Motion, is taken away, etc. He
there says thus, We see those Bodies which have more Heaviness or Lightness;
So that they be one Figure, to be more swiftly moved by equal space, and by
such proportion as they have the one to the other. And therefore they are so
moved per Vacuum, etc. which is proved to be false. Furthermore, what St.
Thomas Aquinas says touching this; any man that will, may read; for no man
better understood the mind of Aristotle. But for the Examples, that Simplicius
and Averroes give to the understanding of this (by two Spherical Bodies of
equal Quantity, but of diverse kinds, as one of Gold, and the other of Silver)
we must not therefore say, that he understood this Proposition as I will
demonstrate. For they should have said somewhat of the Equality of the Quantity
of those Bodies; forasmuch as the Motion of Bodies, equal and unequal, is all
one, so that they be all one Figure: As for Example, If there be three
Spherical Bodies, of the which two are of Gold, and the third Silver, and they
of the Gold are unequal, and the other of Silver equal to one of the Golden
Bodies; then in the same Proportion of time, shall be moved the Golden Body
equal to that of Silver, with Silver Body, with the Golden uneqal, as shall be
declared hereafter. Furthermore, 6 Physic Cap. 1. in the end, and in a manner
through all the Chapter of the same Book, he confirms the same: but in the
fourth he says thus, whereas every thing that moves, moves in some other,
and in some time, and that moveable is Motion of the whole, the same or all one
shall be the Divisions of the time and the moving, and of to be moved, and of
that which is moved as also of that in the which is moving. Afterward he gives
Demonstration after his manner, but Cap, 7. he wills the same, where he
intends, that infinite time, nothing may pass into infinite greatness, etc.
Furthermore Aristotle in his first Book, de Calo, confirms the same, saying
simply, that the Reason or Consideration of times, is contrary to the reason of
weights; as if half a weight be moved in this time, the double is moved in the
half of this, etc. And this Cap. 6. furthermore, Cap. 8. of the same Book he
says, the Fire in as much as it is greater then the Earth, so much the sooner
and swiftlyer it comes to its resting place, etc.

Also in his Second Book, de Calo, Cap. 8. he says thus: As in other things,
the greater Body is the more swiftly moved by his proper course or motion, even
so also in the Heavenly Circles, and again Cap. 13. he affirms the same in
two places, saying that the greater Earth, is swiftlyer moved.

Item, Lib. de Carlo Cap. 2. He says thus, if according to the Proportion
which has the space of C D. the Body of B shall be divided, all B in the same
time shall be moved by C E, in the which time part of B by C D, of necessity:
Wherefore it follows that B be moved by swifter Motion then part of B.
Afterward he makes a like Demonstration, saying thus, The swiftness of the
less to the swiftness of the greater, has such Proportions as the greater Body
to the less, etc. Again in his 3d. Book de Carlo cap. 5. In the end of it he
says likewise, that so much the more every thing is moved, as it is the
greater, as also the Fire, the greater it is, is so much of swifter Motion,
etc. he confirms the same cap. 2. and 4th. of the same Book, where yet
speaking more clearly, he faith, That the greater Fire rises swiftlye^ upwards
than a less; and a greater piece of Gold or Lead, does swiftlyer move
downwards, and the like of heavyer Bodies; and more clearly can no man gather
the meaning of Aristotle.

Vitelio, in his second Book of Perspective, in the second Proposition, has
fallen into the same Error. I pretermit his Ignorance in that Proposition where
he thinks that there is no Quantity insensible: But let this pass with other
Errors, the which at another time shall be showed in their place. He that will
read other Philosophers, shall see that they all accord with the mind and
Sentence of Aristotle, who also in diverse other places confirms the same: but
to have Rehearsed these principal places, may suffice, and therefore we shall
now come to the Demonstration.

This propounded Demonstration, I will show apparently, that it may the better
be understood, and forasmuch as Aristotle in his work De insidentibus Aquae,
has spoken nothing of the Proportion of Motion of Elements, it is manifest
that he has not yet searched this Proposition; for there was the proper place
of this matter. But it is not granted to any one man to know all things: and
therefore it was very difficult to many to imagine the Supposition, whereas
Archimedes makes none other Demonstration, but that natural Motion is not
caused of any other then of the Excess or proceeding of a Body in an Element,
above or upon the said Element.

The Demonstration
Let be for Example two Bodies, G and O, both alike (that is) Spherical and
Homogenie (that is) altogether of like substance: of the which O shall exceed G
in Quadruple Proportion, (for if it shall exceed it in Quantity, it shall also
exceed in Heaviness as is said before) and that the Mean or Middle be Uniform,
as B D F M V. For Example; Let the termining Lines be Equidistant, and the same
also circular upon the Center S, then by the termining Line, from whence, let
pass or be drawn the Line P I D, and by the termining Line to whom let pass the
Line R M V T. Thus I conclude, the Bodies G and O to be moved in equal time by
the said space, by the Motion of Nature in the foresaid Mean: but if the body O
were equal to the body G, there were no doubt, but that those bodies should be
moved in equal time by the same space, etc. I will therefore by imagination
divide the body O into four equal parts, like unto their whole: Let be
therefore those parts signified by the Letters, H K L N. whose Centers (for
Example) I will put in the Line P O, so that the distance betwixt H and K, by
the same that is between L N. I will also divide the Line K L, by Equality, by
the the 29 of the third of Euclide in the point I, which shall be the Center of
the heaviness of the bodies H K, and L N. by common Science maintained, by the
third Proposition of the Book of Archimedes, De centris granium. Furthermore it
is manifest, that every one of the Bodies, H K L N, shall be moved in equal
time from the termining Line or space of P I O, to the termining Line R V M T,
to that in which is G, passing together from and at the same instant, shall be
moved equally, that is to say, in equal time, and ever the Line passing by
their Centers, shall be distant to the Line R M V T. Finally if the Line be
understood by the Center I, and the body O divided by Equality or equal
Distance, then the point of Division, shall be the Center of the weight H K L N
and O, by the aforesaid, but now if that Line be understood to be moved by the
force of the aforesaid bodies, and Demissed from the Line P O, or equidistant
to it, for then also should M V R T. be equidistant by common Sense; M V R T,
and the body O, in equal time by the motion of Nature, shall be moved by the
granted space, to that in the which the bodies H K L N, shall be moved for
distance of the Mean to the bodies H K L N, is the same which is to the body O.
But that this may appear, diagram depicting center of mass for a system of
objects

Let it be thus understood. Let us imagine (for example) two bodies of Water:
of which, the one shall be equal to the body O, and the other to the body G, or
to one of the bodies N L K H, which shall be all one: then sixteen of the fifth,
the proportion of O to G, or one of the aforesaid bodies, is the same which is
of the waterie equal O, to the waterie equal G, by the proposition declared
before. The proportion of the waterie body equal O, the heaviness of the watery
body equal G, is the same which is between the quantities of the self same
bodies: but we must understand them to be sustained or weighed in a rarer or
thinner Element. The proportion thereof shall be the same which shall be
between the proportion of bodies D and G, by the eleventh of the fifth; the
aforesaid proportion being thereto. Furthermore let us imagine the heaviness of
bodies, O and G, so the other gravities and heaviness, shall be those which
shall be moved without impepiment, as appears by the 7 of Archimedes, de
insidentibus Aquae.

And whereas by the fifteenth of the fifth of Euclide, the proportion of these
heav^^ bodies is the ^a^e which is beetween D and G, by the nineteenth of the
fifth aforesaid: the resistance of the mean or middle to D shall be quadruple to
the resistance of G. The same also do I say to every one of the bodies N L K H.
It appears by common Science, that resistance of the mean to the bodies N L K
H, is equal to that which is to the body D, but is the same to which G by the
first conception of Euclide. Furthermore, if there be two bodies all of one
figure, but of diverse homogeneite or substance, and of unequal corporality, and
(for example) either of them heavier than the mean or the middle, in the which
they are moved, and that also the lesser of them be heavier then the bigger,
yet that the greater weigh more then the less, then I say, that the less shall
be swifter in motion: and the same shall be the proportion of time to the less,
which is to the greater, which is also the greater kind of heaviness to the
kind of the less, taking away so much heaviness from both, as is the half of
every of them. Let it be for Example, two bodies M and N of the same form, and
diverse homogeneite or substance, and the same also to be unequal (for of equals
there is no doubt) of the which the greater shall be M, but of the kind of the
body N, to be heavier than the kind of the body M; putting the case also, that
the body M, be heavier than the body N, and each of them all heavier than the
mean or middle body, by which they move, then will I show the proportion.
Understand first A V J. to be equal and like figure to the body M, but of the
kind of the body N. Let Us imagine also that the body M in heaviness, to exceed
the middle or mean in double proportion A V J, or in the eighth proportion: so
then the moving of the body A V J, shall in the seveth proportion be swifter
then the body M, because the resistance of the body M is subdupla, and to the
body A V J is suboctupla, by the seventh of Archimedes de insidentibus Aquae.
But by the aforesaid demonstration, the body M shall be moved in the same time
which the body A V I. Wherefore by the the first conception of the mind added
upon Euclide by Companus, the proposition is dear.

diagram demonstrating physics of interacting objects of various masses

The like reason is also of violent motions, taking the proportion of the
moving strengths, and taking away the proportion of the half or middle. Also,
whereas are two equal Angles about the Horizon, or under, but in contrary
motion of Nature, because violent motion is swifter in the beginning than in the
end, and the contrary chances in the motion of Nature: for with violent
motion, the motion of Nature is ever somewhat mixed, if Horizontically or
Angulerly it shall be above or beneath the Horizon: and Nature works so much,
until it bring violent motion to some end. But if the Perpendicularly Violence
shall be made about the Horizon, and toward the place which that body
naturally moves unto, then Nature cannot strive against or withstand, but that
Violence does ever go with it, in respect of the end from whence. Furthermore,
by the aforesaid, it is manifest, that to be false which Aristotle says 7
Phisic. in the last Chapter, where he says, if A be that which moves B, and B
that which is moved, and C the Longitude whereby, and D in which the motion is,
that is to say, in equal time and power equal. A the half of B, shall move by
the double of C, and C in the half of D, for so shall be the similitude of the
reason, etc. That it is false I will thus demonstrate. Let us first imagine two
bodies as before, in any mean or middle homogenie, etc. And let ns for example,
M and N, and that M be double in quantity to the Body N, and that the weigt of
N be with one of the weight of M; and also that the body A V I, be equal to the
body M in quantity, and in likeness or kind of the body N; then by common
Science, the body of A V I shall be double in heaviness to the body M. And
granting that the body M by double in heaviness above the half, then shall the
body A V I be quadruple in heaviness above the said half. Wherefore the
resistance taken away, let be left the time in which the body A V I be
quadruple in heaviness above the said half. Wherefore the resistance taken
away, let be left the time in which the body A V I in the same time shall be
moved the body N, by the aforesaid. Or if in the same time the body N, shall be
moved with the body M, yet the space by which N shall be triple to that by
which M. for the reasons are all one of violent motions. The same shall
precisely come to pass, if instead of the excess of weight above the half, we
shall take the virtue or power of moving, etc. as before.

Arristotle likewise erreth in his 4 Physic. Chap. 8. Where he discourses de
Vacue, saying that the same, or else all one, shall be the proportion of
motions of any body by diverse Elements. As if the Air be in subtilty double to
the water, in double time B. The mean shall Pass to that time, in which by the
mean D and C, the it me shall be double of the time E and C. Now to show the
Error of Aristotle, let us first understand, a body to pass through Water by
natural motion, as (for example) by a granted space, let us also imagine that
body in double to exceed the water in the weight, and that the Water in
heaviness exceed the Air in double proportion, then the granted body shall be
quadruple to the Air. Wherefore in the haviness the resistance of time taken
away, in the which the motion of that body in the Air, by equal space to that,
by the which in Water to the time wherein by Water in the granted space is
moved, the proportion shall be subtriple, and not subduple, as Aristotle
affirms. Aristotle also erreth in the same Chapter, supposing that if motion
should be granted in void, the same or all one, should be the reason of time
to time, as is between moving bodies, which is impossible by the aforesaid. For
those bodies should be moved is equal time, although they should be of diverse
kinds, forms and bigness. By which place also is easy to gather, that the mind
of Aristotle was, that the proportion of motion to motion, is the same thing
which greatnesses have between them, according to the heaviness and lightness
simply. But that this also may the more clearly be understood, imagine the
bodies M and N in void, and that the body N be of the same weight which A V I,
but of diverse kinds, and consequently of diverse bigness: then whereas those
bodies have no resistance, there is no doubt but that they shall be moved by
equal time, by equal space. I will take therefore the body A V I, of the kind
of the body N, but of quantity of the body M. Now then by the mean of the true
method of the demonstration before showed A V I, and N shall be moved in equal
time with the body, N by equal space. Wherefore, by the first conception in the
same in the M, wherefore it follows, etc.

Furthermore also where Aristotle 7. Phific. speaks of the comparison of
motions, saying that a right Line is not comparable to a crooked Line, because
there should be found some right Line equal of circuler Line, either greater or
less. For whereas by reason of the definition given by him in the 6 Phisic. to
the swiftness and slowness of motion, it seems to him that it cannot be, that
circular motion should be comparable to right motion. In the which he is
manifestly deceived, and chiefly thinking that a right Line cannot be found
equal, greater or lesser to the circular Line: Whereas Archimedes in his first
proposition in Geometry, shows the contrary, and that by Mathematical
demonstration, and not by the opinion of Aristotle. For Archimedes shows
there, by what means we may find a right Line greater or less then any circular
Line, constituting figures of right Lines, without or within the circle, etc.
But some men may say, that though a right Line may be granted greater or less
than any circular line, yet that the same cannot be found equal, whereas in the
fifteenth of Euclide the third is showed, that a greater Angle may be found,
then is the Angle of a Contingence, and that by the motion of the right Line of
the greater. Angle, passage is made to the right Line contingent or touching
the circle: yet that it cannot be that with the contigent Line it should make
an Angle equal to the Angle of Contigence. To this I answer, that although a
greater Angle be granted, yet not a less: for if the less should be granted as
well as the greater, we should likewise have an equal.

geometric diagram

For Example, consider the circle A C, with the Line A B, does touch in the
point A. The Angle of contingence shall be A B C, then let the circle inwardly
described A E, touching the circle A C, in the point A, for to one only point
it shall touch the circle A C, by twelve of the third. And so the Line A B,
shall touch the circle A E, by common Science, by the which the Angle B A E
shall be greater than the Angle B A C. Likewise also, if the circle A D shall
be described outwardly, the Angle B A D should be less than the Angle B A C.
And consequently by the same order whereby we make the greater or the less, we
shall also constitute equal, which is the less.

Wherefore it follows, that it may be done contrary to that which Aristotle
says, and for the same sentence of Aristotle, some have thought that it is
impossible for any of the figures of crooked Lines, should be frund equal to
any figure of a right Line, or the contrary, the which to be impossible I will
demonstrate. For Example, let be given a Trigon, I mean also of all figures of
right Lines, for as much as they shall be divisible into Triangles, as
appears by the thirty-second of the first. And of these Triangles we shall
constitute a superficial Line of equidistant sides, by forty-four of the first.
Taken as often as need shall be, which duplicate by the helps of thirty-six of
the first, and afterward a Diameter in it, then the healf of the superficies
shall have an equal Triangle of the taken superficies of the forty-one of the
first, or by the taken right Line by the first conception, I will constitute a
superficial of two crooked Lines continued equal unto it. I will divide the
first basis or ground A C by equal spaces into points H by ten of the first,
and I draw B H, which also I draw forth until H K by double to B H by 3 of the
first assumpted. Then to the half of H K. Thus is I, I direct C I and AI; I
join thereto also AK and C K, by right Lines: then (by the first of the sixth)
these Triangles shall be all equal to themselves. After this, I will constitute
a superficial of equidistant sides, and of right Angles upon whatsoever Line,
which superficies shall be equal to the Poligonie ABCK, by 44 of the first
assumpted, as often as shall be needful, that superficies is made G D. But in
the which I draw the Diameter F E, so that by 41 of the whole Trigon F G E,
shall be the half of the whole superficies, and by common science equal to the
Tigon B K C. and Triplus to the Trigon B H C. Now I divide F G by equal in the
point M by 10 of the first. So do I also of the Line M L, dividing it by equal
in the point N, by the aforesaid 10 of the first. Afterward by 44 of the first
twice assumpted of equidistant sides, I make a superficies of right Angles upon
the Line M, N equal to the quadrature of the Line F M, traverse or overthwart,
and N D right, I constitute a Parabol of a right Angle, that it may be of less
labor: for this Example may suffice of by 52 of the first of Apolonius
Pergeus, the Termining Line of which Parabol, shall pass by the points of F N,
and G by the same and by 33 of the same F E shall touch the Parabol at the
point F. And afterward when the Trigon F E G shall be triplus, to the Trigon B
H C, as we have showed before, but also the portion of F N G, Triplus by the 17
of Archimedes, de quadratura Parabolae. Wherefore the portion F N G shall be
equal to the Trigon H B C, by the first conception in Euclide, added by
Companus. Furthermore, I draw E G until by the third of the first G R. Equal G
R. I draw forth also F R, and LMO, then by the fourth of the first Triangle,
FGE shall be of equal sides, and also of equal Angles to the Triangle F G R.
Furthermore, D M is equidistant G R, by common science, and by R G of the
first, the Angle F D M equal to the Angle F R G, and the Angle of F R G equal
to the Angle of F M D; and whereas the Angle of F R G is common to either of
them, then by the four, of the fix, the same, or all one, shall be the
proportion of R G, to DM, as is of G F, to M F. But as is G F, to M F, so is G
F, to M L. Wherefore by N of the first, G F has it self so to M F, as G R to
DM. But by the 16 of the same ML to DM, has it self, and GF to GR. Wherefore
ML equal MQ; which MQ I divide by equal in the the point X, by 10 of the first,
and will do as before. Then by the reasons aforesaid of the same, the portion
of FXG, shall be equal to the Trigon ABH, and the whole superf^ices FGNX, shall
be equal to the whole Trigon, ABC, which is proposed.

geometric diagrams

The contrary appears thus, Let be grated a superficies, contained of two
parallel lines, as FNG, and F X G, proposing (for Example) to find a
superficial of right lines Trianguler equal to the granted superficies. I draw
first F G. Then afterward by 44 of the second of Apolonius Pergeus, I find the
Diameter of the Parabol FNG, which is MN, which I draw to ML, to be equal MN.
Then I draw F L, which shall touch the Parabol of F N G in the point F by 33 of
the first of the same. then from the point G, I draw a line G E, equidistant
from the Diameter M N L, by 31 of the first of Euclide: which I draw until it
join together with F L, the which doubtless shall be done by the second of the
first of Vitellio.

The Point of the Concourse or joining together, is E, then I divide F, into
three equal portions by the 11th of the sixth of Euclide, in the points S and
T, which points I join with the point G. by the Lines of F G, and G R. Now
shall there be three Angles all equal to themselves by the 38 of Euclide. After
this, I constitute a Trigon, B H C, equal to the Trigon, F S G. by this means
I draw forth H C, to the Equality of G S, by the Equality of the 4th of the
first of Euclide. Then at the point H I design an Angle, B H C, equal to the
Angle of F S G. by the 23d of the first of Euclide; and by 3. of the first of
the same, I draw H B, until it be equal F S. Afterward I join B C, by a Line,
then by 4. of the first, the Triangle B H C, shall be equal to the Triangle F S
G, and shall be equal to the Portion F N G, by the 17. of Archimedes, de
Quadratura Parabolae, by the help of the first Conception of Euclide. I do the
like of the Portion of F G X, to whom by an equal Triangle O P K, then I draw P
Q, equally distant O K and R V equally distant O P, by 31 of the first of
Euclide, then by 41. of the same O P R shall be half of the Superficies O V.
Now then I somewhat portract C H, then upon B H I constitute a Superficial of
equidistant sides, having an Angle of B H A, by 44. of the first of Euclide,
twice assumpt to the Diameter of the first Superficies, A P B, then by 41. of
the same by the first conception of the Trigon A B C, shall be equal of the
Superficies F G N X. granted which is the intent. Aristotle (to say the Truth)
was an excellent searcher of things, yet I will not say as some say (which have
never read the the Works of Aristotle, or understand them not) that every Word
of Aristotle, is almost a Sentence; and that Aristotle was the God of
Philosophers, and that he never erred in one Word, but was divine in all
things. Such miserable men, if they knew what it were to speak with
Demonstration, and what by Experience to the Sense, would never have said such
things. For Sense simply, in those things which are not properly sensible, we
are oftentimes deceived. And whereas we cannot perceive the Deception, by the
Mean of that simple sense, then it seems to us that the thing cannot be, and
that it is not in very Deed as it appears to the sense.

As for Example, who is he that thinking not a Reflex Form on the Superficial
Water immovable, to be seen of the same greatness, as is by a right Longitude,
by the mean of a Diaphane, gathered of a Radical Line incident and Reflex;
whereas this is false by G D, of the 6 of Vitellio. For the Superfities of the
Water is Spherical, as shows Aristotle, 2 de C^^lo, cap. 4. But better
Archimedes in the second Proposition, De subsidentibus aquae. And therefore
when any Star appears to us above the Horizon, yet is it not indeed as it
appears by this Demonstration. Let the Star be I, the Horizon R A T, the
Earth E A M. whose Center is A, and the sight G, the Vapors O E; then whereas
the radical Line passing from any rare thin, or transparent in any transparent
of more thickness, makes a Perpendicular, by the 45. of the Second of
Vitellio, it is manifest therefore that the Star I, to be seen by the Line I D
E, which Line shall be crooked, because that simple Air is thinner then
Vapors, and Fire thinner then Air. Also the matter or substance of Heaven is
thinner then Fire, by the 50. of the 10 of Vitellio.

atmospheric diagram

Furthermore, the higher part of the Air is thinner then the lower part, the
same I say also of Water and Fire (if we may call Fire the highest part of the
body, and near unto the concavity of the Moon) and of every Superior part of
Elements. And so the Star by the Line D E, seems to be above the Horizon, in
the point V. But Vitellio also in his 10 Book, in the Proposition 49. teaches
perspectively, and how it may be instrumentally proved, how the Stars may be
seen in the Horizon, without their proper places, by reason of Incurnation or
crooking of the Beams, whereof it follows that they do not Mathematically
define the Horizon, which say it is the Terminer or ender of the sight, and of
the greatest Circles of the Sphere, whereas by the Demonstration before, the
Circle ending of the sight, is cutting the Sphere in two unequal Portions, and
that the higher Portion be greater then the lower. For if the Horizon be the
ender of the sight, and one of the greatest Circles, then the Earth is not
equally about the Center or middle of the World, or else the middle of the
World is without the Earth. But if the Earth does equally compass about the
middle, ergo, the ender of the sight is not of the greatest Circles in the
Sphere, or contrarity. Therefore if we shall see any Star above the ender of
the sight, we should not therefore think it to be in the twelfth station of
Heaven (this is to be understood by reasonable manner) for the Virtue of the
Star appears chiefly in the great Circle (whose Pole is Zenith) passing by
the 90 Degree of the Equinoctial, from the Intersection or dividing of the same
with the Meridian toward the East. Furthermore, the difference between the
ender of the sight, and the greater Circle, is not only one Diameter of the
Star, but of Degrees, which if it were not, we could by no means use the
Proposition 49 of Vitellio: and therefore it was no small Error of them that
said that the Horizon is the ender of the fight. and one of the greatest
Circles in the Sphere, and that ever the middle of Heaven appears unto us,
for evermore then half appears unto us; for the Incurvation or crooking of
the Beams. But he that will see more Examples of these things, let him read the
4th Book of Vitellio, and the Tenth, and in some parts the Second and 5th of
the same, in all of which he shall see somewhat how easily we may be deceived
by this sense, but the like of other Senses is not to be doubted. Therefore not
without weak and slender judgment, they call Aristotle so Divine a Prince of
Philosophy, and Divine Peter Arches, did very wisely give Commendation to
Aristotle proportionally and no further, but only to God; forasmuch as it is
humane to err, Aristotle also might sometime fail.

We having thus thoroughly discoursed of Proportions Local, we shall now next
fall upon the swift Motion by the Art of Navigation, which will occasion us to
traverse many rare Mathematical Secrets.

This most swift Motion to the common sort of men seems incredible, for that
the same may be done by sailing in a Ship or other Vessel, against whatsoever
course of any Outrageous Flood or River, and against the most furious Winds
whatsoever they are, even also in the deepest Winter, and greatest Sourges of
Water. Neither is it strange, if it be incredible to the unexpert. For the
common people count that for a Miracle, which the expert Mathematicians know to
be natural and easy: for if it should be propounded to the ignorant people,
that any man might in the midst of the Waters and Floods, descend to the bottom
of the River Rhene, his Apparel remaining dry, and no part of Body wet, and
also to bring with him burning fire from the bottom of the Water, it should
seem to them to be ridiculous and an impossibility: Which nevertheless in the
year 1538. in Toleto a City of Spain, in the most swift River Tagus (in which
the Gold is said to be found) running through the course of the Sun, none
otherwise then Danubus, and three other in the World, making their course from
the West to the East, which strange fight twelve thousand Persons saw in the
presence of Charles the Emperor, the fifth of that Name. Of such strange
Experiments I shall not need here to speak much. Others there be that dare
affirm, that a certain Ship was in such sort driven with violent Winds and
furious Seas, with such a swift course, that the Pilot standing in the Keel of
the Ship, near unto the Mast, shooting an Arrow out of a Cross-bow, the Arrow
fell down before his Feet, and came not so far as the forepart or fore-castle
of the Ship. I have heard also of credible men, that a certain Pilot
Cantabrian, lying at an Anchor at Antwerp, on a certain Sunday after morning
Prayer, departed with full Sails and prosperous Winds until he came to the
Coast of St. James of Compostella, and immediately returning with like
prosperous Winds came again to Antwerp in the same Ship the Sunday next
following. The which I deny not but may be done, yet not without great danger
of Shipwreck, especially in the return, the wind being at the South. Also in
the year 1551. there was Experience made of a most swift Motion; For, from
Drepan of Sicilia and Trinacria, the Port of the Gales of Maltha (now being in
the place of the Rhodes, otherwise called of St. John in Jerusalem) A certain
Ship without ever striking Sail, in 37 hours arrived at Naples. And yet are
these places distant in Latitude almost five degrees, besides some part of
Longitude: which on the Earth correspondeth and amounts to four hundred and
five Miles. The motions are caused by violent Floods and outrageous Winds. The
like also may be done against the fury of Winds and the violence of Floods,
when need shall be for expedite carriage of Victuales by Sea, and even in
places where it is hard to come to Land, and this with small labor, as
hereafter I will plainly declare by Demonstration: but oftentimes, most expert
Pilots and Seamen do marvail that Sailing in Ships of the self same making,
weight, content, or capacity, framed also of the same Shipwright, furnished
with equal Sails, and all other things appertaing, yet to be of such diverse
swiftness, that the one cannot keep equal course with the other, which
admiration doubtless must proceed through some ignorance or want of knowledge
of the due proportion of the frame of all sorts of Ships: that is the depth,
breadth, height and length, (named by the Master Seamen, Latitude, Longitude,
Altitude and Profunditie) the which if they are unknown of the Master Carpenter
or Shipwright, two Ships can never be so directed by equal course, but that one
shall be swifter than another: and this doubtless only by reason of their
different proportion in their framing, making, or architecture.

In the framing of any manner of Ship, the proportion of length, breadth, height
and depth, ought most chiefly to be exactly observed, least the ignorance or
negligence of these considerations, should hinder the swift course, and cause
danger of Shipwreck. The due proportion of Ships most suppose to be, that first
the Longitude or length of the Ship or Vessel whatsoever it be more or less,
ought to be divided into 300 equal parts, as appearetheth in the Figure
following, of the which depiction of a ship parts 30 must be assigned to the
height or depth, for the 10th part of the whole or length, and to the latitude
or breadth shall correspond the parts of the said longitude 50, or the sixth
part of the Longitude. The Matter also or the Timber of such a Ship must be
light, least too much heaviness of the Matter should hinder the swift course.
And this proportion of Ships, or other Sailing Vessels, of whatsoever shape or
frame, is most convenient and no less necessary, for Sciffes, Ships of burden,
Galleys, double, triple, or quadruple (that is to say) of two, three, or four
to an Oar. Also for Toystes, Pinaces, Brigantines, Espions, and such lik.

I have oftentimes attempted by Mathematical reason, how and in what manner a
commodious fashion of Ships may be Invented with small labor, and as little as
may be of cost, which may in short time strive against the course of whatsoever
strong Floods or Rivers, as Rhene, Danubie, Mosella, Scalda, and infinite
others of our own and other Countries, boiling and overflowing through the
abundance of great Showers, melted Snows and furious Winds, and this more
especially for the commodity of speedy transporting of Victuals, and such other
necessaries: in consideration whereof, the proportion first observed, and the
said Ship or Vessel almost finished, then must be made three holes from the
Keele, toward the forecastle or foremost part of the Ship, as appears in the
figure by the Letters ABC. In which holes, in time of the course, certain
Engines of strange and mavelous invention may be fastened. In the poupe or
hinder part of the Ship, may be prepared (after the manner of Germany) a little
Stove or Hot-House, where Passengers may commodiously rest, now the Ship being
thus prepared, the bottom thereof should be dressed with Tallow; and not with
Tarr, that it may move the swiftlyer.

Thus having considered of the proportion and frame of the said Ship, the rest
of the Mechanical or Handycraft Work, we leave to the Carpenters and
Shipwrights.

It chances oftentimes, and that more especially in Winter, that certain
Floods and Rivers overflown with too much abundance of waters, do through their
violence refuse all Navigations that may be made against their course, to the
great damage and hurt of the Inhabitants of many Towns and Cities, to the which
they should carry Victuals and other Provisions, against the course of the
Rivers: And therefore in savor of the Commonwealth, I have invented these kind
of Ships, that I may hereby, as by my Seal, confirm the good will I bear to our
posterity. Now therefore it may suffice to have said thus much of this swift
motion which I have proved with my own strength of reason, and sufficiently
declared the framing and use thereof: whereunto it may be easy for expert men
to add more, according to the excellency of their Wits and Cunning. For in all
Sciences it is easier to add to Inventions, then to Invent. Let us now not only
consider what commodity this may bring to our selves, but also to the
Brabantines, Sailing from Antuerp to Bruxells in the new River: for that which
they attempt dangerously with great vexation and shogging in Wagons by foul and
tedious Journeys, often wet to the Skin for the space of a whole day, may by
Water be done more conveniently, in the space of four or five hours even
against the River and Wind.

And least the Reader should seem to refute our sayings, while he thinks that
those things which he esteems for Miracles, to exceed the Limits of Nature, I
will show manifestly by one Demonstration of the forementioned Enterpriser, the
manner how he descended to the bottom of the River, his body remaining dry as
before I have affirmed. But here first let us consider, that naturally the
Water or Sea (as other Elements) intends to a Sperical form, and with its
globositie or rising, overpasseth most high Mountains. But hear again will
arise another doubt to the inexpert. That is, If the Sea be higher than the
Land, how is it then that it does not drown and cover the Earth, whereunto I
answer, that the dryness of the Earth may so long resist the moistness of the
Water, until it receive or imbibe too much moistness, which may thus be
naturally proved. Fill a Cup, a Glass, or other Vessel with Water or Wine to
the brim, so that the fullness thereof may seem to swell as if it would overflow
the brim of the Cup. Then may you yet put therein many pieces of Gold, without
shedding one drop of Water. But if the extremity of the brim be once wet,
immediately the Water overfloweth, because the dryness of the Vessel does
participate of the moistness of the Water: which is yet* better proved in the
manner as follows: Take a certain quantity of Water and sprinkle it by drops
upno a dry (or dusty) Table: so shall the drops partly show a Sperical form
remaining; but if the Table before be never so little wet with Water, the drops
sprinkled thereon, shall float abroad, and keep no sperical or round form, by
reason of the moisture that the Table has received before of the Water. It
has oftentimes happened that certain Towns and Lands have been drowned by the
Rivers overflowing near unto them. Nevertheless, how much soever such Waters
increase or rise, there is no danger, until great Showers falling from Heaven,
do thoroughly wet the Banks, Ramperts and Calseys of such Rivers. For when they
(as we have said) are thoroughly imbibed with moistness, they cause the
overflowing and breach, whereof follows the overflowing and drowning of the
Region: And this may suffice for Advertisement. Now I shall instance the
aforesaid experiment showed at Toleto by two Gre ks: who taking a Chalderon of
great Capacity, the Mouth turned downwards, and so hanging it in the Air by
Ropes, they fastened certain Boards, Posts, or Shelves in the midst of the
Chaldron, where they placed themselves with the fire. Then to make it hang
steadfastly and equally, they compassed the Circumference, brim, or border
thereof with Leaden Plummets, every side equally, and made of equal weight,
least any part of the circumference of the mouth of the Chaldron, except it
were equally and softly let down into the water, should sooner touch the water
then the whole circumference. For so should the water easily overcome the air
enclosed in the chaldron, and resolve it into moisture. But if by due
proportion the Chaldron thus prepared, be fair and softly let down into the
water, the air enclosed in the chaldron (by resistance of the water) shall
violently make it self place, not admitting the water to enter. So the men
there enclosed, shall so long remain dry in the midst of the water, until
success of time do by respiration debilitate and consume the enclosed Air,
turning it into gross humidity, engrossed by the coldness and moistness of the
water: but if in due time the chaldron be softly and equally drawn out of the
water, the men shall remain dry and the fire not extinct, as it was then
experimented, which also may be thus proved: take a Cup or Glass of a certain
quantity: the circumference of the mouth whereof, shall be broader then the
circumference of the bottom. In the mouth let be fastened a little stick, tying
thereunto a thread: on the stick, fasten a little candle of wax, whose light
may come only to the midst of the cup, least as much nearness of the water
might suffocate the candle. Then proportionably (as in the former experiment)
put the cup with a burning candle into a Vessel full of water, and in due time
draw it out softly and equally, so that no part of the mouth of the
circumference thereof be drawn out before the whole, or speedily, so shall the
candle remain in extinct. Let not therefore the Ignorant condemn our writings,
before they know what may be done by experience, it is now no miracle, when it
is known to be natural: and thus it is in all other Sciences and Experiments,
which the common people think to be impossible. As that the salt water of the
Sea may be made fresh, and Potable to be drunk; which nevertheless may be done
naturally, as has been often proved diverse ways. Some do this (as is written
in Gemma Philosophica) putting the salt water in a Vessel plaistered or crusted
over with clean wax, which distilling through the strait or narrow pores
thereof, leaves the salt, which for its grossness cannot pass thereby. The
same may be done better by a Canon or Pipe, filled with Gravel or little
stones, that the salt water poured thereon may diverse times pass through that
Pipe into another Vessel.

Furthermore, Let these ignorant People take notice that the Arts and Sciences
have all of them in the latter Ages either been revived from decay, or reduced
to use, or brought forward to perfection: so many secrets of nature and rare
conclusions having been found out by and imparted to the World by Albertus
Magnes, Levinus Lemnius, Fernelius, Fracostorius, Babtista Porta, Cornelius
Agrippa, Cardanus, Trithemius, Delrio, and infinite others, besides our own
Countrymen, such Inventions as have been singular and artificial, for the use,
ease, delight, or ornament of Mankind, as a number of Mecanical. Mathematical
and Musical Instruments, Chimneys, Stirrups, Paper, Spectacles, Parcellan,
Perspective-Glasses, Fining of Sugars, Hand-mills, Glones, Hats, Bands,
Watches, besides diverse excellent Works in Stuffs and Silks, in Linnens, in
Hangings, in Carpets, with many others, particularly set down by Polydor Virgil
de Inventoribus rerum, and Pancirellus in his novo rep^rta, and Cardanus in his
17 Book de Artibus, artificiosisque r^bus, to whom notwithstanding much more
might be easily added, for as truth is the Daughter of time, so are useful
Inventions too, as rightly Manilius.

Sed cum Longae dies acuit mortalia corda
Et Labor ingenium miseris dedit, and sua quenque
Advigilare sibi jussit fortuna premendo,
Seducta in varias certarunt pectora curas,
Et quodcunque sagax tentundo r^perit usus,
In commune bonum commentum L^ta tenere.
But when the tract of time had whet men's wits,
And Industry had molded them by fits;
Fortune pressing each Man to endeavor
To free himself from misery, together
They bend their Minds to search out sundry things,
And what is found by observation sage,
They cheerfully impart from age to age.
I will only specify some other of the rarest Artificial Works of this latter
Age, comparable for Workmanship with the best of the Ancients,

Peter Ramas tells us of a wooden Eagle, and an Iron Fly, made by Regiomontanus
a famous Mathematician of Norimburgh, whereof the first in Imitation of
Architas his Dove, met the Emperor a good way off coming toward it, and having
saluted him returned again, waiting on him to the City Gates. The second at a
Feast whereto he had invited his loving Friends, flew forth of his hand, and
taking a round, returned thither again, to the great Astonishment of the
Beholders; both which the Divine Pen of the Noble Du Bartas has excellently
expressed.

Why should I not that wooden Eagle mention,
A Learned Germans late admired Invention,
Which mounting from his fist, that framed her;
Flew far to meet an Almain Emperor:
And having met him, with her Noble Train
And weary Wings, turning about again,
Followed him close unto the Castle-gate
Of Norimburgh, whom all their shows of State,
Streets hanged with Arms, Arches curious built;
Grey-headed Senate, and Youths, gallantise,
Graced not so much as only this devise.
He goes on, and thus describes the Fly.

Once as this Artist, more with Mirth than Meat
Feasted some Friends whom he esteemed great;
From under's hand an Iron Fly flew out;
Which having flown a perfect round about,
With wearied Wings returned unto her Master,
And as judicious on his Arm he placed her.
O Divine Wit! that in the narrow Womb
Of a small Fly, could find sufficient room
For all those Springs, Wheels, counterpoise and Chains,
Which stood instead of Life, and Spur, and Rheins.
Desimanus itaque Architas columbam mirari, cum muscam, cum aquilam Geometricis
alis alatum Norsbergea exhibeat, says Ramus, let us give over to wonder at
Architus his Dove, f^ithence Norimburgh has exhibited both a Fly and an Eagle
winged with Geometrical Wings. Bartas likewise remembers the curious Dial and
Clock at Stransburgh, my self have beheld not without Admiration.

But who would think that mortal hands could mould,
New Heavens, new Stars whose whirling courses should
With constant windings, through contrary ways.
Mark, the true monds of years, and months and days,
Yet it is a story that has often been heard,
And by a hundred witnesses averred.
Neither does he forget the most excellent Silver Sphere (matchable with
Archimedes, or that of the Zapores King of Persia) which was sent as a present
by the Emperor Ferdinand to Solomon the Great Turk; and is mentioned by Paulus
Jovius and Sabellicus; it was carried as they write by twelve men, unframed and
reframed in the Grand-Seigniors Presence, by the maker, who likewise delivered
him a Book containing the Mystery of using it.

Nor may we smoother, or forget ingrately
The Heaven of Silver, that was sent but lately
From Ferdinando, as a famous Work
Unto Byzantium to the greatest Turk:
Wherein a Spirit still moving to and fro,
Made all the Engine orderly to go:
And though the one Sphere did always slowly slide,
and contrary the other swiftly glide;
Yet still their Stars kept all their courses even
With the true courses of the Stars of Heaven.
The Sun there shifting in the Zodiac
His shining houses, never did forsake
His pointed Path, there in a Month his Sister
Fulfilled her course, and changing often her Luster
And form of Face (now larger, lesser soon)
Followed the changes of the other Moon.
So that which way soever we turn our Eyes, we may see that Posterity has not
riotously wasted the Inheritance of Arts and Sciences, left them by their
Predecessors, but have greatly increased the same and invented others: for
certainly the multitude of things incomprehensible, is infinite, and so
therefore inventions must needs also be infinite, and without end, like tunes
in the Art of Music.

And forasmuch as I have made mention of sundry Inventions, it shall not be
from the purpose, to describe the goodly Instrument whereof Angelus Politianus
in his fourth Book of Epistles to Franciscus Caso, where he writes in this
manner, I have received your Epistle, wherein you signify to me, that you have
heard of the strange Engine or Instrument Antomatan invented, and made of late
by one Lawrence a Florentine; in the which is expressed the course and motions
of the Planets conformable and agreeable with the motions of Heaven, and
forasmuch (says he) as the report thereof is hardly believed, you greatly
desire that I should write to you, what certain Knowledge I have of that thing,
wherein I am ready to obey your Request. And although now it be long since I saw
it, yet as far as I bear in memory, I will briefly express to you the Form,
Reason, and Use thereof. And if the Description thereof shall seem to you to be
somewhat obscure, you shall not ascribe it altogether to my Declaration, but
partly to the subtlety and Novelty of the thing. It is in form of a square
Pillar, sharp toward the top, in the manner of a Pyramidis, of height almost
three Cubits: over and above it in manner of a baner, is a flat or plain round
of gilded Copper, adorned with sundry Colors, on whose other part is
expressed the whole course of the Planets, and whole Dimension or Measure is
somewhat shorter then a Cubit, and is within turned and moved with certain
little Denticle Wheels, an immovable Circle comprehending the highest Border
or Margent, divided with the spaces of 24 hours within it, in the highest
turning Roundel, the twelve signs are discerned by three Degrees. Further,
within are seen eight Rundels, in manner of one greatness, of these two obtain
the middle point, the one fastened in the other, so that the lowest being
somewhat bigger, represents the Sun, and the higher the Moon. From the Sun a
beam coming to the circle, shows in it the hours: and in the Zodia^k, the
Months, days, and number of Degrees, and also the true and half Motion of the
Sun. From the Moon also proceeds a Pin, or ^^yer, which beneath or downward
in the Border or Margent of the greatest Rundel, shows the hours: and passing
by the Center of the Epicide of the Moon, and extending to the Zodiac, shows
the half Motion of his Planet. Another also rising from thence, and cutting the
border of the Center of the Moon (that is of the Epicide) shows her true
place, whereby are seen the slowness, swiftness, all Motions and Courses,
Conjunctions also and full Moons. About these are six other Rundels, of the
which, one whom they call the Head and Tail of the Dragon, shows the
Ecclipses both of the Sun and the Moon. The other are attributed to the
Planets; from every one of which, proceed two points, assigning the Motions (as
we have said) of the Moon, but they also go backward, which chances not in the
Moon, whose Eclipse is moved contrariwise. And thus the reason of
Conjunctions, Departings, and Latitudes is manifest in all. There is also
another Border likewise to the Zodiac, cutting or dividing upward or above,
those six little Rundels of the Planets, whereby appears the Degrees of the
East signs, and the spaces of the days (that is to say) at what hour the Sun
rises, by the which, every one of the Planets are carried in their Rundels or
Circles by course, in the daytime to the East, and in the Night to the West.
Again contrariwise, the greatest Rundel of all, draws with it all the
Planets, in the Night to the East, and in the day to the West, in the space of
24 hours. All which to agree with the Motions of the Heavens, both Reason and
Experience do confirm; and therefore we ought not to marvel if these things
seem incredible to many. (For as says the wise Proverb) Faith is slowly given
to great things, for even we scarcely believe our own Eyes, when we see such
things. And therefore, whereas in time past I read, that such a like Instrument
was made by Archimedes, my Faith yet failed to give Credit to so great an
Author, which thing nevertheless this our Florentine has performed. The work
doubtless being of such an Excellence, that all praise is inferior to it, and
cannot otherwise for the worthiness thereof, be otherwise praised, then to say
that it is above all praise; insomuch that he may seem a man sent from Heaven,
where he learnt the making of this Heaven; Hitherto Politianus. Of the like
Instrument, Roger Bacon makes mention, affirming the same to be worth a
Kingdom to a wise man. But forasmuch as the Subject I have discoursed of is
chiefly touching Inventions appertaining to Ships, and the Art of Navigation, I
shall here think it fit to say something of the Invention of a certain Italian
Writer Leonardo Fiorauanti, who in his Book Entitled, Specchio di Scientia
Universal, does greatly glory in the Invention of Ships, which cannot perish
either on the Sea, or the Land, affirming the like was never invented since the
Creation of the World. But I fear, least his vain Glory of discoursing in the
Italian Tongue, has caused him more then needs, to commend his own invention.
Therefore commiting the judgment hereof to men of greater Experience and
Knowledge in these things, I will only translate his Words, whereby in the book
before-named, he describes the same Ship in this manner. Take Beams of Fur or
Pine Tree, which of their own nature can never sink or go down, or remain under
the Water, and with these Beams frame an Engine or Machine, of the length of
threescore foot, and of the height of six foot, and of the breadth of twenty
foot, laying the first rank in length, fashioning the forepart like unto other
Ships, and in like manner, bringing the poop or hinder part to good Form; then
with such Irons as appertain bind it, and strengthen it in such manner as it
cannot break. And upon this Frame or Foundation build your Ship, of such
fashion as you think best, etc. But whether the Frame or Foundation should be
builded upon the Keel or bottom of the Ship, or otherwise (as I have said) I
must commit it to them of better judgment. But least I should be unmindful of
my Promise, concerning the rare Geometrician Beson, that caused a book to be
Printed containing the Forms and Portracts of 60 Engines of mavelous strange
and profitable Device, of which I only mentioned three forasmuch as they
chiefly appertain to Ships, viz. the 54, 57, 60. I shall here make a brief
Rehearsal of them, the 54 therefore (as he writes) is an Engine not unlike to
that which Archimedes in former time invented for the Syracusians, wherewith a
man with the strength of only one hand, by help of the Instrument called
Trispacton (which in our Tongue some call an endless scrue) brought a Ship of
mavelous greatness from the Land into the the Sea, in the sight of King
Hieron, and an infinite Multitude which with all their force could not do the
same, etc. Of which also our Countryman Roger Bacon, a great Philosopher
seemed to have had some Knowledge: he making mention of an Instrument no bigger
then a man's body, wherewith one man might draw to him the strength of three
hundred men. And when I was in France I heard credibly reported that an Almain
made an Engine, where with one at 15 years of Age lifted from the ground a
weight, which the strongest man in the Court was not able to remove. Almost the
same device we see in the bending of a Cross-bow. Also at my being in Germany
in the City of Strasburgh, a worthy Gentleman, Monsieur de Saleno, told me that
in that City one had invented an Engine of Iron, no bigger than a man's hand,
whereunto fastening a Rope, with a hook of Iron, no bigger than a man's head,
and casting the hook upon a Wall, Tree, or other place, where it might take
hold, he could with that Engine lift himself up to the Wall, or other places.
But to return to the other two Engines of Beson, pertaining to our purpose, The
60 Figure (as he there writes) is the Invention of an Engine, scarcely
credible, wherewith by Balance and easy Motion, beyond the order of Nature, a
Ship ma be ordered and governed, that in the ^alm Sea it shall move forwards,
and in little Wind hasten the course, and in too much Wind, temper and moderate
the same; a Secret (as he says) worth the Knowledge of a Prince. Of the third
Engine which is the 57 of his Book, he writes thus, an Artifice not yet
divulged or set forth, which placed in the poop of a Ship, whither the Water
has Recourse, and moved by the Motion of the Ship with Wheels and Weights,
does exactly show what space the Ship has gone, etc. by which Description,
some do understand that the Knowledge of the Longitude might so be found a
thing doubtless greatly to be desired, and hitherto not certainly known, although
Sebastian Cabot on his Deathbed, told me he had the Knowledge of the same by
Divine Revelation, yet so, that he might not teach any Man. But I think that
the good old man, in his extreme Age, somewhat doted, and had not yet even in
the Article of Death, utterly shaken off all worldly vain Glory. As touching
which Knowledge of the Longitude, to speak a little more by occasion now given,
it shall not be from the purpose, for to rehearse the Words of that Excellent
Learned man, Joannes Fernelius, in his incomparable Book de abditis rerum
causis, where in his Preface to King Henry of France, he writes thus, we have
put our helping hand to the Art of Navigation and Geography; for by the
Observation of the hours of the Equinoctials, we have invented how in
whatsoever Region or place of the World a man shall be, he may know in what
Longitude it is; which certainly we have not taken from the Fountains of the
Ancients, but first of all (as I think) have drawn it out of our own Rivers, as
our own Invention. I shall conclude (as I said before) that which way soever we
turn our Eyes, we may see that Posterity has not riotously wasted the
Inheritance of Arts and Sciences, left them by their Predecessors, but have
greatly improved and increase the same, and also invented others.

FINIS.

