ADVICE To those who never Received the SACRAMENT: OR, THE True PENITENT
INSTRUCTED, Before, At, and After The Receiving the Lord's Supper. WITH
Meditations suited to the several parts of that solemn Ordinance, particularly
with respect to Easter, Whitsuntide and Christmas. The Whole written in a
different Method from any thing published on this Subject. By a Person of
Honor.

LONDON, Printed, Sold by E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, 1697.

THE PREFACE.
WHatever Apologies the World may expect for Books of another Nature, I think
they ought not to be gratified in Books of this, for whatever tends to regulate
our conversation, and advance a happiness in another World when our hopes fail
us here, is sufficient to recommend it self.

Its unaccountable, that since Religion, in spite of all designs to undermine
and make it look little, asserts its own Authority and make men confess its
beauties, that they should be such fools as not to be charmed by them. Since
Atheism and Infidelity are become mere Name, and Men are obliged to own a
Being, which they have the Impudence to disobey: It may become a Question,
Whether they had not better have continued in their Opinion that there was no
God, if there were ever any such, than pretend to own a Being, and pay so
little respect to it: How Men came to distrust the God who made them, or not
carefully observe him whom they own to be the Maker of the World, are things
equally unaccountable; that Man, who is endued with Reason, and capable to
convince himself, that he is not of himself, and that whatever was the Cause of
him, must have a Cause, or that that Cause must be Eternal, and the Maker of
all things, who is forced from Natural Principles, and common Arguments, to
allow a first Cause, and that he could not have had this Knowledge if this
Cause, had not revealed it self: That the same reason, which inclines him to
take any thing for truth of which he has not demonstration, or to give credit to
any thing, obliges him to believe the Account of God, of Religion, and Himself,
which is delivered in the Scriptures, and for the truth of which there is the
best Testimony in the world. For their Antiquity, there is nothing so ancient,
and for their Credit, they have the general Consent of all Ages, Jewish and
Christian. So that if they be true, we ought to give our entire Assent to all
that is declared, and they testify of One whom God was to send to redeem this
sinful World: For Man fell from what he was created, and stood in need of an
Atonement; that this Person in the fullness of time was manifested to the
World, being conceived by the Spirit of God, and born of a Virgin; that he
wrought Miracles; taught us an exact Rule of Faith and Obedience, and then laid
down his life as a Ransom for all that should believe on him; that after his
death, he raised himself from the dead, and in the sight of his Disciples
ascended into Heaven, and there remains, till he shall come to judge the World:
That he appointed Apostles, and gave them power to make Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, that by such an Order of Men, the Laws which he Commanded might be
taught to us, and the Rites of that Religion which he planted, duly performed.
Of this we are infallibly assured, and though we have the witness of Men, yet
the witness of God is greater, and he that can no more deceive than be
deceived, has positively confirmed. We have had a constant succession of men in
the Priestly Office, even to this time, what then is the cause of our
Dissensions, of our Unbelief and Misbelief, but that they who polluted our
Manners, would betray our Faith, and make us altogether incapable of those
Blessings which these Scriptures promise us to enjoy; why such industry to bear
down Revealed Religion, but that Men hate the light which would expose their
Deeds that are Evil. Why are they so laborious to defame that Doctrine which
has increased against Opposition, and the malice of Hell, and will be preserved
to the end of the World: It Is impossible to know a God reconciled without
revelation, and (...) has revealed himself it must be by some ^ody, and is
there any that they can prefer to our Savior, who has the witness of the
Father and the Holy Ghost concerning him. He was prophesied of 3000 Years
before, and exactly answered the Character of him that was to come: What Excuse
then can Men have for their Obstinacy, who pretend to own a God, and yet will not
believe the words of his Mouth? Is there any Law, any Precept, any Character
misbecoming the Dignity and Wisdom of the Son of God? Has our Savior said any
thing to be the Will of his Father which is not rational, and most becoming the
Almighty Governor of Heaven and Earth? If not, Why should the hearts of the
Sons of Men be lifted up, and despise the D ctates of this preacher of
Righteousness? If they own a God, can they serve him in a more acceptable
manner? Can they propose better Rules of Conversation, be governed by better
Laws, be better Men than the Scripture can make them? If there is nothing in
the Scripture misbecoming an infinite Wisdom, and they declare to us the Will
of God, which is, that we should believe and obey his Son, why should we refuse
to serve him, as he himself thinks fit? So little reason has the Deist for his
Opinion, that it is impossible to establish it, unless we destroy that by which
we came to know there is a God, which no Man could have done without Original
Impressions upon his Soul, or explicit Revelation. So that it is to live
unaccountably, to believe they know not why, but do what seems Good in their
own Eyes, and every man to worship a Being which he reveals to himself, which
being impossible is to live in the possession of absurd Principles, and which
are not answerable to the common Reason of Mankind.

But these are not the only Persons who are prejudicial to Religion, for that
suffers like our selves, most by those who pretend to be our Friends; the
Wisdom of God so far condescended to our weakness, as to make himself known in
a wonderful manner. When our first Parents fell, sin entered into the World, and
Death by sin, for in them all Men were made sinners; if our Parents
transgressed, we must derive a contagion from their Loins, for who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean, and if we are conceived and born in Sin, what is
Man that he should be clean or he that is born of a Woman, that he should be
Righteous: God saw this, and knew our insufficiency, that we should incline to
Evil, and could have no merit to atone his Justice, for what could the Sons of
Violence offer that was clean, or Man, miserable Man, propose to restore
himself to the favor of God. But God was pleased to propose a sacrifice, to
take away the sins of the World, and this he declared as soon as Man had sinned,
and continued to inculeate this Goodness in the minds of Men by his Prophets,
who continually declare the mercy of God which should appear to bring
Salvation; this is what Abraham believed, and 'twas imputed unto him for
Righteousness, for he saw the Day, and was Glad: This was it that was typifyed
by the Ceremonies of the Law, that every time they Sacrificed and Worshipped in
the Temple, they might have something to put them in mind of their Messia, whom
they expected, and who was called the Wonderful Counsel, or the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; that his Office was to visit and
redeem his People. Thus did God prepare the way for his Son, that we might
reverence him, and though his Dignity was thus great, yet he was to be rejected
and despised by Men, smitten of God, that the Chastisement of our Peace might
be upon him, and by his Stripes we might be Healed. This indeed was wonderful,
and what proved a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles,
and what they who in this Age continue to deny the Lord who bought them, think
very Ridiculous: But however merry these Gentlemen of that Persuasion are with
the price of their Salvation. I believe it would startle them to have it
seriously put to them, whether they renounce the merits of that Cross which
they despise, or the Name into which they were Baptized; we are certain it can
be no jesting matter, if the Scriptures don't err concerning Him, for they tell
us, he died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, and that
without him, we have no life in us; that he is our Advocate, and was made a
propitiation for our Sins, and yet that he was from Eternity; for he came down
from Heaven, and was in the Beginning, and was with God, and was God, and yet
became Flesh, and dwelt among us, that even in this State, he was worthy of
Divine Honor, by virtue of that Union in him, of the Divine and Humane Nature
that he was Alpha and Omega; that in the beginning he laid the Foundations of
the Earth, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy; therefore let us take heed
to the things which we have heard, least at any time we let them slip, and
then, How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? And who then can
deny that this Jesus, as the Scriptures explain it, is God manifest in the
Flesh, to whom be Glory for ever. And yet there are a sort of Men, who set up
themselves in contradiction to this Mystery of Godliness, and fancy by
searching, they can find out the Almighty to perfection, who pride themselves
in Reason, and think it a disparagement for any thing to be above their
Knowledge. They are so refined in their Notions, that they can see no
difference between a thing, being above their reason, and being contrary to it:
They are so great Masters, that not to understand a thing, or its being
repugnant in its self are the same thing, for with them all is Non-scence and
contradiction, which they don't comprehend; when at the same time they cannot
give an account of themselves, and yet would be thought to understand every
thing else. The Scripture more perticularly is their Talent, and if we can
believe them, there is nothing like a Mystery in it, but they can easily
comprehend all, or as easily deny: That our Savior was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and Born of a Virgin is possitive in the Scriptures, but what they never
yet made easy to our conceptions, but in such a manner as gives the lie to the
Prediction, and wretchedly perverts the Sense of the Scripture, by leaving it
more perplexed and above our reach than it is of it self. That he was the
express Image of the Father, and therefore to him every Knee should bow, that
all Power in Heaven and Earth was given unto him, and therefore if we do not
believe in him shall be Damned. That he came out from God, and that he and the
Father are one, and therefore is able to hear our Prayers, and has promised if
we ask of him he will give us, and yet that took upon him the form of a
Servant, is what God has Testified, and what he thought was not too much for
our sake, though in himself he thought it not Robery to be equal with God, and
of this there are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Holy Ghost, and that these three are one; and into this truth are we
commanded to be Baptized, for 'twas his will that all Nations should be Taught
and Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; these are all
infallible Truths, whether they understand them or not, if they cannot, then
there are Mysteries, and what they must believe without knowing any more than
that God with whom all things are possible has said it, and if we would be
saved must believe, that we have all sinned and stand in need of a Savior, is
what our Reason and Scripture informs us; the Person and Dignity of this
Savior, the Scripture possitively asserts, and if that be true, he could not
be less than God that undertook our Redemption, and that had those peculiar
attributes belonging to him; but how he the Godhead and Manhood was united in
him, is not what his Wisdom has thought fit to reveal, and what our finite
understanding is not capable of, and what is not necessary to our Salvation
that we should know, but believe: So that the Controversy seems to be this,
whether God can oblige us to believe what we cannot comprehend? And whether he
has not obliged us already to a Faith which must be obedient to his word, till
they can prove to our reason, that either of these are untrue or impossible?
Let it suffice us to h ld fast the Faith in which we are bred up, and only
believe as much as God has been pleased to reveal, and have regard to what the
Scripture say concerning him, through whom are are to have everlasting Life.
Thus much is certain, and what I think to be an unanswerable Argument, and a
just account of the Christian Belief, which a Great Divine of our Church has
lately offered. That the Foundation of the Doctrine of the Trinity is this;
First, That there can be but one God; Secondly, That there is nothing in God,
but what is God; Thirdly, That there can be no composition in the Deity with
any such positive real Being distinct from the Deity it self. But the Church
finding in Scripture mention of three to whom distinctly the Godhead belongs,
expressed these three by the Name of Persons, and stated their Personallity
upon three distinct Modes of subsistence allotted to one and the same Godhead,
and these also distinguished from one another by three distinct Relations.

And now what designs these Traducers of the Lord of Glory can intend, by
puzelling themselves and every Body else with their pretentions to more Reason
than God has given them, I cannot imagine, unless under the disguise of Charity
to our Reason, they would subvert our Religion, and by pretending to bring the
sublime Truths of God's Word to our understanding, they would Ridicule the
hidden things of God, and so open a way for Atheism and Insidellity, by denying
first that there is any thing which our reason cannot comprehend, and then that
there is nothing in the Scripture, but what can easily be understood. This is
to make our Reason, not the Scripture a rule of Salvation, and when once our
sense is to judge of these Divine Truths, all of them that we can give a
Mathematical Account of, must be rejected: And yet that there are such truths
of which they can have no Idea is certain, and after all, they must own, that
either they are not to be understood, and yet believed, or else that they are
Nonsense and contradiction, which is an impudence they dare not publicly own,
and what would be fatal to their designs; for the Socinian needs only appear in
his proper Color, to make him abhorred and rejected by all, and looked upon as
an Enemy to God, Religion and the common sense of Mankind.

But there is yet another sort, who pretend an Obedience to the Gospel of
Christ, and yet make that easy rule of Salvation so confused and perplexed,
that either they dare not, or cannot give an account of their Faith. Their
principles, if they have any, are as unaccountable to themselves as to the
World, and they agree in nothing so much as to oppose the plain sense of the
Scripture; that Baptism and the Lord's Supper are positive Institutions, the
one to be performed by Water in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and
the other by Bread and Wine, in remembrance of our Savior's Death and
Sufferings, are as plainly and positively commanded, as any one thing in the
Scripture. That the Apostles and primitive Christians made it their Practice,
is capable of the same proof as the Scriptures themselves; they went about
Preaching the Lord Jesus, and Baptising all that believed in his Name, and the
condition of Salvation in those days, was Faith, Repentance and Baptism; that
to strengthen People in their Faith, they meet on the first day in the Week to
break Bread, and St. Paul is very careful to instruct our Behavior, that we
might receive the Bread of the Lord worthily.

Yet notwithstanding this, as if an aukerd Gravity, and sullenness of Behavior
were to pass for Authority, they pretend by a New Light to another
understanding of the Scripture, and impudently prevert that Sense which the
Christian Church for 1600 Years and more submitted too. So unwilling are they
to go to Heaven in the steps of their Fathers, that they prefer every wild
Enthusiastic Notion to the written Word of God, and so fearful of following
the Examples of Tradition that each Man sets up for a Rule to himself; they
have no Priests as well as no Sacraments, no settled constitution of a Church,
and are so little observers of St. Paul's Command, to do all things with
Decency and Order, as if he did not speak it by the Spirit, but to gratify his
own Superstition; they live as if the Gospel was all Privilege, and no Duty,
are Enemies to a form in Divine Worship, and in spite of the Scripture which
commands Women to be in silence, will needs have them for Speakers among them;
thus do they play at cross purposes with the Word of God, and by their
Obstinancy and Fantasticalness, make it of none effect. But there is an
Argument against them, which they never thought fit to answer, and till they
can, must be thought Enemies to the Gospel of Christ: An Ordinance once
enjoined and never repealed, is still in force; but Baptism by Water was once
enjoined, but never repealed: Ergo, and so of the Lord's Supper, and what ever
else is accounted an Ordinance in the Church of God, and all that lies upon us
to prove, is, That what we assert is an Ordinance, and was enjoined by lawful
Authority; and this is what the Scriptures prove themselves, and what has been
strengthened by the Arguments and Practice of the Church down to this day. So
that if there is any such thing as Unbelievers, false Teachers, and denyers of
the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, we may find them in this wretched Sect
of pretenders to Christianity.

But now among these who have no knowledge of the Truth, or hold it in
Unrighteousness, or put Godliness into a Form to draw the ridicule and scorn of
the World, its no wonder to meet with them Debauched, or filled with Pride,
Conceit and Devillishness, or Deceitful, trusting in themselves Hypocrites,
turning the truth of God into a lie. But that we who are Born in a Nation,
where the true Religion is Established by Law, and have all the Advantages
which God can give us to make us Happy. Our Church teaching us the form of
sound Words once delivered to the Saints, and makes the Word of God her Rule of
Faith, the Example of the Apostles and Primitive Fathers her Guide, and her
constitution such as Decency directs, that we in the midst of such assistances
should fail of the end of Creation, and in the spite of God's Grace and Mercy,
deprive our selves of everlasting Happiness, by living in Disobedience to this
Church, in contradiction to the word of God, and in defiance of what our reason
tells us is both our interest and duty. Whence is this hardness of heart, that
Men forget they were Baptized, and live as if they never heard of Religion? Let
us all put the Question to our selves, and see whether one Reason of this
Stupidity and Wickedness is not from our Neglect, in the Education of those
committed to our Charge.

We are dedicated to God and Religion as soon as Born, according to the command
of our Savior; but since most of us are borought to the Church, when through
our tender Years we are not capable to judge nor perform what is required of
us. The Church according to an Ancient Prescription has appointed Sureties in
our behalf; they solemnly Engage for us till we come to an Age that we are able
to take care of our selves. Whence is it then, that notwithstanding this
Prudent care of the Church, so few are bred up to those Pious Rules prescribed
in our Baptism, and how many less when they come to Age, think themselves bound
to perform what was vowed in their Names. Do they who are Godfathers perform
their part? Do they endeavor early to instruct their Children, and inform them
to what advantages they are Born, that they promised by them who are their
Sureties to perform their duty to God and their Neighbor; that now they are
able, they are to be accountable for their own Actions, and take upon them that
Solemn Engagement to Fight under Christ's Banner, and to resist the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, and to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
Thus much is certainly incumbent upon such as undertake for Infants at least,
that they put the Parents in mind to do it for them, so that there is no such
difficulty that should discourage any from so charitable a Work, but there is
danger for those who take it upon them with no design, but to comply with the
custom, but not to inform them of good and Evil; and, Oh, how happy should we
be, if when we first come to the knowledge of Good and Evil, that we could so
pursue the Good, that God may not deny us the privilege of tasting of the Tree
of Life also.

Do they who are Parents perform their part by confirming the Advice of the
Godfathers to their Children, in adding both their Precept and Example. The
Church has appointed Godfathers to be as Monitors, but it is they that will be
accountable for the mismanagement of their Children, for they have a constant
Eye over them, and their Authority last as long as their lives, and if through
their Negligence, their Children are lost, their Blood will be required at
their hands. 'Twas a severe Judgment upon Old Eli, for not maintaining the
right of a Parent in the correction of his Sons, though he was not altogether
silent at their wickedness, but mild in his reproof, and yet God removed from
him the Priesthood for ever. But how many are there that don't say so much as
he did? My Sons, ye do not well to make the Lords's People to Transgress, but
are rather encouraging them in their Vices, or silent at their Wickedness. Good
God, that Men should desire Children to make them miserable! Surely it concerns
us as much as it did the Jews, to bring them up in the fear and Nature of the
Lord. Why should we be cautious in our Admonitions, when it is our Duty, and
their Interest, to hear and to obey, and we have this for our Encouragement, if
they are disobedient, the Laws of the Land are ready to our assistance in the
punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and we have this Negative Power, to restrain
them from being very bad, if we cannot make them very Good.

We are born into a World full of Temptations and Miseries, and though God has
pronounced it good, as the work of his hands, yet we are so prone to do amiss,
that we scarce arrive to the power of acting, but we incline to pervert that
Blessing, and make that our Curse, which was designed our Happiness. It Is the
Goodness and Mercy of God that we are created with a power to Will, and he has
placed in us such an inclination to good, as may be infinitely improved by
getting in us the upper-hand of Evil, and a power to overcome the subtilties of
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; let us then make use of this Power which
God has given us, and they who are Young, look up to God to preserve their
Innocence; and they who are so unhappy as to have been over taken by the Enemy
of Mankind, let them now at length call their ways to remembrance, and turn
their face unto God's Testimonies; to this end, let them according to the
Direction of a great Man:

First, Consider what they have done amiss,

Secondly, What is fitting for them now to do.

Thirdly, If they do it not, what the end of their neglect will be.

This Examination consists in a review of their past life, as to their Actions,
all that they have left undone, as well as done; as to their Faith, whatever
they disbelieved that is true, or believed that is amiss; and this is no easy
task, it requires Time and Pains, Zeal and Constancy, if their own Education
has not given them the advantage of directing themselves, let them address
themselves to some discreet Minister; let us first consider the necessity of
Repentance, and then the difficulties, and they are more than we can presently
imagine. Our lusts are not to be conquered by a Sigh, a Tear, or a Resolution,
when we are in a fit of Devotion; but let the difficulty be greater than our
imagination, we must resolve to undertake the Combat, and root out every habit
and disposition to sin: In order to it, let us first know what is fitting for
us to believe, and then what is fit for our practice; for if we build upon a
true Foundation, our Faith will direct us to work out our Salvation by a true
Repentance; if we suffer our selves to be deceived by any known sin, we are not
in safty, and it is not Repentance when we repeat our Wickedness, and we have
not conquered our lusts till we are able to resist them; he who thinks he may
go to Heaven, because he is Honest in the main, or is one the world calls a
Moral Man, is in danger of Eternal Ruin; the Young Man in the Gospel had kept
all the Commandments from his Youth, and yet lacked one thing needful to make
him perfect; and the reason of this purity is plain, for the same dispositions
which we have when we leave this World, will follow us to the next; we are
mistaken if we suppose that with this Body we shall put off the body of sin;
or, because we die in a fit of Devotion, that God will accept of this last part
of our life, and not account for the rest. Our Souls will have the same
affections in the other World, as here, for there can be no alteration, as the
Tree falls so it lies, and if we resolve not to endeavor a change till Death
approach us, and think that our Reflections upon a Sickbed are sufficient to
atone a misspent life, we shall be miserably deceived: It is certain indeed
that a true Repentance, though never so late will be accepted, but who can be
certain that he shall truly repent at a time when he is not fit for the
ordinary Offices of life, when his Soul is upon the Wing, and ready to take its
flight into another World. Repentance includes more then can be done in such a
dreadful Extremity; it implies not only that part which many endeavor at that
time to act, by moving all about them with their Tears and Resolutions, but an
absolute change in their whole Man. Who can satisfy himself that his heart is
right toward God, when he has not an opportunity to try and examine his
sincerity? Can any Man be secure that if he should live, that his Vices would
not return with his Health, since 'twas necessity, not choice, that drove him
to these new Resolutions; and if he cannot, what unanswerable folly is it to
defer what reason and every Man's Conscience suggest ought presently to be
done; let us then not trust to uncertainty, but since God gives an opportunity
to be happy, not make our selves miserable; let us cast off the Old Man with
his Deeds, and betake our selves to a newness of life; and to enable us in this
work, let us set our Faces toward the Altar of God, for it is there we are to
receive strength and comfort, and every good thing. This is what we obliged our
selves to at our Baptism, and since we have lived unworthy of the First
Sacrament, let us in Humiliation and Repentance approach the Second, that our
sins may be blotted out, and we may be made meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in Light; and now if any ask what preparation we
ought to make, I answer: I know of no other than what I have endeavored to
persuade, and what is necessary and reasonable, even a true Faith and
Repentance; that the Sacrament is a Duty, is generally acknowledged, yet
through mistakes there are abundance neglect it. Our Savior was very
particular in this Order to his Disciples, and his Apostles devoutly press it
in all their Writings, and the Ancients received it as an inestimable Blessing.
We are told, that unless we Eat Christ's Body, and drink his Blood, we have no
life in us, and that this is to be done by Bread and Wine in the Holy
Communion, is what the Apostles and generality of Mankind down to this Age have
believed. Christ, when he gave it them, told them, it was his Body, and St.
Paul directs our Behavior, that we might not receive it unworthily, but
discern it as the Lord's body, and therefore first, to Examine our selves, and
then Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup, what then should hinder our
approaches to this Holy Banquet; that we are wicked is no excuse, for why are
we not otherwise; that we are afraid, because of our unworthiness; if there is
no other reason but our fear, is no Excuse. For it is not the sense of our
unworthiness that should hinder us, but our resolution, or unwillingness, to be
otherwise, and that indeed will make us unworthy for ever; for, where shall we
be washed, if not in this Fountain which is opened for Sin and Uncleanness? If
none but such as are perfect could approach this Holy Table, who then would
venture to come near? And what can we think of our Savior, that could propose
a Snare to endanger our Ruin? No, it was ordained for such as had a sense of
their Unworthiness, and were sensible of their load, but desired to be eased of
their heavy burden; Well, but they who come to the Sacrament are obliged to
live stricter lives than other Men, and some are afraid they cannot conform to
an exactness of Conversation. Why are they not as well afraid, that because
they don't lead such lives, that they shall be punished, which would be an
argument to put them upon that Trial, and when once they saw the pleasantness
of the paths of Righteousness, they would endeavor to persevere in them?
Besides, they are not obliged, but to lead such lives as is necessary to
Salvation, and how dares any Man that believes another World do less? There is
danger indeed in unworthy Receiving, and there is as great a danger in staying
away, both of them are a contempt of the Lord's Body, and will receive their
reward; in short, whatever our Scruples are that hinder us from this Ordinance,
let us with all speed endeavor to remove them, for there is no excuse for our
Abscence, nor any objection, but what may easily be answered, if we are sincere
in our inquiries; it is the neglect of this Sacrament that is the cause of our
coldness in Religion, and I cannot tell how it comes to pass, that though the
Church and State requires all that are at the Age of Sixteen to communicate at
least three times in the Year, that there is not one in a Thousand observe the
order; there are a great many considerate persons that never seem to have a
desire after it, till they come upon their Deathbed, and then are willing to
have it to conduct them to Heaven. The Ancient Church refused to Administer to
any that had not received it before, and if the discipline was maintained, it
would make us more circumspect; for a great many think if they can have the
Minister to pray by them, and give them the Sacrament, all will be well: But if
they who refused it in their Health, were denied it upon their Deathbed, it
would be a dreadful warning to others not to neglect it, and those Ministers
who venture now to Adminster it, transgress the Rubric in this case; but it is
as indiscreet to trust to This now, as to depend upon a Repentance, begun at
such a time which is hardly possible to be sincere, and if not, they are lost
for ever; there are the same Arguments to bring Men to the Sacrament, as there
are to persuade them to a newness of life, without both we are not assured of
Salvation, and he that pretends to lead a life according to God's Holy Word,
and yet refuses to eat of the Bread which came down from Heaven, how can he
hope to be raised up at the last day? The truth on it is, Men are not willing to
part with their Lusts, and as long as they are in that mind, they do well to
stay away, but do very ill to continue in such a resolution; but what shall we
say, if neither Promise, or Threats, Rewards or Punishments, Heaven or Hell,
will persuade Men to forsake their sins, nothing will; however we must never be
weary in well doing, and it is our Duty to exhort one another daily, which was
the chief inducement of this, Advice to those which never Received the
Sacrament, and this I thought I could not do in a better manner than by
showing, First, the unreasonableness of Sin, and then, Secondly, the necessity
of Repentance; to this end I have collected a form of Devotion which may be
useful in our Conversion, and when we are so happy as to be sensible of the
folly of our ways, that we can set before us the difficulty of returning, and
yet dare venture through all hardships to attain Salvation. I thought it
necessary to add some Arguments to oblige us to that Duty, which is our
interest to comply with, and which will strengthen our resolutions in Piety; to
these Directions, I have collected another form of preparitory Devotions to be
used at any time before we approach the Sacrament, and left it to the Reader's
Discretion to use as much of it, and as often as he pleases. That our behavior
in the Church might be answerable to the Solemnity, there is appointed a large
Form of Devotion, and I have endeavored to range them in a suitable Order,
that every Prayer having a particular relation to what we are then a doing, our
Minds might be more moved, and our Souls thus ascending with our Devotions, we
may pray by the Spirit, and the understanding also. I Am very willing to
believe, that all who come to this Holy Table, endeavor to be as devout as
they can, and it is possible, fancy themselves very Zealous, if they prescribe
their thoughts to that which is good in general, and no doubt it is very well if
they have so much victory over themselves, as to curb their thoughts and
desires; but if by any other helps they can arrive yet farther, and not only
when they enter the Church, leave the thoughts of the World behind, but can
place such as are suitable in their room, it is not only their virtue, but duty;
we are to consider that we are come to remember Christ, and that all our
Thoughts ought to bend themselves to such holy Meditations; we should as much
as possible pry into these Mysteries which the Angels desire to look into, and
thus by not only taking words with us when we enter the House of God, but
directions for our Thoughts too, we might not be in danger to offer up the
sacrifice of Fools. To these Devotions in the Church I have added some for our
behavior at Home, for it is necessary to keep our affections in a heat
afterward, as to kindle them before; besides, I had this design in it, to
inform some, who by their practice don't seem to know any more, than that we
are to be serious while we are about this Solemnity, and as soon as it is over,
forget their Resolutions and the Obligations they have put upon themselves, by
Eating and Drinking before the Lord. We come there to receive Grace to help up
to perform our Resolutions of amendment, as well as to receive pardon for our
past Offenses, and unless we come with this design, we can have no Absolution,
and I would to God, that we all did approach this Table with such Resolutions:
In order to it this Collection of Devotions is humbly offered, and if it shall
please God to make it an instrument, but to convert one sinner, or add a zeal
to any sincere Christian, it will abundantly recompense my trouble, and to God
alone be the Praise.

ADVICE To those who never Received the Sacrament. etc.
OUR Savior has proposed Two Sacraments, as necessary to Salvation, and the
Church of England has taken care in her Chatechism to instruct those bred in
her Communion to perform both, according to the Command of her great Lawgiver:
So that as soon as we are taught to Read, we may learn our Duty to God, our
Neighbor, and ourselves, and this for a very wise reason, that Religion may
grow up with us, that we may not be to learn our Duty when we should practice
it. But it is the unhappiness of a great many People, that they could give a
better account of their Faith when they were Children, than at the Age of
Discretion. They invert the Example of the Apostle, when they are become men,
begin to take upon them the Childish things; they think what was taught them in
their Youth was only fitting for Children to know, and don't become the study
of their graver years, till their neglect brings them almonst to that
necessity, of going to School to learn Wisdom from Babes, and get understanding
from them that have hardly any knowledge: They have not only forgot what is
required of them who come to the Lord's Supper, but are ignorant of the meaning
of it too. This is owing in great measure to the general neglect of Religion;
we live without concern, have no other Thoughts but for the present, suffer our
selves to be hurried on by our perverted Inclinations, and are without God in
the World. So miserably do we expose our selves by folly, and inconsideration
that we neither think of our condition here nor hereafter; and because we are
so Mad to live like Brutes, to fancy we shall perish like them that have no
Understanding, but let us not deceive our Souls, Religion is no Chimera, and
Heaven is worth thinking on. For this end we came into the World, and what is
so manifestly our Duty, ought to be the business of our lives. They who have
neglected, or are ignorant of it, ought to inform themselves, and be convinced
of their Sin and Disobedience. No man ought to think himself too Old, or Wise,
to be instructed; especially in Religion we may always be improving, and when
interest joins with our Duty it should be no hard matter to persuade us into a
compliance. There are very few but are persuaded in themselves of the
reasonableness of Religion, and intend at one time or other to become
Religious; they hope they shall live to a good Old Age, and then grow weary of
the World, and its Vices together; but can they think when they are fit for
nothing else, they are capable to do God good Service: So unreasonable are some
Men's expectations, though they come in at the last hour, and are past their
labor too, yet hope to stand upon the same Terms with those that have born the
heat of the day, and think God a hard Master, if he should discount for their
Idleness. Though they cannot complain with the Servant in the Gospel, that God
reaps where he does not sow, for they tacitly confess it is in their own power
to improve their Talent, but are unwilling God should have too much interest:
They are sensible their time is given them to work out their Salvation, but
suppose a small part will suffice for that, therefore reserve it for the last
thing, that at least they may conclude well; but if the night should come on
before they have finished, they must not be angry at that dismal surprise; they
knew their Master's will, and must submit to be punished for their neglect with
weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

We all have an inclination to be Happy, and accordingly pursue whatever we
think leads to Satisfaction; the only Unhappiness is, we are apt to be
mistaken, and place our Felicity in things which profit nothing; we naturally
adhere to a sensible good, fancy that Religion ties us up from those Delights,
and therefore desire to be excused, and left to our own Enjoyments. There is
little hopes of Men's growing wiser, till they are better reconciled to
Religion; it is the Devil's subtilty to represent its Precepts impracticable,
and in so loose an Age, when Men give themselves up to Ease and Luxury. Nothing
appears so terrible as the taking up the Cross, but if Men could be persuaded
to suspend their Opinion, till they become capable of giving judgment, we might
hope to see nothing bear so great a Character, as the Beauties of Religion: We
are required to deny our selves nothing that is fit for wise Men to do, and are
generally so fond of that Epithet, its wonder we don't endeavor to deserve it.
None so really can lay claim to it, as they who have the fear of God before
their Eyes; for the fear of the Lord, that is, Wisdom, and to depart from Evil,
Understanding. They have the greatest share of Knowledge, whose conversation is
in Heaven, and study in the Gospel of Christ: There we learn those wondrous
Truths which puts Philosophy to a stand, and renders the Wisdom of this World
foolishness. There we may learn what God has done for us, and what we ought to
do for our selves, could we be so happy as to be governed by our Reason, to let
our thoughts have there proper place, we should in a little time perceive that
we were not sent hither to gaze about us, that we have immortal Souls to be
taken care of, that the greatest Age is but a few days, and all the Pleasures
of this World momentary and deceitful, that if we all could rejoice in the days
of our Youth, yet we must be brought to Judgment; could we but think of these
things, we should find enough to do, to secure our interest in Heaven, and may
conveniently dispense with the Vanities of this World; for besides the evil of
them, they take us off of the contemplation of much better things. He that has
God and Eternity upon his Mind, has infinite variety to employ his Thoughts.
The most exquisite Wits have subject for their Fancies, and the ignorant may be
improving in true Wisdom.

It Is our misfortune to suffer the love of this World to prevail upon us, and
till we have something more lovely to remove our Affections, cannot easily give
a Bill of Divorce. Our Passions are strong, and when we have habituated our
selves to the love of any one thing, cannot quickly put a curb to our desires;
we talk of Heaven but at a distance, think it sufficient to take up with those
pleasures, when we can enjoy these no longer we are sure of the present, and
have a mistrust either that the future will not come, or that they are not
worth the exchange, that we should deny our selves a familliar satisfaction for
uncertain expectations. It Is from such reasons we are deluded, and though we
dare not speak out, are such fools as to mistrust in our hearts the truth of
these things. In short, it is the want of Faith, we are not fully convinced of
the existence of a Deity, or that there is a Providence in the World. This
proceeds from the want of consideration, we don't allow our selves time to
think, but take it upon trust, we don't endeavor to reconcile it to our
Reason, and having no conviction in our minds grow indifferent, at last come to
that degree of wickedness as to cast off all thoughts of God and Religion.

This is certainly the Case of too many: And even among those who are more
fully persuaded of these things; that believe there is a God, and a Judgment to
come, we find a prodigious Neglect; and have nothing but their Words, to
incline us to believe they ever heard of the Christian Religion. Indeed, they
come to Church once a a Week, hear Jesus Christ preached, and that they must
depend upon his Merits to be saved. This they are willing to believe, if God
will accept them upon that Condition; for they do not care to be concerned in
the Working out their Salvation; but are free to let our Savior have the
Honor of Conducting them to Heaven, if they may be exempt from the Severity of
Fear and Trembling: They can heartily believe any thing that favors their
Interest, and are very desirous of getting into Paradise by Faith, if God will
excufe them from Good Works. But this we must not believe; for we are as
certain as there is a God, that no unrighteous Man shall see his Face; nor any
Man, without Repentance, and a true Faith in Jesus Christ. Except we repent, we
shall all likewise perish: And unless we believe that Jesus is the Christ,
shall be damned. True Repentance is a hearty Sorrow for Sin past, and a serious
Resolution to amend our Lives for the future. True Faith will be shown by our
Works; for if we believe in him, we shall keep his Commandments. We cannot
think that God made us for nothing; and was at the Expense of so great a
Miracle, only to furnish witty Men with Matter for a strange Story. There must
be something more in Sin, than we imagine; and the Provocations of the Wicked
must be exceeding abominable. It must be of a prodigious Nature, that could so
incense a merciful God, that nothing less than the Sacrifice of his Son could
expiate. Can we think the Work of our Redemption of so little value, that it is
not to be considered? Oh! let the Consideration of this move us to be grateful
to the exceeding Love of Christ: Let us glorify God in our Lives; and let not
the Price of his Blood be utterly lost: Let the Time past of our Lives suffice
for the Works of Iniquity; and let us break off our Sins by Repentance, and
turn to the Lord our God. To which End, let us call our selves to a severe
Account, and examine the Error of our Ways; let us humble our selves in
Fasting and Prayer, beg Pardon for our Offenses, and Strength to withstand the
Assaults of the Devil, and our Inclinations; for till we are thus purified, we
expect the Grace of God in vain. Christ will not come into a filthy Habitation;
and while our Bodies are unclean, the Holy Ghost will not erect his Temple
there. How necessary is it then to begin our Repentance speedily; to day, while
it is called to day, lest any of us be hardened through the Deceitfulness of
Sin? Sin is very bewitching; and when it has got the Mastery, is not easily
resisted. Habits require a great deal of Pains to unlearn; especially, when
they are such as cause us not only to take pleasure in them our selves, but
delight in those who do the same thing: They are then become mighty Dallila's,
dearer to us than our Eyes or Limbs; we can much rather part with either than
our Lusts: Of such mighty force are they, that we not only loose our Strength,
but Reason; and are led Captives wheresoever they will. A Man thus overcome, is
miserable indeed; for he is not only under the Power of the Devil, and his own
unruly Lusts; but has God for his Enemy: And where can he then flee for
Succor? How dreadfully must his Soul be shaken, when his Conscience begins to
suggest all things are not well within, that there is a Necessity of a speedy
Alteration; that his Impieties are daring, and grown to such a height as
cannot be thought on without Horror and Confusion; when he can neither put off
these Reflections, or bear the Trial of the Prospect! The first Sight renders
him monstrous; and the Continuance, exceeding frightful! It casts him into a
thoughtless, yet amazing Condition, and leaves him under the Pressure of a
wounded Spirit! Such are generally the Conflicts of those that have submitted
to the Yoke of Satan, when they first come to themselves: And no Man that
believed the Torture of this Condition, would put himself under so dreadful a
Necessity. Alas! these are but the Beginning of Sorrows; there is Eternity
behind, and Hell, the Habitation of the Wicked for ever, unless this Sense of
Sin drives us to Repentance and Reformation. But it is uncertain whether we
shall come thus to our selves, till Death overtake us; or, since we resolved to
sin till we could sin no longer, whether there will be Place found for our
Tears. Therefore let every Man call his Ways to remembrance: But they who are
thus enslaved in Sin, let them make haste to deliver themselves from the Wrath
to come; their Case is very dangerous, they seem to be destined to Destruction;
for they have so long suffered their Lusts to have Dominion over them, that
they know not how to free themselves from this Tyranny of Sin. But blessed be
God, who has provided a Lamb for the Sacrifice, there is yet a Way for our
Redemption; God has not wholly left us without Help in this World. Though the
Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination, yet those of the Penitent are not so.
If we are so happy as to stop in this Career, have but so much Resolution to
begin a Reformation, God is so merciful as to add his Grace to help us forward
to Repentance: But it is only when God sees us set about it in earnest, for he
knows our Hearts and Thoughts long before.

Therefore let us embrace the first Thoughts of Repentance, and carry them on
to a sincere Reformation: Let us retire from the World, and humble our selves
in Fasting; and this not once or twice, but often; for we have need to cry
mightily to God, Day and Night, to be redeemed from this worse than Egyptian
Bondage. On the Day of our Humiliation, that the Misery of our Condition may
oblige us to the greater Penitence, let us first consider the Odiousness of
Sin, that we may learn to detest it; the Aggravation of it, by being committed
frequently, presumptuously, and against Knowledge; that we may abhor our selves
for our Folly and Ingratitude. Then let us reflect upon the Number of them;
which being infinite, ought to lay us in the Dust, and confess our selves to be
worse than nothing.

Reflections of a true Penitent upon his first Conviction.
O God! to what an amazing, and miserable Condition have I brought my self! I
stand exposed to thy Severest Judgment here; and am liable to thy Indignation
hereafter. I know, I am not in a State of Salvation, and yet cannot lament my
Misery. I am a Sinner, and reflect upon the evil Consequence of Sin; yet am
neither Terrified, or Sorrowful. What a heap of Contradiction and Wickedness
am I made up of, that believe the Pleasures of thy Law, and yet depart from thy
Commandments; that fear the Justice of thy Anger, and yet cannot be persuaded to
forsake the Evil of my Ways. Thus miserable, O God, do I behold my self; but
thou see, that I am infinitely more vile than I can imagine; Though my Crimes
appear to me beyond my expression, and my Heart thus condemns me, thou art
greater than my Heart, and know all things. Thou know how often each Sin
has been repeated, and the vileness of that Sin; and how much more heinous, by
the habitual Repetition, when my Depraved Nature will neither let me know the
Baseness of the one, or the Ingratitude of the other. I am insensible how much
thou art offended by one Sin, and am forgetful how often I have repeated that
Offense; and can only tell that Sin in me is above measure sinful. O! that
there was a Heart in me even to apprehend this! that I could say with a sincere
Heart, and pensive Soul, Lord, I am a miserable Sinner. But this is not in my
power; I can only reflect upon my Sins at a distance, as if they did not
concern me, and my poor Soul was not to answer for them at thy Tribunal. O God,
thy Hand is heavy upon me, I know my Sins are abominable in thy Sight, and that
thy Judgment inflicts this Hardness of Heart, and that thou art resolved to try
me no longer. Thou see that I am Grounded in Wickedness, that evil is
continually with me, that if thou should forgive, I shall revolt again, and
wherefore shoudst thou withhold thine Hand. O my God, I have nothing to offer
to put a Stop to thy Vindictive Justice; but confess, I deserve Eternal
Damnation: But who can be content to dwell in Everlasting Burnings? Is there
then no Way to escape thy Vengeance? Will thou be angry for ever? Yes, O God;
unless I repent, thou will bring me to worse than nothing; for thou will
condemn me to Eternal Torment. How can I repent, unless thou change my Nature,
and give me a Heart to be sorry, and abhor the Evil of my Ways? But why should
I expect this Mercy, that have abused all others. I cannot look up to thee with
any Confidence, to beg thee to have Patience with me; for my Prayers must be an
Abomination, and my Devotions no way pleasing in thy Sight: Oh! the Misery that
I have brought my self into, God has withdrawn himself, and taken his Holy
Spirit from me; there remains only, that I be reserved against the Revelation
of that Day, in which the Righteous Judgments of God will appear, to condemn
me, and all such ungrateful Souls, to the Torments of Hell. Righteous art thou,
O Lord; and in the midst of Flames will I confess thy Justice. Fear is come
upon me; and thy Judgment is the severer, in that I am not sensible of the
Danger. Will thou laugh at this my Calamity? And shall not mine Eyes be open,
till the Flames of Hell terrify them? Will thou suffer me thus to sink down
into Torment; and despise the Groans of a Soul in an Abyss of Misery? Oh, I
could be content to yield to thy severest Inflictions here, if I could be
brought to the favor of God: But I dare not ask of Thee to correct me, least
thou do it in Judgment; and yet I dread thy Rod that it will come, and how can
I bear to fall into the Hands of the Living God. Who can deliver me from thy
Power, Oh, thou Omnipotent God? What can I do when Misery thus abounds, and
each Reflection presents Damnation to my view? Surely, if I was truly affected
with my Condition, it would work upon my Spirit, and when my Soul was sensible
of Sin, and how bitter a thing it is to depart from God, it would cause such
Relentings and Tremblings, such Contrition and Humiliation, as becomes a Soul
loaded with my Crimes. Oh, that my Conscience would rise up against me, and
call me to the strictest Account, that my Soul was wounded within me. That I
had the fear of an angry God deeply imprinted upon my Soul; Oh, that I was a
sorrowful Sinner. Oh, that I could grieve as never Man grieved; but alas, it is
not in my power thus to afflict my self, and what would it avail me if I could
wrack my Soul, and put my Nature into terrible Conflicts. Can the Sighs and
Groans, and torturing Convulsions of such a Sinner, move Compassion in the Most
High; will not God be Deaf to my Complaint, and regardless of my Cries? Is
there then no Help, and must I perish for Ever, wherefore have thou made all
Men for Naught? Why did thy Exuburant love express it self to lost Mankind by
such a woundrous Miracle? Why did thou empty thy self, and come down among us,
become Poor, endure Hardship, Cold and Hunger, and run through a Sea of Blood?
But to atone those Crimes, from which Men nor Angels were able to set us Free,
to afford us that Mercy which the justice of God would not allow of. Oh, my
God, have thou only excepted me, will thou be so severe with me who have most
need of the satisfaction of my Savior which was offered for a Sinful World. I
am inexpressibly Miserable, and want to be sensible of my Condition, and will
infinite Mercy refuse what the love of God came on purpose to do. Can my Sins
come near the dimensions of thy Mercy? I own to my Confusion, I am as great a
Sinner as a mortal Man can be; but it is neither beyond thy Power, nor unsual to
thy Mercy to relieve such a matchless Object of Distress. I confess I Am not a
penitent Sinner, but thou can make me one, and though I want an humble and
contrite Spirit, yet thou can enable me to offer up a Sacrifice that thou will not Despise. Oh, my abused Jesus, I fly to thee, thou may indeed censure
the Approach, but it is thy Love, thy Mercy, and my own Unworthiness which
drives me to thee; thou know I Am more unworthy then I think my self, but was
I yet worse, I firmly believe thy Blood can cleanse me, and that the merit of
thy Cross and Passion can cover my imperfections. Oh, Holy Spirit of God,
inspire me with the humblest Soul and devoutest Affections, that I may apply my
self to the Father of Mercies, and be made a fit Object for the God of comfort
to relieve. O God the Father, O God the Son, O God the Holy Ghost; O Blessed
Trinity have mercy upon me, a miserable Sinner.

We may reasonably suppose that a Man who has devoted himself to Wickedness, at
the unburthening his Conscience, must entertain some such thoughts as these.
It Is natural he should be divided betwixt Hope and Fear; the more he is
sensible of his Sins, the greater his Astonishment. His Humiliation and mean
Opinion of himself cannot be two severe, if he keeps from Despair; for after
all, we can neither sufficiently know the evil of Sin, nor lament for
committing it. The more we consider, the greater will be our Aversion, and when
we have arrived to such a sense of Sin, as will beget in us a hatred to it, we
may with more security promise an Amendment. But before we proceed to that, let
us by the help of some Catalogue, of Sin examine our Condition more fully, for
the Heart is deceitful, and the Memory willing to forget what it is afraid to
consider. Having laid before us such a Scheme, let us then beg of God to enable
us in this work, that we main't deceive our Souls. Let us upon our Knees
consider that we are now to Examine our selves of those things which we are to
Answer at the Day of Judgment, if we don't Confess and Repent shall be
miserable for ever, and that it is much better that we condemn our selves, than
leave it to the Tribunal of a just God; therefore believing we are in the
presence of God, as we certainly are at all times, but God is more especially
present, when we are upon Religious Duties; let us say.

Oh, my God! hear the Voice of my humble Petition now I cry unto thee, and lift
up my Hands to thy mercy Seat. Behold, Lord, now I am about to search into my
own Heart, but alas, my Heart is Deceitful and desperately Wicked, how can I
know it? Thou therefore that searchest the Heart and triest the Reins, discover
to me all the evil and deceits of my own Heart, that I may Confess, Bewail and
forsake them, and obtain mercy. Lord hear me, Lord help me, for the merits of
Jesus my Savior, Amen.

Oh, my Soul! Thou art now in the presence of the Great Judge of Heaven and
Earth, before whose dreadful Tribunal thou must certainly appear at the day of
Judgment, to give a strict Account of all thy Actions, of every idle Word, and
every evil Thought, and thy own Conscience will then be thine Accuser.

Think, O my Soul, think if thou can, what unimaginable Horrors will seize an
impenitent Sinner, when the last Trump calls him out of his Grave, and Devils
begin to drag him to God's Judgment Seat! What would such a Wretch give to
purchase one such opportunity of Repentance, as God now in great mercy gives
thee; if ever thou hopest to escape those Horrors. O my Soul, make thy Peace
with God, judge thy self here, least thou be Condemned hereafter.

Let us now proceed to ask our selves whether we are Guilty or not; when we
find our selves Guilty, let us set it down upon a Paper, and say.

Lord have Mercy on me, and forgive me this sin.

To those we have not consented, let us humbly praise God, and say.

Glory be to thee, O Lord, for preserving me from this Sin. O continue thy
Goodness, and give me Grace to resist it to my lives end.

After we have ranslak'd our Breast, and laid before us the dismal scene of our
Folly, we shall certainly be moved at our Transgressions, and our Repentance
will be ushered in with Sighs and Groans, to testify our Abhorrence, or Tears
to show our Trouble. It is possible with both together, and when God sees us
thus Relenting and Trembling, Weeping and Blushing for our Offenses; he may be
moved through the intercession of our Savior, to hear our humble Petitions,
for such a Sacrifice he is pleased with, and a Heart thus broken God will not
despise. Therefore let us now humble our selves and with all possible
Penitence, confess our selves to God in the following form.

Righteousness, O Lord, belongs unto thee, but unto me confusion of Face, the
Vainest, the Vilest, the sinfullest of all the Children of Men.

Lord, I am vile in my own Eyes, and desire to be more vile, because my sins
have made me vile in thine.

I am not worthy of the Air I breath, of the Earth I tread upon, or the Sun
that shines upon me; much less worthy to lift up Hands or Eyes to Heaven, for
thou have said that no unclean thing shall come within thy sight, how then
shall I appear who am so miserably defiled?

If the Man, according to thine own Heart, could say that he was a Worm, and no
Man, Lord what am I?

If Abraham, who had the Honor to be called thy Friend, could say that he was
but Dust and Ashes, O God, what am I?

O my God, thou maidst me of nothing; and thou see how I have spoiled this
Work of thine: I have made my self worse than nothing, for I am still in my
Sins, and know not what to do, but this I will do.

I will confess my Wickedness, and be sorry for my Sins. I will pour out my
Prayers in the bitterness of my Spirit; and therefore now Lord call my Sins to
my Remembrance, and when thou have so done, blot them out of thy Remembrance,
and Pardon me.

A Confession of Sin.
O Thou great Judge of Heaven and Earth, before whose glorious Majesty, even
the good Angels who never sinned, fall prostrate and tremble; with what
debasement and dread ought I to appear before thy awful Presence, who am but
Dust and Ashes, and which is infinitely worse a miserable Sinner.

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, God Almighty, thou art of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity, with the least approbation, the way of the wicked and the sacrifice
of the wicked is an Abomination unto thee: Woe is me then, O Lord, Woe is me, for
I have inclined unto Wickedness, but for the sake of thy well-beloved Son, cast
not out my prayer, nor turn thy mercy from me.

Miserable wretch that I am, I have gone astray from the very Womb, I was
shapen in Wickedness, and in Sin did my Mother Conceive me. Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean, What is Man then, O God, that he should be
Clean, or he that is born of a Woman, that he should be Righteous? Thou, Lord,
put no trust in thy Saints, The Heavens are nor clean in thy sight, and the
very Angels thou chargest with folly.

How much more abominable than am I, who daily drink iniquity like Water. Lord
Pity, cleanse, forgive and save me, for thy mercies sake. I know, O God, that
in my flesh dwells no good thing, for when I would do Good, Evil is present
with me, and I see a Law in my Members warring against the Law of my Mind,
bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin: Lord have mercy on me, and
deliver me from this body of Death, from this tyranny of Sin.

Alas, my whole Nature is corrupt, infinitely prone to all Evil, and a verse
to all that is Good; my Understanding is full of Ignorance and error, my will
perverse, my Memory tenacious of all things that may pollute me, but forgetful
of my Duty; my Passions are inordinate, my Senses the inlets to all impurity; I
have abused all my faculties, and am unclean, unclean.

Lord pity, cleanse, forgive, and save me, for thy mercies sake.

O Lord God, how have I through my whole life violated the sollemn Vow I made
to thee at Baptism, by eagerly persuing the Vanities of this Wicked World; by
early yiedling to the Temptation of the Devil, by greedily indulging my own
carnal Desires and Lust, by a fruitless and dead faith, and by a disobedience
to thy holy Will and Commandments.

Father, I have Sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy
to be called thy Son; I have Sinned, O Lord God, I have Sinned against Thee. By,
etc.

[Here make your confession of Sins against God, and then add,

O Jesu, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, let thy Blood cleanse me from these
sins: O pity, forgive, and save me for thy mercies sake.

I have sinned, O Lord God, I have sinned against thee, and my own self. By, etc.

[Here confess your sins against your Self, and then add,

O Jesu, Lamb of God, etc.

I have sinned, O Lord God, I have sinned against thee, and my Neighbor. By, etc.

[Here confess your sins against your Neighbor, and then add,

O Jesu, Lamb of God, etc.

O Lord God, my wickedness is exceeding great, and my iniquities are infinite;
they are more in number than the hairs of my head, and my heart would fail me,
but that I know thy mercies are greater than my sins. Have mercy upon me
therefore, O God, according to the multitude of thy mercies do away my Offenses.

Who, alas, can tell how often he Offends? Oh, cleanse thou me from my secret
faults; from all my sins of Ignorance, or Infirmity, or Omission, or which I
have not observed, or which I have forgot, Lord, lay none of them to my charge:
Father, forgive me, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me. O remember not the sins and
offenses of my Youth, but receive me, O heavenly Father, into the Arms of thy
Fatherly compassion, and forgive me all my Transgressions for the merits of
Jesus, thy Son, and my Savior, Amen.

O Lord God of Mercy and Pardon, give me a just remembrance and sad
apprehension of my sins; teach me to, bewail them with as great indignation and
bitterness, as I have committed them with complacency and delight: Let my
Prayer and Confession come into thy presence, and obtain mercy and pardon for
me. Let not thy Justice and Severity so remember my sins as to forget thy own
mercy, and though I deserve to be condemned, yet thou can not lose that
glorious attribute whence flows comfort to us, and hopes of being saved. Spare
me therefore, O merciful God; for to give pardon to a sinner that confesses his
faults, and begs remission, is not impossible to thy Power, nor
disproportionate to thy Justice, nor unusual to thy mercy. Blessed Jesu,
acknowledge in me whatsoever is thine; cleanse me from whatsoever is amiss:
Have pity on me, now in the time of mercy, and condemn me not when thou come
to judgment, for what profit is there in my Blood. Thou delightest not in the
death of a Sinner, but in his Conversion is joy in Heaven; and when thou have
delivered me from my sins, and saved my Soul, I shall praise and magnify thy
Name to all Eternity, O Jesu, God be merciful to me a miserable Sinner.

O Lord, who art the God that hear prayers, and alone has power finally to
forgive sin, I beseech the mercifully hear, and graciously answer these my
Petitions for pardon. I am a sinner, and deserve punishment, but, O Lord,
remove my guilt, and spare me, who do now confess with shame and sorrow, my
sins unto thee, that I whose Conscience by sin is accused so justly now before
thee, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved from my Guilt, for the sake and
through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious
Death and Burial, Good Lord deliver.

O Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the World, Have mercy upon

O Christ hear me,

Lord have mercy upon me,

Christ have, etc.

Lord, have mercy, etc.

Our Father which art, etc.

A Prayer.
O most gracious God, who out of thy boundless Compassion to thy Creatures, art
never wanting in any means that may draw them to thy self. I the unworthiest of
thy Servants, desire to give Glory to thee in a hearty acknowledgement, that
thou have afforded me all the methods that might either force or allure me to
Obedience; but I have resisted that goodness of thine which should have lead me
to Repentance: Thy compassion has been affronted by my continuance in sin, and
thy forbearance only served to harden me in Iniquity. I have lived to provoke
thy Mercies, by endeavoring to out-vye them with my Sins; what can I expect
but to find a Judgment worthy of God, such an irreversible ruin as might
render me an astonishing instance of thy severity to the whole Earth. Thou have
attested thy self to be indeed a Father of Mercies, and yet I who enjoy the
benefit of them, neither consider them as Blessings, nor thee as a God; but
Atheistically defy that providence by which I subsist. (Thou give me a time
for Repentance, but I Am unwilling to throw off this Bondage of Sin, and think
it a hardship to submit to that Yoke whieh is easy and delightful, and if I
could stifle the Terrors of my Conscience, would glady proclaim License to my
Lusts. These are the base returns I have made; thus have I requited the Lord,
and incurred his Displeasure, yet I am fearless of his Wrath, and cannot repent
me of my ways, nor consider the Evil I have done. Surely my Heart is heardned;
and I am nigh unto Cursing: O Lord, what can I plead to avert the sentence, who
am as far from Penitence as Innocence? How can I pray against that Vengeance
which I make it my business to pull down? if thou, O Lord, should spare me,
what would it avail if it serve but to set me at a greater Hostillity with
thee? O merciful Savior, who gave thy self a ransom for Sinners, look again
with compassionate Eyes on me, who needs now a second Redemption, even a rescue
from my self; Lord, thou see the miserable state to which I am reduced, Where
is thy Pity, and the sounding of thy Bowels toward the Afflicted? Oh! bow thy
Heaven and come down, hear the Prayer of a distressed Sinner, deliver me from
that misery I have involved my self, put thy Laws a new into my Heart, and
write them in my Mind. O blessed Mediator, who prayedst for thy Crucifiers,
interceed also for me, who have under the name of a Disciple crucified thee
afresh; and though I have nothing to say for my self, cannot pretend that I knew
not what I did; yet let thy Stripes and Wounds, thy Cross and Passion, plead
for me: Oh! let thy Blessed Spirit breath again upon me, that even these dry
Bones may live in thy sight. Let him so effectually convince and reprove,
illuminate and excite me, that I may cleanse my self from all filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, walk worthy of the holy Vocation whereto I am called, and
evidence my relation to the Prince of Peace. Oh, that my ways were thus direct,
but alas, how little Disposition have I toward it: This change, must be only
the work of that mighty Power, which is able to subdue all things to it self;
and yet, O Lord, with what face can I beg of thee to force me to that happiness
which I still resolve to resist. What can I say to thee, O thou preserver, thou
redeemer of men, who have put my self beyond all the ordinary means of thy
grace: I can only lay my self at thy Feet, display my misery, and leave thee to
consider thine own compassion. Oh, let that move thee to do for me, whatever my
wretched state is in need off. O Lord, Hear, O Lord, forgive, consider, and do
it, for thy name sake: Thou art Jesus, a Savior, save thy servant from his
sin, and let me not slide back by a perpetual backsliding. Oh, abandon not thy
poor creature, Lord, carest thou not that I perish. Turn thee again, O Lord,
sanctify and cleanse me for I am exceeding sinful, create a new Spirit within
me, melt my obdurate heart into contrition, and if it cannot be done without
the rigor of thy Laws, Lord do that, or any thing with me, so that I may
become a Vessel of honor meet for thy Service. But, O Lord, if thy gentler
method may have any effect, be pleased to continue thy Long-suffering, and
though I have no pretense to mercy, yet do thou assert thine own work; be
merciful because thou have been so, dispense to me whatever thou see most apt
to reduce me, and that thy outward applications may be no longer in vain,
enforce and enliven them with thy free Spirit, subdue my obstinate perverseness,
and give me at last such Grace as I may not turn into wantonness. Oh, thou, to
whom all things are possible, who have been so merciful to me, work again
greater miracles in me; and of a profane ungrateful wretch, make me a penitent
and obedient servant, that I may study as much to please as I have to provoke
thee, and by a continuance in well doing, may obtain the Crown which thou have
laid up for those that serve thee, and possess eternal joys in the Kingdom of
thy Father, which thou, O blessed Jesus, have purchased with thy blood, and
sealed by thy Spirit; To which blessed Trinity be ascribed all praise, honor,
Glory, now, and to eternity, Amen. O Lord God, I am Ashamed, and Blush to lift
up my Face to thee, for my iniquities are increased over my Head, and my
Trespasses grown up unto Heaven.

O my Soul, what Fruit have I reapt from all the pleasures of Sin, but Vanity
and Vexation of Spirit. Lord, I am ashamed of my own Folly, Madness, and
Disingenuity; when I call to mind how greedily I have sucked in my own
Pollution; how treacherously I have betrayed my own Soul to Temptations; and
combined with the Devils to hasten and increase my own Damnation; how
obstinately I have fled from thee, when thy Mercy persued me with promises of
Pardon; how unworthily I have abused thy Goodness, and Forbearance, and
Long-sufferings which should have led me to Repentance.

Son of David, Blessed Redeemer, Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the
World, have Mercy upon me; O Jesu, be a Jesus unto me! Thou that sparedst thy
Servant Peter that denied thee thrice; thou that did cast seven Devils out of
Mary Magdalen, and forgavist the Woman taken in Adultery, and did bear the
convert Thief from the Cross to the joys of Paradise, have Mercy upon me also.
Though my Offenses are greater than these, yet not their Sins, nor mine, nor
the Sins of the whole World, can equal thy Glorious Mercy which is Infinite and
Eternal as thy Self. I acknowledge, O Lord, that I am Vile, but yet redeemed
with thy precious Blood; thou, O Lord, love to show Mercy, behold then a fit
Object for thy pity. My sins are so great and many, that to forgive me, will
be a glorious act of mercy: Despise me not, O Lord, for I am thy Creature,
despise me not, for thou did die for me; cast me not away in thine Anger, for
thou came to seek and save me: Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation, let thy
Holy Spirit lead me from the Error of my ways, into the paths of Righteousness,
to great degrees of Repentance, and through all the parts of a Holy Life, to a
Godly and Holy Death. Grant this, O Blessed Jesu for thy Mercies, and for thy
pity sake, Amen.

Most merciful and indulgent Jesus, hear the complaint of a sad and miserable
Sinner. I have searched into the secret recesses of my Soul, there I find
nothing but Horror and a barren Wilderness, a neglected Conscience overgrown
with Sins, and cares beset with fears and sore Amazement. I tremble when I
remember that sad Truth, If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
Wicked and Ungodly appear? I know, O Lord, that all my secret impurities shall
be laid open at thy dreadful Judgment. O just and dear God! how shall I
appear, who shall plead for me, who am laden with Impurities, Vanity,
Ingratitude, Malice and the Terrors of an affrightning Conscience? Wilt not
thou answer for me, O Jesus, thou art my Judge and my Advocate, thou art to
pass Sentence upon me for those Sins for which thou die. O reserve not my
Sins to be punished in the life to come, for then I die Eternally, but bring me
in this World to a severe Repentance. Behold, I am in thy hand, grant I may so
Weep and be contrite for my Sins, that in the hour of my Death, I may find
Mercy, and in the day of Judgment be freed from the Terrors of thy Wrath, and
the Sentence of the Wicked. Thou have spared me all this while, and not taken
me off in the midst of my Sins, which is an unspeakable Mercy, for if thou had
dealt with me according to my Deserts, I had been now at this instant sealed up
to an Eternity of Torments hopelesly miserably, fearing the Revelation of thy
day with an insupportable Amazement. But now under the sweet influences of thy
mercy, I am praying to thee, confessing my sins with Sorrow for my ingratitude,
but with a full hope in thy Mercy. O my dear God, let thy Grace speedily work
that in me, for which thou so long have spared me, even a true Faith and Holy
Life; establish in me a great contrition for my Sins, lead me on to an humble
Confession, and let thy Grace make me bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, O
Blessed Jesu, who lives and reigns, ever one God, world without end, Amen.

I hate all evil ways, O Lord, But thy Law will I Love: O God, with shame I
confess that other Lords besides thee have hitherto had Dominion over me.
Miserable Wretch that I am, that I should begin so early to offend my Creator
and sin so much in so short a time. Lord, I fear I never yet thoroughly
considered how evil and bitter a thing it is to depart from thee; O make me
every day more and more sensible of the Error of my ways, and of my own infinite
Vileness. Miserable Wretch that I am, that ever I should commit those sins
which expose me to all the vials of thy Wrath, to all the curses of thy Law, to
all thy judgments Temporal or Spiritual in this life, and to all the Horrors
and Despair and Torments of the Damned in the life to come.

Miserable wretch that I am, that ever I should transgress that Law of thine; O
God which is so Just, Holy and Good, perfect and so condescending to my
Infirmities, and in keeping of which there are so great, so unconceivable
rewards.

O Blessed Savior, how can I ever sufficiently lament the guilt of my Sins
which was so great, that nothing but thy own inestimable Blood could expiate.

O Blessed Spirit, instill true penitential sorrow into my Soul; make my Head
Waters, and my Eyes Fountains of Tears, or do thou supply the want of them with
Sighs and Groans unutterable. But alas, I know all the Tears I can possibly
shed, can never wash away the least of my Sins, it is thy Blood only, Lord, that
can do it.

O Heavenly Father, in the defect of my own Tears I offer thee, the Blood of
thy own well beloved Son, for his sake have mercy upon me.

I have been in the snare of the Devil, and been led Captive by him, and sin
has reigned in my Mortal Body, and I have obeyed it in the lust thereof, but
from henceforth I resolve to serve none but thee, and from this very moment I
utterly forsake all my sins and turn to thee. I do from my heart renew my
Baptismal Vow; I do for ever renounce the Devil and all his Works, and the
Vanities of this World which may pervert me from thy Service, and all the
sinful Lust of the Flesh. O my God, I do steadfastly believe all the Articles
of the Christian Faith, I will keep thy Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of my life. All this I am bound to do and believe, and by
thy help so I will; and I heartily thank thee, O Father, who have called me to
this state of Salvation, through Jesus Christ my Savior, and I humbly pray
thee for his sake to give me Grace to continue in the same to my lives end.

O Lord God I have Sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous
Judgments; but alas, I Am not able of my self to do nothing that is Good, not
so much as to think one good thought, and I no sooner shall rise from my Knees,
but I fear I shall be tempted to those very sins I have now so solemnly
renounced, and those Temptations will certainly overcome me, unless thou, Lord,
do reasonably interpose thy Grace to withold me, but I can do all things
through the strengthening me; do thou then, O Blessed Savior, perfect thy
strength in my weakness, for in thee only is my trust. O my God, thou have
promised to give thy Holy Spirit to those that ask it. Behold, Lord, I do
Humbly, I do Earnestly ask thy Holy Spirit now of thee. O fulfill thy gracious
Promises to me! O vouchsafe me that Holy Spirit I pray for, to purify my
corrupt Nature, to strengthen my Weakness, to comfort me in Troubles, to
support me in Discouragements, to succor me in Temptations, and to asist me in
all the part of my Duty. Thou, O searcher of hearts, know the sins I Am most
inclined to; [here name them] herein will lie my greatest danger of
Backsliding; but, O my God, I beg a double portion of thy Spirit, and
invisible aid against them; hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my
Footsteps slip not. O work in me that victorious Faith by which I may overcome
the World, the Devil, and my own corrupt Nature.

My help stands in thee, O great Creator of Heaven and Earth, and I commit my
Soul to thy keeping. O thou that art Faithful as well as Almighty, keep that
safe which is committed to thy Trust, watch over me that I may not be beguiled
by the deceitfulness of Sin, or betrayed by my own treacherous heart, or
surprised by my Ghostly Enemies, and give me grace to Watch and Pray
incessantly my self, least I enter into Temptation.

O Heavenly Father, for thine own infinite Mercy sake, for thy Truth and Promise
sake, for all the Merits and Sufferings of the Son of thy Love in whom thou art
always well pleased; pardon all my Sins and Failings, and receive me into thy
favor for the sake of him who has taught me to call the Father, and when I
pray to say,

Our Father which art, etc.

The following Form to be added when we have some assurances, that our Hearts
are steadfast toward God.
O the God of my life, and the unexhausted Fountain of mercy, which can never
be drawn dry. I have now by the assistance of thy Holy Spirit, gone through,
though with weak and trembling steps, the whole exercise of Repentance; for I
have confessed my Sins, and thou have promised, upon my Confession of them, not
to impute them to me; I have gone one step farther, I have repented of my Sins,
and thou have promised upon my Repentance, thou will remember them no more; and
because thy Holy Word has taught me, that a new life is the only Repentance, I
have this day in thy sight, and in the presence of all the Angels, that attend
thee in the conversion of a sinner, made my firm resolution never to fall again
into the Sins I have repented of, and now

O God the Father of Heaven, who can not be thought so cruel as to make me
only to destroy me,

[Have mercy upon me.

O God the Son, who knowing thy Father's Will, did make it thy business to
come into the World to save me,

[Have Mercy, etc.

O God the Holy Ghost, who to the same end did sanctify me in my Baptism,
and have so often since breathed Holy thoughts into my Soul,

[Have mercy, etc.

O Holy Blessed and Glorious Trintiy, whom in three persons I adore as my one
and only true God.

[Have mercy on me.

Hear me, O Lord.
Help me, O Lord.
Save me, or else I perish.
Lord, carest thou not that I perish.

Thou that would have all men to be saved.

Thou who would have none to perish.

And will thou now show thine anger against a Worm, against a Vapor that
vanishes before thee? O remember how short my time is, and deliver not my Soul
into the power of Hell, for what profit is there in my Blood; no, let me live
in thy sight, let me live, O my God, that my Soul may praise thee: O remember
for whose sake it was that thou came from the Bosom of thy Father: Remember
for whom it was that thou enduredst the agony of the Cross, and shed thy
precious Blood. Was it not for the Sins of the whole World, and have thou
particularly excepted me? Can I imagine thou die for Sinners of a lower kind,
and left such as I without Remedy: O how easy is it to thee to forgive, for
it is thy Nature; how proper is it for thee to save, for it is thy Name; how
suitable is it to thy only end of coming into the World, for it was thy
business; and when I consider that I am chief of Sinners, may I not urge the
Father and say, shall the very chief of thy business be left undone.

[Mercy, Mercy, Good Lord.

I ask not of thee any longer the things of this World, but thy pardoning
Mercy. O that I could hear thee say, as thou did to him in the Gospel, My Son
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

O that I could never sin against thee more, never purposely, deliberately,
wilfully sin against thee more, and for those sins of daily Incursion, those
over familiar corruptions of my Nature which thou have not yet given me
strength enough to conquer, Lord, either subdue them by degrees, or lay them
not to my Charge; but wherein soever my Conscience most accuses me, therein, O
my God, be thou most merciful unto me.

[Save me, O Lord, as a brand snatch out of the Fire.

Receive me, O my Jesus, as a sheep that has wandered, but now is returned to
the Great Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul.

Let this day, O my God, be noted in thy Book, do not thou forget my Prayers,
nor suffer me to forget my Resolutions; though I am weak, though I am unworthy,
though I am unprofitable, yet I am thy Servant, and here upon my bended Knees,
I humbly beg of thee that I may live and die so.

Lord hear my Prayers, and let my cry come unto thee. Lord pardon my Prayers,
and let not my coldness, and wanderings, and infinite unworthiness turn them
into Sin. Lord hear my Prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.

O Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the Eternal God, interpose thy holy Death, thy
Cross and Passion between thy Judgment and my Soul now, and in the hour of my
death, granting unto me Grace and Mercy; to all faithful people, pardon and
peace; to the Church, unity and amity; to all Sinners, especially those I have
led into Sin, Repentance and Amendment; to us all, life and Glory everlasting,
who live and reignest ever one God World without end. Amen.

O Lord, bless me, and keep me, O Lord, Make thy face to shine upon me, O Lord,
lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and give me peace for ever. Amen.

Having performed this Office with due sincerity, let us reflect upon what we
have been doing; it is possible the result of our Thoughts may terminate in a
mixture of fear and joy: But we ought not to let either passion prevail more
than is justly necessary; don't let our fear depress, and cast us into such a
Melancholy, as may suggest, God will not be reconciled, and if we have been dull
in the performance of these things, that God has rejected us. The Devil knows
how fatal this course is, to redeem us from his Power; he is very busy to
prevent our repentance, and abuse our imaginations with allusions; perhaps our
own disuse of prayer has rendered us incapable of a due attention; it is
impossible to become immediately good from being very wicked; or that we should
pray with the same steadfastness, as they who are accustomed to this duty: We
are therefore to strive to the uttermost; where we fail to be sorry, ask God's
Pardon and Grace to do better for the future, and in a little time we shall
prevail to our satisfaction: On the other side, don't let our joy puff us up,
and because we have shed a few Tears, said so many Prayers, Fasted and given
Alms, that we are now become perfect, and need no more Repentance; we have but
set the first step to this great work of our Salvation, were we sure we had
fully conquered sin, and should not suffer our selves to be deceived any more:
Yet this negative part of Christianity is not sufficient, it is not enough that
we cease to do Evil, but learn to do Well; we are now to begin our course, and
as we have many things to unlearn, so there are abundance to learn, without
which we shall never see the Face of God. What they are the Scripture will
inform us, it is from thence we are to learn our perfection, for he has showed
thee, O man what is Good, to do Justice, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God; we are to attend the House of Prayer, frequent the Sacrament, and be
holy in all manner of Conversation. If we want to be informed in any thing, let
us have recourse to our Pastor, that he may satisfy our Consciences. I would
advice that our Confession be made to some discreet Minister; for it is a great
sign of our Repentance, when we are thus willing to take shame to our selves;
besides 'twill be a greater restraint-upon us. We shall be afraid to join in
the next Temptation, when we know we must confess it; it is the depravedness of
our Nature to be afraid, rather of Men than God. We are not scrupulous to do
those things in private, which we could not do before Men; it is seldom that
Companions in Wickedness will suffer one another to be Witnesses of their
shame, so easy is it to be afraid to confess what we don't blush to commit;
but this I leave to every Man's Conscience, but let him have a care he don't
deceive his own Soul. We shall be tortured to little purpose to put our selves
upon mock Repentances, and when our Confessions come wilfully short of our
sins, we wilfully exclude our selves from the Favor and Mercy of God; 'twill
be a sad remembrance at the last day, to think 'twas in our power to be Happy,
that we were not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet must fall short of the
Glory of God. To prevent which, let us deal Faithfully with our Souls, when we
think we stand, be careful we don't fall, and having begun our course to
continue to our lives end, that we may be saved.

When we come abroad into the World, there is a necessity we set a watch over
ourselves, we must expect to be attacked, if we can bear the first assault, the
rest will fall by degrees, and every Temptation be less powerful; when we are
first tempted let us remember, that this is the very thing that has cost us so
much trouble, which we vowed to resist, which is our mortal Enemy, and which
will set us at a greater variance with God. How can we do this thing, and sin
against Heaven? Let us Remember this is the first Trial, if we submit, how can
we think to prevail another time? the next Temptation may have a better
appearance. There may be a Thousand things to render it more taking, and so by
degrees we shall be brought to our old state, and the last condition will be
worse than the first. We must not allow our selves in the Commission of any one
known sin, we must resist the beginning, we must not suffer our selves to think
upon old Habits, but with abhorrence; for it is not only a sin, but will
endanger us to fall back. If we take pleasure in their remembrance, the Devil
wont fail to excite our delight, by adding some new relish to make them more
acceptable; if we would shun the danger, we must avoid the occasion, and then
need not fear being led into Temptation. But there is a greater motive yet; we
must remember we are but beginning, and to look back at the first step is such
a piece of folly, that every body must be ashamed of. Sure none can be so
unreasonable to desire it should be reckoned among their good Deeds, that they
only thought of Repentance; if we are truly sensible of our sins, we shall be
very desirous to get rid of them: We are taught there is no way, but by coming
to Christ, they that come unto him must do the Will of his Father, to those he
gives power to become the Sons of God, the Children of God are manifest; they
that do wickedness are not of God. Let us endeavor therefore to add to our
Repentance, Obedience, that acceptable Sacrifice, and be forward in all the
duties of Christianity; that so we may approve our selves in well doing, for
it is the will of the Lord that we add to our Faith, Virtue; and when we have
tried our selves, that we can resist Temptation, and are ready to Good Works;
let us then prepare to meet the Lord at his Holy Table, that we may receive
Grace and Strength, to walk in the same all the days of our lives. This is the
great duty of the New Law, and there needs no arguments to bring those to the
Sacrifice, who are sensible of their necessities, or are desirous of growing
better. Our Church has taken care to instruct every Christian how he may become
a worthy Receiver, by telling him first what he ought to Believe and then what
he ought to Practice. I shall content my self with the method of the Church in
both these Cases, and recommend it to those who are desirous to be informed.
Bread and Wine is what the Lord has commanded to be received, and the Church
has told us, that they signify the Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily
and indeed taken by the Faithful, and the benefits are the strengthening and
refreshing of our Souls. This is what we are positively to believe, and when we
can give our entire assent, let us according to the Direction of the Church
examine our selves, whether we repent truly of our former sins, steadfastly
purposing to lead a new Life, have a lively Faith in God's mercy through Jesus
Christ, with a thankful Remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all
Men. This is in short the Duty of every Communicant, and no Man who would come
to the Lord's Supper worthily, can leave out any of these things; instead of a
great many Arguments, I must press the observance of them. It Is the misfortune
of a great many to think they have discharged their Duty, if they can use so
much Self-denial as to refrain from their usual excess a week before the
Sacrament; say the Morning and Evening Devotion, and bring themselves to
confess they are sorry, for what upon a little Examination, they find a miss.
This they think is Repentance enough, and because their Book finds no more work
for them, set down well satisfied with their performance. They seem willing to
compound the matter with God Almighty, confess themselves Bank-rupt, and desire
to be set free for paying half Tribute. They have their set times for Devotion,
are content to be Fools for three Weeks, and then set down to make up the Month
the other week, and confess their Folly: Thus for one weeks Penance think God
is obliged to be reconciled, and because they have the impudence to wipe their
Mouth, conclude God will think they have done no ill; but we cannot deceive God,
where it is to be had, he will exact the uttermost Farthing; let our Consciences
be our Judges, and our Guides: Use Books only as helps to Devotion, for it is
impossible for a Book to be writ to suit every Man's occasion, there is
something particular to every one of us, that another perhaps never thought of,
and it is not likely such a one is capable to prescribe a Remedy before hand;
wherefore when we are arrived so far in our way to Happiness, as the forsaking
our old Habits, and placing better in their room, we may venture to draw nigh
to that Holy Ordinance, of which whosoever is a worthy partaker shall live for
ever. A good Life is the best preparitive to this Feast, it is not enough we
shake hands with our Vices for a time, and return to our Folly when the
Ceremony is over; if we are not qualified before we come, we are in danger to
receive this Sacrament Unworthily, and the consequence of that is so terrible,
that the thoughts of it must amaze us: No Man is qualified that does not
sincerely Repent, it cannot be supposed that God has allotted just so much time
to mortify ourselves, or that a week is sufficient to prepare us for Heaven.
They who have lived in a course of sin, and never approached this Holy
Communion, must not think the first fit of Sorrow sufficient to Denounce them
true Penitents. It requires time, and pains to conquer their Lusts, the old Man
must be cast off, and they must give a signal of their Loyalty before they be
accepted Subjects of the Most High; in short, if upon Examination we find our
Faith firm, our Purposes steadfast, and our Desires after Christ strong, we may
come to the Altar of God, and if we appear there with Charity; our Prayers
shall be conveyed from thence to the presence of God. It Is upon no other terms
we can come with security, for there is no concord between Christ and Beliai:
They who frequent the Sacrament, and suffer themselves in the Commission of any
known sin, are reconciling of contradictions, and will find their mistake to
their confusion.

It Is very certain, as long as we are upon Earth, we are in a state of Trial;
no man must expect to be exempt from Temptation: But we should make it our
business to strive and resist the World, Flesh and the Devil. If by surprise,
or other accident, we are betrayed into sin, we know our duty to be sorry, and
arm our selves against it for the future: We may reasonably expect pardon upon
this humiliation, if we don't join our good Will, and commit the evil with
approbation. This we certainly do, if we suffer our selves to be often over
come by the same Temptation; such a one ought to suspect the sincerity of his
resolution, and not approach the holy communion, till he is satisfied his heart
is perfect in the Commandments of God: But after all, men must be left to
themselves in this matter: It Is certain, no man can be a Hipocrite against his
knowledge, and what pretenses men have for Hipocrisy in other cases, they are
reasons of a prodigious nature, which shall induce a man to play the cheat upon
himself: For no man is forced to the Sacrament, and if he was, it is very sad it
should be accounted criminal to Oblige them to be good: However men trifle in
other cases, let them be serious in this; if they are really sincere, God will
pardon a multitude of Faults; no Man that knows his own sincerity need be
afraid to approach the table of the Lord.

When the Minister declares the time of the next Communion, and invites all
such as shall religiously be disposed, let us lift up our Souls to God, and beg
of him that we may become worthy Partakers of his Body and Blood: In order to
it, let us remember, the nearer we draw to God in his Holy Ordinances, the
greater must be our care in the Management of our selves; though, (as I have
already premised) a Good Life is the best preparative to a worthy Reception of
the Lord's Supper, yet when we approach the Presence of the Lord, we ought to
be more than ordinary circumspect. 'Twas David's resolution, To wash his hands
in Innocence, before he approacht the Altar of God. God himself commanded
Joshua to pull off his shoes when he was upon the holy Ground; and then surely
it is our duty, to become such as the Lord may be we well pleased with: Let us
as much as possible this week, have our conversation with God: Don't let it
suffice that we have formerly called our selves to account, but go over all
again, there may be something past over in our last Examination, or something
new to add to our Affliction; however the sight of our late Iniquity will
sufficiently affect us, and beholding our misery afresh, we shall be the more
desirous of coming to Christ; for our Sins when we are sensible of them, will
be a burden too heavy for us to bear: But to increase our Desires, Humiliation
and Love, let us reflect on the Goodness of God, in sending Our Savior Jesus
to be a sacrifice for our Sins, that as the Terrors of the Lord first brought
us to our selves, so now the Wonders of his Love may effectually persuade us to
turn to the Lord our God, that he may have mercy upon us.

A Meditation Preparitory to the Communion.
LOrd, what is Man, that thou have respect unto him, and the Son of Man that
thou so regardest him? When we had forfeied thy Favor, by a cursed
Disobedience to thy Command, and deserved to feel the reward of our Folly to
Eternal ages; if thou had only spared us from thy Wrath, and delivered our
Soul from the neithermost Hell, that Mercy had called for our greatest
Devotion, and employed us to eternity in singing Praises; but thy infinite Love
would not debar us the privilege of Creation; since thou made us for thy
self, thou resolvedst to try all means to bring us to the enjoyment of that
Happiness. When we were sunk into Misery, almost beyond recovery, what manner
of Love did thou extend to the dropping World which lay in Darkness, and in
the shadow of Death; thou emptiedst thy self, and communicatedst to us of thy
fullness, by sending thy Eternal Son out of thy Bosom to make us thy Children,
and exalt us to everlasting life.

HOly, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Saboath, Heaven and Earth are full of the
Majesty of thy Glory, Glory be to thee O God. Glory be to thee for this
incomprehensible Mystery: O thou God, who wast manifested in the flesh, Glory
be to thee; inspire the universal World to a greatfull acknowledgment of thy
Love surpassing knowledge: That we may all acknowledge thee to be the Lord, for
on Earth there is none like thee, and among the Gods there is none can do as
thou have done; When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man, thou did not
abhor the Virgins Womb, but submitted to our flesh, that thou might open the
Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.

O Thou Word of God, how did thou strip thy self of thy Glory, and descend
from the felicities of thy Throne, to take upon thee the form of a Servant?
Thou were born of poor Parents, and laid in a Manger; thou induredst Hunger and
Thirst, and had no place to lay thine head, yet did it not discourage thee
from going about to do good. But these were the least of thy sufferings, thy
Love to this World urged thee on to greater difficulties, and for which the
whole host of Heaven must praise and adore thee to Eternity. After thou had
declared thy intention of coming to save Sinners, and notwithstanding the
opposition of Men and Devils, did deliver the Doctrine of Salvation to
complete thy Father's Will, and fulfill the Scriptures concerning thee; thou
proceedest to give thy self a Sacrifice, to atone for those Sins from which
neither Men nor Angels were able to set us free. Thy Life indeed was an entire
piece of sorrow, and thou always did suffer by the contradiction of Sinners:
Thy works of Charity were received as unkindnesses, and thy Miracles supposed
to be the works of the Devil, though thou spakest as never Man spoke, yet they
rejected both thee, and thy doctrine: Thus did thou endure those Affronts and
Injuries, which were never offered to any but thy self, and with much pains,
yet admirable patience, go on not only to confirm thy former goodness, but to
add a mercy greater than them all, and seal it by thy precious Blood.

Here all our Thoughts ought to be Silence, Amazement, Reverence and
Admiration, with Tears of Love and Contrition; that the Eternal Son of God to
cloth us with his Grace should cloth himself with our humble Nature, and
presently load himself with the Burden of our sins, take upon him their
punishment, and die upon the Cross for them too. That the cleansing of us
should make him be defiled, with the spittings of Blasphemous Mouths; that for,
the washing our Souls, he should shed his precious Blood. This is a business
more proper for our Love than Meditation, more to make us active in his
Service, than Contemplative in our Thoughts, and to be expressed more by our
wonder than our word.

BUT, O thou God of Mercy, thou did not leave us comfortless, thou saw how
much reason we should have to Mourn, Fast and Pray, when the Bridegroom should
be taken hence, and therefore did send thy Holy Spirit to assist us till thy
coming again; accomplish therefore the number of thine Elect, and hasten thy
Kingdom, that we, with all that are departed in thy Faith, may have our perfect
Consummation in Bliss. Jesus, my God, give me Grace to be ready when soever
thou call, that I may meet thee with thy Saints at thy second coming, and be
fit to enter with thee into thy Glory.

O My Soul take yet a fuller view of the loving kindness of the Lord; consider
the infinite compassion of thy Redeemer, how great a regard he had to thy
Safety when he was in view of his dreadful Passion; for that very Night in
which he was betrayed into the hands of sinful Men, he instituted the Holy
Sacrament, left us his Body and Blood to be a continual remembrance of him.

O Infinite Charity, which contentedst not thy self with being our Redemption,
unless thou also becomest our Nourishment. O infinite Charity, which knowing
that our Offenses would Nail thee to the Cross, were yet providing a remedy for
those Offenses. Lord, is it thy custom to repay Benefits for Injuries? Come
hither ye Devout Souls, bewail with me so great a Sin; come Love with me so
great a Love; come with a Spiritual Hunger, and offer up your hearts to receive
that Divine Nourishment, and prepare your Souls for this beloved Lord to Enter.

NO sooner had he finished this Holy Mystery, but he yielded to be encompassed
with the Sorrows of Death; having first kindly cautioned his Disciples of the
approaching Tragedy, the time of which he had often told them was at hand, the
Shepherd was to be smitten, and the Flock scattered abroad: They had hitherto
reposed their confidence in his Protection, and had all their safety from him,
but the time was coming when they too must drink of the Cup which was now
preparing for him; and that they might be encouraged to follow his blessed
steps he first set them the Example of his patience, that they might submit
with the greater Resignation; this was his time of Suffering for them, and he
only would have them see how willingly he would lay down his life for their
Sakes; they might surely resist unto Blood when he had trod the dreadful path
before them, but we find his Sufferings came on too fast, and were too severe
for them to behold. That stout Champion who had formerly confessed him to be
Christ, and was for dying with him, could follow him now but a far off: His
Agony in the Garden was but the beginning of Sorrows; he there saw his Passion
but at a distance, though that cast him upon his Knees, and betrayed the
Horrors his Soul labored under. Our sins were pressing upon him, and he who
knew no sin began to feel the weight of ours, and the Wrath of God which was
due to us for ever.

Where, O my Soul, behold him prostrate on the Ground, his Nature racked with
an insupportable Amazement, and the stream of his Blood turned a contrary
course, forcing it self through the pores of his Body, and his Humanity sunk by
an extremity of Sorrow to the Gates of Death.

He had no sooner overcome this terrible Conflict, but behold the fatal
Messengers of his Afflictions ready to apprehend him; his own familliar Friend,
who had eat of his Bread, conducting them to the place where he was. This was
their hour, and he was to suffer even for the ingratitude of his Murderers; he
finds himself now forsaken, as well as betrayed by his Friends, and they who
could not watch for his safety, could now fly for their own. Thus desolate and
helpless was the innocent Lamb of God, exposed to the extravigance of a Blood
Thirsty People, who came upon him with Sword and Staves, but there was little
need of Guards to secure one, who was so willing to obey their Summons; though
their strength and number could not add Resolution to their Guilt, for his own
Confession, that I am He, awed them into a Reverence, made them go Backward,
and fall to the Ground. But now he lays aside his Majesty, and submits to their
Rage, who with Infamy and Derision dragged him to the Judgment Seat. Where,
though their Malice was great enough to say any thing, could not make their
accusations agree; they laid to his Charge things that he never said nor did,
yet that with the Voices of the chief Priests must prevail; and though the
judge declared him Guiltless, yet the People had among them a Law, by which he
ought to die: Even to this, he opened not his Mouth, but submitted to all that
their Revenge, Impudence and Cruelty could invent. Since he had professed himself
their King, they were resolved not to lead him to Execution, before they
Clothed him with Vestments of Derision, Crown him with a Diadem of Affliction,
and put the Scepter of Weakness into his Hand; they Bow the Knee before him,
Salute him King, and to fill up their Ingratitude, inhumanly defile his Face
with Spittle. After the Horrid Pomp of this Solemnity was over, they divested
him of this Dignity, and proceeded to treat him like a Slave, and that his
Death might appear more dreadful; they usher it in with all its Terrors, with
Stripes and Scourges, and all the Torments their malice could Inflict. Thus
bruised and wounded with the weight of our Transgression, he ascends the last
steps of his Passion, and without the least Reluctance, stretches out his Arms
to be fixed on the most painful instrument of Death, where, O my Soul, behold
the Son of Man lifted up! O dearest God, who wast Wounded, Despised, Crucified,
and Crowned with Thorns, and for my sins were Nailed to the Cross, I beseech
thee by the Merits of them all, O sweetest Jesus, to pardon my Offenses.

His Death was now a hastening on, and their Diversion near to a Conclusion;
they were resolved to make the best use of their time, and make their
ingratitude last as long as his life; they rail on Him, treat him with all the
marks of Infamy, and continue their Revilings to his dying Minute. Their
Madness, Folly, and Aggrevations reached Heaven, put the World into disorder,
and turned the Day into Night, but could not move his Soul; he saw their
Madness, felt the weight of their Offenses, and only prayed for their
Forgiveness; he pitied their Misery, and when they endeavored to pull the
Vengenace of his Blood upon their Heads, he was sheding it as Sacrifice for
their Wickedness. But when the Majesty of Heaven grew Angry, and exerted his
Fury, and laid on him the iniquities of us all, he trembled at his Wrath, could
not bear the direction of the Deity, and groaned away his Soul, when God
withdrew his presence from his support; yet, neither the Frowns of his angry
Father, nor the Rage of Men or Devils could make him sink, till all was
fullfil'd, which the Scriptures spoke concerning him; when that was finished he
only tarried to recommend his Mother to the pious care of his beloved Disciple,
bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost.

O crucified Jesus, let thy Blood wash my Scul, I am not ashamed of thy Cross,
but adore thee in thy Passion, and acknowledge thee to be God.

Let us now turn the Scene, and think how we have offended this God, and lived
in a continual Rebellion, and then of what punishment ought we to be thought
worthy, who have Slighted, Contemned, and abused such infinite Mercy; Who have
returned the Love of God with the basest ingratitude, and had no other reason
for our Wickedness, but that God was Good? What an inconceivable Mercy is it
that we are not this minute in those unquenchable Flames, where the
exquisitness of the Torment should oblige us instead of crying for Mercy to
breath out horrid Blasphemies? And as we slighted his Government here, Curse
and Dam his severity thee, still sinking our selves deeper in the intolerable
Misery, where will be no Mittigation of the Torment, nor end to our sad
Affliction. Let us constrain all the forces of our Soul to praise God that we
are alive, entreating his Pardon: Let us beg Pardon even for taking that
liberty to praise him, and withal, that he would still help us to praise him
more. O let us reflect on every thing that may move us to confess our
Wickedness, and be sorry for our sins.

The thoughts of these things may well enough put us in a heat, and when our
Passions are thoroughly urged, vent themselves in Sighs, and earnest desires of
Reconciliation, that both of them may meet with success; let us add alms to our
Fasting and Prayer, for when our Petitions are thus assisted, the mercy of God
will not deny us a suitable return; therefore in the entrance to our Devotion,
let us set apart something for the Poor, and humbly offer it up in the
following form.

O God, Blessed be thy Name, all things come of thee, and of thine own do I now
give thee; O let this Alms be as an Odor of a sweet smell, and acceptable in
thy sight.

Preparitory Prayers before the Communion.
ALmighty Eternal God, thou art the comforter of all that call upon thee, thou
have concluded all under sin, that thou might have Mercy upon all. Look upon
me, O God, and have pity on me, lying in my Blood and Misery in my Shame and
in my Sins, in the fear and guilt of thy Wrath, in the shadow of thy Death, and
in the Gates of Hell. I confess to thee, O God, what thou know already, but
I confess it to glorify thy Mercy, who have spared me so long; I am guilty of
the vilest and basest Follies, which usually dishonor Fools, and the worst of
Men; I have been Proud and Covetous, Envious and Lustful, Angry, Indevout and
Irreligious, restless in my Passions, Sensual, hating wise Counsels, and soon
weary of the Offices of a Holy Religion. I cannot give an account of my Time,
and I cannot reckon the Sins of my Tongue; my Crimes are Intolerable, my
Imperfections Shameful, and my Omissions Innumerable: What shall I do, O thou
preserver of Men? I Am so Vile I cannot express it, so Sinful that I Am odious to
my self, and I Am much more Abominable in thy sight. I have sinned against thee
without Necessity, sometimes without Temptation, only because I would Sin. I
have been so Ungreatful, Foolish and Unreasonable, that I have put out my own
Eyes, that I might with confidence and without fear, sin against so good a God,
so mighty a Redeemer; my sin is grown shameful, and aggravated even to
Amazement. O God, I Am amazed and confounded in thy presence.

BUT yet, O God, thou art the healer of our Breaches, and the litter up of our
Head. I must not despair, I Am sure thy gooness is infinite, thou do not
delight in the Death of a Sinner, my sins, though very great, are infinitely
less than thy Mercies; I Am not worthy to look up to Heaven, but be thou pleased
to look down into the Dust; let me not perish in my Folly, or be consumed in
thy Displeasure; give me time to Repent, give me the power of thy Spirit, that
as by thy Gift and Mercy I intend to amend what is amiss, so I may indeed have
Grace and Power faithfully to fulfill the same. Inspire me with the Spirit of
Repentance and Mortification, that I may always fight against my sins, till I
be more than Conqueror. Support me with a Holy Hope, confirm me with an
excellent Operative, and unreprovable Faith, enkindle a bright and burning
Charity in my Soul, and grant by the power of thy Spirit, I may overcome all
Carnal and Spiritual Wickedness, be wholly delivered from sin, preserved from
thy Wrath, and at last pass on to the Glories of thy Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ my Savior.

A Meditation of St. Austin.
BEfore thy Eyes, O Gracious Lord, we bring our Crimes; before thee we expose
the Wounds of our bleeding Souls: That which we suffer, is but little; that
which we deserve, is intolerable. We fear the Punishment of our Sins, but cease
not pertinaciously to proceed in sinning. Our Weakness is sometimes smitten
with thy Rod; but our Iniquity is not changed. When thou smitest us, then we
confess our Sins; but when thy Visitation is past, then we forget that we have
wept. When thou stretchest forth thine Hand, then we promise to do our Duty;
but when thou take it away, we perform no Promises. If thou strikest, we cry
to thee to spare us; but when thou sparest, we provoke thee again to Anger.
Thus, O God, the Guilty confess before thee: Unless thou give us Pardon, it
is but just we perish. But, O Almighty God, our Father, grant to us what we
ask, even though we deserve it not. Pardon us, O Gracious Father; and take away
all our Sin: Destroy the Work of the Devil, let the Enemy have no part in us:
Acknowledge the Work of thine own Hand, the Price of thine own Blood, and the
Purchase of thine own Inheritance; and bring us to the Place which thou have
designed for us by the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, by the Pains of thy
Cross, and the Glories of thy Resurrection, O Holy and Blessed Jesus, our
Redeemer.

MOst merciful God and Father! I thine unworthy Servant, render my humblest
Thanks to thy Divine Majesty, that it has pleased thee, notwithstanding my
Unworthiness, to give me a Heart to approach thy Blessed Sacrament. Give me thy
Grace, that I may be a curious Spender of my Time this Week, so as I may best
resist or prevent all Temptation. Let thy Grace so perpetually assist and
encourage my Endeavors, conduct my Will, and fortify my Intentions, that I
may persevere in that holy Condition which thou have put me in by the Grace of
the Covenant, and the Mercies of the Holy Jesus. Oh, let me never fall into
those Sins, and retire to that vain Conversation, from which the Eternal and
Merciful Savior of the World has redeemed me. Let thy Preventing Grace dash
all Temptations in their Approach, that my Hopes be never discomposed, my Faith
weakened, my Confidence made remiss, nor my Portion be lessened in the
Covenant. Give me Grace to put on the Wedding Garment: And since thou have
commanded me to examine my self, let me seriously consider and review my Life
and Actions; and how I am prepared for so weighty an Action. I desire to do
this, O Lord, help my weak Desires. Give me Power to live more exactly than I
have done. I confess, O Lord, I am by Nature a Child of Wrath; give me
therefore a True and Lively Faith, that I may be spiritually joined to thee by
the Visible Signs of Bread and Wine: And so cleanse my Soul, that thou may
take up thy Habitation within me. I know, O Lord, I am unworthy of this
Blessing; yet for thy Name sake, bestow it upon me: And when I present my self
before thee, at thy Table, restrain my Wandering and Idle Thoughts; let them be
seriously fixed on the Death of my Savior: And as I receive this Bread and
Wine for Bodily Sustenance, so cause me to feed on the Body and Blood of my
Savior, that it may be real Nourishment to my Soul: Which I beg for the sake
of him who offered both his Body and Blood for my Salvation; Jesus, thy Son,
and my Redeemer. Amen.

O Most Good and Gracious Jesus, how excellent was thy Love toward us; thou
leavest thy Body and Blood to be our Food to Nourish us. O thou true Food of my
Soul, receive me who am to receive thee, quicken me with thy Spirit, feed me
with thy Flesh, satisfy me with thy Blood, and let me receive Life from thee,
to act and live unto thee. O, my Lord, give me a Heart that I may think on
thee, a Soul that I may love thee, and a Mind to remember thee. Let me find
thee, O my hearts desire, let me hold thee, O thou whom my Soul does love; O my
life, for whom all things live, by which I live, without which I die. O, my
Lord, let me renew this life of mine, by coming to thy Holy Sacrament: Where
may I find thee but here? O that I may faint in my self, and depend on thee. O
Lord, let me love thee, because thou did first love me: Where shall I get
words to express the signs of thy particular great love toward me? I bless
thee for my Creation, Preservation, and all the Blessings of this life, but
most of all for my Redemption, and the benefits conveyed to us in the Holy
Sacrament. O let me go to thy Holy Table, to receive Life and Salvation. O that
I may cry after God, even the living God; that I may watch for thee more than
they who watch for the Morning, and that my delight may be in thy Commandments,
O God.

I Dare not presume to come to thine Altar, Most Holy Lord God, before I have
cleansed my Mouth, by confession of my Sins, washed my Hands in Innocence, and
purified my heart by profession of my Faith in my Redeemers Blood; for thy
sacred Word teaches me that Holy Thing must not be given to Dogs, nor Pearls
cast before Swine: with loathing of my self, and greatest detestation of my
rebellious corruption, I confess that never Dog so often returned to his Vomit,
nor Sow to wallowing in the Mire, as I have to sin and sensuality. I was at
first conceived in Lust, and since Lust has conceived in me, and brought forth
sin, and sin had long ago brought forth Death, if thy Grace and Mercy had not
prevented it. I am not able to conceive, what sin I have conceived in my heart,
or uttered with my tongue, my best actions are tainted, how much more my
defects; my Prayers against sin are, through their many imperfections unless
thou cover them, abominable in thy sight, how much more the sins themselves,
against which I pray: All the remedies which thou have prescribed in thy Law
against the maladies of my Soul have increased them, and so improved my sin,
that sin is become above measure sinful. O Lord, thy Commandments are exceeding
Broad, and extends not only to our Words and Actions, but to our Thoughts,
Desires and Affection; the smallest desire of sin, is sin, the very inclination
to sin without consent of the will, the delight in sin against the consent of
the will, our vain fancies by Day, and dreams by Night, though not in our power
to prevent, are pollutions in thy Eyes, who are purity it self. Who then can
say his Heart is clean, or who knows how often he offends? O cleanse thou me
from my secret Faults, Pardon all my known and unknown Transgressions, whether
they be Omissions of any duty Commanded by thee, or Commissions of any thing
forbidden. O loose me from those Bonds wherewith Satan and my own Lust have
bound me; thou see I have abundant need of thee, but am so cloged with Guilt,
that I am not able to move toward thee. O let not my impenitence and
unworthiness frustrate thy Mercies to me, and since thou have appointed this
Spiritual Feast for rich and famished Souls, let my desires be answerable to my
need of it, and do thou qualify me by thy Grace to receive the full benefits
of it. O Christ hear me, and grant that I may approach thee, with more sincere
and fixed Reasolutions of an entire Reformation; and let me receive such
strength from thee, as may enable me faithfully to perform them. Lord, there
are many old Habitual Diseases my Soul groans under, and though I lie never so
long at the pool of Bethesda, come never so often to thy Table, unless thou be
pleased to put forth thy healing Virtue, they will still remain uncured. O thou
Blessed Physician of Souls, heal me, and grant I may so touch thee, that there
loathsome Issues may immediately stanch, that these Sicknesses may not be unto
Death, but to the Glory of thy Mercy in pardoning so polluted a Wretch. Lord,
have Mercy on me, and grant I may approach thy Holy Table with such Humlity and
Contrition, Love and Devotion, that thou may vouchsafe to come unto me, and
communicate to me thy self, and all the Merits of thy Passion. I acknowledge to
my shame and sorrow, that this Feast has often been prepared, and I have with
frivolous excuses absented my self, or if I have come, it has been rather to
defy than adore thee; I have brought such Troops of thy professed Enemies,
unrepented sins, along with me, as if I came not to commemorate, but renew thy
Passion of what punishment ought I to be thought worthy, who have trampled
under foot the Son of God, counted the Blood of the Covenant an unholy thing;
by defiling my self with sensual pleasures, and breaking my holy Vows since I
received the blessed Sacrament, and thereby have incurred the greatest danger
by receiving that Unworthily, which can take away the guilt of my Sin; yet, O
merciful Jesus, this Blood is my only refuge, let this make my atonement, or I
perish Eternally; Wherefore did thou shed it, but to save Sinners? O let me
find its saving Efficacy, let not the price of thy Blood be utterly lost, but
Pardon that heap of sin which I bring to thy Cross to be forgiven, that so I
may be an acceptable Guest at thy Holy Table, which I beg for thy Compassion
Sake, Jesus my God and Savior.

BLessed and all sufficient Savior, I, the unworthiest of thy Servants,
prostrate my self at thy Mercy Seat, humbly imploring that Pardon and
Forgiveness of my multiplied Transgressions, which render me unfit to receive
the least of thy multiplied Kindness, much less of being made a partaker of the
greatest in the participation of the Sacred Body and Blood in the Holy
Communion. Dear Redeemer, let me approach this Divine Institution, with a
prepared Heart, and a purified Soul. O that infinite Justice of the Almighty,
in taking so full vengeance upon sin, even upon thee his only beloved Son, that
we might fear and tremble at the sad Effects of sin. O the infinite Mercy of
the Almighty, ever to think of such a remedy for miserable Man's Restoration. O
the equal Goodness of thee our dearest Lord, who wast a willing Sacrifice, who
wast Content, Ambitious, Hungring and thirsting after our Salvation by thy
dreadful Passion, for which let me how my self at the Footstool of thy Cross,
and mourn for thy Sufferings, as occasioned by my Sins. O let the drops of thy
Blood trickle down into my Bosom, and wash out the stains of sin there; let thy
Thorns pierce me to the Heart, and thy Nails fasten me to thee, as much as ever
they did thee to the Cross: Thou that did entertain Judas with Tranquillity,
and suffer him to kiss thy Cheek, reject not me thy unworthy supplicant, but
kiss me with the Benediction of thy Lips, and with the Affections of a Savior;
thou that did permit the Soldiers to bind thee, to satisfy for my looseness
and abused liberty, bind me now unto thee with the Chains of Love, let that
Holy Union dissolve the Cords of Vanity, and subdue my Passions and unruly
Desires. Dearest Lord, as in my Body of sin there is no part free, so in thy
suffering Body there was no whole part; nothing but Sores and Stripes, Wounds
and Bruises: I have offended in all my parts, thou wast tormented in all thine,
so that with shame and sorrow, I confess that my sins inflicted the misery of
thy Passion by the hands of thy barbarous Enemies. O let the Spear that pierced
thy Heart, sweetest Jesus, pierce mine with true Sorrow; let me contemplate on
thy Passion, with infinite hatred of sin that occasioned it, and with infinite
gratitude to thy Love for performing the same. I adore thee, O Lord, Blessed
Jesus, for instituting the Holy Sacrament, strike an awe into my Soul when I
approach it, and create in me Heavenly dispositions to celebrate so Heavenly an
institution; let me verily believe, that if with due preparation I come to thy
Altar, as certainly as I receive the outward sings, so certainly shall I
receive thy most blessed Body and Blood; to receive which inestimable Blessing,
O merciful Lord, do thou fit and prepare me for thy mercy sake in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

O All sufficient Savior, teach me by thy great good Examples, Obedience and
Submission to thy Divine Will. I humbly beseech thee so to prepare my Soul to
the due receiving of the Holy Sacrament worthily, that I may thereby
effectually feel, taste and feed on thee my Savior Christ, that I may be thee
have Eternal Life. Pardon, O Lord, pardon my unpreparedness to come to so Holy
and Divine a Mystery, make thy Word and Sacrament always so powerful and
effectual in my Heart, that I may thereby be sanctified and renewed unto all
Holy Obedience, unto thy Will, in the mortification of my sinful Corruptions,
renewing of thy perfect Image in me unto Holiness, Righteousness, Sobriety,
Truth, Knowledge, Faith, Temperance and Chastity. O Blessed Jesus, by thee let
me have access to thy Heavenly Father, that by thee he may accept me, who by
thee is revealed to me; let thy Innocence and Purity procure pardon for my
uncleanness and disobedience, let thy Humility extinguish my Pride and Vanity,
and thy Charity cover the multitude of my Faults, and that thou will with the
hands of thy Mercy, immediately after this life, receive my Soul into
everlasting Joy and Felicity, there to Reign with thee for ever.

A Concluding Prayer.
O Lord God, into thy hands I commit my Body, Soul, and Spirit, my Thoughts,
Words and Works, desiring wholly to be thine. O my God, Gracious and Merciful
accept me in thy beloved Jesus Christ; for his sake let me not go from before
thee without a Blessing, a Blessing of Pardon and Peace, a Blessing of thy
Spirit and of thy Grace to come Holy to thy Table, a Blessing of thy favor and
of thy love in the Lord Jesus; thus Lord, say of me that thou have Blessed me,
and I shall be thy Blessed for ever; pardon the defect of Prayers, my Coldness
and Wandering in my Devotions, and deal with me according to thy Mercies in
Christ Jesus, who in compassion to my infirmatives has taught me to call thee
Father, and when I pray, to say,

Our Father, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

Having performed these Devotions faithfully, let us wait for the Blessing of
the Lord; if we would have a speedy answer to our Prayers, let us have respect
in all our Conversation to what we have been doing. It Is not sufficient that we
passionately beg God's Favor, we must endeavor to deserve it by performing
his will, and when God sees that we choose him, he will not deny us the
Blessings that are needful for us. It Is not to be supposed, that Man is serious
who can be earnest and zealous in his Closest, but loose and intemperate in the
World, or that he is heartily desirous to be eased of his burden, who makes no
other attempts to acquit himself, but when he is upon his Knees. Can we think
God will hear the Prayer of a Man who only asks to be freed from his
Infirmities? When the wicked Man turns from his Wickedness, and does that which
is Lawful and Right, be shall save his Soul, and not before. If a Man that is
an Adulterer, Lascivious or Unclean, would have his Vices routed out, he must
first set himself against the Sin, endeavor to mortify the Lust, and avoid
the occasion of his Folly, and then he may expect God's Pardon for the past,
and assistance for the future: He ought during the time of his Trial to beg
God's Grace to help him in the conquest of this Enemy, and if he is sincere,
may be sure in a little time, that he will be more than Conqueror; but don't
let us fly to God to save us from those Evils we voluntary run into, which we
don't care to avoid, and which are no longer uneasy than they sensibly affect
us. We shall but mock God, and provoke him to give us up to the deceits of our
own Heart; but it is hoped they who are arrived so far in Virtue, as to set
their Resolutions to approach the Altar of God, have no such custom that they
truly are sorry for their Offenses, and intend to lead a new life, that their
Faith is such as overcomes the World, that they have brought under their unruly
Appetites, and are zealous of good Works. These are the things about which we
ought to Examine our selves, let this be our study, the nearer we approach this
Solemnity that so we may search every Corner of our Hearts, and when we have
set our ways before our Eyes, there is no doubt but we shall bewail the
iniquity of them, and raise in our Souls an ardent love to Christ who is so
ready to relieve us, and has done so much to bring us into Favor with God. Our
unworthiness and his Mercy are sufficient to exercise our thoughts our whole
lives, we are astonished at the one, and confounded at the other; but when we
consider his mercy extends to the other World, even to the making us happy for
ever, we know not what to say are desirous, our Eternity should be passed away
in his Praises, and even wish for the order of a Seraphim to express our
grateful acknowledgments in Joyful Halelujahs; they who consider the dignity of
this Sacrament, will be desirous of approaching thither with all possible
purity, and endeavor to cleanse themselves according to the Purification of
the Sanctuary. In short, let us but get a true understanding of the Sacrament,
and that will teach us our Duty.

Let us add the following Form to our Devotions on Saturday Evening.
O What shall I do to have my Soul wholly possessed with thee, but by coming to
thy Holy Communion, there to seal the promises I have made to thee this Week,
for the future to live more Godly? Suffer me (thy justice laid aside) to speak
unto thy mercy, me Dust and Ashes, yet suffer me to speak, being it is to the
mercies of God; say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation, and hide not thy face
from me, let me see it, though I die, least otherwise I die, so as never to see
it; the mansion of my Soul is to marrow to entertain thee. O let it be enlarged
by thee, by my coming to thy Table, it is very ruinous, be thou pleased to
repair it; cleanse me, O Lord, from my secret sins, from my presumptuous
wickedness deliver thy Servant. I have confessed these my sins unto thee, and
hope thou have forgiven the iniquity of them. I do not contend in judgment with
thee, for thou art the Truth: If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, who may
abide? But we have confidence in thy mercy through the merits of our Savior
and Mediator, who was also made known to the Saints of Old, that they by the
Faith of his Passion to come, as we by the Faith of it past, might obtain
Salvation. As he was Man, he was Mediator, but as he was the Word, so he was no
midling Person, because equal to God, and God with God, together with the Holy
Ghost, one God. How far have thou loved us, O thou good Father, who sparedst
not thine only Son, but delivered him up for us ungodly? How far have thou
loved us, for whom he who thought it no Robery to be equal to thee, was made
subject even to Death upon the Cross? Therefore do I justly repose strong hope
in thee, that thou will heal all my Diseases which are very great, but much
greater is the cure which thou have provided. This is my great delight, and so
often as I can be released from necessary affairs, I will repair to this
pleasure of coming to thy Table, neither find I in all these things which I run
through any settlement for my Soul, save only in thee. Behold, O Lord, I cast
all my care upon thee, let me live, and I will consider the wonderful things of
thy Law; thou know my Ignorance, my Infirmities, teach me, heal me, O Jesus,
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom. Redeem me with thine own Blood,
for I meditate on it; I Eat and Drink at thy Table, and desire to be satisfied
therewith, amongst those who Eat, and are satisfied.

Oh! Lord, thou see how much I have left behind after all my diligence to
cleanse and purify my Soul. Alas! all my thoughts of thee are but Dreams, my
Desires but a Vapor, my love but a Flash, my Prayers are but a Breath, and my
Tears will scarce fill a Buble; my Sorrow is no bigger than a Sigh, all that I
do, I am ashamed of it my self, and thou may much more loath and despise it.
Come thou, O Lord, therefore and search my heart, try me, and know my toughts,
see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
Everlasting. Do thou awaken in me most lively thoughts, do thou inkindle a
burning affection, open thou the Floodgates of my Eyes, and open thou my Lips
that my Mouth may show forth thy praise. O my gracious God, unless thou
interpose thy power, I am very much afraid I shall not keep this little
goodness till the next morning, which now seems to be in me. These weak
Thoughts, these faint Desires and sickly Affections that are in my Soul, I
doubt will not live a Night, unless thou find ways to preserve and cherish
them; my inveterate Habits of Evil will smother and choke these new
Resolutions, I am in fear that all these Meditations will be flown away, while
I am a sleep, and my House be foul again, unless thou keep me. Ah! my dear God,
seeing I have bestowed some small pains upon my heart, and have conceived some
little hopes, suffer them not to be dashed to pieces in a Night, spread the
Wings of thy goodness over me, and maintain that, which not I, but thou thy
self have wrought. Lord, let me find when I awake, that my afflections and
desires are grown beyond the strength of Man, and that thy power rest upon me.
Oh! let me find a greater fervor than ever in thy Service, let that spark which
I fear would go out, be blown into a Flame that will never expire; so shall
thou draw mine Eyes toward thy self alone, who workest such wonders, and my
Lips shall ever flow with thy Praises. Lord, if I may beg this Grace of thee, I
am verily persuaded I shall languish after none but thee; therefore my good
Lord, I leave my self in thy hands, hoping that either I am, or would be, such
as thou desire, and if I am arrived but as far as a Will and Desire to be
thine, that Will is thine, and therefore seeing the Will is mine too, and we
both conspire together, I take the boldness to say, Lord, let thy will be done.
Oh! sweet Savior, I was going to say, I am sick of Love, that I cannot love
except thou love me, and make me better, but I correct my self, and it is enough
if I be sick, because I cannot love thee. Do thou make me sick, or rather do
thou make me well with love unto thee, so shall I come to thy Table with Joy
and Gladness, hoping that thou will kiss me with the Benediction of thy Lips,
for thy love is better than Wine; draw me, and I will run after thee, yea, we
will run after thee, for I will proclaim to others the loving kindness of the
Lord, Amen.

Devotions for the Day we intend to Communicate.
IT well becomes a Christian's Piety to welcome the day which brings our
Savior so near to us, with acts of Joy and Thnaksgiving, for the approach of
so great a Blessing. And since one Night may breed too great a damp, and
chilness upon our Spirits, it will be very wholesome to renew those Thoughts
and Affections that we left there when we went to Bed, and so go to the house
of God, in a sense of our unworthiness, to entertain so glorious a Person; and
in a sense of sin which is the cause of that unworthiness, together with a joy
in our Souls, and Praises upon our Tongues that he will forgive them, humbly
desiring of the Lord that he will accept of us for his Habitation, and that he
will come and enlarge our Souls by a holy Love to him, and longing after him,
that there may be room for his Sacred Majesty, and a place clean and dressed to
receive him. In order hereunto, as soon as we awake, let us adore that Sacred
Majesty of Heaven in the following Ejaculation.

A Prayer.
O Merciful God, as thou have awakened my Body from sleep, so by thy Grace
awaken my Soul from sin, that I may appear before thee this day at thy Holy
Altar, with a pure and undefiled Soul. O Jesus cloth me with the Wedding
Garments of Righteousness, and true Holiness, that being a worthy Receiver of
thy Body and Blood, I may continue steadfast to my lives end, and at the last
Trump, according to thy Blessed Promise, be made a pertaker of thy Heavenly
Kingdom, Amen.

The solemnity of this day requires a most exact attendance in the service of
God, all our affections should be so employed, that even the necessaries of
this life, ought not to incumber our Souls, or take off those Holy Meditations
which should be inseperate to our Minds, much more should we dispense with
things of less moment, and therefore however we indulge our selves at other
times; let us now take leave of our Bed, and prepare to meet our God with
humble Addresses, and rising with a thinkful acknowledgment for the Mercies of
the Night past, let us say,

Glory be to thee, O Lord, for watching over me this Night.

Lord, raise me up at the last day to life everlasting.

In the name of our Lord Jesus, Christ, who was crucified for me, I arise; he
by his cross and Passion, save bless and preserve me this day and for ever,
Amen.

As soon as we are Dressed, let us retire unto our Closet, and before we
prostrate our selves at the Throne of Grace, exercise our Thoughts a little
upon the approaching Solemnity, and reflect upon our base ingratitude, consider
how infinitely unworthy we are of such an inestimable benefit, and then let us
adore that inexpressible Goodness which gives us so glorious an opportunity of
waiting on our loving Lord at his Holy Altar, after such a religious confusion
of Soul, let us humble our selves, and say.

Good Lord pardon thy servant why endeavors to prepare his heart to seek thee,
though I be not cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary.

A Prayer.
O Lord, I do not presume to come to that great Feast of thy Body and Blood,
upon the least opinion of my own worthiness; for when I look upon my self, I
dare not come least I should Eat and Drink my own Damnation; but when I
consider thy infinite Mercies unto us, and thy own words calling all men
without exception, and knowing that thy crucified Body is not only food to
nourish, but Physic to cure: I beg leave that am but Dust and Ashes to come to
thy Holy Table, and with my weak Faith, to feed upon some Crumbs of the Bread
of Life. I confess, O Lord, I have no Wedding Garments on me, but I come to
seek them at thy Cross, from thy bitter sorrows to derive into my Soul a Godly
sorrow working an unfeigned Repentance, from the broken Body, a broken Heart,
from thy warm Blood flowing from thy wounded side, Zeal and fervency, that I
may love and admire thee my God as I ought to do. I come, O Dear Jesus, to
fetch Humility and Temperance, Chastity and Charity, and whatever thou see
needful for me. O bury all my sins in thy Grave, my stony Heart, my natural
Corruptions, and vile Affections; I come, O Lord, to fetch a new life from thy
Holy and Blessed Resurrection, for I stand in amazement when I consider my own
vileness, and how miserable my end must be when the Heavens are not pure in thy
sight, and the very Angels are charged with folly; there is no Holiness, O
Lord, if thou withdraw thy Hand, no Wisdom profits if thy Government ceases,
when thou leavest us we perish, we are unstable and unsecure unless secured and
confirmed by thee, we fly to thee for help, and yet depart from thy
Commandments. O how meanly do I deserve to be thought of, how little and
inconsiderable is the good I do; how innumerable, how intolerable are the
Evils I have done, many good things have I received from thee, but I have
abused them; thou have given me Grace, but I have turned it into Wantonness,
thou did create in me a hope of Glory, but I have lost my Confidence.
Wherefore behold, O Lord, I come unto thee, thou might indeed justly censure
the approach of such a polluted Creature to be a daring presumption, but I
beseech the condemn not the action, but behold the motives which drew me
hither, even my own miseries and thy mercies. I increase the number of my sins,
what shall I do to thee, O thou preserver of Men? Who shall raise me up when I
shall fall before thy dreadful Judgment Seat? I will lay my Face in the Dust,
and confess my self to be nothing. Pity my Shame, O God, bind up my Wounds,
remove those sins that so easily overcome me, and unite me to my Savior Jesus.
O help me to supply in Humility what I want in worthiness, let my mean and just
opinion of my self, my bended Knees, and broken Heart, show that I durst not
have adventured so nigh, if thy mercy had not held out the Golden Scepter; O
then dear Jesus, be a Jesus to me, and let this Sacrament be a savor of life,
and thy Body the Bread of life, thy Blood the purifier of my sinful life: O
send me not empty away, for I shall faint and die, I cannot live without thee;
O let virtue come from thee and heal my Sickness, do thou appear to my Soul in
these holy Mysteries, enlighten my Darkness, turn me from all vain imaginations
and illusions of the Enemy, all perverseness of Will, all Violence and
Inordinate Passions, sensual Desires, Lust and Malice, Gluttony, Pride, Envy
and Detraction; let not sin reign in my mortal Body, nor the Devil lead my Will
captive, nor the World abuse my understanding, nor debauch my Conversation. O
grant I may receive these Divine Mysteries, for the amendment of my Life, and
for a defensative against all my sins, for the increase of Virtue, and the
perfection of the Spirit; this I beg, O merciful God, for the sake of thy
Eternal Son, my crucified Savior and Redeemer Jesus, Amen.

Here rising up, read as Follows.

AND as they were Eating, Jesus took Bread and gave thanks and blessed it, and
breakt it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, Eat this is my Body
which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me; likewise also, he took
the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all
of it, for this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood which is shed for you, and
for many, for the Remission of sins, and they all drank of it. Verily I say
unto you, I will not drink henceforth of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day
when I drink it new in the Kingdom of God my Father.

I adore thee, O Blessed Jesus, for instituting this Holy Sacrament; O let thy
Divinity thus stamped on it, strike into my Soul a holy awe in approaching it; O
create in me a Heaven disposition to celebrate so Heavenly an Institution, and
for thy Mercies sake, pardon all my stupid forgetfulness, and ingratitude
hitherto; do now create in me such a thankful and lively remembrance of thy
dying love, that may excite me to give up my self entirely to thee, as thou
did give up thy self on the Cross for me.

[Kneeling say,

A Prayer.
BEhold, O sacred and undivided Trinity, an unworthy, wretched, weak, and
wounded Soul, oppressed with an intolerable weight of Misery, terrified with
the consideration of thy inscrutable Judgments, confounded with the memory of
her base ingratitude, and encompassed with sorrow. I have with the prodigal
wasted that portion of Grace thou did bestow upon me, and therefore do
infinitely want a supply out of thy Treasury; but, O Lord, how shall such a
wretch as I dare to approach this Holy Table, how shall this spiritual Manna,
this Food of Angels be given to one: Who has chosen to feed on Huscks with
Wine? nay, to one who has so often trampled upon these precious things, either
carelessly neglecting or unworthily receiving these holy Mysteries. O LOrd, my
horrible guiltiness makes me not dare to stay away, for where shall my polluted
Soul be washed, if not in this Fountain which thou have opened for sin and
uncleanness, hither therefore I come, and thou have promised him that comes
thou will in no wise cast out; this is, O Lord, the Blood of the New Testament,
grant me so to receive it, that it may be for the remission of my sins, and
though I have so often, and so wretchedly broken my part of that Covenant
whereof the Sacrament is a seal, yet be thou graciously pleased to make good
thine; be merciful to my unrighteousness, and remember my sins no more, and not
only so, but place thy Laws in my Mind, and write them in my Heart, and by the
power of thy Grace. dispose my Soul to such a sincere and constant Obedience
that I may never again provoke thee. Lord grant that in these holy Mysteries, I
may not only commemorate, but effectually receive my blessed Savior, and all
the benefits of his Passion; and to that end, give me such a preparation of
Soul as may qualify me for it; give me a deep sense of my sins and
unworthiness, that being weary and heavy leaden, I may be capable of his
refreshings. Raise up my dull and earthly mind from grovelling here below, and
inspire it with holy Zeal, that I may with spiritual affections approach this
spiritual Feast; and let, O Lord, that infinite love of Christ in dying for so
wretched a sinner, inflame my frozen and benumed Soul, and kindle in me that
sacred fire of love to him, and that so vehement, that no water may quench, no
floods drown it, such as may burn up all my dross, and not leave one
unmortified Lust within me, and such as may also extend it self to all whom
thou have given me command to love, even my Enemies as well as Friends. O Lord,
I beseech thee cloth me with the Wedding Garment, and make me though of my
self a most unworthy, yet by thy mercy an acceptable guest at thy Holy Table,
that I may not eat and drink my own Condemnation, but may have my Pardon
sealed, my Weakness repaired, my Corruptions subdued, and my Soul so
inseperably united to thee, that no temptation may be ever able to dissolve the
Union, but that being begun here, in grace it be consummated in Glory. Grant
this, O merciful Father, for thy dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord.

ONce more, O my Soul, contemplate that thou art now a preparing thy self for
that Divine Banquet, which thy loving Lord instituted a little before those
Sufferings and that Death, before the breaking of his Body, and the sheding of
his Precious, Sacred, and Royal Blood, which he declared to be signified by the
breaking of the Bread, and the pouring out of the Wine, for he went that very
Night into the Garden, where his pious Soul, apprehensive of Divine Wrath,
humbly addressed with reiterated supplications for Relief, and being sensible
of the miseries of Mankind pressing hard upon his spotless Soul, the Torments
of the approaching Cross, the executing Terrors of the Powers of Darkness, and
the whole Artillery of an incensed God, which he was in little time to graple
with; they shook his very Nature, melted him into streams of Blood, and so cast
down his Spirits, that nothing less than an Angel of the presence, was able to
mittigate the conflicts of this otherwise insupportable Agony. These are but
the beginning of Sorrows, for no sooner then Mercy overcame the afflicting
convulsion of his Soul, who was sorrowful to Death, but he began to fortify
his kind intentions to poor Man, by that inexpressibly loving, and unparalled
Resignation to the will of his Heavenly Father, he cheerfully proceeded to
offer up that Sacrifice which was to appease the Divine Justice for the
iniquities of an impious World; when after a most exemplary submission to the
affronts and injuries of implacable Spirits, the ungrateful Malice, and
supercillious Envy of those who thirsted for his Blood, being despitefully
abused, afflicted and tormented, denied by some, forsaken by others, desolate
and comfortless in every sense, truly a Man of sorrows was forced to add weight
to his past Sufferings, and bear the Cross of his own Crucifixion.

Where, O my Soul, behold by Faith the Lamb of God lifted up for the sins of
the World. O humble thy self into the center of thy own nothing, for of what
punishment ought thou to be thought worthy, that have so insensed the
Majesty of Heaven, to give up the innocent and most Holy Jesus, thy best, thy
only Friend, and his dear Son to be Tortured and Tormented for thy sins. O how
cruelly was he scourged with Wips, wounded with Thorns, laden with the Cross,
torn with Nails, pierced with a Spear, and racked on the most painful
instrument of Death, his lovely Face defiled with Blood and Spitting, his Ears
filled with Upbraidings and Curses, his Eyes drenched in Tears for the ruin of
his Enemies, and his Soul amazed at the Terrors of an angry God; 'till at
length all wounded, broken and bloody with many groans, yet with admirable
patience he breaths out his Soul with infinite Charity and Forgiveness.

O holy Jesu! how excellent is thy Goodness? O ye blessed Host of Heaven, who
rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, adore and praise that unknown sorrow,
which ye your selves contemplate with awful admiration.

I cannot doubt thy power to ease me, because of these Sufferings of thy Love; I
must not question thy willingness, who call me of thy own accord, nor dare I
suspect thy sincerity, who art Truth it self, and always in earnest with poor
sinners; my Guilt has made me think to fly from thee, but thy melting Voice has
eneouraged me to turn to thee, and laid me prostrate at thy feet, groaning
under my Offenses; but if thou will pity me, I am safe; it thou art pleased, I
am eased; if thou pardon me, my burden is gone; and if thou will take away this
intolerable Lord, I will then venture to draw nearer even to thy Altar, O holy
Jesu, there to receive more refreshment from thy mercy. Come unto me, all ye
that are weary and heavy leaden, and I will give you rest. These are thy words,
O Christ, for you have spoken them, and they are mine, because spoken for my
salvation. O sweet and amiable words in the ear of a poor sinner, by which thou
invitest an indigent, starved wretch to partake of thy Body: But who am I, O
Lord, that I should come? The Angels and Archangels reverence thee, thy Saints
and holy Ones fear before thee, and yet thou say unto me, come: Unless thou
have said it, who could have believed it to be true? Unless thou had
commanded it, who durst have attempted this approach?

Does my Savior invite? and shall I go? Shall a sinner dare to sit down at his
Table? Does he invite, and shall I not go? Shall a Wretch presume to refuse his
Call? Rise then, my Soul, and take thy swiftest wings, and fly to the presence
of this great Mystery.

A Feast of Holy Bread and Holy Wine, in representation of thy sacred Body and
blood, where thy all glorious self is freely to the meanest guest a feast of
peace and love, and incomparable sweetness, to which thy own blessed mouth thus
kindly call us.

But stay, am I dressed like a friend of the Bridegroom, that I safely may come
to the Marriage Supper; have I considered how chaste those eyes should be which
go to behold the God of purity; have I considered how clean that mouth should
be, which presumes to eat that Bread of Heaven, but most, how all caelestial
that Soul should be which aspires to a union with the Body of Christ.

Oh! how poor, and dull, and empty am I, how infinitely unworthy of so divine a
Sacrament; yet am I called by him that can Command, by him that sees and
pitties my misery; he bids me come, he surely will receive me, and with his
bounteous fullness supply my defects.

Go then, my Soul, to that sacred Table, and take thy part of that delicious
banquet; go all inflamed with Love and joy, and hope, and quench thy holy
Thirst with that spring of bliss, when thou have tasted his everlasting
sweetness, and feel his heavenly streams flow gently on thee; open thy happy
breast, and suck those Waters in, and let them freely run over all thy powers.

Let them soak deep to the root of thy heart, and turn thy barren heath into a
fruitful soil; fruitful in holy thoughts, and pious words; fruitful in good,
just and charitable Deeds, fruitful in good examples; and God of his infinite
goodness confirm all this, that my Soul may bless his holy Name here, and with
the whole host of Heaven sing Hallelujah to him that sits upon the Throne, and
to the Lamb for over hereafter, Amen.

[Our Father, etc.

O Lord, bless me and keep me, this day.

O Lord make thy Face to shine upon me, and be gracious unto me.

O Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, and give me peace this
day, and for ever. Amen.

The Blessings to be obtained, and the sense of our Unworthiness, which surely
by this time is ingrafted in our hearts, will inform us, that each moment of
this day ought to be carefully employed, and therefore in every interval when
we cannot be upon our knees, let our holy Meditations carry us above the
contemplations of this world; and as this is a day of rejoicing, in which our
Souls are to be solaced with the ravishing sweet of so divine a repast, let our
Actions attest this inward satisfaction, and show in some sort by their humble
demeanor, that they are touched with a sense of those incomparable delights,
and can relinquish their sensual Enjoyments to attend the Devotions of their
better part. After we have thus discharged our Duties in private, let us
prepare for our more solemn Devotions in the House of God. In our way thither,
let us endeavor to get stronger apprehensions of God, and the invisible
Majesty that dwells there: Let us strengthen our Faith by a positive belief of
the presence of the Most High, and this will occasion a holy Awe and Reverence
when we enter the Church, and cause us to say with humility: Surely, the Lord
is in this place: How dreadful is this place? This is none other but God's
house. This is the Gate of Heaven.

As soon as we are placed in our seats, it will become us to bow our selves
before the Lord, and in humility of Soul to offer up our Petitions to the
Father of Heaven.

A Prayer.
O Most gracious and merciful Lord, thou have called all those that are weary
and heavy laden with the burden of their sins to come to thee, and have
promised to ease and refresh them; thou have invited all those that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness to come to thy Table and taste of thy Supper, and has
promised that thou will satisfy them in assurance of these promises; I come to
the Lord Jesus, beseeching thee to ease and refresh me, and to satisfy me with
thy Mercy, for I hunger and thirst after thee, and thy Salvation. I confess
that my daily sins have made me unworthy of my daily Bread, much more of this
heavenly Banquet. O make my Soul ascend to thee in an humble supplication, and
let my Savior's intercession procure thine acceptance, and give me such a
faith as may take possession of all I pray for; besprinkle my polluted Soul in
the Blood of thy dear Son Jesus, O let the Blood of his Wounds, and the Water
of his Side make me clean, that I may come to the blessed Feast of the spotless
Lamb. I confess, O God, that when I consider thy greatness, and my nothing, thy
purity and my uncleanness, I see it infinitely unreasonable and presumptious in
me to approach thy sacred prescence, and desire to partake of thy Sacrament, or
hope for a part of thy Glory; but when I consider thy Mercy and thy Wisdom, thy
Bounty and Goodness, thy readiness to forgive, and willingness to impart thy
self unto thy servants, then am I lifted up with hopes, then I come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace, even so, O Lord, because thou have commanded
and love it should be so. It was never heard from the beginning of the World,
that thou ever did despise him that called upon thee, or forsake any that did
abide in thy fear, or that any that trusted in thee was ever confounded; but if
I come to thee, I bring an unworthy person to be joined to thee; and if I come
not, I shall remain unworthy for ever; if I stay away, I fear to lose thee; if
I come, I fear to offend thee, and that will lose thee more: I know, O God, my
sins have separated between me and thee, but thy love, O Jesus, and thy
Passion, Holiness and Obedience has reconciled us, and though my sins deter me,
they make it necessary I should come, and though thy Greatness amazes, yet it
is so full of goodness, that it invites and incourages me to approach these
holy Mysteries this day. O mighty God, rebuke Satan, restrain all Earthly and
Carnal affections, that they do not once dare to whisper a temptation to my
Soul, a distraction to my Thoughts, while I am in Communion with thee at thy
Holy Altar; do thou, O Lord, rule me by thy Grace, govern me by thy Spirit, and
defend me by thy Power, and crown me with thy Salvation, which I humbly beg in
the Name and Merits of my Redeemer Jesus, whom with thee, O Father, and the
Holy Spirit, I will Worship as one God to all Eternity, Amen.

Let us now employ our Thoughts as becoming the Sons of God, and all the vacant
time before the service of the Church, let us employ in holy Meditation. Let us
remember not only that we are in his presence, but that this is his day, on
which we are met to glorify his Name; for the good things we have received, to
ask such things as are necessary for our future welfare, and to hear his Holy
Word, to direct us in the way to Salvation. Let us beg of him to open our
Hearts, that we may receive with meekness the word we are to hear; that for the
Merits of Jesus he will receive our Prayers, and no doubt when God sees us
earnestly and humbly challenging his Word, he will for his Truth and promise
sake grant us all those good things which he knows needful for us; and this
should mightily encourage us to be sincere at all times when we enter the place
where his honor dwells. Certainly every Christian that is sensible of the
greatness of God, will not dare to dissemble or behave himself irreverently there,
especially at such a time when our strickest attention is required, and even
that not enough, to contemplate the most High.

When the Service begins, we are to lay aside these Meditations, and
immediately apply our selves to that, if we devoutly attend to every part,
shall need no Paraphrase to heighten those expressions, or make us more in love
with that incomparable composure; it is the singular excellence of the Common
Prayer, that they who frequent it always find out something that deserves to be
more admired than they can express. I dare affirm no one ever found any
flatness or defect that came without prejudice, or was piously inclined, for it
contains all that may occasion a sensible pleasure to a good Man. The Sentences
and Exhortations are excellent motives to press us to our Duty; the confession
full of Pathetical expressions, and suited to the conditions of all men; the
Absolution most comfortable to a penitent Soul that wants to be eased from its
weary Burden. The Hymns, and Psalms very proper to stir up our Souls to a holy
rejoicing in the Lord; the Scripture has its place that we may receive comfort
from those lively Oracles of Truth. After the profession of our Faith, we
supplicate our God according to the Apostle, not only for our selves, but for
those who are in authority over us, nay, our Charity reaches further, to all
Christian Kings and Princes; and to show we are not forgetful of those of
lesser degree, we extend it to all sorts and conditions of men; What can be
more agreeable to a devout Soul, than thus to exercise it self in the Law of
God? What can be more moving than to see, and hear a devout Priest offering up
Prayers and Supplications, and others joining in his Petitions by Ecchoing a
hearty Amen? How does it constrain us to outvie in Zeal, and cause a Holy
Emulation, when we hear our Minister with fervency, crying to the Father of
Heaven to have Mercy upon us, and we with equal earnestless invocating the Son
and Holy Ghost mercifully to hear us? Let others mock, and call them vain
repetitions, while we endeavor to express the desires of our Souls in those
Pathetical supplications, Lord have mercy upon us, We are not so vain but to
confess our want of that Mercy, nor ashamed of the Repetition when we find the
benefit, even the favor of the Lord, which is better than life it self;
wherefore I must be earnest with every Christian to attend this service; don't
let our thoughts be roving, but correct the wanderings of our minds, the whole
Service is in order to prepare us to a worthy reception of the Holy Sacrament;
when once we have got the mastry of our selves, and can go along with all the
parts of the Church, we shall have less occasions for these helps to Devotion;
we shall find so much contained in the Prayers and Exhortations, as will take
up all the vacant time in Holy Meditation; and this will make Holiness become
exceeding delightful, when we can turn our Souls toward God, and solace them
without interruption; when we can leave the thoughts of this World, and look
steadfastly to God. But this is to be done by degrees, when we have conquered
the love of this World, and wearied our selves from its Alurements, and this
only to be performed by a constant watch over our words and actions, and
perseverance in the ways of goodness.

When the Prayers of the Church are over, let us humbly ask God to pardon our
defects in his Service, and say,

O Lord Pardon the wanderings and coldness of my Petitions, deal not with me
according to my Prayers or Deserts, but according to my needs, and thy infinite
mercy in Jesus Christ, Amen.

Having discharged our duty in Prayer to God, let us prepare our selves to hear
what he will say to us out of his Holy Word; we ought to look upon the Minister
as an Ambassador of Christ, and hearken with reverence to his Doctrine at the
end of it, to beg that we may bring forth the Fruit of it in our Lives and
Conversation, and this we cannot do in better words, than in one of the Collects
after the Communion.

[Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, that the Words which we have heard this
day, etc.

While the People are going out, let us devoutly turn toward the Table of the
Lord, and endeavor with admiration and reverence, to contemplate the
approaching Ordinance; let us entertain thoughts of our unworthiness, and then
humble our selves before the Lord, and say,

A Prayer.
O Almighty God who art infinite in Compassion, and art able to pardon more
sins than I can commit; the stretched out Arms of my dear Savior upon the
Cross, can encompass the largest extention of my sins, and his Passion affords
an ever flowing Red Sea to cover them, that they may not become my confusion: O
then let his Blood be my Bath, purge me with Hysop and I shall be clean, wash
me and I shall be whiter than Snow, and to capacitate me for these Mercies, let
the deepest sorrow wound my Soul; Oh! let it grieve my Spirit that I have lived
so long to the grief of thine, and let me grieve so long that I can grieve no
more, make my Soul to ascend in an humble supplication, and let my Savior's
intercession procure thine acceptance, and give me such a Faith as may take
possession of all I pray for; and least my own trust should deceive me when I
have said Amen to my Prayers, do thou say Amen to my Amen, that so an
Establishment of Blessings may be the crown of my Soul, which I beg through the
merits and mediation of Jesus Christ. Extinguish, O Lord, all the Fires of
Hell, my Lust, Pride, Envy, Malice and Uncharitableness; create in me, O God, a
great longing after the Bread of Heaven, and a thirst after the fountain of
Salvation, that as the Heart pants after the water brooks, so my Soul may
long after thee, my Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

When the Minister goes up to the Holy Table, letus raise our Affections, and
prepare our selves to accompany him in this great work, and fixing our selves
in a devout posture when he begins the Exhortation to Charity, let our thoughts
carry us beyond the litteral Expression of those Sentences; and whilst he
Reads, consider the necessities of the Poor. Let us enlarge our desires, and
wish we were able to satisfy the complaints of those who are in want, at least
let us resolve to do according as God has put it in our power, not Grudgingly,
and of necessity, because it is the custom, and the Church requires it at such
Seasons. Here we have an opportunity of examining our selves whether we have
fulfilled the will of God in this manner. It Is not to be supposed that we
deserve the name of charitable persons, who take no time to distribute of this
World good, but when we cannot help it; therefore let us ask our Souls at every
Sentence, Have thou followed this Advice, or obeyed this Command? Have thou
performed that great duty of the Law, doing as thou would be done by? Have
thou restored with interest, whatever thou have unjustly detained from any Man?
And first, have we taken care that they who have sown unto us Spiritual things,
should reap of our Temporal; for it is meet, those who wait at the Altar, should
be partakers with the Altar, for we must know, that even so, God has ordained,
that they who Preach should live of the Gospel? Therefore if we have failed to
do this, let us ask God's Pardon, and don't let us, because the Minister cannot
exact it, take that advantage, and pay nothing? Secondly, have we showed our
compassion to the poor, by giving Alms? Have we not turned away our Face from
our Brother who was in need, but been merciful after our power? If our Hearts
condemn us not, we have confidence in God that he is Righteous, and will not
forget, but reward us in the day of necessity; thus may we turn these excellent
Admonitions into heads of Examination, and happy are we if we have offered up
such Sacrifices as are acceptable. The Church has taken care to tell us what
they are, and has placed them at the beginning of this excellent Office to
exhort us to Good Works. We are about to remember that exceeding love of
Christ, and the wonderful charity of our Savior, therefore it is very proper in
the entrance to this Holy Ordinance, to exhort us to be like minded, that our
Lights may shine before men, and the world may see the love of God dwells in
us, by our readiness to perform his commands; but what need we of Arguments to
press us to that which is so reasonable in it self, which the Law of Nature
teaches we ought to do. But a sad experience informs us, that neither the law
of God nor nature is sufficient to oblige some tempers to compassion; but let
all such remember, however serviceable their Estates are to them in this World,
they will turn to their destruction in the other; their full Barns that have
been shut at the knockings of the Poor, will then be of no advantage, nor the
multitude of their riches prevail for their security, both of them will turn to
their reproof, the rust of the one, and fullness of the other will sink them
into despair, and exclude them to Eternity from the Happiness of God.

We have been taught that no one must approach this sacred Feast in bitterness
of Spirit, we must have love toward the Brethren, and if we are in charity
with all men, shall more especially have bowels of compassion to those who are
in want; therefore let us while we have opportunity, impart of our abundance,
and bless God for enabling us to do good to the Household of Saints; and this
coming from us so readily, will be the more acceptable sacrifice, for God loves
a cheerful giver, and that our Alms ascend not alone; it is necessary we
accompany them with Prayers, and though we have no Angel to assure us they come
up before God, yet we need not doubt their acceptance, for God himself has
assured us with such sacrifices he is well pleased, therefore let us humbly
say, [at the giving our Alms.

[Blessed be thou, O Lord God, for all things come of thee, and of thy own, do
I now give thee; O let this Alms be an Odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, and well pleasing in thy sight.

After the sentences are read, we have nothing to do, but devoutly compose our
selves, and join with Reverence to the Prayers of the Church; if we consider
the substance of this excellent Office, we shall be freed from the
interruptions which often occur in our devotions; for when our minds are wholly
taken up with the signification of the words, we shall have less room for
wanderings. When the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's Church is begun, let
us interest our selves in that excellent form, that when the Priest comes to
beseech God to accept our Alms and Oblations, let us in our minds humbly beg it
for Jesus Christ his Sake, and that together with them, God would receive our
Prayers for the Universal Church; for we cannot but enlarge our Passions, and
desire the good of all Mankind, not only of those who confess Christ, but that
the Heathen may be brought into the Possession of our Savior, and agree in the
Truth of his Holy Word; we must desire the Welfare of Princes, because they
are set over us by God, for the punishment of Vice, and the praise of them that
do well; and for the Pastors of the Church, there is a great deal of reason for
us to pray for them, that they may duly administer this Holy Mystery, and by
their Example and Doctrine, both save themselves and those who hear them; they
who are in Affliction call for our fellow-feeling, and since we are all of one
body, we cannot let any member be in disorder, and neglect to procure its
remedy; we are passionately to desire the Health and Salvation, not only of
those we know want present relief, but to all that are in any danger, Sickness,
or other Distress, considering it may be our condition, and we must desire it
with the same Ardour, as if it was for our selves; and since God has given us
the example of good Men, who are gone before us, we ought to pray that we may
follow their steps, that so we may arrive to the same degree of Blessedness,
and to obtain all this more certainly; we are to beg it in the name of Jesus
Christ, believing that God will never refuse any thing that is convenient for
us, when we call upon him in that most prevailing Name, especially since he is
our Advocate, we have the assurance of his intercession, and God can deny
nothing to the Son of his Love.

After this excellent Prayer is over, we are exhorted by the Minister to a more
serious preparation to the Communion, though it is supposed that every one who
approaches this Holy Table, has considered before, repented and got a competent
understanding in this sacred Mystery, yet it is very necessary we should attend
this Exhortation, and Reexamine our selves whether we are such as the Gospel
requires. The Church has taken care to instruct us in this Duty in such a
manner, that we cannot easily deceive our selves; she encourages us with
rewards, and sets before us the dreadful consequence of our carelessness or
neglect. We may be over awed in our private Examination, by the Dominion of our
Lusts, or perhaps the love of our selves may incline us to think better than we
are; but when we hear God's Minister urging us to this Duty, and powerfully
representing those things we have prevailed with our selves to pass over, and
that God is immediately present to acquit or condemn us, we are obliged to
confess our Wickedness and be sorry for our sin; this is the Repentance we
shall not be ashamed of, that will put us in a state to be reconciled with our
Savior, and make us fit to receive the Body and Blood of Christ, and the
benefit of that is, the becoming one with him, and to be pertakers of his
Everlasting Glory; therefore when we hear the Priest exhort us, Judge therefore
your selves Brethren, let us humbly say, I confess my self a sinner, and
condemn my ingratitude.

[Repent you truly of your sins past, etc.

I repent, O Lord, and am sorry for my Wickedness; Have a lively and steadfast
Faith, etc. I believe, O Lord, help my unbelief; Amend your lives, etc. O grant
me thy Holy Spirit to amend my life; Be in perfect Charity, etc. I forgive all
Men their Trespasses, Lord, do thou forgive me; So shall ye be meet partakers,
etc. O make me a worthy Communicant; Ye must give most humble and hearty
thanks, etc. I adore thy infinite love to Mankind in the Redemption of the World
by our Lord Jesus; who did humble thy self to the death upon the Cross, etc. By
thy Cross and Passion, sweetest Jesus deliver me; He has, etc. and ordained
Holy Mysteries as pledges of his Love, etc. I remember thy exceeding Love to
us, miserable sinners, and adore thy infinite compassion in dying for Mankind;
To thee therefore, O Jesus, with the Father and the Holy Ghost; let us give, as
we are most bounden; continual thanks, submitting our selves wholly to thy holy
Will and Pleasure; studying to serve thee in true Holiness and Righteousness
all the days of our Life; Amen.

The Priest proceeds now to a more immediate invitation, and to show us that we
ought to think highly of these things, calls only those who have such
quallifications as he just before told us was absolutely necessary, and that we
might not come rashly, puts it to us again, ye that do truly Repent, etc. But
to heighten our esteem, and make us more in earnest with our selves; let us
imagine we hear Christ himself inviting us, for it is the Minister in his stead,
calling us to Repentance, Confession and Humility of Soul; these are the
Garments wherewith we ought to be clothed, and he that comes without them,
does but mock God, and we have heard the dreadful effect of that presumption;
it is provoking him to plague us with Diseases, and sundry kinds of Death; we
kindle God's wrath against us, and his indignation will last to Eternity. But
that the Terrors of the Lord might fright away none but the impenitent, the
Church assures us all, they who come with Faith and Repentance, may take the
Holy Sacrament to their comfort, and accordingly exhorts them to draw near to
testify their sincerity by an humble Confession, and to remove all suspicion
of Hypocrisy, commands, that it be done upon our Knees with contrition. They
who hope for Pardon can expect it upon no other Terms, therefore we ought to be
very circumspect, that we don't call upon God with our Lips, when our Hearts is
far from him; the Sacrifice of such Fools only work their Destruction. Don't
let us look upon it as matter of form only, that we are to tell God Almighty a
sad story of our selves, and yet in such a manner, as if we were not concerned
for the Sin, nor God for the punishment of it. But when we come to that part of
the Confession, acknowledging our Offenses, by Thought, Word and Deed, let us
reflect on some of those Transgressions we have repeated most, and have most
cause to repent of; let us think of them with sorrow, and detestation, with a
resolution to forsake them, and a passionate desire to be freed from the Evil
of them; let our Hearts go along with our Prayers, and they are such as will
inform us of our condition, and being affectionately repeated, will teach us to
be humble and contrite, and that will render us capable of the pardon which
follows to be pronounced by the Priest.

It Is impossible to prescribe Rules for our thoughts in the time of Absolution,
we have a hundred Idea's at once in our Minds, the Soul is full with Transport,
Rejoicing and Humilliation; we have so much to say that we are confounded in
our selves, we know not how to bless God enough, are afraid of our wickedness,
and astonished at his goodness; there is no re-presenting the Passions of a
Soul in this Religious Agony, nor how prevailing the confused sighs of a
ravished sinner are to our merciful God. They who are most sensible of their
sins, can best tell what a boundless joy arises at the thoughts of their
forgiveness.

But lest we should have any mistrust, because of our sins, the Church has
collected some comfortable assurances from the Gospel, for it is no wonder we
receive our Pardon doubting and trembling; we have need of infallible Authority
to persuade us of the truth of these things, when our fear had so cast us down,
that we almost were brought to believe that God had utterly forsaken us; we can
now cry with cheerfulness, blessed be God, that has not so turned his mercy
from us, but has sent his Son Jesus Christ to call us to Repentance, therefore
when we hear the Priest say, Come unto me, etc. Let us humbly say, I come unto
thee, O Jesus, ease me of my Burden; so God loved the World, etc. I believe,
Lord save me, or I perish; this is a true saying, etc. Mercy, sweet Jesus, I am
a miserable sinner; If any man sin. O thou great advocate of my Soul, I bless
thee, and all that is within me, shall praise thy Holy Name.

Certainly our affections are so moved, that we shall be zealous to lift up our
hearts with joy and gladness, and now confess it is meet and right to give
thanks; to which purpose let us summons our strongest affections, that we may
with Angels and Archangels magnify the glorious Name of God most High; If it
be upon any particular Feast, as Christmas, or Easter, there is greater reason
to strain our selves to the highest Note, to give thanks for those particular
Blessings.

We are now approaching nearer to these Holy Mysteries, and must express the
greater Reverence, and before we taste how gracious the Lord is, confess our
unworthiness to receive him into our Habitation. This we cannot do in better
Words than the Church has provided for us; therefore we are to join heartily in
the following form, and beg that our sinful Bodies may be made clean by his
Body, that being so prepared, our Souls may be made fit to receive the Lord of
Glory.

After this excellent Prayer is over, let us look toward the Holy Table, and
whilst the Priest is ordering the Elements, Meditate and be astonished at the
transcending love of Christ; let us lose our selves in contemplation of that
Divine Mystery, that Heaven should so condescend to Earth, and Man be united to
God; that God should take upon him our Flesh, die for us upon Earth, and
nourish us now he is in Heaven. Let us represent to our Faith the intolerable
sufferings of our dying Lord, his whole Passion upon Mount Calvary, and the
Agonies of that unknown Sorrow there. Imagine we behold him stretched upon the
Cross, and see the Blood issuing from his wounded side. Behold him grapling
with the fury of an incensed God, and all the furies of the Powers of Darkness;
and this to redeem us from the Horrors of Hell, which were due to us for Sin
and Wickedness. Sure the consideration of these things will create an
odiousness of sin, which was so great, that nothing but the Blood of God could
expiate; we shall be sensible of our unworthiness, and adore withal, the
forces of our Soul that love surpassing knowledge, and beg of our crucified
Redeemer, to inspire us with holy Zeal, that our now softened Souls may Echo
Hallelujahs, and all that is within us may sing Eternally to God the Father,
who contrived this glorious Redemption, to God the Son who effected it, and to
God the Holy Ghost, who gives us the benefit thereof.

Let us now return with the Priest, and earnestly beg of our merciful God, that
the Elements may really become what they represent. After we have performed
that with Devotion, let us leave the rest to God and the Priest, and rising
from our Knees at the Consecration, look toward the Holy Table devoutly,
attending every Word and Action, for all is Mystery, and deserves a particular
Meditation; let us imagine we hear our Savior consecrating, and that we like
his Disciples at the last Supper, are waiting to be fed with the Bread from
Heaven, when we hear the Priest, saying, Who in the same Night he was betrayed,
took Bread, etc. Let us adore that inexpressible love of our Savior, which was
working our Salvation when his cursed Enemies were contriving his Crucifixion;
let us bless the goodness of God, and admire the Humillity of our Savior that
would be represented by no richer preparation than Bread. Here is no costly
sacrifice to exhault our Treasure, That, we may bestow upon those that want it,
the poor which we have always with us; but for the representation of himself,
he chooses what is necessary for our sustinance, to show us that his Body is as
necessary to the strengthening of our Souls, as Bread for the support of our
Life; And when he had given thanks, he breakt it, etc. O blessed Jesus, do
thou give thanks for my Redemption, behold I join my praises to thine, and
bless thee with all my Soul; O show thy acceptance of my praises, by hallowing
these Elements to the purposes they are designed. Saying, Take, Eat, this is my
Body which is given for you, etc. Here let us reflect upon the passion of our
Savior, and imagine we see him in that unspeakable Passion, offering up his
pious Soul upon the Cross. Do this in remembrance of me.

O Jesus, let me never be so ungrateful as to forget thee, likewise also, after
Supper, He took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, etc. Our Savior was not
content to give us his Body alone, but to pour out his Blood for us, and has
chosen Wine for the Commemoration of that inestimable mercy. O let our Souls
thirst after this Cup of Salvation, and when the Minister holds it out to bless
it, let us call upon the Name of the Lord; He gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of this, etc. Do this in remembrance of me. This is the time to Exercise
our Faith, and therefore, let us believe they really are to us what they
represent, and say a hearty Amen; for it is unto us, according to our Faith, if
we believe, it is unto us the Blood of Christ indeed; that no doubting nor
infidelity may unhallow these sanctified Elements to any of our Souls. Let us
say.

A Prayer after Consecration.
LOrd, it is done as thou have commanded, and I doubt not but the Mystery is
rightly accomplished; I am persuaded that here is that which my Soul longs
after, a crucified Savior, communicating himself to poor penitent Sinners. O
let me be reckoned among that Number, and then I shall assuredly receive thee,
Holy Jesus, Amen.

O Holy Savior, I behold thee stretched upon the Cross, with thy Arms spread
ready to embrace all Mankind; Glory be to thee, O Lord Jesus, Lamb of God, Son
of the Father, who did offer thy self a sacrifie to take away the sins of the
whole World, Lord have mercy upon me, and take away mine also.

When the Minister is a Communicating, let us humbly desire that God would hear
his Prayer.

The Lord hear thee, and remember all thy Offerings and Sacrifices; grant thee
thy Hearts desire, and fulfill all thy mind. The Lord perform all thy Petitions
which thou have made at this time for thy self, for us, and all Persons, Amen.

We have nothing to do now, but compose our selves for the acts of holy
Communion, remembering we are to feast with God by Silence and Heavenly
Contemplation; let us reflect upon the mercies of God in this Sacrament, and
when we have by Faith beheld the Glory of the Lord, confess our unworthiness to
appear before him, and acknowledge his goodness, which gives us the opportunity
of adoring his inexpressible Love.

While others are Communicating.
O How dreadful is this place? Seems it a small thing unto thee, O my Soul,
to be feasted with God, waited on by Angels, fed with the Body of Jesus, and
refreshed with the Cup of that saving Blood, which has attoned for the Sins of
the World? What means this secret, that so poor a Wretch, and sinful a Rebel,
should receive so mighty a Favor, and be received to so near Embraces? How can
I approach to these terrible Mysteries, till I have pulled back the Vail, and
worshipped him that feeds my Body to convey Grace to my Soul, and make that
stoop to the Eye of sense, which Angels cannot behold with open Faces? Here is
represented the Almighty Love of an infinite Being; here the God of Gods
appears all Bloody to fright thee from thy sins; here the All-merciful Savior
of the World, is as it were crucified before thine Eyes, that contemplating the
horrid Aggonies of the Cross, and remembering the cause of his cruel Sufferings,
thou may mourn for thy ingratitude that brought him to the torments of that
inexpressible Passion; here the Holy Jesus appears loaded with all the
Blessings of Heaven; here the everlasting Trinity seems to use his utmost
endeavor, to persuade thee into a Heavenly Conversation. To thy Holy Altar, O
Dear Redeemer, I am coming to renew my Baptizmal Vow, to enter into a Solemn
Covenant with God, and faithfully to promise thee to resign my self entirely to
thee, to fall out with thee no more, to be faithful to thee, to vindicate thy
Glory, to live up to those Laws which thou have sealed with thy own Blood. To
this end, I eat of thy Bread, and Drink of thy Wine, and so seal my Covenant
with thee. Quicken me, O Lord, and make me more earnest and zealous in thy
Service, and as thou have sent thy Son to bring me to thy self, do thou
likewise send thy Holy Spirit to sanctify me for thy self, and then I, who of
my self can scarce move unto thy Altar, by the assistance of thy Grace, may run
the ways of thy Commandments.

Having declared the reasons of our approaching this Holy Table, and begged
God's blessing upon us, let us Meditate after this manner.

Thou, O my God, have prepared a Table for me, and have promised, whosoever
eats thereof, shall never Hunger, and drinks, shall never Thirst.

This consideration alone is sufficient to furnish us with matter for
Contemplation. The mercy of God in preparing this Sacred Feast, the benefits we
receive from it, and the time in which it was institued when he was surrounded
with the Horrors of Death, and began to feel the weight of our Transgressions,
are enough to put us in a confusion, and constrain us at once to humble our
selves even into our first nothing; for abusing such goodness, and then adore
that amazing constancy of our Lord, that in the greatest of his Agony, could
endure yet more for our sakes, and resign himself to the Cross, notwithstanding
the contradiction of sinners. O let us consider this price with which we were
bought, and glorify God in our Bodies and Spirits which are his; therefore
bowing our bodies before the Lord, let us consider the wonder of his love.

BEhold what kind of love, O my Soul, is expressed by thy Redeemer, when our
sins, his treacherous Servants, and enraged Enemies were contriving his Death;
he was designing an excellent benefit for us, the stream of his affections was
so strong, that our baseness and ingratitude could not check it; we might have
expected that the horror of this dismal Night should have made him repent of
his undertaking, and have put him upon reversing all his former favors; but
lo, he adds a greater than ever he had given before, and appoints this as a
seal to confirm and convey the rest to us. Thy love was stronger than Death,
and when all the terrors of thy dreadful Passion were in view, thy Soul was so
calm, as to be at leisure to institute this Feast of Joy and Gladness. Surely,
I will entertain this Festival with the dearest regard I can express, since it
was one of the last and greatest Testimonies of the love of a dying Friend;
this blessed Legacy, this parting Remembrance, shall be in my heart for ever.

Having considered the exceeding great love of God, in instituting this
Sacrament that very Night he was betrayed, and that he should be mindful of us,
when he was about to drink that Cup of which we were not able; let us now
contemplate the preparation our Lord then made for us, and that we have already
heard, is Bread, but don't let the meaness of the outward part be a
disparagement to this mystery, but let us adore the Humility of our Savior,
who was content with so mean a Re-presentation.

A Meditation upon the Element of Bread.
O Blessed Jesus, how lovely is thy Humility thou have chosen to be represented
by Bread, and though some curious or costly preparation had been more agreeable
to thy Dignity, yet this best expresses thy condescension. Bread is the poor
Man's Food, yet necessary for the Rich; it springs from the Earth, yet it is
the staff of our Life, and given to strengthen Man's heart, and so it
signifies, that Body which thou did take from the Earth, and gave for the
life of the World. O that I may receive thee by Faith, and then I know I shall
draw the most salutary nourishment from thee, and thou will as effectually be
united to my Soul, as the Bread which is eaten is to my Body. Let me eat this
Holy Bread in Charity, O do thou make it thy Body, and it shall be the Bread of
Life to my Soul. O merciful Jesus, thou have taken Bread into thy bountiful
hands, and behold I faint for Hunger, I languish for this Spiritual Food, and
since I am come so nigh thee, on this blessed day of Distribution, I beseech
thee pass not by me; as thou take this Bread, so did thou take thy Body
only to be broken in Sacrifice for us, and in Sacrament to us; let me not
therefore want my part.

O Eternal Word of God, by whose power all things were made, I will not ask how
thou can give me thy Flesh to eat, because, I am abundantly satisfied in thy
saying, this is my Body, since thou can make it become to me, whatsoever thou
say it is. I believe Lord, help my unbelief; what though my senses assure me
the outward substances, and its accidents still remain, yet, my Faith and
experience tell me, there is an Efficacy therein beyond the power of any other
thing. Alas! the Flesh would profit me nothing, for he that is joined to thee
must be one Spirit. O let these sacred Symbols therefore make me partaker of
thy Nature, and a partner in thy merits; let them unite me to thee, ingraft me
in thee, and make that Body mine which did suffer Death for me, and then I
shall need no further, but be more happy than if I could understand all
mysteries; sure I am, this is thy Body in Sacrament, it communicates to us the
blessings and benefit thereof, and though presented with a Figure, and by a
Holy Right, yet it is to all its purposes, that which it does represent; I will
therefore receive it as thy Body, and esteem it infinitely above all other food,
that I may not be judged for not descerning thy Body: O let it be unto me
according to my Faith.

I Am a sinful Wretch, O Lord, and yet if I bid thee depart from me, I banish
all true happiness from my Soul; I long for thy presence, but how shall I
entertain thee? Thou wast born of a pure Virgin, wraped in clean Linen,
dwell now where nothing defiled can enter, but never was there so unworthy
apartment prepared for thee, as my polluted heart, into which I durst not
presume to bring thee, but that I know thou can make it clean; however, when
by Faith I see that Body which all the Angels in Heaven worship, I cannot but
abhor my self in Dust and Ashes, I am amazed to see such a Majesty come to
visit a Sin-sick Soul in so poor a Cottage, yea, I cannot but tremble at thy
presence, O thou King of Glory, because I am so overspread with the filth of
sin, but I will lament those corruptions which I cannot fully purge away, and
beseech thee not to despise me though I deserve it. I confess my self unworthy,
but thy condesention in stooping to me will be the more illustrious, and if
thou have less delight in me for the present, thou shall have more Glory
afterward; When thou have changed my vile Body, and made it like to thy
glorious Body, according to thy mighty Power.

O My Soul, make have, behold thy gracious Master is dealing his Bread to those
that hunger after Righteousness; be not discouraged at thy unworthiness, for he
gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth not. O dear Jesus, give me a share
thereof, declare me to be thine, by feeding me at this Table, thou, who were
content to be bruised and broken to satisfy my offended God. O be pleased to
give thy self, and the merits of this thy Passion unto me; Lord, give me ever
more of this Bread.

HOly Jesus, I am not worthy to touch this blessed Body, as it is thine yet I
presume to approach, because thy love has made it mine. This is the sacrifice
for my sins, the price of my Redemption, and that by which my Soul was ransomed
from Hell, and rescued from a dreadful destruction (it was given for me) and it
shall now be given to me, and have thou made such a preparation for me, and
offered it unto me. Lord, I am transported at thy love, dear Savior, I will
love thee with all my powers, and strive and pray that I may love thee more, as
fervently as ever any thy Saints have done; I will give my self unto thee, and
despise all other things in comparison of thee, and when I have once tasted of
this all-saving Sacrifice, which was given for me, I Am persuaded that neither
Life, Death, Pleasure or Pain, things present or to come, shall be able to
separate me from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

O My Celestial Food, the bread that came down from Heaven, how does thy
sweetness and my own necessities invite me? My body is liable to Temporal, my
Soul to Eternal Death; and behold here is the medicine of immortality, which
will remove the sting of the first, and destroy the power of the second, which
will fill me with the Graces I want, fit me for the Glory I desire, and advance
my Soul and Body above the Power of corruption; I feel a mighty Hunger created
in me, which nothing but this Heavenly Manna can satisfy. I despise the meat
which perishes and feeds for Destruction, and long with impatience to taste
of this Body of Christ, of which I may eat and live for ever, which will make
the Grave unable to hold me, and Hell not dare to shut its Mouth upon me. O
make no long tarrying, but give me now and ever this Bread; I desire nothing
but Christ, if I want this repast, shall faint or die before I come to the
Mount of God.

O My Soul, behold how thou have incensed the Majesty of Heaven; see thy
Savior offered up for thy sins, and submitting to the heavy Wrath of God, and
yet whatever he suffered was thy Portion; Wretch that I am to live in such a
manner, that nothing else could satisfy or make my Peace, but here I come this
day to call my sins to remembrance; I will look on thee whom I have pierced
with a most tender and sympathizing Affection, and while I break this Holy
Bread with my Teeth, will commemorate how thou wast bruised for our iniquities,
how our offenses did torture thee with grief and pain. Holy Savior, I Am angry
at my self, and full of anguish to see what I have brought upon thee; I Am sorry
with all my heart, that I have given harbor to thy Murderers, but I hope this
dismal spectacle shall mortify in me all desires after Evil, and make me abhor
all those desperate pleasures which must be so dearly paid for by thee, or
stand charged upon my account for ever.

A Meditation upon the Element of Wine.
O What preparation is our gracious Master making for us, he thinks it not
enough to give us his blessed Body with the merits of all those Torments which
he suffered in the Flesh; but he is pleased to pour out his Blood and Life,
together with it, that we might drink thereof, and so take as it were his very
Soul into us; miserable Wretches we are, that nothing less will help us: O how
gracious a Redeemer have we, that will not deny us this; behold, O Lord, I
Thirst, and this Wine of joy makes me more impatient to taste of this Cup of
Thanksgiving. Thou that have prepared it for me, make it thy holy Blood unto
me, and then it shall cleanse my Soul, and make me thine for ever.

O Lord, I tremble at the apprehensions of all those Evils that stand between
me and thy Glory; the Grave gapeth for me, and Satan is ready every moment to
devour me, wherefore I beseech thee, sprinkle me with thy all-saving Blood,
that the destroying Angel may pass over me. Let me drink of this Cup of Life,
and Death shall be Defeated, the Grave Dismantled, and Satan disappointed: Let
me drink of thy precious Blood, that I may receive abundance of thy Spirit, so
shall my body be hallowed into a sacred Temple, and my Soul replenished with
such Graces, that I can never perish. O give me this Divine Cordial at present,
and make to me a preservation for Body and Soul to life everlasting.

I Door thy unspeakable Goodness, I delight in thy unmeasurable Mercy, I desire
to know nothing but the Lord Jesus, and in him Crucified: O let the Power of
thy Cross prevail against all the Powers of Darkness; let the Wisdom of thy
Cross make me wise unto Salvation; let the Peace of thy Cross reconcile me to
thy Eternal Father, and bring to me Peace of Conscience; let the Victory of thy
Cross mortify all my evil and corrupt Affections; let the triumph of thy Cross
lead me on to a state of Holiness, that I may sin no more, but in all things
please thee, and in all things serve thee, and in all things glorify thee. O
my God, assist me now and ever, graciously and greatly grant that I may not
receive Bread alone, for man cannot live by that, but that I may eat Christ,
and then I shall be thy servant for ever.

GReat Advocate of my Soul, thou see my desires to love thee, I leave my self
to thy Mannagement; O enter into this frozen heart, and erect thy Kingdom and
Empire there, let every desire of my Soul be subject to thee, and make me
willing to submit to any thing, so I may but love thee.

O Compassionate Savior, whose Bowels yearn over the penitent, let my Soul
rest in and contemplate thee; enlarge my Mind, loose me from my Bonds, and let
the effect of the offering up my Soul in the Holy Sacrament, be, that I may
become a servant of Righteousness, and may relish no wisdom, but from above.

O Lord Jesus, I am not worthy to come near so great a Mystery, but thou can
make me worthy; and though I am a sinner, I come to offer the sacrifice thou
have commanded. O pardon my Offenses, and receive me graciously for thy Mercies
sake.

I lament, O God, my detestable iniquities, for having so long, so often, and
so obstinately offended thee. O most merciful Lord, pardon me for Jesus Christ
his sake. O hear his dying Groans, regard his Agony and Bloody Sweet by his
Cross and Passion, let my sins be blotted out by his glorious Resurrection and
Ascension, let every Evil affection and lust be crucified, that I may arise to
a newness of life.

Great Friend of my immortal Soul, choose I beseech thee my heart for thy
dwelling place, replenish it with thy Graces, and make me to loath these
transitory possessions.

O Lord, what is there in Heaven, or what upon Earth that I would have besides
thee?

My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready.

Lord, what would thou have to me do, grant me to do what thou command,
and command what thou will.

O my sweet Savior, I long for thy Company, and am miserable without thee, yet
dare scarce draw near unto thee, because I have nothing pure enough to
entertain thee; Lord, be merciful to me a sinner, for I am grieved for my
unworthiness, and amazed at thy condescension in offering thy self to so vile a
Creature.

O Holy Jesus, I am utterly ashamed that ever I should put thee to such
exceeding Smart and Torture, I am ashamed to think of it, and abhor my sins.

O light of mine Eyes, my secure refuge; O life of my Soul, my Maker, my
Redeemer and my preserver; into thy hands do I commit my Spirit.

O joy of my Soul, when shall I love thee with all my Heart, with all my Soul,
with all my Might? When shall I enjoy thee? When shall I come and appear before
thee? When shall I fully please thee?

O that I could always serve thee, that I could perfectly obey thee.

Grant me, O my only Love, that I may continually reverence and adore thee.

Permit me not, O Lord Jesus, ever to be separated from thee.

Teach me, inlighten me, direct me, and assist me in all things, but especially
at this time, that I may do, or say nothing, but what is agreeable to thy
blessed Will, Amen.

I Have made a large Collection of Meditations and Prayers, because of the
difference of Congregations; some are very numerous, and I esteem them
pertinent to regulate our thoughts in that interval before we go up to the
Altar; the lesser Congregations, and they who are desirous to be first at the
Holy Table, may have advantage of variety, and make use of them as their
inclinations and opportunity will give leave. Our thoughts are not always upon
the wing, we require diversity of Arguments to press us to a forwardness,
besides they are not designed that our mind should be wholly taken up with
them, that we should read them all, and then think we may safely go up to the
Altar of God. The best composure in the World will be insignificant, if we
don't offer it with Devotion, Sincerity and Affection; one of these Petitions
rightly performed, is of greater Efficacy than the whole repeated in a rambling
disorder. Lord, have mercy upon me a miserable sinner, said with humility, was
more prevalent than the long Prayer of the wordy Supplicant. God knows our
necessity before we ask, and if we ask with Faith, depending on the
incercession of our Savior, he will grant our Petitions even before they are
ended; so that I would have some of them repeated with deliberation, and
between them call in our thoughts reconcile them to our reason and faith, and
then offer them up with earnest devotion, and so shall we be prepared to
receive the Lord of Glory.

When we have made an end of these Meditations, and are ready to go to the Holy
Table, rising from our Knees with Reverence; let us say,

GReat Captain of my Salvation, I am going to learn to fight the good fight of
faith in the blessed Sacrament of thy Love, let thy great Example there,
encourage me to fight against all Ambition and Ostentation, Censoriousness and
Uncharitableness, against coveteous, lustful and blasphemous Thoughts, against
guile and hypocrisy, discontent and mistrust of thy providence; against such
enemies, give me Grace to fight, over these let me Triumph, that having striven
lawfully, I may at last be admitted to the sight of thy sweet self, and be
charmed with thy. Love for evermore.

Having thus began our Warfares, and declared our chiefest Enemies, let us
approach the Holy Altar, that there we may put on the Armor of God, and being
endued with Righteousness from above, may walk more securely, and be defended
from the subtilty of Men and Devils; therefore as we are going up, let us turn
our thoughts to God in the following manner.

As we go up to the Altar;

I Come, Lord Jesus, O take me to thee, for thou love me, and have prepared a
Table for me in the seat of thy Love; in the multitude of thy mercies, O Lord
God, do I now approach thy Altar: O pardon my Sins, and receive me graciously;
if thou should be extreme to mark what is amiss, O Lord, who may abide it,
but with the Lord is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.

Lord, have thou set open this fountain, and will thou let a wretched creature
die for thirst in thy presence? Have thou prepared such Balm to heal me, and
shall I languish here before thee? I know if thou will, thou can make me
clean, here is the very instrument: Grant therefore, holy Jesus, that I may
duly apply it, and rightly use it, and then it shall prepare me for thee, and
unite me to thee by such inseparable Bonds, as shall never brake, unless
Eternity have an end: Blessed are they who so eat thy Flesh, and drink thy
Blood, so as thou requirest, and so as thy Saints have done, for they have been
cleansed at this fountain, and here there Union with thee first began. O happy
opportunity! Lord, let me do it well this once, and I am thine for ever.

Let us now kneel before the Lord, and say,

O Jesu, Son of God, everlasting King, receive my Spirit, O my Life, take my
Soul, my Joy, draw my heart unto thee, thou that art my Head, direct me: Light
of mine eyes, enlighten me: O my comfort, rejoice me; my sweet Food, let me eat
thee. O Word of God, refresh me: O Light Eternal shine thou over me, that I may
understand, know, and love thee.

After we have thus dedicated our selves to God, let us humbly represent to him
the occasion which drew us hither, and beg for his promise sake, that we may
not be sent Empty away.

O Lamb of God, thou have said, he that eats thy Flesh, and drinks thy
Blood, has eternal Life; behold thy Servant, O Lord, be it unto me according
to thy Word.

O Lord God, I desire to renew my Covenant with thee, and to seal it now with
this Sacrament: Lord, put thy Laws into my mind, and write them in my heart;
and for the passion of thy dear Son, which I now commemorate, be merciful to my
Unrighteousness; my Sins and Iniquities do thou remember no more, but be thou
my God, and I will be thy Servant.

The Minister now approaching us, we ought with the Centurion in the Gospel to
acknowledge our unworthiness, to receive so glorious a guest, and after such a
Humilliation, let us look up with confidence and represent to the Father of
Heaven, the prevailing sacrifice of his Son.

LOrd, I am not worthy thou should come under my roof, but speak the word,
Lord, and thy Servant shall be whole.

Behold, O Lord, the sacrifice of the everlasting Covenant, the Lamb that takes
away the sins of the World: Oh, let all the World feel the power of his
Intercession; hear, good Lord, the cry of his Wounds, and deny me not since I
bring thy Son with me; let us all know that he lives that was dead, and is a
live for evermore.

O holy Bread, which came down from Heaven, and give life to the World,
come into my heart, and cleanse me from all defilements of Flesh and Spirit;
enter into my Soul, heal and sanctify me within and without. O my Soul, taste
now, and see how gracious the Lord is: Whence is it that my Lord himself should
come to me.

Let us now with steadfast Faith repeat after the Minister, bowing our Bodies,
The Body of our Lord Jesus, etc.

After we have received the Bread, let us lift up our Souls in thankfullness,
and say.

Hail! Holy Lamb of God, thrice welcome art thou to a poor perishing sinner.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, who feedest me with the Bread of Life; let thy
crucified Body deliver me from this body of death.

Before the Cup.
I Will receive the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. Lord,
if thou will, thou can cleanse me; O touch me, and say, I will be thou clean:
Oh, let this Blood of thine purge my Conscience from dead Works to serve thee,
the ever living God.

It will not suffice me, dearest Savior, to receive thee in part only, for I
must be wholly thine, and blessed be thy Name, that thou have already given me
thy holy Body to cleanse my Nature; and now thou art preparing thy precious
Blood to wash away my Guilt, my sins have poured out every drop thereof,
wherefore thou presentest it to me by it self, to show how truly thou did
suffer Death for me, and now, O my Redeemer, thou have said this Cup is the
Communion of thy Blood, and thy truth is unquestionable, thy power infinite,
and thy love was such, as thou gave thy hearts blood for me; I will receive
it therefore as the everlasting Covenant, the Seal of all the promises of thy
holy Gospel: I have indeed drunk iniquity like Water, and therefore am unfit to
taste this Water of Life, and yet shall perish without it, for I Am all over
defiled, and this is the fountain which thou have opened to cleanse us. I am
scorched with the Flames of lust and unruly passion, and this is the Cup which
thou have provided to cool and refresh us: What value is sufficient for me to
put upon this immortal Cordial? How can I reverence it enough, since the God of
Heaven esteemed it a price sufficient for millions of perishing Mankind: My
Soul longs after it, Lord, let me taste, and my Soul shall live; let me wash
in this laver before I come to thy great Tribunal, so shall I be whiter than
snow.

Let us repeat after the Minister, the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

After the Cup.
IT is finished, blessed be the Name of our gracious God. Blessing, Glory,
Praise and Honor, Love, Obedience, Dominion and Thanksgiving be to thee, O
sacred Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Amen. Well come, O my good Jesus,
now dismiss thy Servant in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.

If we have time before we return to our Pews, let us add.

HOw chearing is this Cup to me, blessed Jesus, which was so dreadful unto
thee; it was thy Agonies and thy Wounds which afforded me this Wine of Joy.
Thou did find how bitter it was, when thou were appeasing an offended God,
but I taste how sweet it is now, that thou have made him a tender and
reconciled Father. I receive this Cup, O Savior, as a new pledge of thy
dearest Love, and since thou do here give me a right to that great
Expiation, which thou have made, I do most humbly commemorate the same before
the Father of Heaven, as the full satisfaction for my innumerable Debts, and I
will remember the dolors of thy Cross, with a brisker sense than ever; because
thou have made me drink of thy Blood, and given me thy Soul, thy Life, and thy
Spirit; and since thou have thus joined me, to thy self, O let nothing separate
that which thou have so graciously joined together, Amen.

They who have advanced thus far in their Duty, and been refreshed at the Table
of God, will easily acknowledge Thanksgiving to be the least tribute they can
pay, and will not be satisfied, that they have given praises at the Altar, but are
willing to offer this sacrifice every opportunity, therefore let us at our
return to our Seats, be ready to acknowledge the loving kindness of the Lord.

PRaise the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me bless his Holy Name; was
it not enough that thou should suffer so much for me, but thou will also give
all the purchase of those sufferings to me; thy loving kindness is truly
admirable, thou have taken my sins on thy self, and communicated thy
Righteousness to my Soul; Lord, while I believe and consider the benefits of
thy Passion, I am revived and filled with an unwonted Vigor, my Conscience
does accuse me of many and grievious sins, but I do here most humbly and
thankfully set forth this perfect sin, offering before thy Divine Majesty, I
know thou cannot except against it, I believe it is sufficient to atone thine
Anger. Blessed Jesus, how is my Soul refreshed, that is again restored to thy
Father's love; let Heaven and Earth praise thee for this glorious Sacrifice,
and I will bless thee while I have any being. I have received thy immaculate
Body, and it shall cleanse my sinful Body, and teach me by the virtue of so
rare an Example, to relieve my poor Brethren for whom thou have died, and to
conquer my Enemies by charity; for thus thou have done to me, and both my lips
and life shall set forth thy praise, for now I begin to find the Mercy, Peace,
Comfort and Grace which flow from the Death of Christ; wherefore I will love
thee, Holy Jesus, more than I can express; and since thou have given thy self,
thy Merits and Graces to me, and sealed a new Covenant with me in thy Blood, I
here bind my self by this sacred Cup to be sincerely thine. I have sworn, and
am steadfastly purposed to keep thy Righteous Judgments; O let me never
unhallow that Body, or defile that Soul in which the Lord Jesus delights to
dwell in; let no Oaths, or Lying, profane those Lips, no Obscenity or
Intemperance pollute that Mouth by which these holy Symbols have passed; but
let thy Mercy keep me in this happy Temper till I have accomplished all my
Resolutions, Amen.

Or This:

ALL is thine, Dear Savior, dispose of all that is here of Body and Soul, of
life and lodging, according to thy Divine Will and Pleasure; I intend, O Lord,
strengthen me in this very Hour: I intend, O sweet Savior, a Total Reformation
of my Life and Manners, an entire Mortification of my Corporal Senses, an
absolute change in my whole Man; grant therefore, O good Jesus, that at each
word of my Mouth, at each glance of my Eye, at each morsel I Eat, at each
member I Move, at each action Inward or Outward I undertake, I may perform all
according to thy holy Will and Pleasure. I will therefore expect from thee, O
Heavenly Father, the exact Remembrance; from thee, my Redeemer, the perfect
Knowledge; from thee, O Holy Spirit, a true Repentance; from thee, O Sacred
Trinity, the entire Absolution and Plenary indulgence from all my iniquities,
Amen.

We have been informed that this is the great Feast of Love, and are now
commemorating that inexpressible love of our Savior, and since his Blood was
shed for the sins of the whole World, let our Charity extend it self to the
uttermost parts of the Earth, but more especially, the Holy Catholic Church;
therefore the time we spare from our Devotions, let us bestow in good desires
to those present, sending up a hearty Amen to the Prayers for our Brethren; let
it rejoice our Souls, to see so many of the Servants of God waiting at his
Altar to receive the Bread of Life; let us earnestly pray that this Communion
may be life to every one, that all who are present, may meet to Feast in life
Everlasting.

O Thou Eternal Being, vouchsafe to bless, confirm and strengthen us all who
are present before thee, deliver us from the day of Condemnation, and let us
not be confounded when we shall appear before thee in the presence of thy
Angels, but grant that through the blood of the Cross, we may all be cleansed
from our sins, and presented pure unblamable, and irreprovable in thy sight,
that so we may be admitted into that place of purity, where no unclean thing
can enter, to sing Eternal Hallelujahs to him that sets upon the Throne, and to
the Lamb for ever.

May what we have now offered up to thee, O Lord, be accepted for the good of
the universal World, for all those for whom the Holy Jesus shed his most
precious Blood, for the Glory of thy Holy Name, and for the coming of the Holy
Ghost, that he may please to visit and enlighten all our Hearts. O Lord, be
propitious to the Holy Catholic Church, and by the increase of Faith, Hope and
Charity, enlarge its Limits; be pleased to remember all that are Fallen, all
that are in Captivity, the Infirm, Sick, Stranger, Fatherless and Widow; in
great Mercy look upon them all, restore, heal, comfort, and relieve them, for
Jesus Christ his sake.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his Holy Name,
Amen.

As soon as the Congregation has communicated, let us prepare to glorify the
Lord together, in order to it, let us reflect upon the Goodness of this God,
who has done so much for us, and if we are attentive to the Prayers of the past
Communion, it is impossible to behave our selves coldly, or indifferently; there
is so much life in the expressions, that we are forced to utter them with an
affectionate concern, and the greater our Zeal, the greater is the Benefit we
receive. Each thought must give us an Idea beyond our Expression, we shall be
so wholly taken up with this wonderful love of Christ, that we shall be angry
our conceptions are so imperfect, that we don't see more clearly this Beauty of
Holiness. O let us lose our selves in this boundless contemplation, and be
ravished with the loving kindness of the Lord; and now that we are in earnest
become the Sons of God, we may with confidence lift up our hearts to Our Father
which is in Heaven, which is the first Prayer the Church has appointed to offer
up to God; we have been feasting at his Table, renewing our Covenants, and made
pertakers of our Savior and his Spirit; therefore being so clothed, it is very
proper our first address be made in his own word. After we have repeated that
with Reverence, let us join in the next, for it is now high time that we make an
offering to the God of our Salvation, and there is nothing we can give more
pleasing than our selves to be a reasonble sacrifice; therefore let us entirely
dedicate our Souls, Body and Spirit to the service of God, and be infinitely
rejoiced, that God is pleased to accept us therein, and this will enable us
more cheerfully to join in the following Hymn. When our Heavenly King sees us
so hearty in his Service, so desirous of Pardon, that we with the greatest
Earnestless, cry to the only begotten Jesus Christ; and with all, so forward to
return our humble thanks for his Mercy: No doubt he will be near to our
Assistance, and reward us with more than we can ask or think, even exalt us to
that state of Glory with him that sits on the right hand of the Father, and is
most high in the Glory of God.

After we have thus affectionately joined in the Prayers of the Church, let us
with Faith and Thankfulness receive the Blessing, and then with humble
Adoration once more magnify the goodness of God, for who can be weary in
praising the noble acts of the Lord?

PRaise the Lord, O my Soul, and let all thy Powers be acted with such love and
wonder, that thou may break forth into all the expression of joy and
gladness, that admiration and gratitude can inspire thee with; Glory be to
thee, O Lord, most High.

Let us rise from our Knees and bow toward the Holy Table, showing our
unwillingness to depart the place where his Honor dwells, leave it with a
reluctance, and still say in our hearts, it is good for us to be here. They who
are arrived to such a habit, must necessarily desire another opportunity to
glorify God in this manner, and be very fond of frequenting his House till
this blessed season returns; for we are not to think our Duty done with our
Prayers, we must create a kind of a familiarity with God, and no way so likely
to do that, as by the constant appearance in his House; there it is he has
promised to be, and thither we must come if we would have our Prayers returned
with success. Though private Devotions be necessary, yet the Public are
absolutely so; there God is honored by the company of his Saints, and there we
have the opportunity to acknowledge him to be the Lord. It Is there we assemble
with one accord to present our Petitions to the Throne of Grace, and it is most
likely our Incense should pierce Heaven, when it ascends thither in a thick
cloud, but sure there will be no occasion to use Arguments to those who have
felt the Blessings of coming thus together; they must see how pleasant it is to
dwell in such Unity, and prefer the door of the Tabernacle, to the Palaces of
Princes; they who are so unhappy as to be Strangers there, who have no taste,
nor are persuaded of the Truth of these things, I could wish they would prevail
with themselves to try the deliciousness of the Employment, and I am sure they
would be obliged to confess not one half has been told them.

A Meditation for the Communion at Christmas.
Welcome thrice blessed day, the desire of all Nations, whose distant glories
made the Father of the Faithful to rejoice, and whose approaches filled the
World with wonder and expectation; thou were ushered in with Angelick Hymns,
and celebrated ever since with Anthems of praise, because thou did bring
forth joy, and a Redeemer to Mankind. Happy am I that have a sacrifice of
Thanksgiving in my hand, to express the delight which my heart does feel: This
Holy Table is the Altar, upon which I offer my Acknowledgmets for all mercies;
And Oh, how many, how great are those which this day brings to my remembrance,
so Infinite it cannot be expressed, and yet so excellent they must not be
forgotten: This day has reconciled Heaven and Earth, and Contradictions made
friends; to find a way to help us, as if nothing might disagree when Man was at
peace with God: O my Soul, summon all thy powers to admire and worship, for all
is Miracle, and the Height of wonder, eternity begins to be; the maker of all
is made himself; an infinite Majesty is shrunk into the dimensions of a Span;
the Word is made Flesh, and God becomes Man, yet remains God still: Here is a
Mother who knew no Man, a Son that had no Father on Earth; a Child of Adam,
untainted with the contagion that infects all his posterity; an Infant honored
with a new gloriou, Star; adored by Kings; worshipped by Angels, yet born in
the condition of the meanest Fortune: All Hail, sweetest Savior, How lovely is
thy condescension? How honorable thy abasement? Thou have more splender in the
rags of humility, than all the Grandeurs of this world could give thee; thou
art more of a King, because thou would be like a Slave for our sakes, and
conquers more hearts by thy stupendous Love, and unparalleled self-Denial: O
how shall I celebrate this great solemnity, where withal shall I set forth my
gratitude for this most auspicious Day; I will receive the Cup of Salvation,
and with faith and ravishments of delight, feast upon that precious Body and
Blood, which Jesus did this day assume for me: It is not enough, dearest Lord,
that thou wast born for me, unless that also thou were born again in me, and as
it were become incarnate in my heart: In thy birth thou wast made one with us,
thou did put Flesh; and were a partaker of our Humanity, and thou have
appointed this Sacrament, that I might be one with thee, be replenished with
thy Spirit, and a partaker of Divine Nature: Nor is it any incongruity, if I
remember thy passion, and praise thee for thine Incarnation at once; for as
soon as thou wast born thou did begin to die, and the life which was here
begun, compared to that glorious Life which thou did leave, was it self a
very death for us, which thy Divinity could not feel, and thy Nativity was the
first Scene of thy passion, for it introduced thy Death, and that effected our
Salvation, so that I will remember both together; in both thou have most
admirably humbled thy self to the depth of miseries, and yet I doubt not but
thou would have stupid lower, if it had been either necessary or possible, but
there needs no more Testimonies of thy love, blessed Jesus, I am already
overwhelmed with these that are so strange and undeversed, so sweet and
ravishing, that my Soul could not contain, if it did not vent it self in thy
praises therefore with Angels.

A Meditation for the Communion at Easter.
O My Soul, adorn thy self with the Garments of Gladness, prepare thy most
triumphant Hymns to go forth, and meet this great returning Conqueror; thou
did rejoice when he was pleased to undertake the combat, and did celebrate
his entrance into the Lists with praises: How then will it ravish thee to
behold him come off with success and Honor, his warfare is now accomplished,
and he has passed through the Scorn and Cruelty of Men, the malice and rage of
Devils, the just, but severe anger of God, yea, the shadow of death, and
regions of eternal horror; and after all this thy surety is set at liberty, for
he has paid his debts, and cancelled all those dismal Bonds, by which thou art
forfeited to eternal ruin, thy Champion is victorious, and as the Trophies of
his Conquest, he has the Keys of Death and Hell, and leads them both in
Triumph vanqished and disarmed. Blessed be he that comes in the name of the
Lord, we receive thee, dearest Savior, as born to us a second time, and this
shall be thy Birthday, also the Nativity thought not of our Emperor, yet of
thy Empire, thy Restoration to a Sat of Immortality. Thy former Birth showed
thee to be the Son of Man, but this declares thee to be the Son of God, and now
that our Redeemer lives, he that loved us so infinitely as to die for us does
now ever live to intercede on our hehalf, he that expressed such kindness to us
in his passion, has so fully demonstrated his own Power in his resurrection,
that we are sure he is able as willing to deliver us: Let the Heavens rejoice
and the Earth be glad, for this is the day that the Lord has made, a day to be
had in everlasting Remembrance, a Time destined to Jubilee and rejoicing:
Behold how nature is raising it self from the grave of Winter, and seems
annually to celebrate the memory of our Lord's resurrection, in her green and
fresh attire, a season chosen by God, a Festival three Thousand years ago, and
Observed ever since by Jews or Christians, or both, with the greatest
Solemnity; see how those blinded Jews rejoiced over their Pascal Lamb in the
midst of all their calamities, for the deliverance of their Fathers: But we
have a nobler Passover, for a greater deliverance, Christ, our Passover is
sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the Feast, and that upon the precious
Body and Blood of the Lamb of God, who is slain, but is alive again; behold he
lives for evermore, wherefore I will go to thy Alter with joy, and tell out thy
works with gladness. O most mighty Savior, who have not only died for my Sins,
but risen again for my justification, and indeed what comfort could I have
found in this memorial of thy death, if it had not been for thy resurrection,
this Sacrament would have only remembered thy sufferings, and renewed my sorrow,
to think that so excellent a person had perished in the attempt; but it is
become a feast of joy, because it is an assurance of thy resurrection, as well
as a commemoration of thy Passion; and since thou live, sweet Jesus, we live
also, thy resurrection raised our hearts from sad despair, it gives a new life
to our hopes, it makes our sorrows light, our labors easy, our lives
cheerful, and our death advantage, because it has lost its sting, and is
become the Gate into Immortality; we can charm all our fears and Troubles with
this one word, the Lord is risen, yea, the Lord is risen indeed, for thou have
washed us in thy own blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God, to Offer up
at this Altar never ceasing Praises.

A Meditation for the Communion on Whit-Sunday.
I Will go to thy Altar, O Lord, with a new sacrifice of praise, because thou
have given me a fresh Instance of thy Love this day; thou art slow to punish
thy enemies, but speedy to comfort thy servants, for no sooner was thy misery
changed into glory, but we received the greatest demonstration of thy
affections; no sooner did thou put on thy Crown in Heaven, but the earth felt
the bounty of thy dispensations; for it was not possible for thee, sweet Jesus,
for thy promise to remain long unperformed, or the sad expectations of thy
Disciples unsatisfied: Being assembled therefore this day, with one heart in
one place, they are suddenly surprised with wonder, and inspired with a
Heavenly power, such as they had never felt before, vigorous as a mighty wind,
chearing as the morning light, inflaming their hearts with zeal, and filling
their mouths with Anthems, indicted with the Languages of all the World: O
wonderful Change, their Ignorance is turned into Learning, their mistakes into
infallibility, their fear into courage, their weakness into strength, their
sorrow into joy, and they in a moment made able to confound the Arts, and
conquer the Oppositions of the Heathen world, and maugre all the divices of
Satan, to set up the Kingdom of the Lord Christ; and shall we not praise thee,
for these miraculous dispensations by which the gospel was made known, even to
us in the most utmost corners, and last of times; yes, Holy Jesus, we will also
meet thee with one accord at thy table, not doubting but thou would give us the
measures of thy Spirit there, if our duty, or our necessity, did require it; it
is enough to us that thou know our need more than will supply them; we dare
not ask, lest thou will not give; thou have given us thy self, wherefore we
believe thou will not deny us thy Spirit, without which we can have no Intrest
in thee, nor benefit from thee: We come not, gracious Lord, with the carnal
Jews to devour thy Flesh, but to partake of thy Spirit, which only gives life,
the flesh profits nothing; behold thy Spirit has converted Millions: Let me
therefore, together with thy precious Body, receive here such proportions of
thy holy Spirit, as may suppress my evil Affections, revive my dead heart,
comfort my dejected mind, and turn my ignorance into knowledge, my knowledge
into practice, and make that practice so sweet and easy, that this may be a
day of joy to me also, solemnized in the white Garments of Sanctification and
rejoicing; and finally, let not this Heavenly Inspiration be only expressed in
Ecstasies, and only fervours this day, but let thy Spirit rest upon me, and
dwell in me for ever, so shall I always have cause to bless thee for so
incomparable a gift: Methinks I feel already the force thereof, bearing down my
corruptions, and the bright beams driving the mists of Sin and Error. I find
its flames warming my heart with Zeal and charity, and its quickening power
opening my sealed lips to show forth thy praise.

A Meditation for the Communion on Trinity Sunday.
O Admirable mystery! to be adored in the profoundest silence, by the
contemplation thereof; when I am struck with amazement I can learn humility,
and discover mine own Ignorance, and I have the opportunity of exercising a
Nobler faith than if I could comprehend it with my shallow reasonings, and
imperfect demonstrations, the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity has
been derided by the Heathens, and endeavored to be perplexed by the Wits of
all kind of Heretics, but it suffices me, Blessed Jesus, that thou have
revealed it, and thy Holy Church, divided into many other things, has
universally agreed in thy great Truth, and I am the more confirmed in it
because I learn by it to worship with a regular devotion, from hence I am the
more confirmed: I am taught to pray to the Father in the Name of the Son,
through the assistance of the Holy Ghost, and as long as I live will I praise
thee, and magnife thee in this manner; I will bless thee particularly at this
Holy Feast for so excellent a revelation, for this Ordinance it self contains
many things above my understanding, and its all mystery; the Trinity is the
Article, and thy Sacrament the Rite which do distinguish thy true Riligion from
all the sects in the World; wherefore, by observing this Rite, I do embrace
this Faith, and upon the representation of thy death, I do profess to live in
it, and die for it, resolving never to have other Lords; when I find the Father
giving, the Son giving, and the Holy Ghost dispensing that Gift unto my Soul in
this sacred Communion, it shall be a greater confirmation to my faith in divine
Mystery, than can be acquired from the most curious search into it: However I
am resolved my Reason shall vail to thy word, and I will be content to stay for
a full apprehension of this sublime truth, till I am advanced to a State of
Angelick perfection, and come to hehold the glories of the true God; till then
I will bless thee for what I know, and believe more than I can conceive, and I
will worship the same Majesty which the Heavenly Choir does, in these Addresses.

THE Church has now done her part, and leaves us to discharge the rest, she has
told us the benefits, and forewarned us of the danger, let it be upon our own
Heads if we have drunk Christ's Blood unworthily; therefore let us as soon as
possible retire and examine our behavior during the Celebration of these Holy
Mysteries. How our thoughts were employed, and how earnest our longings were
after this Bread of Heaven; whether we had duly examined our selves before, and
repented as we ought, in what part soever of these things we have done amiss;
let us ask pardon and endeavor to come more prepared the next time. This will
show that we are sincere with God, and don't come out of custom, but for his
Grace and Mercy; and let us take every opportunity to ask that, for Christ is
now come very near us, therefore let us lay before him all our wants, that so
we may be filled with his Heavenly Benediction; let us not lose a minute on
this day, but be earnest in all manner of supplication, for we must not leave
our Devotions with the Church, that would be setting open the door indeed, that
Satan might enter into us; but I hardly believe, they who have had their hearts
kindled at the Altar, can suffer them to grow cold before they get home;
therefore let us retire, before Dinner, and after we have thus seriously
reflected upon what we have been doing, let us add to our thoughts the
following Meditation.

A Meditation before Dinner.
WHen I compare thy acts with mine, Holy Jesus, I am exceedingly ashamed to
behold so a vast a disproportion thou give me, thy Merits and Graces, thy
Life and Love at present, and have promised to me thy Kingdom in reversion, and
I have scarce returned this with the entire devotion of one half hour. O how
little is my obdurate Heart affected with the sense of my own Guilt, the fears
of thy Divine Wrath, or apprehensions of thy sufferings, yet, Lord, I desire,
and did endeavor to praise thee, so that I hope thou will consider my
infirmities with much compassion and measure, my services not by the exactness
of my performance, but by the sincerity of my wishes, so shall I be accepted
before thy Heavenly Father, and by the mercy of that acceptance, be obliged to
thee for ever.

O Most merciful Lord God, I am amazed at the mighty favors which thou have
showed to me a sinful wretched Creature; I cannot but acknowledge thy goodness,
though I can make no Retribution, had I all the World at my disposal, I could
freely give it all to thee as a Testimony of my unfeigned gratitude, but I hear
thy gracious voice, saying unto me, My Son, give me thine heart, it is not
mine, but me thou seek; sinful and misrable though I am, yet I am the
purchase for which Jesus has left his Glory, laid down his Life, done and
suffered all these things. O marvelous Condescension! I am nothing, I have
nothing, I am void of all Good, full of Evil, and deserving thy Wrath, so that
I abhor my self; and can thou dwell in me! Be it so then, I will dispute no
more with unsearchable mercy, I believe, O my God, and wonder, I can no longer
resist thy condescending and almighty love, I will with all the joy imaginable
give my felf unto thee, who have but lately restored me to my self; I have been
a prisoner to Satan, a Slave to Sin, and marked out for Destructioon; but thou
have procured my Pardon, Liberty and Life, requiring no more for so
inexpressible a bounty, but that I become entirely thine; had I the life of an
Angel, the understanding of a Cherubim, or the power of one of thy Heavenly
Host, thou deservest it all. I Am sorry I Am no better, yet such as I am, I do
most freely surrender my self unto thee, my Body and Soul, avowing I will be no
more my own, but thy servant: O be thou pleased to come and reign over me, take
possession of this unworthy heart, I hope I shall never be so unjust, perjured
and sacrelegious, as to rob thee of my self hereafter; it is indeed a miserable
gift that I offer, a defiled Body, and a stained Soul, but it is all I have to
give, all that thou requirest, and 'twill be the better for being thine; let me
never have another Master, let me never sully, that which the Blood of Christ
has washed, nor sell that to Satan which Jesus has bought for God. Grant me
therefore, gracious Lord, that I may find by the workings of thy Spirit within
me, that thou have accepted me; give me such help from thee, to confirm my
hope, that I may always perform my vows, and never rob thee of that which I
have dedicated in the sincerity of my Soul: I am thine, O save me for thy
mercies sake, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

From the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, the Name of the
Lord shall be great among the Gentiles in every place; incense shall be offered
unto his Name, and a pure offering for his Name shall be great among all
Nations.

Glory be to the, etc. As it was, etc.

This Day is appointed to be observed as a Festival; and I would have no
Christian so mistake himself, as to keep it otherwise: But since it is likewise
a Day to be kept holy to the Lord, we must not indulge our selves overmuch,
lest we run into another Error, and make us incapable of serving God, or our
selves as we ought, by turning our reafonable Service into sleepy Devotions.
And since I Am speaking of the Sabbath, it cannot be unnecessary to lay down some
Rules for our Observation of it. There is no Christian, but must lament the
general Neglect of it; for one sort spends it in unnecessary Business; the
other, in impertinent Recreations; and even they who are more reserved, and
seem to have a greater Sense of Religion, are apt to make large Allowances,
that except the Time spent in the Church, there is little bestowed on any Act
of Religion. The Church requires our Belief of the Morality of the Sabbath; and
if we were persuaded that it is a Day set a part by God himself, for his own
Service, we should have less Inclinations to lay out so much of it in our own:
We must positively believe our Obligations to God on this Day, and resolve,
that the Time we don't spend in the Church, should devoutly be employed at
home. We should separate our Thoughts from the Concern of this World: In the
Morning, earnestly beg of God that we may sanctify the Sabbath: After Church,
reflect upon what we heard; if it was practical Matter, resolve to make use of
it in our Conversation; if Matter of Faith, examine whether we can give our
positive Assent to it; if we don't justly comprehend it, let us endeavor to be
better informed: Let us call to Mind the Benefit of our Creation, Redemption,
and whatever else may beget in us holy Thoughts, and a fervent Love to God: Let
us turn our Thoughts into our selves, that we may the better understand our
Condition toward God; for how is it possible to be sensible of our Affairs, if
we don't suffer our Souls to contemplate for their Safety? There are many that
cannot accuse themselves of notorious Crimes, that can answer to the positive
Prohibitions of the Law, All these have I kept from my Youth; yet if they
suffer themselves to go further in their Examination, will find Reason, with
the young Man in the Gospel, to be exceeding sorrowful, though upon another
Account; they will find a dismal Account of other things to answer, and which
are as necessary to be repented of, as they are to be observed for the future.
Besides, Contemplation is the best Way to improve our Understanding in the Ways
of Goodness; there is infinite Variety for our Thoughts to work upon, and all
of them exceeding pleasant: It Is this that will make us in love with Piety; and
then we shall soon turn our Speculation into Practice. They who are used to
meditate, find the Satisfaction of their Consideration: Though it is no easy
matter for a Man that has wholly bent his Affection to an immoderate Love of
this World, to bring under his unruly Desire; he shall hardly begin to think
what he is, why he was sent hither, and whither he is hastening, but he shall
stop in the middle, and the very Thoughts of the present, put him upon enjoying
it in another manner. So vain and trifling are we when we have given up our
selves to be mistaken for a while, that it is hard to bring us to our Senses,
and persuade us we are our selves when we become Rational Creatures. I Am
unwilling to prescribe our Christian Liberty on this Day; it is certain we may
extend it to all Things of Necessity, but then we should be cautious; for we
are generally such Latitudinarians in things that concern our selves, that we
are not willing to lose an Inch of our Liberty; and are apt to think our Time
lost, which is bestowed in the Service of God: Our Trade is not then going on,
and we are backwarder by one Day in our Affairs of this World, never
considering we have another Merchandise to care for; but if we can secure
Wealth enough here, have no great Affection to lay up Treasure elsewhere; as if
we were afraid our Riches would corrupt there, or our Venture come short of our
Expectations. It was the Observation of a great Man, That the more exact he was
in keeping the Sabbath, his Affairs met with the greater Success in the
following Week. Whether every Body would be thus happy, I cannot resolve, but am
sure there can be no Danger in the Trial; and if we fail once, it may succeed
the next: However, there is sufficient Reward in it self, for we shall have the
Satisfaction of doing our Duty; and that we cannot effect more exactly, than by
a devout Meditation when alone, and a serious Attention when at Church. They
who have Families, are to instruct their Household in their Duty, and see they
discharge it; by giving good Examples and Instructions, and seeing they follow
them; for when all is done, the effectual Preachers are Parents and Masters:
Ministers may give the best Counsel, and preach the greatest Truths; but it is
they must see it has its proper Effect in their own Lives and Conversations,
and in those that belong to them.

If this were industriously practiced, what Encouragement would it be to the
Ministers to labor more abundantly for the Salvation of their Flock? And how
should we all rejoice in the Day of the Lord, that they had neither run, nor
labored in vain. In short, Our Communion on this Day ought to be free from
Lightness or Vanity; not in Worldly Affairs, nor Relations of foolish Stories,
and as little as possible in common Talk, no unnecessary Visit, nor any where
but when we have an Opportunity of doing good. This ought to be our constant
Care, to apply our selves wholly to God and Religion, and avoid every thing as
much as possible that would take up our Thoughts on any thing else. This is
truly to sanctify the Sabbath: And they who can thus observe it, will find the
Benefit, even an Everlasting Rest to their Souls in Heaven.

After we have dined, let us retire again; and when we have raised our
Affections by a serious Contemplation, let us say,

A Prayer after Dinner.
O Thou All-seeing, and most holy God! I have been admitted to make my Oblation
of Praises, and my self, unto thee; and am infinitely concerned that thou
should accept me therein; not for any Merit in me, but for thine own Mercy
sake. O my God, thou know I have been polluted with Sin, undutiful to thy
Commands, unfaithful to my Promises, and confederate with thine Enemies; yea,
even in the time of these holy Mysteries, so obdurate and confused, that I
might justly fear, lest my Wretchedness should make my Sacrifice an
Abomination: I blush that I am not fitter: I lament that I should bring so many
Defilements, where the Purity of an Angel is scarce sufficient: But I take
Sanctuary in thy more obliging Condescentions; and because I am so unworthy,
will endeavor to esteem my self as vile as really I am in thy sight. Oh, do
not look upon the Defects of a wretched Sinner; but remember thine own Mercies,
and accept what thou have required of me; and so shall thy Favor be more
illustrious, because it is bestowed upon so evil and undeserving a Creature;
and the Sense of my Unworthiness shall enlarge my Thankfulness, and make me
praise thee more than if I had approached thee with all Perfections.

It is a mighty Favor to me, O God, that thou have made Bread to grow out of
the Earth, to nourish my mortal Body: But, Oh! how far have thou transcended
that Mercy, in giving me the Bread of Life from Heaven, to feed my immortal
Soul! Whom was there in Heaven or Earth that I could have wished for, in
comparison of Jesus Christ! O my Soul, bless thou the Lord: I went not to gaze,
or taste of the outward part; but to satisfy my Soul, by laying hold of the
Merits of my Crucified Savior; yet I have received the Elements, and thou have
made them to me that which I needed, and desired, even the Body and Blood of
thy Son. Oh, how it fills my Soul with Joy to see thy Sacred Majesty appeased!
But, O merciful God; I tremble in Expectation of those furious Assaults which
will be made upon me by my Enemies, from whom I am withdrawn. O God, thou
know how often I have returned to Folly: But if thou please to plant thy
Grace within me, and send thy Blessing upon me, I will not fear the Powers of
Darkness. I have received that Heavenly Food, which is the Means of conveying
this Grace unto me. I know by this Celestial Remedy, many of thy Servants have
been dreadful to the Powers of Darkness! and thou did never cast off an
humble Soul. Oh, bless then this Life-giving Mystery unto me, that I may find
such Power, Strength and Resolution flowing from thence, that I may stand firm
to the Purposes I have made. Sweetest Savior, I am now thy Servant; Oh,
deliver me from Anger, Malice and Intemperance; from Pride, Lust and
Covetousness, and all the Furies which use to torture me. O mark me for thine
own; and deny me not that Grace which is necessary to make me thine. I Am sure
in thee all Fullness of Grace dwells, and let it now overflow, that I may
receive of thy Fullness; and then shall I always perform my Vows.

Gracious God, I have beheld the Efficacious Sacrifice which thy Son has
offered for us; I have remembered it, blessed be thy Name for it, though not so
highly as I am obliged, for the Benefits are inestimable: There is no Want of
Merit in Jesus to deserve, nor of Mercy in thee to bestow Remission: Oh, let
there not want in me, nor in any for whom Christ died, grace to accept this
Pardon, Behold, Lord, how I struggle under a load of guilt, but I have received
that which is an effectual remedy, who was ever reconciled to thee, but by
Jesus, or who was ever so much thy Enemy, but this Holy Sacrifice has made
their Peace, and shall it be ineffectual only to me; Dear Father, let me find
the Effecacy thereof in my self, and then I shall be engaged to praise thee
more and more for this great Salvation through Jesus Christ.

Our Father, etc.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus, etc.

HAving thus renewed our desires, and fired Souls with an ardent love of
Christ, let us prepare again to meet the assembly of Saints, that we may
worship God together, and give thanks to his Name, that we may receive new
instructions for the amendment of our Lives, and the confirmation of our Faith,
that we may enlarge our desires after Heaven, and see the pleasures of the
Habitation of the Lord. At our return home, 'twill be necessary that we give up
our selves to a serious Meditation of our actions this day, if our heart
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God; if otherwise, let us
humbly beg Pardon: Let us be earnest in this Examination, for it is of great
moment to be very circumspect now; don't let us cry Peace when it is far from
us, and fancy we are reconciled to God, when we are in league with the Devil;
for so every one is, that has not been heartily sorry for his sins, and
seriously intended a reformation of his Life; we must not think our selves
perfect because our affections are raised, and we seem to have a zeal for the
Glory of God, for no one can approach this solemnity without transport; if we
examined our selves before entertained Resolutions of Repentance, and come with
Faith and Humility, though during the Celebration of these Mysteries, we had
Wanderings, evil Thoughts and Disturbances; yet if we struggled with them then,
and are sorry for them now, God will receive us into his favor; therefore it is
very necessary we should now call our selves to an account, be sorry for the
ill, and bless God for the good, which may properly be done in the following
form.

A Prayer at Night.
BLessed be thy glorious Name, O Lord; for all thy unspeakable Mercies to me,
and all the World; I adore and magnify thee for thy great goodness, in giving
thy Son to die for me, and making me partaker of his blessed Body and Blood. O
Lord, what is Man that thou regardest him? Or what am I a vile and wretched
sinner, that thou should be thus favorable to me, thou have been pleased to
admit me to renew that Covenant with thee, which I had broken, and to give me
assurance of thy readiness to pardon so vile and great a Sinner as I have been.
I have received the pledges of thy love, and been admitted to thy Holy Table; I
have there devoted my self again unto thee; I have vowed Obedience, and after
the most solemn manner, consecrated my self to thy service. Thou art a God that
know the heart, and art not to be mocked; I tremble when I consider thy
infinite Power, Wisdom, and Holiness; let these thoughts beget in my Soul a
great fear of thy Name, and care to perform thy Will. Grant I may not turn the
Grace of thee, my God, into wantonness, and that I may not receive thy grace in
vain. O Lord, help thy Servant, keep the possession of my Soul which I have
unfeignedly surrendered up to thee. O pardon the defect I have been guilty of in
the performance of the duties of this day, and unite my heart, O'Lord, to sear
thy Name, grant that I may spend the remainder of my time in obedience to thee,
and in acts of Charity to my Brethren, create a clean heart, O Lord, and renew
a right Spirit within me; guide me by thy Counsel, and at last receive me to
thy Glory. I do greatly desire the Salvation of Mankind, and humbly represent
to thy Divine Majesty the glorious sacrifice which our dearest Jesus made of
himself upon the Cross, and by a never ceasing intercession now exhibits to
thee in Heaven in the Office of an Eternal Priesthood, in behalf of all that
have communicated this day in the divine Mysteries in all the Congregations of
the Christian World, in behalf of them that desire to communicate, and are
hindered by any accident, sear, or the sentence of their own Consciences.

Give unto me, O God, and unto them a portion of all good Prayers, which are
made in Heaven and Earth, the intercession of our Lord, and the supplications
of all thy servants, unite us in the band of the common Faith, and a holy
Charity.

I humbly commend to thee this Church and Kingdom, all our superiors in Church
or State; have mercy upon all states of Men and Women, give thy grace speedily
to all wicked persons, especially those that I have tempted to sin, that they
may repent, live well, and be saved; to all good people give an increase of
Gifts and Holiness; to all Scismaticks and Heretics grant conversion; and to
all that have erred from the Truth, bring thou into the right way. O merciful
God, I humbly pray unto thee in virtue of our Holy Savior, to grant unto us
all the graces of an excellent and perfect Repentance, an irreconcilable hatred
of sin, a love of thee, an exact imitation of the Holiness of the Blessed
Jesus; fox the sake of the Sacrifice of thy Eternal Son, O Heavenly Father, let
it be, because it is best, and because thou love it should be so, Amen.

O God the Father of Heaven whose mercy is over all the World, I am infinitely
pleased to behold thy Glory, and to hear the praises which thou have gotten by
thy mercy to poor sinners, and I could even pour out my Soul in the
manifestation of that joy which my heart conceives at thy universal Honor;
wherefore I will praise thee by Acknowledgments, bless thee with Hymns, worship
thee with the lowest Reverence, and glorify thee to the utmost of my Power. I
will give thanks unto thee with all my Soul, for thy Pity, Patience, and Mercy
toward thy unworthy and miserable Creatures. How shall I express thy welcome
into my Soul, blessed Jesus? Or how shall I celebrate thy Praises? I will
remember what thou art in thy self, and what thou have done for us: O thou
Eternal and only begotten Son of God, equal to the Father, who art thy self
both Lord and God. How lovely art thou, O thou innocent Lamb of God, encircled
with Millions of redeemed Souls, whom thou have washed in thy Blood? O how
illustrious a Brightness shines round thee, whilst thou art in the midst of all
thy happiness interceeding for poor Sinners. I adore thee, and long to do thee
Honor, my Lord and my God; hear then my importunate supplications, and enable
me to proclaim the goodness of the Lord.

BLessed Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith, who art the same
Yesterday as to Day, and for ever; thou have given Spiritual means to those
that fear thee, and wilt ever be mindful of thy covenant, but my goodness is as
a morning Cloud which soon passes away; my Devotion flees like a shadow, and
never continues in one stay; Oh, do thou establish me with thy free Spirit,
that I may not so easily forfeit my Comfort, forget my Duty, and break my Vows;
how unwearied art thou dearest Savior, in doing well unto me? How constant is
thy Love, and shall I be so ungrateful to thee, so cruel to my self, as to
forsake thee, and my own Happiness? I fear the Power and Policy of mine
Enemies, I do with shame and sorrow call to mind my former returns to folly. I
most passionately entreat thee not to leave me to my self, I have, through thy
goodness, now obtained some measure of Peace; my Eyes are enlightened, my Heart
revived, and my purposes seem to be sincere; give me thy grace therefore that I
may be able to perform whatsoever I have promised, that I may be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in thy work; O Lord, let me hold fast that which I
have, and daily strive to gain more; make me faithful to Death, that thou
may give me a Crown of Life.

Now the God of Peace which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant; make me perfect in all good Works, working always that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, and the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost be with me for ever, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, Amen.

There is no occasion to prescribe any Rules for our Behavior between the
Evening Service, and the time of rest; we have already been informed, that no
part of this day when we don't communicate, ought to be spent in our own
inventions; then surely it requires our strickest observation when we have had
so great an honor conferred upon us, to be adopted the Children of God; the
thought of this will continually run in our mind, and we shall have sufficient
reason to be always praising God, till Nature puts us in mind of our
Necessities, and that its time to commit our Souls and Bodies into his keeping,
when we shall be unable to take care of our selves.

THE CONCLUSION
HAving thus begun our Course, Let us run with diligence the race that is set
before us; It Is now that we are begun to be Christians, and let us be very
cautious how we discredit the holy Name by which we are called: It Is not
sufficient to assume the Title, without departing from Iniquity to complete the
Character: Therefore at our return to the World, let us have the mercies of God
in continual remembrance; let that goodness which has so far led us on to
repentance, move us to be zealous in his service, and prevent our ingratitude,
by keeping our selves from every evil work.

Let us consider, that we are bought with the price of the Blood of Jesus, and
looking upon our selves so redeemed, let us not sell our selves any more to
work wickedness.

Let us consider the dignity of our Nature; that God has made us but a little
lower than the Angels; that we only came into this World in order for a better;
that we were born on purpose to be eternally happy; Why then should we do any
thing to debase our selves, and make us incapable of that blessedness, which
the Wisdom and Goodness of Heaven has prepared for us? The consideration of
this will lead us to praise God for our Creation, which we ought sincerely to
do, and shall want no motives to offer up our Thanksgivings, if we consider the
inestimable benefits we may receive by it.

Let us consider we are but begun in our way to Glory; that to falter in our
purposes would endanger our ruin; and to return, would be to lose the glorious
pains we have been at in our conversion: All those Prayers and Tears, Fasting
and Alms-givings, which entered Heaven in our behalf, and by the intercession
of our Savior, done so great things for us, will turn to our confusion; be a
terrible accusation of our hypocrisy, and banish us to eternity from the
presence of God; besides, how can we expect to atone Heaven, if we should
attempt a second Repentance, when all our former Vows prove false? Will Not God be
deaf to our complaints, when they are ushered in by such treacherous Advocates?
Can feigned tears move compassion from that God, who is a lover of truth? What
form of Prayer will serve our turn, when we have made use of the best
composures as a mock to the Judge of Heaven? Oh, Christian! since thou have
approached the Altar of God, and there vowed a perpetual Obedience to his Will,
as thou hopest Heaven has heard thy petitions, and signed thy release; as thou
believe thou have eat the Flesh, and drunk that Blood of Christ, and by that
incomprehensible Mystery art united to our Savior Jesus; as thou hopest from
this wonderful mercy to be raised at the last day to Eternal life, live worthy
of thy Calling, by a perfect submission to the Will of God, and a holy
perseverance in his ways, make thy Election sure. Since thou have thus put on
the Armor of God, and taken to thy self the shield of faith; resist the World,
the Flesh, and Devil, and thou shall at last reap that reward which is laid up
for those who have continued in well doing, and by their constancy in some sort
merited, that eternal Gift of God, which is a Crown of Glory in endless
inconceivable joys.

Let us endeavor to fill our Souls with all virtues, and when we are so happy
as to have our inclinations after goodness, that we have a fondness for the
Glory of God, and habituated our selves in his service, we shall find the
advantage of our conversion; for besides the inward peace and satisfaction,
which is the result of a pious mind, we may enjoy with more pleasure the Goods
of this World, than when we gave a loose to our desires, and were led captive
by our lusts; when we so industriously pursue our happiness, we shall arrive to
that degree of goodness which will make it as uneasy and difficult to commit
wicked actions, as 'twas at first hard to refrain them. We shall have an
aversion to Vice, and see our weakness and folly that could be subject to its
embraces; it will then lose all its charms, and we shall yield to that divine
Truth, that God is only to be loved; that Religion is our wisest choice; that
to be happy is to understand her, for her ways are ways of pleasantness, and
all her paths are peace. This indeed is what very few believe, Men generally
frame an austere Notion of Religion, think it ties them up from the business
and pleasure of this World; they have an inclination to serve God, but think he
requires so much of their time, that they have but little for themselves, or
Families: This may be one reason why some are so religious by fits, they are
mighty zealous against an Easter, or any particular time of Devotion, but as
soon as the Season is over return to their former habit of indifference, and
can give no other reason, but that their Business calls them off, as if
Devotion consisted in saying just so many prayers; at such an Hour to be in
their Closset; to fast such a day in the week, and to neglect the Affairs of
this World, because we cannot serve God and Mamon. Such a Notion of Duty is
certainly very prejudicial to the practice of Religion: God created this World
for our convenience, and did not design we should be preserved like the
Lillies, which toil not, neither do they Spin, but commanded man to get his
bread with the sweat of his brow, and can we think his labor shall be turned
to his reproof; that whilst he honestly persues the necessary Duties of his
Calling that he should be accused for not employing that time upon his knees.
Providence has ordered very differing circumstances among men, and to discharge
with fidelity the Post in which he has placed us, is part of our Religion, and
when justly performed, as acceptable as our Devotion; we may enjoy a great deal
of this world, and yet be very good Men; nay, by being virtuous, we may make a
freer use of it; for Virtue teaches a right use of every thing, and God has
denied us nothing that is useful, for all things were created for the use of
man: In short, it is not the use, but abuse of this World, that renders us
obnoxious to God: We may endeavor after Riches, but not to set our hearts upon
them. They are given us to do good with, and when we cross the intent of them,
by making them a useless Treasure, the rust of them will make them to consume.

Religion don't tie men up from the Affairs of this World, it only teaches them
how to behave themselves in it, by prescribing such Rules which are necessary
for the quiet order of the World in general, and for a just management in
particular between men; for the general Government of the World, it teaches us
that we submit our selves to every Ordinance of Man; that we be not unruly,
stiring up sedition by speaking evil of Dignities; and it comprehends the
Church Government, as well as State, by constituing an Order of Men who are to
watch for our Souls, and for that reason we are to Obey them that have the rule
over us in the Lord. Thus, by obeying Our Spiritul Pastors, and Temporal
Masters, we shall at last receive the Reward of our Obedience; but they who
resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation: For the particular management of
our selves amongst our Neighbors, we are, if possible, to live peaceably with
all Men; to be just, and Charitable, and in every thing to do as we would be
done by; to be dilligent in our Calling, and by an honest industry provide for
our Families. We are not to be solicitous for the Morrow, nor by a carping care
after this World neglect the other: If we are successful, let us look up to him
who is the giver of all good things, for his is the hand that sows the seed,
and his the hand that gives the Blessing. If we have losses, and become poor,
let us submit with Patience, and resign our selves to his Wisdom, still relying
upon his Providence. Such a Contentment may move the compassion of Heaven to
raise us again in this Worlds esteem, or what is infinitely better, remove us
from the present Evils, to the Joys of his Kingdom. Let us remember that we
ought to receive Evil as well as good from the hand of God, that he knows what
is best for us, and why then should we be angry that God does that which is
wisest, and most fit to be done. Let us cast all our care upon him, and
whatever condition we are in shall have most satisfaction; this is as much a
duty, as it is pious in it self, and incumbent on the whole race of Mankind. The
Rich ought more particularly to have respect to it, least they suffer by their
confidence, and trusting in the Multitude of their riches be confounded: The
Mighty, that they may not be brought low; and thee Poor, least God forget their
Cry. Oh, how happy are they who can with confidence look up to God, that can
use this World, neither abusing it, nor themselves; by making it a hindrance to
their Religion, and by an unaccountable extravigance, make that miserable
change of their Souls for their Vanity.

Let us first seek the Kingdom of God, and his Rightousness; looking upon our
selves as born for another World, and that we are only in our Passage thither.
Could we but persuade our selves of this truth, we should remove our affection,
and make use of this World, but as it serves to conduct us to a better. To what
purpose should we strive to heap up riches, when we know not who shall gather
them? Why should we be coveteous to establish a Name, when the Glory of this
World so soon passes away? Let us do all possible good in our Station,
endeavoring to be exemplary to the present Age, and not be solicitous for the
sounding of our fame to the future: That cannot affect us, for we shall not be
sensible of it; or if we were, can it add to our happiness in Heaven, or shall
we have leisure to be pleased with our own Character, when we shall be in veiw
of him, in whose Presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for evermore: But after all, our Virtuous Actions must have another
motive than Popular applause; for if we do our good Deeds to be seen of Men, we
have our reward; we can have no retribution of our good works that are not with
a design to the Glory of God; we must do them, because God requires them, and
is best pleased when such Devotions are offered up for his sake: It shows our
conformity to his Will, when our obedience proceeds from a sense of our
Obligations to him, and then he that gives a Cup of cold water in his Name,
shall not lose his reward. The Mercy of God appeared in this, nor that we loved
him, but that he loved us; and can we be too grateful to the inexpressible
love of the Father? Can we propose a greater advantage than we shall receive at
his Hands, or suppose it is not honorable to be just, for we rob him of his
tribute, and make our Vanity the occasion of the Good. The folly of this is too
gross to have any Advocates, for though Men love to blow the Trumpet that have it
found in the Name of God: Therefore let us be good, because God is so, and this
will put us upon every opportunity to please him, that we may by a constant
practice of Virtues, mould our selves more and more into the likeness of him,
in whom God was so well pleased, because he went about doing good.

It concerns us who have gone thus far in the way of Holiness, that have ceased
to do Evil, and began the pleasant exercise of doing Good, to endeavor the
performing it in the most acceptable manner. The Holy Scripture gives us
direction, and our Savior's Example to encourage us; let us therefore look up
to that pattern of Righteousness, that we may as much as possible be Holy, as
he is Holy, and we shall find him summing up all in this one word, Love. It Is
Love, that is the great Duty of the New Law, and absolutely necessary to be
studdied by all who intend to be saved: We shall have no excuse for our
Ignorance, or neglect of that Duty, which God came on purpose to instruct and
enjoin. We ought to have it perpetually in our Minds, and never proceed to any
action without it. In our Retirements we ought to be thinking of it, because
that will prompt us to seek some new occasion of our Love, and in our Business,
because then we shall never act amiss; for how can he be guilty of an
injustice, who has love in all his thoughts, that not only studies to do as he
would be done by, but is always considering to do the good in his power,
without the mean consideration of return; for to arrive to the utmost of this
Duty, we must not only consider what we would have done to our selves, but what
is fitting for us to do to others. This indeed must be left to our Consciences,
but let us have a care of deceiving our selves, for our Consciences are to be
our accusers. Let us remember that we are to show our selves Disciples of our
great Master, by loving one another, and if we truly do so, God will reward us
according to our Love; we cannot evidence our Relation to him more than by our
compassions to the necessitous, and we are assured that unless we put on bowels
of compassion, we have no right to his promise, for if a man sees his Brother
in want, and relieves him not, how dwells the love of God in him. Let us
consider that we are all of the same Body, that Christ died for us all, and
therefore it is not fitting any one member should perish. Christ came to procure
to himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good Works, and we must not reckon our
selves as his Servants, till we can submit to his Commandment. Great Men have
it in their Power, to relieve the Distressed, to be merciful to the Poor, and
to be a Friend to the Fatherless and Widow; the Poor must not be wanting in
their part, by being grateful to their Benefactors, and faithful in their
Trust, by being humble, obedient and contented, for Love teaches us all things;
if we could but possess our minds of this excellent Virtue, it would abate the
swelling of our Ambitions, it would inform the Proud that it is nothing but his
conceit which advances him above his Neighbor, and inform the indigent, that
nothing but an inward peace and satisfaction is to be desired by those who have
any understanding, for Love's the generous Virtue of the Mind. If Men believed
this, they would not so much labor after a great Name as a Good, nor desire
riches so much to advance their Families, as to benefit the Necessitous. They
would not covet to be Great for the sake of Honor, and a gaudy Retinue, but to
have it in their power to be Just, to advance Merit, and give reward to Desert.
Great Men, though they have no Employment, have least occasion to be Idle; if
their Country don't require their Immediate service, they have the more time to
attend their better part; let God receive their leisure, and the public be the
better by their Piety. If God has Blessed them with great Estates, and raised
them to great Dignity, they have the more reason to be diligent, in employing
their Honor and Fortune to his Service; it concerns them to manage with
caution, and not turn the bounty of God into Licentiousness; they are to give
an account of their Stewardship, and where much is given, much will be
required; it was given them that they might have an opportunity to do good, and
they have the blessing of God here and hereafter for their Encouragement. How
ought they then to adore the goodness of God, that has put it so much in their
power to be Happy, by giving them a valuable blessing here, as an earnest of a
future Reward. But we are not to think that Charity belongs only to great Men,
it is true, they have it in their power to excel Men of less condition, but we
are all to distribute of this world's good, as God has put in our power; and
though we cannot do great things, let us do what we are able; there is an
obligation even upon the poor themselves, to afford what help they can to
assist their Brother in Distress; in short, if we have Love, that will teach us
all that is owing to our selves or Neighbor, that so we may live as becomes
those who profess that Gospel of Christ in all manner of Holy Conversation; to
let the love of God dwell in us richly, and endeavor to a similitude of him,
who is the express image of his Father, who is Love.

Having considered that it is both our Duty and interest now we are arrived thus
far, to persevere to the end, that we may be saved; that in order to it we must
fill our selves with all Virtues, and that the chiefest of them is Love; let us
resolve with all our Souls to prosecute these considerations to purpose; let us
not think we stand too secure to be shaken, but reflect upon our former
weakness, and still suspect our frailty, wherein we most fear by earnest
supplication; let us make known our request to God, that he may support us in
the day of Danger, and cover us from the assaults of our Enemies; we are always
to lament our old Miscarriages, and their remembrance ought to be grevious. To
this end let us continue steadfast in our Addresses to God, and beg that he
would still give us a sense of the odiousness of sin, that so we may be
deterred from committing it. Let us, as much as possible, frequent the Church,
if our necessary Business will not give us leave to attend her daily Devotions
Morning and Evening, let us not fail of offering up our private Sacrifice. No
Business must entrench upon that, it is a right which belongs to God, and if we
value our safety, we must not omit it: Let no Man be discouraged, because he
cannot attend the service of the Church so constantly as he would, if we do it
but as often as we can, God is no such Task-master, but he accepts of our Will
and Endeavors. But God knows, People are very apt to take up with Excuses, and
because they hant a mind, will make their business to prevent their Duty, and
they who have leisure prefer their Idleness to Devotions; and what I admire at
most, some people who frequent the Sacrament, very seldom approach the House of
God but when they go up to the Altar, as if the Church doors were never open
but on Sundays, or once a Month. How can these Men's Religions be sincere, who
have no desires to give God thanks in the Assemblies of his People, and confess
their sins among the Congregation of the Lord? How do they live in obedience to
the Church, that don't appear at Morning and Evening Prayer, unless unavoidably
hindered? And how do they deceive themselves when they make a lying Excuse? Let
us all, to whom God gives an opportunity, wait on him constantly in his House;
let us observe the Fasts, and the Feasts of the Church, with Reverence and true
Devotion, and not bring a scandal upon the Church by our ridiculous mistakes
about them; let our Fasts be as she directs, and as God has appointed, and let
our Feasts be kept Holy to the Lord. On Saints-Days, let us commemorate the
Blessings conveyed to us by that Saint we have in Remembrance, at Easter,
Whitsunday and Christmas, the wondrous Mysteries which the Church commends to
our Devotion, and not turn them into Jollitry and Prophanness Let our Lent and
Ember Days be held in Veneration, and if we cannot strictly Fast, let us do all
we can for Mortification; let the poor Man and Labourer nor take the
opportunity of these Seasons, to spend them in his Diversion; there is no such
pleasure as in the Service of God, which is perfect freedom; and since
Providence has denied them other opportunities, let them take these to watch
for their Souls, and improve them in true knowledge; let not the Rich feed
themselves in Luxury, and make these Holy Seasons an occasion of greater
Debauch, for that will make God as much displeased with our appointed times and
feasons, as the Jewish New Moons and Sabbaths; but let us all, according to the
true intent of them, improve them in true Devotion, and if we continue in the
observance of these things, time will show us the beauty of Holiness. We shall
then behold this World with pleasure, and be glad that we were born to this
delicious Employment.

Let they who have Families and Children take care to give Examples of Piety,
and have so much Charity as not to deny them all opportunities of attending the
Church, let them have recourse to God as often as they can, and see that
public Prayers at least once a day be performed in their Houses; instruct them
in Religion, and of the Church; teach them the excellency of the Prayers, and
to perform them with Devotion; we had need do all we can to bring Religion into
Vouge, and pray that God would Establish his Church in Righteousness.

Let us show our Zeal for the Glory of God, by promoting of Holiness among Men,
and take care that our Conversation be void of Offense, and give up our time as
much as possible to Devotion, that by our constant Addresses, we may be filled
with God's Grace, and Heavenly Benediction; it is to all our Advantages to be
upon our Knees, or in Meditation; as frequent as we can; they who know the
Pleasure of Conversing with God, need no Arguments to bring them to their
Closet. The Saints of Old were very Zealous in this Duty; they had their set
Hours of Prayer, and if we followed their Piety, we might assure our selves of
the like Success. It was David's constant practice to praise God in the
Evening, Morning, and at Noonday; and I Am sure our necessities are as urgent
as his, and if they who have most leisure would double their Devotion, and
offer up their Sacrifices six times a day, their labor would not be in vain;
besides, when we are accustomed to this frequent Communion with God, we shall
be convinced with Holy David, That the ways of God are exceeding pleasant, and
be ready upon our Solemn days of Devotion to stretch our Zeal to an Equality
with his, who took up the holy Resolution of praising God seven times a day,
because of his Righteous Judgments.

FINIS.

