The ABHORRENCE, OR, Protestant Observations in Dublin, upon the Principles and
Practices of the Protestants at London.
A popish thing under ye mask of a Church of England man.
Abdicraunt DOMINUM, et Abducerunt Populum ad Nequitiam. 3. April. 1690.
Published Saturday February the First, 1689.
IN all Ages some Prodigies or Monsters, have appeared amongst Mankind, that
have been ingenious at the peril of the Public, such who compass their ends
not by fairness and strength of Argument, but by insinuating themselves into
Men's affections by all the basest Method of subtilty and adulation, which sort
of flattery is indeed a Collective accumulative baseness, being compounded of
the most sordid, hateful qualities incident to Mankind, viz. Lying Servility,
and Treachery, each of which being detestably deformed singly, must certainly
in conjunction make up a most loathsome ugly Gu lt. But not to trouble our
selves to search for Precedents in former Story, we see before our eyes more
than sufficient! much more than future Ages will ever credit. We behold indeed
so much, that after one Century the truth of these things shall be taken for
feigned Hyperboles, or abominable Lies. Who will ever believe this general
Defection? Who can imagine that Bishops, Noblemen, etc. would ever Harlotize
that Sacred Character of Nobilitas est sola atque unica Virtus, and suffer
themselves to be ingender'd with Treachery! Nay, that such Men who bear so
great a Character in Church and State, would ever see, nay assist!) so foul a
Monster as Treason to deflower their Virgin Loyalty, and at once to Rob the
Glory of the Reformation, (the Church of England) of all her pretense to the
Beauty of a most Pure and Primitive Christianity. O horrid! O abominable
Invitation! Religion (that Sacred Name! that true interest of all Christians
Souls) is continually abused to palliate and countenance the most abominable
Undertakings: And Men of turbulent and restless Spirits will be sure to find,
or make some pretenses or occasions of Quarrel under the most Just and Equal
Government. But as such Proceedings stand, in respect to Religion, the Reverend
William Sherlock, D. D. (foreseeing what might come to pass, as well as what
had happened in the World) declares in a Sermon on Sept. 9th. 1683. Pap. 11.
13. There is nothing more expressly contrary to the revealed Word of God, than
Treasonable Plots and Conspiracies against Sovereign Princes: Christian
Religion (says he) is the greatest Security of Government, both in its Precepts
and Examples; it commands EVERY Soul to be subject to the Higher Powers, and
threatens Eternal Damnation against Rebels. And (as things now stand) were
there any true concernment for Religion, can We imagine that the most prosest
Atheists! the most lewd profligate Wretches! the greatest Monsters, and
Prodigies of Wickedness! (as many of our Inviters are notoriously known to be)
should be so Zealous for Religion? These two Words (says the Bishop of Ely, in
a Sermon, upon the sme day, p. 17.) of the wicked Politician Caiaphas, Venient
Romani, are effectual Incentives to stir up the People to Cry, Crucisie him!
Crucify him! Always (says that Reverend Prelate) Popery! Popery! serves the
turn of any great Incendiary to break through all Divine and Humane Laws. And
John Fitzwilliams, D. D. on that day Preaches to all Christians, That Subjects
withdrawing their Obedience from their Lawful Prince, is a denying the
Authority of God; a shaking off Gods Government from their Shoulders, that even
the Almighty should not Reign over them; They have not rejected Thee, but Me,
that I should not Reign over them, 1 Samuel 5.7. Treason against the King, (says
this Reverend Divine) is a kind of Sacrilege, and Revolt from him, an Apostasy
from God, and a Resisting him, an Opposing of God, Rebelling against him,
Fighting with God; The setting up a Counterfeit Prince against the True One, an
introducing a Plurality of Godheads, the Obeying of an Usurper, Idolatry; the
slandering his Anointed, and his Footsteps, a Blaspheming of God; the blaming
his Conduct, a quarrelling with Providence, etc. To these may be added the
Suffrage of many more, the best and most Learned of the Church of England: By
which it is fully evident, our Principles, of the Principles of the Church! are
for Loyalty: And I will now challenge the most Malicious Abdicator, even Burnet
himself, (who has thrust in his black Face to bespot her Beauty) to show me the
contrary, otherwise than by the Complexion of his own accursed Actions. And
further, the Laws of our Country are in this case adequate to those of our
Religion, and do attaint Those that Invited the Frince of Orange of the highest
Crime that can be committed (in respect to Civil Government) upon earth, and
Condemn for High Treason those that maintain the Invitation. First it is a
known Maxim of the Common Law, That the King of England holds his Power from,
and is accountable to none but God, Rex Anglia sub nullo nisi, tantum sub Deo,
Bracton. And by the Statute Law, 25. Edw. 3. cap. 2. To compass or imagine the
death of the King, Queen, or Prince of Wales. To levy War against the King, or
adhere to his Enemies to give them Aid or Comfort within the Realm or
elsewhere, is High Treason. And by the Statute 13. Car. 2. cap. 1. If any
intend to Depose the King, or to levy War against him, or to move, [or Invite]
any Strangers to Invade any of his Majesty's Dominions, is also High Treason.
Inviolably to keep, and Religiously to observe which Laws, all the Nobility,
Lords Spiritual, as well as Lords Temporal, Clergy, Lawers, and the greatest
part of the whole Gentry of England, besides most of the Tradesmen, and
inferior sort of People, one time or other, (upon some manner of occasion)
have Sworn, and upon the Holy Evangelists declared, That it is not Lawful, upon
any account whatsoever, to bear Arms against the King, or against any, that are
in Commission under him. And likewise, That his Majesty James the Second, is
the Only Supreme Governor in all his Dominions: And that They will do their
utmost to resist Any Foreign Prince that shall Invade him.

But alas! When I reflect upon the sad and dreadful Complexion of the Times!
when I behold the Monstrous Ingratitude, and Treachery of Some, persisted in
with such an Obstinacy as is not to be found, but in Apostate Angel, who
cannot, and amongst Traitors and Rebels who will not Repent.

However I say, some of Us may speak for our selves, yet I must and will blame
Those whose Undutiful Actions made the first Scene in this Bloody Tragedy of
Rebellion! Those who have boldly ventured (upon peril of their own Damnation)
to streign a point of strict Duty, and dispense with the beforementioned Laws
of Conscience, and of our Country, having nothing to plead for themselves, but
that old pernicious Principle of Doing Evil, that Good might come thereof. Our
Church, the Bulwork and Glory of the Reformation! The most Pure and Apostolical
Church upon Earth, (who as the Bishop of Ely (in his Sermon before cited, Page
33.) says, Never takes the Sword against her Lawful Sovereign; was never in
that Danger as now: Now is the time, says our Adversaries, that Heresy is
swallowed up in Atheism; Now is that lamentable time, wherein with horror we
behold the sad Convulsions of our beloved Reformation: Our Churches are now to
be new Molded into all the sordid and slovenly Methods of the Coventicle, Our
Episcopal Rites, and Jurisdictions, into all the Faces of Calvinism and
Presbitery. And I tremble to think what Satisfaction must be given to the
Divine Vengeance, for that vast effusion of Christian Blood, etc. that is now
like to be spilt in the damnable progress of this most Unnatural and Impious
Rebellion.

This Paper shall Weekly demonstrate our Loyalty to the King, whom you have
most barbarously Abdicated, to the great Scandal of Chrianity it self. You
shall upon all occasions find us Abhorrers of this Rebellion. Our Actions shall
speak our Fidelity Sworn to James the Second, whilst You pay your Perjured
Allegiance to the Usurper. And we will Now begin to set our selves heartily to
do His Majesty Right, against your Invasion, in order to send the War home to
you, who so Wickedly began it.

Dublin, Printed for Alderman James Malone, Bookseller in Skinner Row.


