Their Majesty's COLONY OF CONNECTICUT in New England VINDICATED, From the
Abuses Of a Pamphlet, Licensed and Printed at New York 1694. Entitled, Some
Seasonable Considerations for the Good People of Connecticut.

By an Answer Thereunto.

Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not Rail upon the Judges; neither Speak Evil of the
Ruler of thy People.

Prove. 10.18. He that Dissembleth Hatred with Lying Lips, and he that Inventeth
a Slander is a Fool.

Prove. 14.3. In the mouth of the Foolish is the Rod of Pride: but the Lips of
the wise preserve them.

BOSTON in New England. Printed by Bartholomew Green. Anno Dom. 1694.

Hartford, April. 23d. 1694.
THE Governor and Assistants met, do Order this Answer to the Pamphlet
Entitled, [Some Seasonable Considerations for the Good People of Connecticut]
to be forthwith Printed.

Robert Treat, Governor. John Allyn Secretary.


To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THIS small Tract, must chiefly own its Perusal; To thy willingness to hear an
Asperssed People (and Their Majesty's Subjects) Vindicated, from almost
Vnparraled Abuses. We were necessitated to its Publication, by a Pamphlet
written (as it is intimated in it) by one of this Colony of Connecticut: and
Licensed and Printed at New York in the present Year 1694. Which being spread a
broad into the World, and so also will lie to Posterity to our Defamation. It
was thought our Duty and Interest to give it an Answer; and not by Silence to
be Accessory to our own (so great) Wrongs: Let the Candid Reader Consider the
Wife Man's Intimation, That in the Answering of some men there is a sort of
being like them inevitable. Wherefore we Advertise, That the Real or seeming
Harshness of our Answer, is not in Revenge but for our Just Defense and
Vindication. To the Remedy of a Cancerous Humor something (yea much) of a
Proportionable Accrimony ought to be allowed; what thereby of Reproof falls on
our Impeachers is Accidental, to our endeavor. We have not departed from
Truth, Shuned any thing of Strength, nor misrepresented him whom we answer; in
any thing we know of: and as the Reader, if he has that Pamphlet may find: We
were put upon what we have herein done by the call of some highly cencerned for
the Colony, as well as the Occasion it self given. Our plain way (in this able
and curious Age) of VVritting, has no Apology but what the kind Reader will
make for men, who have so little Occasion as we have to to improve the PRESS.
Some may think we complain too much; let the Occasion be Considered, and it may
be seen that our Stroke is heavier than our Groaning, Job 23.2. To those that
have Injured us by that Book, we would wish them no worse than Repentance of
it, and Pardon for it. The Lord is Righteous in all this and other Evils that
have come on us, for we have Sinned against Him.

J. A. W. P.

An Answer to A PAMPHLET, Entitled, Some Seasonable Considerations for the
Good people of Connecticut, Printed at New York. 1694.
IT becomes an Honest Writer, to introduce his Book into the World, with a
Title fitting the Scope and Intendment of it: But whosoever has Perused this
we are answering would rather have thought, such a Title as this, Proper to it:

Viz.

1. Unreasonable Essays, to Represent Connecticut to be Inconsiderate,
Irreligious, Rebelious etc. or something Equivalent; which is the Argument of
the Book, as is but too manifest by it. Whither under this Pretense of
Seasonable Advice there be not the greatest Violence and Injury, offered to the
Reputation, and Interest of Connecticut: will be in part seen, by what we have
to say on this account. We would Unmask it therefore, only with this intimation
here, that another thing than Seasonable Advice to us, is intended, and
prosecuted in that Piece.

2. As to its Seasonableness: It is evidently otherwise; the cause therein
Agitated, depending now before Their Majesty's, and not Issuable by a
Pamphleters Advice; which is wholly disproportionate to that concern: yet
indeed in some respects, it may be very Seasonable: namely, to stir Factions
(though it has missed that too as yet) and to make us odious to the World
(which seems to be mainly intended in it) and to prejudice our cause (which he
that Wrote might have been too late, for had he stayed the Result) in England;
and if Occasion serve, for after Severities; this is a Seasonable fore
condemning of us: If these, and the like, make it Seasonable, and Suiting its
writers, and Licensers designs upon us, Seasonable it is. But it may appear,
that the whole work in its design and management, has little of Justice or
Charity, whatever it has of the contrary.

3. The Epithet of Good People, he gives here; he utterly takes away, and
contradicts all along after: the kindness of it here therefore is worthy no
notice, but only, that in his Title he begins not Sincerely.

We must come to the work it self: he says,

Pamphlet. Advice was given us in the Year 1689. when we were about to make our
Revolution (as it is called) and for ought I know, it had been good for us that
we had taken it.

Answer. 1. By what is most probable? he that gave that Advice, dwells not far
from him that gives these aleadged Seasonable Considerations: and is but his
own Patron and commender here.

2. That Advice is well enough known, to have been given in the other Colonies,
as well as here: the substance of it was; to manage the Government (by
Commissions granted by Sir. Edmund Andross) after the Revolution made at
Beston; and to decline Charters.

3. This Advice was not followed in Massachusetts, Plymouth, Rhead-Island, no,
nor York, the Reasons have formerly been Rendered: we think to the Satisfaction
of all, but only the Irreconcilable Enemy; of Charter Government, which is so
well known to be dear to the People of New England.

Pamphlet. But we are so unwilling to be Advised, and so ill Affected to any,
that tell us the truth, that there is little Encouragement, to any to Expose
themselves in that kind for the future.

Answer. 1. Unless this Person would be attended, as the only Oracle of
New England; and impose on all other men's understandings and Consciences: there
is little Reason for him thus Complainingly to charge the body of the People,
with being unwiling to be Advised: and being ill affected, to any that tell us
the truth; his notions were considered and advised on largely. But other
Reasons did preponderate, in the Judgment of the most, in a manner of all: as
is well known.

2. The Public accounts given by the Reverend Mr. Mather, of His Majesty's
Approbation, of that Revolution at Boston; with a now above five years
implicit allowance off the measures here taken, might have taken of the
fondness here paid to that advice. But some Counselers, if not attended will be
angry [so was Achittophel] and seek revenge some where.

Pamphlet. And it is he says, An Evil time, and the Prudent shall keep Silence
-- Cast not your Pearls before Swine etc.

Answer. 1. Its great Pity he did not keep Silence, or speak better: but if he
follow not his own Advice, it will impede others to follow it.

2. It is not over modest to Emblaz on his own Advices, thus as Pearls; and
how unworthy this his Composure, is of such a Representation! will not be
difficult to an Impartial Reader, to Judge of.

3. To compare a Colony, to harmful Swine, is hard, and yet harder; when if we
be so, in respect of the Advice in 1689. in a manner all the People of
New England are so. But such a whole Sale Champman, that thus Barters all our
Credit; will deserve an Examination.

4. Here begins, what is carried on all along his Book: namely, a
misapplication of Holy Scripture. Whether this be not a great Profaning the
Holy Name of GOD, is more meet for others to Consider; than for us here to say.
What? are his Advices to be Similized with the truths of the Gospel? which are
the Pearls there spoken of: or is New-Englands not attending those things from
him, and others of his Opinion; to be represented and made abominable, by the
fellest Persecution against the Gospel? The Excesses of this kind, and the
Rating and Blemishing (if not Curssing us) by the mouth of Scripture; are no
small Scandal to us; and we desire it may be well considered by the Pious
Readers.

But this notwithstanding, he proceeds to tell us;

Pamphlet. That he hopes the case is not so desperate.

Answer. We hope so too, yet he all along, gives us up as in the most desperate
hopeless posture.

Pamphlet. He then pleads it his duty; Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy
heart, but shall Rebuke him etc.

Answer. If any can reasonably judge, that more of hatred, and less of Love
could be exerted, by the Pamphleter, than is to be found in him here: they may
believe he has performed this, as his duty. But we may not dwell on every
Particular. Let it be noted that the Scripture here aleadged as a warrant to
this Book, is Levit 19.17. and the verse next before it Viz. 16. is, Thou shall
not walk about with Tales among thy People; thou shall not stand against the
Blood of thy Neighbor, I am the Lord. Which seems as full and direct a
prohibition of this his work as redily can be found in the Bible.

2. Having thus Prefaced himself; our Adviser or rather judge; and Connecticut
People the Objects of his pleasure: in the Second place, in Page 1st. 2d. He
calls to a Serious Attention, by Scriptures and Arguments, no less weighty,
than his Occasion and use of them are Slighty; as will appear, we need not
transcribe him.

Answer. All the things he proposes (that are true) are Obvious, and have been
considered, and needed not his Repetition.

2. This (like many other things) is a Representing us to the World; as
Ignorant and Inconsiderate to an Excels. But these Artifices, every candid
Reader will easily detect; to whom we refer it to consider, whether the
following things in that Pamphlet, be adapted to our Advice and consideration;
or to Breath out his own Spirit against us, and to furnish ill minded men, with
matter and words, to defame us; to ensnare the more unwary, into hard thoughts;
and many into groundless fears.

3. His Prefacing thus ended, in Page 3. He tells of the Commission of
Leiutenancy over the Militia of this Colony; His Excellency Sir. William Phipps
had: and says:

Pamphlet. But upon notice hereof, a General Assembly was called, and met, and
there it was Resolved: Not to submit to it, nor to take any notice of Sir.
William Phipps in that capacity.

Ans. 1. That His Excellency Sir. William Phipps, in His Commission had such a
Leiutenancy Granted by Their Majesty's and that the General Court met, is true.

2. That His Excellency did give an account of it, and desired to know what
Officers were in Commission, and at length sent a Copy of that His Commission,
is also true.

3. That the General Court, at their meeting did send His Excellency an
account, what our intentions were, as to Addressing Their Majesty's, in that
behalf; and that in the Interim, the Military Officers, were to good
Satisfaction, is also true.

4. As to the Resolve of the Court, here asserted: We say these things. (1.)
That it seems to be of absolute necessity, to the ends of the Pamphlet, to
charge such Resolves, and Acts of the Court, upon them with Rising in Arms etc.
Else, they could not make out, Opposing Their Majesty's, and so lay a
foundation large enough, to Superstruct all the revilings and menaces, that for
the ends he had before him, must be used. (2.) If such a Resolve were, our
Governor, who was then in Court, must put the Question, which it did Resolve,
and this is an high Reflection on him. (3.) Since this Pamphlet was Licensed at
York, and things of this nature Asserted in it; it behoved in Justice, that he
had Attested Copies, or other Equivalent assurance of it ere he thus expose us.
(4.) We love not such course words as to tell the World that what is so said,
is an absolute Lie: and yet this we must say (if we will say the truth) for
there was no such Question put, nor no such Resolve made; and we challenge them
to prove it, that say it: and who that finds such things, so certified, and
hears no other, would doubt the truth of it; or demurr to conclude us Direct
Opposers of Their Majesty's. But we have more of this kind, to come in yet,
wherein an amazing, Impudent Falsifying, is used against us. (5.) It will not
heal the evil to make a Subterfuge of any inferences from other things, as
arguing such a Resolve: for it is matter of Fact, that is here asserted, and not
brought in as a Consequence of what was matter of Fact: for that had been but
Opinion; whereas this is Exhibited, as a Court Act, or Resolve.

Pam. He says further, At another General Assembly, we resolve to to Address
Their Majesty's forthwith -- (and) yet no Address is made to Their Majesty's.

Ans. It is not true to say no Address is made, we did forthwith, with all
possible diligence, send our Address: that we have no account of it, is from
other causes than our not sending. It is a very sad thing thus openly to be
rendered as mere dissemblers, with Sir. William, and Their Majesty's Especially:
but this is the measure that is mete us, and surely Mr. Clarkson gave his
Imprimatur on very fallible grounds to this.

Pam. After which, Sir. William Phipps making some further demands in the
Spring 1693. we promised to pay him some Hundreds of Pounds, and to take upon
us the defense of the upper Towns, upon the River, belonging to the
Massachusetts. As if these things would Satisfy Their Majesty's Commission?
(and these things, in Page 6.) he calls a Composition with Sir. William
Phipps, which gives his meaning, and what he would suggest, and have believed
in the World, as to the Transactions between His Excellency, and this Colony.

Ans. 1. He that has only this Pamphlets information in this, and Credits it,
will be tempted to think; that those Hundreds of Pounds were a Bribe, engaged
and accepted. This is an Affront to His Excellency as well as to us, to
Represent a thing after this manner, which was in some sort true.

2. The truth was, in Effect only this: His Excellency designing to disrest the
Enemy Indians, at the Eastward, sent to us for men to Aid therein; and because
we could not (without great inconvenience) send men so far ( by two Gentlemen
that were sent down on purpose) we tendered 400. Pound, for furthering that
Expedition, if it went on as was propounded: but not a Penny to compound with
him, about his Commission, as the Pamphlet would insinuate: and the Offer was
made openly to His Hxcellencies Council; not secretly to His Excellency: and
which was done sincerely for Their Majesty's Service: and we must complain of
this partial account, and Representation of the Pamphlets; as setting a false
face on, and misconstruing that Action.

3. We undertook not absolutely, the defense of the upper Towns; but only to
such a number of men, as occasion should be: which was accordingly performed,
to our no small charge: but to an envious eye, will pervert the best actions,
in accounting them to the World for what they never were.

4. Here we must remark, the observable difference, between the Treatment we
had with His Excellency and the Gent. of Boston, and what we now have from this
writer, on these Occasions. We may believe, that they had as more to do with
it, so as much Integrity and Prudence, to manage such a thing with us, and much
more, than this medler, yet never handled it as he has done.

5. Notwithstanding this seeming care for this first Commission, it is to be
noted, that in all the time of it, our Adversary never gave us any such
Seasonable Advice, to comply with it, as now, in a Month (as it is intimated in
Page 7.) he is all on a light fire against us, why were not the dangers of
delaying, and addressing, then set before us; since himself says, that sincere
Obedience is Universal. So would his to Their Majesty's, and Love to us, have
been in a then advising, if he had been Equally poised. But this his
partiality, may make some suspect that all this kindness for the first
Commission, is but a mere Shooing horn to his designs by the second: and that
he Loves Massachusetts, and Connecticut much alike.

6. What is fit, in answer to this Pamphlet, to be said why we gave such an
Answer, as we did to this Commission, will occur afterward, on account of the
Commission of His Excellency of York; which being the contest with that writer,
we do refer to what will follow.

Pam. In Page 3d. he begins, and so goes on, with an account of the like
Commission of Leiutenancy, given by Their Majesty's to His Excellency Col.
Benjamin Fletcher; and remarks upon it, That upon notice hereof, the Freemen
and Soldiers in the several Towns, are Convened; to see how they stood
affected, and what they will Contribute, toward Addressing Their Majesty's in
this behalf. A General Assembly also is called and meets, and there it is
resolved, forthwith to send an Agent for England: Money is provided etc.

Ans. 1. And was not this Lawful and necessary? It has been declared with
sufficient Authority, That it is the right of the Subject to Petition the King.
Let the Bishops case and what the Convention Parliament declared, be remembered;
and might not in Lawful peaceable meetings, the Peoples minds be inquired into?
and if they are found (as they were) so sensible of their concernment herein,
that (in a manner) they Unanimously declare for an Address to Their Majesty's,
is it not thereupon just to take care for the Charges to defray it: and if this
Unanimity and Vigorousness, grieve the Pamphleter and his Abettors, we are not
therefore to be blamed. But this Arrow will not pierce, unless he head it.
Wherefore he adds, as a part of that Courts Conclusion.

Pam. And Lastly, That if any such Commission do come, in the mean time they
will not submit to it, but oppose it, till they have answer from Their
Majesty's.

Ans. 1. He seems to be very sensible, that all his labor will be lost, and
his whole design (of Defaming Connecticut) frustrate, if he do not charge us
with Explicit Resolves against Their Majesty's; and therefore if truth will
not aford him matter for it; Lies must and shall.

2. We say of this, as of the other Resolve, charged on us about the Commission
to Sir. William; that it is a mere falsehood, forgery, our Records, and the
whole Court are Witnesses of the contrary of it; and this, though for its
truth, it could not have an Imprimatur, yet for its usefulness, it must be
passed to the Press. It was said of old by Cyprian, that some went abroad with
Lies, as if truth could not follow them. And as one says of him that wrote the
Romish Legends; That he had an Iron Forehead. So we may say of him, that
Asserts as here a matter of Fact, which never had any being; and that of the
Representative Body of the Colony: and to such perverse ends. The Court
Resolved or Concluded, only of an Address to Their Majesty's, with what was
necessary to it, as the charges, Person etc.

3. If these two great falsehoods, of the writer of that Book newly mentioned,
and a third of Riseing in Arms (which we shall meet with afterward) be set
aside, as they ought to be, for stark Lies, that have not a Ragg of truth to
Cover their Shame: all the rest affirmed against us (whither true or false) is
too weak to bear the weight of his Reproaches cast on us.

Pam. By these methods (says he) the Freemen of the Corporation, and as many
of the People as will fall in with them, are ensnared, and strengly Preingaged,
to make Opposition against Their Majesty's Commission.

Ans. They engage only hereby in an Address; not in, or to, an Opposition.

Pam. Insomuch that one Jeers, another will spend his Blood to keep off His
Excellency etc.

Ans. 1. There is not much (if any thing) to be believed on his Credit, nor his
Imprimaturs, in this business; who have so departed from truth in what they
affirm, and pass, of the General Court.

2. Though we have heard of no such speeches (from any persons of Credit) yet
can we not say, but some Rude Persons, may have talked at this Rude Rate, and
possibly on the as rude Provocations of some others. But still, is this fit to
be used in reproach of a whole Colony, when yet none of the offenders were
brought to any of the Majestrates, to answer such things? the particular
Persons (if such there were) should have been named, and the evil confined to
them: we take it as a wrong, to have these things indefinitely and
Promiscuously cast on us, as if it were a common and general Practice; and
hereon to ground in great part, the heavy imputations that follow. We shall often
meet with these kind of things: let this stand for an Answer to them, wherever
they occur in the Pamphlet.

Pam. In Page 5. he gives an account of His Excellencies coming to Hartford,
Reading his Commission, leaving a memorial of it etc. and in Particular, that
he Assures us, That he has neither power, nor intent to invade our Civil
Liberties; That in case of our Submission, he would Commissionate all that were
in Commission before, and take our Advice for the supply of Vacant Places. And
particularly tender a Commission to our Governor, for the Command of the
Militia in the Colony; only in Subordination to this Their Majesty's Commission.

Ans. We must defer the answer to this a little while, and see first his
account of the Success of it, on the Court, in these words.

Viz.

Pam. The Deputies (diverse of them at least) being so prepared as aforesaid,
are Resolved before hand, and have determined the Question before the Court
meets (God has given them such a privilege) and therefore if Their Majesty's
put such things upon them, they must oppose, and hold their own, they are bound
in Conscience to do it.

Ans. 1. This Representation of the Deputies, as preresolved to Oppose Their
Majesty's Commission, is unlimited, and unproved, and therefore as here and
afterward improved, is an evil Surmise, and asperses all the Deputies, and the
whole Colony, and opens a wide Door to any such Calumnies; but as long as it is
wound up, to Resolving to oppose, it must be worthy of an Imprimatur.

2. The Court Act on this matter, shows what the Deputies minds were in it; and
in honesty he should have produced that; and then they had spoken for
themselves, and not out of the mouth of an Adversary. But that answer of the
General Court, speaks not Opposition to Their Majesty's, loud enough, he
perceives, but Subjection; therefore in all his Book he recites it not, but in
stead of it pops off his Readers with this Surmise, and other misaccountings of
it.

Pam. He then troubles himself with the Halberteers; as if they were designing
to Conceal the Commission from being known etc.

Ans. It Is a silly thing thus to imagine as he does, why should any desire, or
with what hopes endeavor a concealment? There were but four Halberts, and it
was only to prevent a throng at first; the People were instantly admitted. But
he adds.

Pam. And no marvel the General Court not overwilling to give the Commission a
hearing.

Ans. This is another tacit Scandal cast on the General Court, who waited many
days to give it an hearing (and this our Records and the Printed account of
those Transactions, Published by His Excellency do prove) and sat several
days on it: and therefore for him to say, as he does on it; That the Court
take no great notice of His Excellency, wave the business, would bring him to
Composition, as they had done Sir. William etc. is apparently a mistake; we did
take notice and attend as the account mentioned shows.

Pam. But he thought (it seems) that it would manifest Opposition to send, as
he says, Orders to such as Command the Forts, to prevent their Seizure.

Ans. This misconstruction of Actions, is a frequent thing in this Pamphlet.
The order he should have Printed, if there were any thing of an Opposition to
His Excellency in it. The truth, and all of it is, That at that time, there was
a Pyrate or Enemy on the Coast; that took many Vessels; and it is usual with
our General Courts, when they sit, to renew Orders of that kind, and that was
what was then done: yet this is Rattled into the World, as a kind of Rebellion,
and afterward we are told of holding Forts against the King, wherein he seems
to refer to this, but all that know our two poor Forts, may well Judge us all
mad if we should attempt to hold them against the King.

Pam. He goes on saying, And it seems (if the common Fame be true) it is their
Opinion, That Their Majesty's have nothing to do with us.

Ans. 1. One would have thought that the Topics of Lies, evil Surmises,
misrepresenting things, misconstruction of Actions, misapplications of
Scriptures, and Laws; which are the Nervous parts of this Pamphlet; had been
enough to furnish the Railery of it, without taking in Fame, and wronging it
too; for it may be truly answered, that unless this Pamphlet by defaming, have
so famed us, we never were so Reputed, in a common way, or at all as we know of.

2. What could he say worse of us, than that it is our General Courts Opinion
(for of them he speaks) that Their Majesty's have nothing to do with us? It is
fitter indeed to be answered with renting our Clothes in detestation, than with
words. Do we not professedly and practically, hold all under Their Majesty's?
and Serve them to our Capacity as the rest of Their Subjects do? Say it be
doubtful as yet, in this one point of the Commissions? is all Allegiance
renounced, in one demur (on just Reasons as we trust) and about which we have
(at great charge) sent with all speed to Their Majesty's.

3. Let it be considered, what these his dealings with Their Majesty's poor
afflicted Subjects will prove; of his and his Imprimaturs Subjection to Their
Majesty's? however highly they word it for their Allegiance?

Pam. He adds, in Page 6 and 7th. That hereon Commissions from His Excellency
are declined, abuses offered him, and such of the Assembly as moved for
Submission, thought unfit for their places; such as yield obedience traduced as
Rogues (and with the rest) yea some rise in Arms to Oppose him, and others are
in readiness upon Occasion to do the same.

Ans. 1. This of rising in Arms to oppose His Excellency here Asserted; is as
false as any thing that can be told: that some came to Hartford with some Arms
to list under His Excellency has been said: but this cannot be the thing
charged; also that some Troopers were appointed and went to wait on His
Excellency to conduct him into Hartford, is true; but His Excellency came not
at the time Expected, and they went no more. A Training was in hand but put by,
by the Governors Order. Besides these (by all the enquiry we can make) no one
man was in Arms in the Colony, while His Excellency was here: unless the
Halberteers mentioned before, and our usual Guards on the Lords Days; much less
did any Rise against His Excellency, and least of all, yea not at all, as is
here suggested to Strangers as a general thing.

2. This false charge, is by its confident Asserting, and Licensing past into
the World; and down to Posterity, as a real truth.

3. We are by it greatly wronged, rendered (as the Pamphleter has to effect his
designs a necessity) as in open Rebellion. As to that of others being ready to
Rise, it is only Surmised. The same we say of what was said of some of the
Members of the Court, being thought unfit for their places; and the traducing
of some as Rogues; and abuses offered His Excellency; these things we have
answered before, that it is the particulars (if any such be) that are blameable
not the whole or body of the People. As to the not taking Commissions, it will
occur afterward to be spoken unto.

Pam. In Page 7 and 8. Several things are said of a Proclamation, left with
Coll. Allyn, imparted to the Governor, and fault is found that it was not
published, and so of a second Proclamation sent from York.

Ans. 1. Let our General Courts Answer be considered; and that will show how
improper it was for our Governor to Publish those Proclamations.

2. Was it not enough that no hindrance was given His Excellency when here, and
that he yet did not do it?

Pam. In Page 8 he takes it for granted, that all former Military Commissions
are Expressly determined, by the Publication of this: and therefore finds fault
with Trainings, and adds, it is said, we have made a Major too.

Ans. 1. His Opinion differs from the General Courts, in the first point, but
that being Controversal, it is before Their Majesty's.

2. As to Trainings in the interim; it was it seems thought meet by some
Officers, not to desist, and thereby let the Soldiers grow unfitted for
Service, but attend what the Law requires in a time of War as this is, here
being none in Commission neither, but what had Commissions from the General
Court; and a Vacancy at this junture, seems not safe.

3. As to a Major; the Major Winthrop being gone for England, the General Care
of New London County, which is most exposed to danger from the Sea, required
somewhat of a Special Order in that respect. Our duty to Their Majesty's in our
present Circumstances do admit, and require, that we omit nothing wherein we
may best Serve them. But these Trainings etc. in his usual heat he ill resents,
and declares against.

Pam. Thus we make all the defiance to Their Majesty's, and Their Commission,
trample them into the very dirt, and offend with as high an hand, as is well
possible for us to do.

Ans. It is time now to say somewhat more, to take of these heavy Imputations,
and we will promise to do it; that there are several important things, that are
not convenient on the Provocations of this Pamphlet, to be made Public. Nor
may a few, undertake to give the whole sense of the General Court and Country.
We shall content our selves, and we hope satisfy the Reader, with what answers
this Pamphlet.

1. Then we say, the Militia is the Kings. So says he in Page 25. and onwards.

2. This is so declared by two Acts of Parliament, 13 and 13th. and 14th. of
Charles II. So says he, Page 26.

3. The Militia that is the Kings, and so declared in those Acts, is the
Militia intended in the Commission to Sir. William Phipps, and now to His
Excellency of York: So he Argues, Page 26. saying, It is declared by two
several Acts of Parliament, of 13. and 13. and 14. of Charles II. and of this
His Majesty was pleased to put us in mind, by express mention of the first of
these Statutes in the Commission to Sir. William Phipps. And in Page 3. he
calls the Commission to His Excellency of York, a like Commission; and argues
in Page 26. and onward, our duty to obey this Commission, by Virtue of those
Acts.

4. The latter of those Acts, do to determine the whole Regulation of the Kings
Militia, in 36 Articles; according to which His Majesty's Leiutenants, we
conceive must Execute their Office: this we think is indisputable, unless that
Act be void, or vainly urged on us by our Antagonist. We desire that a special
notice may be taken, that this Act of 13. and 14. of Charles II. is the Limit,
and Boundary of the Kings Militia, as it is Committed to, and is to be
Commanded by the Kings Lieutenants, as such: and that if this be plucked up.
(1.) The very Leiutenancy is taken away, being as to Law founded only hereon.
And (2.) That if the Kings Leiutenants as such, can claim, and Command a
Militia as the Kings, beyond the measure of this Act, what shall stop them from
Commanding, who when, and in what manner so ever they please? (3.) The word
[Militia] as it relates to the King and His Leiutenants, is restrained to this
Act, and does not take in all that strictly may be denominated [Militia] for in
a large sense, Corporations, Towns, Families, yea single Persons; have, and may
have, that Furniture for War, offending and defending, as their respective
Capacities do require, and admit, that may be called truly and properly [their
Militia] and yet neither the things so called, nor that name, shall incorporate
them into the Kings Militia; and put them under His Lieutenant. (4.) That when
the King makes His Leiutenant, that Leiutenancy is necessarily refered to this
Law, and stands in Connection to it; and all words and clauses, in the
Leiutenants Commission, must be accomodated to the tenor and true intent of
this Act; and not otherwise: for as it is Leiutenancy, so it is but Leiutenancy,
and what Leiutenancy shall be, and how far extend, this Act provides; these
things we refer to the Readers notice in this whole contest.

5. In the third Article or Paragraph, as Wingate renders it, is said, that the
Leiutenants etc. May charge any, where their Estates be, with Horss, Horsman,
and Arms, that have 500 Pound Per. Annum in Posession, or 6000 Pounds, in Goods
or Money besides furnitue of their Houses, and so Proportionably: And any with
a Foot Soldier and Arms, that have 50 Pounds Per. Annum, in Posession, or 600
Pounds in Goods or Money, other than Stock on the ground, and so
Proportionably; they shall charge none to find both Horss and Foot in the same
County.

We need recite no more here, only in the close of the foregoing Paragraph; it
is said, And the said Leiutenants, and in their absence or otherwise by their
directions, the deputy Leiutenants, or any two or more of them, may Exercise
and Conduct the Persons so to be Armed etc. as is here after expressed.

And in the 25. Article or Paragraph, we find to the same Effect. Viz. The
Leiutenant etc. May from time to time Lead, Train etc. all Persons Raised and
Arrayed, according to the Act of 13 and 14. of Charles II. Chap. 3. Here it
seems very plain, (1.) What the Kings Militia is. viz. Persons of such Estates
as are mentioned. (2.) That the Kings Leiutenants as such, and by Law have only
those Persons of those Estates under their charge and power. As yet nothing is
offered us to prove it otherwise.

6. There is no such Militia so constituted, yet formed in Connecticut;
therefore no Subject or Object of such a Leiutenancy, yet formally Existing
here; this is well enough known.

7. His Excellency nor Sir. William, ever went about forming such a Militia
here, by and according to the 3d. 4th. 5th. and 10th. Articles or Paragraphs,
of the said Acts of Parliament: therefore were not opposed in Executing their
respective Leiutenancies according to the Acts referred to in their
Commissions: and Consequently not opposed in their Commissions rightly
understood and applied; and as the Pamphlet argues for them.

8. The Militia of Connecticut, as now constituted by the General Court, by
virtue of the Charter, and as our need requires; consists of all Males from 16
to 60 years of Age, some few, as Majestrates, Ministers etc. only excepted, be
their Estates what they will.

These things being thus, the Question is whether the Kings Militia
constituted, and to be Governed as by said Acts, or the Corporation Militia, of
another constitution, and Government (and therefore so constituted because so
to be Governed) be the Object of the Leiutenantcy? the disputes of the Pamphlet
run for the latter; but still wholly on grounds taken only from the former; but
that will not hold: for what Their Majesty's claim by Law (that is by those
Acts) they furely Execute upon, according to the same Law or Acts of
Parliament. It Is an happy truth, that all the People are Their Majesty's, yet
are not all by Act of Parliament from 16 to 60 years of Age (that is Males) His
standing Militia.

If this had come to practice here and His Excellency had called all from 16 to
60 to the duty of Soldiers, and they had refused as not having Estates to
Oblige them by the Laws, his Commission is dependant on and must be exercised
by; and the Corporation Militia strictly so called had been severed there from;
what a poor posture had that been in? when it may be the Colony would not have
yielded an Hundred Soldiers to that part, it may be not half an hundred?

But it may be said, does not the Commission say; the Militia of Connecticut,
all the Forces etc. And this answers all. We say no: For we know His Majesty
Governs by the Laws of the Realm; and this our Adversary not only yields us,
but makes it the Basis of all his Arguing, in Page 23. where he says, In this
case, (Rex praecipit and Lex praecipit) the Kings Commands and the Laws
Commauds, is all one. So that by his own account the Laws Command and the Kings
Command in the case are Mutual, and Reciprocal and do expound each other; that
is the Statute of 13 and 13 and 14 of Charles II. do expound this Commission of
Leiutenancy, and all others of that kind and in the sense and under the
Limitations of those Acts, it is to be taken and no otherwise. And this alone
with the Consideration of the Constitution of Connecticut Militia, at once over
throws utterly his whole Hypothesis in the Pamphlet. And he might have spared
the labor of all his Sophistications, in arguing and concluding as he does
from the one to the other, when as not the same thing, or a thing of the same
Constitution is in both.

And here we must note his misrepresentation of those Statutes as intending a
Militia, which they do not by applying them directly to another kind of
Militia, as he does evidently all along. It is like he knew that they are but
few Comparatively that Read those Laws, and yet fewer of his Readers that know
or will be informed what a different Militia from that, Connecticut Militia is:
and so the Ambiguity of the word Militia would not be dicovered; and so it must
and would be concluded, that if we hold any Militia, it was the same in the
Statutes, (this is no fair dealing in him) His Majesty claims His right
according to those Laws, and what is by Patent Granted to His Subjects, and is
of another Constitution, we may be bold to hold that, till we can enquire His
Majesty's right and pleasure to be otherwise, and in this we claim not His
Majesty's Militia, as it is distinguished from, our Corporation Militia, it is
all His Majesty's in Service.

In a word, what is the Kings Militia so settled by the Laws of His Realm, we
never gave the least hindrance unto His Leiutenants in: if they had clamed the
Command of that and that only, and had been refused; some such Charges, as now
we are laden with, might have had a color, whereas now they have none. To a
full management hereof, many other things should and might be added; but this
may suffice to show that the Pamphlet by not distinguishing between Militia and
Militia, runs into all manner of confusion; and charge us with claiming the
Kings right, when we claim it not; but a distinct thing, and not that neither,
but in Subjection to Their Majesty's (what of the Kings Militia is involved in
the Corporations we know not, till it be distinguished as the Law requires) if
these things be not clear to others, they are so to us, and will bear at least
an enquiry in England, before we be put on, to what we are not clear in; and
this may be the better born with, since as he said in Page 5th. His Excellency
offered to continue the Militia in the hands it was then in, which showed a
good Satisfaction in the Military Commission Officers; the odds of being under
the Corporation, or His Excellency, till we could here from England, needed not
the Sharpness of this Pamphlet; which has nothing helped; save to render us as
bad as possible, and beyond truth, or peace.

And here we might end our answer; but because of the long and bitter Harrangue
that continues in that Book, and some things that must be cleared, we must
attend it. And at once we will insert the Courts Answer to Coll. Fletcher, that
all may see what it was, and not take it in the disguises that are put on it;
and it shall be as it was Printed at York. Viz.

To His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General, and Governor in Chief,
of Their Majesty's Province of New York etc.
IN Return to your Excellencies demands of the Millitia, of us Their Majesty's
General Court of Their Colony of Connecticut: we say: That finding in your
Excellencies Commission no Express, Superseding of the Commission of the
Millitia in our Charter, nor Order to us from Their Majesty's to Surender the
same: And being sensible of the great importance of this matter, and finding it
in several main things which do need a particular Explication, and Settlement,
as we shall (God willing) manifest to Their Majesty's: cannot but conceive it
our duty, both with respect to Their Majesty's Service, and our own peace, and
preservation in this time of War, to continue the Militia as formerly; till by
our Agent now sent for England, we shall receive further Orders from Their
Majesty's.

And in obedience to Their Majesty's Gracious Letter of March 3d. 1692. We
shall be ready upon all just Occasions, to yield Assistance to His Excellency
Coll. Benjamin Fletcher Esquire His Majesty's Captain General, and Governor of
New York etc. and to the Commander their in Chief, for the time being: for the
defense of the said Province, against the Common Enemy, according to our
ability, and in proportion with our Neighboring Colonies and Provinces;
although we have already been out about Five Thousand Pounds, for the defending
our Neighbors of Albany, since the War began, besides the loss of Lives. And
further, this Court does see reason to grant the Sum of Six hundred Pounds in
Country pay, out of our Country Rate, toward the Charge of maintaining the
Garrison at Albany, onwards of what shall be our proportion of that charge, in
Obedience to Their Majesty's Letter of 3d of March last.

By Order of the Governor and General Court of Connecticut.

Signed by John Allyn Secr.
HARTFORD October, 25th. 1693.

On the 27th. of October 1693. was sent this Memorial following.

Excellent SIR.
WE have in our former to your Excellency, tendered you Six hundred Pounds, in
Country pay out of our Rates; toward the charge of maintaining the Garrison at
Albany, onwards of what shall be our proportion of that charge. We desire your
Excellencies answer, whether that be acceptable to you. But if you judge it
more for Their Majesty's Service, to have men, we shall raise about Fifty men
to Assist in Garrisoning Albany, who we shall raise and send forth, with what
speed we may, to continue, there till the Spring to the end of March, or first
of April next. We Crave your Excellencies Answer, who are,

Your Humble Servants the Governor and General Court of Connecticut.
By their Order signed John Allyn Secr.


HEre is what can be charged truly on our General Court; and the Spirit of it
is in that clause, where it is said, We cannot but conceive it our duty both
with Respect to Their Majesty's Service, and cur own Peace, and preservation in
this time of War, to continue the Militia as formerly, till by our Agent now
sent for England, we shall receive further Orders from Their Majesty's. And
this is spoken only with respect to the Corporation Militia, not at all with
respect to a Militia Constituted as by the 13 and 14 of Charles II. which for
distinction we call the Kings Militia, and on the reasons there aleadged, the
full import of which is for Their Majesty's special Audience: and with a
provision to do our duty as to aiding York and Albany. And what does this
amount to but our Courts sense, Judgment, or Opinion, in the matter of their
duty.

Let any man cooly Consider, whether this be not justifiable, whether this will
bear all the Mountainous weights of Reproach, which this wretched Pamphlet
casts on us on this accout? And had the Pamphleter dealt with any honesty, he
should have proved that for our Court thus to declare their sense is Opposing
the King, and what else he loads us withal; and not publish Horrid Lies of us,
and then argue from them. We know that sins and vices are Immergent as well as
Graces and Virtues. Lies evil Surmises misconstructions and the like, will
yield Misapplications of Scriptues and Laws, and these then will yield a
torrent of Infamy. But had he derived only from truth, it had been otherwise
then now it is, and better for him and us.

In Page 9, 10, 11. He tells us of two sorts of People among us. Viz. The
Deceivers and the Deceived, and compares the best of these to the Rebels on
Absoloms side, and their case and danger like the Regicides, and advises them
to take the course of Peter, who had denied his Lord and Master, the other sort
are desperate etc.

Ans. It Is to much to Transcribe it, but the Reader that has that Pamphlet may
examine it.

1. He is over what is matter of Fact, as to the main of it; and this, and what
follows, for the Substance being only his own sense of the things fore
mentioned; we shall pass through them more briefly: And we shall once for all,
desire the Candid Reader to take notice; that all his loud Openings and Noise,
are upon a wrong scent; for he pursues us as with-holders of the Kings Militia,
settled by Parliament; when as but newly declared we meddle not with that, but
another thing only.

2. It would and should make any one tremble, to read such things, such
Comparisons made on such wrong grounds; but we would know not only the words,
but the power of these men, thus to Arraign, Condemn, and Execute (as far as
Pen and Imprimatur Malice can go) Their Majesty's Subjects and the People of
God. Surely if the double Fence of Sacred and Civil Laws, had been at all
regarded, we had not been thus Broken in upon, and devoured in some of our
choicest Interests: the Holy ninth Command in its several Branches by the
things mentioned, and to be mentioned is by the Pamphlet Violated Lies,
Reproaches, evil Surmises, Misconstructions, Misrepresentations, and the like,
do Violate that Rule. The fifth Command to Honor Superiors, Equals,
Inferiors etc. Requires the hiding real Blemishes, not with Ham to see and
deride, were that the case with us, much more it injoyns not to Invade our just
Repute, with Falsehoods. By the Civil Law we are Their Majesty's Subjects, and
as such his Honor is in a degree concerned in ours, and Sugestions against the
Subjects ought to be made to the King, not to the World, to defame the Kings
Subjects openly, in the Face of His Enemies, sorts with no Law or Policy:
nothing is to be done in terror of the People, the Kings Peace is to be kept
by all, the King has a Judicature to Issue Controversies, and our cause, is at
Caesar's Judgment Seat where we ought to be judged: who made this man a Censor
over us? But all these things notwithstanding to tear and worry us is what that
wretched Tract seems designed to.

3. What Color is there that we are with Absoloms Rebels pursuing Their
Majesty's, or with the Regicides about their work, or have we denied with Peter
our Lord and Master.

4. May we not for his thus Comparing us retort his own Interogations; and say,
Consider how he by these carriages Elemishes Religion and Scandalizes the
Gospel. Has he thus Learned Christ etc.? The Tables thus turned would stand
the righter way.

5. Our Gracious KING and QUEEN, nor any of Their good Subjects, we do believe
do like a Phalaris with his Brazen Bull to Torment men in, to Extremity; which
this Pamphlet is but too like unto.

6. The Pamphlet goes on, to tell of the Fountain of good Principles, and what
his are, Page 12 to p. 21. We will give only the heads of them, and his
Inferences from them against Connecticut.

Pam. 1. That Allegiance to our Prince is a Morral and necessary Duty.

2. That Religion Comprizeth both Tables of the Law.

3. That the Second Table of the Law is like unto the First.

4. That the Morral Law is not abolished by Christ.

5. (To abreviate it) That the King is next to God Supreme upon Earth, Chief
Governor in all His Dominions.

Ans. 1. The manner, and end of Exhibiting these Principles, is to Suggust,
that we in Connecticut are Heterodox in these points, and so little distant
from mere Infidels: this perverse Insinuation we detest.

2. We own, and desire to live by these Principles, though we are as yet so
unhappy, as not fully to understand our duty in the one point Controverted.

3. Therefore all the pains taken in these 11 Pages, may justly be called, The
New-labour-in-vain; a washing a white man, as if he were a black-more, to make
him white, when as he never was other-wise.

Pam. But he infers on the first Principle, that now it seems this Sound
Doctrine will not be endured, Page 15th.

Ans. 1. When or wherein was the Doctrine of Allegiance to our Prince, so
Opposed or Punished among us, as not to be endured? The present contest turns
not on that hinge, whether we shall be Subject to Their Majesty's, but what is
the true intent of this Commission? this we may enquire without renouncing our
Allegiance.

2. Since the 40 years mentioned, it is well known who Preached an Election
Sermon, on Romans 13.7. Honor to whom Honor; and how well he Pressed Obedience to
the Colony Government thence, and it were well if some were still as willing to
be minded of their duty to God, and their Brethren, as the body of this People
are to be Subject to Their Majesty's.

Pam. On the Second Principle, Page 17. he says, But we have seen that of late
in Connecticut, which if Abraham himself had been here, would have made him say
as once he did to Abimelech, because I thought surely the Fear of God is not in
this place.

Ans. This is like the most of the Pamphlet, a bitter Censure, and Causless;
and we doubt not but he has deeply wronged therein, many a Son of Abraham.

Pam. On the Third, he glances on the Pastors of the Churches, and I may add,
then, and not before will Religion too be sound and safe, when Obedience due to
Princes, shall be thought to be a part of Piety; and when the Pastors of the
Church shall Train up the People by the Word of God, to perform Obedience to
them.

Aus. The Emphasis seem to lie in the word [then] whether the meaning be not
that it is not so [now] or as yet, we refer, but these Persons he is aware of,
and therefore comes so on, as he may Retreat.

Pam. On the Fourth Principle thus, That a Godly Rebel is a Scolecism, a
Prodigious Monster in Religion.

Ans. Who this is spoken to, and of, is Obvious: and what he bated the Reverend
Pastors, he gives in over weight to their Flocks, and but that some Tongues are
unruly Evils full of deadly Poison, it would not have been thought, that such
Reflections should have been made on us.

Pam. On the Fifth, If our Religion be so over grown, to that pass that it
teaches us to deny Kings and Majestrates etc.

Ans. Is it not too much that our Civil and Military benifits, have been so
struck at by some, but must our Profession of Religion be also prostituted to
Contempt in this manner? We profess no Religion that teaches to deny Kings and
Majestrates: but of this enough before. Yet we would tell the Pamphleter, that
he is Suspected of other Principles, such as aforded all the untruths and
Ranchors of his Book; and that Leven has spoiled the use of these his
Principles herein; and however high his Credit has run abroad, and formerly,
we will here tell him: that it is no good Principle for any to hold that a man
may Lawfully Marry with his Deceased Wives natural Sister: nor no good Practice
to write a Book to justify one that has so done; which its said will be
Printed; this is contrary not only to the Current of Protestant Divines, but
even of Papist; and the Pope himself, save as he holds that he can dispense
with the Law of God for the good of the Church, and the Manuscript is now
extant to prove this.

Pam. In Page 20 He refumes what he had said of us from Fame, Viz. That it is
our Opinion, that the King has nothing to do with us; and thereupon proceeds
to prove that His Majesty has to do with us, as if this last were a denied, or
doubted Principle with us.

Ans. It is too long to Transcribe, for it begins in Page 20. and ends in Page
25.

1. But it is Coincident with that aleadged opinion as (represented by him, by
us denied) and also with his fifth Principle but now answered; and therefore we
need here only say what in effect we have said; namely that it is a falsity,
and figment of his own, to say and insinuate that we deny Their Majesty's
Authority over us, and therefore all his Interogations, and wretched
conclusions on that Suppositions of our denying Their Majesty's we detest, and
if he will go on with a Labor in-vain (unless it be to wrong us in the
highest) he must, we can but Vindicate our selves.

2. We can tell him, that the highest word Assertors of Soveranty, are not
always the truest Subjects: Haman under pretense of exal^ing and benifiting
his King, sought his own Revenge, and used the Royal Bow to shoot down good
Subjects: And no Age has been free of this Pestiferous mischief, when Subjects
are leveled at, while they are on their Knees before their King, as now we are;
it is no great Indication of Obedience to Their Majesty's, or Love to Their
Subjects.

Pam. In Page 22 he says: It is a manifest thing, that this and the other
Homunculus has a thousand times more Authority, Respect, and Obedience in
Connecticut than Their Majesty's have. If a man come in Their Majesty's Name,
and with Their Commission, he will not be received by us; but if a man come in
his own name without Their Majesty's Authority and Commission, him we will
receive: This is not the behavior of good Subjects.

Ans. Either this is a base Reflection on those worthy Persons of the
Neighboring Jurisdictions with whom we have for the Public been concerned (it
can intend no other) for who have we received Viz. Aided but his Excellency of
the Massachusetts, and before him the Administrators of that Government, and
those of Albany and York at the Instance of them and by the advice of the
Massachusetts, to call these as he will have it Homunculus; we received also
Mr. Livingstone of Albany when Mr. Leisler vexed him; these were the Homunculus
the little men we received, but not in their own names, it was only to serve
the Public; or else we are here taxed as if we used Their Majesty's Authority
to serve private Persons and Interests, which is a gross Slander: he should
have named some of the [Homunculus] that we received in their own names and
prefered before Their Majesty's, that our answer might have reached it
particularly; as for Mr. Leisler it will be spoken to afterward.

Pam. In Page 25 he moves us an Objection as made by us about the Lawfulness of
Coll. Fletchers Commission, and this he returns over into an Asserting the
Kings Right in the Militia.

Ans. 1. As to Their Majesty's right in the Militia, it has been owned, and
that he may grant Commissions accordingly is not to be doubted. But this is not
the difficulty, but whether this Commission do reach any other Militia than
what the Laws of the Realm do constitute, and this the Pamphlet in words at
least yields in our sense, for in Page 29. thus he says, This Commission is
therefore a Lawful Commission being founded upon the Ancient and standing Laws
of the Realm.

If then there be an Inseparable Connection between this Commission and the
standing Laws of the Realm, and it be founded on them, and that Act of 13 and
14 of Charles II. be such a standing Law? then this Commission is measured and
limited by that Law, which extent of it, was never denied that we know of. But
(2.) If they will extend it to a Militia of another Constitution, Viz. The
Corporation Constitution; then there is matter of Law in it, not only to be
disputed, but to be tried, or at least to be inquired of Their Majesty's,
whether it be Lawful or no in that Extent. (3.) Their Majesty's pleasure may be
sought, even as to that which the said Act (if applied) would take out of our
Constitution of the Militia; wherein many things may be, and we hope are said
before them. (4.) If men that have neither 50 Pound Starling Per. Annum, nor
600 Starl. in Money or Goods (as most with us are such) shall refuse the duty
of a Soldier in the standing Militia, what Law that this Commission is
dependant on, will condemn them for so doing? and this as has been hinted will
be our case; if the Colony Militia (so to call it which is the Kings too in a
sense) be disolved; but of this we gave an account before; yet could not well
omit this further notice of it.

Pam. In Page 31. he reflects on the Government as Severe and Sharp, Upon any
disacknowledgment of our disputable Authority. How Bragg and Peremptory should
we have been if this Commission, in terminis had been given to us? Certainly
Fire and Faggot, or the Noose of an Halter, had been good enough for any one
that should have offered to oppose it etc.

Ans. 1. Himself says, that Male contents never want Complaints and Commends a
throughness in Government. Page 54. p. 58.

2. It is the general complaint, that Connecticut Government is too Mild; and
possible those that know it best, will laugh most at this. Imagination of Fire
and Faggot, and the noose of an Halter. What error is in Connecticut, in these
things, lies on the other hand.

Pam. In 31 and 32 Page, he speaks of Greedy catching at the Kings Letter of
3. of March last.

Ans. This Their Majesty's Letter was very Graciously sent, and we hope
thankfully and dutifully received and obeyed by us; and he needed not speak so
of it as Greedily catching; but we know to whom that Letter has been an Eye
sore.

Pam. In Page 32, 33, 34. he charges Ingratitude to Their Majesty's on so hard,
that it is intolerable. It was an old Saying: Say I am Ungrateful, and say any
thing; but the best of it is, he is no fit Judge of any thing concerning
Connecticut, who is thus Fire hot against us with Rage; and we have Their
Majesty's and moderate Persons to judge herein; we acknowledge (and wish we
could do it better) Their Majesty's kindness to us, and were it not
transcendent, as the Sky is above the Earth, to this man's Spirit; we were very
Miserable. But whether he be within bounds of truth, Sobriety, or Charity, let
any one Judge; when he says, Shall we requite Love with Hatred, Tender Bowels
with Malignanty? for what else can our behavior signify, but a Malignant
Spirit and Inveterat Hatred, against the King as King, and who ever comes from
him as such? We have sufficiently declared our Affections to the King, and what
we should have done if we had Him in our Hands; we should soon Rid the World of
Kings, if we had them in our Power; Remember Hazael, Is thy Servant a Dog,
says he, that he should do this great (i. e. this abominable) thing? Yea, but
when Temptation and Oppertunity met together, he did it notwithstanding, and
verily so should we.

Ans. This is such a Charge as shows the Pamphleters Spirit, in Lively and yet
Blackest Colors. To take the Altitude of this Promontory; this Charge or
Surmise: Let it be considered. (1.) That to Imagine the Death of the King, is
by Law High Treason. (2.) To Imagine the Death of Kings in General is yet
higher or highest Treason. (3.) That such Imaginings are Sins of the most
heinous nature before God. (4.) That such a People so Spirited are justly to be
abhorred of all mankind. Wherefore to Tax a Colony with such Treasons and
Impiety, to render them an abhorance to all men, is so abhorredly Injurious to
them, That if Cerberus had been brought to Bark at us, it is not imaginable he
could more Hellishly have performed this task. Let Leviticus 19.16. Be here
again remembered, Thou shall not walk about with Tales among thy People: Thou
shall not stand against the Blood of thy Neighbor: I am the Lord. We will set
against it the mind of Excellent Owen, in his Book of the Dispenssing of the
Holy Spirit Fol 517. Where Truth is not universally Observed, according to the
utmost watchfulness of Sincerity and Love, there all other Marks and Tokens of
the Image of God in any Persons, are not only Sulied but defaced, and the
Representation of Satan is most prevalent.

Pam. In Page 34, he demands an Example of us, who so ingratful who so
disobedient as we etc.

Ans. Supposing us to be such as he just before affirms us to be, we think none
are like us or should be so, nor do we know any like him for misusing the Kings
Subjects, in such an horrid degree.

2. But if the meaning be, who ever did Address a King before they obeyed an
Order they had to inquire further on (which only is pertinent here) as we have
done Examples in a greater Latitude then that abound every where. For one let
Dan. 2.24, 25. Compared with the 13, 14, 15, 16. Verses be seen; Scores might
easily be produced, that have acceptably done this, as well as we.

Pam. In Page 35, he thus Interogates us, What? do we indeed intend to fall off
to the French etc.

Ans. When men are thus forming and feeding Chymeraes, it is endless and in
vain to follow them; we are not falling to the French, nor from the King, and
yet for diversion we will tell him that his Counsel [If we intend so to do let
us speak out] is very weak.

Pam. In Page 36 he urges us with the unseasonableness of our Acting, from the
time in which we are Addressing Their Majesty's, and with his usual Severity.

Ans. If we should for once gratify his humor, and say we mist it therein, yet
what is he better than Esops Doctor to the Dead man? the case was sent away to
England, and that before he wrote, and he is too late to help it.

Pam. In Page 36, he grows Jocous, and it is all that he is pleasant in, in the
whole Book, and but sour there too, he Masquerades, tells us that our Great
Champion, our Goliath leaves us in the Lurch, the Stone is Sunk in his forhead,
etc. And shall we yet harden our selves etc.

Ans. He uses a great Liberty, we know none that have so Lurched us, though the
Stone of a Slander, that one took a great Bribe at York has been cast at one of
us; but its most like to be found in another forehead.

Pam. In Page 37, he propounds the Event to Consideration, and this he Predicts
will be (1.) That Friends will be ashamed of us, Enemies will Insult.

Ans. We think his Friends (if he have any wise ones) will be ashamed of him,
for his Trifling, and abusive use of Sacred and Serious things; and that his
and our Enemies will insult upon us with this weapon he has so unadvisedly or
maliciously, put into their hands.

Pam. His Second Prognostic is, That the King and Council expects better
things of us.

Ans. He is all along too bold to give the Kings sense: it has been said of a
Chancelour in some cases, that he that knew the Chancelours mind, knew the
Kings mind; but we have no assurance that this man's Perception is so deep.

Pam. His Third Presage is that, That we Prejudice Their Majesty's Interests,
frustrate Their Intentions, defeat Their Counsels etc.

Ans. 1. As we justly dislike his fore Staling Their Majesty's Judgment, so we
do but a little fear it, though that be evidently designed by his Book, and he
may move in his own Orb, and not Soar with his Icarian Wings so near the Sun;
alas little thing why thus Cheek by Jole, with the Sovereign power? will he
perform the thing through thee? we know a divine Sentence is in the Lips of the
King, and that our Judgment comes forth from the Lord.

2. Let it be remembered that we do take care of our duty in respect of the War,
and are out great charge as has been said.

We will pass over his fond Conceits in Page 39, of the French Concluding that,
they have Connecticut to Friend, at least in a posture of Neutrality; and that
of the Maquaes being put to go to the French, as Instances only of one that
wants to Sleep; and that of the Commission as what we had before, with this
Intimation; that Connecticut has also the Kings Broad Seal for their
Corporation Militia.

Pam. In Page 40 he falls afresh to rating at us, Do we not know, That to Levy
War against the King is High Treason etc. That an Actual Rebellion or
Insurrection is a levying War against the King. That a gathering Forces for the
Removal of Counselors Altering of Laws etc. is levying of War against the
King. That the holding a Fort or Castle by force of Arms against the King and
His Power is a levying War against the King etc.

Ans. 1. We must refer to what has be said chiefly for answer to these things;
to avoid vain and tedious Repetitions; but as these things are applied unto us,
we may say as Nehemiah to Sanbalat Chap. 6. v. 8. There are no such things as
though say, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.

2. Has not Connecticut an uncondemned right to somewhat of a Militia? Why may
we not in the reverss, charge as hard those that interupt us; especially
considering that the General Government is (under Their Majesty's) yet in the
Corporations hand, to which particular Officers (though by Patent) one would
think should stand in some Subordination.

But it may be said, that we mistake him; he does not charge us with Treason,
levying War against the King; he lays it only as a ground to argue from, as he
does.

Pam. What Construction then do we think it will have, If we shall be found to
Rise in Arms against the Kings Lieutenant Publishing His Commission, and
Commanding Obedience unto it; and by Force and Arms, to withold the Militia,
and all Forces by Sea and Land, and all Forts and places of strength, in a
whole Colony, or Province, from the King against His plain Commission Published
under the great Seal?

Ans. 1. The [if] that all this is propounded with, makes it like a wet Eale,
hard to take any hold on, or how to use it; but he intends not to beat Air, but
to strike us in these things; and because here he seems to clench most of his
Coblery we say.

2. If he argue from the former of Treason etc. to this of our holding (which
he will call withholding) the Militia, that the latter is as great, as bad, as
the former or worse; then we did not mistake him; and indeed his sense Suites
best his Scope in the whole Book. But,

3. If he argue from the greater to the lesser, there is no great force in it:
for though it be Felony to kill a Man, yet it is not so to kill a Fly; though
a man may not Rob, yet he may stand a Trial in Law, for what he has held
quietly a long time (on a good tenure) ere he Surrender; and if finally he
should be Ejected, yet a Trial is due to him, ere a delivery is due from him.

4. All a long the Pamphlet beggs, and not proves the main question; for he
still runs away with this, that our Charter now gives us no use of any Militia
at all; and on that Supposition he builds in a manner all his discourse: but
this we differ from him in, and take it our right to have Their Majesty's, and
the Laws descission in.

5. What if after all this his Scuffle to bring our heads within his halter;
the Charter and his Excellencies Commission, should be found to refer to diverse
Militia's, the one to a Corporation Militia, as formed by the General Court to
our necessity, and without which we are undone; and the other to the Kings
Militia, according to the 13 and 14 of Charles II. Or, which is almost the
same, that they should refer to the same Militia, in diverse respects: Namely,
the one to what of our Militia falls not within the verges of that Act
forementioned, and the other to what of it that Act will on trial be found to
Comprehend; will not this reconcile the Charter and Commission? Or what if the
Law, or Their Majesty's Grace, will firm our former and present Station in
these things? these things are not only possible, but hopeful, and he might
have staid his hand, and not have run out upon us as Traitors, as worse than
Turks as dispisers of the King, as he does, Page 40.41.

6. A Contest with His Excellency, is not a Contest with the King; if Ajax and
Ulisses strive for Achiles Armor, this makes neither an Enemy to Achiles nor
the Greeks: if Herod and Pilate differ abut Jurisdiction, neither is hereby a
Rebel against Caesar: Are not Contests about Rights to particular Commands
frequent in the Courts of Princes? And though but one can prevail, yet is not
the other made a Traitor for holding what he had till a decission be. The
Pamphlet over charges, in saying (in a case thus Circumstanced) That
disobedience and Contempt offered to the Kings Ministers, redounds and is done
to the King Himself (for Connecticut is the Kings Minister also)

Pam. But he is bold at all adventures, to affirm that besides, other vile
Indignities (not fit to be named) His Excellency is in danger of his very Life,
such as assert their Allegiance and declare their Submission, run the same
Hazard.

Ans. This is not the first nor second time we have found him at the trade of
Impudent Falfifying, as is before noted; there was no appearance to give ground
of such sayings; His Excellency was with all freedom and safty among us, nor
were his Servants or any hurt or assautled in the least degree, that ever we
heard of: true it is he lodging at a Public house and Inn, there was a
concourse of People of different persuasions, and that discourses, and disputes
were many is without question, as there are on many Occasions: yet to raise
such things to an hazard of His Excellencies Life, or others; is a false
Inference; Can he say that any man shouldered a Gun, girt on a Sword, lift up
so much as a Staff, or hand in such a way? we have a full account of the
contrary, we are deeply injured therefore, thus to be represented to the World,
as a Company of Assasmates; and he that gave his Imprimatur to this, had reason
enough to know the Contrary.

Pam. In Page 42, thus he says, Some may Imagine they have found a Neat way to
defeat the Kings Commission, they will not take Commissions from His Lieutenant
themselves, but will also deter others etc. -- What! do we think he is to be
put off with our Scurvy little tricks etc.

Ans. Here he finds he touches ground, for all this while he has been but
floating, and has contended only with words of the Courts etc. but when as not
withstanding that Endeavors were used, to find persons to take Commissions,
and such an universal adherence to what was settled by the Charter was found in
the People, as that those proposals would not take, and that this gave a Remora
to all present further proceedings: the Observation of this puts the Pamphleter
into this Rage, and passionate Exclamation against (whom he knows best) perhaps
he means the Governor first, and then the Court, as thus persuaded. But this
is a groundless Surmise; it was the set and Spirit of those to whom such
Commissions were offered, and of the whole Country in a manner, which they were
sensible of that stood in the way; and needed not the adjuvancy of any of the
Court to persuade to it.

2. Since the proceedings stoped here, he might have spared most of his Labor
in taxing the Court with opposing (as he will call it) that Commission, and
laying its present Ineffectiveness there where it centred not. Let this be well
noted, and it will ease most of the other difficukies that are urged against
us: Since it is run a ground here in our Pamphleters own account, though it
rubbed else where.

3. Yet is there reason enough to believe, that those few that were asked to
take Commission (and they were very few indeed by all we can learn) and that at
a second third or forth hand way (which may clear the most, and those few too,
of refusing) none did it, nor any others would do it, in the least
unwillingness to Serve Their Majesty's, (for Them they Serve with their present
Commissions) but as well understanding their previledg and Interest, from which
a Pamphlet has not moved them; and the general sense and set of the People, is
an argument of more weight in this affair, then we shall now insist on.

4. Yet the this using their Liberty, does not render their Obedience to Their
Majesty's Arbitrary neither; nor is it a putting Them off with Scurvy little
tricks; it is but a waiting to have that made clear in their Alteration (if it
must be so) which yet is doubtful it seems to some.

5. Nor will this not taking Commissions merit Their Majesty's displeasure, as
he suggests, Page 43.

6. Nor is it a necessary Consequence from not taking the Commissions so
offered (if any were) that such are like, the Citizens in the Parable that
hated their Lord and that would not have Him Reign over them (Nor that
therefore His Majesty should or will say) Those mine Enemies that would not
that I should Reign over them bring hither and Slay them before me, as p. 43.

7. Nor yet that we and our posterity shall be ruined, be declared Rebels, put
out of Protection, be shut out of Commerce, be reduced by force, kept under a
strong Garrison be sorely Fined, fetch over some to England; as he gives his
Judgment in his way Page 44.

We must confess these things though hard, are a great abatement of what went
before, of being Slain: But they only signify and are Effects of an Incendiary,
and Horrible prejudication, on weak grounds, without any Authority; and for a
close he shows how loath he is, that these things (or some of them) should not
befall us; in these words, and it is a new sort of Grace if They (Their
Majesty's) do nothing.

It may be thought this man has forgot that he writes in the Reign, and within
the dominions of Just and Gracious KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY.

Now at last, we have the Fish that has all this while, and with all this
Baiting and Angling for been sought, as the prey, brought out; and the white
all these Arrows Aimed at; set open in Page 44, 45.

Pam. Let all good Subjects then Consider, and as they would deliver themselves
from the Common Guilt, so let them distinguish themselves, and make have to
yield their due Obedience. And as for the Rest, we may say, Father forgive them
they know not what they do.

Ans. We believe it will not be found in any Instructions from Their Majesty's,
that Their Commission to His Excellency should be forwarded in these turbulent
ways, moving for Commotions among Their Subjects, who are in Peace among
themselves; Save this and a few more Male contents (and so on other grounds
than this business) and we persuade our selves, that it will displease them and
all good men that shall Consider it, that private Persons should over the heads
of those that here Serve Their Majesty's in the Government.; thus bespeak the
People of this Their Colony: make such distinctions between them, and
especially that the Holy Scriptures, the Laws and Their Majesty's name, have
been put to such ill uses, as are every where obvious, and that the same should
have an Imprimatur also.

2. What he means by due Obedience, is evident from his Scope; but if any
should ask how, or in what way shall we yield it, as the case now stands? he
says nothing by way of direction, for if he had its most probable that the
executing it, would openly have Violated Peace, and Order, to beget an ill
affection therefore against the present dispensations in the Government, and so
to make way for some other, seems to be the drift of all this ill taken pains
with the People. But surely our Settlement, or changes, must or should come
from Their Majesty's; and not by these means.

What follows is only several Objections (most of which are his own, not ours)
and his Answer to them, to which we will briefly Reply.

I. Objection.

The Militia is very well disposed of all ready; King Charles the Second of
happy Memory, did by His Charter for Himself and His Successors, Grant it to us
and our Successors, in the Year 1662.

It is too much to Transcribe his whole answer, the Sum of it is, First, That
we overween our Charter. Secondly, That the King knows our Charter, and how the
Militia was disposed thereby. Thirdly, That the Charter never granted us a
standing Militia. Fourthly, Nor to send men abroad. Fifthly, That what was
granted was not to the General Court. Sixthly, Nor no places of Strength, Forts
etc.

Ans. To all these things we need say no more, but that the clauses in our
Charter, and those Equivalent, in the Massachusetts former Charter, and
Rhoad-Island Charter, were always understood and practiced upon, as
Commissionating a standing Militia, and the Rule of it to be next the King,
first in the General Court, and that we could aid our Neighbors, hold Forts
etc. without which we had been undone in the Indian War, and in no safty at any
time.

But the discussion of these points is large, and of little use here: where the
dispute is confined to the Supposed Competition of our Charter, and His
Excellencies Commission, for the Militia.

2. He reasons all the Charter granted is void, because the Militia is a Jewel
of the Crown not to be granted by the King from His Successors, it is like
Abishag etc.

Reply. 1. We need not it is in vain, and therefore we will not here meddle with
that Question, how far in a Charter to a foreign Plantation a King may make a
grant of the Militia, for and from His Successors: it is plain that such a
grant there is; but we wave that here.

2. Yet we have before shown, that the Kings Militia as settled by 13 and 13
and 14. of Charles II. is a distinct thing from the Militia as settled here; so
that though the grant may not hold as to the former, against His Successors,
yet it may as to the latter, as being no part of that undemissible Jewel of the
Crown, as we suppose, and withal, that as yet that is undistinguished in this
Colony, from the other.

Pam. It is Answered by him in Page 47, That our Succession was determined in
1688. So that we cannot talk of Succession or Successors, without some new
grant.

Reply. This indeed if it would hold does all the business at once, for our
Charter is gone then, and we know who has played on this String all along
since that Year. It Is a large field, we will enter it no further now, than to
say that as Good Judgments as we could get in England or New England are
otherwise. Nor have Their Majesty's so declared yet of it, but rather
otherwise: but this is in England where we leave it.

His II. Objection, which he makes in our name, is,

But we Suspect that this Commission is a Cheat^ because the King was in
Flanders at the Date of it.

Ans. This is to put a Cheat upon the World, and an abuse upon us, to render us
as thus Objecting, like much of what is already detected, begetting Brats and
Fathering them on the body of the People, on whom he does reflect in his
Promiscuous Charge; to Render us Odious and Rediculous; he claps a fools Coat
on us, and then derides us in his Answers; but this is no disappointment to us
whatever wrong it be, we could look for no better from a Person so engaging as
he in this Pamphlet. He and his Imprimatur may be ashamed of such things. What
if some few should quere at the rate of this Objection? Is it thereby a General
Court or Colony Objection? the Court never in their answers, took it for other
then a reality: as is plain by the Printed account of those Transactions.

His III. Objection.

The King has given us no command to Surrender the Militia to His Excellency.

This he slights as a poor Shift, as if Their Majesty's Commission to His
Excellency to Command were not Command for us to Obey etc.

Reply. It is one thing for a Command to come to the Objects of it immediately,
and another for it to come to them by a Medium (as the Government is where
under they are) Again, it is one thing for a Command to come without a
Competiting Command, and another when it is otherwise. Thirdly, Its one thing for
a Command to be clear and indisputable in its intent, and another thing where
it is not so.

If this Command must influence. (1.) The General Court and by them the People:
if withal the General Court have a power to the same Command, and these powers
are not cleared from interfering, in such a case, and when these also are
depending for Issue, we say a Commission to Command is not imediately a Command
to Obey, till those encumbrances are removed.

2. We have cause to believe, that the not nuling our right in the Militia, nor
giving Orders for Surrendering: was done by Their Majesty's, to give us the
opportunity of applying to Them, in reference to it, in both the Commissions,
or else as well our power as Sir. William Phipps, we think had been determined
expressly.

3. Common reason suggests, that every one in trust, is to mind his own Orders,
and Instances of this are plentifully discourst.

4. A Charter Grant is of that nature, that (so far as it is good) we think a
particular Order does not null it, wherefore we lay not the stress of this
matter chiefly there.

Pam. He says, His Excellency Demands no Surrender of the Militia: But
Obedience to His Commission, etc.

Reply. We ask, what was that Obedience he demanded of our General Court? or
what Obedience were they Capable of herein as a General Court but a Surrender?
Or why is our Court so faulted with opposition and disobedience all a long; if
they were capable of no Surrender? or had no demand thereof as here he says?
by this account their Audience, of the Commission, and not actually resisting
his Executing it; was our Compliance, and discharge, and this he had to the
full; and yet complanes.

Pam. The last part of his answer to this Objection, stands thus, Did Their
Majesty's ever give Their Subjects any Command to yield Obedience to our
resumed power? We lately received a Letter from Their Majesty's; did Their
Majesty's therein or any otherwise give the People any imediate and express
Command to obey us, in what we were thereupon about to do? Yet we expect
Obedience from them, without any such Command, and are not we Their Majesty's
Subjects as well as the rest of the People?

Reply. This is a poor shift indeed: Is it reasonable or possible, that every
Individual Subject, in his private capacity, should have His Majesty's
particular command; as it is reasonable and possible, that a Body Politic or
Public Person should? Every Inferior is to attend the Orders of his
Superior, but Their Majesty's are our Superiors, we may expect Their Orders
therefore, though our Inferiors must take up with ours.

His IV. Objection. But we cannot manage our Government without the Militia.

Ans. This Objection is of great weight, and requires a large Consideration to
handle it, but its to no purpose here to insist on it; only this is the general
sense, that if all Militia be taken from us, the Civil part of the Government
will be extremely weakened, if not desolated thereby; things in this respect
are not here as in England, as might be demostrated if that were here to be
done. The hitherto constant Conjoying of the Civil and Military power in the
foreign Plantations, is evidence enough of the necessity of the one to the
other. What is a Body without some what defensive and offensive, but a prey, or
at another Arbitriment?

His V. Objection. Is Coincident with the former, only he adds somewhat about
our annexing to York.

Reply. We shall wave this for the most of it, as being no present inquiry
whether it be good for us to be annexed to York? that is not our bufiness; and
though he speak of it as indifferent, or desirable, yet our People it is well
known desire their old Station.

2. Whereas some mention is made there, of our Aiding Leisler, which some may
take in a wrong sense; we say that what we did therein, was only out of a
sincere respect to Their Majesty's, at the Solicitation of Albany, and of
Massachusetts; and it is known that Persons of Honor came from Massachusetts,
and one from Plymouth, and joined with our Agents there, in that matter; and
the State of that Province, and of affairs in general needed it, and it was not
out of any sinister or personal respect to Mr. Leisler.

3. His Suppositions of our Shouldering out the Kings Government, which he
insists on, are mere Imaginations of his own, without any ground given, to it
by us.

His VI. Objection about Rates are impertinent; and the complaints of the
Long-Islanders, though loud, is not our business; unless it be to wish that
others espoused no more the complaints of Male contents here, than we do
theirs, who they give that name to there.

His VII. Objection.

That the Governor of York is a Proud Moross Stearn and Austeer Man etc. And
His VIII. Objection, That he is a Papist.

Reply. We say to these in Sum, what we said to his second Objection; Let the
Reader turn to it, and when these are not our Objections, it is hard to be
falsely taxed and thereupon to be further reproached as there; Viz. Who knows
when the Devil and his Children, will have done Lying and Slandering -- (and
calls us) a Rude, Proud, Ungoverned, Disorderly People, as we have declared our
selves to be: And more to that effect as there it follows.

Reply. If these his dealings with our Colony be not Rude, Proud, Ungoverned
and Disorderly, we think never any such will be found in Paper and Ink.

As to what Encomiums he is pleased to give His Excellency, we need to say
nothing of it.

Pam: For a farewell, and as the Sum of all, to give our Carracter as we stand
in his account, he cites at large 1 Samuel 10.26, 27. There went with Saul a Band
of men whose hearts God had touched, but the Children of Belial said, How shall
this man save us? and they despised him etc. But he held his Peace.

Reply. Who these Comparisons intend is notorious; we have only this kindness
from him therein; that he tells not the World how small a number that Band he
aludes to, was; for then in all probability, it would have been known, that he
had called almost all the men in Connecticut Colony, Children of Belial: And
there is one thing in it, that is Extremely and to Admiration strange, and that
is; that since his Saul was so wise as to hold his Peace, that he (one of his
followers) should be so very foolish, as to write so much (and in the manner as
he has) about it.

Pam. Lastly, he cites, John 1.46. Nathaniel said can any good come out of
Nazareth? Philip says to him, come and see.

Reply. We leave it to the Sober and Pious, whether he did not begin, go on,
and has not ended in a dreadful prophanness; Contrary to the Third
Commandment, which enjoins the true and Reverend use of the Holy Scriptures.

FINIS.

