ANSWERS For the Freemen Fleshers of Edinburgh, to the Petition presented to
His Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, by
Alexander Milne and William Lauson, Andrew Brown, Archibald Douglass, Janet
Carse Relict of Vn^quhile Thomas Wright Fleshers of the said Burgh, against
them.
THe Incorporation of Fleshers was Established by a Seal of Cause in their
Favors granted by the Magistrates of Edinburgh, above two hundred Years ago, and
continued in the Exercise and Possession of the Liberties and Privileges
thereby granted to them ever since that time, as well as any Incorporation of
the said Burgh, and obtained these Privileges particularly established,
against the Invasions and Encroachments made upon them by the Un-free-men of
the said Burgh, after hearing of both Parties; by an Decree of Council, dated
the seventh day of June, 1595 years, under the Hand of Mr. John Skeene Clerk
Register, as the samen herewith produced bears. And sicklike by an Act of the
Magistrates and Town Council of Edinburgh, dated the 20 of August, 1656 years,
the sundry Privileges, mentioned in the several Acts therein specified, are of
new Ratified and Approven to them, and ordained to be made use of by the said
Freemen Fleshers, in all time coming; and particularly that the Un-free-men
Fleshers in Burgh and Landward only sell their Flesh in open Market upon the
Market Days, either by whole Carcasses, or at least Quarters, and no otherwise:
All which Privileges are Ratified in the Parliament 1681, As also by Decree
of the Lords of Privy Council, dated the twentieth sixth day of November, 1685.
The Un-free-men Fleshers are expressly discharged to bring in, or hang any Beef,
or other Flesh in the Flesh Market of Edinburgh, but upon the three common
Weekly Market Days, and reserved the point of Right to be disscussed by the
Lords of Session, as the said Decree bears; all which Privileges are again
Ratified by Act of Parliament, dated the fifteenth day of June, 1693 years: and
particularly the foresaid Act of the Town Council, in anno 1656, where it is
statute and ordained, that the whole Un-free-men Fleshers, keep only three
Market Days in the Week, viz. Tuesday, Thursday and Saturnday, as the said
Ratification likewise beart.

The Freemen Fleshers of Edinburgh being thus founded by the Seal of Cause,
and other particular Rights abovementioned, it is humbly conceived their said
Rights cannot be summarily taken away by a Petition, but the samen are only
competent to be quarrelled of reduced before the Judge Ordinary, as the private
Rights of particular Parties, or Incorporations and Societies are in use to be.
Secundo, If this Method be allowed of, to quarrel the Incorporation of
Fle^^ers, then all the Incorporations within the several Burghs of Scotland,
may ^e brought in question that same way: And as it would be thought, both a
Novelty and great In^^^a^^ment upon the Liberties and Privileges of the Burghs
Royal, to have the Rights and Privileges of their several Incorporations
brought in question, and infringed by extranious Persons; So it is hoped, His
Majesty's High Commissioner and Honorable Estates of Parliament, will not open
such a Door, by summarily destroying the Privileges of the Freemen Fleshers,
and thereby breaking their Incorporation. Tortio, The Act of the Town Council
of Edinburgh, founded upon in the Petition, can no ways be Relevant to infer
the Conclusion and Desire, in favors of the Un-free Fleshers, in respect:
Prinio, It is evident, the samen has never been intended for a perpetual Rule
or standing Law in the Burgh, being only an Article subjoyned to a Table of
Pryces for Butcher-meat, Wild-fowl, and other Vivers, made by the Magistrates of
Edinburgh for the year 1688, and which being only made for one year, and by the
constant Custom altered yearly, according to the scarcity or plenty of the said
kind of Vivers: That Article could be of no more lasting or dureable Force,
than the other Articles subjoyned to that Table of pryces: and as it were
absurd to pretend now, that the Wine should be sold at eighteen shill. per
Pynt, as it is appointed there, so it is no less absurd, to pretend that the
Article about the Unfree-men Fleshers should be of perpetual Continuance.
Secundo; There being an Act of Parliament made a little before that time,
appointing Flesh to be sold by Weight, the Magistrates of Edinburgh, for
bringing the Fleshers to the Obedience of that Act of Parliament, did indulge
the Unfree-men to sell by Weight upon all days of the week, to the effect they
might constrain the Freemen Fleshers to Observe the foresaid Act of Parliament
more readily: But that Act of Parliament falling in desuetude, and proving in
practicable, and the Unfree Fleshers being the first that left off to sell
their Flesh by weight, upon pretense of their being restricted to sell
Carcasses, or at least Quarters. There was no reason they should enjoy that
Article, as a perpetual Right which they had only been indulged the favor of
for a particular time, for Ends and Causes they had never answered nor
observed. In Consideration whereof, the Magistrates of Edinburgh, by their Act
dated the 4th. of September, 1689 years, did of new again restrict the
Unfree-men to the said three Mercat-days, conform to the Gifts and Privileges
conceived in favors of the Freemen, as the Act herewith produced will
testify. Quarto, It were a great prejudice, not only to the particular
Incorporation of Freemen Fleshers within the Town of Edinburgh, to admit the
Unfree-men to the equal Privileges with the Freemen, but also to the whole
other Incorporations and Landlords within the samen, in respect, if this
Incorporation be broken, and no distinction be made betwixt Free men and
Unfree-men, then the Freemen can never bear Scot and Lot of the Burgh, but
their Proportions of Cesses, and all other public Burdens which they did bear
within Burgh, must necessarily fall upon the other Incorporations and
Landlords, to the great prejudice of the Burgh, which it is hoped, His
Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Estates of Parliament does no ways intend,
for gratifieing only two or three obscure inconsiderable Persons, who
presumptously assume the general Designation of Un-free-men; and albeit three
or four of the Petitioners have had the presumption to give in the Petition in
Name of the Un-free-men in general, yet the Generality and understanding Men of
that Number, considering how much it would tend to the prejudice of the
Inhabitants of the Burgh, have for most pregnant Reasons disclaimed the
foresaid Complaint, and taken Instruments against the turbulent Movers thereof,
as an Extract of the Instruments, here present to show bears. Quinto, The
Magistrates of Edinburgh can easily rectify any Abuses, that the Freemen
Fleshers may happen to Commit, and accordingly every year, with Concurrence of
the Lords of Session, do set Rates upon, and Rules for the Sale of all kinds of
Vivers within Burgh: But they can no ways be answerable for Un-free-men, who
are not subject to their Jurisdictions. And farther, His Majesty's High
Commissioner, and Estates of Parliament are humbly entreated to take into their
Consideration, of what Evil Consequence this pretended Advantage would be, by
tollerating Un-free-men, as is demanded in their Groundless Petition, for
besides what is above Represented, which makes the Freedom of Incorporation as
secure as Law can make it, yet if Un-free-men were tollerat to come in six days
in the Week, then they may Combine amongst themselves to keep up their Fleshes
from sale one day, unless they get what Pryces they please, because they know
they can expose it the immediate next day thereafter, and so have advantage
over the Inhabitants. Whereas, when they are restricted to three days in the
week, they are obliged to sell at a reasonable Rate, because Fleshes will not
keep uncorrupted until an other Market Day: And besides that, it is presumed,
that the Country Fleshers would rather sell at easy Rates, than to carry back
their Fleshes to the Country again, and they are in no worse condition than the
Freemen are, for the Freemen are restricted from coming to the Land-mercat,
except upon the same days that are already allowed to Un-free-men.

And whereas it is pretended, that the giving a toleration to Un-free-men,
would hinder the Freemen to exact Exorbitant Prices. It is Answered, that
three days being allowed to Country Fleshers, the Inhabitants may easily
provide themselves in one day, as much as may serve them two: And if the
Freemen should offer to exact greater Rates than the Un-free-men, then they
would ruin themselves, and their Fleshes would ly un-sold, and before another
Market day, would be unfit to be presented to a Market. And as to the present
Dearth, it is unquestionably known to the Honorable Court of Parliament that
the same is occasioned by the bad Season only.

And lastly, If the Freedom of the Incorporation should be incroached upon, and
Infringed, then this evil does inevitably follow, as it has done in former
times; that the Free-mens Servants do thereupon quite their Service, and look
upon themselves to be as free as their Masters, and go to the Country, and in
their Masters Names, do buy Bestial from Gentlemen and other Persons, and
Butcher the samine themselves, without ever paying these from whom they buy
them: So that it may be said with confidence, that the Country has sustained
thereby the loss upwards of Forty thousand Pounds, within these few Years: And
that is not the only loss, but several others of the Un-free-men do buy at the
Fourth Hand, and so consequently must sell at dearer Rates than the Freemen.
By all which the Incorporation is abused, and are deprived of Servants, for
serving the Leidges; which is occasioned by the countenancing and tolerating
Unfree-men.

And if the Un-free-men Fleshers found upon an Act of the Privy Council, in the
year 1687. and shall produce the same, no Respect ought to be had to that Act.
1. Because it is given part in audita, and without either Complaint or
Probation, at the instance of any Party, of any Abuses or Malversations done or
committed by the Freemen Fleshers 2. This Act was solisted for, and Impetrat
by Josias Johnstoun, upon particular Grudge against the Freemen Fleshers, and
he obtained it as a Gratification to him for his conversion to the Romish
Religion. 3. This Act was a Deed of the Absolute Power, in the late Arbitrary
Times, infringing the Privileges of the City of Edinburgh, and met with the
less Opposition that the Magistrates themselves were created by the same Power,
which had swallowed up the hail Rights and Privileges of the Magistrates of
Royal Burghs, so that it was no marvel that they incroached upon one single
Incorporation: and seeing, by the late Revolution, and His Majesty's gracious
Favor, the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and particularly of the Burghs
Royal have been restored and recovered: It is hoped and expected from the
Justice of the High Court of Parliament, that the Incorporation of the Freemen
Fleshers shall be preserved in their Rights and Privileges and Freed from any
Invasions made upon them, in the late Arbitrary time, and not have their private
Right taken from them without any special Cause libelled: but only on the
Clamor and Importunity of three or four Invidious and malicious Neighbors:
And it is evident by the very Act it self, that all that was designed for them,
was the Land-Mercat, that being the separat place for the Landward Fleshers,
and it is notourly known that there never was, more than three Flesh market
days in that place.

In Respect whereof, it is hoped, His Majesty's High Commissioner, and
Honorable Estates of Parliament, will not cut off the Rights and Privileges
of so ancient an Incorporation, who is the Tenth Deaconry of the Burgh of
Edinburgh, conform to the Set and Decree Arbitral, pronounced by King James
the Sixth: But on the contrary, will be pleased to reject the desire of the
foresaid groundless Petition; and of new again, to Ratify and Confirm the
Rights and Freedom of the Incorporation, as formerly was done, both in this
Current Parliament, and others preceding.


