IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Needham RRmo in Christo P. ac D.D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacr.
Domest.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Feb. 15. 1685.
A DIALOGUE Between A Pastor and Parishioner, Touching the LORD's SUPPER.

WHEREIN The most material Doubts and Scruples about Receiving that Holy
Sacrament, are removed, and the Way thereto discovered to be both Plain and
Pleasant.

Very useful for private Christians in these Scrupulous Times.

With some short Prayers fitted for that Occasion, and a Morning and Evening
Prayer for the use of Private Families.

By MICHAEL ALTHAM, Vicar of Latton in Essex.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Luke Meredith, at the King's Head, at the West End of St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
IT was a Saying of the Jewish wise men, He that contemns the Feasts, or the
sacred Conventions, (of which the Passover was the chief) and he who makes
void the Covenant of Abraham our Father (which was Circumcision) there is no
portion for him in the World to come. A Saying worthy their consideration who
despise things sacred, whether the holy Assemblies, or the holy Sacraments.
Correspondent whereunto is that expression of one of our own men, who tells us,
That to neglect the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, has more of evil and
danger in it, than people do usually think of; For, 1. It is next to the
disowning of Christianity, or not professing our selves to be Christ's
Disciples. 2. It is a cutting our selves off from the Body of Christ, an open
Declaration that we have no Communion with him; and therefore as plain a
confession that we deserve to be rejected and cast off by him, for whom we have
so little regard. Both which Sayings do evidently declare the sense of their
Authors as to the necessity of Sacraments, and sacred Conventions.

These Sayings have so much of weight in them, not only from the Authority of
their Authors, but also from those reasons upon which they are founded, that no
man will have cause to wonder, when I tell him, that at first sight, I was very
much affected with them.

But when I had seriously considered the Institution of the sacred Eucharist,
or Supper of the Lord, and deliberately weighed the word of command which
attends it, I could not but stand astonished to observe the slight and neglect
which people usually put upon it.

This deeply engaged my thoughts for some time, and made me mighty desirous to
discover the reason, and if possible, to find out some suitable remedy. To this
end I set my self seriously to observe the design of the Author and Instituter
of this holy Feast, and upon the most diligent search, and exactest scrutiny
that I could make, could find nothing intended by him, but only the good of
Mankind. I examined the thing it self, and could discover nothing therein, but
what had a real tendency to man's happiness.

I heard God, by his Ambassadors, the Ministers of the Gospel, with all the
kindness and earnestness imaginable, inviting and persuading men thereunto; and
I saw men, with all the aversion, scorn and contempt possible, refuse the
kindness that was offered, and reject the invitation that was given them. I saw
a Table spread, a rich Feast provided, and nothing wanting but the Guests to
sit down; and I beheld those who were invited, and who ought thankfully to have
received so great a favor, stand off, and keep at as great a distance, as if
there had been really Mors in Olla, Death in the Pot, or some deadly poison in
the Bread and Wine which was offered to them.

This surprised me so, that I stood amazed, and could not be at quiet till I
had found out the cause of this rude behavior. This put me upon being more
curious and inquisitive than before; And at last I espied two evil Demons
lurking in their secret Corners, viz. Ignorance and Prejudice, and plainly
found that they had been the occasion of all this.

To obviate therefore both these, by better instructing the ignorance of some,
and removing the prejudices of others, is the great business of this small
Treatise, and was the only design of the Author. And if in any measure it may
prove serviceable to these great and good ends, Let God have the glory of it.

Did men truly know, what it is to be admitted guests at God's Table, to have
the honor not only to feast with him, but feast upon him; that it is none of
those common mercies, which are equally shared among the sons of men; but a
privilege peculiar only to the followers of the holy Jesus.That man as man
has no right thereunto, but as he is a Christian man, one who has embraced
the Faith, and submitted himself to the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Did all who
pretend to Christianity truly know this, how much would they value themselves
upon that account? How fitly may that of the Poet be applied to such.

-- O fortunatos, bona si sua norint! How happy are Christians, if they knew
their own happiness!

But alas! how little is this understood? or if at all, how little is it valued
by any of them? Certainly were men so sensible of their own happiness, as one
would think they ought to be; we should not need so earnestly, and yet so
unsuccessfully, to invite them to this holy Feast, as usually we do. They would
with less reluctance, and more readiness embrace, and with greater Reverence
and Devotion use such opportunities. With what longing desires, and greedy
appetites would they receive them? With what care and caution would they fit
and prepare themselves to be present at so great and glorious an entertainment?
Then would they employ all their thoughts, and all their time, so to deck and
adorn their Souls, that nothing might appear unhandsome or unseemly, either in
them or about them, when they come into the presence of the holy Jesus; Then
would they cloth themselves with Faith and Charity as with a garment, and
having with tears of true and unfeigned repentance bewailed the miscarriages of
their bypast lives, they would with resolutions of better obedience for the
future, and grateful acknowledgments for the present opportunity, address
themselves thereunto.

But it is too sad a truth, The name of Christian makes a great noise in the
World, whilst the power and life of Christianity is almost (I wish I might not
say altogether) lost among us. There are indeed a great many Christians but
little Christianity left in the World. It is storied of Diogenes, that he went
with a Candle and Lanthorn at Noon day to search for an honest man in Athens;
and so may we too (and I am afraid lose our labor as he did) to search for a
true Christian among the crowd of those who call themselves by that name. Shall
we call him a Christian, whose unchristian practices contradict his pretensions
thereunto? who denies obedience to the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, and declines
all opportunities of approving himself such an one?

The Celebration of the Lord's Supper, is a business of our blessed Savior's
own Institution, whose command we have, not only to do it, but to do it often;
and yet all this notwithstanding, how few are there who seem to have any value
and esteem for it? Some scruple and say, they are there not ready, but never
take care to prepare themselves for it. Others pretend they are hindered by
Worldly business, and yet are readier to engage in more, than to rid their
hands of any they have already. But the far greater part do utterly slight and
neglect it, as a thing not worthy their time and thoughts. I appeal to all
sober Christians, whether this be not the case of Christianity at this day? and
if so, how sad a symptom is it of its decay and languishment?

To prevent which, what better expedient can we find out, than to teach men the
true worth and value of Religion, and persuade them to entertain a regard and
esteem for it, suitable to the dignity thereof. But because general discourses,
though never so excellent in themselves, seldom prove very effectual; not for
any defect in them, but for want of a due capacity in those to whom they are
delivered; who being for the most part either ignorant or prejudicate persons,
or cannot, or will not apply them to the particular instances and duties of
their Religion.

For this reason I have fixed my thoughts upon one great and necessary duty,
viz. Receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. A thing, which by the
command of Christ, we stand obliged to do, and do often in remembrance of him.
Wherein the dying love of the blessed Jesus is so lively represented to us, as
cannot choose but mightily affect our minds. Can we think of what he has done
and suffered for us, and yet be wanting in those dutiful returns, and grateful
acknowledgements that are due to him? Can we behold those wounds that our sins
have given him, without a transportation of mind, and an holy indignation
against our selves for it? Can we see him in his gore blood praying, entreating
and beseeching us to be reconciled to him, without melting into tears, and
humbling our selves in dust and ashes?

To make men in love with their Religion, and particularly with this great and
almost neglected part of it, was my design in first framing this Discourse; and
for this very end have I suffered it to look abroad, and do humbly and heartily
pray; that God Almighty would second my design with his blessing, and make it
serviceable to men for their good.

I have all along industriously avoided those knotty controversies which have
made so much noise in the World about this Sacrament, looking upon them as
things fitter to amuse than edify. I have endeavored to entertain my Reader,
not with words, but matter; not with Rhetorical flourishes, but plain truth. I
have endeavored to represent this holy Sacrament in its native and primitive
dress, to acquaint my Reader, with the true, plain, and genuine notion of it,
without the additions of Popish Superstition and Idolatry on the one hand, or
Fanatical misconceivings and misrepresentations on the other. I have labored
to ease the minds of men of those fears and jealousies, those scruples, doubts
and objections, which they have been taught to make against their own
happiness. I have furnished them with some rules which may direct them in their
preparation for this holy Feast. I have acquainted them how they ought to
behave themselves when they are at Gods Table, and what will be expected from
them after they have been there. And all this with the greatest plainness in
the World.

This, Reader, is the substance of this little Book, which I now commit into
thy hands, only begging this of thee, That to the reading of it, thou would
bring a sober and unbiassed mind, void of passion and prejudice, willing to be
informed, and ready to embrace truth for truth's sake; being desirous, not only
to know, but as ready to do thy duty when it is known. If I can but obtain this
of thee, I do not doubt but that by God's blessing upon thine and my
Endeavors, thou will find comfort and advantage by it. Which that thou may
do, now is, and ever shall be the humble and hearty Prayer of the Author of it.

A DIALOGUE Between PASTOR AND PARISHIONER Touching the SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S
SUPPER.
Pastor. GOod Morrow, Neighbor Parishioner, 'pray which way are you traveling
this Morning?


Parishioner. A good Morning to you, Mr Pastor; by so happily meeting with you,
my Journey is at an end, for I was going to wait upon you.


Pastor. Good Wits, they say, will jump sometimes, and so I see will good
intentions too, for my design was to make you a visit this Morning.


Parishioner. I thank you, good Mr. Pastor, for your kind intentions, and 'pray
let not my meeting with you divert them.


Pastor. I am not willing to lose the end of my Journey, nor would I have you
lose yours; and therefore when I know whether my going with you, or your going
with me, will better serve the design of us both, I shall readily comply with
either.


Parishioner. I do not know, Sir, what your design in coming to me may be,
though I am well assured it must be good and kind; but mine in coming to you,
was not only to pay my respects, but to receive a kindness from you.


Pastor. I thank you for your Civility, and if it be in my power to answer your
desires, you may rest assured that I will not be wanting in my endeavors. You
have nothing to do therefore but only to make known what kindness that is which
you expect from me.


Parishioner. That which I have to desire of you is a matter of great moment.
It is the greatest kindness that I can desire of, or expect from, any one in
this World.


Pastor. The greater the better, provided it be but in my power to do it, and
therefore 'pray be free to let me know it.


Parishioner. Sir, You are placed here, by the appointment of Divine
Providence, as my Spiritual Guide, to instruct me in the true Worship of God,
and direct me in the right way to Heaven and Happiness. I am to presume that
your Lips preserve Knowledge, and therefore at your Mouth I am to enquire for
it. Your work, I know, is very great, and your charge weighty; you stand
charged with the Salvation of all our Souls. But as your concern is great, so
ours cannot be little; Our Souls lie at stake, it is our Salvation that is
endeavored, and therefore it is certainly our duty to do what we can in order
thereunto; which if we refuse or neglect to do, all your endeavors, though
never so great and good, will, as to us, prove vain and fruitless. I very well
know, that if you faithfully discharge your duty, you may thereby please God,
and save your own Soul; but if we in the mean time neglect ours,
notwithstanding all your diligence, we may perish, and our blood will be upon
our own heads. These thoughts for some time have very much troubled me, and I
have long considered with my self, what was best for me to do; at length I
found that all my hopes of happiness, both here and hereafter, did depend upon
my Religion, and that if I did not piously and devoutly serve and worship God,
I could have no reason to expect either his blessing and protection in this
World, or to have any part in that blessed state in the World to come. Now
seeing Religion is a thing of so mighty concern to the Sons of men, there can
be nothing surely, the knowledge whereof ought more to be desired and
endeavored. I have oftentimes therefore had it in my thoughts to wait upon
you, and to desire your direction and instruction therein; and though hitherto
something or other has always prevented me; yet finding of late one main duty
of our Religion, in a more than usual manner pressed upon us, and believing
that it did require our most sober thoughts, and serious considerations; this
did revive and heighten my resolution of waiting on you; But when I heard in
public your pious and charitable Declaration to all your People, how ready and
willing, nay how glad you would be to spend your time, in setting their minds
right in this great affair; I was thereby so encouraged, that I was impatient
of any delay; and upon that very account, and for that very end, I was now
coming to wait on you.


Pastor. And for this very end, I was now coming to visit you; and I hope that
good God who has inspired us both with the same thoughts, will bless both our
designs, and make that communication we are now about to enter upon, to be in
the end of great comfort and advantage to us both. But this place not being
altogether so convenient, I will desire you to walk to my House, where we will
retire into my Closet, and being there sequestered from all noise and
disturbance, we may calmly and quietly debate between our selves, whatsoever is
thought fit to be propounded by either of us.


Parishioner. I thank you, Mr. Pastor, for your kind offer and invitation, and
do willingly accept of it; and I do assure you, that I come with a mind void of
all passion and prejudice, ready prepared with all humility and meekness to
receive such wholesome instructions as I hope to receive from you.


Pastor. I am glad to find you in so good a temper, and that you have so great
a sense of Religion and the duties of it. This gives me good hope, that before
we part, we shall both of us have occasion to bless God for this meeting.


Parishioner. I am of that opinion too, Sir, and to that end do make it my
hearty Prayer to God, that he would be pleased to give his blessing to what we
go about.


Pastor. Well, Neighbor Parishioner, you are heartily welcome, and the more
welcome, because you now visit me upon so pious and so religious an account.
And though you tell me, that at this time you expect a kindness from me, yet I
most freely acknowledge, you do me the greatest kindness imaginable. For, you
give me an opportunity to do good, and to do it in that place and station which
God has appointed me. 'Pray therefore sit down, and consider with your self
what you have to propound; be free in it, and confidently expect all the sober
satisfaction I am able to give you.


Parishioner. I once more heartily thank you, Mr. Pastor, both for your
welcome, and the freedom you give me. I have indeed much to say, and more than
I think will be convenient at this time. I confess I am too too ignorant of my
Religion, and therefore should be very desirous to be instructed in all the
principles of it. But this I am sensible is a great work, and will require both
more time, and more consideration than this occasional meeting and discourse
will admit of. That therefore which I shall now confine my self to, and desire
to be instructed in, is that great Ordinance which you now invite us to, I mean
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.


Pastor. My good Neighbor, There is nothing either in this particular, nor in
any other part of the Christian Religion, which at fit times and due seasons I
shall not be always ready to instruct you in, to the utmost of my small
abilities. But since you confine your self to one only instance at present,
What is it, I pray, that you scruple at, or desire to be better instructed in
as to that particular?


Parishioner. Sir, You have of late invited us to this great Feast, and that
with all the earnestness imaginable; you have told us, that it is a duty
incumbent upon us, and that by virtue of a divine command, you have endeavored
to make out the great and indispensible necessity of it. And I do find that our
Governors both in Church and State, by their Sanctions both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, do, what in them lies, to enforce this command, and exact from
us the performance of this duty. Now, Sir, for my own part, I must ingenuously
acknowledge, that I cannot conceive what design or interest you can have to
impose a lie, a falsehood upon your people; to tell them that it is commanded by
God, if it were not really so; especially when I consider that the sacred
Records are in the hands of all men; and if it were not so, the folly and
falsity of such an assertion might easily be detected. Nor can I believe, that
either God would command it, or our Governors exact our compliance with, and
obedience to that command; if it were not a thing both necessary, good and fit
to be done. But, Sir, we have been of late times taught by other Ministers,
that though it be a duty, yet it is a dangerous one; who have so represented
the thing unto us as the most frightful Mormo, and the greatest Bugbear in the
World; who have given it such a Character; and put it into such a dress, as if
they had designed thereby not to allure and invite, but to deter and affright
men from having any thing to do with it. This I confess has very much puzzled
my mind, and not only mine, but that of many others, who I hope are very honest
and well-meaning Christians; This has raised such a storm in the minds of men,
as has made them so staggering and unresolved; so fearful to do what perhaps
they are satisfied they ought to do. To take off this fright therefore, and
restore my mind to a calm, quiet, and peaceable temper again, I desire you
would inform my judgment in the true nature and notion of this holy Sacrament.


Pastor. That I have of late, with great earnestness, invited you to this holy
Feast, and persuaded you thereunto, as to a duty that is absolutely and
indispensibly necessary by virtue of the institution and command of our blessed
Savior. And that our Governors both in Church and State have taken cognizance
of the great neglect of this duty, and are at this time very desirous to reduce
men to a right understanding of this great Ordinance, and a reformation of
their practice touching the same, is all of it very true. But notwithstanding
their care, and our endeavors in obedience both to God and them; yet we find
people very averse thereunto, mighty unwilling to do their duties, though it be
their greatest concern so to do. And probably this their backwardness may
proceed from that very reason which you mention, viz. the inconsiderate
rashness, and intemperate zeal of some, who in the times of confusion have
usurped the Office of the Ministry, and either out of design, or for want of
understanding, or both, have put such a frightful character upon this holy
Ordinance, as has unsettled and distracted the minds of many well-meaning
Christians. How much these men have to answer for, who by this means have
broken the Communion, and disturbed the peace of the best reformed, and most
flourishing Christian Church in the whole World, they themselves will one day
find. But I am glad to find you so well inclined, as to desire to have your
Judgment better informed, that being the only true way to settle your mind, and
restore it to a calm, quiet and peaceable temper again.

To satisfy therefore this your so just and godly desire, I shall endeavor
with all plainness to acquaint you with the genuine and true notion of this
holy Sacrament; but in order thereunto, it may be convenient that in the first
place I give you some account of Sacraments in general.

Sacraments are either properly or improperly so called.

A Sacrament improperly so called is, when the word is used in a large sense
for any sacred rite, or religious duty. And thus both the Jewish and Christian
Writers use the word; for, those, who have been conversant in the Writings of
the former, tell us, that many of their sacred Rites are by them called by that
name. And those who have narrowly searched the Records of the ancient Fathers
since the Institution of Christianity have observed, That all or most Articles
which are peculiar to Christian Faith, and all or most duties of Religion,
containing that which sense or natural reason cannot of it self discern, are by
them commonly called Sacraments. And in this sense the Church of Rome, instead
of her seven Sacraments, may reckon seventy, or seven-score, or more if she
please.

But there are Sacraments properly so called, when in a restrained sense we
apply the word to some few principal divine Ceremonies, and then it imports in
every such Ceremony two things, viz. The substance of the Ceremony it self,
which is visible: and somewhat else which is more secret, in reference
whereunto we conceive that Ceremony to be a Sacrament.

Of this latter sort we now understand the Word, and of this kind we meet with
two only in the Old Testament, viz. Circumcision and the Passover; and
correspondent thereunto we find two only in the New Testament, viz. Baptism and
the Lord's Supper.

The Word, Sacrament, is variously taken, and according to the different
acceptations of it diversely defined.

Sometimes it is taken for the sign only, and then it is styled, A visible sign
of invisible grace.

Sometimes, it is taken for the thing signified only, and then it is called,
The free mercy of God offered to us in and by Christ.

Sometimes it is taken for the whole, viz. both for the sign and the thing
signified, and the whole action thereabout; and then it is said to be, A
Testimony confirming by an external sign the wholesome promises of God to
Believers, and as it were engraving them in their minds.

All which is compendiously delivered to us in our Church-Catechism, in Answer
to that Question, What meanest thou by this Word Sacrament? The Answer
whereunto is this, I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace, given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby
we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.

From all which it appears, that there are four Conditions requisite in every
Sacrament properly so called, the want of any of which will overthrow the whole
notion and nature of it.

1. It must be of divine Institution. For, being a Seal of a divine promise of
Eternal Life, and such spiritual Grace as none can give but only God; It cannot
be instituted either by the Apostles, or holy Angels, or any other but only
God. And therefore our Church, when she defines a Sacrament of the New
Testament, makes this a necessary part of her definition, that it is ordained
by Christ himself. Hence is it, that the Evangelists, when they relate the
History of the Institution of this Sacrament, are so careful to mention the
Author and Instituter of it. And St. Paul persuading the Church of Corinth to a
due and orderly Celebration of this Sacrament, is careful to acquaint them,
That what he delivered unto them, he had received from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.23.

2. It must have some visible sign. For, Sacraments are therefore used, that by
visible signs we may know and comprehend Heavenly and invisible things; and
therefore our Church in her definition of a Sacrament, calls it, An outward
and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.

3. It must have a divine Promise added to the sign, that so the thing
signified may be united therewith. The promise must import spiritual grace
here, and Eternal Life hereafter. Which Promise is as it were the Soul of the
Sacrament: for, as man consists of Body and Soul, so a Sacrament consists of a
sign and thing signified. And this is the inward and spiritual grace mentioned
in the Definition.

4. It must be given to the whole Church as a perpetual sign, viz. as long as
the outward form of the Church instituted by God shall continue. For, the Law
concerning the form of outward Worship being changed, the use of those
Sacraments which were instituted during the continuance of that form, is also
changed. So the Sacraments of the Old Testament are not now used in the New,
because the external Form of God's Worship is now changed. So likewise
Anointing, the gift of Miracles, etc. though they were given to the Church of
the New Testament, yet because they were neither given to the whole Church, nor
for perpetuity, they cannot properly be called Sacraments.

These are those four Conditions, which ought jointly to meet in every
Sacrament properly so called. For, Whatsoever wants a divine Institution, a
visible sign, a divine promise added to that sign, and a coaeval duration with
the external Form of God's Worship in that Church to which it is given, cannot
properly be called a Sacrament.

This short account of Sacraments in general, I thought fit to premise, looking
upon it as a good preparative for the better understanding of the true notion
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in particular.


Parishioner. I heartily thank you, Mr. Pastor, for the pains you have taken in
thus clearing the way. You have furnished me with a better notion of
Sacraments, than I had before; and thereby given me so great satisfaction, that
you shall not need to bespeak my attention hereafter. I beseech you therefore,
since you have well dispatched the notion of Sacraments in general, that you
would now proceed to that of the Lord's Supper in particular.


Pastor. I shall very willingly comply with your desire, and in so doing I
shall endeavor to do these two things: I. To show you plainly what notion you
ought to have of the Lord's Supper. II. That the Celebration thereof is a duty
incumbent upon us by virtue of a divine Command.

I. We must look upon this Supper as a Sacrament properly so called. I have
already shown you what conditions are requisite to constitute such a Sacrament;
and if I make it appear that all those conditions are to be found in this, then
may it be justly reckoned as one of that number.

The Conditions I told you were these four.

1. A Divine Institution. Now that this holy Supper was instituted and ordained
by Christ, that it owes its Original to none other but only the Son of God and
our Savior, will plainly appear from the concurrent testimonies of St.
Matthew, St. Mark, and St. Luke. St. Matthew gives us this account of it: As
they were eating, Jesus took Bread, Matthew. 26. v. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take,
Eat; This is my Body. And he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he
gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it: For this is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. But I say unto
you; I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day,
when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom. And when they had sung an
Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives.

Much to the same purpose is that account which St. Mark gives of it: And as
they did eat, Jesus took bread, Mark 14. v. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to them, and said,
Take, Eat, this is my Body. Also he took the Cup, and when he had given thanks,
he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. And he said unto them, This is my
blood of the New Testament which is shed for many. Verily, I say unto you, I
will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine until that day, that I drink it new
in the Kingdom of God. And when they had sung an Hymn, they went out into the
Mount of Olives.

St. Luke also, with little variation, gives the same account. And he took
bread, Luke 22. v. 19, 20.
and when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave it to them, saying, This is
my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also
after Supper he took the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my
blood, which is shed for you.

And if we call in St. Paul to give his suffrage with these three Evangelists,
we shall find him according with them all in the History of the Sacrament and
the Institution of it, but most expressly with St. Luke; 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25,
26. I have received of the Lord that which I also have delivered unto you, That
the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, Eat, This is my body which is
broken for you, this do ye in remembrance of me. After the same manner he took
the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the new Testament in my blood,
this do, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me. For, as often as you eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show (or show ye) forth the Lord's Death
till he come.

Thus have I shown you all those Scriptures, which give any account of the
History of this Sacrament and the institution of it, and you see plainly, they
do all agree, that it was ordained and instituted by Christ; that it owes its
Original to none other but only the Son of God, the Lord's Christ, and our
Jesus: and if so, then the first thing requisite for the constitution of a
Sacrament properly so called, viz. A Divine Institution, does evidently appear
in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

2. The second thing requisite for the constitution of a Sacrament properly so
called, is a visible sign. And that there are such things in the Lord's Supper,
is visible and apparent; for, by the words of Institution, Bread and Wine,
which are substantial and visible things, are appointed to be the Elements
thereof. And though these in their own essence and nature, do nothing differ
from common Bread and Wine, yet in regard of their designation and use, they do
very much differ therefrom. For, in this holy Supper they are designed for, and
used as outward and visible signs of inward and spiritual grace, and in respect
of that secret thing which is hidden under them, and represented by them, they
become Sacramental.

3. The third thing requisite for the constitution of a Sacrament properly so
called, is a divine promise added to the sign, which importing spiritual grace
here, and eternal life hereafter, may firmly unite the sign, and thing
signified; and that this is to be found in the Lord's Supper is plain from the
words of institution, where the Bread blessed and broken is called the Body of
Christ, and the Cup, the New Testament in his blood, which is shed for many,
for the remission of sins. And our Savior expressly says, John 6.35. I am the
bread of life, he that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he that believes
on me shall never thirst. And again, v. 54, 55, 56. Whosoever eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day. For, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Which plainly
declares an Union of the sign and thing signified, by virtue of a divine word
and promise; in which Union consists the nature of a Sacrament properly so
called.

4. The fourth thing requisite for the constitution of a Sacrament properly so
called is, That it be given to the whole Church as a perpetual sign, to
continue so long, as the external form of divine Worship, instituted by God,
does remain in that Church. Now that this was given to the whole Church,
appears plainly, from the institution of it, for the Disciples to whom it was
first given were the Representatives of the whole Church; And that it was given
for perpetuity, seems plain from those words of our blessed Savior, Matthew.
26.29. I say unto you, that I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
Vine until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom.
In which words the Holy Jesus seems to intimate two things to his Disciples:
1. That this was the last time that he should ever celebrate this Feast with
them in this World. 2. That though they were not to expect his Company, his
Bodily presence; yet they and the whole Church represented by them, should keep
up the observation of this Feast, till they met again to celebrate an Eternal
Feast in his Father's Kingdom. And that this latter was designed by him, is
evident from those words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye do eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show (or show ye) forth the Lord's Death till
he come.

Thus have I shown you, that those four Conditions which are thought necessary
to the constitution of a Sacrament properly so called, are all to be found in
this; and therefore this may deservedly be reckoned as one of that number.

But to make the notion of this Sacrament, yet more plain to you, let us
consider by what names it is usually known in holy Scripture. It is called a
Supper, and the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. It is also called a Feast, and a
Feast upon a Sacrifice, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for
us, Therefore let us keep the Feast, says St. Paul. When therefore you fix
your thoughts upon this holy Sacrament, with a design to celebrate the same;
let me desire you to look upon it, 1. As a Feast: 2. As a Feast upon a
Sacrifice: 3. As a Feast upon a Sacrifice for sin.

1. Consider it as a divine Feast which our Lord has appointed to be kept in
Commemoration of himself. The cheer provided, viz. Bread and Wine, and the Body
and blood of Christ; The actions about it, viz. Receiving, Eating, and
Drinking; The names given to it, viz. Breaking of Bread, and the Lord's Supper;
The design thereof, which is to nourish up the members of Christ's Church unto
Eternal Life; do all of them sufficiently speak this notion of it. And that it
was ordained to be a Commemoration-Feast, the very words of Institution tell
us, which say, This do, in remembrance of me, Luke 22. v. 19.

Nor were these kind of Feasts unusual in the World, both before and at that
time. For, as the Hebrews had their Feasts, which were commonly signified by
setting on Bread, or Eating Bread. So the Greeks also had their sober
Compotations. (...).
At which Feasts they did usually commemorate the worthy actions, and glorious
Examples of some memorable persons. And this, no doubt, was the design of this
most holy Feast, wherein Christians have the honor, not only to feast with,
but upon God; the holy Jesus being both the Master of it, and the cheer
provided in it. Wherein we have an opportunity of feasting with one another,
thereby the better to promote and preserve amity, love and charity among our
selves, to keep up a lasting remembrance of our glorious Redeemer, and to fix
more deeply in our minds all that he has done and suffered for us. Hereby
shall we be the better disposed with all thankfulness and humility to embrace
such opportunities when offered, with greater joy and alacrity to address our
selves thereunto, and made the more careful, that in a becoming manner we
appear before our Lord and Master therein. In a word, by this
Commemoration-Feast, we shall be the better disposed, and hold our selves the
more obliged, to a cheerful observance of our Redeemer's Will, and to pay a
sincere and entire obedience to all his Laws.

2. Consider it not only as a Feast, but as a Feast upon a Sacrifice, wherein
we are more particularly to commemorate the sufferings and death of our blessed
Savior. St. Paul does very well explain those words of Christ, [ Do this in
remembrance of me, Luke 22.19.] when he says, [ As often as ye eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup of the Lord, ye show forth the Lord's Death till he come, 1
Cor. 11.26.] thereby teaching us, that we ought herein to commemorate the dying
love of the holy Jesus, with such suitable praises and thanksgivings as may be
agreeable to that great goodness which he expressed by dying for us.

As in all Feasts of this kind both among the Jews and Gentiles, God had his
Portion, and the people had their portion, wherewith to entertain themselves
and their Friends; so in this Christian Feast, we also are made partakers of
the Sacrifice, in that by these representations of the Body and Blood of Christ
Jesus, we are admitted to feast upon it.

And as by eating of the Sacrifices offered at the Altar, both Jews and
Gentiles professed themselves to be the Worshippers and Servants of that God to
whom the oblation was offered; so we, by partaking of this holy Feast, do make
a solemn profession of the Christian Religion, of our Faith in Jesus, and
obedience to him. We declare our selves to be the Disciples and Followers of
him, to whom we join our selves in Communion.

Eating and Drinking together was always esteemed a sign of Friendship, and
good understanding, between the parties so doing. But when a Feast was made on
purpose to express their Friendship, then was it the more notorious. But when
the Feast was upon a Sacrifice, then the obligation between them was held the
more sacred and inviolable. We therefore by being partakers of this holy Feast,
do thereby engage our selves in a mutual Covenant with the blessed Jesus, and
by often doing this, we make repeated protestations of our fidelity, and renew
our Baptismal Vow and Covenant, taking (as we usually say) the Sacrament upon
it, that in all things we will be faithful and obedient to him.

3. Let us consider this holy Action, not only as a Feast, nor only as a Feast
upon a Sacrifice, but as a Feast upon a Sacrifice for sin.

That Jesus Christ did offer up himself as a Sacrifice for sin, is so plain and
evident through the whole History of the New Testament, that to produce
instances to attest it, would look like an uncharitable censure of others; as
if they had neglected to peruse those sacred Records, which contain the Charter
for their Inheritance in Heaven.

Now in the time of the Law, when any Beast was slain, and offered in Sacrifice
for sin; it was not permitted (in that case, nor indeed in any other) neither
to the People, nor Priests themselves, to eat of the blood; Nor had they any
portion of the flesh, for that was wholly burned. To partake of the
sin-offering therefore was a privilege reserved for Christians, who at this
holy Feast, are allowed both to eat the Bread, (which represents the Body or
flesh of Christ) and drink the Cup (which represents his blood). And in this
case that of the Apostle is fully verified, We have an Altar (i. e. a
Sacrifice) whereof they had no right to eat, who served the Tabernacle, Hebr.
13. v. 10.

By virtue of this privilege we are made partakers of the Body and Blood of
Christ, and all the benefits thereof; We are strengthened and refreshed in all
grace and goodness, and the remission of sins is not only offered, but conveyed
to every worthy Communicant. The consideration whereof, as it ought to beget in
us a grateful sense of all God's favors, and of this in particular; so ought
it to be an Obligation or Bond of Union between all Christian People. For, If
God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 4. v. 11.

Thus have I performed the former part of my promise, by showing you what
notion you ought to have of the Lord's Supper; That it is a Sacrament properly
so called, having all the conditions that are or can be thought necessary to
constitute such a thing. That it is not only a Feast, but a Feast upon a
Sacrifice, and which is more, a Feast upon a Sacrifice for Sin. And under such
a character as this, I hope it will not appear to you with such a frightful
visage, as you tell me it has been represented to you heretofore.


Parishioner. No indeed Sir, Instead of a dangerous and dreadful Precipice, I
have a plain path now before me; instead of terrible and frightful objects, I
have a pleasant and delightful prospect; instead of affrighting, it does now
allure and invite me to it; it seems to offer me such advantages, as I once
thought I could never reasonably hope for from it. I confess, Sir, You have
mightily relieved my mind, by removing that pressure, which prejudice and
prepossession had put upon it. I heartily thank you for the pains you have
taken in it, and am so well pleased and satisfied therewith, that, if it be not
too great a trouble to you, I would humbly beg the performance of the other
part of your promise also.


Pastor. No, Neighbor Parishioner, it will be no trouble to me, I am better
pleased with doing my duty, than to think it so, and therefore if you can but
be contented to continue your Patience, I shall not, I hope, grow weary of so
good a work.

II. The other part of my promise was, To make it evident to you, That the
Celebration of this holy Feast, is a duty incumbent upon all Christians by
virtue of a Divine Command.

And to do this, I shall need only to have recourse to the words of
institution, as they stand recorded by St. Luke, and repeated by St. Paul. In
the Evangelist the words run thus, He took Bread, and when he had given thanks,
he brake it, and gave to them, saying, This is my Body which is given for you,
This do in remembrance of me. Likewise also after Supper he took the Cup,
saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Luke
22.19, 20.

The Apostle is somewhat more large, taking in the account which the other
Evangelists also give of it, for he tells the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.23,
24, 25, 26. That he had received from the Lord that which he delivered unto
them, viz. That the Lord Jesus in the same night in which he was betrayed, took
Bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, Eat, This is
my Body which is broken for you, This do ye in remembrance of me. After the
same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood, This do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of
me. For, as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show (or show
ye) forth the Lord's Death until he come.

These words, as they are recorded by St. Luke, are indeed directed to the
twelve Apostles; but then we are to consider, that the Apostles in that holy
action were the Representatives of the whole Church, and therefore to be
considered under a double capacity, viz. either as Governors and Ministers
entrusted by Christ with the power of dispensing and administering the
Sacrament; or as ordinary and Lay Communicants.

If we look upon them in the former capacity, as Governors of the Church, and
Stewards of the sacred mysteries; then the duty to which they are obliged by
the express command of Christ, is to take the Bread into their hands, to bless
and consecrate it to that mysterious and divine use to which he designed it, to
break it, to give it to the Communicants, as he gave it to them: And so in like
manner to take the Cup, to bless it, and give it to the people. Whence it is
plain, That there is an unavoidable necessity upon them and their Successors,
to administer this holy Sacrament. And if they stand obliged to give it, then
certainly there must be some who are obliged to receive it. And if we look upon
them in the other capacity, as private men, and Lay Communicants, we have a
plain evidence hereof. For, it is evident, that in that capacity, their duty in
obedience to the Command of Christ was, to take and receive the consecrated
Elements of Bread and Wine, to Eat and Drink, and to do all this in
commemoration of his wonderful love, in giving his Body to be broken, and his
Blood to be shed for the sins of the World.

But if we will suffer St. Paul, who well knew it, to explain the mind of his
Master, the matter will be yet more plain and evident. For, though he give the
same account of the History of the Sacrament, and the institution of it, as the
Evangelists do; yet does he not therein address himself to his Fellow-Apostles
or their Successors, but to the people of the Church of Corinth; thereby
plainly showing that the Command of our Blessed Savior (This do) does equally
oblige both the one and the other. That as the Priest is bound to prepare and
give it, so the people are bound to prepare and receive it, and both by virtue
of a divine Command.

For, that these words (Do ye this) were not spoken by way of Counsel, but
Command, will plainly appear, if we consider, that whatsoever may be thought
requisite to render any expression preceptive and obligatory; are to be found
in this. For, 1. There was sufficient power and authority in the person
commanding, viz. Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, and our Savior. 2. The
Terms, in which he is pleased to signify his divine will and pleasure, are
imperative, Do this. 3. The obedience which he expects thereunto is to be
perpetual, till his coming again, 1 Cor. 11.26. 4. St. Paul's interpretation and
application of this command to the Lay Communicants in the Church of Corinth,
does plainly speak the design of our blessed Savior, which was to oblige them
and all Christians to do this in remembrance of him, i. e. to express their
thankful acknowledgments of what he did and suffered for them by their dutiful
obedience to this Command.

Thus have I performed the other part of my promise to you, and I hope made it
sufficiently plain, that the Celebration of this Feast is a duty incumbent upon
all Christians by virtue of a Divine Command. And if so, then how those who
pretend to Christianity, will at the great and general day of Judgment, answer
their neglect and refusal of it, I wish they would seriously consider.

But, my Friend, can you and I reflect upon this as the Command, and last
Command of our dying Savior? Can we remember that he gave his Body to be
broken, and his blood to be shed for our sins? Can we think of his being made
subject to the wrath of God, the hatred of Hell, and the malice of Man, and all
this for our sakes? and that for all this he requires no more of us, but only
to keep a Feast, wherein we may solemnly commemorate, and perpetuate the memory
of what he has done and suffered for us? Can we, I say, remember all this, and
yet at the same time be so unkind, so ungrateful, and so undutiful, as to
neglect opportunities when offered, of paying the tribute of our acknowledgment
to our great Savior, and mighty Redeemer? To close up this Argument, let me
only read unto you one place of Scripture, and desire you seriously to consider
it: John 6. v. 54, 55, 56. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my
Blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For, my
flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. The inference from which
words, as they relate to this holy Feast, is plain and easy, viz. That as it is
highly necessary for all who would be saved, to be made partakers of the merits
of Christ's Sacrifice, and the efficacy of his Death and Sufferings; so will it
as highly concern them (who have an opportunity to do it) to partake of the
Lord's Supper in order thereunto: For, those who refuse (when they may) to
receive the tokens and signs of his Body broken, and Blood shed for their sins,
and persist in that refusal and neglect; can never hope to be owned and
rewarded by him, as his Friends.


Parishioner. I must needs own, Sir, that you have very well acquitted your
self in the performance of what you promised. I am better instructed in the
nature and notion of this holy Sacrament than I was before; and am now very
well satisfied, that the Celebration of it is a duty upon me and all
Christians, by virtue of a Divine Command. But, Sir, I have still some scruples
upon me, which (if I did not fear I had too much tired you already) I would
have propounded, in order to your resolution of them.


Pastor. Let not any such fear trouble you, I neither am nor can be weary of
well doing. If therefore you have any thing to offer, be free in it; and assure
your self of my utmost endeavor to give you satisfaction.


Parishioner. Sir, You oblige me very much, and seeing you are pleased to give
me that freedom, I will presume to make use of it.

Obj. 1. And the first thing I shall propound, and desire to be resolved in is
this: Whether this duty be so strictly enjoined, and so indispensibly required
of all Christians, that none of them are left at liberty, either to Communicate
or not, as they shall think fit?


Pastor. This Query seems to answer it self; for

1. It supposes the thing in question to be a Duty, and if so, then it ought
to be out of question; for every Duty implies an obligation, and every
obligation lays a restraint upon liberty, and takes away the indifferency of
the thing it obliges to: To be at liberty therefore either to do, or not do a
thing, must suppose the thing, not only to be indifferent in its nature, but
also to be free from any command or obligation, and so consequently to be no
duty at all, but only a prudential Act, which a man may either do, or leave
undone, as he in his discretion shall see cause.

2. It supposes the thing in question to be a Duty enjoined, which implies a
superior power, endued with full and just authority to impose the thing, and
by that imposition to make it necessary. Now that power, I have told you, is
God, and that authority Divine, which makes the thing required to be a duty
upon us, by virtue of a Divine Command. So that unless you can assign any power
superior to that of God, which can and does dispense with his Commands, you
can never fancy to your self any such liberty, as you seem here to enquire
after.

These two considerations might suffice to overthrow this pretense of liberty,
and show the necessity of the thing required; but because I would willingly
quiet your mind, and give you all the satisfaction that I can, I shall offer a
few things more to your consideration, and desire you to spend some serious
thoughts upon them.

1. Consider the extent of the Command, and the unlimited obligation thereof.
The word of Command [Do this] is general and indeterminate, it reaches all
Christians, in all times, and in all places; and when all are included, none
are exempted. And the obligation of duty and obedience thereunto, is as general
as the Command. For, unless we will call in question the power and authority of
God and Christ, we must needs acknowledge, that to whomsoever it is said, Do
this, they stand obliged both in duty and conscience to yield obedience
thereunto. If therefore the command reach all, then the thing commanded must
needs be a duty incumbent upon all. And indeed I know no other limitation that
this divine Command admits of, save only one of these two, viz. Either want of
opportunity, as when men are in a Journey, in such a place, and under such
circumstances, that though they do earnestly desire it, yet can they not, for
want of an opportunity, do the thing they desire: Or some just impediment, as
when one is under a Church-censure, or some indisposition which at present he
cannot conquer. In the former of these Cases men must, in the latter they may,
forbear the doing of the thing required; These Cases may limit, but they do not
lessen the Duty; They may suffice as excuses for the present, but they will not
serve always: For, so soon as an opportunity can be had, and the impediments be
removed, the obligation will return upon us, and in obedience to this Command
we ought to apply our selves to the performance of the duty required therein.

2. Consider, That to disobey the command of God, when we have an opportunity,
and no just impediment to hinder us from yielding obedience thereunto, is not
only a sin, but a sin of a deep die; tinctured with so much pride and
obstinacy, and attended with such aggravations, as makes it not only highly
displeasing unto God, but (if not timely repented of) will render it
destructive to our selves. This is to add sin to sin, and by that means, to
heap up wrath against the day of wrath upon our own heads. Now, that to [Do
this] is a duty incumbent upon us by virtue of a Divine Command, I have plainly
shown you, and the want of opportunity you have no reason to complain of, being
so often, and so earnestly invited thereunto; And therefore unless you have
some just impediment to hinder your present compliance with that command, you
have no reason to decline your duty, nor any cause to fancy to your self such a
liberty, as you now enquire after.

3. Consider, That the solemn profession of our Christian Faith according to
Gods Ordinance, is a Duty which all Christians ought most readily, and upon
every just occasion to perform, Luke 12.8, 9. Whosoever shall confess me before
men, him shall the son of man confess also before the Angels of God. But he
that shall deny me before men, shall be denied before the Angels of God, says
our blessed Savior. Thereby plainly intimating, that whosoever shall be
ashamed to own him, and to confess their Faith in him, in this World, them will
he disown and be ashamed of at the great and last day. Now the Celebration of
this holy Feast, is one of the most memorable actions of our life, wherein we
are most solemnly to Commemorate the dying love of the blessed Jesus, 1 Cor.
11.24, 26. For, this we ought to do in remembrance of him; And as often as we
do it, we are to show forth the Lord's death till he come, i. e. We are herein
to commemorate all that the holy Jesus has done and suffered for us, and not
be ashamed to confess our Faith in a dying Savior. And that all this is
according to God's Ordinance, is plain, because it is a duty incumbent upon us
by virtue of a Divine Command. Unless therefore you can dispense with your duty
to God, and content your self to dissemble your Christianity; unless you can
persuade your self, that the profession of your Faith in Jesus, a thankful
acknowledgment of all that he has done and suffered for you, and a public
owning of all those favors and benefits which you have received from him, be
things indifferent to you: It will be in vain to pretend such a liberty as you
now enquire after.

By this time, Neighbor Parishioner, I hope you are satisfied, that neither
you, nor any other who pretend to Christianity, are left at liberty in this
case; That to (Do this) or leave it Undone, as they please, is no part of that
liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free.


Parishioner. I thank you, Mr. Pastor, for the pains you have taken with me,
which, by God's blessing upon them, have not been in vain; they have had their
designed effect: for, I am now very well satisfied, that it is not a thing
indifferent, but a Duty. But pray, Sir, be not offended, if I trouble you with
another Question.


Pastor. No, my good Neighbor, I shall not; pray be free, and rest assured
that you cannot better please me, than by giving me an opportunity of offering
you all the satisfaction that is in my power.


Parishioner. My next Question, Sir, is this.

Obj. 2. If this command be so strict and general, and our obedience thereto so
indispensible, are not all then who live within the pale of the Church, whether
good or bad, without any exception, to be admitted thereunto?


Pastor. You may remember, that in answer to your former Question, I did
intimate to you, that there are some cases, which though they do not lessen the
Duty, yet do limit the command as to our present actual obedience thereunto.
For, as our Savior forbade the casting of Pearl before Swine, and the giving
of the Childrens Bread to Dogs; so has he left power with his Church to make a
difference between worthy and unworthy Receivers: and, where the case is so
manifest as to come within her Cognizance, to judge who are so, and who are
not. And besides those cases before intimated, there are some other, wherein
the Church does, with good reason, take upon her, to restrain and keep back
some from profaning this holy Sacrament, and ruining themselves. Especially
these that follow.

1. When men are grossly ignorant, so little knowing in the things of God, so
much unacquainted with the Religious part of their duties, that in this case,
what the Prophet Jonah said of many thousands in the great City of Nineveh, is
but too truly verified in them, Jonah 4.11. They cannot discern between their
right hand and their left hand. And of this sort, God knows, we have too many
in our days, who are so sottishly ignorant of what concerns God and themselves,
at least, the better part of themselves, viz. their immortal Souls, that though
the light of the Gospel shine so gloriously, yet still they sit in darkness;
though the glorious truths thereof be daily preached, so plainly asserted, and
so frequently inculcated upon them; yet are they no more improved in their
knowledge of them, than those poor Indians who never heard of the Gospel. It Is
strange indeed there should be such, but not so strange as true. Now such as
these, till they are better instructed in their Religion in general, and in
this part of their Religion in particular, ought to be withheld from being
partakers of this holy Sacrament. For, Our Church supposes all those her
Members, who either do, or are fit to receive the holy Sacrament, Rubric after
the Communion Service.
to be persons of discretion, i. e. persons of some competent knowledge, able
to discern between the Table of the Lord, and their own Tables, between this
holy Feast, and a common Meal. What measure of knowledge there ought to be,
seeing God has given us no standard to judge by, I shall not presume my self
wise enough to determine. But that there ought to be some, and a competent
share of knowledge too, will appear, if we consider what qualifications our
Church requires in those whom she admits to be Communicants. They must be
such as truly repent them of their former sins; They must be such as steadfastly
purpose to lead a new life; such as have a lively Faith in God's mercy through
Christ; such as thankfully remember the sufferings and death of the blessed
Jesus for their sakes; Chapter Catech.
and they must be in charity with all men. All which do presuppose a good share
of knowledge, and a godly practice of what they know. Besides, all who are
admitted to the Lord's Supper, by the Rules of our Church, ought not only to be
baptized, but also after Baptism, to be confirmed by the Bishop, or at least to
be ready and desirous to be confirmed. Rubric after the Order of Confirmation.
Now in order to Confirmation it is required, that they be of a competent age,
able to say in their Mother tongue, the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, Rubric after
the Catechism.
and the Ten Commandments, and to answer to the other questions in the Church
Catechism. The reason whereof is plain, Preface to the Order of Confirmation.
Because in Confirmation they do in the presence of God, and of the
Congregation renew that solemn promise and Vow that was made in their names at
their Baptism; ratifying and confirming the same in their own persons; and
acknowledging themselves bound to believe and do all those things which their
Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for them. Now all this considered will
plainly evidence, that persons who are grossly ignorant, and devoid of some
competent measure of knowledge in their Religion, are not thought by our Church
to be duly qualified to be Communicants. Nor does our Church proceed without
good Authority herein; for this her practice seems to be founded upon that
qualification of a Worthy Communicant, required by St. Paul, viz. Discerning
the Lord's Body, 1 Cor. 11.29.


Parishioner. Sir, I am very well satisfied that such persons as you have now
described ought not to be admitted as guests at God's Table; and I am glad to
understand by your Discourse, that our Church does not knowingly admit any
such. But there is one thing which I perceive the Church makes a necessary
qualification in every Communicant, viz. Confirmation by the Bishop. Now, Sir,
I never was confirmed, and I believe very few in the Parish have been; and
therefore if this be necessary, all or most of us, for want of it, are under a
necessity of absenting our selves therefrom.


Pastor. It is true, that by reason of the iniquity of the late times, which
put all things out of order both in Church and State, most who are now grown up
do want the benefit of this holy rite; but I am willing to believe, that it is
not their contempt of it, but rather either the want of opportunity, or the
want of better instruction since, that is the occasion of their not being
confirmed. And therefore our Church, like an indulgent Mother, in her new
Rubric, makes not the want, but the neglect of it, to be a bar against us,
for she now requires that all who are admitted to this holy Ordinance, should
either be actually confirmed, or ready and desirous so to be. Now when you
rightly understand the design and tendency, the usefulness and excellency of
this holy Rite, (which I have hinted to you in part, and of which you may see
more, if you will but take the pains to read over that short Office for the
Order of Confirmation) I do not doubt but you and all others, will be very
desirous of it. And if you be so, then is the want of it at present, no bar to
your present communicating with us in this holy Ordinance.


Parishioner. I am very well pleased, Sir, that it is not; and if the want of
it be not, I do assure you, the contempt of it, never shall be any bar against
me. By that little which you have said of it, I am so well satisfied in the
excellency and usefulness thereof, that I shall not willingly omit any
opportunity hereafter of being confirmed. And in order thereunto, I do humbly
beg your assistance therein.


Pastor. You may promise your self my assistance in this, or any other thing
that is for your good at all times. But since you are so well satisfied in
this, which has given occasion to this short digression, I shall now return to
the consideration of your main Objection, and proceed to show you some other
cases, wherein our Church thinks fit to restrain the rashness and presumption
of some, who, without due consideration, would rush upon this holy Ordinance.

2. If men be grossly scandalous, open and notorious evil Livers, who make no
Conscience of what they do, who live in Gluttony and Drunkenness, in Chambering
and wantonness, in strife and envying, and take no other thought, save only for
the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it, Romans 13.13, 14. Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, Effeminate Persons, Abusers of themselves with Mankind, Thieves,
Covetous Persons, Drunkards, Railers, and Extortioners, as they shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, so neither ought they to be admitted to this holy
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 6. v. 9, 10. And therefore our Church is so far from giving
encouragement unto such, that she requires her Ministers, having knowledge
thereof, to call upon them, Can. 26. Rubric before the Communion.
and advertise them, that they do not presume to come to the Lord's Table,
until they have openly declared themselves to have truly repented, and amended
their former evil life.

3. If any have been at strife and variance with their Neighbors, and do still
indulge their malice and hatred, refusing to forgive injuries done to them, or
to repair wrongs which they have done to others; Can. 26. Rubric before the
Communion.
These are not to be suffered to come to the Lord's Table, till they be, or are
willing to be reconciled; till they have forgiven from the bottom of their
hearts all that their Neighbors have trespassed against them, and have
recompensed, or are willing and resolved so to do as soon as conveniently they
can, all the wrong they have done unto their Neighbors.

4. Churchwardens or Sidemen who have the Oath of God upon them, and have bound
their Souls thereby to present to their Ordinaries all such enormities and
public offenses as they are particularly charged to enquire of in their
several Parishes. Can. 26.
If these (notwithstanding the obligation of their Oath, and their being
frequently called upon by their Minister and Ordinary to discharge their
Consciences by the due performance of their Duties) shall wittingly and
willingly, desperately and irreligiously, incur that most horrible sin of
perjury, by neglecting or refusing to present such enormities or public
offenses, as they themselves know, or are otherwise made known to them. They
ought not to be admitted to this holy Sacrament, till they have evidenced their
repentance, and repaired their fault by a more vigorous performance of their
duties.

5. If men be Schismatical, or of known rebellious principles, i.e. if they
refuse to comply with the Order of the Church in kneeling at the Sacrament,
Can. 27.
if they do designedly absent themselves from the public Prayers of the
Church, if they be common and notorious depravers of the Book of Common Prayer,
and administration of the Sacraments, etc. Or, if they be such as do speak
against and deprave his Majesty's Sovereign Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical. Except every such person shall first acknowledge to the
Minister before the Churchwardens, his repentance for the same, and promise by
word or writing, that he will do so no more; He shall not be admitted to the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.

6. Strangers, i. e. persons of another Parish ought not to be encouraged in
leaving their own Parish Church and going to another, or in leaving their own
Minister to hear another. Much less ought they to be encouraged in deserting
Communion with their own Minister and Parishioners. Our Church is so tender in
this point, Can. 28.
and so far from giving encouragement unto such, that instead of admitting, she
forbids them, and remitteth them home to their own Parish Churches and
Ministers, there to receive the Communion with the rest of their Neighbors.

In all these Cases, you see, our Church is very cautious, and therefore no
fear of such an universal and promiscuous admittance to God's Table, as your
Objection supposes. She is not so prodigally lavish as to cast her Pearl to
Swine, or give her Childrens Bread to Dogs.

But though these cases may limit, yet do they not at all lessen our Duty. Let
our circumstances be what they will, yet to Do this, is still our Duty. To
continue therefore under these circumstances must needs be sin, because it
hinders us from doing that which is our duty, and to plead our excuse for
Non-Communion upon that score, is to add sin to sin, and double that iniquity,
which was too great before.

What therefore is to be done in this case? but as speedily as may be to put
our selves out of these circumstances, that we may the sooner set about the
performance of our Duty. Which whosoever refuses or neglects to do, he does
plainly declare, that he has a greater value for his own inordinate lusts, and
debaucht practices, than for an holy Communion with God and Christ.


Parishioner. I am mighty well pleased to understand, That the Wisdom and Piety
of our Mother, the Church of England, (in taking so much care to guard the
Table of the Lord, and with so much caution to fence the Body and Blood of
Christ, against the bold approaches of ignorant, profane and wicked persons)
is far greater than I thought it had been, or than many will yet believe it is.
But, Sir, I have something more still, which, if I did not fear I had too much
tired you already, I would gladly be satisfied in.


Pastor. No more of these Apologies, good Neighbor, if your own leisure and
patience will allow it, mine will hold out. And therefore now we are together,
and have so fit an opportunity for it, speak your whole mind, and speak it
freely, propound what ever scruples you have, that I may apply my self to give
you all the satisfaction I can.


Parishioner. I humbly thank you, Sir, for the freedom you are pleased to give
me, which I shall willingly make use of.

The next thing I have to propound is a matter of great weight, an Objection
that has and still does very much startle me, and I believe many others, which
if you can clear, your so doing will very much smooth the way, and encourage
both me and them to communicate with you.

Obj. 3. St. Paul expressly says, He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body, 1
Cor. 11.29. Now, Sir, I do not find my self worthy, and I hope you would not
have me to eat and drink my own Damnation?


Pastor. This Scripture which you now cite, has been, and still is made very
much use of to deter and affright men from doing their duties, from
communicating with the Church and People of God in this holy Ordinance. Some
men who have usurped the Pulpit, and invaded the Office of the Ministry in our
late unhappy times, have with so much zeal but little knowledge taken upon them
to interpret the holy Scriptures, that they have made them to speak other
things than the holy spirit of God, or his Amanuenses, the Prophets and
Apostles ever intended. And I do not doubt but to make it plain to you, that
the Objection raised from this passage of St. Paul, is founded in the
misunderstandings of men, and not in the Text it self, or the true and genuine
sense of the Apostle in this place.

In order whereunto, I shall endeavor to lay before you the plain meaning of
St. Paul in this Text, and that by the resolution of these two Enquiries.

Qu. 1. What is here meant by eating and drinking unworthily?

Qu. 2. How and when men are said to eat and drink their own Damnation?

Qu. 1. What is here meant by eating and drinking unworthily?

Ans. For Answer whereunto, let me premise, That the Worthiness here spoken of
does not consist in perfection, or in an absolute and unsinning obedience to
all the Laws of God. For, if we were indeed thus perfect, we should have no
need, or at least not so much need of this Sacrament. Since the first Adam in
the state of Innocence, none, save only the second Adam the Lord Christ Jesus,
could ever justly glory in being thus qualified. Notwithstanding the vain
pretensions of some Enthusiastical Catharists, this certainly is a thing which
is not attainable in this life. For, All have sinned, says St. Paul, Romans
3.23. cap. 5.12. There is none that does good no not one, says holy David, Ps.
14.3. The just man falls seven times, says the wise Solomon, Prove. 24.16.
And if any man say, that he has no sin, he does but deceive himself, and the
truth is not in him, says the Apostle John, 1 John 1.8. From all which
Scriptures, and many others which might be produced, wherein the terms are so
general, that they cannot but include all and every individual; it is plain and
evident, that perfection does not belong to the present state of Mankind. And
if so, then must we conclude, that the great and wise God, and the holy and
blessed Jesus, have instituted this Feast in vain, and given out a command to
no purpose. A Table indeed may be spread, and richly furnished, but the rooms
will be all empty; for if none but those who are perfect be worthy, there will
none be found that are so. This therefore cannot be the meaning of the Apostle
in this place.

And as the worthiness here spoken of does not consist in perfection; i. e. in
an entire and unsinning obedience to the whole Law of God: So neither does the
unworthiness here mentioned consist in imperfection or sin. It is not every
failing, not every weakness, nor every sin, that presently renders men unworthy
to be Guests at God's Table. For if so, then all mankind would be excluded,
because all have sinned, as appears from the Texts already quoted. And
consequently the Table of the Lord would be as empty, and this great Feast as
much want Guests upon this account as upon the other. But this is so far from
being the sense of the Apostle here, that it is quite contrary to it. For, as
Christ came into the World purposely to save Sinners, so did he institute his
holy Supper for the sake of those who were liable to sin, and weak in the
Faith; that thereby they might be fortified against the one, and strengthened
in the other. For any one to say then, I am a Sinner, and therefore Unworthy,
is a false consequence. For, it is not sin barely, but an obstinate and
impenitent continuance in sin, that renders any one an unworthy Guest at God's
Table, as I shall show you hereafter.

From this account of this Text, you see plain, that there are some who have no
pretense to perfection in this life, and yet in God's account are esteemed
worthy Communicants. And of such an one I shall give you this short Character,
which may serve as a Test to try your own worthyness by.

To be a worthy Guest at God's Table, is, not to be without sin, but to be
sensible of sin, and sorrowful for it; one who does hunger and thirst after
righteousness; one who does earnestly desire Union and Communion with Christ,
especially in this holy Feast; One who is truly sensible of, and as truly
thankful for, what the blessed Jesus has done and suffered for him; One who,
upon that consideration, does resolve with himself, that as much as in him
lies, he will for the future lead a new life, and live in all godly love and
charity with all men.

This, though short, I take to be a full Character of a worthy Guest at God's
Table. Which worthy disposition may very well consist with many and great
weaknesses and imperfections.

This thus premised may enable us to give a more direct answer to our first
enquiry, and help us to discover, What it is to eat and drink unworthily?

To eat and drink unworthily in the Apostle's sense, does therefore imply these
things.

1. To come to the Lord's Supper with low and mean thoughts of it, being either
ignorant what it is, or if in some measure knowing, yet are they willing to put
a slight and contempt upon it; The former of these are indeed the more
pityable, but neither the one nor the other are excusable; both of them, in St.
Paul's sense, may be truly said to eat and drink unworthily. The one contentedly
sits down under such circumstances that he cannot; and the other, if he can,
will not make any difference between the Table of the Lord, and their own;
between this great and holy Feast, and a common and ordinary meal and repast.
This is that for which St. Paul reproves the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11. v.
20, 21, 22. saying, When ye come together into one place, this is not to eat
the Lord's Supper. For in eating every one takes before other his own Supper;
and one his hungry and another is drunken. What, have ye not Houses to eat and
drink in? Or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? What
shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in this? I praise you not. This is to
come to the Lord's Table without Faith or Fear; neither believing nor
remembering what the blessed Jesus has done and suffered for them, of which at
this Feast they ought to make a grateful and solemn Commemoration. 1 Cor.
11.24. This is to approach thereunto without that due regard and reverence that
becomes them, and befitteth the action they are about; not once considering
with whom, or upon what they are to feast. And this is part, if not all, that
St. Paul designeth in those words which he adds in the close of this Text,
not discerning the Lord's Body.

2. To eat and drink unworthily, is, to come to the Lord's Supper without a due
sense of sin, without a just remorse, a godly sorrow, and an unfeigned
repentance for it. For, as I before hinted to you, it is not sin barely, but an
obstinate and impenitent continuance in sin that makes men unwelcome guests at
God's Table. If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed,
and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he has committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousness that he has done,
he shall live, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18. v. 21, 22. A broken and contrite
heart, God will never despise, Ps. 51.17. I might, if it were needful, produce
many other Texts to this purpose, for the holy Scripture is full of such
passages as speak the goodness and mercy of God to repenting and returning
Sinners, how ready he is to receive them, how he opens his arms to embrace
them, and how kindly he bids them welcome. If the Prodigal can but think of
returning to his Father, his Father will prevent him, and run to meet him, Luke
15.18, 19, 20. Turn unto me, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts,
Zech. 1.3.

But though God be thus kind and gracious to the Penitent, yet will he be
severe and inexorable to the obstinate and impenitent. If men will sin with an
high hand, and go on therein without once reflecting upon what they do or have
done; If they will still persevere in wickedness against all the admonitions of
God, and checks of their own Consciences; If they be resolved to indulge their
lustful appetites, and inordinate affections, and not to be reclaimed
therefrom; If against the judgment of the Church, and the plain evidence of
Scripture and reason, they will reject the Truth, and espouse and defend
Errors and Heresies; If they give themselves over to strife and contention, to
promote malice and hatred, to disturb their own and the peace of that Church
and state in which they live. What can such men expect, but a certain fearful
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation to devour them? Hebr. 10. v. 26,
27. There is nothing does more surely forfeit the kindness and mercy of God,
nor any thing that does more certainly treasure up to it self, wrath against
the day of wrath, than an hard and impenitent heart, Romans 2.5. As impenitency
is a certain bar to Man's Salvation, so is it to his participation of this holy
Feast. For, to come to the Lord's Supper without a due sense of sin and sorrow
for it, is to go about to join righteousness with unrighteousness, to mix light
with darkness, and to lodge Christ with Belial, 2 Cor. 6. v. 14, 15.

3. To eat and drink unworthily, is, to come to the Lord's Supper without
Charity. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee; leave there thine offering before the Altar,
and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift, Matthew. 5. v. 23, 24. This counsel proceeds from the unerring wisdom of
the blessed Jesus, wherein he does plainly intimate how vain it is to expect,
that God will accept an offering at our hands, whilst our hearts are filled
with malice and hatred to our Brethren. Love to God and love to the Brethren,
are qualifications indispensibly necessary in every one, who will be a worthy
Guest at God's Table; and neither of these can well consist without the other.
If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: for, he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not
seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his
brother also, 1 John 4. v. 20, 21. Now who they are that come without Charity,
will best appear, if we consider that noble Character which St. Paul gives of
it, and compare their manner of address therewith. Are men impatient under
sufferings? Are they apt to murmur and repine at the dispensations of Divine
Providence, touching the ordering and governance of persons and things in this
World? Are they morose and unsociable? Are they over-tenacious, unfriendly, and
unliberal? This betrayeth their want of Charity. For, Charity suffers long,
and is kind. Are men apt to be envious at the happy estate of their Brethren?
Do they look with an evil Eye upon the prosperity of others? Do they macerate
and wast themselves with vexing at the welfare of other men? This speaks
them strangers to this excellent grace; for, Charity envyeth not, 1 Cor. 13.4.
Are men proud and haughty? Do they love to be the Trumpeters of their own
praise, and the proclaimers of their own worth? Are they apt to swell and be
puffed up with the conceit of their own excellency? Do they entertain so high
an opinion of themselves, and their own virtue and goodness, that they look
with scorn and contempt upon all others? Are they unwilling to be indebted even
to God himself, or to his mercy and blessing, or to any thing else, but only
themselves, for their success in all things? This bewrays their want of love
and Charity. For, Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up. Are men
censorious and contumelious? Are they Railers, Revilers, Detracters and
Backbiters of others? Do they love to betray the secrets, disclose the faults,
and expose the persons of others to contempt and scorn? Can they please
themselves, with being unhandsome, rude, and unmannerly? This shows how empty
they are of Love and Charity; For, Charity does not behave it self unseemly, v.
5. Are men wholly devoted to themselves? Are they altogether led and acted by
the dictates of their own interest? Can they lay aside all care and concern for
the good of that Community in which they live? Can they be content that all
public good should truckle and give place to their private profit and
advantage? Are they so much in love with themselves, that they love nothing
besides, or in comparison with themselves? This plainly shows, that they have
no true Love and Charity in them, For, Charity seeks not her own. Are men
passionate and suspicious? Are their passions quickly raised, but when up, so
ungovernable that they are not easily laid again? Are they apt to take fire at
every spark, and be offended even with innocence it self, if it happen to run
counter to their humors and inclinations? Are they so jealous and suspicious,
that every bush is taken for a Bugbear? that nothing, though never so good, can
occur, in which they do not suspect some hidden evil, or secret mischief
designed against them; This is directly contrary to the rules of true Charity,
For, Charity is not easily provoked, thinks no evil.

Are men carnal, sold under sin? Romans 7.14. Do they love to walk in the vanity
of their minds? Are their understandings so darkened, that they are become
Aliens from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them? Are they
past feeling, and have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness? Ephesians. 4. v. 17, 18, 19. Do they love to speak lies
through hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot iron? 1 Timothy
4.2. Do they rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked?
Prove. 2.14. Are they so bent upon wickedness, that they cannot sleep except
they have done evil, and their sleep departs from them, unless they have
caused some to fall? Prove. 4.16. This is a temper far different from that of
true Charity; For, Charity rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth, v. 6. Are men impatient of injuries, and cannot bear the least affront?
Are they diffident and distrustful of all things propounded to them, either by
God or Man? Have they no prospect of a future state, nor can hope for any thing
but what is before their Eyes, and within the reach of their senses in this
life? This plainly demonstrateth that they are strangers to this excellent
grace of Charity; For, Charity bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things, v. 7.

Thus have I shown you who they are that come to the Lord's Supper without
Charity; and by this and the two preceding rules, you may plainly perceive what
St. Paul means, when he speaks of eating and drinking unworthily. Now if
either you, or any other be really thus unworthy, it will nearly concern both
you and them to consider what you do. It will not be safe for you to approach
this holy Table with such unworthiness about you. But I hope better things of
you, and that upon this account you will have no just cause to absent your self
from this holy Feast.

Parishioner. I heartily thank you, Sir, for the pains you have taken to
rectify my misunderstanding, and inform me better. I bless God I have no such
low and mean thoughts of this Heavenly Banquet; and though I confess I am a
Sinner, yet am I heartily sorry for my sins; though I am not so charitable as I
ought, yet am I not such a stranger to it, as you have now described. And
therefore, if other obstacles be removed, I do believe I shall not hereafter
absent my self upon this account. I am sorry that I have interrupted you, but I
could not forbear to testify my satisfaction in what you have said; And now
Sir, I beseech you proceed to explain the other part of this Text, by resolving
that other enquiry, viz.

Qu. 2. How and when men are said to eat and drink their own Damnation?

Pastor. I shall endeavor with all readiness, and as much plainness, to make
good my promise, and gratify your desire, in the resolution of this enquiry
also. And in order thereunto let me premise this in the general, viz.

That the punishment of unworthy Communicants differs, according to the
different degrees of their unworthiness.

1. Some there are who come to these holy mysteries without any Faith, or any
repentance, or any Charity at all. So Infidels or Unbelievers, Reprobates,
Hypocrites and inveterate Sinners come. Now those who thus presume to approach
this holy table, they in the strictest sense may be truly said to be guilty of
the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.27. i. e. They are as much guilty of
his Death, as those who Crucified him in the flesh. These have no more value
for the blood of Christ than those had; and therefore may expect to be as
severely punished as they were or shall be. The Death of Christ will be unto
them a savor of Death unto Death, not of Life unto Life. The Apostle's
Argument is of great weight in this case. He that despised Moses his law, died
without mercy under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment then,
suppose ye, shall he be worthy, who treads under foot the son of God, and
counts the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and does despite to the spirit of grace, Hebr. 10. v. 28, 29. These are
all comprised under that one general expression, He that believes not, and of
such an one our Savior says, He shall be damned, (...), Mark 16.16. Those
therefore, who being thus unworthy, do presume to come to the Lord's Table,
they profane this holy Feast, they trample under foot the blood of the
Covenant, they are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and may in the
strictest sense, be said to eat and drink their own damnation. But I do not
take this to be the meaning of the Apostle in this place.

2. Some come to the Lord's Supper, who, though they have some small
glimmerings, some little knowledge, yet do they not so well discern the Lord's
Body as they ought; who, though they have Faith, yet is their Faith so weak and
languid, so low and faint, that it does not so powerfully work by love and
repentance as it ought; who do not so well discern the mystical Bread in this
Sacrament from common food, and therefore with too much rudeness, and too
little reverence approach thereunto. Now such is the goodness and mercy of God,
that he is always willing to pity the weaknesses and infirmities of his people.
If there be but some beginnings of grace, some weak efforts, and faint desires
to do their duties, he is so far from discouraging, that he is willing rather
to encourage them therein, that in time they may do better; He will not break
the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, Matthew. 12.20. If there be but a
willing mind, it will be accepted, according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. But if men be not so careful as
they ought, to rectify their mistakes in time, and amend their doings; then God
is pleased sometimes by Discipline and correction to inform them better, to
show them the folly of their doings, and reduce them into the right way. And
this, I conceive to be all that is imported in that Word, which our Translators
have rendered, Damnation, in this place.

To make this good, I shall consider both the signification of the word here
used, and the design of the Apostle in using of it.

There are two words made use of by St. Paul in this Chapter. The former of
which ((...)) is properly rendered Judgment, and the latter ((...)) Damnation or
Condemnation. Now it is the former of these words that is used in this Text,
which is not so well rendered as it might have been. For, it does not import
the Judgment of Eternal Damnation, (as some would understand it) but only a
Temporal punishment, which God is pleased sometimes to inflict upon Believers,
to correct what is amiss in them, and stir them up the better to prepare
themselves for the performance of their duties. That such kind of punishments
were more frequent in the primitive times of Christianity, is sufficiently
evident from the Writers of those times. And that this is St. Paul's sense here,
is plain from the following words: For this cause many are weak and sick among
you, and many sleep, v. 30. But more plainly from the 32 Verse, where St. Paul
himself distinguishes the two sorts of Judgments, saying, When we are judged
((...)), we are chastened of the Lord; because we should not be condemned
((...)) with the World. Whence it is very plain and evident, that the word,
which is here rendered Damnation, imports no more but a judgment of Correction
or Discipline for our good. And even that also may be prevented if we will take
the right course. In order whereunto, St. Paul prescribes us a most excellent
rule. For, says he, If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, v.
31. Now what he means by judging our selves, is plain from the 28 Verse,
where he says, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread,
and drink of this Cup.

I have now considered and explained this Text of Scripture, which, I fear,
has heretofore been made use of by some to very ill purposes; and set up as a
Mormo to affright many well-meaning people from their duties. By virtue of this
Text, ill understood, and worse applied; the Peace of the Church has been
disturbed, the Bond of Union broken, and those who should have lived together
in love and amity, like Fellow Citizens, and Members of the same Family, have
been crumbled into Parties and Factions. Christians have hereby been divided,
not only in their judgments but affections, small differences at first have
been improved into Schisms and Separations; and those have produced such heats
and animosities, that the unity of the Spirit, which should have been kept in
the Bond of Peace, has thereby been dissolved; and the Seamless-Coat of Christ
Jesus has been rent asunder. I cannot believe that Zeal and Ignorance had the
only hand in this business, but that there must be a great deal of malice
joined with them; Those who pretended to be your Guides could not but know
better, and therefore must on set purpose impose upon themselves and you, that
underhand they might the better carry on their designs upon Religion and the
Church of God; In which they have been but too prosperous: Instead of the
substance, the shadow of Religion was only left us; instead of Order and
Discipline, nothing but disorder and confusion was to be seen among us; Every
one setting up for himself, and drawing Parties and Factions after him. And
from whence came all this, but from our breach of Union and Communion with that
Church, of which God had made us Members?

But when you have seriously considered what I have now said, I hope you will
find the Masque taken off, and that this Text has no such frightful visage as
some have put upon it, and in which they have formerly represented it to you;
that it is so far from discouraging any in their communicating with the Church
in this holy Ordinance, that it is rather a great enforcement of their Duty.

And now having thus cleared the way, by explaining this Text of Scripture to
you; for the more easy removal, or prevention of that Objection which is
usually raised therefrom, let me ask you, or rather let me desire you to ask
your self a few Questions.

1. When God calls, Whether it be fit for you, or me, or any of us, to say we
are not ready? When he commands to Do this, whether it will suffice us to
say, We cannot do it as we ought, and therefore we will not do it at all? Let
me put you a plain Case, and pray consider of it; You are the Master of a
Family, and you command one of your Servants to do this: he Answers, he
cannot do it to please you, and therefore he will not go about to do it at all.
You command another to do the same thing, and he answers, he cannot do it so
well as he should, but in obedience to your command he will do it as well as he
can, and he hops you will be pleased with his endeavors. Which of these two
would you account the better, and more acceptable Servant? I do not doubt but
that you would prefer the latter. Well, this is your very Case, God Commands
you to Do this, though you cannot do it so well as you should, yet do it as
well as you can; by so doing you obey the Command of God, who knows your
infirmities, and instead of punishing will pity them. Though God expect all
that we can do for him, yet he expects no more than we can do. For, if there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, not
according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12.

2. Whether it be not a thing certain, that you and I and all men must once
die? and if so, Whether we shall not then be called to an account for the doing
or not doing of this duty? There is an appointed time for all men once to die,
and after that the Judgment, Hebr. 9.27. At which time, all men must receive
the things done in the body, according to that he has done, whether it be good
or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.

3. Whether any of us know the time, when we must die? if not, it may be this
moment as well as the next, and if we be not fit to receive the Sacrament, we
are not fit to die; and if we be taken in the act of disobedience to a known
command, what can we expect, but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
indignation to devour us?

4. What is the reason that we are not fitted and prepared for this holy
Sacrament? Is the fault in God or Christ? No, they kindly invite, and command
us too, to do our duties, and this duty in particular. Is it in the Sacrament
it self? No, that is ready prepared for us. Is it in the Ministers who are
employed about these holy things? No, they in the name of God and Christ, do
earnestly invite and entreat us, and are ready to deliver the same unto us. If
therefore we are unfit and unprepared, the fault must be in our selves, and
what is this, but to double our guilt, by doubling our sin? i.e. by disobeying
the Command of God, and persevering in so doing, to contract a greater guilt.

When you have asked your self these Questions, and seriously considered what
answer is to be given unto them; then be advised seriously to ponder, Whether
this Plea of unfitness and unpreparedness will stand you in any stead at the
Day of Judgment?

When that great Day of the Lord shall come, (as none of us knows how soon it
may come) when the Books shall be opened, and the Consciences of all men
displayed, when every thing shall be open and bare before the great Judge of
Heaven and Earth, then will you wish, when it is too late, that you had been
more careful and conscientious in the discharge of your duties, and more
complying with God and Christ in the observation of their Commands. Then will
you wish that you had your Lives to live over again, that you had once more
those opportunities offered, which you have so often slighted and neglected.
Then will you wish that you were but once more invited, and once more admitted
to feast with God and Christ. How would you then improve the opportunity! You
would certainly so bestir your selves, that every moment should be a step
toward Heaven and Happiness.

Consider this therefore whilst you have yet time, neglect not your present
opportunities. Remember, Opportunity is bald behind, it is not easily retrieved
after it is once passed by us. Let it therefore be your care, whilst it is
called to day, so to improve every occasion offered, that when God shall call,
you may be ready to go, and take possession of that Eternal Inheritance
prepared for you in Heaven.


Parishioner. Sir, I have with great satisfaction attended to your Discourse,
and have great reason to thank you for the pains you have taken to rectify my
judgment in this particular. I do plainly find, I have been too much imposed
upon, and for want of considering so well as I ought, have blindly swallowed
that which I ought not. But being better instructed, I hope for the future I
shall be more careful, and make it my business to be always ready to do my
duty, when God shall please to give me an opportunity.


Pastor. I shall think my self very happy, Neighbor Parishioner, if, either
this Discourse, or any other weak endeavor of mine, shall, by God's blessing
thereupon, prove instrumental to reduce you, or any of my People, to your
duties, and to direct you in the right way to Heaven and Happiness. To do all
the good I can in this station, wherein God has placed me, I know and
acknowledge to be my duty; and in the performance thereof, I bless God, I am
willing to spend and be spent, to lay out all my strength, and all those
abilities which he has been pleased to endow me with. I am never better
pleased, than when thus employed, either in resolving the doubts, or otherwise
instructing those committed to my care and charge. And therefore, if you have
any thing more to offer, let us not lose the opportunity; propound it freely,
and I will endeavor with as much clearness as possible to resolve you.

Obj. 4. Parishioner. Sir, I have heard some scruple the posture in which we
are required to receive the Sacrament, viz. Kneeling, fearing lest there should
be either Superstition or Idolatry, or both in it. And I must confess it has
very much startled me, nor am I yet thoroughly satisfied about it.


Pastor. Our Church in her Appendix to the Rubric, after the
Communion-Service, has very well obviated this objection, for, she there
declares two things.

1. That no adoration is hereby intended; nor ought to be done, either to the
Sacramental Bread and Wine there Bodily received; or to any corporal presence
of Christ's natural flesh and blood. For, 1. She declares, that the
Sacramental Bread and Wine do remain still in their very natural substances,
and therefore ought not to be adored; for, that were Idolatry to be abhorred by
all faithful Christians. 2. That the natural Body and Blood of our Savior
Christ, are in Heaven and not here; It being against the truth of Christ's
natural Body to be at one time in more places than one.

2. That this posture is only meant, 1. To signify thereby our humble and
grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ, therein given to all worthy
Receivers. 2. To prevent such profanation and disorder in the holy Communion,
as might otherwise ensue.

Now after such a plain Declaration as this, one would think, there should be
no room left for such fears and jealousies.


Parishioner. Indeed, Sir, I am of your opinion, and had I known, that the
Church had taken so much care to satisfy her Members in this Case, I should not
have been so easily startled as I was. But I see, I have been more than one way
imposed upon; every thing that may serve to affright has been set before us;
but whatsoever might serve to satisfy, has been carefully concealed from us.


Pastor. The Art of Legerdemain is one of the great Masterpieces whereby those
of the Separation have carried on their designs. Without this they could never
have made such rents and divisions in the Church of God, and crumbled it into
so many Parties and Factions. This we have known long, and I am glad you now
see it.


Parishioner. Sir, I bless God for this happy occasion, and I humbly thank you
for the pains you have taken to undeceive me in many things. And though I am
already in a manner satisfied as to the folly and vanity of this scruple; yet
because it makes a great noise among the Dissenting Party, and is believed to
have some weight in it; and because I would willingly be able to give some
reasonable account of what I do; I will beg the favor of you to furnish me
with an Answer to their Objection. Which runs thus.

Kneeling (say they) is not the posture in which our Savior gave the Sacrament
to his Disciples, and therefore it ought not to be imposed upon us.


Pastor. I commend your care and prudence in that you are so desirous to be
able to give an account of what you do. And the better to enable you, I shall
now consider their Objection.

I willingly grant, that this is not the posture in which the Disciples
received this holy Sacrament from the hands of our blessed Savior. But then we
may consider,

1. That as the posture is not the same, so neither is the time nor place; for,
he gave it after Supper, we administer it before Dinner; He gave it in an upper
Chamber in a private House, we administer it publicly in the Church; and yet
there is no fault found with us for either of these.

2. That there is no word of Command in the whole institution of this
Sacrament, for the observation either of the same posture, or the same time, or
the same place. And therefore being things indifferent in their own nature,
they are left to the wise and prudent determination of our Governors.

3. That as Kneeling is not the same posture, so neither is sitting nor
standing, which are the postures our Objecters usually contend for; especially
sitting, as being a Table-posture. For, that of the Disciples, was a posture of
discumbency, lying or leaning upon Beds, with their heads in one another
Bosoms; which then was, and still is the Table-posture of those Eastern
People; and which neither is, nor ever was in use, nor indeed is practicable
among us.

But to furnish you with a more full answer to this Objection, take these
considerations along with you.

1. That time, place and posture, are necessary circumstances of every action.
I cannot do any thing, but I must have some time and place to do it in, and be
in some posture of body when I do it.

2. That though these circumstances be necessary in the general, yet whether
this or that in particular, is a thing indifferent in it self. If there be no
obligation upon me to this or that, I am at liberty to use any one which I
shall think most convenient.

3. That the determination of this indifferency is left to the discretion of
those, who are either to do, or direct the doing of the action. If it be a
thing of choice, so that I may either do, or not do it, then I am at liberty to
do it in this or that manner, which I please. But if it be a thing prescribed,
so that I am necessitated to do it, then am I to observe the directions of him
or them, who have power to prescribe the action, as to the manner of doing it.

4. That in sacred actions the most humble posture is most suitable for
Creatures to their Creator. If I be to pay my devotions and adorations unto
God, that posture which is most significant of my humility, and does best
express the sense which I have of God's greatness in himself, and his goodness
toward me, will certainly be the most suitable and becoming.

5. That to determine which is so, is not left to every private person. For, if
it were, then should we have as many opinions as persons, and as many postures
as opinions; and all those obtruded upon us as the most fitting; which, how
great a disorder and confusion it would occasion in the service of God, you
may, without consulting an Oracle, easily divine.

6. That to prevent this confusion and disorder, God has left us to the
direction of our Superiors in these Cases. And therefore is it, that we are
commanded to obey them that are set over us, and submit our selves, Hebr. 13.17.

7. That since there must be some posture in which this holy Sacrament is to be
received, and that those whom God has set over us, have determined this, we
ought without murmuring to submit our selves, and acquiesce in their
determination.

8. That if we deny them obedience in this and such like cases, we leave them
nothing to do in the service and worship of God. For, if the thing commanded be
just and good, lawful and right, antecedent to their command, then ought we to
do it, whether they command it or not. And if the thing be evil and unlawful,
then we ought not to do it, though they should command it; for, in this case
the rule holds good, Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye? Acts
4.19. So that if we will not allow them to command and determine us in things
indifferent, we must deny them any power and authority over us, and
consequently make this great Ordinance of God to be vain and foolish.

These considerations duly weighed, and by your serious reflections upon them
further improved, will, I hope, furnish you with a sufficient answer to this
Objection, and enable you to give a reasonable account of what you do.


Parishioner. Sir, I am abundantly satisfied in what you have said, I am now
well provided to give a reasonable account of what I do my self; and do not
doubt, but by God's blessing upon my endeavors to do some good upon others
too. I have only one Objection more, which if I were as well satisfied in, as I
am in all the other, I should bid adieu to all scrupulosity in this Case.

Obj. 5. It is not thought safe to Communicate in a mixed Congregation, in an
Assembly made up of good and bad, wicked as well as godly persons; lest by so
doing we should be partakers of other men's sins.


Pastor. I shall endeavor with as much plainness to give you satisfaction in
this, as I have done in the other, and I hope shall not fail in it. In order
whereunto, it will be necessary rightly to understand the true state of this
Case. There are two things which you seem to fear, viz. Communicating in a
mixed Congregation, and being thereby made partakers of other men's sins. I
shall consider these severally, and do not doubt but to make it evident, that
this is a causeless fear; and that those who have taught you thus to scruple,
have indeed made you afraid, where really no fear was.

1. As to the first part of the Objection, which concerns Communicating in a
mixed Congregation, an Assembly made up of good and bad; the plain English of
it is no more than this. You have no mind to receive the Sacrament in the
Company of those, whom you think not to be so good and holy as your selves. To
cure which tumor, I shall offer these Considerations.

1. Whether there be any Society in this World without such a mixture? i. e.
Whether there be any such Assembly of men, in which there are not some good,
and some bad?

2. Whether for any one to entertain such high thoughts of himself, and such
low ones of others, do not savor too much of Pharisaical Pride and Insolence?
and whether that be not as great a sin as any other?

3. Whether such a temper of mind does not bespeak a man as unfit, if not more,
than those whom he judges to be so unworthy?

4. Whether it be not the duty of all, who address themselves to this holy
Table, to lay aside all proud and overweening thoughts of themselves, all low
and mean thoughts of others, and with lowly and humble minds to approach
thereunto?

5. Whether this lowly and humble temper of mind does not principally consist
in a deep sense of our own sin and unworthiness; in a due apprehension of God's
greatness in himself, and his goodness toward us, notwithstanding our
unworthiness? And if so, Whether there can be any room left in such an one for
low and mean thoughts of others?

6. If those, who thus object, will deal truly and justly by themselves and
others, I appeal to their own Consciences, Whether they do, or can know so much
unworthiness in any other man, as they may and must know in themselves? And if
so, then have they no more cause to scruple the Company of others, than others
have to scruple theirs.

7. Whether the same reason will not hold in civil Conversation, as well as
sacred Communion? And if so, then must they not converse with any one, who
either is, or whom they think to be in a lower form of godliness than
themselves. They must retire and live alone, they must turn Hermits, and
forsake the Conversation of the World, because there is no Society of men to be
found in it, in which there are not bad as well as good.

8. Whether it be not a piece of great impertinence (to say no worse) for any
one to concern himself with the worthiness or unworthiness of another?
Especially considering that plain and excellent rule, which St. Paul has
prescribed in this Case, Let a man examine himself (not another) and so let him
eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28.

These things well considered may suffice, I hope, to answer the first part of
this objection, and remove that scruple of receiving the Sacrament in a mixed
Congregation. But

2. There is a greater danger yet, they are afraid lest hereby they should be
made partakers of other men's sins.

This (if there were any thing in it) would be a dangerous thing indeed. For,
he that is a partaker of other men's sins, shall certainly participate with them
in the punishment due to those sins. But I do not question but to demonstrate
to you, that even this also is a causeless fear. For, there are but these five
ways (that I know of) whereby one man may be said to partake of another man's
sins. 1. By counselling or contriving an evil action. Or, 2. By consenting to
the counsel and contrivance of others in an evil thing. Or, 3. By abetting and
encouraging men in evil doing. Or, 4. By conniving at the wickedness of men,
when it is in our power to prevent it. Or, 5. By joining and cooperating with
them in their evil doing.

Thus and only thus may one man become a partaker with another in his sins. And
how far these rules are applicable to our Case, I appeal to your own
Conscience; But before you give your Verdict, let me advise you to take these
considerations along with you.

1. That the action you are now required to join in, is so far from being evil,
that it is good and very good; being a duty incumbent upon you and all
Christians by virtue of a Divine Command.

2. That it is one thing to join with others in a known duty, and another thing
to join with them in a known sin. These are cases so different, that to think
of confounding these together, were not only to put a force upon our own, but
to offer an affront to the reason of all Mankind. We may as well attempt to
bring the two Poles together, or to make Righteousness and Unrighteousness,
Christ and Belial, Faith and Infidelity, or the most contrary extremes, and
most palpable contradictions to agree in one, as to make these to conspire
together.

3. That in the performance of a common duty, every man is to be accountable
for himself, no one for another. That Jewish Proverb is now out of Doors. The
Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, Ezekiel.
18.2. For, the soul that sins shall die; the Son shall not bear the iniquity
of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the Son; the
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon himself, v. 20.

4. That a good man doing his duty well, will be never the worse for the
Company of one that does it ill; nor will he that does it ill be ever the
better for the Company of him that does it well. Judas was never the better for
communicating with the Disciples, nor they ever the worse for communicating
with him.

5. That unless a man do, by some one or other of the ways before mentioned,
join with another in doing evil, there is no fear of his being partaker with
him, either in his sin or punishment.

All which considered, may, I hope, be sufficient to discharge your mind of
this fear, and guard you against such impressions for the future. By this time,
I suppose, you are sensible how much you have been imposed upon, and that
without any just cause you have been withheld from the performance of a known
and necessary duty. I pray God to forgive them who have thus misled you, and
direct you better for the time to come.


Parishioner. Sir, I am very sensible now how great an error I have labored
under; I bless God, and thank you for it. I beg your Prayers, and shall not
fail to join my own, that it may please God to pardon both me and them who have
led me into it. I am so well satisfied, that I hope I shall not hereafter omit
any opportunity of doing what I am commanded. Sir, I have given you a very
great trouble, though you are pleased not to think it so; You have taken a
great deal of pains, and to good purpose, for I am very well satisfied, that
all my scruples have been idle and ungrounded Cavils, and that I had no just
cause to separate my self from the Communion of the Church, as I have hitherto
done. But, Sir, may I presume to give you a little more trouble; You have
removed my scruples, and now I desire to be admitted into Communion with the
Church, and am resolved (by the blessing of God) to walk orderly and peaceably
therein. If therefore you will please to furnish me with some short rules,
which may direct me in my preparation for this holy Ordinance, and instruct me
how to behave my self both then and afterward; you will greatly oblige me, and
I shall make it my business to observe them.


Pastor. I shall very readily and willingly comply with your desire, and think
it no trouble at all. I am so far from thinking it so, that I look upon it as
my duty, and am mighty well pleased when I meet with an opportunity of doing
it: so well, that I could heartily wish, that those whom God has committed to
my charge, would often give me this occasion. And to satisfy you that these are
my real thoughts, I shall now apply my self to answer your desire, by giving
you the best rules and directions that I can in this Case. And to render them
the more effectual, I shall observe the method propounded by your self, and
endeavor to show you,

1. What is required of those who come to the Lord's Supper?

2. How they ought to demean and behave themselves when there?

3. What will be expected from them afterward?

1. What is required of them who come to the Lord's Supper?

Ans. Our Church has given a short but very full Answer to this Question,
which is this, They are required to examine themselves, Chapter Catech.
whether they truly repent them of their former sins, steadfastly purposing to
lead a new Life, have a lively Faith in God's mercy through Christ, with a
thankful remembrance of his Death, and be in Charity with all men.] Which
Answer is founded upon that excellent Rule laid down by St. Paul in this Case.
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this
Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28.

To examine ones self, imports a serious, diligent and impartial Trial, in
order to amendment and reformation. A transitory glance upon the several
Occurrences of our lives, or a general survey of what we do or have done, will
not serve the turn; but we must make a particular search and scrutiny into our
several actions, and the several circumstances, wherewith they have been
attended; We must consider from what principle, and by what rule we have acted,
and to what end our actions have tended; and apply these to those several and
respective duties we have been about. For, without the due consideration of
these things, an action, though materially good, may be formally evil.

This is to examine, but whom are we to examine? Not others but our selves; Let
a man examine himself. God Almighty having endued man with reason and
consideration, having made him sensible of his duty, and apprehensive of those
hopes and fears, that advantage and danger, which usually attend the
performance or nonperformance thereof; leaves him to be his own Judge, and
remits him to his own Examination. So that if men will flatter and deceive
themselves in that which is their greatest concern, they may blame themselves,
and none but themselves, if danger ensue thereupon. God would not have men
either impertinently to meddle in the concerns of others, or carelessly to trust
others with what concerns themselves; he would have every one do his own duty,
and take care of his own concern. It may reasonably be supposed, that every man
either is, or at least ought to be best known to himself; and that he will be
most just to himself. And therefore God trusts man with himself, and St. Paul
in this very case refers man to himself, saying, Let a man examine himself. But
if after all this, Men will be unfaithful to themselves, and deceive their own
Souls, whom have they to blame but themselves?

Thus have I shown you both the importance of the word, and the Subjects of the
Duty; what it is to Examine, and who they be, that are to undergo that
Discipline. There only remains to consider the end for which we are to
examine our selves, and that is, In order to amendment and reformation. God
would not have us to ravel into our bypast lives, on purpose to take pleasure
in our former sins; or from our impunity, to take encouragement to go on still
in the like iniquities; but he would have us to understand wherein we have
formerly transgressed our rule, and done amiss; to correct and amend it for the
present, and to resolve upon a more renewed course of living for the future.

This in the general is, or ought to be the design of self-examination; but to
be more particular, and bring it nearer to our present Case, I shall endeavor
to do these five things.

1. To show you the reasonableness of this advice, Let a man, etc.

2. The necessity of the thing we are advised to, viz. Self-examination, in
order to a due participation of this holy Feast.

3. What we are to examine our selves about.

4. By what rules we are to proceed in examining our selves.

5. For what end we ought to examine our selves.

1. The reasonableness of this advice, Let a man examine himself.

St. Paul's advice and counsel in this case will appear to be very reasonable,
if we consider either the excellency of the Feast we are invited to, or the
unworthiness of the persons who are invited.

It is no common and usual entertainment, but a great and extraordinary Feast
that we are invited to; Nor is it only a bare Feast, but a solemn Feast upon a
Sacrifice; and that Sacrifice no other, than the offering up of the Son of God
and our Savior. Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, therefore let us
keep the Feast, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5.7.

The Master of this Feast, or he who makes this great entertainment for us, is
none other save only the holy Jesus. It was he, who as a Priest offered himself
as a Sacrifice unto God the Father; who has instituted this holy Feast in
memorial of his Death and Passion; and therein prepared for us not only common
food for the refreshment and sustentation of our decaying Bodies; but such as
may suffice to nourish both our Bodies and Souls unto Eternal Life; not only
the food of Angels, but that which far surpasses those Quails, and that Manna,
wherewith the Israelites were so miraculously fed for forty Years together in
the Wilderness. The dainties which are now prepared, are not only Bread and
Wine, but the Body and Blood of Christ Jesus, the tendency whereof is not only
to preserve life here, but to fit and prepare us for Eternal Life hereafter. So
that if we consider either the Excellency of this Feast, the dignity of its
Author, the greatness of his preparations, the goodness of the things prepared,
the greatness of its ends, or those glorious advantages which may thence accrue
unto us; have we not great reason to proceed cautiously herein? to take the
advice which St. Paul gives us, and examine our selves, before we presume to
eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.

But if we consider the unworthiness of the persons who are invited to this
great Feast, it will render the advice yet more reasonable. Who are they for
whom the holy Jesus prepares so great a Feast, and whom he invites to so noble
an Entertainment? Men they are, but fallen men; Men in an estate of sin, in a
depraved and degenerate condition; who, by their original pravity, have lost
their primitive purity; and thereby unfitted themselves for Communion with so
holy a God. Whose Parents have been attainted of High Treason against Heaven,
and have involved their Children in the same guilt. Who have not only been sold
under sin, but are become willing slaves thereunto; who are not only guilty by
derivation, but more criminal by their own actual transgressions; who are not
only by nature the Children of wrath, but by their own personal crimes liable
to eternal ruin; who have not only sinned, but repeated their sins against
Heaven; and by their iterated provocations have challenged the utmost of divine
fury and indignation. Who have been forward enough to make Vows and Promises of
better Obedience unto God, and as ready upon all occasions to break those Vows,
and violate those Engagements. Who have been always willing to close with
opportunities of sinning, but very unwilling to be reclaimed therefrom. These
are they who are invited to this holy Feast, but be not mistaken, for, whilst
such, they have no encouragement to come thereunto. And therefore St. Paul
gives us good counsel, when he says, Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup. Which Examination, as I have
already told you, must be in order to amendment and reformation. So that if we
seriously consider, either our original pravity, or our actual iniquities, our
repeated sins against God, our manifold breaches of Vows and Promises made unto
him, or our great unwillingness to be reclaimed from our sinful courses; we
must needs own our selves to be very unworthy Guests at God's Table; and if so,
then we shall find great reason to be very cautious in our approaches
thereunto, and to think this advice very reasonable, To examine our selves
before we eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.

2. The necessity of the thing we are advised unto, viz. Self-Examination in
order to a due participation of this holy Feast.

The necessity of Self-Examination in order to this end, will appear to be very
urgent, if not indispensible, when we consider, That without a serious,
diligent, and impartial trial of our selves, we can never fully understand
wherein we have done amiss. And so long as we are prepossessed with an opinion
of being innocent, we shall never endeavor to amend; and if we do not that, we
can never expect to be well-come Guests at Gods Table; and if we be not fit
Guests there, we cannot expect the advantages thereof. But if, notwithstanding
our unpreparedness, we will presume to come thereunto, then may we look to meet
with that dreadful Sentence pronounced against him who wanted the Wedding
Garment, which was, To be bound hand and foot, and to be cast into outer
darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 22.13. All which
considered, may fully evince the necessity of Self-Examination.

But though the advice which St. Paul gives us, be in it self so reasonable,
and the thing he advises us to be so necessary; yet will not the want thereof,
excuse our disobedience to the command of Christ, or our non-attendance upon
him at this holy Feast. It will rather condemn us, because we refuse to gratify
him in a business, which is not only reasonable in it self, but necessary for
us. To make an Apology for our not communicating upon this score, were to
excuse one fault, by committing another. For, there can no other reason be
assigned of our not doing our duty, but only our negligence and unwillingness.
Let not any therefore hence forward dare to say, they are not ready when Christ
calls them; but rather let them before hand consider what it is that is
required of them, and so prepare themselves that they may be always ready. Let
them make it their business to understand their duty and do it, to search every
corner of their hearts, and every circumstance of their lives, and amend what
is amiss; that so they may be always ready. And to assist you herein, I shall
now apply my self to the next thing which I promised to show you, viz.

3. What we are to examine our selves about?

There are two things which we ought especially to examine our selves about;
viz. Our bypast lives and conversations, and our present thoughts and
resolutions. As to the former of these, Let us consider under what obligations
we stand unto Almighty God to live holily and righteously, how far he has
obliged us by his mercies and goodness, by his Promises and by his Providence,
by Mercies conducing both unto Life and Godliness here, and to Eternal Life,
and never-failing Happiness hereafter. How far we are engaged by our own Vows
and Promises, not only made, but frequently repeated in the presence of God and
of his People, and by our constant and continued profession of Christianity.
Let us consider what rules he has given us to live by, how equitable they are
in themselves, how practicable as to us, and how easy and pleasant he has
thereby rendered our way to Heaven and Happiness. Let us call to mind how far
we have violated those obligations, and how often we have transgressed those
rules; and feriously examine what progress we have made toward repentance and
amendment. Those who are so considerative, as to make these reflections upon
the time past, will find cause sufficient to be troubled for what they have
done, and to reform their way of Living; by which only means, they may in some
measure capacitate themselves for this holy Feast.

But it is not only our bypast Lives and Conversations, but our present
thoughts and resolutions, we are to examine our selves about. We ought to
consider what thoughts we have of the ways of God, and the ways of sin; toward
which the bias of our affections does most incline; Whether we can, not only
be content, but with cheerfulness abandon the ways of sin and wickedness, and
with eagerness pursue the principles of holiness and true righteousness:
Whether we be convinced in our Judgments of the unreasonableness and folly of
the one, and of the great reasonableness and equity of the other; and whether
these sentiments, (if any such be found in us) be as yet formed into
resolutions of better obedience for the future. These are the things which we
are to examine our selves about, and that we may the better do it, Let us in
the next place consider,

4. By what rules we are to proceed in this Self-Examination?

The rules by which we are to examine our selves are these two, viz. The word
of God, and our own Consciences.

The one will show us our duty, and the other will either accuse or excuse us
as to the performance of it. Let us therefore carefully study the Book of God,
and make it our business to be acquainted with his Will made known unto us
therein. Let us keep a good correspondence with our own Consciences, neither
stifling the genuine dictates thereof, nor suffering them to be groundlesly
clamorous upon us; Let them not strain at a Gnat, whilst they swallow a Camel;
let them not start and boggle at things indifferent, whilst they greedily
embrace things unlawful. A good understanding of the former will help to inform
the latter; and these two thus qualified will be the best rules to examine our
selves by. Let us therefore make use of these rules, and for our further
direction, let us in the last place consider,

5. For what end we ought to examine our selves?

The end of our Examination, as I have already hinted to you in the beginning
of this Discourse, ought to be amendment and reformation. In order whereunto
several things will be requisite, as

1. A serious Meditation of God's goodness and our own unworthiness. The former
of these will show us under what obligations we are, and the latter may serve
to humble us under the sense of our miscarriages; and both these together may
contribure much to our amendment and Reformation. The kindness and love of God
our Savior toward us being duly considered, cannot choose but constrain us to
live more holily and righteously; and the consideration of our own unworthy and
disingenious dealing must needs make us ashamed of what we have done, and
willing to do better. Let us therefore often think of these things, and
endeavor to awaken those sentiments of duty and gratitude, honor and honesty,
interest and advantage, to persuade us to a good improvement of this Meditation.

2. Repentance for sins past, Reformation of life at present, and a firm
resolution of better obedience for the future. In vain shall we examine our
selves, if after we have found what is amiss in us, we do not repent of it; and
to little purpose will that repentance be, if we do not reform and amend it;
and as little worth will that reformation be at present, if we do not resolve,
and perform our resolutions too, by living more holily and righteously for the
time to come. For this end therefore ought we to examine our selves.

3. Prayer to God will also be highly necessary in this Case. No Christian Duty
can be successfully carried on without God's blessing, and the divine
assistance; and God does not ordinarily vouchsafe that to any but those who
faithfully and fervently pray for it. If therefore we expect any good Issue of
our Self-Examination, we must thereunto add Prayer. When we have thereby
discovered our sins, we must pray unto God for the mortification and
forgiveness of them. When we address our selves to God's Table, we must pray
unto him to compose and settle our thoughts, and to bless and direct us in what
we go about. And that our Prayers may be the more effectual, we must add our
hearty endeavors for the accomplishing of what we pray for. Without thus doing
we cannot hope for any good effect of our Examination.

4. Watchfulness will be very necessary. We must watch over our selves, over
our thoughts, over our words, and over our actions, that nothing therein be
displeasing unto God. We must watch against our Enemies, the World, the Flesh
and the Devil, that they do not withdraw us from our duty, and persuade us unto
folly. Without this, our Examination will be to little purpose, and our
reformation and amendment will go but slowly on.

5. Fear and reverence, or an awful regard of that Deity, with whom, and upon
whom we are invited to feast, will also be very necessary. For, if the
Examination of our selves, and the consideration of what we go about, do not
produce in us reverential apprehensions of the divine presence; if it do not
make us more careful in what manner we make our approaches thereinto; and how
we behave our selves whilst there; if it do not create in us a fear to
displease, or offend him, with whom we are to feast; if it do not make us very
cautious of provoking that Deity, whom we pretend to worship and adore in this
holy action: It is an evident sign, that our pretended Examination has no
tendency toward amendment and reformation.

6. Thankfulness for so great a mercy as is now offered us, will also be highly
necessary. Can we consider what God our Savior has done and suffered for us,
and what advantages he does daily offer to us, without being deeply sensible,
and truly thankful? If we can, it will be a sad symptom of the deplorableness
of our present estate and condition, and give but little hopes of our amendment
and reformation.

7. Faith and confidence in God through Jesus Christ, that our endeavors
herein will be successful. This also will be highly necessary. For, doubting
destroys all the comfort, which we might reasonably hope for, from the
performance of our duties; and takes off the cheerfulness with which we ought
to prosecute our endeavors. Let us therefore lay aside this, and draw near
unto God with full assurance of Faith. Let us believe that he not only is, but
that he is a Rewarder of all those that faithfully seek him. Having duly
performed those duties that are required on our parts, let us not doubt, but
believe, that he will accept of our so doing, and bless us therein.

Thus have I endeavored to make good the first part of my Promise, by showing
you, what is required of all those who come to the Lord's Supper, viz.
Self-Examination; as also by showing you the reasonableness and necessity of
our so doing; what we are to examine our selves about, by what rules we are to
proceed, and for what end we ought to examine our selves. And whosoever he be
that does seriously set himself to the performance of this duty, and in so
doing does carefully observe these rules, may with confidence approach, and
reasonably hope to be a welcome Guest at God's Table.


Parishioner. Sir, You have very well acquitted your self in this first part of
your Promise; I am mightily pleased, and wonderfully well satisfied with those
directions which you have given me, and am resolved, by God's blessing, with
care and Conscience to observe them. I know, I cannot do it so well as I
should, but I will do it as well as I can; and I hope God will accept my
willing mind, and pardon my weaknesses and infirmities.

But, Sir, You did also promise to direct me how to demean and behave my self
when I am at this holy Feast, so that I may not displease and offend my blessed
Savior, who has been, and still is so kind to me.


Pastor. It is very true, I did promise you that also, and I hope, I shall not
fail you therein, because I intend to take two unerring Guides along with me,
viz. The blessed Jesus, and his holy Apostle St. Paul; The former of which, not
only commands us to do this, but to do it in remembrance of him, Luke 22.19.
and the latter tells us, that in the doing of it, there ought to be a
Discerning of the Lord's Body, 1 Cor. 11.29.


1. When we come to this holy Feast, we ought to call to mind all that the
blessed Jesus has done and suffered for us. He who commands us to do this,
commands also to do it in remembrance of him.

This holy Feast was never intended by the blessed Author and Instituter of it,
to be an Expiatory or propitiatory Sacrifice; nor as the Papists call it, an
unbloody offering for the sins both of the quick and dead; nor for a scenical
and histrionical representation of the Death of Christ. But it was designed to
be an Eucharistical Sacrifice, or a Sacramental action, whereby Christians are
to commemorate that bloody Sacrifice, which Jesus Christ offered upon the Cross
for the sins of Mankind. And therefore St. Paul, reciting the words of
Institution, applies them to this holy action, saying, This do ye in
remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. And that he might be the better
understood, he explaineth himself in the following words, saying, As often as
ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye show forth, (or show ye forth) the
Lord's death, till he come, v. 26.

Now the word (...) which is here used, and rendered to show forth, does not
signify to express one thing by the likeness of another, nor to represent it by
histrionical gestures, but to preach and declare the thing as it is, i. e. by
celebrating this holy Feast, to keep up the memorial thereof, and thereby
declare, what a deep sense we have of all that our blessed Savior has done
and suffered for us.

Whence by the way, I may note unto you the vanity of that Popish Figment of
Transubstantiation. For, if the blessed Jesus had designed to have been always
really and bodily present with his people in this holy Feast; this command of
his would have been very insignificant; for, Remembrance does not respect
things future, or things present, but things past.

But to return to our business, To do this in remembrance of him, and in so
doing, To show forth the Lord's Death, seem to be expressions exegetical or
explanatory of one another. And therefore it may not be amiss to enquire into
the sense and meaning of both, that we may the better understand how to behave
our selves at this holy Feast. To that purpose I shall take them in order, and
show you,

1. What it is, To do this in remembrance of him?

2. What it is, To show forth the Lord's Death?

1. What it is, To do this in remembrance of him?

Ans. An idle and unconcerned remembrance of the sufferings and death of
Christ; such as men sometimes have, when they call to mind things past which
are of no great concern to them, is not the thing here intended: No, it must be
an effectual remembrance; i. e. Such an one as may stir up our minds to
apprehend and apply Christ with all his benefits to our selves; so to remember
the Sacrifice and Death of Christ, that we may thence reap Comfort, Joy, Peace
of Conscience, increase of Faith and Charity, and an assured hope of future
life and felicity on that account: So to remember the love that he has shown
unto us therein, as to be always thankful to him for it. But to be more
particular,

1. When we come to God's Table, and there see the two Elements of Bread and
Wine, ready prepared to be delivered to, and received by us; we ought to call
to mind that Jesus Christ is a perfect Savior, and that his Body and Blood,
which are represented thereby, are the true Bread and Water of Life to all that
believe in him, and worthily receive that holy Sacrament.

2. When we see the Bread and Wine set apart by the Minister, and by him
Consecrated to that holy purpose, by repeating the Promises and Prayers made
for that end; we ought to remember that Jesus Christ was also ordained of God,
appointed and set apart by him to be our Mediator and Redeemer: to make
intercession for us at the Throne of Grace, and redeem us from all our sins.

3. When we see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured out, it should put us in
mind how the Body of Christ was broken, and his Blood shed for us, how he was
Crucified and slain, and all this for our sins: and that if he had not thus
once died for us, we must have died ever, i. e. we must have undergone an ever,
yet never dying Death.

4. The Sacramental actions of giving and receiving the Elements, should put us
in mind, That God does truly and really give Christ, with all his merits, and
all the efficacy of them, to every worthy Receiver in this Sacrament.

5. The consideration of these two last Meditations should put us upon renewing
our Faith and Repentance. For,

1. When we remember that his Body was broken and his Blood shed for us, it
should stir up in us a godly sorrow, and unfeigned repentance for our sins,
which have been the causes of so great sufferings to our blessed Savior. 2.
When the Minister gives the Bread and Wine, and we receive them; we should at
the same time lift up our hearts to Heaven in a deep sense of God's goodness,
and our own unworthiness, and endeavor to apprehend and apply Christ with all
his benefits to our selves; believing that he was made man for us, and that he
suffered and died, not for the remission of sins in general, but of our sins in
particular.

6. The consideration of the dying Love of the blessed Jesus, represented to us
in this holy Sacrament, ought to put us in mind how necessary a charitable
frame and temper of mind is this Feast. If Christ have so loved us, then
certainly we ought to love him; and if we would do this well, let let us take
his own directions, who says, If ye love me, keep my Commandments, John 14.15.
And if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, 1 John 4.11. Love to
the Brethren is not only our duty, but our greatest interest, For, thereby know
we that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren, 1 John
3.14. The remembrance therefore of the dying love of the blessed Jesus, ought
to stir up in us at this time, a love to God, and to the Brethren.

7. The consideration of the whole should create in us an humble and thankful
frame and temper of mind. It should put us upon offering the Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving unto God, not only in word, but in every action of our
life, for Christ and all his benefits; and to testify the reality of that
gratitude, by renewed acts of Faith, Repentance and Obedience all our days.
Thus ought we to receive this Sacrament in remembrance of Christ.

2. What it is to show forth the Lord's Death till he come?

Ans. An Historical Narrative of the Sufferings and Death of Jesus Christ; to
be able to tell that he died at Jerusalem, in the Eighteenth Year of Tiberius
the Emperor; Pontius Pilate being the Roman Deputy in Judea, and Josephus
Caiphas the High Priest that same year; This is not to show forth the Lord's
Death in the Apostles sense. But such a serious Meditation thereof as may
inhanse our hatred of sin, our love to God, and our thankfulness to Jesus
Christ; if it be constant and continued, will best declare our sense of our
Savior's Sufferings, and show forth his Death till he come.

1. When therefore we are at God's Table, and there see all things prepared for
us; when we consider, that Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us, and that
we are now invited to a Feast upon that Sacrifice: We cannot but reflect upon
the just anger and indignation of God against sin. We cannot but observe, that
such was the severity of Divine Justice, and the heinousness of sin, that no
reconciliation could be made between God and Sinners, till the punishment due
to sin was suffered. So highly was God incensed, so great was his wrath justly
conceived against sin; that he was not to be pacified by any thing, but only
the deprecation, and Death of his own Son. These ought to be our thoughts,
especially at this time; and if thus we employ our selves when we are at this
holy Feast, and in pursuance of these thoughts do for the time to come loath
and abhor, hate and avoid all manner of sin; then and thereby shall we truly
show forth the Lords Death till he come.

2. When we are at God's Table, and there see the dainties provided for us;
that there is not only food for our bodies, but for our Souls also; not only
such as may sustain our frail Bodies, or support and maintain the union between
our Souls and Bodies here; but such as will nourish us up in grace here, and
fit us for Glory hereafter. When we consider, that such was the love of God to
Mankind, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believed on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16. have we not the
greatest Specimen of God's mercy and goodness toward us, that we can desire?
and is not this love writ in Characters so legible in this holy Sacrament, that
he that runs may read them? and if so, what cause have we with grateful
acknowledgments to own and declare the goodness and mercy of God, to praise and
thank him for it, to love him again, and to testify that our love, by keeping
his Commandments. Which if we do, and persevere in so doing, then shall we
truly declare and show forth the Lord's Death till he come.

3. When we are at God's Table, and there, under those symbolical Elements of
Bread and Wine, can clearly discover the Body and Blood of Christ really,
though not corporally offered to us; how lively is the dying love of our
blessed Savior therein represented to us? May we not therein plainly read
those dreadful pangs, those dying groans, and those unspeakable sufferings,
which the blessed Jesus did willingly undergo for our sakes? and ought we not
with all possible expressions of love and gratitude to commemorate this his
kindness? This is all ( i. e. this with the dependencies thereupon) that he
requires of us, for all that he has done and suffered for us, viz. to
celebrate this Feast in remembrance of him, which if we rightly do, and
continue so doing, then do we truly declare, or show forth the Lord's Death
till he come. For, this Meditation cannot fail of filling our hearts with
grateful sentiments of our Saviors Love; and those sentiments will certainly
employ our tongues in thankful acknowledgments, and engage our whole lives in
dutiful returns unto him for it.

Thus have I shown you in the first place how you ought to demean and behave
your self, when you are at God's Table, viz. you ought to do this in
remembrance of Jesus Christ. But there is one thing more yet required of you,
viz.

2. In the doing of this, there ought to be a Discerning of the Lord's Body.

This expression has been mightily strained by some, who have racked their
inventions to find out such notions of it, as, I am apt to believe, were never
intended by St. Paul; but I shall not now either trouble my self or you with
the Examination of them. My design is only to instruct you plainly, and make
things as intelligible to you as I can. In order whereunto, all that I shall do
at present, shall be only to acquaint you with the full importance of the word
Discerning, and by that means to show you the true and genuine sense of the
Apostle in this expression.

The word ((...)) here used and rendered Discerning, imports only a discretional
act, whereby we do exempt some one thing from the common order of others, and
set a more honorable value and esteem upon it. This sense of the word is
warranted by the usage of it in other places. St. Jude, v. 22. advises us to
have compassion of some, making a difference, ((...)) i. e. between such
Sinners as are treatable, and willing to be instructed, and such as are
intractable, obstinate and disobedient. And St. Paul puts the question,
saying, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who has made thee to differ? ((...);) i. e. who has
separated thee from the rest of Mankind, and placed thee in an higher Form than
them? from both which places, the importance of the word is very plain, that it
implies only a discretional act, whereby one thing is distinguished from
another, and more honor and respect paid thereunto, than to the other.

To discern the Lord's Body therefore (in St. Paul's sense) is, to look upon the
sacred Elements of Bread and Wine in this holy Feast, as the most precious
symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, to put a difference between them, and
all other common meats and drinks, to use them with a religious reverence, and
not to approach this holy Table without a lively Faith in Christ Jesus, a
serious and unfeigned repentance of all our sins, a steadfast purpose of leading
a new life, and being in Charity with all men.

This I take to be St. Paul's meaning in this expression, and if you thus
discern the Lord's Body, you will certainly find the blessed effect of it, in
the spiritual nourishment of your Soul unto Eternal Life.

And thus have I performed the second part of my Promise to you, by showing
you, how you ought to demean and behave your self at God's Table.

Pashioner. Sir, You have infinitely obliged me by the pains you have taken to
furnish me with such good rules and directions, I pray God to give me grace to
observe and follow them. I shall (God willing) do my endeavor, and I beg your
Prayers for my assistance. But there is one thing more yet, which you were
pleased to promise me, viz. some Directions how to behave my self after I have
received this holy Sacrament. And these also I would willingly take along with
me when I go from hence.


Pastor. I confess I am your Debtor by Promise as to this also, and shall
endeavor to discharge my self of that Debt, by giving you some short and plain
rules how to carry your self afterward.

1. When you go away from this holy Sacrament, you ought to carry along with
you a deep sense of those great obligations which God Almighty has laid upon
you therein. You ought to retire not only into your Closet, or some private
place, but into your self; and there meditate of the great mercy and goodness
of God the Father, in sending his Son to be your Mediator and Redeemer; and of
the great condescension, and infinite kindness of God the Son, in taking upon
him your nature, and submitting himself to Death, even the Death of the Cross
for your sins. You ought often to think of that great honor you have received,
in being admitted not only to feast with God and Christ, but to feast upon
Christ, the true Christian Sacrifice. In a word, you ought by serious thoughts
and meditations of what you have been about, to imprint upon your minds a due
sense of God's goodness, and thereby take a prospect of all that happiness,
which you either do enjoy, or may obtain, by complying with, and being obedient
to the command of the blessed Jesus in this particular.

2. Having thus imprinted these things upon your mind, you must endeavor
thereby to work it into an humble and grateful frame. When you reflect upon
your former sins and present unworthiness, you will find cause sufficient to be
humbled for them; and when you consider God's greatness in himself, and his
goodness toward you, you will find good reason to be thankful for the favors
you have, and daily do receive from him. Let it be your care therefore always
to cherish due sentiments of divine goodness in your mind, that so you may be
ready upon all occasions to praise and glorify his great and holy name for it.
Can you remember how kindly you have been invited, how courteously received,
how nobly and friendly entertained by the blessed Jesus, and yet be unthankful?
I cannot believe that any one who pretends to Christianity, can so far forfeit
his Religion and reason too, can be so much lost to all the sentiments of piety
and humanity at once, as to be guilty of so gross ingratitude. Unthankfulness
in Divinity is an odious crime; and Ingratitude in Morality is no better. So
much was it abhorred even by the Heathens, that it became a Proverb among them,
Call a man ungrateful, and you have said the worst you can of him. Be not you
therefore guilty of that against God, which the Heathen looked upon as so great
a reproach among themselves; Consider that heavy charge which God draws up
against Israel; Isa. 1.2, 3. Hear, O Heavens, and hearken, O Earth, says the
Lord, for, I have nourished and brought up Children, but they have rebelled
against me. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib; but Israel
does not know me, my people does not consider. Let the consideration of God's
so deep resentment of this crime in his own people, teach you and me to beware
of it. Let us recollect our selves, and call to mind all those incomparable
favors and benefits which God from time to time has bestowed upon us, and the
advantages of this holy Feast in particular; that so our minds may be always
ready to make grateful acknowledgments thereof.

3. When by these or the like Meditations, you have wrought your mind into such
an humble and thankful frame; Your next work will be, to evidence the truth and
reality of that temper, by actions suitable thereunto. We do not expect to find
grapes on thorns, nor figs on thistles. For, as a good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit, so neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit, says our
blessed Savior, Matthew. 7.16, 17, 18. And thence he concludes, Therefore by
their fruits ye shall know them, v. 20. The best evidence therefore of a worthy
Communicant, is to be taken from his way of living afterward. If he make
Conscience of what he does, if he make it his great care and business to live
holily toward God, and righteously toward all men, it is a good sign of the
goodness of his condition; But if, notwithstanding the obligations which have
been laid upon him at this holy Feast, he return with the Dog to his Vomit, and
the Sow that was washed to his wallowing in the Mire; if he still adhere to his
old sins, and take pleasure in his former wickedness, it is an evidence that he
still remains in the gall of bitterness, and that without a timely repentance
and reformation, his portion will be with Hypocrites in Everlasting Burnings.
It is good counsel which St. Paul gives us, Col. 2.6. As ye have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. Thereby intimating, that our returns
ought to be suitable to favors and benefits which we have received. The holy
and righteous God loves holiness and righteousness in his people, and expects
it from them.

When by our Baptism we were at first admitted into Christianity, we entered
into Covenant with God; That we would renounce the Devil and all his Works, the
Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful desires of the
flesh; that we would believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith: And that
we would keep God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the
days of our life. Now our continued profession of that Faith, into which we
were baptized, is indeed a daily repetition of that Promise; but as often as we
receive this holy Sacrament, and feast with God upon this holy Sacrifice, we
solemnly renew our Covenant, and do thereby engage our selves to perform the
Conditions thereof.

To sum up all in a word therefore, If you would know what is expected from
you, after you have been admitted a Guest at God's Table; It is briefly this,
You must make it your great concern, with all care and Conscience, to perform
your Baptismal Vow and Covenant in all the parts and branches thereof; i. e.
You must take care to spend the remainder of your lives in living holily
toward God, and righteously toward all men.

And thus have I endeavored to perform the third and last part of my Promise,
by acquainting you, what it is that will be expected from you, after you have
had the honor to be admitted a Guest at God's Table, and to bear your part in
the Celebration of this holy Feast.


Pashioner. Sir, You have, to my great satisfaction, fully performed all that
you promised: And now, it is my part not only to remember, but carefully to
observe, and conscienciously follow those good Rules and Instructions, which
you have given me. And that, from this time forward, I will endeavor, by God's
Assistance, to do. I beg your Pardon for the trouble I have given you, and
heartily thank you for the pains you have taken with me. I hope you will excuse
the One, and I will endeavor to improve the Other to those good Ends and
Purposes, which you designed it. And that I may the sooner set about that Work,
I will at present take my Leave of you.


Pastor. God b'w'y', good Neighbor; Go, and do as you have said, and the Lord
give a Blessing thereunto. Be not you wanting to your self in your Endeavors,
and God Almighty will never be wanting to you in his assistance. But that you
may carry on this work the more comfortably, be frequent in your Prayers to God
for his blessing and direction; and rest assured, my Prayers shall not be
wanting at the Throne of Grace, that you may be successful therein.


A SHORT FORM OF PRAYERS Fitted for the more Worthy RECEIVING OF THE Holy
Communion: WITH A Morning and Evening Prayer for the Use of Private Families.
WHen you hear the Exhortation read by the Minister, on the Sunday, or Holy Day
before, and find your selves thereby invited to, and admonished to prepare your
selves for, the Celebration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; consider
seriously, by whom, and to what you are invited; imprint upon your minds a due
sense of that great honor which is done you by God, and of the great love of
your dying Savior; and think with your selves with what Godly Preparation you
ought to approach thereunto. And that these impressions may not wear out, let
me advise you constantly to use this following, or some such like Prayer and
Confession, every Morning and Evening the Week before.

O Almighty and most merciful Father, who of thine infinite goodness have been
pleased to invite me not only to Feast with thee, but to Feast upon thee; who
have provided for me not only Sacramental Bread and Wine, but the Bread and
Water of Life, the Body and Blood of my blessed Savior. How infinite is thy
mercy, and how unspeakable is thy loving kindness herein! I am overwhelmed with
the thoughts of it, and lost in admiration. But when I consider, That Thou art
a God of purer Eyes than to behold the least Iniquity; That Thou neither do
nor can approve of any Sin in any one; then my fears arise, and my confidence
fails me. How shall I, who am a great and grievous Sinner, appear before
thee? How shall I dare to approach thy presence? I cannot but own that both in
thought, word, and deed, I have grievously offended thy most Sacred Majesty,
and that too frequently, and with too high an hand. I have done what in me lay,
to forfeit thy favor, and to provoke thy wrath and indignation against me.
What therefore can I expect, but with him who wanted the Wedding Garment, to be
rejected with scorn, and exposed to Punishment? But, O Lord, with Thee is mercy
that thou may be feared. It is thy property, to have mercy and to forgive. In
confidence, therefore, of this thy great mercy, and in hopes of Pardon and
Forgiveness, it is, that I am now humbly bold to appear before Thee. Behold me,
O Lord, thus prostrate in thy presence, with the tears of true, and unfeigned
Repentance, bewailing the miscarriages of my bypast life; and for thy mercies
sake, and for the merits sake of thy dear Son, Jesus Christ, humbly begging,
not only Pardoning Grace for Sins past, but Preventing Grace against Sin for
the time to come. It was for my Sin that my Savior suffered; it was to wash
away the stain thereof that he shed his Blood, O let me not lose the benefit of
it! If there be any thing in me that may render me incapable of it, be pleased
to remove it. If there be any thing wanting in me, to make me fit for it, let
thy Holy Spirit, O Lord, work it in me. Subdue and mortify all my Lusts and
Corruptions, and implant in me principles of Holiness and true Righteousness.
Teach me to love and fear Thee as I ought. Give me an humble and obedient
temper of mind. Let it be my great pleasure to walk in thy ways, and my only
delight to keep thy commandments. Make me thankful for all thy mercies, and
careful to improve them to thy glory, my own comfort, and the good of others.
Fit me for all states and conditions of life, and prepare me for every good
work; but especially for the celebration of that Sacred Feast which I am now
invited to: Let nothing, O Lord, be wanting in me that Thou know requisite
for me, when I appear in thy presence. Let me be found a welcome guest at thy
Table; and there receive that heavenly Food, which alone can nourish up my Soul
unto Eternal Life. All which I humbly beg, in the Name and Mediation of Jesus
Christ, and in that Sacred form of Words, which he himself has taught us,
saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

In the Morning of the Communion-Day, before you go to Church, use this
following, or some such like Prayer.
O Lord my God, the Day, the joyful Day is come, on which Thou have promised to
provide, and invited me to be a guest, at a most Heavenly Banquet. This day I
am to Feast with Thee, and Feed upon my blessed Savior and Redeemer. Give me,
I beseech Thee, a due sense of that Honor and Happiness I am now going to be
made partaker of, and make me truly thankful for it. I am now going to Thy
Table, good Lord fit and prepare me for it; furnish me with such Graces, and
Ornaments of Mind, as may be suitable to so high and honorable an
entertainment; fill my Soul with Fear and Reverence, with Humility and
Meekness, with Piety and Devotion, and with Faith and Charity; that nothing may
be found wanting in me, when I appear before Thee. Let thy Blessing go along
with me, and let Thy Holy Spirit guide and direct me. Let me find a gracious
reception there, and a full satisfaction to all my wishes and desires: Enable
me so to Eat the Flesh and Drink the Blood of my blessed Savior, that he may
evermore dwell in me, and I in him. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ's
sake, our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

When you Approach the Lord's Table, and there see the Symbols of Christ's Body
and Blood placed in order, and ready to be Consecrated to that Holy Use; you
may use this following, or some other short Prayer, to this purpose.
I Am here, O Lord, in Obedience to thy Command; and am very desirous to do my
Duty: I come to renew my Covenant with Thee; and beg thy assisting Grace, That
I may keep it better for the time to come. To this end, be pleased to increase
and strengthen that Faith, which Thou have already wrought in me; and grant,
That I may ever hereafter serve and please Thee in Newness of Life. I find a
Table spread for me, blessed be thy Name for it; give me, I beseech Thee, a
Spiritual Appetite thereunto. I am unfit, I confess, for so great an Honor: I
am unworthy to partake of these Holy Mysteries: I have no Merits of my own to
trust to; but I have thy Mercies to depend upon, and the Merits of my Blessed
Savior to plead for me. Hear them, O Lord; and, for their sakes, look
graciously down upon me: upon their Account, let me find Favor with Thee here,
and obtain Everlasting Life, when Time shall be no more, hereafter. Amen.

When you see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured out by the Minister; then
use this following, or some other short Prayer, to this purpose.
O Holy Jesu, who for my sake did suffer thy self to be Apprehended,
Arraigned and Condemned, and (at last) to suffer Death upon the Cross for my
Sins: Give me Grace to be truly affected with the Remembrance of what Thou have
done, and suffered for me. Write it on the Tables of my Heart, that I may ever
be mindful of it: and let the Consideration thereof, cause me to hate Sin, and
love Holiness. Create in me, O Lord, a new Heart, and renew a right Spirit
within me; that, for the future, I may make it my business to Perfect Holiness
in thy Fear: That, as Thou diedst for Sin; so I may die to Sin: That, as thy
Body was broken, and Blood spilt upon the Cross for the Sins of Mankind; so my
Heart may be broken under the Sense of Sin, and broken off from the love and
likeing of any Sin; and, at last, fixed upon Holy and steadfast Resolutions of
better Obedience for the future. Amen.

Whilst the Minister is Receiving the Sacrament himself, and Administering it to
the rest of the Communicants; you may use this following, or some other short
Prayer, to this effect.
O Blessed Lord God! Who am I, that Thou should be thus mindful of me? That
Thou should admit me a Guest to thy Table? I know, I am unworthy to appear in
thy Presence, and should have wanted Confidence to approach this Sacred Place,
if I had not received thy Command so to do. Lord, Let me not suffer for my
Obedience thereunto: But, as Thou have thought fit to invite me hither; so be
pleased to prepare my Heart for the Reception of these Holy Mysteries provided
for me: And grant, That my so doing may in some measure be instrumental to the
Advancement of thy Glory, the Good of my own Soul, and the Edification of
others. And this I beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

When you have Received the Holy Sacrament, whilst the Minister is Administering
it to others, or returning to the Table, and placing things decently, and in
order there; you may use this following, or some other short Prayer, to this
purpose.
O Almighty God, and Heavenly Father, I most heartily thank Thee for that
Spiritual Food, which I have now Received. Let not, I beseech Thee, any Failure
of mine deprive me of the Advantages of this Holy Feast: But be pleased to add
thy Blessing thereunto, that so it may be Food indeed, and nourish my Soul; not
only in Grace here, but unto Glory hereafter. I am so sensible of the
Obligation, that Thou have been pleased now to lay upon me, that I do
henceforward devote and consecrate my self, Soul and Body, wholly to thy
Service; humbly beseeching Thee to accept this my bounden Duty, and to give me
Grace ever hereafter rightly and truly to perform the same; to thy Honor and
Glory, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

When you return Home, and are retired into your Chamber, or Closset; you may
use this following, or some other Prayer, to this purpose.
O Almighty and most Merciful Father; who art Good, and do Good: Thou art an
inexhaustible Fountain, and an unfathomable Depth of Mercy and Goodness! Of thy
Fullness we all receive, and are filled, without lessening thy Store. How great
an instance have I this Day had of thy Bounty? How large an Experience of thy
Mercy? I confess, I am a Sinner, and a great Sinner; the unworthiest of those
that worship Thee, unfit for the Company of thy Saints and Servants: And yet I
have this Day had the Honor to sit at thy Table, and to be entertained by Thee
at a most Heavenly Banquet. I have had the Happiness, not only to Feast with my
Savior, but to feed upon Him; to eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood: which
whosoever does, He has assured me, Shall have Everlasting Life; and He will
Raise him up at the last Day. What shall I render unto Thee, O Lord, for all
this Mercy and Goodness? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the
Name of my God: I will make it my business, to serve and please Thee, as long
as I live. These are my Resolutions: Lord, Let not thy assisting Grace be
wanting to me, for the Performance of them! Write, I beseech Thee, this thy
Mercy upon my Mind, in such Characters as may never be blotted out. Give me
such a due Sense of it, that my Heart may be unfeignedly thankful; and that I
may show forth thy Praise, not only with my Lips, but in my Life; by giving up
my self to thy Service, and by walking before Thee in Holiness and
Righteousness all my Days, through Jesus Christ our Lord: In whose Blessed Name
and Words I further Pray as He has taught me, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. FOrasmuch as no Business, either
Religious or Civil, can be well done by us, without the Grace and Assistance of
Almighty God; nor any thing prosper under our Hands, without his Blessing
thereupon: And that, neither his Grace and Assistance, nor his Blessing upon
what we go about, can reasonably be hoped for, unless, with Pious and Devout
Hearts, we faithfully and diligently Pray unto Him for the same: It will highly
concern us, even in point of Interest, as well as Duty, to take the Counsel of
St. Paul, and Pray continually; i. e. To keep our Hearts and Minds in such an
Holy and Devout Frame and Temper, that at all Times, and upon all Occasions, we
may be ready to offer up pure Hearts, and clean Hands unto God in Prayer. But
though this ought to be the constant Frame and Temper of our Souls; yet there
are some particular Seasons, when we ought seriously, solemnly, and on set
purpose, to exercise the same; especially, Morning and Evening. And because all
Masters of Families ought, with the good Joshuah, to take care, that not only
They themselves, but those of their House, serve the Lord; and that this can
never be well done, without keeping up some Religious Order and Discipline in
their Families; it will not only be convenient, but necessary for them, to set
apart some certain Times and Seasons, wherein both they and their Household may
jointly exercise this so immediate Act of Worship; and together, offer up their
Prayers, and return their Thanks and Praises unto God. This Part of Religious
Worship, I am afraid, is too much neglected, if not wholly laid aside, in many
Families, at this Day. To restore, therefore, this Holy Order and Discipline in
private Families; to revive the Exercise thereof, and to assist those who are
not already better supplied, in that Godly Practice, I have Composed this
following Prayer; and do heartily wish, that all Masters of Families would take
care, that either this, or some such like Prayers, be constantly, at least
every Morning and Evening, used in their Houses.

The Prayer.
O Almighty, most Merciful, and Eternally Gracious Lord God! Thou art a God
hearing Prayers; therefore, to Thee shall all Flesh come: Thou art Good, and
do Good: Thou art the Great and Glorious Creator of Heaven and Earth, the
Wise Orderer and Disposer of all things therein. We, the unworthiest of thy
Creatures here on Earth, are at this time prostrate in thy Presence; humbly
confessing our Sins, and thankfully acknowledging thy Mercies. We confess, O
Lord, we have sinned against Heaven, and against Thee, and are no more worthy
to be called thy People: We have left undone those things, which we ought to
have done; and we have done those things, which we ought not to have done: We
have omitted many Duties, and committed many Enormities: We have sinned against
great Light, and great Love, discovered to us in the Gospel of thy Son. Our
Sins, we confess, have been so out of measure sinful, that, should Thou deal
with us as we have deserved, or measure out unto us a Vial of Wrath
proportionable to the Ephah of our Iniquities, it might in a drowning measure
and manner fall upon us. But with Thee, O Lord, is Mercy, that Thou may be
feared; and therefore is it, that we are once more humbly bold to offer our
Persons, and our Devotions, to the Throne of Grace; beseeching Thee, for thy
Mercy's sake, and for the Merit's sake of thy dear Son, and our Blessed
Savior, in Mercy to look upon us; to open our Eyes, and make us sensible of
our Sins; to open our Hearts, and make us sorrowful for our Sins; to work in us
a Repentance, never to be repented of; to subdue and mortify in us all our
Lusts, and lustful Inclinations; all our corrupt Thoughts and Imaginations:
And, instead thereof, to implant in us Principles of Holiness, and true
Righteousness. Give us a lively Faith in thy Son, a sincere and entire
Obedience to thy Will, a profound Humility and unwearied Patience under thy
Hand, and an holy Contentedness with every Estate and Condition, wherein Thou
shall please to place us. Justify, we pray Thee, our Persons, and sanctify
our Natures: Wash us throughout in Soul, and Body, and Spirit; that so, both
our Persons, and our Performances may now and evermore be acceptable in thy
Presence, O Lord, our Strength, and our Redeemer.

With us, we pray Thee, be mindful of all Thine: Bless thy Universal Church,
and every Member thereof; particularly, these Churches of England, Scotland,
and Ireland. And herein, in a particular manner, let the choicest of thy
Blessings rest upon the Head and Heart of thy Servant, but our dread Sovereign,
JAMES, by thy Grace, and especial Providence, of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, in all Causes, and over all Persons, as
well Sacred as Civil, in these his Realms, and in all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries, Supreme Moderator and Governor. As Thou have done
Great things for Him; so, we pray Thee, do Great things by Him: In Him give
unto us the Blessings of Government; and in Him fulfill amongst us the Ends of
Government. Bless Him and Us in the Safety and Preservation of his Royal
Person, and in the Health and Happiness of his Royal Relations. In particular,
Bless Him and Us, in blessing his Royal Consort, and our Gracious Queen, MARY;
make her a joyful Mother of Children, and happy in them. And in Blessing, be
pleased to bless Katherine, the Queen Dowager, their Royal Highnesses, Mary
Princess of Orange, the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family.
Endue them with thy Holy Spirit, enrich them with thy Heavenly Grace; prosper
them with all Happiness, and bring them at last, though late, to thine
Everlasting Kingdom. Bless Him and Us, in blessing the Ministers of thy Holy
Word and Sacraments; as well Archbishops and Bishops, as other Pastors and
Curates. Bless the Lords, and the rest of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council. Bless all the Nobility, Gentry, Judges, Magistrates, and
Commonalty of the Realm: Bless them all, from the Highest to the Lowest, with
Religious Hearts toward Thee their God, Loyal Hearts toward their Sovereign,
and Loving and Charitable Hearts one toward another. And now, O Lord, we pray
Thee for a Blessing upon Us, even Us, who are here before Thee, at this time:
Bless Us in our Persons, in our Offspring, in our Servants, in our Relations,
in our Acquaintance, in our Habitations, and in all our Lawful Actions.

Thus far this Prayer may be used both Morning and Evening; and the Morning
Prayer may be continued thus:
LET thy good Hand of Providence be over us this Day for Good: Let it preserve
and defend us from all Dangers both of Soul and Body. We are now going to
Converse with a subtle and sinful World; be Thou pleased to fortify our Minds
against both the Allurements and Contagion thereof. Let neither our own inbred
Lusts, and Corruptions betray us; nor the Power of Satan, nor Policy of the
World, prevail upon us to swerve from the ways of thy Commandments. Be pleased,
O Lord, to go in and out with us in all our Undertakings, and to bless and
prosper us therein. Imprint upon our Minds such a warm and vigorous Sense of
thy Divine Providence over us, as may engage us always to walk in thy Ways, and
oblige us to study nothing more, than how to serve and please Thee all our
Days. Nor are we mindful of our selves alone, but of all those also, who are in
worse Condition than our selves; who are any ways afflicted or distressed in
Mind, Body or Estate, (especially those, who either desire, or stand in need of
our Prayers): Let it please Thee to comfort and relieve them according to their
several Necessities; giving them Patience under their Sufferings, and an happy
Issue out of all their Afflictions. And, as we Pray unto Thee; so, we desire to
Praise Thee, for all Mercies, at all Times, and upon all Occasions afforded to
us: We bless Thee for our Creation, Preservation, and all the Blessings of this
Life: In an especial manner, we adore thy Great and Good Providence for thy
Protection of us this Night past, and for that competent Measure of Rest and
Sleep, which we have enjoyed. We bless Thee, for that Thou have safely brought
us to the Beginning of this Day: Defend us in the same with thy mighty Power;
and grant, That this Day we fall into no Sin, neither run into any kind of
Danger: But that all our Doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do always
that is Righteous in thy Sight. We bless Thee for all those thy Saints and
Servants, who are departed this Life in thy Faith and Fear: Beseeching Thee to
give us Grace so to follow their good Examples, that we, with them, may at last
obtain a Glorious Resurrection in the Life Everlasting. But above all, we adore
and magnify thy Great and Glorious Name, for the Redemption of the World by our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Fountain and Foundation of all our Mercies; for the
Means of Grace here, and the Hope of Glory hereafter. For all these Mercies we
Pray unto Thee, and for all these Blessings we desire to Praise Thee, in that
most Sacred Form of Words, which the Holy Jesus has taught us, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The Evening Prayer may be continued thus;
WE Praise and Glorify thy Great and Glorious Name, O Lord God, for thy most
Gracious Providence over us, and Protection of us this Day past; that, by the
Assistance of thy Grace, and Holy Spirit, Thou have withheld us from falling
into many Sins, which our own Lusts and Corruptions might have betrayed us
into; and prevented us from running into many Dangers, into which our own Folly
and Vanity might have led us. Continue, we pray Thee, the same Providence over
us this Night; and let it watch over us for Good. Lighten our Darkness, we
beseech Thee; and, by thy Great Mercy, defend us from all Perils and Dan^^e of
this Night. Furnish us with a competent measure of Rest and Sleep; and let that
Sleep be sweet and pleasant, strengthening and refreshing to our wearied
Bodies. Let it be our Care to compose our Minds into a quiet and sedate Temper,
and to fill them with such Holy Thoughts, and Heavenly Meditations, that there
may be no room for our extravagant Fancies to work upon them, nor any place for
evil or idle Dreams to disturb them. And grant, we beseech Thee, That by that
Rest and Refreshment, which we shall this Night receive at thy Merciful Hands,
we may be so enlivened and invigorated, that the Day ensuing we may be able (in
the Strength thereof, and by the Assistance of thy Grace) not only to discharge
the Duties of our Particular Callings in this World; but also, those of our
General Callings, in order to our Everlasting Happiness in the World to come.
And this we beg, for the sake of thy dear Son, and our Blessed Savior, Jesus
Christ; in whose Blessed Name and Words we Conclude these our broken and
imperfect Prayers, saying, as He himself has taught us;

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by L. Meredith, at the King 's-Head, at the West
End of St. Paul 's Churchyard.
A Short Discourse upon the Reasonableness of Men's having a Religion, or
Worship of God. By his Grace, George Duke of Buckingham. The Songs of Moses and
Deborah Paraphrased; with Poems on several Occasions. Never before Published.
To which is added, A Pindarick on Mr. L' Estrange. Two Treatises: The First,
Concerning Reproaching and Censure; The Second, An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's
Sure Footing. To which are annexed, Three Sermons Preached upon several
Occasions; and very useful for these Times. By the late Learned and Reverend
William Faulkner, D. D. An Introduction to the Old English History;
comprehended in Three several Tracts: The First, An Answer to Mr. Petyt's
Rights of the Commons Asserted; and to a Book, Entitled, Jani Anglorum Facies
Nova: The Second Edition very much enlarged. The Second, An Answer to a Book,
Entitled, Argumentum Antinormanicum, much upon the same Subject: Never before
Published. The Third, The Exact History of the Succession of the Crown of
England: The Second Edition, also very much enlarged. Together, with an
Appendix, containing several Records, and a Series of Great Councils and
Parliaments, Before and After the Conquest, unto the End of the Reign of Henry
the Third. And a Glossary, expounding many words, used frequently in our
Ancient Records, Laws, and Historians. Published for the Vindication of Truth,
and the Assistance of such as desire with Satisfaction to read, and truly
understand, the Ancient English Historians, and other Pieces of Antiquity. By
Robert Brady, Doctor in Physic.

