THE WEAPONS Of the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, Turned backward, by the Shield of
Truth; the Fountain whereof is the Rock, and sure Defense of that Despised,
Contemptible Instrument, ELIZABETH ATKINSON.

Being Confident and Sure that the Floods of Reproach cast out of their Mouth
shall not Prevail.

Wherefore my Soul does Magnify the Lord, and my Spirit Rejoices in God my
Savior.

Printed in the Year, 1669.

The Weapons of, etc.
YE People, who would be counted Israelites in the Spirit, and call your the
selves chosen of the Lord, owning your selves a Body of Friends, when any
smooth things are spoken to you; but rage when the pillows are torn from under
your Arms.

Though I shall not take notice of your Words or Writings, so as to answer all
your malicious Forgeries; yet if ever you or any of you recover the use of your
senses, then take notice, how the pride of your vainglorious Spirits has
transported you beyond truth and sobriety so long professed by you.

You seem to ground your first Objection from my speaking in the plural Number,
which you say are general Terms. And in great Rage you cry out, Who but an
impudent person, etc.

To which I answer: Pride has blinded you; Does the word (Those) that
practiced honesty, etc. more include all that practiced honesty, then the word
(They) or this people draw near to the Lord with their lips, etc. did include,
All that drew near unto the Lord with their lips?

Neither will your subtilty take effect, wherein you would persuade people as
if I, by a loose Life had more knowledge or intimacy with your seeming holy
Hypocrites, then the chief of you; which is known to be an apparent falsehood;
for had I been as sensible of your gross Hypocrisy then, as now, I should have
had as much familiarity then as I now have with you, which is none at all: but
it is evidently known they had more acquaintance and approbation with your
Ministers, then ever they had with me. And if I were disposed to particularize
persons and their fruits, since your pretending to walk by the light you call
Christ in you; I should not need to cloth you in any other then your own
defiled habit, to make you appear what you would not be thought to be; I am
sure a smaller piece of Paper would contain your Remaining Virtues; For your
corrupted body has of late broken out with putrified sores in several parts,
not only in your mean Members of small account, but in the chief and principle
parts thereof, who seemed to guide the rest; And it may as truly be said to you
as it was to the Israelites of old, That from the sole of the foot, to the head
there is no soundness in it; though not every part broken out with one and the
same disease: How often was the house of Israel reproved in General Terms, yea,
and pleaded withal as if they were one single person, as may be seen by
Record, Ezekiel the 16. Chap. and Numbers the 25. Chapter? Neither was Jeremiah
to be branded as an impudent person, though he told them in general terms, they
were as fed horses, Neighing after their Neighbors wife; yet there was a
Remnant for whose sake they were not made as Sodom and Gomorrah; Neither do I
doubt, but that there is among you a Remnant that may obtain mercy to have the
leaven of the Pharisees purged out, by faith in that Jesus whom they are yet
ignorant of; and then they will no longer take part with you, in reviling those
that show you some of the dirt that you have spotted your selves withal, since
you were lifted up in spiritual pride, standing afar off, as if the Garments of
others would defile you; and when those deceived people that now have an esteem
of your spirit shall come to the knowledge of the truth, they will find the
greatest Number of you to be A Generation of Vipers.

And now as to your Query, what I have against your Principles; wherein you
only pervert my words by your own serpentine spirits, falsely saying that I have
blasphemously accused the light, and staggered like a drunken person; but I
know this judgment of yours proceeds from the giddiness of your own heads,
that thinks others stagger when they stand upon firm ground: Wherefore as to
your Principles, I have this to say, that though you may repeat the Law every
Meeting Day, yet I know and testify that you are yet Unbelievers, and have not
the knowledge of the true God and Savior of them that believe; Who promised in
the Beginning to Bruise the Head of the Serpent, and his promise the Saints
believed; which was imputed to them for Righteousness; and when the fullness of
time was come he faithfully performed his promise, by taking our Nature upon
him, sin excepted; who by suffering at the hands of unbelievers, having passed
through deaths Kingdom, according to his promise raised up the Temple of his
Body in three days; and this spiritual Body both before and after his
Ascension, gave the Saints full Assurance of their own Resurrection and
Salvation; this light and knowledge you are not yet partakers of, though you so
much take the name of light in your mouths: Neither can that light in every
man's nature (though you have fed so long upon it, not being enlightened with the
light of faith) apprehend this Mystery of God, being manifest in the flesh of
Christ, and laying down his life that he might quicken again and rise a
spiritual Body, which ascended into the highest Heavens: but the pride of man's
rational spirit is always aspiring to be a GOD, though it was made to be a
Subject; wherefore it is light is become darkness, that it neither knows
beginning nor ending of it is Misery, until it is Crown is laid down at the foot
of Jesus by Resignation, and becomes a child again; indeed God made the Spirit
of Reason, yet it was not serpentine until it aspired; which caused the Lord to
withhold his flowing virtues, and then it became dark, and received a name
suitable to its nature; which being by the first man's disobedience defiled, is
notwithstanding bridled by the law or light placed in every man's nature by the
bright, shining and living Jehovah; who afterward to accomplish the work of
man's Redemption, did manifest himself in the person and name of Jesus; whom the
Professors of the first Covenant would not believe in, though he came to
establish the Second upon better promises, yet they accused him for the
lawbreaker: The corrupted spirit of man is very zealous in making large
profession of keeping the Law, when for want of purifying faith in Christ, it
is quite-dark and ignorant of him the only Savior; and so makes idols of his
handy-works; which if used in its place would manifest and declare the wisdom
and power of God, the Fountain from whence the whole Creation did flow: But
there is none but the enlightened by Faith in Jesus, can understand the mystery
of Salvation through his crucified body; though they may rejoice before their
Idol, as the children of Israel did, when they provoked the true God, by
attributing their deliverance to a piece of the Creation: who would have a
thought a people groaning so long for deliverance should when it came, have
been so blind to proclaim before an Idol, Behold thy Gods, O Israel, that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: But though the Lord suffered their
idolatrous provoking spirits to travel and multiply in the Wilderness to make
known more of his power; yet it was but a very small Remnant that were
permitted to enter into the land of Promise; wherefore you boasters that think
you have more light than your Forefathers: Yet know though your iniquity is
more mysterious, it is discovered to be as Great, if not greater idolatry to
worship the likeness of any thing in the Heavens above, as in the Earth
beneath; For though God made Man in his own image or likeness; yet he was a
Creature and subject to change from his created purity, as he did, though he
was created Good, as all the rest of the Creation was; Wherefore he was capable
of Death; and it is clear to the Eye of Faith, though not to Reason, that death
came upon all, as being the offspring generated from corrupted Adam and Eve our
first Parents, and the Resurrection from the Dead could be no way procured; but
by the Lord of Glory, who abased himself and came in the form of a Servant,
though he were Lord of All; And not for an Example only; but to triumph over
death that would have kept all under, and then the reprobate had never been
raised to Eternal Judgment, nor the Elect to Everlasting Happiness: But this
was the promised Restoration, which the Believers hoped for, and trusted in,
being grafted thereinto by the Union of Faith.

But the Pharisees trample this precious Pearl under feet; because their carnal
spirits cannot understand the worth of it: neither can you that are kicking and
smiting against further light dispensed, because it comes not out from amongst
you; but you shall find if you go on, that you will surely fall though four
hundred to one say to the contrary. Wherefore it is not your collecting out of
Scripture what light and knowledge the Saints enjoyed by believing in Jesus
that will do you any good, seeing you have not believed in him, even the man
Christ Jesus, that you also might have had the revelation and knowledge
inspired into you of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ; For these Saints
that were thus enlightened, gave all Honor and Glory to him that conquered
Death, the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, who was dead and is alive,
and lives for evermore. Neither would the Angel that had power to show this
Revelation endure to be worshipped; for he said, I am also a fellow servant:
and I know were you sensible how Christ lives in the hearts of Believers by
Faith you would not thus blindly accuse me; For I never denied any light, nor
the Office of it appointed by God the Fountain and Original of all Lights, who
dispenceth it according to his own pleasure, that he might have all the glory:
And though you hate me, yet I must tell you the truth, it is but your own
spirits that you worship, being lifted up by the inlightning of the law within
you, showing you good and evil: hence I know it is the spirit of the Serpent in
you as it was in the Pharisees, that directed them to reject the justification
of Faith in the Blood of Christ, and stick to the justification of the law by
their own works: Though I do certainly know that the Regenerated by Faith in
Jesus, do more singly perform the honest and true intents of the Law then the
Pharisees with all their outward seeming holiness; For the Believers are
constrained by love (which is the law of faith) to act justly, though they know
their eternal Happiness and Recovery arises not from any thing performed by
them, but from Christ the Author of their faith, by taking upon him unspotted
flesh; and when that deceived Remnant amongst you, shall be enlightened with the
knowledge of the whole truth: Then they will see that you are not justified in
your Principles, by what I formerly wrote to you, though you take it to your
selves; For you have not that light of faith in you to believe or understand
how Christ is the Sacrifice once for all in his own person; Neither are you in
the state of Man in the first Creation, though you have had some sense of
convincements by the Law; which is general to all men; because all are included
under sin, being generated from fallen Parents, who by defilement lost their
first state, by aspiring to be wise as Gods; which pride when it was received,
caused them to feel the Effects of threatened wrath, which was the entrance of
Death and Mortality, upon them and their posterity; which was as surely
fulfilled, as all the words of the Lord are in their appointed time; for the
account of the Lord who is Eternity is not like unto men's, who are blinded by
the fall, and the promise of resurrection to life, was, is, and shall be, as
surely fulfilled to Believers, as the resurrection to condemnation to
unbelievers: and in that day the Reprobate though he believe it not, will be
surprised with the second ever dying Death, not having Faith or Belief in
Christ the first Resurrection; for though these substantial things are figured
out to us in several dispensations; yet it is only the Elect that have the
faith and patience to wait for the accomplishment of them: But the Reprobate
continually sets the Figure in the place of the Substance. The Pharisees had
not accused the Lord of Life for a Blasphemer, Had they not trusted in the
righteousness of the Law, which was the greatest dispensation of light
discovered by them in their days; yet they knew not the Fountain when he
manifested himself, and openly declared himself so; for had they known they
would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, and taken his blood upon
themselves. I hope there is some that are yet amongst you, who will see the
truth of what I say, and that I have not denied Christ the Inlightner of the
Saints, but have only denied your Imaginations built upon the enlightening of
the law or light in you, which is become darkness though you have given it the
name of Lord and Savior, and are performing some of the Punctilioes of the
letter which you do not rightly understand. It is the giving high and
honorable titles to your deceived imaginations that has deceived the simple,
being lifted up in pride under a feigned show of humility in outward habit; But
I am confident in what I affirm that it is your own spirit which you worship,
being lifted up by the inlightning of the law which is good and profitable to
them that use it in its right place, but in the place you have stated it makes
you incapable of benefit in Christ; this mystical idolatry began to appear
above ground in those forward sprouts that sang Hosanna, whose top Branches you
have nipped, but the root of the matter remains still in you; which has
appeared several times since in your confused actings from the motions of your
confused spirits; but your punishment belongs to the King of Kings against whom
you commit spiritual High Treason. You put forth an envious Question, What help
I had in composing my Paper written to you, which you have named after your own
kindred? but though you ask it in pride and scorn, I shall answer it in truth
and plainness; by negligence in the Printing there was some words misplaced,
which did something wrong the sense of it, and this was all the help I had from
any man in the wording of it; and for approvers I never sought after any; but
what approbation it would have with you, I was very sensible of, as I have
sufficiently experienced since, from the raging tongues of your confused
Multitude: you seem to reprove me for Blindness, wherein you discover your own
blind presumption; Let the sober-minded consider, whether the Lords accounting
the believing Children of the promise to be the seed of Faith that shall
inherit the Kingdom, Did import an impossibility in them to sin; For their
uniting to Christ the holy Offspring that could not sin, was by the union of
faith, which faith was the Righteousness of that Remnant that followed the Lord
in every dispensation according to his Command; but uoy that have not followed
him are become so blind that you know not Light from Darkness, which makes you
cavil at that which is clear to the Eye of Faith; For the children of Israel
were called and adorned by the Lord, though Moses were the instrument to
declare it to them; But when they would not stay for further Counsel, but
concluded it was a vain thing to worship a God at a distance, then did their
imagination make an Idol to go before them, which caused them to be as dark as
the Egyptians Darkness which they departed from; and a time will come when some
of you, will read the figure right though the rest will be hardened; As for the
rest of your superfluous falsehoods and threatenings which ascends out of your
Bottomless Pit, I shall not take particular notice of it, being assured you
have no more power to hurt me then you have to save your selves.

But as to your last Question what fruits I am bringing forth, I shall leave
that to the Testimony of those that sees it, who are best able to give an
account of it, if they be unbiassed and without prejudice? And whether you be
an innocent people in General, or a corrupted people blinded with pride and
ignorance though wrapped up in a pretended innocent outside, there are witness s
many who have testified thereof no more then they know to be truth; yet I do
not deny but that there is some amongst your Multitude who are yet ignorant
both of the mystery of in^quity that first entered, and also of some gross
Evils arising from the Ground cursed for the first offense: But the appointed
Remnant shall be recalled to their Everlasting peace, though they may be long
deceived as I was by the fair pretenses of those that talk of perfection while
they themselves were the servants of corruption. But the self-justifying
Pharisees though they had so much light in them to plead for and preach the
justness and righteousness of the Law given out by the Prophets, yet those
despisers did wander and perish, because they would not believe or understand
the virtues and effects of the Personal Suffering, Resurrection and Ascension
of the Lord of Life; Wherefore he pronounced woes to them, showing them that
they should be judged by the Law which they trusted in; because they rejected
him who was the Righteousness and Recovery to Everlasting Happiness of all that
believed in him. And were you not Blind leaders of the Blind, you would see how
you are daily taken in your own net? for every tittle of that Law broken which
you trust in for justification will make you guilty of All.

And for your two Witnesses that have signed this your Birth of supposed
Nobility whose Father is known by its language, they cannot be justified in
this sordid abusive Answer stuffed with reproachful Terms and Expressions that
Envy invented; But when the time of Reaping is past, and you begin to taste the
Fruits of what you have sowed, then shall you remember that you were told the
Truth by me

Elizabeth Atkinson.


