A SOVEREIGN REMEDY AGAINST ATHEISM and Heresy. FITTED FOR THE WIT and want
of the British Nations.

BY M. THOMAS ANDERTON, alias BARTON.

PVBLISHED AFTER HIS DEATH, and Dedicated to the Lady Frances Hamilton, By her
humble Chaplin E. G.

An. 1672.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS LADY THE LADY FRANCES HAMILTON.
MADAM,
England your native soil, once so much celebrated throughout all Christendom
for an Istand of Saints and Angels, is now censured, even by its own
Parliament, as a Nursery of Atheism and Heresy, and therefore that great
Representative of the Nation is no less solicitous for a cure, than sensible of
a disease so dangerous and destructive not only to the soul, but to the body
politik of the Commonwealth. And yet either our misfortune or their mistake
has renderd all remedies hitherto ineffectual. This Treatise, MADAM, composed
by Mr. Thomas Barton (whose Wit must be admired so long as there will be any
in the world) was found with his Geometry in Holland (where he had designed
to print both) and bestovvd upon me by one that understood not the English
language, nor the ualue of his Present. In my judgment it is one of the best
Antidotes against the spiritual plagues vvervvith England is infected. I
publish it under your Ladps patronage (and beg pardon for doing so without
your Knowledge) because you are not only a perfect Pattern of that ancient
Faith and Virtue which it asserts, but a particular Instance, and a conuincing
Proof, that Heresy and Atheism have not so wholy changed the nature of old
England, but that even now it produces Angels.

I Know, MADAM, these Truths will offend your modesty and Humility, your
greatest care being to conceal your natural and supernatural Gifts, and to
eclipse to the eyes of men your spiritual exercises and devotion, feigning to
be as well pleased with the world, as the world is with you. But that
which has exalted you above the world, and (I hope) writ your name in the
book of life, is your extraordinary Charity. You are not in the list of those
who hope to be saved by charitable indiscretions; No, MADAM, Prudence directs
your alms as well as your other actions: Humor has no share in your
distributions, Vanity no influence upon your liberality; partiality no suffrage
in the choice of the poor you relieve. You stretch your piety to the support of
merit (wheresoever it is) injured by Fortune; and to the defense of Virtue
oppressed by persecution. And though you do it with so great caution as to
disguise supernatural Charity with that noble air of generosity, so natural
and peculiar to your self; yet your devout design is discovered, and your
revvard before God, as well as the relieved persons obligation to you,
infinitely multiplied. Pardon me, MADAM, if I trespass upon your Reseruedness,
and choose rather to incurr your Ladps displeasure, than concur to prejudice
Mankind, by depriving it of so great an encouragement to Virtue as the
Knowledge of your perfections. I speak, MADAM, of those hidden in your soul,
not of those which shine outwardly, and can not be concealed, as your
matchless beauty, and charming graces. These, MADAM, are but fading and
fallacious Ornaments that set out Mortality in a deluding dress, with gay and
lively colors, which a little time will deface; the sad fate of the greatest
beautyes, as well as of the fairest flovvers.

I need not inculcat this Truth to your Ladp. it is so deeply printed in your
soul, that others are odious to you, if they but touch upon any of those rare
qualities vvhervvith Nature (by straining its power to the utmost) has made
you a Miracle of itself, and placed you in the world as a Model, not to be
imitated, (much less paralelled) but to be admired, even by those most emulous
and envious of your own sex which fancy themselves ought to be adored by
ours. But that which most surpriseth the world is, that so envied a Miracle
of Nature as your Ladp. could never yet be censured or observed of having any
Kind of inclination to be admired or applauded. This is a Miracle of Gods
grace, and an effect of that natural modesty and eminent honor vvherby you
alvvayes have preserved your unspotted reputation in the two most dangerous
Courts of Christendom; to both which you are in this particular the best
example, as in all other things the greatest Ornament. This auersion to your
own praises is the only reason why I dare not mention the great Antiquity and
high Alliance of your illustrious Family, the most proper and usual Ingredient
in all Dedicatories. I should uenture though to say something of your acute
Wit, profound judgment, agreeable humor, graceful utterance, becoming
behauior, and discreet conduct, but that these are abuious and observed by all
the World, and particularly by the greatest Court and best Judge thereof;
which gives your Ladp this Character, That you are an exact English Beauty,
naturaly adorned with all the graces of France, and an abridgment of the
purest perfections of both Nations. But because even this authentik and
undeniable Testimony is not grateful to your Ladp. and that it is impossible
to speak any truth of you without commending and offending you, I am forced to
cut off a long Panegyrik of your deserved praises, and conclude with this one
(which I hope will not be offensive) that you are the only person who thinks
you are unvvorthy of that little I have said here, or that can command me to say
no more but that I am with all reality and respect,

MADAM, Your Ladps most obedient and most humble servant. E. G.

THE PREFACE.
WIth no less humility than charity I will propose my thoughts concerning the
Atheism and Heresy of our Country, hoping that if my sense differs from that
of others, I shall not be blamed for offering and submitting my opinion to
better judgments. I shall endeavor to ground mine upon Scripture and reason.
Scripture compares Heresy to that crafty serpent, which deceived our Mother Eve
with the curiosity of Knowing the cause and reasons of Gods revelations;
persuading her that human understandings ought not be satisfied with any thing
less than clear evidence, as if it were beneath men to submit to authority.
When our curiosity and pride preuails with us to contemn the testimony and
tradition of the Church, and to prefer our private opinions before the publik
doctrine and practice thereof, and that we are obstinat in that way, we become
heretics, and in progress of time Atheists: So filth and corruption becoms
first a creeping serpent, and afterward a flying Dragon. For, as this Vermin
is engendered by the heat of the sun in marish grounds, and dirty sinks, so
Heresy and Atheism have their first being from the influence, which heat of
passion, height of pride, and sensual pleasures have upon vicious souls. These
wallowing in the mire of sin, and sucking up its venom, beget the private
spirit, which is a serpent that with hissing whispers infects the brain by
asking why God gave men their senses, if it was not to be directed wholly by
them in judging even of mysteries of Faith. And though God tells us that the
evidence of sense is fallacious, when it agrees not with his word, as it proved
when Eve tasted the forbidden fruit, yet Heretics despising that truth, and
imitating her example, prefer the serpent or the private spirits suggestions,
and their own appetit before Gods revelation; and interpret the Scriptures
after a new manner, contrary to the testimony, tradition, and practice of the
Church, in favor of liberty and sensuality.

Heresy having thus slighted Ecclesiastical authority, and the supernatural
signs or Miracles of the Roman Catholic Church, as fables or frauds of
interested persons; and finding no signs or seals of a Deity in any other
Congregation, it begins to doubt of Gods providence; and after many windings
and turnings from one Sect to an other, deuoring most gross absurdities, even
against the Divinity of Christ, and immortality of the Soul, it grows at
length to be a Dragon, which armed with scales of obstinat incredulity, and
wingd with unbridled liberty and pride, flies at the Deity itself, like that
seven headed Beast of the Revelations. So that Atheism is nothing but ouergrown
Heresy, as the Dragon is an ouergrown serpent. Both agree in making sensuality
the soul of man, and the rule of Faith. The Heretik, by submitting his Faith
and Soul to evidence of sense against Gods warning and word; the Atheist by
maintaining men have no Faith or soul but sense. This last error seems to some
the more judicious, it being most evidently certain, that if there be a
spiritual Soul, it must be superior and ought to command sense, curbing its
inclinations as foolish, and correcting its evidence as fallacious.

Against this vermin and venom of Atheism and Heresy I have prepared the
Antidot I here present you with; its chief ingredients are strength of reason,
and supernaturality of Miracles; it is as natural for reason to submit to
Miracles, as it is for sense to submit to reason. For, what greater violence
can be offered to Reason, than to rebel, or resist against authority, signd by
Gods hand and seal, Miracles? Or to deny a Deity and spirits, because they com
not under the Kenning of our senses? Is it not against the first principles of
reason and morality, to judge otherwise of things and persons, than they seem
to be, when neither the word of God, nor any thing else appears to the
contrary? Though we do not see spirits, or the Deity, yet we see effects above
the sphere and power of bodies, and Nature, which can not be attributed to any
other causes but Spirits, and a Deity. So that we must grant the existence of
these, or maintain an impossibility, which is, that there can be an effect
without a cause. What effect this Antidot will work upon the minds of the
Readers, God only Knows. I have endeavored to express my thoughts in the
cleerest terms I could, and in ordinary English the highest mysteries of
Christianity. Others may excel in the quaintness of expression; I desire no
such commendation; neither is that manner of writing so proper in matters of
Faith, which limits our words as well as our opinions. And though the latitude
were greater, I should choose those expressions which are best understood, my
design being to inform all sorts of people. Yet I would have our wits Know
(and I hope they will find it so by experience) that Atheism and Heresy, how
new and subtle so ever, may be solidly confuted in ordinary and old English.

A SOVEREIGN REMEDY against Heresy, and Atheism, Fitted for the wit and want of
the British Nations.
CHAP. I. OF THE EXISTENCE, UNITY, and Trinity of God.
Q. Is there any such thing as God? I knowthere is such a notion, and that men
fancy (when they speak of God) an unlimited being, including in it self
infinite excellencies, and all perfections. My question is, whether this Deity
of all and infinite perfections be only a mere notion, or a real object?

A. it is a real object.

Q. How prove you that: for, we have notions not only of things that do not
exist, as Vtopia, but of things that can not possibly exist, as Chimeras,
Centaures, etc. How therefore will you make it appear that the notion of an
infinitely perfect Deity is not the bare notion of an impossibility?

A. Many proofs there are of Gods real existence, but (in my opinion) the
cleerest of all must be grounded upon the experience every man has of his own
nothing. For, the only thing we know clearly even of our selves is, that we do
exist and are our selves, and yet that there was a time we did not exist, nor
were our selves, or (which is the same) that we were nothing.

From hence necessarily follow these conclusions. 1. that we can not have our
being or existence from our selves; because that which at any time has bin
nothing, or did not exist, can no more give a being or existence to it self,
then nothing can produce something. 2. that there must of necessity be something
which did always exist, otherwise nothing did produce all things. 3. that the
something which did always exist, must include all and infinite perfections;
because having its being or perfection only from it self, as none could give it
a being but it self, so none but it self could set a limit to its being or
perfections; and that thing must have bin naturaly auers to it self, and by
consequence, not it self, which would wave, hinder, or envy its own happiness,
or its having all perfections.

4. As it is impossible that a thing which has its being from it self, should
want, or wave any perfection, so is it impossible there should be two or more
distinct things infinitely perfect. Because that which is the source of its own
being, must necessarily include in it self all being, or all perfections; seeing
there can be no cause or reason why it should have one perfection, and not all,
unless you will fancy that a thing before it exists, or is any thing, can limit
it self, or (out of a pik to it self) would pick and choose out of infinite
perfections only such as Atheists attribute to that which they call Nature. If
therefore all perfections must be included in that one thing which has its own
being from it self, no other thing of infinite perfections can be as much as
fancied to be distinct from it. Therefore it must be the same: and consequently
there can be but one thing, or one God, including in it self, or identifying
with it self, all perfections. So that you see how little wit Atheists do show,
in denying a Deity of infinite perfections; because they must either grant it,
or confess that we men (or any thing else) when we did not exist, and were
nothing, did or could produce our selves. Or that this world, with all its
imperfections, is God; or that, the world before its existence, when it was
nothing was also something; and so against the first and cleerest notions and
principles of mankind, it must be said, that nothing has not only proportion
with something, but also that nothing and something have the same properties, and
work the same effects, and by consequence that there is no difference or
distance between such contradictions, as nothing and something, being and not
being, existent and not existent.

Q. I see that the existence and unity of God is much more clear than Atheists
pretend; but me thinks the same argument whereby you prove Gods unity, concludes
the impossibility of the Trinity: for if there can not be two or more things
infinitely perfect, it must be granted that either the Father, son, and holy
Ghost, are not things, or beings distinct one from the other; or if they be,
that they are not infinitely perfect.

A. To this question, or objection there are two answers. The first and best
is, that God were not infinitely perfect, if such imperfect creatures as we know
our selves to be, could comprehend his excellencies and mysteries. And though
as rational creatures, we ought (even in what we believe) be directed by
reason, yet that reason which is our guide, can lead us no further in many
things than to persuade us submit to credible authority, which is the testimony
of a Church or Congregation authentikly authorized by God to bear witness that
he revealed such and such mysteries. Though the truth of these mysteries be not
intelligible or visible to our human, understandings, it were want of
understanding to doubt of them, or to deny them: because there is not any one
truth more clear to us, nor more obuious (by undeniable experiments) to all
mankind than this, that there are many truths whereof our human understandings
can give no reason. Now if this be so in human and ordinary things, why should
we presume or pretend that the mystery of the Trinity is not true, because we
forsooth, can not comprehend its truth?

The second answer is this, the Father, the son, and holy Ghost, have but one
being, or nature, common to all three, and therefore they are equaly powerful,
equaly wise, equaly good, and eternal, and by consequence but one God. But
because this divine nature, or essence has three different manners of being,
and that every one of these three manners is identified with, and inseparable
from the Deity, though distinct one from the other, there must be three
distinct persons; the first is called the Father, the second is called the son,
the third is called the holy Ghost. This may be explained by two similitudes.
1. is that of a body, which has three dimensions, longitude, latitude and
profundity, distinct one from the other, but not from the body. 2. is that
ordinary example of our soul, which is but one being, though it has three
different manners of being: the first manner is to know, the second is to wish,
or will, the third is to remember. Though these three manners or modes of being,
are very different in themselves, yet they are not things distinct from the
soul. Q. But how can this be applied to the Trinity?

A. Thus. It must be granted that in the Deity we may consider (and truly it is
so) the Divine nature, first, as having from itself alone all knowledge, and
all perfections. 2. this same Deity may be considered as knowing or reflecting
upon its own knowledge, and perfections. 3. it may be considered, as infinitely
loving itself and its infinite perfections. The Deity therefore or the Divine
nature as it is the fountain of infinite fecundity, and the original principle,
or giver, is called the Father. The same Deity as it is considered not the
fountain, but as if it were the river that flows from that fountain, or the
chanel that receives its own knowledge and perfections, is called the son; The
same Deity as it is infinitely beloved by the Father and the son, is called the
holy Ghost; which holy Ghost proceeds as well from the son as from the Father,
because each of those two persons equaly love one an other, and the Deity:
whence it follows, that the Greeks error of the procession of the holy Ghost
from the Father alone, and not from the son, is not only blasphemy, but
nonsense; because it is impossible that such a Father should not love such a
son, and that such a son should not love his Father, they both having the same
nature, and the same perfections. This is sufficient of so sublime a mystery,
the truth whereof though it can not be clearly comprehended by so imperfect
creatures as we are, yet our human reason may with some probability and
proportion show that the unity of the Divine nature does no more exclude the
Trinity of persons, than the unity of a body does exclude its three dimensions,
or the unity of the soul its three faculties.

CHAP. II. OF THE IMMORTALITY of the soul.
Q. Is the immortality of the soul an article of Christian Religion?

A. Yes, because in the Creed we believe the life everlasting.

Q. May this article be proved by natural reason?

A. yes, if you will admit there is any such thing as reason in man. For,
reason is that faculty whereby a man finds himself naturaly directed and
inclined to raise his thoughts above and beyond the reach of his senses; and to
correct and contradict his own sensations, when he discouers that they are as
false and fallacious as daily experience does manifest in familiar examples v.
g. of oars that seem to bend or break in the water; of sophisticated wine that
seems to be natural; of false colors; of mad dreams, and imaginations that
in our sleep or in a melancoly humor seem to be rational discourses and real
objects; and other innumerable mistakes, which are rectified either by
reflections of our own, or by the rules of perspectiue philosophy, and other
sciences, invented by men to discern the difference that is between the true
existence, and the false appearance of things.

Q. How do you infer that the soul is immortal, because reason (which is the
soul, or a faculty thereof) does direct and incline men to correct the fallacy
of their sensations, and to raise their thoughts above, and carry them beyond
the reach of our senses?

A. Sensation being a cooperation, or a joint operation of the body and soul,
through the organization or ministry of our senses, if the soul (or its
faculty of reason) does correct and contradict some of these sensations, and
finds them to be false or fallacious, it is manifest that the soul may and
sometimes does, operat not only independently of the body, but contrary to
those appearances which seemd to be real, whilst we were in it, and were
directed by them, or believed our senses; and by consequence the soul is
immortal, because the immortality of the soul is nothing else but its
independency of the boby in acting and existing: and if it acts against our
sensations when it is in the body, questionless it may act without them, or
independently of the help of the body; and if it can act independently of the
help of the body, it may exist also without help of the same; and so the soul
is proved to be immortal, or not to dye with the body, by its acting in the
body, contrary to the dictamen, or appearence of our senses.

Q. Methinks this argument only proves that the soul may act (and by
consequence exist) independently of the body for some ryme, but proves not that
it may exist for ever independently of the body; and the immortality of the
soul is not every existen ^ce, but an everlasting existence independent of the
boby.

A. True it is that the immortality of the soul is an everlasting existence
without necessity of the bodies help or support; and as true it is, that
reason, as soon as the soul knows it self, does direct it to desire and
endeavor its own happiness, which ^nuolues not only a perpetuity of existence,
but an everlasting felicity in the same existence. That reasons cleerest act
(after the soul knows its own existence) is, to direct and inspire into the
soul a desire and endeauours of its own happiness, is manifest not only by that
regret and remorse of conscience which men feel when they deuiat from the
direction or dictamen of reason, but also by the love which men bear to
themselves; which love being confessed to be most evidently rational, can not
but be directed by the cleerest principle of reason. Wherefore this desire of
the souls happiness being directed by the cleerest principle of reason, can not
be pretended to be a dream, or delusion, unless you will maintain that the
cleerest reason is the greatest folly, and by consequence destroy the
fundamental ground of all human discourse and rational endeauours; If therefore
the souls desire of everlasting happiness be grounded upon so clear a principle
of reason, this (if it be not folly) must have a real object whereunto we are
directed, and wherewith we may be satisfied, without any possibility of mistake;
and if so, it is as demonstrable that the soul is immortal, as it is that the
most rational desires and endeauours, are not manifest follies; and that the
fundamental and experimental principles of reason can not be false, or
fallacious.

But if any one will be so mad as to grant that the first and fundamental
principles of human reason are false and fallacious; besides that herin he
reflects upon Gods wisdom, goodness, and government, wherewith such a
supposition is not compatible, he must grant that there are some other contrary
fundamental principles true, in opposition whereunto ours are false and
fallacious. Let him therefore produce them, and maintain that it is reasonable
in lieu of honoring our parents, to hate them, in lieu of desiring our
happiness, to wish our misery, etc. and if he can not produce any others
besides these, he can not think it reasonnable we should credit these, or fear
our selves can be misled so long as we stick close to our own principles of
reason, and follow that light which shines, and every man sees in certain
actions necessarily and naturally assented unto, and therefore common to all
mankind.

CHAP. III. OF THE WORSHIP OF GOD, and the sacrifice due to him.
Q. Seeing you have proved that there is a God, and that the soul is immortal, I
would willingly know how God ought to be worshipped.

A. God being the Author of all good, Mr Beacoz a learned Protestant, in his
Tratise entitled the reli^ues of Rome, edit 1560. f. 344 says, the Mass was
begotten, conceived, and born anon after the Apostles time, if all be true
that Historiographers write.

Sebastianus Francus an other learned Protestant in his Epistle for abr^gating
all ^he Canon law, says, im^^diatly after the Apostles all things were turned
vpside down, etc. The Lords supper was trans formed into a sacrifice.

Mr Ascham in his Apology for the Lords supper, p. 31. does acknovvledge that
no beginning of this change can be chevved.

The ancient rathers call the Mass, the visible sacrifice, the true sacrifice,
the daily sacrifice, the sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech, the
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, the sacrifice of the Altar, the
sacrifice of the Church, and the sacrifice of the new Testament.

See St Ignatius the Apostles Scholar in his Epistle to the Church of Smirna.
St Irenaeus. l. 4. c. 32. of whom the Centurists say that he speaks very in
comodiously when he says that Christ tanght a new oblation, which the
Church receiving from the Apostles, does offer to God in all the world. See
Cent. c. 4. col. 63. and Cent. 2. cap. 10. col. 167. they affirm St Ignatius
his words to be dangerous, and quasi errorum semina. See also Terrul ad
scapul. cap. 2. Origin. in numer. hom 23. St Cyprian lib. 2. and 3. verse. fin.
St Ambrlib. 5. Ep. 33. Missam facere coepit, etc. St Leo Ep. 81. ad Dioscor. St
August. term 91. de Temp. and lib. 9. Confess. cap. 12. and in Enchird. cap.
110. etc. Says that the Sacrifice of our price was offered for his mother
Monica, being dead; and that it is not to be doubted but that the souls of the
dead are relieved when for them is offered the sacrifice of our Mediator, etc.


the only beginning and cause of our existence, the end and hopes of our
happiness, it is fit we exhibit unto him the greatest honor we can, not only
every one in particular, by an inward submission of our souls acknowledging his
infinite excellencies, and our own nothing, and imperfections; but also by an
outward offering or oblation of some visible thing that ought to be consumed, or
changed; thereby to own Gods infinite power and Dominion over his creatures, and
consecrated to his Divine majesty by a solemn ceremony, and publik Minister.
This way of worship is called a Sacrifice, and the publik Minister who offers
it, is called a Priest. It has bin practiced since the beginning of the world,
as appears in the sacrifices of Abel, Noe, Melchisedech, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Job. and others in the law of nature, and in the written law of Moses,
great part thereof is nothing but rules and ceremonies concerning the manner of
sacrificing, and the habit and method which the Priest ought to observe in
performing that publik ministry.

Q. What is the sacrifice of the Christians, or of the law of grace?

A. It is the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, offered for the living and
for the dead, under the species or appearence of bread and wine; and is
commonly called the Mass.

Q. Is not the sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, as it was offered upon the
Cross, the proper sacrifice of Christians, or of the Catholic Church?

A. It is the most excellent sacrifice that ever was offered; nay all other
sacrifices in the law of nature, of Moses, and of grace, did and do derive
their virtue and efficaciousness from the sacrifice of the Cross; but because
Christ, as offered upon the Cross, is a general fountain of graces, and
pardons, and the foundation of the sacrifices of the old (as well as of the
new) Testament, whereof they all were but types, or figures, therefore that
Divine and bloody sacrifice of the Cross can not be so peculiarly attributed to
the law of grace, as to be called the proper sacrifice of the Christian and
Catholic Church.

Q. Is not the sacrifice of the Cross, and the sacrifice of the Mass, the same
sacrifice?

A. They differ not in the substance, because the same Christ is offered in
both, and Christ himself is the chief Priest in Both. But they differ in the
manner, for in the sacrifice of the Mass Christ is offered under the species or
appearance of bread and wine, and in the Cross he was offered in his own shape.

Q. If the substance of the sacrifice be the same, what need is there of that
of the Mass? is it not sufficient that Christ offered himself upon the Cross
once for all?

A. It is a general rule grounded upon reason, and the concurrence or custom of
all Nations which ever professed any Religion, that every particular Religion
must have its sacrifice peculiar to itself; because Religion being Divine
worship, and sacrifice being an action professing the Divinity of that which is
worshipped, it inuolues a contradiction to say Religion, and no sacrifice, or to
say, that a religion can continue, and the sacrifice thereof not continue. Seeing
therefore the Christian and Catholic Religion does continue, and that the bloody
sacrifice of the Cross, or Christ's passion, does not continue, the sacrifice of
the Cross can not be the proper and peculiar sacrifice of the Christian
Religion, and Catholic Church.

Q. It is not sufficient that the effects of the sacrifice of the Cross
continue in the Church though Christ suffered but once; for the cause may be
said to continue in its effects?

A. It can not be properly said that the cause continues in its effects.
Otherwise it might be properly said, that the Priestood and sacrifice of Noe
after the deluge (chap. 8. Gen) does yet continue, because the effect thereof
(viz. the assurance of not suffering an other deluge) does and will continue
until the end of the world.

Q. If all the sins of the world be pardoned (or at least be sufficiently
satisfied for) by the sacrifice of the Cross, what use is there for the
sacrifice of the Mass? or how can it be a propitiatory sacrifice, in virtue
whereof sins are pardoned and satisfied for?

A. It is not against the sufficiency or infinitness of the sacrifice of the
Cross, that sins be forguien, and satisfied for by the sacrifice of the Mass;
not only because the same Christ is offered in both sacrifices, but because the
sacrifice of the Mass is a commemoration of that of the Cross, and does apply
the sufficiency of the same to the pardon of particular sins, that were not
committed before Christ's passion, as we say of Baptism and other Sacraments.
And if the sacrifices of the old testament were propitiatory, in virtue of
Christ's passion, before he came to the world, there can be no ground to deny
that the sacrifice of the Mass is a Propitiatory sacrifice, in virtue of the
same passion after that he sufferd.

CHAP. IV. OF THE CHVRCH OF GOD, and of Divine faith.
Q. Though I know that they who worship God as he commands, are his Church, yet
there being so many Congregations of Christians pretending themselves alone to
be those worshipers, and the true Church, or at least a part thereof, I would
willingly know whether there be any certain and clear signs whereby the true
Church and its members may be discerned from all false and heretical
Congregations? and what signs these are? I am satisfied that any two or more
Congregations dissenting in any doctrine, can not constitute that Catholic
Church, out of which there is no salvation; because such Congregations can not
have either unity, or verity in that doctrine wherein they disagree; and by
consequence, seeing God (who is truth itself and infinitely auers from falsood)
can no more countenance, or confirm with supernatural signs the least, than the
greatest falsood, that Church or Churches which propose contradictory Tenets
(whether fundamental or not fundamental) can no more be the Catholic or part
thereof, than God can forfeit his veracity, or incline and oblige men to believe
contradictory points, whereof one must needs be false.

A. That there are certain and clear signs whereby the true Catholic Church of
God may be discerned from all false and heretical Congregations, is as evident
as Gods veracity, and his inclination to truth; or as it is, that God did not
institute a Church wherein there could be no peace, concord, or order; but all
must have bin disorder, confusion and dissension; For, if the testimony of
every of those Congregations were as credible (by supernatural signs of their
being the true Church) as they are confident in their pretentions of being so,
the most learned and prudent men might live and dye safely in the state of
perplexity; and all the world (at best) must have bin seekers, or sceptiks; and
there being no reason (in such a case) to believe, why rather one sect than an
other should be the true Church. Therefore God being the Author of truth, peace,
order, and unity, his Church can not be a Congregation of dissenting, or
perplexed people, changing from one faith to an other, for want o^ discernable
and supernatural signs, which none but the true Church ought to have, to the
end all men may find it out, and thereby be directed to embrace the true Divine
worship and doctrine.

These signs must be supernatural; that is, signs, above the sphere and power
of natural causes; at least they must seem so, not only to the vulgar people,
but to the wisest men and greatest Doctors, after a diligent scrutiny, and
mature consideration of all causes, and circumstances: because they must be
such as produce in us an evident obligation of believing that God alone is the
Author of the Doctrine proposed as Divine, and that he has authorized that
Church to propose the same. The signs must not only be obseruable, but obuious
to every vulgar comprehension, and perceptible even by our senses. The reason
is, because many, of the mysteries which are to be believed with Divine faith,
exceed human capacity, and therefore as well the learned as the ignorant are to
be instructed therein by the Church, and must take its testimony for a
sufficient proof of their obligation to believe (without doubting) that God
revealed those things which it proposes in his name, and they can not
comprehend; though they be credibly revealed. Now to believe that things so
difficult as many mysteries which the Church proposes, are true, and revealed
by God; and that any man or Congregation of men is authorized by his Divine
authority to propose and press such things upon our understandings, this belief
I say, can not be a prudent or pious act, without seeing seeiming supernatural
signs, so obuious to all kind of people, that they may (if reflected upon)
exclude all prudent doubts of our being mistaken, because they must dispose us
to fix our thoughts so firmly upon Gods goodness and veracity, that we assent
with greater assurance to what the Church says, and its signs show, than if
we had seen it; not because the Church says it, or because the signs confirm
its testimony, but because we rationaly judge it impossible, that God would
permit such an appearance and testimony to be falsely fathered upon himself, or
permit us to be deceived by signs so likely to be supernatural.

Q. How can a certainty only moral of God being the Author of the commission
and doctrine of the Church, be a solid and sufficient ground for acts of
Christian faith, whereby we believe without the least doubt, and by consequence
with more than moral certainty or assurance, that God is Author of the
commission and doctrine of the Church? How can any prudent act of our
understanding assent to more than it does see? or assent with greater
assurance, than there is appearance of the truth? An intellectual act or assent
being an intellectual sight of the truth of the object. To say therefore that by
acts of faith we assent to more than we see, or with greater assurance then
there is appearance of the truth, is as much as to say, that by acts of faith
we see more than we see; and believe more firmly than we can?

A. The answer of this objection is, that assent being no more than an interior
yielding a thing to be (as dissent is an interior denying it to be) the assent
of the mind is not always an intellectual sight of the truth of its object. It
is not always the same thing in the soul to say a thing is so, and to see it
is so. For, if these two were the same, the soul could never assent or rely
upon authority, nor be mistaken in any assent, because it is never mistaken in
its sight of the truth. Besides, this opinion that confounds the assent of
faith with the sight of the truth (whether it be in proper causes, or by its
connection with the evidence of Gods revelation) takes away the obscurity,
liberty and merit of Christian faith; because a clear sight of the truth (by
whatsoever means it coms) is not compatible with those attributes. St Paul
tells us that faith is an argument of things not appearing; and surely if they
do not appear by faith, they are not seen by an act of faith. More. A great
proportion of the supernaturality of faith and of its merit consists in over
coming the difficulty we find not only in examining the motives, and in
adhering with the will, but in assenting with the understanding to the truth,
and to the existence of its revelation; as, to that of the Trinity,
Incarnation, etc. But if our assent of faith were an intellectual sight of the
truth, or of the existence of Divine revelation of those mysteries, such an
assent could not inuolue, nor we find therein, any intellectual difficulty: for,
what intellectual difficulty can there be in saying inwardly, it is so, if we
see it is so. There is rather a necessity (in such a case) of saying, it is so.
Faith is so far from being an intellectual sight of the verities believed or
assented unto, that the less clearly you see the truth, or the revelation
credited (so it be prudently credible) the greater your faith is. Therefore
Christ reproacht St Thomas for not believing the Resurrection until he had
seen with his eyes Christ resuscitated. ^oan. 20.
And told him, they were happy that believed, and did not see what they
believed. Now the reason why faith and sight or knowledge are so opposite, is;
because the nature and notion of faith is, to supply (and by consequence it
does suppose) the want of sight or knowledge. Hence it is that many say faith
and knowledge are no more consistent one with the other, than the want and not
want of the same thing. And indeed this notion of faith is well grounded;
because experience does convince, and all confess, our human nature to be so
imperfect, that it stands in need of Christian faith to supply the want of
knowledge touching Divine mysteries. And even in worldly affairs we must in
most rely (for want of cleerer knowledge) upon the authority and testimony of
lawful witnesses, and take their word for legal evidence; which, as it is a
sufficient proof of what they testify, so is it a demonstration of the
imperfection of our understandings; and that most of our human assents and
judicial sentences are not intellectual sights of the truth itself, but humble
submissions to the authority and knowledge of others which we believe, though
for ought we evidently know, we may be misinformed by their mistake or malice.
But the supernatural signs of the Catholic Church do shine so clearly upon the
same, that not any who reflects upon them, and relyes upon Gods veracity, can
prudently entertain the least fear or doubt of being mistaken in its
authority, or misled by its doctrine, notwithstanding that we do not clearly see
the Divine trust of the Church, or the infallible truth of its Tenets.

But though the assent of Christian faith be not an intellectual sight of the
truth revealed, or of the Divine revelation, it does suppose (at least in our
Predecessors) sensations, or an intellectual sight of some seemingly
supernatural signs, which being credibly reported to us by Tradition, are
sufficient to gain so much credit and authority for the Church wherein they
appeared, as that whoeuer does not believe its testimony, and assenteth or
yields not to its doctrine as Divine, is justly condemned by Christ himself in
his last words to the Apostles; Marc. 16. v. 16.
and therefore tells them that his Church shall have visible and supernatural
signs, whereby it may be easily discerned from all heretical Assemblies, some
whereof he specified, as power to cast out Devils, to cure diseases, to speak
unknown languages, to rid people of serpents; These, besides others related in
Scripture, as the Conversion of Nations to Christianity, the continual
succession and sanctity of Doctrine and Doctors, the spirit of profecy, and many
such miraculous marks, joined with profound humility, and eminent virtues, are
so far above all heathens and heretics pretended morality and sanctity, that
when their saints are compared with canonized Catholics, they appear to be but
hypocritical sycophants, puffed up with that secret pride, so proper to all
sectaries, preferring their own private interpretation of scripture before the
publik sense, and practice of a visible and miraculous Church.

We conclude therefore that an assent of Christian faith is not an
intellectual sight of the truth revealed, nor of the revelation; and yet the
faithful do assent to both with no less assurance than if it had bin a clear
sight of both; because every assent of Christian faith is grounded upon and
directed by this truth, Gods goodness and veracity will never countenance
falsood with miracles, nor permit errors in a Church, whose authority and
testimony is confirmed with such marks of his Divine ministry and favor, as
the Congregation of the Roman Catholics is. This shall be in the ensuing
section more particularly proved.

SECT. VNICA. OF THE RESOLVTION, AND RVLE of Catholic faith, and whether this,
or Heresy, be consistent with a clear evidence of Gods revelation.
Q. Notwithstanding you have told me that the assent of faith is rather a
submission or yielding of our understanding to the Divine authority, than a
sight or evidence of the same authority or revelation, yet other Roman Catholic
Authors hold the contrary, because they say that the tradition or testimony of
the Church is the rule or motive of Catholic Faith. Now this tradition
affirming that the faithful delivered to one an other from age to age, from
year to year, the same doctrine in every particular, which the Roman Catholics
now hold, and that they delivered that doctrine not as the doctrine or opinions
of men, but as the word and revelation of God, it is as impossible we should
not see this doctrine to have bin revealed by God, as it is, that a tradition so
universal, wherein every man was so particularly concerned, and which has bin
conveyed by such evident sensations, (as that of hearing, preaching, seeing,
practicing, and professing our faith by the most significant words and actions)
can be fallacious, or false, or that such multitudes could forget, or would
alter the doctrine of this year, which they had received as Divine the year
before.

A. I know that the Author of sure footing has writ with great zeal some
Treatises upon this subject, and has so confounded those who assert only a
moral certainty in Faith, that they can not vindicat themselves from the
Atheism whereunto their principles and bare probability of Christianity leads,
and wherewith the aforesaid Author does unanswerably charge them. But because he
took or revived this way, thinking that by no other the certainty of Christian
faith can be made out, nor the Socinians argument (against the possibility of
assenting by an act of faith with more assurance than appearance of the truth)
answered; and that I believe both these difficulties may, and ought to be
solued otherwise, I make use of other principles for the resolution and rule of
faith.

Q. What is the resolution of faith?

A. It is an orderly retrogradation from the assent or act of faith to its
first motive, or to that which moved, or made us assent.

Q. What is the Rule of faith?

A. It is that which directs us to that motive, and to assent or believe as
Christians.

Q. Is not the rule and the motive of faith, the same thing?

A. Many confound the one with the other. But they are diferent things; The
motive of faith is Gods veracity. The rule of faith is the Testimony or
Tradition of the Church. Faith does not fallow the nature of its rule; if it
did, we could not call it a Divine virtue, because the testimony or Tradition
of the Church (which is its rule) is human. Its called Divine faith, because it
is specified by, and relyes wholly upon Gods veracity, and therefore is a Divine
virtue.

Q. Ought not the rule of faith be an infallible direction to the motive of
faith? Ought it not also be of such a nature as to manifest clearly its own
infallibility to every one that will examine the nature of Tradition, which is
the rule of faith?

A. It ought to be an infallible direction in itself (otherwise it might lead
us out of the way) but that infallibility ought not be more manifest to us than
the infallibility of faith itself. The reason is, because a Rule, as such, is
but a direction; and one may be infallibly directed though himself does not
Know it; as a seaman who obeyes the Pilot commanding him to steer his ship by
such and such land marks. It is no necessary part or property of a Rule, to
evidence its own infallibility, unless the thing whereunto we are directed be
self evident and uisible, as we see in the rules and instruments of Mecanik
arts. But if the truth of that object or act whereunto a Rule directs us, be of
its own nature obscure, and not obuious to our senses, but rather above the
reach and sight of our understanding, then the truth or infallibility of the
Rule ought not to appear clearly to us; for, if it did, the Rule having a
necessary connection (a part rei) with the act or object whereunto it directs,
it would clearly discover to us the truth of that object or act, which is
supposed to be obscure. This is explained by examples. A man that is purblind,
or trauells by night, may be safely and infallibly directed or led between
precipices, or through an uncouth and unknown path, though he does not see his
own safety, nor the skill of his Guide, or the certainty of his way. It Is
sufficient for his satisfaction, and encouragement to bear patiently the
incommodiousness of his journey, that being credibly informed he belieues his
Guide is skillful and honest. It Is so in our journey to Heaven. We do believe
that the rule of our faith (which is Catholic Tradition) is infallible (by
virtue of Gods particular assistance and protection) though we do not clearly
see or know it is so. We believe also that every assent of Christian Faith is
infallibly true though we can no more see its infallibility than we can the
truth of its object, v. g. of the Trinity, Divinity of Christ,
Transubstantiation, etc. So that there ought not be greater or cleerer evidence
required for the infallibility of the rule of faith, than for the infallibility
of the truth of faith; this being the end, and the other but subseruient to it.
Tradition therefore (even as it is sealed with all the signs of the Church) does
not make clearly evident to us that God revealed any article of faith, or any
point of Christianity, nay not that fundamental one of Christ's Divinity; for,
though Catholic Tradition and the signs and miracles of the Church may make it
clearly evident to us that Christ revealed our faith and doctrine, yet they do
not make it clearly evident to us that Christ was God, or that God revealed
Christianity: witness all the heresies of witty and learned men in all ages
against Christ's Divinity; and every one Knows that against clear evidence
their can be no heresy.

Q. The Church being our Guide of faith, if some Doctors thereof do not see
clearly the way, how can we be led to heaven? How can they induce heretics to
follow them, or assure them that the saying of our savior will not be verified
in us, si caecus caecum ducat, or that our Doctors are not like the Scribes and
Pharisees, caeci estis and duces coecorum?

A. The greatest blindness in faith is to pretend a clear sight of its rules
infallibility. The Catholic Church (acording to St Paul and the Scriptures) is
a Congregation of men who do not see what they believe, and are led and
directed by the holy Ghost in matters of doctrine. This Church is every
particular man's immediate Guide, because we follow it, and hold fast to its
testimony and tradition; but this Church also has a Guide (the holy Spirit)
which leads it (as Christ says) into all truth by continualy directing it, and
assisting in its definitions and decrees. When the four first general
Counsels defined the Divinity of Christ and of the holy Ghost, they did not
clearly see nor demonstrat against heretics the truth of that doctrine, or that
God revealed it. For if they had, the heretics could not have continued
heretics in their judgments. Its therefore fufficient that in the Catholic
Church there be Doctors and arguments to demonstrat that all Dissenters or
heretics (by not submitting to its doctrine and authority) go against reason,
and the obligation all men have to embrace that religion, which is most likely
to be Divine, in regard of greater appearance therein of supernatural signs
(which Christ said his Church should have) than in any other. To ground
therefore the certainty of Christian Faith, or of its rule, upon any evidence
which faith itself declares to be fallacious and fallible (as it does declare
the evidence of our senses and sensations is in the article of
Transubstantiation) is to destroy Christianity; and therefore Tradition as
receiving its certainty from our sensations, can not be a sufficient ground for
the certainty of Christian faith.

Q. I pray resolve your Catholic faith unto its motive.

A. That is don by answering questions, Thus. Why do you believe the mystery
of the Trinity, or Transubstantiation? Because God, who can not deceive nor be
deceived, revealed it. How do you know God revealed it? If you speak of clear
knowledge, I do not know that God revealed it. But if you will speak properly
as a Christian, or as a man that understands what we mean by Faith, you must
not ask how I know, but how, or why do I believe that God revealed it? Then I
will answer, that the testimony or tradition of the Church, confirmed with
seemingly supernatural signs, testifying that God revealed those mysteries,
makes it evidently credible he did reueal them. But because I know my
understanding is so imperfect, that I can not pretend to infallibility, and my
senses are so fallacious, that by our sensations we are often mistaken, and
that faith itself tells us so (in the article of Transubstantiation) I cant no
assent to this article, or to the mystery of the Trinity, or to any other
(pretended to be evidently revealed by virtue of self evident Tradition and
infallible sensations) with that certainty which Christianity requires, until
I reflect and rely altogether upon Gods veracity, and apply it to the aforesaid
testimony and Tradition of the Roman Catholic Church; which declares that
itself is authorized by God (and shows for that authority seemingly
supernatural signs) to propose as revealed by him those mysteries and all the
other particulars of our Faith.

When I compare and apply the Divine veracity to this testimony of the Church
authorized by those signs, I assent to all she proposes as revealed by God,
by this act. Notvvithstanding I do not see any clear evidence or infallible
connection between the testimony or signs of the Church, and Gods revealing its
doctrine, yet because Gods veracity and his auersion from falsood is infinite, I
do believe as certainly as I do that God is infinitely inclined to truth, that
he never did nor never will permit the least falsood to be so authenticaly
proposed as his revelation, or word, as I see every point of the Roman
Catholic doctrine is proposed by the tradition and signs of that Church. This
general assent is applied to every particular article. Here you see that the
motive of our Chatholik Faith is not the Tradition or testimony of the Church,
but only Gods veracity. You see also that the tradition of the Church is the
rule of our Faith, because it helps and directs us to reflect and rely more
upon the motive, which is Gods veracity, than upon Tradition itself. Lastly you
see there is no impossibility in assenting (by an act of faith) with more
assurance than there is appearance or evidence of the truth assented unto;
because the assurance is not taken from, nor grounded upon the appearance, but
upon Gods veracity and his infinite inclination to truth. Hence follows. 1.
That whosoever denies any one article of Faith, (whether fundamental, or not
fundamental) belieueth none at all with Divine or Christian Faith; because he
slights the motive thereof (which is Gods infinite inclination to truth, and
auersion from falsood) to that degree, as to be persuaded the Divinity can
permit falsood to be so credibly fatherd upon itself, as the Roman Catholic
Church does its doctrine, with so seeming supernatural signs, and so constant a
Tradition. The motive of Faith being thus once slighted, none that so slights
it, can believe any thing for its sake, or upon its score. 2. It follows,
That the Tradition and Miracles of the Catholic Church do not make it clearly
evident to us that God revealed any one article of Christian Faith, nay not
that fundamental one of the Divinity of Christ. For, though Tradition makes it
clearly evident to us there was such a man as Christ, and such prodigies as his
Miracles, and that him self said he was God, yet that Tradition and those
prodigies do not make it clearly evident to us, (as it did not to the Jews)
that Christ was realy God. For, if this had bin clearly euidenc'd to them or
us, neither Jews nor Socinians or any other ancient heretics, could have bin
obstinat or heretics in their judgments against Christ's Divinity.

Q. If I do not see an infallible connection between the assent or rule of Faith
and Gods revelation, I must needs see there is no infallible connection, and may
say, the assent of Faith may be false, seeing Tradition, which is the rule of
that assent, is fallible. On the other side I must sayt he assent of Faith can
not be false. So that if Tradition be not so self evident as from it to
conclude clearly the impossibility of Faiths falsood, it must be granted that I
see Faith is, and is not, infallible: and that Tradition is, and is not, an
infallible Rule.

A. Though I do not see any infallible connection between Gods revelation and
the Tradition of the Church, or any other rule directing to believe what he
realy ^eueald, or (which is the same) between the assent of Faith, and the rule
of Faith; yet it does not follow that I must see, or say there is no necessary
connection between them. For at the same time I do not see that necessary
connection, or infallibility, I do believe there is that connection, though I see
it not: nay it is therefore I can believe it because I do not see it: Faith
requiring that what is believed, be not seen. It would indeed be a
contradiction to say, I see and do not see the infallibility of Tradition, or
of Faith; but it is not any to say, I do not see, and do believe that
infallibility. It may be as well said a man who is blind, and infallibly or
securely led by a knowing Guide through a dangerous way, does see his ruin or
danger, because he does not see his own safety, or the infallibility of his
Guide, though he belieues himself secure from all danger.

Q. Is it not clearly evident that God can not permit falfood to be so
authenticaly proposed in his name, as the Roman Catholic Church does her
doctrine, by so continued a tradition, and so surprising signs, as her miracles,
sanctity, conversion of Nations, etc.

A. Though I am of opinion God can not permit such an appearance of Divine
truth to be a mistake, yet our understandings being so imperfect, it would be
presumption in us to define, or pretend to demonstrat what God can do, or not
do. We only know he can not sin. But we do ^ot know scientificaly whether he
may not (...) to punish the sins of some) permit the Church to err, and the
world to be deluded by their cleerest and most frequent ^ensations, whereupon
(as our Adversary says) the certainty of Catholic Tradition is grounded. And
though both Scripture and Tradition say, the Church shall never fail or err,
yet we do not pretend to clear evidence that either Scripture or Tradition is
Gods word.

SVBSECT. HOW A MAN MAY ASSENT in matters of Faith, with more assurance than
there is appearance of the truth.
Q. If it be not clearly evident to us by the tradition of the Roman Catholic
Church, nor by Gods veracity, that he revealed its doctrine, how can we assent
or believe with infallible certainty or assurance, that God revealed it? Is it
in our power, or even in Gods power, to make us affirm inwardly and certainly
any thing, we not knowing whether it be so, or no? How therefore can we affirm
inwardly and certainly the truth of the Trinity, or that God reueald it, if we
know it not clearly either by Gods veracity, or by the tradition of the Church?

A. Assents grounded upon authority differ in this from assents grounded upon
clear knowledge, that the certainty of these are derived from, and measured by
the clear sight and evidence we have of their truth, or of the objects being as
they are affirmed to be. But the certainty of assents grounded upon authority,
is not derived from, or measured by any clear evidence or sight of their truth,
but by the persuasion we have of the persons we believe his knowledge and
inclination to truth. Now all men who admit of a God, being most certainly
persuaded that he is infinitely inclined to truth, they may, and ought, to
assent with the greatest assurance and certainty imaginable, that God did realy
reveal all that which the Church proposes as Divine doctrine; for, though we
do not see this truth in the mystery or matter delivered by Catholic tradition,
nor in that evidence which our sensations give to tradition itself; yet by
reflecting upon Gods infinite auersion from falsood, and upon our own persuasion
of his infinite veracity, and seeing so great an appearance of his being deeply
engaged and concerned for the truth of a Churches testimony that looks so like
his own, affirming the doctrine to be Divine, we are bound in conscience to
believe without the least doubt, or at least we are bound to endeavor to
believe without doubt (which must be a rational endeavor seeing our obligation
of endeavoring is so evident to us) that God is the Author of the Roman
Catholic doctrine, and has reueald it; for, if he had not, he would never
permit the same to be so plausibly and probably proposed as Divine by Miracles
and other signs of the Church, that prudent and learned men must sin in being
obstinat against its doctrine and testimony. And this is that we mean when we
say that we apply the Divine veracity to every particular point of faith; not
by seeing the revelation itself in the tradition or testimony of the Church (for
then we could not deny its doctrine was reueald, nor be heretics) but by having
so much veneration for Gods veracity, that whenever it seems to be so
publikly engaged, and prudently believed as we see it is in the Roman Catholic
Church, God speaks, or reuealeth, what it proposes as his word.

Q. Methinks the veneration we have for God and his veracity, ought rather
oblige us not to assent to any doctrine as spoken or revealed by him, unless it
be clearly evident to us, that he spoke or revealed it; for, if we do
otherwise, we expose his holy name to contempt, and ourselves to damnation: by
uenturing to father what we fancy upon God, when perhaps he never said or
revealed what we imagined.

A. Its a prerogative due to sovereignty (and a fortiori to the Deity) to
speak and command by Ministers and inferior officers, which bear the badges
of the royal authority. And it is not only a disrespect, but obstinacy and
rebellion, not to obey laws and commands so authenticaly proposed. So likewise
it must be not only a sin of disrespect and contempt, but of heretical
obstinacy, not to believe that God speaks or commands by the Roman Catholic
Church; when its testimony and tradition of having Gods trust and authority to
declare that he speaks or reueales its doctrine, is authenticaly proposed by
signs so supernatural in appearance that no human authority is so authentik,
and no other Church can or dares pretend to the like. The more soueraign is any
superiority and veracity, the greater obligation there is in subjects not to
exact for their obedience thereunto, or belief thereof, cleerer evidence of its
commanding, than is usual and sufficient in human affairs when Princes proclaim
or command. And the more infallible the veracity of him is who claims the
authority (if this be authenticaly proposed) the greater is the obligation of
assenting inwardly thereunto, without cleerer evidence that it proceeds from the
infallible Author of the same, than such a moral certainty as the signs of the
Church create: this being the cleerest that is consistent with the nature,
liberty, obscurity and obsequiousness of Christian Faith.

Q. Ought there not to be in the true Church an evident and conclusiue argument
against heretics and Pagans, to let them see their obstinacy, by showing
clearly to them that God revealed what they deny to be true, or to be matter of
Faith?

A. If men were to be saved by Demon.strations or clear knowledges, deduced one
from the other, what you say, were fit and necessary. But God having decreed to
save men by Faith, rather than by science, by a meritorious and free, rather
than a necessary or demonstratiue assent of him self being the Author and
Reuealer of the Christian doctrine, it is so far from being fit the Doctors of
his Church should convict Pagans or heretics by clearly euidencing to them God
revealed the saving truths, that it is not possible. For, though some Divines
have said, Faith is consistent with clear evidence of God having revealed the
truth of its object, because forsooth, though the belieuer does see the truth
(and by consequence can not doubt of it, or be an heretik) yet he does not see
it in its proper causes, but only in Gods revelation; notwithstanding I say
this unwary opinion of some schoolmen, themselves can not well reconcile with it
the merit, obscurity, liberty, and obsequiousness of Christian Faith, nor show
how it is possible for any learned Catholic or other man to be an heretik in his
judgment, because the malice of Heresy (this being an error in the
understanding, as well as obstinacy in the will) consists in doubting or
denying inwardly that God did reueal such an article of Faith; but if every
learned Catholic does see (by virtue of tradition) that he did realy reueal it,
he can not see nor say the contrary in his mind, and by consequence can not be
an heretik. And yet its granted on all sides that any learned man without
forgetting any part of his learning or knowledge may be an heretik.

Besides, the assent and certainty of Christian Faith does not enter further
upon its object than to say it exists, or that the act of Faith is true, it
medles not with why it exists, or with any of its proper or particular causes,
that is, with any reasons why the object exists, or why the act of Faith is
true; it is grounded only upon Gods revelation, and this says no more than it
is so, all other reasons and causes are impertinent, as to the nature and use
of Faith; Faith being an imperfect knowledge and a total relying upon the
Divine authority, and not upon the knowledge of proper or any other causes.
Now, it is impossible that the obscurity and nature of Faith can be more (or so
much) destroyed by subsequent evidence, impertinent to its end and nature, than
by an evidence that immediately and directly opposes and is inconsistent with
its motive, its merit, and nature. If the act of Faith be not consistent with
the clear sight or evidence of its truth in the proper and particular causes,
notwithstanding those causes are not its motive, nor considered or touched by
the act, or assent of Faith; how can its merit, obscurity, or nature consist
and continue with a clear sight of its truth, or of its motive, or (which is
the same) with evidence of the Divine revelation? This sight or evidence being
as destructive of the obscurity and difficulty we meet with in assenting to
the mysteries and of the trust we repose in God by believing (which is no less
essential to Faith than its truth) as it is directly oppofit to the state of
obscurity wherein we must be, if we trust his word delivered to us by the
Church, as also to the darkness and desguise he must speak to us in, if he
will have us trust him and merit by Faith, or indeed believe him at all; for,
men do not believe when they assent to a truth they see or can not deny. And it
is impossible for them to see that God (who is truth itself) speaks or
reuealeth any mystery, without seeing also it is truth he speaks or reueals. Our
adversaries seem to make the Montebanks saying, seeing is believing, the rule of
Divine Faith.

Q. Why should not the merit of Faith be consistent with the clear evidence of
the truth thereof in its proper causes; or with clear evidence of Gods revealing
the mystery believed? Is it not sufficient for a meritorious assent that the
Will applied the understanding to clear the difficulties which might retard or
suspend the act of Faith before its actual assent? Must this assent also meet
with obscurity, and ouercom a difficulty in saying (and not seeing) that God
revealed what it assents unto, after all our former pains taken in finding out
the rule of Faith, and examining the nature of Catholic Tradition?

A. The chief merit of Christian Faith consists in ouercomming the difficulty
we find in assenting to more than we see, or with more assurance than we see
there is evidence of truth. If we did see, or certainly know that God revealed
what we assent unto by the act of Faith, we could not have that difficulty in
assenting to the mysteries thereof which we find by experience: for, what
difficulty can there be in saying inwardly, God revealed the Trinity, or the
Trinity is true, if we see that God revealed that mystery, and (by an immediate
consequence) that it is true? Therefore the proper and immediate merit of an act
of Faith (as such) does consist in ouercoming the difficulty of actualy
assenting that God revealed the mystery or matter we believe he did reveal,
though we see not his revelation, nor any necessary connection between it and
the doctrine, tradition, or testimony of the Church. As for those other
difficulties antecedent to this (and to the act of Faith) which we ouercom, and
are rather dispositions to make our selves fit to believe (by removing the
obstacles of education and custom, or by examining the nature of Tradition, and
the motives of credibility) than immediate acts of Faith; the merit that results
from ouercoming those difficulties, is not the proper and immediate merit of
Faith itself, because it is antecedent to it, for after all our aforesaid
inquiry and examination of the rule and motives of Faith, we find still a great
difficulty in assenting actualy or believing, that God revealed what Tradition
affirms he did; this, our own experience does demonstrat, and it may be proved
by diverse places of holy Scripture, as that of Luc. 19. when one having bin
credibly informed (and perhaps seen) how Christ wrought many miracles, he
desired Christ to dispossess his son of a dumb Devil: Christ told him if he
could believe, he would deliver his son from that spirit. Without doubt the
Father found great difficulty in the very act of Faith whereby he believed
Christ's power; for though he said, I do believe, yet he cried out, adding, Lord
help my incredulity. And yet this man was very well disposed, and informed of
Christ's power and miracles before he brought his son to him, otherwise he would
not have taken so much pains to follow him, and present his son before him.

And indeed incredulity (as obstinacy also) does suppose as much information
and evidence of the motives of credibility, and of the rule of Faith, or
Tradition, as is requisite for the actual assent of Faith; otherwise none could
be called incredulous or obstinat for not believing. The faithful therefore
merit and ouercom a great difficulty by the very act of Faith, after that all
other difficulties precedent to it, are cleared or ouercom. And in ouercoming
this last great difficulty consists chiefly the supernaturality which is most
peculiar to the act of Faith. Heretics therefore may be convicted of obstinacy
and heresy, though they do not clearly see, nor we evidently conclude (by
tradition, or any thing else) that God revealed what they deny or doubt of, and
the Church proposes as revealed by him: For, heresy does not consist in an
impossibility, but it would be one if it were requisite that learned heretics be
obstinat against a clear and conclusiue evidence of God having revealed what
they deny or doubt of. How can any passion or pride blind a learned heretik (if
it depriues him not wholly of his wits, and then he can not sin, or be an
heretik) so far, as to make him deny or doubt of what he sees evidently
concluded God said, or revealed? That were to deny God is God, or the existence
of a Deity. A learned heretik therefore can not be better or more clearly
convicted of heretical obstinacy, than by our evidently concluding against him,
that he is obliged in conscience (to avoid the threatened danger of damnation if
he does not believe the Church, whose testimony is confirmed with Miracles) to
assent to that doctrine as Divine, which is delivered by Catholic Tradition and
confirmed by the motives of credibility, though it be not clearly evident that
its doctrine is Divine, or its tradition infallible. More of this hereafter. Now
I will prove the evident obligation all men (who are informed of our Faith)
have to believe the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church as Divine, as also how
they are obliged in conscience to inform themselves thereof.

CHAP. V. HOW THE MIRACLES OF THE Roman Church evidently convict all its
Adversaries of damnable obstinacy; and how a credible report of them obliges
all men to inform themselves of those miracles, and doctrine confirmed by them;
and that of all Christian Congregations the Roman Catholic alone is the true
Catholic Church.
Q. Supposing the Catholic Church can not be composed of all or any two
Congregations dissenting in the least point of doctrine, as has bin proved in
the precedent Chapter, I desire to know which of them all is that one true
Catholic Church we ought to believe, according to that article of the Apostles
Creed I believe in the holy Catholic Church, and out of which there is no
salvation?

A. You know the true Catholic Church is only that Congregation of Christians
which has the signs Christ said (Marc. 16.) should follow the true belieuers:
and that those signs are, the casting out of Devils (not by coniuring, but)
in the name of Christ; the gift of tongues, the conversion of Nations to
Christianity, the curing of diseases, raising of the dead, and other
supernatural marks of Gods trust and truth committed only to the ministry of
that Church, and by which marks i^ must be discerned from all false
Congregations, pretending to be either the whole, or a part of the Catholic
Church.

Q. Out of your discourse I gather that all the marks of the true Catholic
Church are reduced to miracles; because supernatural sanctity, the conversion
of Nations to Christianity, the gift of profecy, etc. are as great miracles, as
the casting out of Devils, curing diseases, raising the dead, and the gift of
tongues. But it is a common saying among Protestants, that miracles are ceased
in the Church; and some Catholics grant they are so few, and wrought in those
remote regions of Iapan and China, that you can hardly meet with one who did
ever see a miracle. How therefore can miracles be the marks whereby every man may
be directed to know the true Catholic Church, if few or none see them?

A. I grant that all the marks of the Catholic Church must be miraculous;
otherwise they were not fit motives for prudent men to submit their judgments
to the testimony or ministry of that Church, as to the Church of God. But
miracles are not ceased, nor confind to those remote regions of Iapan and
China: There is not a Catholic Nation in the world which does not show some
things at least so like supernatural miracles, that as wise and wary men as any
in Christendom, believe them to be so. And such Protestants as pretend they are
not, can not with any probability show that the matter of fact is false, or
that the manner of working them is fraudulent or natural; seeing therefore Christ
himself assures us that supernatural miracles shall follow the true belieuers,
and that until the end of the world there will be true belieuers, and by
consequence a Catholic Church, we are bound in conscience to believe, that only
is the true Church, wherein we see (or at least hear credibly reported) there
are true miracles, or things so like true miracles, that as wise and as wary
men as any in the world (after a severe scrutiny, and serious study) mistake
them for true miracles, notwithstanding they know that upon their not being
mistaken in so important a matter does depend their everlasting happiness, or
misery. Dr Dovvnham in hi^ Treatise of Antichrist l. 1. c. 9. page 111. says,
neither Turks, nor Jews, nor any other Churches of Christians, but only the
Pope and Church of Rome do vaunt of miracles.


Q. Is there but one Congregation of Christians that pretends to such miracles?

A. No.

Q. Which is that?

A. The Roman Catholic.

Q. If all other Christian Congregations be against the Roman Catholic, and
that in every Christian Congregation there be as wise and wary men, and as
willing to be saved, as any Roman Catholics; why should any man be bound in
conscience to believe the Roman Catholic miracles are true, when as great, or a
greater number of wise and learned men do maintain they are not true miracles?

A. When learned parties agree in the fact of an accident so extraordinary,
that no natural cause thereof (after diligent scarch) can be known, but seems
to be above the power of all natural causes and human industry, doubtless the
party which belieues the fact to be supernatural, or a miracle, deserves to be
credited before all which contradict the same, and can give no good reason for
their contradiction. 1. Because in some Christian Congregation or other there
must be true miracles, otherwise Christ's words, Marc. 16. can not be verified.
And seeing no other Christian Congregation but the Roman Catholic pretends (at
least upon so publik and probable grounds) to have true miracles, the Roman
Catholic is to be credited in this point before all others. 2. It is not
consistent with Gods infinite veracity to permit so publik and probable an
appearance of true miracles for confirming falsood, as the appearance of
miracles in the Roman Catholic Church is. For that, veracity is an inclination
to truth, and an auersion from falsood; and by consequence, the Divine veracity
(being infinite) inuolues an infinite auersion from falsood. But an infinite
auersion from falsood is not consistent with Gods permission of so probable and
plausible an appearance of true miracles to confirm any false doctrine, as we
see in the Roman Catholic Church. Therefore if the miracles of the Roman
Catholic Church be not true, Gods infinite veracity (as also his goodness and
providence) may be questioned.

This may be explained to the vulgar sort by a similitude. Suppose there were
in some shire or town of England or Scotland a company of men acting in the
Kings name, as his privy or great Council, with all the forms and formalities
thereof, as a Lord Chancellor, or Commissioner, Tresurer, Secretaries, members
of Parliament, Clerks, etc. and that a considerable part of the Nation obeyed
their orders and commands, as men authorized by the King, who is not ignorant
of these publik proceedings, and by consequence can not be rationaly thought
auerse, but rather seem to approve of them, especialy if he be able (without
danger of disturbance) to hinder and humble this pretended Council, by
declaring them to be but a counterfeit Assembly of Cheats and Rebels, and by
punishing them accordingly. A King I say that might hinder such a counterfeit
Parliament or Council from abusing himself and his subjects by so seeming a
legal authority, and yet would not, can not be thought to have any truth,
goodness, or justice; because by his conniuance at those impostures, which he
might have discouerd without trouble or inconueniencies, he does countenance,
and confirm that Council as commissioned by himself. This may be easily and
aptly applied to the Roman Catholic Church, which is invested with so many
miraculous marks of Gods authority, and therefore does act by a warant so
seemingly Divine, that Gods bare permission of such a cheat as Protestants
suppose the Roman Catholic Church to be, would conclude his want of providence,
goodness, and veracity, and by consequence there can be no excuse or rational
hopes of salvation for Protestants, or any others that will not submit their
judgment to a Church and doctrine so publikly commissioned and confirmed by Gods
great seal, Miracles; as yet shall more particularly appear in the ensuing
sections.

SECT. I. WHETHER THE CREDIBLE and constant report there is of true miracles
wrought in the Roman Catholic Church, be a sufficient evidence to convict of
damnable obstinacy and heresy such as stight them or will not hear of them.
Q. Is it then upon this ground of not believing the Roman Catholic miracles,
which are recounted by the ancient Fathers or others, Roman Catholics say, that
we Protestants are obstinat heretics, and that such of us as dye not members of
your Church, are damned? Is not this a foolish and uncharitable opinion?

A. One of the grounds of that censure is the Definition of Heresy, which is,
an error in the understanding, and obstinacy in the will against any truth or
authority that is sufficienly proposed as Divine. Now the great appearance and
moral evidence there is of the Roman Catholic Church (together with its
tradition) does sufficiently propose or declare its doctrine and authority to
be Divine. For, though it be not demonstratiuely evident that the Roman
Catholic miracles are true miracles, nor that its tradition and testimony is
infallible, yet it is moraly evident (and by consequence sufficiently evident)
that its doctrine is Divine, and that God is Author of the same, it being
confirmed by such Miracles, and that by them he does authorize that Church, as
Princes do their officers by letters patents under their great seal; Miracles
being the great seal wherewith Gods Ministry and doctrine is made authentik.

Q. What is moral evidence of a miracle!

A. Moral evidence of a miracle is, so credible and so constant a report
thereof, that to deny or doubt of the fact reported, argues imprudence in the
dissenter, and renders his caution of not believing, both rash and ridiculous;
because it destroys (at least) all historical and human Faith.

Q. May not a man believe History, and rely upon human authority, though he
belieues not the stories of the most authentik Roman Catholic miracles?

A. No, if he discourses consequently, and according to the rules of reason,
whereof one principal is, that the same cause produces the same effects; and
the same authority the same assent or belief. If therefore the same ancient
Fathers or Authors upon whose testimony or tradition you rely for believing a
miracle of Christian religion in genral, or of the Trinity or Incarnation in
particular, recount the like miracles of Transubstantiation, prayer to Saints,
or Purgatory, you are rash and irrational in contemning that same authority,
which you credited in as difficult a subject, and as much above your
comprehension: for, you ought to believe both the miracles and mysteries, or
neither.

Q. Is moral evidence of true miracles sufficient to convict of damnable
obstinacy and heresy all such as slight that evidence, and will not examine the
grounds and effects thereof?

A. Yes The reason is; 1. because they are a sufficient evidence that the
doctrine confirmed by them is Divine. 2. because Christ's miracles were only
moraly (not demonstratiuely) evident as miracles; for, if they had bin
demonstratiuely evident as such, none of the Jews could deny them to be
Divine, or could think they were wrought by the power of Beelzebub. And though
it was but moraly evident that Christ's miracles were true miracles, yet that
moral evidence was sufficient to convict the incredulous Jews of damnable
obstinacy and heresy.

Q. I desire to Know what it is you call damnable obstinacy?

A. Damnable obstinacy is a settled resolution of remaining in your own opinion
of religion, or a neglect of inquiring into the grounds of any other,
notwithstanding the prudent doubts you have, or would have had (if you had not
bin carless) of being saved in the way wherein you have bin educated, or made
choice of.

Q. I do agree with you that if one doubts of the truth of his own religion, he
will be damnd unless he inquires into it, or some other, until he does what he
can to be satisfied; but I can not be persuaded that a man is bound to doubt of
that religion wherein he has bin bred, because he hears of miracles wrought in
an other, unless his own be so absurd, or inconsequent, that he must doubt of
its truth whether he will or no.

A. There are two sorts of doubts. 1. is a doubt which occurrs to ourselves by
our own observation. 2. is a doubt not started by ourselves, but by some other
more learned in matters of religion, and as much to be credited, and as little
to be suspected of having any design (but our salvation) in our change of
opinion, as he whom we most confide in. Doubts of our own observation are very
ordinary, being grounded upon the most obuious occurrences, as a publik change
of Religion, either upon the score of conscience, or interest: this last is as
suspicious (even to the dullest comprehensions) as the other is edifying. Not
only the change into a thriuing religion, but constancy in a persecuted one,
does make great impression upon all sorts of people, as also relations of
miracles credibly reported. These impressions, and the inspirations which
follow them, raise doubts; and these) if not endeavored to be cleared) are a
sufficient cause of damnation.

The doubts which are raised in ourselves by the example, or the discourse of
others, who have no design upon us but the salvation of our souls, are also
damnable to us, if we neglect the clearing of them by all the ways that a
buisness of so great importance does require. And the more diligent we must be
in the search, by how much more the persons interested in maintaining our
persuasion (I mean such as live by the ministry thereof) deterr us from so
rational a scrutiny; which they would never dissuade us from, if they did not
fear a discovery of their own wickedness, and of their causes weakness.

Q. I pray sir, apply this discourse to the Protestants, and Roman Catholics of
England.

A. I beg your pardon sir, I am loath to offend the Parliament. But I will
apply it to the Arians and Roman Catholics of Spain. The Heir of that Croun,
Prince Hermenegild, having bin bred an Arian, doubted of the truth of that
pretended reformation; this doubt was ocasioned by the discourse he had with St
Leander Archbishop of Seuil. At length he was conuinc't of the falsood of that
Arian heresy, and reconciled to the Roman Catholic Church. The King his Father
would needs have him receive the Arian communion, which the Prince refusing to
do, the wicked Father (for fear of his people) sacrified the Heir apparent of
the Croun to their fury, and caused him to be murdered. This change to, and
constancy in the Roman Catholic Religion (together with a report of some
miracles) wrought so much upon all the people of Spain, that a little after,
they all turned Catholics; and a law was made, that none but Catholics should
have employment in that Kingdom. Hence you may infer what strong influence the
example of a religious and resolute Prince has even upon the most uulgar
judgments, and how damnable it is in all people, not to examine the motives of
so edifying a conversion as that whereby one hazards and waves the greatest
temporal interest; and how certain it is that God will punish as well in this
world as in the next, all such as resist or neglect the impressions and
inspirations which men feel in themselves to follow a religion so generously
professed, and preferrd before all the greatness and glory of an Imperial Croun.

Q. If Princely suffering upon the score of conscience be so great a miracle,
why shall not the Lady Jane Grayes suffering (and Queen Elizabeth's also) for
the Protestant religion, be miracles; and confirm that profession as the true
Catholic? Add to these the patience and constancy of those glorious Protestant
Martyrs recounted by John Fox in his Acts and Monuments.

SECT. II. OF THE DIFFERENCE BETVVEEN Catholic constancy, and heretical
obstinacy: and vvherin does each consist.
A Your objection is material, and I shall endeavor to answer it as clearly and
in as few words as I can: but depending of a proper notion of heresy, it
inuolues some difficulty. Experience and history has proved (almost in every
age) that some heretics suffer with as great resolution all Kind of torments
(and death itself) for their false religion, as Catholics do for the true one.
And yet we all agree in terming the heretics resolution, obstinacy, and the
Catholics constancy. The reason is, because the heretik suffers for adhering to
a particular opinion, and to his own private judgment; The Catholic for
conforming himself to the belief of the uniuersal Church, and for submitting
his judgment to the same. Therefore St Paul says that an heretik is condemned
by his own proper judgment; 2. Petr. 1. 2. No profecy of Scripture is made by
private interpretation.
and St Peter tells us that the true interpretation of Scripture is not that of
a private man, but of the Church. And the very word Heresy, signifies a
particular choice, or a wilful division and declining from the first doctrine.

This supposed, there can be no difficulty in declaring why an heretik may
without any miracle suffer with great resolution the greatest torments for
maintaining his heresy; Because men are naturaly inclined to follow their own
opinions, and to maintain their own choice, and therefore we see what endeavors
are used in vain, to persuade an humorsom and wilful man or woman, to recall
any foolish Act they did of their own heads; and how hard it is to convince
them that it was ill don. Now, every heretik makes his religion his own act,
not by an humble submission of his judgment to the Church (as Catholics do) but
by a proud preference of his own understanding before that of all others. This
needs no other proof than that pity which every pitiful Protestant (even the
women) has of the most learned Roman Catholics ignorance and Idolatry. In this
pride and preference of their proper judgment, and in the wilfulness of
continuing in their own choice, does consist the obstinacy of heretics; as the
constancy of Catholics takes its denomination from that religious perseverance
which is grounded upon so rational a resolution as it is to submit and stick to
the doctrine of a Church signalised with so many supernatural and uisible marks
of being trusted by God, to teach and preach the true Catholic Faith, as has
bin demonstrated in the 5. Chap.

Q. I grant that the difference between Catholic constancy and heretical
obstinacy is, that this is a more wilful than rational adherency to a man's
proper opinion, or to a private interpretation, of Scripture against the
testimony and tradition of the Church; and Catholic constancy is a religious
perseverance in a resolution of submitting our judgments to the same Church:
but how will you make it appear that our Protestant interpretation of
Scripture is a private one or that we are guilty of pride, seeing we follow the
interpretation of the Church of England, and submit our judgments thereunto?

A. I will make that heretical obstinacy appear in those very Protestant
Saints and Martyrs which John Fox does celebrat for their constancy. And to
begin (as you do) with the most innocent of them all, the Lady Jane Gray, she
did wilfully choose, and prefer before the Catholic, a new religion, or an
interpretation of Scripture that was not as old as herself, though she was very
young. It had bin hatched by Cranmer, and confirmed by the Parliament of Ed. 6.
but some five years before she suffered: and was then Known and declared by an
other Parliament (1. Mar.) to be heresy, and contrary to the publik sense and
continual tradition of the Catholic Church, and therefore was called by the
Protestants themselves a Reformation of the old doctrine. So that though the
Church and Parliament of England in the reign of K. Ed. 6. called it a Common
prayer, or a publik worship, yet was it declared by the Parliament of Q. Mary a
bundel of Cranmers errers, and private opinions, which himself and some few
others invented, or borrowed from Luther and Calvin, and other Innouators, who
had resolved to make themselves popular and powerful by setting up their own
private interpretations of Scripture, and opinions for points of Religion. So
that though all England, or a greater part of the world than England is, should
embrace that Reformation, and submit their judgments to that Church, their
protestant Tenets are still private opinions, and the submission of their
judgments to the same does still inuolue that pride and preference of their own
choice of a nouelty, or new interpretation of Scripture before the ancient
doetrin and against the publik testimony of all precedent English Parliaments,
as also against the tradition of the Catholic Church. As for Queen Elizabeth,
she accommodated her religion to the times, until she got the Croun; and
then she made use of the new Faith to serve her turn, and secure her interest.
Indeed John Fox his Martyrs were great but foolish sufferers; their ignorance
was proportioned to their obstinacy; they cast themselves into the fire without
Knowing wherefore. And yet John Fox says those Tinkers, Tanners, and silly
women confuted the Bishops that endeavored to save their lives, which themselves
had forfeited acording to the ancient laws of the land. And though they dyed
not Martyrs, yet they dyed like Englishmen, that is, with as little concern and
as great courage, as if their cause had bin better. But this is no miracle in
England, though the foolish partiality of John Fox his pen does endeavor to make
his Protestant Readers mistake those proud mad fellows for pious Martyrs.

Q. Though I do approve of your difference between heretical obstinacy, and
Catholic constancy, yet I must still condemn your application thereof to
protestancy and popery, for an other reason; which is, that Protestancy is so
far from inuoluing pride, that the Church of England does not as much as
pretend to be infallible in its doctrine; neither does it exact from its
children a submission of their judgments to itself, but only to Scripture. And
I hope there is as much humility (I am sure there is more safety) in submitting
our judgments to Gods written word, as to the tradition of the Roma Catholic
Church.

A. As I commend the Church of Englands modesty and ingenuity in acknowledging
its fallibility, and in dispensing with the submission of your judgments to the
same (no fallible Church can exact or expect a submission of judgment in any
points of doctrine) so must I continue in my opinion of the pride and obstinacy
of protestancy. 1. Because you will not believe any thing inculcated to you by
God, unless it be delivered to you in writing, as if the Divine majesty had not
as much right to command by orders intimated to us by word of mouth, as by his
writing. All the true belieuers of the world until Moses his law, were
gouernd by the testimony and tradition of the Church, without any writing or
Scriptures: neither is any thing written in the old or new Testament whereupon
Protestants may with any color of probability ground their pretended privilege
of not believing any thing but Scripture; and this does in many places tell
them, they are as much obliged to believe Tradition, or Gods unwritten word, as
the written. Now, why Englishmen, and some Northen people alone, should refuse
to obey the Catholic Church, unless it shows for every particular Gods order
in writing, is not intelligible, themselves and all other Nations owning the
contrary to be prudently practiced in all human governments? This must be pride
and obstinacy.

2. The pride and obstinacy of this their pretended privilege (which is the
life and fundation of all Protestant Reformations) is further discovered by the
practice of aprinciple wherein all Protestants agree: which is, that not one of
them thinks he is bound in conscience to submit his judgment to any of their
own or any other Congregations sense of Scripture in controuerted texts, if
that sense agrees not with his own private interpretation; If that of his
Church agree not with his own sense, he may stick to his own, and reject the
other. And this is the reason why Protestants are divided into so many sects.
How this principle and practice may be excused from heretical pride and
obstinacy, I know not: For, they stand at a defiance with all Churches, and
will as little submit their judgments to their own, as to that of Rome. Every
Protestant is by the fundamental Tenet of the Reformation his own Master, and a
supreme Judge of Gods written law. Does not this demonstrat how those
Reformations are founded upon pride and obstinacy? Can there be greater, than
that simple men and silly women should presume to be Masters and Judges of
those Divine and incomprehensible mysteries? That they should prefer their
private judgments before that of their own Church, and of ours, unto which the
greatest Doctors in all ages have submitted? What a proud, foolish, insolent,
and obstinat people would the English conclude any other to be, whereof not one
would acquiesce in the judgment or sentence of the Courts of Judicature, but
every one assume to himself the power of deciding his own law suites, and of
appealing from the Chancery, or even from the Parliament, to his own private
opinion and judgment? Let every Protestant know this is his own case in matters
of religion. He appeals in what concerns Faith and the sense of Scripture, from
his own Church and the Catholic, and general Counsels, to his own proper
judgment. Does he think that Christ would institute so absurd a spiritual
government? Can any man of sense imagine it agrees with Scripture? To what
purpose then should the Scriptures and St Paul bid us be of one belief,
peaceable, and humble? Is any of these virtues, or that of Catholic Faith,
consistent with such pride, obstinacy, and dissentions, as this principle must
inspire, and we see in all the reformed Churches, and in that of our own
Country? You see therefore that your reformed Churches and interpretations of
Scripture have so little in them of the unity, obsequiousness, and humility of
Christian Faith so much recommended to us by St Paul, that they seem to the
most learned Roman Catholics not only to savor of heresy, but to be the very
source of heretical pride, and damnable obstinacy, so far are they from having
the least smack of the fundation or fruit of Christianity.

SECT. III. SOME INFERENCES FIT TO BE considered by all Protestants, and
whether any may be saved if they dye in that persuasion.
IF Protestancy does inuolue that pride and obstinacy which I have endeavored to
prove, and deduce from its principles, without doubt he who dies a Protestant,
is damned. But Because some are called Protestants, and yet know not what
protestancy is, I will deliver my opinion how far their ignorance may excuse
them from being damnd by their profession.

1. No Protestant Bishop or Minister can be saved, if they repent not their
having bin of that religion. The reason is; though many of them were more
ignorant than they are, yet that ignorance can not excuse them, because their
calling does oblige them to be at least so learned in History (if not in
Divinity) as to know the nouelty of their own reformed Tenets, and the manners
and motives of the Authors of their Reformations. These having bin so contrary
to Christianity and morality, the Preachers and Promoters deserve nothing so
well as damnation, either for damning others, or for not knowing they will be
damned themselves.

2. No man or woman that has read, or heard the contents of Doctor Heylins
History of the Church of England, or of any such Protestant Author, relating
the change of Religion, and the causes of that change in our Country, can be
saved, if they continue and dye Protestants. For, the cheat of that change is
so visible, the motives so wicked, and the practices of the Authors and Actors
so abominable, that there is not the least room left for a tolerable excuse, or
conscientious mistake. The spiritual supremacy of a layman does not only
inuolue a contradiction, but the occasion of King Henry 8. assuming it, was so
scandalous, and the way of exercising it so ridiculous, that every one was as
much offended at his presumption in making himself Christ's Vicar in
spiritualibus, as they were at his profaness in making Cromuel of Putney his
own Vicar general over the Clergy. And all this confusion was raised, because
the Pope would not comply with his lust in diuorcing him from his lawful wife,
and marrying him to An Bullen. There was not a man in England then, who did not
see and say from whence the Kings spiritual supremacy (the fundation and
distinction of prelatik Protestancy) had its rise, and their saying is to this
day continued, and grown a rude Proverb.

As for the change of the Mass into the Common prayer, it seemed even to all
the poor Country folks so absurd, that they took up arms against it in K. Ed.
6. reign: and both it and the whole protestant Reformation was condemned as
heresy by Act of Parliament, 1. Mar. And though the same Reformation was again
restored by an other Act of Q. Eliz. some five years after, yet every one Knew
that the very same persons who voted for restoring it were they who had
condemned it, and now went against their conscience for Q. Elizabeth's sake, who
not only promised rewards, but gave hopes (as Doctor Heylin Confesses) of
marrying herself to diverse persons (even of the lower House) who were
instrumental in getting Votes, and securing her interest by reviving and
settling that Religion which themselves had cried down as heresy in Q. Mary's
days. What ploughman or Ditcher in any part of England has not wit and
learning enough to confute and contemn such a change, and such a reformation?
There needs no Logik or Divinity. A bare Knowledge of the fact is sufficient
to discover the fraud. Fevv in England are so ignorant as not to Know that
Henry 8. turned away Q. Katherin for his love to An Bullen, and that Q.
Elizabeth brought in the new Religion to strengthen her vveake title to the
Croun against the Known right of the Steuards.

3. Though it were granted that the Knowledge of this change of Religion does
not quite convince the most illiterat and dull people of its falsood, yet it
can not be denied but that it must of necessity raise prudent doubts against
its being Divinely inspired; and that whosoever is careless in clearing those
doubts, does sin mortaly, and will be damned, if he dies in that sin. For, a
prudent doubt is as if it were the twilight of reason, discovering some
absurdity in that which formerly we unwarily believed, not reflecting upon the
same until some new chance, or circumstance made it appear more clearly unto
us. When this new chance or circumstance does make an impression upon our mind
and conscience, we are bound to inquire after the cause and cure of that
impression and remorse; if not, the sore will turn into a canker, which can not
be otherwise prevented than by a conscientious curiosity, according to every
ones capacity. The illiterat person is not bound to learn to read, or to study
Philosophy, but he is bound to repair to his honest neighbors, to inquire and
hear what the Papists can say for their Religion, as well as the Protestants.
And if he does this without prejudice, and with a good intention, he will clear
his doubt and conscience.

Q. I am confident there are many poor Country fellows in England who never
heard of King Henry 8. amors with An Bullen, nor of his assuming the spiritual
supremacy, nor of Q. Elizabeth's reviving protestancy to salve her own
illegitimacy, or to secure her interest against the Queen of Scots right. How
then can these men doubt or discourse of what they never heard? must they also
be damned?

A. There is not one in England who has not heard of Persecution and
Proclamations against Papists, and that these men suffer for their conscience,
and the old Religion. This can not but excite a curiosity to Know what men
these are, and why they should be so foolish, as to suffer for so ridiculous a
Religion, and so strange a Beast as the Parson describes both the Pope and
Popery to be, when he forgets his sermon, or has a mind to divert his
Audience, or incense them against Catholics. By these and other such ways the
most dull men com to hear, and may be informed, of the Roman Catholic
Religions antiquity, as of the nouelty of the Protestant, and how this came to
be introduced; this once Known, all the industry and artifices of the
Protestant party will never be able to prevent, or root out of men's minds those
rational doubts which are grounded upon the light of common sense, when it
discouers (as it must in this case) the least deformity or dissonancy against
reason in any object whatsoever. For, what can be more dissonant to the very
first principles of reason, than to prefer a private new and interested sense
of Scripture before that old one which the Church stuck to as authentik for so
many ages? The English Bible or Translation, before that which all Christendom
has bin said by above 1200. years? An Act of Parliament of Queen Elizabeth
and the Abettors of her interest, before all other Acts of English Parliaments,
and all general Counsels? The authority of such debaucht Friars and Priests as
Luther, Calvin, and the first Protestant Reformers, before that of all the holy
Doctors and the whole body of the Roman visible Church since the Apostles? In a
word, new fancies called a Reformation, before that old Christianity wherein our
Ancestors, as also our Kings, lived and dyed so happily? and wherein (as the
learned Protestants themselves confess) they were saved; whereas we all deny
that they can be saved by Protestancy.

Q. I see you are of opinion that no Protestant at all can be saved. What? Can
none of them have invincible ignorance? Is there so clear and obuious an
evidence of the Roman Catholic being the true Church, that none can pretend nor
plead ignorance of that truth?

A. That out of the true Church there is no salvation, is a maxim of Faith
wherein the holy Fathers agree. That the same Church is so visible and
preferable before all others, that even the most stupid may as easily see it,
as a City upon a mountain, and therefore are commanded to repair to it, is
manifest in Scripture. That the Roman Catholic has those clear marks of Gods
favor, which persuade the most scrupulous it is the true Church of God, has
bin in the 4. Chapter demonstrated by us, and appears by those supernatural
signs of miracles, sanctity, conversion of Nations to Christianity, etc. which
shine in it, and have set it out so gloriously in all ages and places of the
world since the preaching of the Apostles. That in England there is any corner
or person wherein common sense can be so burried, or curiosity so dead, as to be
ignorant of these things, and others delivered by tradition from age to age,
and year to year, is not credible. But in case there be any Protestant so near
a beast as not to reflect upon any thing he sees or hears of his own or of
our Religion; his Baptism will save him, if he did not loose, by a mortal sin
the grace which he received in and by that Sacrament. And this is all the
comfort I can give my Protestant friends, whose salvation I more heartily wish,
than those do, who delude them with larger opinions.

Q. This is but very cold comfort. Will not God grant to some poor ignorant
Protestant an act of contrition, at least in the last hour?

A. I think not. But if he does to any, it is to some of those stupid Creatures
I last spoke of. As for others, who have wit and ways to consider and reflect
upon those doubts which occurr to themselves, or are raised in them by the
discourse of others, their obstinacy or affected ignorance in not listening, or
inquiring into a matter so important, and so easily resolved, makes them
incapable of so great a favor as an act of contrition. And as for those ernest
or bigot Protestants, they are in greatest danger of any, and furthest from
contrition; because having a cleerer Knowledge of their own religion, and
spending much time in the meditation thereof, they must needs have great doubts,
if they do not stifle them in their first birth, by diuerting their thoughts to
more pleasing objects, and by avoiding all occasions of discoursing of
protestancy, as commonly they do, especialy when they perceive there is any
likelihood of laying open the weakness of its principles, and the wickedness of
the first Reformers. Besides, an act of contrition inuolues Faith, hope, and
charity, and these Protestants not having Faith, but rather an auersion against
hearing of it, are not in a disposition fit for contrition, which is the
greatest grace God does to his most eminent servants, and the Saints of his own
Church.

Q. Methinks this is very hard. I can not as yet comprehend why a devout
Protestant may not be capable of an act of contrition. Is protestancy so
abominable in the sight of God, that he will not turn his merciful eye toward
Protestants? Is it wors than other great sins which God does pardon? Is it
heresy? And if it be, may not an heretik have an act of contrition? Is the
malice of heresy so great as to exclude Gods mercy?

A. Without doubt Heresy is the greatest of sins, and yet excludes not Gods
mercy; but an Heretics conversion precedes contrition, this not being
compatible with heresy. I will briefly tell you vvherin consists the malice
of heresy, and leave yourself to judge whether protestancy be Heresy. The
malice of Heresy consists in the contempt of Gods veracity. And Gods veracity
consists in an infinite inclination to truth. An infinite inclination to truth is
not consistent with a permission of falsood credibly fathered and fastened upon
him that permits it, if he can easily hinder the same. Now, the malice of
heresy consists in having so mean an opinion of Gods veracity, or of his
inclination to truth, that he would permit a Church so credibly pretending to
be his own, as the Roman Catholic does (by its miracles, its sanctity its
conversion of Nations to Christianity, and other supernatural marks) to impose
upon the world (in his name) for so many ages, false doctrine for true; vvheras
it was in his power every moment of all that time to discover and declare the
cheat, and disown the doctrine. And yet he did not either. That our miracles
father our doctrine upon God, is easily proved; for, though the first Protestant
Reformers and their successors cry out against some of our miracles as false,
yet they are forced to confess some of them are true; and we join with them in
censuring false miracles as such, and punish them who feign them as
Malefactors. Against our conversion of Nations to Christianity (a confessed
mark of the true Church) they have nothing to say; and as little against the
succession and sanctity of our Doctrine and Doctors. Notwithstanding this
credible (and indeed conuincing) appearance of our miracles, and of the Roman
Catholic Church being the true one, commissioned by God to instruct his people,
yet the Protestants will not believe it, nor submit their judgments to so
authentik an authority, nor hearken to the Divine voice manifesting itself by
the cleerest signs and evidence that is consistent with the freedom, merit, and
obscurity of Christian Faith. Whether this obstinacy be not heresy, let the
Protestants themselves judge; and examine whether to slight the testimony and
signs of such a Church, be not a contempt of Gods veracity, as supposing he can
permit falsood to be so plausibly fatherd upon him as we see the Roman
Catholic doctrine has bin for so many ages, and throughout all parts of the
world.

CHAP. VII. OF THE MINISTRY OF THE Church, and of the nullity of that of
England.
AS it is necessary that Gods Church should have visible signs whereby it may be
discerned from all heretical Congregations, so it is acknowledged that in the
same there is a Ministry caracterised with such publik ceremonies and
authentik testimonies, that there can be no danger of counterfeiting a mission
or vocation so sacred. In the Christian Church the Ministers are called Bishops
and Priests. Both are consecrated by a real imposition of Episcopal hands, and
other ceremonies which have bin practiced in the Church ever since the
Apostles, from whom by a continual succession the Episcopal caracter must
descend, and be proved; otherwise no credit is to be given to any persons
claiming to be Bishops of whose ordination Priestood depends.

It was the misfortune of the Protestant Reformations, that the Authors thereof
were not Bishops, and, by consequence, could not transmit either that caracter,
or that of Priestood to their successors, as they did their doctrine. This
defect they endeavored to supply by persuading such as believed them, that no
indelible caracter or visible ceremony of imposition of Episcopal hands, was
necessary for a Minister of the Ghospel. And even the Church of England was
necessitaded to approve of this desperate doctrine (in the 25. of its 39.
articles of Religion) because it was then well Known, the Consecrators of her
first Bishops were no real Bishops, though they were called so for reason of
state. One is, that the constitution of English Parliaments requiring Bishops
as one of the three estates of the Kingdom, and their votes being a
considerable addition to the soueraigns authority, of which alone their
nomination depends, Q. Elizabeth in this particular of Episcopacy went
against the principles of other Reformations, and would needs Keep up the name
of Bishops in her Church. But it happened very cross to her design, that none
of the Catholic Bishops of England (no others were then there living) would lay
hands upon, or consecrate any of those new ones which she named to that
dignity. See the commission and dispensation in Doctor Bramhall the Protestant
Bishop of Derry, his vindication of the Episcopacy of England. See the statut.
8. Eliz. 1.
Therefore she was forced to issue forth a second commission for that purpose
and therein to dispense (by virtue of her supreme spiritual jurisdiction) with
the very state and condition of the Consecrators. And this power and practice
having bin publikly excepted against (by Catholic Authors in print) as null,
and ridiculous, it was confirmed and declared by Act of Parliament (8. Eliz.
1.) that whatsoever had bin don until then in making of Bishops, Archbishops,
etc. by the Queens commission under the great seal of England, should stand as
ualid, whether the Consecrators were Bishops or no Bishops; any person or
persons whatsoever, having bin declared capable of giving that caracter to any
other, provided they were authorized thereunto by her Majesty's commission under
the great seal.

This occasioned great disputes between Doctor Haiding and Doctor Iuel, one of
the first Protestant Bishops. Doctor Haiding in his printed books desired Mr
Iuel to name the Bishop that consecrated him, Parker, and the rest of Queen
Elizabeth's first Bishops; and was content to submit to Iuel, and own the
validity of his and the other protestant Bishops consecration, if he would name
Parkers Consecrator. A man would think this was no such intricat matter, nor
strong argument, if ever Parker had bin consecrated by a Bishop. And yet Iuel
having bin thus provoked by his insulting Adversary, could never name Parkers
Consecrator, of whose consecration depended that of the rest; nor produce
Registers of that consecration, when Harding called for them, though some 50.
years after, appeared in print a very formal Register of Parkers consecration,
copied forsooth out of Records Kept in Lauander at Lambeth. The unseasonable
appearance of this new found Register occasioned much laughter, and new
disputes which have continued until these times. And indeed it can not well
enter into any considering men's heads, that Parker, Iuel, and the first
protestant Bishops (who were called by Catholics no Bishops in print, for want
of a right Consecrater, and challenged to name the Bishops that consecrated
them or Parker, their adversaries setting their stress upon that only argument)
would not take the pains to see and search their Registers of Lambeth for a
Bishops name that imported them so much to name, if any such Bishop had ever
bin, or any such Records had bin then extant. Besides, sure their memories were
not so short, as not to remember without the help of Registers and Records the
name of a man that their Successors pretended (fifty years after the time of
answering was past) had made Parker a Bishop but five years before they were
asked the question, with so much ceremony and solemnity. For, Hardings book and
Iuells answer were printed an. 1565. or therabouts.

An other thing made the prelatik Clergies caracter absolutely null. And that
was the Form which they used in the consecration of their Bishops and Priests.
This Form was judged essentialy defective, because not one word thereof did
express or mention the caracter pretended to be given thereby. And though the
Church of England for near one hundred years had defended and practiced this
Form, yet at length they were forced to submit to their Adversaries exceptions
and reasons against it, and to change and correct the Form, as we directed in
the books we writ against the same. Upon the Kings restoration they printed
their Ritual and therein you may see the words Bishop and Priest added unto the
Form of their consecrations, which (or their equivalent) are absolutely
necessary; and yet nothing like them was in the old Forms, and former editions.
This humility of theirs is to be commended, though it be to no purpose, seeing
the change made not them who went before it, Bishops; and though their late
reformed Form be valid, yet when pronounced by men that are not Bishops, it
works no effect, nor gives any caracter either of Priestood or Episcopacy to
themselves or their Successors. And none of the Protestant Clergy has bin
consecrated by a true Bishop since the change of their old Form.

Let the Protestant Layty now reflect upon the caracter and conscience of their
Clergy, as being men who take upon themselves the administration of Sacraments,
absolution from sins, spiritual jurisdiction, and all functions belonging to
true Bishops and Priests; though themselves can not but know there is no
probable ground to believe they are such. I say nothing of the revenues they
are possessed of upon the account of being Churchmen; but I can not be so
uncharitable as not to advertise my Countrymen of the danger they are in, and
of the damnation which will follow, if by timely repentance and a generous
resolution they do not withdraw themselves from the direction of such Teachers,
and from the Ministry of such a Clergy. What can they answer to the,
objection we borrow from the statut 8. Eliz. Can they imagine that the Queen
would dispense with the state and condition of the Consecraters, if they had
had the Episcopal caracter? What need was there of a dispensation with their
state and condition, if they were real Bishops? Why should the Parliament
confirm this dispensation, and enact by law, that whatsoever was don by this
commission of the Queens, should be valid, whether the Consecraters were
Bishops or not; the words are, by any person, or persons whatsoever. All that
my Countrymen can say, is, that they have an Act of Parliament for the
caracter of their Clergy, and for the salvation of their souls. What that will
auail them in the other world, I wish they did consider. Surely they can not
but know that such Acts, will be no excuse before that dreadful Judge, who
takes no other evidence but that of our own conscience. This only we must
consult in matters of Eternity, and not think that a Clergy or Religion
established by a temporal law, is lawful, though it should be called legal by
an Act of Parliament.

Q. Sir, I have seen the Registers of Lambeth you would have me suspect as
forged. I assure you I see no sign of forgery in them. And as for Bishop Iuels
not answering Doctor Harding demand, concerning the first Protestant Bishops
(and particularly Parkers) Consecrator, perhaps he thought it an idle question,
and underualued so weak an objection.

A. Forged Registers are often the most formal, all counterfeit ware standing
in need of being set forth with great artifice. We have seen Registers and
Records of publik Courts of Judicature so artificialy changed and corrupted,
that nothing but their not being produced many years before, when they were
called for, could conclude the forgery. Doctor Harding called for the Registers
of the first protestant Bishops Consecration, as well as for the Consecraters
name: Neither did B. Iuel contemn this demand, as you imagine. He went as far in
the answer as he durst. He answered, 1. that the first protestant Bishops in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, were consecrated in due form by
Archbishop Parker their Metropolitan: But being again pressed by Harding to
name Parkers Consecrator, he put off that impertinent question (whereof the
whole controversy and the credit of the Church of England depended) by a wild
digression and long discourse of the ancient Bishops being consecrated without
aquainting the Pope. But sure Mr Iuel might aquaint Doctor Harding with the
name of him who consecrated Parker, as well as he named Parker for Consecrator
of the other Bishops; and certainly would, if Parker himself had bin realy
consecrated by a Bishop. If you do not believe my relation, read Doctor
Hargings books against Iuel, and Iuels own Apology for the Church of England,
where they treat of this particular.

Q. Gentlemen, I would to God you did agree among yourselues, and not break the
Layties heads with your disputes. You have put so many doubts into mine, that I
can hardly believe any thing. On both sides you seem to be honest and learned
men; therefore I think my best way is, to continue in the Church of England, and
trust in God, that I shall not be damned for not being of that of Rome, until
I be better satisfied that the points wherein it differs from ours are necessary
for salvation. And this requiring longer time, (the particulars being so many)
than I am like to live, it is not credible God would oblige me, or any other
illiterat person, to spend our days rather in controversies than in prayer and
good works; and in the end be as little satisfied with ourselves as our and your
Clergy are with one an other. Yourselues grant that implicit Faith is
sufficient for such ignorant people as I am, that Faith, I am sure I have; for
I do believe all that God revealed, though I do not know what it is he
revealed, or whether he has appointed the Church of Rome, rather than that of
England, to instruct the world, and inform us of his revelations. And truly I
believe a man may be saved without troubling himself to know which of them it
is that God has appointed for our instruction, provided we be ready to be
members thereof when that shall be made clear to us by better arguments than I
am able to inquire after.

A. This is so dangerous doctrine, that I judge it worth my pains to show yet
further the obligation the most illiterat men have to search after the true
Church, and how easi^y they may find it out by visible signs; and how you may
without any help, but that of common sense, be satisfied of the truth of every
particular point of doctrine wherein Roman Catholics differ from Protestants: And
all this in the space of less than two hours time.

Q. Nay Sir, if you perform your undertaking, I deserve to be damned for all
Eeternity, if I will nor hear you for so short a time as two hours. I pray Sir
proceed.

CHAP. VIII. HOW EVERY ILLITERAT PERSON may easily and in the space of two
hours, find out the true Church, and the truth of every point of doctrine
controuerted betvveen Catholics and Protestants.
When the people of Israel were most divided in matters of Religion, 3. Reg. 8.
the Prophet Elias made a motion to them of clearing the truth by that famous
dogmatical Miracle of burning an Ox upon the Altar without kindling the fire
under it. This clear and compendious way was hugely approved of by the
multitude, as suting best with their capacities, for, they needed not learning
to dispute, their eyes were sufficient Judges, and they had so much common
sense as to know, that God would not permit a falsood to be confirmd by a
miracle in so publik a trial, wherein his Veracity was so particularly
concerned. The Prophets therefore of Baal durst not refuse so fair an offer as
Elias made in their presence, and I hope the Protestant Clergy will be ashamed
to refuse mine. Let us not delude the people with school subtilities, or
obscure texts of scripture. If the Church of England or Scotland or any other
reformed one be the true Church, and its doctrine the true doctrine, let that be
tried by miracles. I shall try ours of Rome by that test. I challenge then all
the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England and all others of the
Reformation, or all the Protestants of the world, to work, or mention any one
miracle ever yet wrought by any Protestant to confirm any one point of doctrine
wherein they differ from the Roman Catholic. Gentlemen, summon your Sinods,
search into all histories, profane, and sacred, set your heads together, and
produce at least some probable testimony of as much as one miracle to grace your
Reformations. And if you can not find undoubted miracles, at least show some
thing that looks like a miracle; some thing that may be mistaken for one,
whereof the falsood or fraud has not bin as yet discoured: such as you say many
of ours are. Perhaps you will pretend that your Protestants are not so easily
foold with false miracles, as our Roman Catholics. But this must be a gift and
privilege of your private spirit; for, the Spaniards, Italians, and French, are
not by nature so dull as our Northen Protestants, and are as loath to be
cheated out of their moneys by Masses, Miracles, Pilgrimages, and other
pretexts of devotion, as you are. And yet they believe such Miracles, as have
bin motives for the Popes, or people, to Canonize our Saints, and those also
whereby Heathens and heretics have bin converted to our Religion.

Q. I doubt not Sir, but that the Catholics are as unlikely and loath to be
imposed upon, as Protestants; therefore I would fain hear some of those
undeniable miracles you pretend to have in your Church, and for confirmation of
the doctrine wherein you differ from us. But I pray let them be Miracles like
those of Christ, for I will not believe any others. I give you this caution for
fear you should trouble me with Mother Iulianas fits, and one Finaghtyes
triks, wherewith he deluded the common people here in England and Ireland, where
that man's Miracles (as I hear) are mightily cried up.

A. Sir, you have reason to expect I should relate unto you Miracles like those
of Christ, seeing himself has said (John. 14.22.) Luther to 7. l. de Iudaeis.
etc. fol. 210. A Deo didicimus, and accepimus, aeternum verbu^ and veritatem
Dei hactenus mill quingentio annis miraculis and signis confessam and
confirmatam.
he that belieueth in me, the works that I do, he shall do, and greater.
Which words not only Luther the first Protestant Reformer, but your English
Bibles (edit. 1576.) in the marginal notes, referr to the whole body of the
Church, in whom this virtue does shine for ever. Though I must confess, both
Luther, and our English Protestant writers contradict themselves again in this
particular (as all men must who maintain errors) and say, when we press them to
relate some of their Miracles, that Miracles are now superfluous, and therefore
none wrought in the Church. But I shall deal so impartialy with Protestants in
this matter, that I will not mention any miracle for confirmation of the Roman
Catholic Church and doctrine, which the best Protestant writers themselves do
not confess to be miracles, though others of them attribute the working thereof
to the power of Beelzebub (as the obstinat Jews did of Christ's) and that, for
no other reason but because the miracles were wrought by Papists, and to
confirm Popery.

As for Finaghtyes miracles, I made it my buisness to inquire after them, and
him also; and do find, that so soon as he began to work his miracles, the
Popish Archbishop of Tuam in Ireland (who was his Ordinary) questioned him for
that presumption, and finding him both ignorant and obstinat, he forbid him the
further tempting of God, and scandalizing the Church by his foolish attempts.
But the man's zeal or vanity prevailing more upon his Spirit, than his Superiors
commands, he continued his ridiculous course, and thereupon was commanded out of
the Archbishops Province. After that vigilant Prelates death, Finaghty lurking
for some time in other places, came into England, and from thence returned to
Dublin, where he played the fool with breathing, and beating the Devil in good
ernest; one Stanton (an other mad Priest of his Country) printed many of his
rash attempts for great miracles. Finaghty, after that his manner of exorcisms
had hin examind, and found to be different from those of the Church, and his
dispossessing of Devils to be without any visible mark or sign of the Devils
possession, or at least departure, was silenc't by the Clergy of Dublin, and
commanded out of that Province. From thence he went to his own (Conaght) and
falling again to his old miracles, he was by the Popish Bishop of Elfin
deprived of his general Vicarship, and that extraordinary respect forgot which
the simplicity of the people had offered to his supposed sanctity; by whom now
he is much slighted. My charity inclines me to believe, that his greatest
fault was folly, and that he was more cheated by the Devil, than so simple a
man could design to cheat others. I have bin more diffuse upon this subject
than you may think it deserves, because the world may be satisfied None
suspects the truth of miracles, nor corrects the foolish Pretenders of working
them more, than we Roman Catholics; it being one of the greatest cares of our
Bishops and Pastors, to prevent such impostures, and to punish the Impostors,
And this has bin the continual practice of our Church, ever since the
beginning of Christianity.

Q. You have given me great satisfaction by your relation and opinion of
Finaghty, and his miracles. If they had not bin so soon, and sesonably
condemned by his own party, I should suspect that all your other miracles
reported in Legends and Saints lives, were of the same nature. But now I see
that miracles which were never contradicted or suspected by yourselues are
credible. I pray therefore relate those, which you say are confessed or allowed
of by the learned Protestants, and yet confirm your doctrine in opposition to
theirs.

SECT. I. THE CONVERSION OF THE Heathen Kings and Nations from Paganism to
Christianity, and Popery, is an evident miracle and mark of the truth of the
Roman Catholic Church and doctrine, in opposition to that of all Protestant
Reformations.
Its continuance even from the Apostles to this present demonstrated, as also
the impossibility of its pretended insensible change.
THe greatest of all miracles (it being the end for which they have bin
wrought, and the Christian Church instituted) is the conversion of the Heathen
Kings and Nations to Christianity. If therefore it be proved, that all the
Heathen Kings and Nations which have bin converted from Paganism to
Christianity, were converted to no other but to that Christianity which
Protestants call Popery, and that the said conuersions were performed by known
Papists, and confessed miracles, our Adversaries must acknowledge that the
Roman Catholic Church, (and it alone) is the true Church of God; otherwise it
will follow, that Christ instituted his Church to no purpose; and that his
design and desire of the conversion of Nations, and saving their souls, came to
nothing. Nay it will follow, that Christ is not the Messiah, to whose doctrine
and Church (as the Scriptures and Prophets foretell) all Nations shall flow,
and their Kings Minister, the multitude of the seas shall be converted, the
Isles shall vvayt for, and the Heathens be its inheritance, and the end of the
earth its possession. All this the Protestants themselves confess to be
prophesied of the true Christian Church, as you may see in their marginal notes
upon the English Bible edit. 1576. in Esaias 60. verse. ult. And in Daniel 2.
verse. 45. This argument made so great impression upon many of the most learned
Protestant writers, (who had resolved not to be Papists) that some of them
turned Jews, others Atheists, others Turks; as Bernardin Ochin, Sebastian
Castalio, David George, Adam Neuserus, Allemanus, and others.

Q. Sir though I doubt not of your sincere dealing, yet I must not take upon
your single credit, that learned Protestants could turn Turks and Jews, upon
the score you mention.

A. Sir I hope you will believe themselves. Read Bernardin Ochins Preface to
his Dialogues, wherein you will find these words, when I did consider how
Christ by his power, wisdom, and goodness had founded and established his
Church, etc. and again discerned how the same was utterly ouerthrovvn, I
could not but vvonder, and being desirous to know the cause, I found there had
bin Popes. From this conceit of the Popes prevailing against Christ's Church, he
concluded there had bin no such thing as Christ's Divinity, and proceeded to
teach Circumcision, and Poligamy; and at length came to be an impure Apostata,
as the famous Beza does term him in his Treatise de Poligam. page 4. Impurus
ille Apostata Bernardinus Ochinus. Read likewise Sebastian Castalios' own words
in his Preface of the great Latin Bible dedicated to King Eduard 6. which are,
The more I do peruse the Scriptures, the less do I find the same (he means the
profecies of the conversion of Kings and Nations) performed, howsoever you
understand the same profecies. David George (say the Protestant Divines of
Basil in their History of him edit. 1568.) discoursed thus, If the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles had bin true and perfect, the Church which they
planted, etc. should have continued, etc. But now it is manifest that
Antichrist has subverted the doctrine of the Apostles, and the Church by them
begun, as is evident in the Papacy: therefore the doctrine of the Apostles was
false, and imperfect And so this protestant Apostle of Basil, by reflecting
upon the fundamental principle of the Reformation (which is a supposition that
the true Church and doctrine had bin invisible or destroyed for many ages by
Popery) became a blasphemous Apostat, affirming that our Savior was a seducer.
In like manner Adam Neuserus, the chief Pastor of Heidelberg, turned Turk and
was circumcised at Constantinople. See Osiander in his Epitom. Centur. 16. page
818. The like fate had Alemannus, Beza his bosom friend, as Conradus
Schlusserburg says in Theol. Calvin. fol. 9. and Beza confesses ep. 65. page
108. Alemannum affirmant ad Iudaismum defecisse. And all their conuersions to
so damned sects, were grounded upon their not finding any pagan Kings or
Nations to have bin ever converted to protestancy, but all ways to popery.

Q. I must confess Sir, that if all the Heathen Kings and Nations have bin
converted to that Christianity which we call popery, and this was performed by
Papists (which could not be don without miracles) and no pagan Kings and
Nations have bin ever converted to Protestancy, nor by Protestants, ye have
much more to say for yourselues than ever I heard before, and we much less. But
I doubt you will hardly prove that until the end of the first 600. years,
there were any Kings or Nations converted to Popery; though afterward I must
own, that profession was spread over the world, and reignd until our
Protestant Reformation began in the year 1517. And to avoid prolixity, I desire
you to rosolue me this one question, whether Constantin the great the first
Christian Emperor was a Papist? We believe that he, and the Church of his
time, was Protestant, because the purest Christianity, (Protestancy) was then
in vogue; though afterward it degenerated insensibly into Popery.

A. Eusebius. de Vita Constantini l. 3. c. 47. and lib. 4. cap. 38. S. Hieron.
contra Vigilant. ante med. Costantinus Imperator sa^ctas reliquias Andreae,
Lucae, and Timothei transtulit Constantinopolim, apud quas Daemones rugiunt.
And ibid. Si reliquius Sanctorum tra^sferre, and in aureos loculos re condere
non licet, sacrilegus fuit cum Constantino Arcadius, omnes Episcopi non solum
sacrilegi, sed and fatui iudicandi, qui rem vilissima^ and cineres dissolut^s
^n seric^, vase aureo portauerunt, etc.

S. August. tom. 39. d^ Sanctis, says, Crucis caracter^ Basilicae dedicantur,
altaria consecrantur.

S. Greg. apud Bedam hist. lib. 1. c. 30.

Eusebius. de vita Constantini. l 3. c. 2. atque interdum vultum salutari illa
passionis signavit nota.

Zozomen. hist. l. 1. c. 8. Sanctae Crucis plurimum tribuit honoris.

Prudentius in Apotheosi, vexillumque Crucis summus Dominator adorat.

S. Chrysostom. in ep. 2. Cor. hom. 26. versus fin. Nam and ipse qui purpuram
indutus est, accedit illa amplexus sepulchra, and fastu deposito, sta^ Sanctis
supplicaturus, ut pro se ad Dominum intercedant.

See the same also in S. Chrysostom ad pop. hom. 60. versus finem.


That Constantin the great was a Papist, and the Religion then in vogue (and
the only then called Catholic) was Popery, is evident by Eusebius his
Ecclesiastical History written a little after Constantins death, as also, by
what the Centurists of Magdeburg and all other learned Protestants confess.
For, it is evident by their writings, that Constantin erected Temples in memory
of Martyrs, and the Apostles; provided his Sepulcher there, to the end that
after his death he might be made partaker of the prayers there offered: He
translated to Constantinople the relics of St Andrew, Luke, and Timothy, at
which the Devil did roar, which particular circumstance St Hierom presses
against Vigilantius, whom he concludes an heretik, for being against the
praying to Saints, and worshipping their relics. St Augustine and St Gregory
(two other Doctors of the Church) defend the practice of consecrating Churches
(when Constantin built them) with the sign of the Cross, and sprinkling of holy
water, which I believe the protestant Clergy of Dublin were ignorant of, when
(as I have bin credibly informed) they framed (very lately) a new form of their
own heads, to consecrat Mr Lingars oual Temple, with such hatred to the Cross,
that they would not make use of the sign thereof in the Consecration, nor bless
themselves in the beginning, or throughout the whole work, nor place any Cross
in the top of the Church, for fear of profaning it, or troubling the Spirit of
that peaceble Minister, not long before departed: Nay Crosses were pulled down
in that Diocese, and Catholics punished for opposing them who committed such
sacrileges.

Without doubt Constantin the great was one of the most rank Papists, and
though he was the man who pulled down Idols, and established Christianity in
the world with its splendour, and publik exercise, yet I fear our Zealous
Dublinian Clergy will protest against his Religion as superstitious, and
censure him guilty of Idolatry, when they hear how often he blessed himself,
making the sign of the Cross in his forhead, nay (which is worse) not only
adorning, but adoring (with an inferior religious worship) the Cross; and
(which is worst of all) praying to St Peter and Paul that they would be
Intercessors for him to God. At least the Church of England will not challenge
him, as a member of theirs, he being so auerse to the spiritual supremacy, and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of temporal soueraigns, that he would not sit down
at the Council of Nice, until the Bishops had thereto given their assent, nor
would he take upon him to judge of Ecclesiastical causes, saying, God has
ordained you Bishops, and has given you power to judge of yourselues, by
means vvherof we yield ourselves to your judgment. So Crispinus in his book
of the estate of the Church page 99. and Zozomen hist. l. c. 10. post med. sets
down these popish words of Constantin. Mihi vero non est fas, cum homo sim,
ciusmodi causarum cognitionem arrogare, etc. He is therefore cursed by the
Protestant vvriters, as bearing the mark of the beast, in acknowledging the
Popes supremacy, and for subduing all Christian Churches to his jurisdiction;
so Frigiuillaeus in his palma Christiana dedicated to Q. Elizabeth page 35.
saying, that Constantin, preferred the Bishops of Rome, and Constantinople
before others, yet attributed the Primacy before all to the Roman. And page 34.
says, that Constantin gave the power of the beast to Pope Julius, which
Julius presently exercised; for Constantin also carried the mark of the Dragon
in his arms, etc. And Mr Napper in his Treatise upon th Revelations dedicated
to King James, says, After the year of God 300. the Emperor Constantin subdued
all Christian Churches to Pope Siluester; from which time till these our days
the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outvvard and visible Church.

Q. Pardon Sir, that I interrupt you from proceeding further in the Proof of
Constantins being a Papist. I am fully conuinc't he was of your Popish
Religion, and seeing Mr Napper says to King James, that Popery possessed and
governed the visible Church ever since that time, I would willingly know
whether it was so before Constantins time, or whether that Emperor bestowed
this supremacy upon the Pope, and pulld down Protestancy to set up Popery?

A. To satisfy your curiosity I will remit you to your own Protestant writers,
the Centurists and others. I will only tell you that one of the most learnest
protestant writers called Philip Nicolai, took great pains in this matter, in
his work de regno Christi, undertaking to discover the first beginning and
increase of the papal dignity, or supremacy, and concludes at last with these
words page 221. Primatus affectatio, communis fuit infirmitas Apostolorum, ac
etiam primorum Vrbis Romae Episcoporum. The affectation of the Primacy was an
infirmity common to the Apostles, as also to the first Bishops of Rome. Mr
Midleton likewise in his Papistomastix, page 193. says, that perusing
Counsels, Fathers, and stories from the Apostles forvvord, we find the print
of the Popes feet. We may therefore follow securely steps so ancient and so
authentik. If Popery were not the right way to heaven, certainly the ancient
Counsels would have condemned it, the Fathers would have declined it, and the
Histories would have recounted how it entered into the Church, and supplanted
the former Religion that Christ and the Apostles had preached. And yet not a
word of this change, or corruption in Counsels, Fathers, or any History. This
is the greatest of Miracles, that the doctrine and publik profession of Popery,
being in itself so contrary to Protestancy (which is supposed by its
Professors to have bin the pure and primitive Christianity) should steal so
early, and so insensibly into the Church, notwithstanding the vigilance of
those primitive Pastors, and the great concern of every faithful, to observe
and oppose the least nouelty whatsoever in matters of doctrine; any change or
corruption thereof inuoluing a damnable heresy.

Q. Though the conversion of all heathen Kings and Nations were as you say to
Popery, and performed by Papists; and that it is not credible God would permit
so general a peruersion, vvherby the end of instituting his Church would be
frustrated, yet I would willingly know whether you can produce any Miracles
against our Protestant doctrine vvherby we differ from the Papists.

A. See D^ Humfry in Iesuitismi p. 2^ rat. 5. p. 5. and 627. Bishop Bale in
Act. Romans Pont. page 44.45. and 46. Osiand. in Epit. Ce^t. 6. p. 289. and 288.
And the Magdeb. Centur. 6. cap. 20.
All the Miracles that moved the Pagans to be Papists, were wrought against
Protestancy. I will instance it in the conversion of our Saxon Ancestors, who
were Pagans, and made Papists by the preaching and Miracles of St Austin the
Monk, Apostle of England. The Protestant writers confess he converted the
Saxons to the Chaos of Popish Ceremonies, and superstition, and specify worship
of Images, praying to Saints, Purgatory, Mass, Transubstantiatiation, holy
water, etc. And yet themselves confess with Saint Bede, that his doctrine and that
of the ancient Britans of that time, Bp. Iuel in his pageant of Popes. Bp.
Goduin in his Catalogue of Bishops p. 1. Fox in his Acts and Monum. printed
1576. page 463.
difered only in a ceremony of Baptism, and in the day of celebrating Easter,
St Austin confirming his own practice therein, by a confessed Miracle of
restoring sight to a blind man. Now it being evident by our English Chronicles,
and the Protestant vvriters (vvherof Mr John Fox, Bishop Goduin, and Bishop
Iuel are to be particularly noted, as being most eminent) that the ancient
Britans after receiving the Catholic Faith in the Apostles time, held the same
until Austins coming, and never forsook it for any manner of false preaching
of other, nor for torments, etc. It must be concluded that the ancient Britans
were first converted to Popery, and so continued until Austins time, and that
his and their doctrine was the same in all particulars contrary to Protestancy,
and confirmed by Miracles. But because you seem to desire a dogmatical Miracle,
that is, one wrought in confirmation of Popery; not only as it is Christianity
in general, but at it is Christianity in particular, and opposite to
Protestancy, I will endeu or to satisfy your curiosity, hoping thereby to setle
your conscience.

CHAP. IX. St. BERNARDS UNDENIABLE Miracles wrought by God to confound
Protestants, and confirm the doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, Prayer to Saints, their
worship, and that of Images, Chrisme, the Popes supremacy, etc.
SAint Bernards learning, sanctity, and Miracles are so generaly confessed by
all Protestant writers that Doctor Stillingfleet in his late Comedy of the
Idolatry and Fanaticism of the Church of Rome, durst not bring him upon the
stage. Whitaker de Ecclesia, page 369. says of him, I do realy believe
Bernard was a true Saint. Osiander cent. 12. says, Saint Bernard Abot of
Clareual was a uery pious man, etc. Gomarus in speculo Ecclesiae, page 23.
says, one pious man your Church had in many years. Bernard your Saint. And
Pasquils return into England page 8. and 13. says, he was a good Father and
one of the lamps of Gods Church. He was so famous for his learning, humility,
devotion, and Miracles, that after his refusal of all Ecclesiastical dignities,
he governed not only the Church, but the temporal Princes were said by him, and
submitted to his judgment. King Henry 2. of England forsook a Schismatical Pope
(which he had supported against the King of France) by saint Bernards
persuasion. The King of France gave over troubling the Bishops for his sake.
William the Duke of Aquitain was converted from a devouring wolf to a meek
Lamb by his words. All the world looked upon saint Bernard as the Apostle of
that age, wherein diverse heresies were broacht by the Waldensis, S. Bern. Ep.
241. ad Tolos says, we thank God for that our coming to you was not in
uain, our stay indeed was short with you, but not nnfruitfull; the truth
being by us made manifest (non solu^ in Sermon sed etiam in vi tute) not only
by preaching, but also by power of vvorking Miracles the Wolves are deprended.
Apostolici, Henricians, and others. These two last Sects had infected a great
part of France, especialy about Tolouse; their chief errors were against
Transubstantiation, Prayers to Saints, and the same which Protestants hold in
our days, and we have mentioned in the title of this Chapter. The Pope sent a
Legate, and St Bernard, to confute them. In this Mission, amongst innumerable
others, he wrought the ensuing Miracle, not only written by his Disciple
Godifridus, who was an eye witness there of, but recorded in the other Histories
of that time, and insinuated by St Bernard himself in his 241. Epistle to the
people of Tolouse, to the end they might be constant in the manifest doctrine
which he had preached against the Henricians, whom Protestants challenge as
members and Martyrs of the Protestant Church, as every one may see in their
Catalogue of the vvitnesses of truth, printed 1597. and in M. Symondes upon the
Revelations, page 142. and 143. The Miracle is recounted by Godefridus invita
Bern. l. 3. c. 5. and by others of the same time, as follows.

There is a place in the Country of Tolosa, called Sarlatum, where after the
Sermon was don, they offered to he servant of God (as every where the use
was) many loaves to bless, vvihich he, lifting up his hand, and making the
sign of the Cross, in Gods name blessing, said thus. In this you shall Know
that these things are true which we, and that those other are false which
the heretics labor to persuade you; that whosoever they be (of your diseased
persons) that taste the loaves: they shall be healed, to the end you may Know
us to be the true Minister of God. The Bishop of Chartres (a great friend to
the Saint) thinking this proposition too general, told the people, they were
to understand, it conditionaly, so they did cate of the loaves with Faith. St
Bernard sudenly replied, My Lord, I do not mean so, my meaning and saying is,
that all sick folks who will eat of those loaves, shall recover their health,
to the end it may be Known we are Gods true Ministers. And acordingly it
fell out, not one diseased person, that did eat of the bread, mist of being
eured; and the Miracle being thus diuulged, by its effects, so huge a multitude
of people came to thank and admire the Saint; that he declined the common
roads, and went by by ways to Tolouse; where at the instance of the
Catholics, and to further confute the aforesaid hetesies against
Transubstantiation, Mass, Purgatory, prayer to Saints, worship of Images, etc.
he with giving his benediction to a paralitik priest that lay a dying in the
College of St Saturnin, restored him to so perfect health, that the Priest
(who also was called Bernard) sudenly rose out of his bed where he had bin
immovable a long time, followed the Saint, and begd of him to be admitted into
the number of his Monks; which was granted, and afterward lived amongst them
very religiously, and was at length Abot of Valdeau. With these Miracles the
heretics were confounded, and so many converted, that their seducer Henricus
hid himself, and finding no refuge among those who formerly had followed him,
he was taken prisoner, and presented in chains before the Bishop.

Q. If God wrought such Miracles as these for the conversion of the Henricians
and other heretics (as you call them) of that age, why may not we Protestants
expect that he will do the same for our conversion, if we be in errors. I am
sure we desire to save our Souls: And certainly God is as willing to save us as
any others. I wish we could see such Miracles wrought by any Bernard, or other
Saint. We should soon be Papists.

A. One of the reasons why God does not work now such Miracles for the
conversion of Protestants, is, because he has wrought them for the
Henricians: For, the same errors against Transubstantiation, Mass, Prayer to
Saints, Worship of Images, etc. being common to both sects, the same Miracles
confute both equaly, and may now convince Protestants, as well as they did
anciently the Henricians, of heretical and damnable obstinacy. And therefore its
not likely Protestants would become Papists, though they had seen an other St
Bernard work the same Miracles to confirm the Roman Catholic Faith against
Protestancy; that in effect having bin don against it in the case of the
Henricians. I am the more apt to believe the sight of such Prodigies would not
convert you, because your Protestant Authors grant the matter of fact of St
Bernards Miracles against the Henricias doctrine, and of S. Dominik against the
Albige^ses Tenets (wherein these also agreed with Protestants) and only answer
that they were Antichristian Miracles, wrought by the Devils power to confirm
the Idolatry of the Mass, and Images, etc. or at least they were feigned by
idle Monks. Take it in their own words. See the Ce^turists, and Osiander in
Epitom. cent. 9.10.11. page 213.
The Miracles which superstitious Monks relate, are either feigned by
themselves, or wrought by Satan's enchantments, and therefore ought to be
enlisted amongst Antichrists Miracles because they were wrought to confirm
manifest Idolatry, and to establish the wicked worship of Images, veneration
of Relics, Invocation of Saints, sacrifice of Mass, etc. True it is that
Osiander speaking of Saint Bernards Miracles, Cent. 12. page 310. says, Not
that I think St Bernard was a Magitian, but that I think it probable Satan
wrought the Miracles, vvherby the Saint himself and others were deceived. And
this is the common answer all Protestants give to our Miracles, when they can
not deny the fact, nor discover any fraud. And certaintly they would give now
the same answer to the most evident and undeniable Miracles, if any were
wrought before their eyes.

Q. Am I who can not read, or understand Latin and other languages, wherein all
this you say and quote, is written, bound to believe the matter of fact, and
conform thereunto my Faith? What if a Protestant Minister or Bishop tells me
all you say are lies? Whom must I believe? Or am I obliged under pain of
damnation to suspect his sincerity and doctrine, if he will not encounter you,
or any other who offers to make good what you say, by showing the passages in
the books themselves? I confess I think I am. Howeuer I pray tell me what I
ought to do in such a case.

A. You see how in less than two hours time you may know by your Bishops or
Ministers carriage and courage in examining any plain book that relates
Miracles and matter of fact, whether the Protestant Religion be true or false.
If he will resolve to conferr, or rather to conster the words of the book, you
will easily judge of the truth by their sense: to which you must keep him (and
the Catholic also) without any other digressions, or discourses: all your
buisness must be, to know whether the Miracle or matter of fact be so in the
book as I told you; and that, you may know from any honest man who can read
and understand it, as well (perhaps better) than from your Protestant Minister
or Bishop.

As for the answers which the most learned Protestants give to the argument of
our miracles, they are so vveak, that none but wicked and obstinat persons can
be satisfied there with. Their first answer is, that our miracles have bin
feigned by idle Monks. This is so damnd an answer that they dare not stick to
it, because it is not possible that such publik transactions as St Bernards, or
St Dominiks preaching, and Miracles against the Henricians and Albigenses,
could be imposed upon the world, there being as many Obseruers as there were
persons either curious, or concernd in two so contrary parties. Why did not
some one of the Henricians, or Albigenses publish and declare the imposture,
when their Religion was so discredited thereby? Why should Pope Alexander 3.
venture to be laughed at, and deposed from the Apostolik see for canonizing St
Bernard, 12. years after his death, if his Miracles were not so authentik,
that they could not be contradicted? What design could the world and that age
have in conspiring to impose such Miracles upon their friends and posterity,
and in damning themselves thereby, for St Bernards sake? The same argument may
be applied to St Dominik, St Francis, St Vincent Ferrer, St Francis Xauier, or
to any other of our Roman Church, whose miracles have bin wrought in publik
assemblies, and not contradicted as false or fraudulent by any of those ages
that were vvitnesses to them, or vvherin they were first spoke of. And this
is of such force, that our Protestant. Adversaries grant it to be true, and
therefore recurr to the Devils power for their answer, and the confutation of
our Miracles, as the obstinat Jews did against them of Christ.

WHETHER TRADITION, TOGETHER with the Miracles of Christ and of the Church do
demonstrat or undeniably conclude that God reueald the articles of Christian
Faith; Or whether they only demonstrat, or clearly prove, that we are obliged
under pain of damnation to believe that God revealed them? And whether it be
clearly evident, or more than moraly evident, that they are true supernatural
Miracles?
Q. I do think the Parallel between Christ's Miracles and those of the Roman
Catholic Church, or between the obstinat Jews and the Protestants, does not
hold. Christ's Miracles were so evidently supernatural or Divine, that if the
obstinat Jews would consider the visible circumstances thereof, they could not
deny them to be true and Divine Miracles. But the Miracles of the Roman
Catholic Church (I speak of the most authentik) are no such; for, we
Protestants examine and consider all the circumstances of them, and yet we can,
and do deny them to be true Divine Miracles.

A. The parallel does hold, and you will think so if you reflect upon it. 1.
It is a mistake to believe that Christ's Miracles were so clearly supernatural
and Divine as to force an assent or acknowledgment of their being so, from the
Jews and Gentiles that saw them (and therefore could not but admire them, and
consider their surprising circumstances.) For, if the Miracles had appeared to
them supernatural and undeniably true, no assent of their Faith could be a free
act; and that vvherwith St Peter owned Christ's Divinity, Math. 16.
and for which he deserved to be made the Rock or foundation of the Church,
would not have bin so particularly applauded, and rewarded by Christ himself;
the other Apostles having seen and considered as much as he the Miracles of
Christ which moved St Peter to that Confession of Faith, and yet no assent of
Christ's Divinity flowed necessarily from that their sight and confideration;
neither was it forced from St Peter; but was a free act and assent of his
(after seeing all the Miracles and considering their circumstances) to say, Thou
art Christ, Son of the living God. The obstinat Jews therefore did consider all
circumstances of Christ's person and Miracles as much as those who believed
them to be Divine, nay more, because the Scribes, Pharisees, and the Doctors of
the law searched and pried more narowly into his actions, and were better able
to judge of their being natural or supernatural, than most of those, who
believed his Miracles were Divine, and himself the Messiah. And this appears
in many passages, as in that of the blind man, whom they cast out of the
Synagogue; for they understood the Miracle better than himself, and were
sufficiently conuinc't of the cure, and matter of fact. It was not therefore
want of consideration of the circumstances of Christ's person and Miracles that
made the learned Jews obstinat, but their abundance of pride, which made them
auerse from submitting their judgments to Christ's doctrine, notwithstanding they
had moral evidence of the Divinity of his person and of the supernaturality of
his Miracles.

Q. I can not comprehend how Christ's Miracles or any others, can oblige men to
believe his doctrine, or convince them of obstinacy and heresy, for not
believing it and his Divinity, unless it be first made clearly and undeniably
evident to them, that the Miracles are true and supernatural. As for your Moral
evidence of their being true Miracles, it is not strong enough to build
thereupon so absolute an assurance as is requisite in our acts or assents of
Christian Faith, which excludes all doubts, and even all moral possibility of
falsood.

A. I often told you that the certainty and assurance of Christian Faith is not
grounded upon the evidence of Christ's Miracles (or any others of his Church)
being true Miracles; or of its Tradition being infallible; but upon Gods
Veracity, which is so infinitely auers from all Kind of falsood, that he will
no more permit any to be so probably and plausibly fathered upon him as the
Roman doctrine is, than positiuely promote it. Now, Christ's Divinity and the
doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church being confirmed by such prodigies and
signs as have a moral evidence of being supernatural and true Miracles, this
makes it moraly evident to all men, that none but God is Author of that doctrine
and of the prodigies which confirm it. This moral evidence of God being the
Author, is not indeed (as you say) strong enough to bear and ground upon
itself the assurance of an assent or act of Christian Faith; but it is a
prudent and sufficient inducement to believe most certaintly, and without any
Kind of doubt, that God would not permit so great an appearance of his
authority as the miracles of Christ and of the Roman Church manifestly show to
all the world, to be a cheat, or any thing less than his own great Seal;
wherefore at the sight thereof all men are bound under pain of damnation to
believe God alone is the Author of Christ's and the Roman Churches Miracles and
doctrine, just as subjects are bound under pain of death to obey the King and
Magistrates Orders, when signed and sealed with the usual and authentik marks of
their supreme authority. They are bound I say to obey, though they have only
moral evidence that he is King, and that his Seal and Orders are true, and not
conterfeit.

Q. Methinks this argument may be retorted against your self. For, if
notwithstanding the moral evidence we have of such persons being our Parents,
or lawful Kings; and of their seals and Orders not being counterfeit, we are
bound only to honor, and obey them in our outward actions; but we are not
bound to assent inwardly without any Kind of doubt, that such men are our
Parents, or our legitimat Kings; or that their hands and seals are not
counterfeit: If, I say, this moral evidence can not oblige us to such inward
assurances and assents, how can the moral evidence of Christ's and the Roman
Churches Miracles being true and supernatural Miracles, oblige us under pain of
damnation to believe (without any Kind of doubt) Christ's Divinity, and the
Roman Catholic doctrine? At least this much follows from hence, that the moral
evidence of the aforsaid Miracles and signs of the Church, can only exact from
us an outward conformity to its decrees, not an inward assent to its doctrine.

A. The extent of every authority ought to be measured by its appearance. If
its appearance be only human or natural, it reaches no further than to regular
those outward moral actions which are necessary for the government and peace of
the Commonwealth; it has not any thing to do with directing the soul by
inward acts and undoubted assents to its supernatural end. If the appearence of
the authority be supernatural, and moraly evident to us, (by prodigies,
profecies, or other visible signs) that it is so, then it claims a
jurisdiction over the soul, and may exact from it such inward acts and assents
as are proportionable to that supernatural end for which God has instituted
his Church, and adornd it with those Divine marks and miracles which Christ
himself mentions, Marc. 16. and have bin visible in the Roman Catholic ever
since the Apostles. This undeniable Maxim being laid as a foundation, there can
be no difficulty in seeing the disparity there is between the human authority of
Commonwealths, and the spiritual and supernatural of the Church, by virtue of
their different appearances; the miracles and signs of the Church making so
supernatural a show as to declare God alone is the Author of its doctrine and
authority, is extended to the soul, and to the inward acts and assents thereof,
regulating them as it is fit for the salvation of mankind. No human or natural
authority of Kings or temporal Princes can reach so far, because the appearance
thereof is only natural.

Q. Will not the appearance of Antichrists Miracles be supernatural? Did not
those of the Magitians of Egypt look like supernatural, and indiscernable from
those of Moses? How then can a supernatural appearance, or a moral evidence of
prodigies being true Miracles, exact or pretend to any authority over our
inward acts of the will and understanding? shall we submit our judgments to
Antichrists doctrine, because his Miracles will seem to be supernatural. If
not, why should we submit our judgments to the Roman Catholic Church, because
its most authentik Miracles seem to be supernatural?

A. This argument only proves that true Miracles (even those of Christ) do not
clearly evidence or conclude their own supernaturality, or their being true
Miracles. It is so hard a matter to distinguish between true and false or Anti
Christian Miracles, that our Savior says, even the elect would be seduced by
the last, if for their sake, and by Gods particular providence those days
would not be shortened; and therefore he warnes his Disciples and all the
faithful to beware of Antichrists Miracles, for ressembling so much his own;
and gives certain signs whereby men may discover that he who works them, is
Antichrist. Christ's Miracles therefore (as those also of the Church) being
first, and as it were in possession of Gods authority, by being his great
seal, and confirming his doctrine, do by that precedence and Christ's prediction
of conterfeit Miracles, manifest their supernaturality in a different manner
from Antichrists and all other lying prodigies, which have bin or will be
wrought to confirm any doctrine contrary to that of the Catholic Church. Out of
all which we conclude that even Christ's Miracles, and a fortiori those of the
Church (if taken without his prediction and their own precedence) do not
clearly evidence to us that they are true Miracles, and by consequence can not
clearly evidence to us the Divinity of Christ, or that God revealed the
articles of Christian Religion. And the same must be said of Catholic
Tradition, even as it is confirmed by these Miracles of the Church. So that
this Tradition is not the Motive, but the Rule of Faith, which directs us
infallibly (though not clearly) to Gods revelations; and therefore does not
demonstrat, or undeniably conclude that ever God revealed any one article of
that Faith; though the same Tradition, as confirmed by the signs of the Church,
does demonstrat or at least undeniably prove, that we are obliged under pain of
damnation to believe (and that most certainly) that God revealed every point
which the Roman Catholic Church does propose as an article of Faith. This much
of Miracles in general. Now let us return to Saint Bernards, and consider it in
particular.

St Bernard makes the same proposal to the Henricians and people about Tolouse,
that Elias made to the Jews, and Baalists. He appeald to Gods omnipotency for
the manifestation of the truth. And spoke with such confidence of success, as
if the attempt of the miracle had not only bin consulted with God, but had bin
commanded by him. Consider now, I pray, whether it be credible to any person
that has common sense, or whether it be consistent with Gods infinite veracity
and goodness, that upon so publik a trial of both, and whereof depended the
damnation or salvation of so many Souls, God would play the Neuter, and permit
the Devil abuse the sincerity and sanctity of Saint Bernard to seduce the poor
simple people by working Miracles, which saint Bernard himself and the wisest
of that age took to be Divine, and were in appearance as much above the power
of nature, as those were which Christ wrought? If this be as inconsistent with
common sense, as it is with Christianity, not one illiterat Protestant in the
world who has any sense, can be excused by invincible ignorance from
damnation, no learned Protestant from heresy. For, heresy is obstinacy against
doctrine sufficiently proposed as Divine. And if Transubstantiation, the Mass,
Intercession of Saints, worship of Images, Purgatory, etc. be not sufficiently
proposed as Divine doctrine by the testimony of the Church, and these Miracles
of St Bernard, and other Roman Catholic Saints; and in a coniuncture that the
same doctrine was as much questioned by the Henricians, Aug. l. 22. de Ciuit.
Dei c. 8. ad sanctu^ Martyrem orare perrexerunt, etc.

He that belieueth in me, the works, that I do, he shall do, and greater.
Joan. 14.

Nazian. in Epitaph. Gorgoniae. Orat. II. says,

Prostrating herself before the Altar, and calling upon him who was honored
and vvorshipt thereupon, O admirable thing! she presently felt her self
delivered from her si^ness, and so she returned eased both in body and mind etc.


as now it is by Protestants, never any doctrine has bin yet sufficiently
proposed as Divine; nay not the doctrine of Elias, nor of Christ himself;
because neither has bin confirmed by greater Miracles than ours. I need not
repeat others more ancient, as that (which St Austin says he was witness of)
when Palladia recovered her sight by praying to St Steven; or that which St
Gregory Nazianzen recounts of his sister Gorgonia recovering sudenly her
health, by adoring the blessed Sacrament upon the Altar; or that of the Image
of Christ erected by the woman he cured of her flux, whereof see Eusebius hist.
lib. 7. c. 14. or that of the Crucifix in Berito, alleged in 2. Concill.
Nissen. act. 4. or that recounted by Optatus, l, 1. contra Donatistas, to
confirm the reserving and taking the Communion in one Kind; as also the holy
oil, or Chrisme; or that of the person raised from death to receive the
extreme Unction, mentioned by St Bernard in vit. Malach. Or that of Confession
related by Saint Bede hist. l. 5. cap. 14. These and innumerable others, are
superfluous, seeing those of St Bernard are sufficient to convince that no
Protestant, who has so much sense as to believe Gods goodness and veracity,
can be saved, if he denies any one particular of the Roman Catholic doctrine,
when he is credibly informed that this authority is confirmed by such Miracles
as those of Saint Bernard, and other Saints of our Church, which are related in
the publik Acts and Process of their Canonization.

AN HVMBLE ADRESS To the Honorable House of Commons.
MAy it please you, Honorable Sirs, who are the Preseruers of our liberties
(except the chief, which is that of conscience) to take in good part, that the
meanest of his Majesty's subjects humbly beg of you to consider, whether it be
not a damnable sin, to persecute Souls for professing the Religion of your
Christian Ancestors, confirmed by so many credible signs of Gods approbation
and protection, that the wisest and wariest men of the whole world (both in
this and former ages) were conuinc't they were true Miracles; and yourselues
have no reason to believe the contrary, but that prejudice whereunto the
principles of your education from your infancy, and the interest of your
Teachers led you, before you could discern the truth of their doctrine, or the
intricacy of their design. Reflect I beseech you, upon the frailty of your
Ministers, and the fallibility of your Church, and weigh with yourselues,
whether it be not more credible that your English Congregation seasoned with
two such Ingredients as frailty and fallibility, may be mistaken in mysteries
of Faith, than that God would permit the whole Catholic world, and such men as
Saint Bernard, and the other Roman Catholic Saints, to be deluded and seduced
by the Devils lying prodigies; and that, in a conjuncture when Gods veracity
and honor Iay at the stake in a publik trial of true and false doctrine. Would
any of yourselues stand by in such an occasion as an idle spectator, or
unconcerned person, and permit a Rogue or a Fool clad in your livery, produce
counterfeit letters, and deliver seditious orders in your name? Would any of
you suffer poor people who wish you well, to be destroyed by such wicked
practices? Would you condescend so far with your greatest Ennemy, as to wink
at his malice, and at the unjust means he applied to ruin your well meaning
Tenants; or friends? Certainly you would disclaim in the fourbery, and never
wink at a fraud so prejudicial to the people, and as contrary to your noble
inclinations, as to the principles of honor, and truth which you profess.

Be pleased then to have as good an opinion of Gods inclination to honor and
truth, as of your own. Let not the first impressions upon your tender
undiscerning years, grown at unawares into a settleness through education and
custom blind your riper and more manly judgments to be persuaded, God can
permit such Miracles as we have recounted, to be only mistakes of the Roman
Church, and human or Diabolical artifices; or that he would suffer his greatest
Enemy to seduce innocent Souls by cheats so like supernatural seals of the
Divine doctrine and ministry, that such prudent, learned, and conscientious men
as the Roman Catholic Church has had in all ages, could (after a severe
scrutiny) conclude to be the work of Gods omnipotency, and above the power of
all natural causes. This well considered, will, I hope, make you more Kind to
your Roman Catholic Kindred and Neighbors, and to the Religion of all your
Ancestors before Queen Elizabeth's reign. But if you slight this humble advice,
grounded upon so clear evidence, I fear that God, who is a jealous God, and no
less concerned for his honor, and veracity, than infinite goodness, and an
infinite auersion from falsood inclines him to be, will visit you in the fury of
his justice, and deny to you in your greatest need, that mercy which ye deny
to tender consciences; he will hear the loud cries of innocent blood which
penetrat the Heavens, when they find no relief upon earth. God direct you in
all your ways, and resolutions; and make us either thankful for your
moderation, or strengthen us with constancy and patience against your
persecution.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX.
HOW RATIONAL IT IS NOT to exact more then moral evidence in matters of Faith.
The Author of Sure footings doctrine in that particular explaind by himself, and
vindicated from the Censure of the deceased Author of Religion and Government.
Q. No body questions but that Gods revelation and authority if it appears
sufficiently applied to the Church proposing and deciding matters of Faith,
does oblige all men (even the most scrupulous and subtle Doubters and
Dissenters) to submit their judgments and inward assents thereunto. My doubt is,
whether the Divine revelation and authority can be sufficiently applied to the
Church unless we see that application proved by clear and conclusiue evidence?
As for your often repeated Parallel between God and Soueraings, there is a
uast disparity between the Royal and Divine authority as to the sufficiency of
their proposal. The Royal authority is sufficiently proposed, as such, by a
moral evidence of its application to such as claim to be the Kings Ministers
and Messengers; because a King can not give to his subjects greater evidence
then moral, that he trusts and employs such men with declaring his pleasure and
commands. But God (without any inconueniency to himself) may give clear and
conclusiue evidence to every indiuidual person that himself reueald the doctrine
which the Church proposes as Divine. And therefore it seems to be uery agreeable
to reason, that in the Church there be some Doctors who may demonstrat, or prove
by conclusiue evidence against the wittiest Doubters, that he has don so de
facto, by virtue of Tradition: seeing clear knowledge is not only the surest but
the most connatural way for rational Creatures to arrive to the happy end we
all aim at by our Faith and actions.

A. If God can justly oblige the wittiest men of the world underpain of
damnation, to content themselves with moral evidence (when they have no
greater) of such and such men being their Princes and Parents, and (in
consequence thereof) to submit unto them, and their Ministers or Messengers,
their outward actions of greatest importance; sure he may justly oblige under
pain of damnation the same men to content themselves with a moral evidence (if
he be pleased to give no greater) for submitting their judgments (by a most
certain belief) to his revelations and authority claimd by the Church, and
showing for it marks so supernatural of the Divine trust and truth, that they
can not be prudently questioned as counterfeit. For, as the imperfection of our
human nature and Knowledge (as also the Prerogative of Sovereignty and
superiority) makes it uery reasonable, and natural enough to us, to be subject
and directed in our outward actions by a sole moral evidence, when we have no
greater; so the same imperfection (and Gods infinite Excellency) does demonstrat
that it is most reasonable, and natural to us, to be directed in our inward
acts and assents by supernatural moral evidence, when God is pleased to give us
no greater, seeing we have no right or reason to exact it in truths which are
obscure to us, and the Knowledge of them is above our merit and capacity. Such
are, not only the mysteries of our Faith, but the Divine revelation of them, or
(which is the same) Gods communication of his thoughts and Counsels to such
slaves and pitiful Creatures as we are. Christ told the Apostles, (Joan. 15.)
he called them his friends, because he communicated to them all which he had
heard from his Father. And every Catholic Knows that Gods friendship or favor
is a supernatural gift which human nature could not expect as due to it. We
have no right or reason therefore to exact or expect that God would not have us
believe whatsoever the Church proposes with moral evidence as being revealed
by him, unless we see the Divine revelation applyd to that proposal by clear
and conclusiue evidence; Moral evidence is sufficient to damn us if we deny to
proceed thereupon in order to a most certain (though not clear) assent of the
truth of the mystery, (Marc. vlt.)
as well as of the existence of the revelation.

As for what you say concerning the nature of Tradition, viz. that it may with
conclusiue evidence manifest and demonstrat (if the dispute be managed by a
witty man) an infallible and clear connection with the Divine revelation of the
Roman Catholic Faith, because it leads us from age to age, and year to year
up along to Christ, who is God, and preached our Faith, to this I answer two
things. 1. That the Tradition of the Catholic Church (whether we speak of it
as it is a Congregation of Knowing and honest men, before we believe or suppose
it assisted by the holy Ghost, or whether we speak of it even after we suppose
it to be so assisted) it can not demonstrat or prove by conclusiue evidence
that God revealed any one article of our Catholic Faith, though it may prove by
conclusiue evidence that Christ did; because that Tradition only proves that
Christ said he was God, and that the Apostles believed so, but goes no further
in proving Christ's Divinity than by testifying his Miracles, which do not
demonstrat, or evidently conclude his Divinity, though they demonstrat our
obligation of believing it. 2. I answer that though Tradition does not
demonstrat or evidently conclude Christ's Divinity, and by consequence can not
demonstrat or clearly conclude that his revelation of our Faith was Divine, yet
it is a conclusiue argument ad hominem against Protestants and all who confess
Christ's Divinity, that God revealed all the articles of the Roman Catholic
Church, because they confess Christ is God. And in this sense the Author of the
sure footing, of Faith vindicated, etc. argues unanswerably against his
Adversaries for the conclusiue evidence (by virtue of Tradition) of Gods
revealing (supposing Christ to be God) every article of the Roman Catholic
Faith. And therefore seeing he has (as I am credibly informed) thus explaind
himself, he deserves rather great commendation than that severe Censure which
the Author of Religion and Government gives of his doctrine, thinking he agreed
with Manicheans and Protestants in making clear evidence the motive and rule of
Christian belief. For, the Author of sure footing utterly disauowes and
abhorres as leading to Heresy and Atheism this Proposition (which some imagined
he maintained, as following out of his Principles.) No Catholic, or at least no
learned or vvitty person is bound to assent or believe with Christian Faith
any article the Catholic Church proposes as revealed by God, unless it be
demonstrated, or concluded by clear and evident reason, that God revealed the
same article.

Q. Do not some Catholic Divines teach that clear Evidence of the Revelation is
consistent with our Catholic Faith?

A. No. Some of them teach the Angels before their fall, and Adam in the state
of innocence had (and even the Devils now have) evidence that it was God who
revealed to them the supernatural Mysteries they believed, and few extend this
privilege to the Prophets and Apostles inspired immediately by God without
outward preaching. See Fr. Dominic. Bannes 2.2 q. ^. a. 1. Estius in 4. lib.
Sentent. lib. 2. did. 23. paragr. 6.
But not any one Divine I could see, or hear of, says that clear evidence of
God revealing our Catholic Faith, (which according to Saint Paul. Romans 10. coms
by hearing (Fides ex auditu) and the preaching or testimony of the Church) is
consistent with the same.

OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN certainty sprung from the sight of Truth; and
certainty grounded upon Trust. The later, excludes clear enidence of the truth;
and is the certainty required in Christian Faith.
Q. I find it uery reasonable (if possible) all men should believe with the
greatest assurance and certainty imaginable, that God revealed every article
both great and small which the Church does propose as revealed by him, though
there were no cleerer evidence than moral for such a revelation. But how is it
possible that scrupulous and acute Wits, or Doubters, can assent to Gods
revealing the articles of Christianity, or to any truth, with greater assurance
then there is appearance and evidence of the same? Is not evidence and
assurance (or certainty) the same thing in our intellectual assents? At least
are they not so connected with one an other, that they can not be separated, or
one be greater then the other?

A. Any thing which is uery reasonable, must be possible, because reason can
not lead to, or approve of an impossibility. How possible and feasible it is to
assent with infallible assurance and the greatest certainty (for so we must
assent in matters of Faith) with only moral evidence, is clear in the
scriptures especialy John. 20. where Christ our Savior reprehended St Thomas
for not believing with the assurance and certainty of Divine Faith the mystery
of the Resurrection, though he had but moral evidence for it (the testimony of
the Apostles, not as yet confirmed in grace) Christ also (Marc. ult.) reproacht
with obstinacy and incredulity against Faith the Apostles themselves, for not
being content with that sole moral evidence of the Resurrection which they had
from the testimony of the three Mary's, and the two Disciples of Emaus. And
certainly Christ would not find fault with St Thomas or the Apostles, for not
doing an impossibility. Its possible therefore to believe by an assent of Faith
with more assurance and certainty then there is appearance of the truth, or
evidence of the Revelation.

I confess it is uery difficult to show how this is don. But if we distinguish
the assurance or certainty we have of truth by seeing the truth in itself, from
the assurance or certainty we have thereof, by putting our trust in an other, or
relying upon his knowledge and integrity, we shall find this point much more
easy then hitherto has appeard to most both Divines and Philosophers. The
assurance and certainty of our intellectual assents which is produced by the
sight either intellectual or sensual of the Truth itself, inuolues clear
evidence thereof. But the assurance and certainty of the Truth, which is an
effect of the Trust and esteem we have of an others Veracity, integrity, power
and wisdom, is so far from including a clear sight or evidence of the truth,
that it excludes it. For, Trust is no more consistent with our exacting the
possession, sight, or clear evidence of that vvherwith we trust an other, than
it is with doubts, cautions, and suspicions of his integrity or power. Upon
this notion and the true nature of Trust (excluding sight or clear evidence of
the thing trusted) is grounded that saying. I Will trust such a man no further
than I see him, that is, I will not trust him at all.

This supposed, We may easily comprehend how its possible to believe, or to
assent by an act of our Christian Faith with more assurance then appearance, or
evidence either of the truth, or of the Divine Revelation. Because to believe,
or to assent by an act of our Christian Faith, is to trust God for his
revelation as well as for the truth revealed (for we believe God did reueal the
mystery and so we must trust him for the revelation also.) But if we see the
revelation evidently applied to the mystery revealed, we can not trust him for
either, seeing the truth of the mystery is inseparable, and necessarily
connected with Gods revelation thereof: and we can not trust God for the truth
of one of two things that we know are necessarily connected, unless we trust
him for both. Therefore if the revelation be clearly evident to us by Tradition,
we can not trust God for it, nor for the truth of the mystery we know is
necessarily connected therewith.

Hence does follow, 1. that seeing we can not trust God for the truth of the
mystery revealed, unless we trust him also for the revelation, we can not
believe either, or any thing the Catholic Church proposes as matter of Faith,
if we exact for that belief conclusiue and clear evidence that God revealed
the same. It follows. 2. That by exacting clear or conclusiue evidence of the
Revelation to believe the mystery or matter proposed by the Church, we do not
only mistrust Gods veracity and goodness, but prefer the word and veracity of
every honest man before his as it is proposed to us by the Church. For, when
we hear any honest man speak, though we do not see the truth of his words,
nor any thing else necessarily connected with that truth, yet we believe him,
and take his bare word for our assent and assurance of the truth. But we will
not take Gods word delivered to us by the Church, unless we see his revelation
which is necessarily connected with the truth of the mystery proposed. And in
this consists most of the obstinacy and malice of Heresy.

It follows 3. That the obstinacy of Heresy is not always grounded upon the
passion or inclination of men to sensual pleasures and those nices which
Christian Faith shocks, and condemns; but takes its rise also from the
difficulty we find in assenting to any thing without evidence, or in trusting,
even God, for the truth of things which seem to be unlikely. Christ's
Resurrection was a thing much desired by Saint Thomas, and the Apostles, and
by consequence they were willing enough to believe it: And yet because they
thought it an unlikely matter, St Thomas would not believe the other Apostles,
nor these the Disciples of Emaus and the three Mary's, when they assured them
Christ was resuscitated. And this is the reason why there have bin so many
speculatiue heresies, as that of the Arrians against Christ's consubstantiality;
and that of the Greeks against the procession of the holy Ghost, etc. True it
is that the Lutheran and other modern Heresies have their principal source from
sensual pleasures, and lendness of life; yet no liberty is more bewitching then
that of opining, even in speculation: and therefore the Church has bin troubled
with confuting many speculatiue heresies in former ages.

I conclude this Appendix with this aduertisment, that many mistakes among
Controuersors are occasioned by their not being well grounded in School
Divinity, especialy in that part of it which treates of the Nature of Faith and
Heresy. Some confound the Motives of Faith with the Motives of Credibility, as
they do the evidence of these with that of the Divine Revelation, and the
evidence of this with that of our obligation to believe it: and fancy that the
Authors who pretend to demonstrat Christianity, or the truth of the Roman
Catholic Religion, intend to demonstrat God revealed those mysteries and
doctrine; vvheras they go no further than to endeavor to demonstrat the
reasonableness and obligation of believing the same, by the evidence of the
Motives of credibility.

Some of late (as Fisher, Rushworth, and others in England) have attempted to
demonstrat or clearly conclude the evidence of the Divine revelation by the
certainty of the human Tradition of the Church, and thereupon ground the
certainty of Divine Faith. As their zeal is to be commended, so they are to be
advertised, that the certainty of Faith must be supernatural, and by
consequence must have a higher and more infallible Motive than the evidence of
human Tradition grounded upon that of our senses; as all Divines confess and
even these modern Authors seem to grant. I hear a bold Spaniard went further,
and pretends that Christian Faith is science, because the revelation is
evidently concluded from the Motives of credibility, Miracles, etc. and because
St Paul says, Scio cui credidi, and certus sum. This is but a Spanish conceit.
Perhaps Saint Paul in his rapt to the third Heaven might have evidence of the
Divine Revelation. But we hear of no others that went so far to find out that
knowledge. I see there are Escobars and Dianas in speculatiue Theology, as
well as in Moral; and I think speculatiue errors are more dangerous than large
cases of conscience; because these carry a certain horror and discredit a long
with them; but erroneous speculations, if new, seem to vulgar comprehensions
(especialy of the weaker sex) to savor of wit; and many would fain seem witty
upon any score, even in matters of Faith, wherein the greatest wits must submit
to authority, and be commanded by the will (piously affected, and
supernaturaly assisted) to believe more than we see, or comprehend.

Yet the Spaniard is consequent enough in his error, by saying Faith is
science. For, if it be evident that whatsoever God revealed is true; and it be
evident that God revealed the Trinity, or Transubstantiation, it must needs be
evident (and by consequence Science) that these mysteries are true; and
therefore no man who penetrats these terms can deny their Truth. For my part, I
wish this opinion were true; it would be a great ease to all Catholics who
find much difficulty in believing the articles of Faith. So that the Authors
and Abettors of Traditionary evidence have this advantage of their Adversaries,
that we desire they may have the better of us in this Dispute; and if they have
not, it must be want of Reason on their side, not any prejudice or obstinacy on
ours. But we have this advantage of them, that we may with more ease convince
heretics (even the wittiest) of heresy and obstinacy than they can: because its
easier to demonstrat or evidently conclude that a man is bound to bilieue God
revealed a mystery of Faith, than it is to demonstrat or evidently conclude he
did actualy reveal it (as it is easier to prove you are bound to believe this
man is your Father, than that realy he is so.) And if we conclude evidently the
first we convince the wittiest Diffenters or Disputers in the world, of heresy
and obstinacy, if they do not submit their judgments and belief to that of the
Church.


