An ANSWER to a Lying Pamphlet, Entitled, The CASE of THOMAS PRICE Esquire;
THE Rectory of Llanywllyn in the Diocese of St. Asaph did never belong to any
Monastery, but was a Presentative Living with Cure of Souls: And Dr. Ellis
Price, Great Grandfather of the said Thomas Price, was Rector thereof, both
before, and at the time of Dissolution of Monasteries, and for many Years
after, in all for above Sixty Years. Toward the end of which time, December.
22.33 Eliz.
he got the said Rectory put into that famous Patent of Tipper and Daw, by
whom, being but Trustees, it was Assigned to his Son Thomas Price and his
Heirs; who by Collusion with them that should have done the Church Right in
this Matter, turned this Rectory into an Impropriation, and in stead of 100 l.
per Annum, (as the Complainant says) left it only 6 l. per Annum as a Stipend
for the serving of that Cure of Souls.

The first Bishop after the King's Restoration offered this Rectory to several
Clerks, but none would be at the Charge to Sue for it. But the Account that he
left of the Churches Title in Writing, put the present Bishop upon a farther
search: By which, finding that it was undoubtedly a Presentative Living, he
gave Institution to Robert Win the present Incumbent; who came to a Trial
with Peter Price the pretended Impropriator, at Salop Assizes in Summer 1683.
Thence, by consent of both Parties, the Cause was ordered to be Tried at the
Exchequer-Bar; and the Issue to be, Whether the Incumbent had good Right to the
Rectory of Llanywllyn? Accordingly it was Tried in Easter-Term following before
all the Barons of the Exchequer; and after a Trial of Five Hours, it was given
for the Incumbent, by a Jury of Gentlemen, whose Names are Printed here for the
Honor of their Virdict: Sir Edward Smith of Holburn Baronet, Sir William
Turner of Bromley Knight, Sir John Elwayes of Fulham Knight, Jonas Morley of
Hamersmith Esquire; Edward Shaw of Covent Garden Esquire; Samuel Rouse of Holburn Esquire;
Richard Gower of Highgate Esquire; Jeffrey Nightingale of Cripplegate Esquire; Thomas
Harriot of Islington Esquire; John Shales of Fulham Esquire; Thomas Ernsby of
Hamersmith Esquire; and Walter Moyle of Ealing Esquire;

After this Trial at Bar, in Trinity-Term following, Mr. Thomas Price moved the
Court on his Fathers behalf for a new Trial; which was denied him, by reason he
could produce no other Evidence than what had formerly been produced at the
Trial at Bar.

But whereas in the Order of the Assizes at Salop is was not said that the
Possession should follow the success of this Trial, therefore the Incumbent was
forced to bring his Cause to Trial at another Assizes held at Salop in Summer
1684, and there he obtained a Verdict for the Possession.

After these Trials and Verdicts, the Incumbent being now in Possession, 85 May
1.
did for a valuable Consideration Demise this Rectory to Edward Vaughan Esquire;
for Three Years, if he continued so long Rector, reserving an Annual Rent to
himself; 88 May 7.
and afterward he renewed the said Lease for Three Years longer, which Term is
not yet expired.

About Three Years ago the said Peter Price brought his Declaration of
Ejectment against the Tenants in Possession of this Rectory, to be Tried in the
County of Merioneth. And at the Assizes, the Bishop being Patron, and Mr.
Vaughan being Lessee of the said Rectory, 88 Sep. 26.
caused a Defense to be made, and were ready to Try the Cause; but Mr. Price
finding the best Gentlemen in that County were returned on the Jury, and for no
other Cause, waved the Trial.

After this he lay quiet till June last, then finding that by Reason of the
Adjournments of Parliament, Mr. Vaughan could not attend, and much less the
Bishop, with whom his Secretary who attended the Trial at Bar, and who only
understood the Records, was then at London, he took this Occasion to give
Notice of a Trial at the Assizes to be held in September last. There Council
appeared for the Bishop and Mr. Vaughan, and Pleaded their Privilege of
Parliament; and Mr. Vaughan's Lease was publicly read in Court, and an
Affidavit was Filed, That the Bishop being in London, and his Secretary
attending him there, who had been employed in all the Trial, had the Papers in
his Custody, they could not possibly Try it. But their Council offered to wave
their Privilege, and to Try it next Assizes by a Jury of Gentlemen of the
County, who are only fit to Try such a Cause. But Mr. Thomas Price, and his
Attorney Mr. Henry Mostyn Rejected that Offer, and without Regard to Privilege
of Parliament, proceeded to Trial, and had a Verdict, no Defense being made.
Thereupon Mr. Richard Green (though being warned of the Breach of Privilege)
granted a Writ for Possession; and pursuant to this Writ, on the 7th of October
last, William Wynn the Undersheriff, turned out Mr. Vaughan's Tenants, and put
Edward Price in Possession of the Houses and Gleab belonging to the said
Rectory: All which Proceedings (with humble Submission) are a Breach of the
Privileges of the Honorable House of Commons.

This is the true State of the Case, whereof diverse material things are
industriously concealed in that Pamphlet, which has been lately spread about
the Coffee-Houses and other Places. There are also many Things said, which are
no more true than they are pertinent to the purpose: But the design of those
Lies is only to Defame them that dare trust the World with their Good Names,
presuming they are so well known, that they need not Answer such Slanders and
Calumnies.


