An Answer to the Objections Made to the SURGEONS BILL.
THat the Surgeons of London in the Reign of Hen. VII. Examined such as were
admitted to Practice Surgery, and chose Mr. John Smith, Dr. in Physic, an
Examiner with them, who was present at such Examinations, appears by an Old
Manuscript formerly belonging to Sir Robert Cotton, and now ready to be
produced. It appears also by the same Manuscript, that the Persons Examined and
Approved, were admitted to practice in the directive as well as the operative
part.

That the examined and approved Surgeons of London examined the other Surgeons,
is further manifest by the Statute of H. VIII. An. 3. C. 11. By the 32d of H.
VIII. C. 42. at their Incorporation with the Barbers, all former Privileges
were confirmed to them: But the Surgeons not permitted to shave, because they
took into their Houses such as had the French Pox and Plague, which are not
Cured by Plasters only.

By the 34th and 35th of H. VIIIth Cap. 8. all Persons having Skill in Herbs,
Ointments, etc. are empowered, not only to Cure outward Sores, but also to give
Drinks in Cases of Stone, Strangury etc, And this Act was made because the
Surgeons had hindered many Persons from doing it, as appears by the Recital:
From which it is strongly to be implied, That the Surgeons had a Right to give
such Drinks: Otherwise there had been no color for their Pretense to restrain
others from it.

'Till the first year of King J. the 1st. the Surgeons used Surgery in all its
parts, without any interruption from the College. And the said K. James the
1st. in the 2d year of his Reign, confirmed all former Privileges unto them;
and further, by Charter empowered them to give Internal as well as External
Medicines, and to Examine all that use Surgery: And the Usage has been in all
times agreeable to it, and looked upon as an Essential part of the Practice of
Surgery.

Whereas the College do confidently affirm, that the Surgeons attempts to
procure a Patent from King Charles the 1st. for giving Internal Medicines in
Cases of Surgery was in vain, and that the Lord Coventry refused to Sign the
same, is not so: For it is apparent that the Surgeons have that Patent, in
which he not only confirms the aforementioned Privileges but grants to them
many others; amongst which, that all Persons using Surgery within the City of
London and 7 Miles thereof, should be Examined by four or more of the ten
Examiners of the same Company, in the presence of two or more of the
Governors, which method continues to this day.

By virtue of the 32th H. VIII. the Physicians of London were empowered to use
Surgery, but not to Examine Surgeons.

That the Surgeons themselves do constantly choose who of the College to read
their Anatomical Lectures is true, (but they are not Elected by the College, as
they would infer,) and four of their own Members to dissect the Body for their
own improvement in that Art; which if the College had been as careful to do,
they would not have discontinued the Lectures which Dr. Harvey left a
considerable Sum of Money to maintain.

Whereas the Physicians affirm they were a Corporation Eighteen years at least
before the Surgeons, the contrary is manifest: For the Surgeons were a Company
in Henry the VIIth's time, as appears by the Arms given them by the said King,
and by the Preamble of the 5th of Hen. VIII. Cap. 6. and 32 Hen. VIII. Cap. 42.

Whereas the Physicians do allege, that the Surgeons met with great
disappointments in the Court of King James the 1st. the contrary is manifest,
by his Gracious Charter above mentioned.

True it is, That such an Order as is mentioned by the College, dated the 13th
of June, 1632. was obtained, and concealed for about three years, but upon
Petition of the Surgeons, and a Hearing before the Court of Star Chamber, it
was disannulled.

True it is, That there was a Hearing before the late Lord Chancellor in the
(...)

When the College lately offered their Bill to the House of Lords, the Surgeons
Petition against it did not find so little favor as they affirm, for
thereupon, their Arbitrary Clause was struck out of the Bill; of which Bill a
Copy is ready to be produced.

The Physicians pretend to object to the Bill; That under color of Cases of
Surgery, it is intended to bring in all Cases.

That is but a mere Cavil, for every body knows what is meant by Cases of
Surgery: And if it be thought that there is any Weight in that Objection, the
Surgeons are content it should be more plainly expressed, if it can be.

Another Objection is, They the Surgeons intend to let themselves into the
General Practice of Physic, by desiring that in all Cases it may be lawful for
the Physicians to consult with them.

The Answer to this is plain -- They only desire that the College may not
restrain Physicians from Consulting in proper Cases with Surgeons: Which the
College of late has pretended to do by Bylaws which they have made. The Bill
does wholly referr it to the Judgment of the Physician, whether he will consult
with them, or, in what Cases he pleases to do so.

In Answer to that part of the Bill, against which the Physicians Object, that
the Surgeons ought not to examine Surgeons: Nothing more is desired in that part
of it, than what is already practiced, except only, that whereas now the Bishop
of London, and Dean of St. Paul's, do License upon a Certificate of any four
Surgeons (in which they may easily be imposed upon) the Certificate by the Bill
is to be from the Examiners of the Company: Whereby Abuses will be prevented.

The Physicians set down three Reasons, as insisted upon by the Surgeons, for
the Bill, which they pretend to except to but without cause: For as to the

First, That they have the like power already, of giving Internal Medicines in
Cases of Surgery; it is most true, that such power is granted them expressly in
the Charter of K. James 1st. and confirmed to them by other Charters.

The Surgeons second Reason mentioned is, That these powers are necessary to
fit them for the King's Service, which is most apparently true, for otherwise
they cannot be capable of serving in the Royal Fleets, or in Merchant Ships, or
in the King's Armies, and the Surgeons are allowed this liberty in all other
Countries in Europe, and here, except within seven Miles of London.

The Truth of the third Reason for the Surgeons, That, till of late, Physicians
have consulted with them: Is known to most Gentlemen, and cannot be denied by
the Physicians themselves.

As to what the Physicians pretend to find in their Annals, That some few
Physicians have sometimes gone in the Fleets, it is true; but they did not go
as Physicians to the Fleet, or to take care of the Seamen, but to attend the
person of some particular great Officer; and it is as true, that there is but
one Physician in the Establishment of the whole Army, whereas there is a
Surgeon and a Mate to every Regiment.

As to the insinuation, That the giving this liberty to the Surgeons, will be a
prejudice to the Universities; it is but a mere pretense: For it is desired
only in Cases of Surgery, which will not affect them. But the Physicians
admitting more than forty Foreign Doctors, and giving them place before the
Doctors of either of our Universities, and the general Licenses to practice
Physic, which the College does frequently give to persons who never were of
any University, if they will pay Fees, Gratuities, and Quarterage-Money, as the
College thinks fit to demand, is a great detriment to the Universities, and a
discouragement to the study of Physic there.

Whereas the Physicians allege, they are so far from discouraging the
Surgeons, that they never denied any who applied to them for a License to
practice, Provided they gave any Testimony of their fitness; the contrary is so
manifest, that they refused to License Mr. Coatsworth, the last person of the
Surgeons Company who had a License from them, till he had procured himself to
be discharged of the Company.

FINIS.

