THE Arraignment AND TRIAL OF The Coachman and Footboy, on Friday last, the
13th. of this present December, 1661. at the Sessions House in the Old-Bailey,
who murdered their Royal Master the Prince of Transylvania, as he was asleep
in his Coach, near Rochester.

Being a perfect and full account of Their peaching each other at their
Examination before the Lord Mayor, Lord Chief Justice, and the rest of the
Honorable Court. The manner how they were brought in Guilty by the Jury; with
an Order thereupon for their being conveyed to Maidstone in Kent, and the
Desires of John Jacob to the Court thereupon.

TOGETHER With the Trial and Condemnation of the 2 Soldiers that killed Mr.
Grouster the Brickler in Turn-again-lane: The manner of their first quarreling,
how they slew him, there flight thereupon; and the taking of them afterward
and committing them to Newgate, who on Saturday last were both Condemned to be
Hanged for the said Murder.

London, Printed by R. W. 1661.

An Impartial, Perfect, and True Account of The Examination and Confession of
the Coachman and Footboy at their Arraignment and Trial at the Sessions House
in the Old-Bailey on Friday last, the 13th of this present December, etc.
Murder is a crying sin, that calls aloud for Vengeance, and will never cease
till it be heard; And although Revenge be not executed upon the Authors thereof
presently, at last it lights heavy on them; for innocent Blood will never be
hid, although never so secretly committed, which does plainly appear by John
Jacob the Jewish Coachman, and the Footboy, (both Servants to the Prince of
Transylvania) who consulted together to murder their Royal Master when they
had him in a private place, where they imagined none might espy them; But the
All-seeing Eye of God they could not escape, whose Bloody action was open to
him, though hid in obscurity for a time from the World, neither did it long so
continue; for being not contented with the Wealth they had taken from him after
he was murdered, coming up to London to sell some of his Apparel, a Hanger,
and a Watch, [as the Witnesses testified in the Old-Bailey] they were
apprehended and committed to Newgate, where they remained till Sessions in
order to their Trial: And on Friday last the 13th of this present December,
they were both brought from thence to the Sessions house in the Old Bailey,
there to answer for what they had done, and being brought to the Bar before
that Honorable Court, the Lord Mayor asked the Coachman, Wha moved him to do
that Barbarous deed, and whether the Boy was as chief an Agent as he, or drawn
thereto by his persuasion. To which he replied, That his intent was not to kill
him, or to do him any harm, only when he was sleeping to take some money from
him, which he was in Arrears, knowing that then he had great store, and that he
intended to take no more then was due to him, which was about some nine pound,
but seeing him stir and begin to awake when he was about it, and fearing his
displeasure, he said he knew not what to do, being heartily sorry for what was
done. The Court told him. Not the stirring of his Master, or fear of his
Displeasure he minded, but a bloody intent to murder him for what Riches he
had then in possession, asking him, Whether he was guilty, or not guilty? He
made answer, That he was not guilty of Wilful Murder, for that he was
resisted, and perhaps he not slain him, said he might have suffered himself for
offering such an attempt when he was asleep.

The Foot Boy standing at the Bar all this while, did seem to be very attentive
and observed the Coachman all the while he was speaking, whereupon the Lord
Chief Justice began thus to examine him:

Sirrah, said he, did John Jacob, prisoner at the Bar, tell you he would take
money from your Master when was asleep, or did you know that he was indebaed to
him for Wages, as he says.

My Lord, replied he, [weeping exceedingly] I knew not of any money my Master
owed him: But when we came within seven or eight miles of Rochester, he asked
me how far we had thither, and so near as I could (having been there once
before) I told him; and as he was fitting in the Coach Box and driving
forwards, he turned him about, and beckned me to him, I going then by the Coach
side, and when I came to him he stooped down, the Horses drawing but easily,
and bid me tell him when he was asleep, for he used to lie along and sleep in
the Coach oftentimes, especially when he went far; and about an hour after he
had spoken to me I told him, not knowing the reason why he asked me, thinking
he would offer no injury in the least to him; he asked me again, If I were sure
he was asleep, and I said yes: Whereupon he came down from the Coach Box to the
Boot, and looking upon him a little while, he drew out of his Pocket a Knife, a
long black handle Knife, and immediately stabbed him in two or three places, at
which I was greatly amazed, wondering much thereat, asking what he intended to
do. Here the Boy seemed to be in a pause, holding down his head, seeming
extreme pensive, not uttering a word more; till at last he was commanded to say
on further, which he did in this manner:

Then, my Lord, he came to me, and took hold of me saying, If I would not help
his body out of the Coach, he would kill me, which with great fear I did:
Whereupon the Court asked the Boy, If he gave him any money? He told them, That
he promised him 100 pounds to conceal it, but he said he would not, and again
thereupon he threatened to kill him, forcing him to take the money. Upon which,
the Lord Mayor made answer, that it was the most inhumanest and barbarous Act
that ever was committed, asking the Coachman, whether the Boy was privy to his
intent. He answered No, but said he took the money when he gave it him. Then
the Court asked him again, whether he was Guilty, or not Guilty, to which he
replied as formerly, That he was not Guilty of wilful Murder. The Court told
him they thought it would not be found so, and thereupon the Jury went upon
them, who brought them in both guilty: But the Prudence of the Judicious Court
in doing of Justice was such, after the Jury had gave their virdit in, that
they thought it not meet for them to suffer here, but where they had done the
Fact, therefore Condemned them not, but ordered them to be sent to Maidstone
Sizes in Kent, there to be further Tried, and receive reward for what they had
done. Since which time the Coachman has taken all upon himself, being willing
to save the Youths life (if he can) who is about 13 years of age, who in all
likelihood by John Jacobs words, was but instrumental to the murder; yet
notwithstanding that, Justice must be satisfied with Real and Impartial Truth,
which they are both to answer at the next Sizes in Maid-stone, which when the
Coachman heard, he pleaded at the Bar, that he had a Letter from His Majesty
Alphonso King of Portugal, in order to be transported thither, there to be
Tried; but being asked to show it, said he had lost it, being very unwilling to
go to Maid-stone: The cause whereof (as yet) is only known to himself, but
perhaps Time may tell it to others. After this, they were both returned unto
Newgate, where they remained that night. The next morning, being

Saturday, December the 14 th.
The two Soldiers that was taken on Lord Mayors Day last in Turn-again-lane,
was brought from Newgate again to the Sessions House in the Old-Bailey, and
there found Guilty by the Jury of Wilful Murder; the manner whereof was thus:

On the Day after Simon and Judes [commonly called Lords Mayors Day] one Mr.
Grouster a Brick-laier living in Sea Coal Lane, came to a Pewterers house, an
acquaintance of his, that sold Drink, to be merry, having appointed him to come
in the Evening, and each of them to beat a Drum together, for they both took
delight in that exercise, and would often use it; where they had not long
continued, but 4. Soldiers being in the house, and hearing the sound of the
Drum (two of them lodging there, and the other two at the sign of the Hand and
Hammer, near the same house) were very eager to go up the stairs, which one of
them presently did. Mr. Grouster seeing him come up so boldly, demanded, What
he would have? telling him he would willingly accept of his company, and the
rest of his fellows that were below, provided he and they would be civil. Upon
which, he replied, He would come up, and stay too; what was that to him. Mr.
Grouster told him it was to him, and he should stay no longer, ar^ thereupon
turned him down the stairs, and when (...) had done, he came up again and shut
the Chambe^ door. The Soldier being down, told the rest of h^^ Comrades what
had happened, whereupon after some Discourse amongst themselves, which they were
taken notice of to have, they altogether ascended the stair^ with their Swords
drawn, and knocking at the door* Mr. Grouster the Brick-laier came and opened
it, whom presently they all struck at, but one of them hit him so violent a
blow on the Head with his Hanger, that he fel^ down upon the floor, and died
immediately, which the rest seeing presently fled, two whereof were taken
within half an hour after the murder was done, coming down the same Lane, who
were both committed to Newgate by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, where
they remained till Sessions, and being found Guilty by the Jury on Saturday
last of Wilful Murder, they were both Condemned to be hanged at Tyburn for the
Fact.

FINIS.

