AN ANSWER To the CASE of the COMMONERS of the MANOR of EPWORTH, in the Isle of
Axholme in the County of Lincoln; Published in Opposition to the Bill for
making the Statutes of Edw. 1. and Edw. 6. against Destroying Improvements more
Effectual.
THOUGH the said Bill is a Public Bill, and has no Respect to any particular
Place; and is designed only to restrain and punish Offenders, and preserve the
Public Peace. Yet the said Commoners would insinuate, That it is Promoted by
one Mr. Reading, to support an Improvement made in the said Manor of Epworth,
which Improvement, they say, is made against Law. For that the Lord Mowbray,
heretofore Lord of that Manor, did approve Part, and made a Grant of the
Residue, by which he debarrs all future Lords from making any further
Improvement. And that King Charles the First, being Lord of the said Manor, was
prevailed on to approve and enclose 7400 Acres, part of 13400 Acres of the
Wastes within the said Manor: So that 6000 Acres were but left to the
Commoners, for whom the whole were scarce sufficient.

TO which it is hoped they will take this full Answer, That all the said Common
and Wastes within the said Manor, were generally Covered with Water, and they
could keep but few Cattle thereon, and no Sheep

THAT King Charles the I. being Lord of the said Manor, agreed with Sir
Cornelius Vermuyden and others, to Dreyn the same, which they Undertook and
Performed at a vast Expense, and have ever since kept the same Dry; so that the
Ground, which before was a Pond, is now Firm and dry Land.

FOR which Expense, and for Keeping up and Maintaining the Dreynage, the said
Sir Cornelius and his Partners, commonly called Participants, had 7400 Acres
Assigned to them by the King, by Consent of the Commoners, which they Enjoyed
diverse Years before the Civil Wars; in which Wars, the Commoners laid all
waste; the Commoners thinking the Participants had too much Ground, frequent
Suits and Troubles were moved and carried on about the same; all which were, in
April 1688. referred to the Honorable Sydney Wortley Esquire Sir Thomas Hussy,
Sir Willoughby Hickman, Sir John Boynton, George Whitchcott Esquire and John
Ramsden Esquire the last Five whereof met and made an Award therein in April 1688,
at the Request and by the Consent of all Parties. That afterward some
Disturbance happening about the Construction of some Words in the said Award,
the Suits went on again, and came to hearing in the Exhequer Chamber, in April
and May 1691, when and where, by the Advice of that Court, the Commoners and
Participants came to a surther Consideration of the said Differences, and to an
Acommodation concerning the same, which was reduced into Writing, and brought
to the Court, and there Signed by all Parties, and by Consent Decreed by the
said Court to stand, and for ever to be effectual, by which Agreement and
Decree, the Participants were content, for Quietness sake, to accept of 2800
Acres or thereabouts, in satisfaction of the 7400 Acres, and left the rest to
the Commoners; which 2800 Acres were by Commissioners on both sides, Set out
and Divided by Consent of the Commoners, and the Participants Enclosed the
greatest Part thereof; but the Commoners, notwithstanding their so many and so
Solemn Agreements, and the Decrees thereon, have every Year, a little before
Harvest, Pulled down and Destroyed the said Enclosures, and the Corn thereon,
either in the Nightime, or in Disguises in the Daytime; and this last
Summer, have in the Daytime in Disguises, Pulled down diverse Dwelling-Houses,
and many great Barns, Stables, and other Outhouses (...)

I would insinuate, That it is Promoted by one Mr. Reading, to support an
Improvement made in the said Manor of Epworth, which Improvement, they say, is
made against Law. For that the Lord Mowbray, heretofore Lord of that Manor, did
approve Part, and made a Grant of the Residue, by which he debarrs all future
Lords from making any further Improvement. And that King Charles the First,
being Lord of the said Manor, was prevailed on to approve and enclose 7400
Acres, part of 13400 Acres of the Wastes within the said Manor: So that 6000
Acres were but left to the Commoners, for whom the whole were scarce sufficient.

TO which it is hoped they will take this full Answer, That all the said Common
and Wastes within the said Manor, were generally Covered with Water, and they
could keep but few Cattle thereon, and no Sheep

THAT King Charles the I. being Lord of the said Manor, agreed with Sir
Cornelius Vermuyden and others, to Dreyn the same, which they Undertook and
Performed at a vast Expense, and have ever since kept the same Dry; so that the
Ground, which before was a Pond, is now Firm and dry Land.

FOR which Expense, and for Keeping up and Maintaining the Dreynage, the said
Sir Cornelius and his Partners, commonly called Participants, had 7400 Acres
Assigned to them by the King, by Consent of the Commoners, which they Enjoyed
diverse Years before the Civil Wars; in which Wars, the Commoners laid all
waste; the Commoners thinking the Participants had too much Ground, frequent
Suits and Troubles were moved and carried on about the same; all which were, in
April 1688. referred to the Honorable Sydney Wortley Esquire Sir Thomas Hussy,
Sir Willoughby Hickman, Sir John Boynton, George Whitchcott Esquire and John
Ramsden Esquire the last Five whereof met and made an Award therein in April 1688,
at the Request and by the Consent of all Parties. That afterward some
Disturbance happening about the Construction of some Words in the said Award,
the Suits went on again, and came to hearing in the Exhequer Chamber, in April
and May 1691, when and where, by the Advice of that Court, the Commoners and
Participants came to a further Consideration of the said Differences, and to an
Acommodation concerning the same, which was reduced into Writing, and brought
to the Court, and there Signed by all Parties, and by Consent Decreed by the
said Court to stand, and for ever to be effectual, by which Agreement and
Decree, the Participants were content, for Quietness sake, to accept of 2800
Acres or thereabouts, in satisfaction of the 7400 Acres, and left the rest to
the Commoners; which 2800 Acres were by Commissioners on both sides, Set out
and Divided by Consent of the Commoners, and the Participants Enclosed the
greatest Part thereof; but the Commoners, notwithstanding their so many and so
Solemn Agreements, and the Decrees thereon, have every Year, a little before
Harvest, Pulled down and Destroyed the said Enclosures, and the Corn thereon,
either in the Nightime, or in Disguises in the Daytime; and this last
Summer, have in the Daytime in Disguises, Pulled down diverse Dwelling-Houses,
and many great Barns, Stables, and other Outhouses and Enclosures, belonging
to the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Irwin, a Member of this Honorable
House, and to diverse other Persons, and with much Corn growing thereon, to a
great value; and for their Excuse, do make some frivolous Pretenses and
Allegations against the said Mr. Reading, who neither promoted, knew of, or is
concerned in the said Bill depending in this Honorable House.

Note, THE Commoners have 12000 or 13000 Acres of Common, which would all of it
be Covered with Water, was it not for the Banks and Sluices, that are Maintained
by the Participants at a vast Expense; and yet when any Persons are guilty of
the Outrages beforementioned, the Inhabitants of the adjacent Towns Protect
and Conceal them; so that it is scarce possible to Apprehend them by any
Process or Warrant, and if Apprehended, they defend them at a Public Charge.


