Alter AMYNTOR: Or the Case fairly Stated between King CHARLES I. and Dr.
GAUDEN Mr. Wagstaff and Mr. Toland, touching Icon Basilike. With short Notes.
WITNESSES for the KING.
The Substance of a Letter from Mr. William Levet Senior Page of the Bedchamber
to King Charles I. during his Solitude, to Seymour Bourman, Esquire; in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
Dear Brother,
I. YOurs of the 21 of this Instant April I received, and one Letter before
that to the same effect, viz. To give you a true account of my knowledge of
Icon Basilike's being composed by King Charles I. I can of my certain Knowledge
depose that that Book was truly his own, having observed his Majesty oftentimes
writing his Royal Resentments of the bold and insolent Behavior of his
Soldiers (his Rebellious Subjects) when they had him in their Custody. I waited
on his Majesty as Page of the Bedchamber in Ordinary, during all the time of
his Solitudes (except when I was forced from him); and especially, being
nominated by his Majesty to be one of his Servants, among others, that should
attend him, during the Treaty at Newport in the Isle of Wight, had the
happiness to read the same oftentimes in Manuscript, under his Majesty's own
hand, being pleased to leave it in the Window in his own Bedchamber, where I
was always obliged to attend his Majesty's coming thither.

From Savernack Park, near Marlbrough April 29. 1691. Your Affectionate Brother
to serve you WILLIAM LEVET.

II. This Testimony is further confirmed by another of his in the possession of
his Son, Fellow of Exeter College in Oxon, in these Words. If any one has a
desire to know the true Author of a Book entitled Icon Basilike, I, one of the
Servants of King Charles I. in his Bedchamber, do declare when his said
Majesty was Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, that I read over the above mentioned
Book (which was long before the same was Printed) in his Bedchamber, writ with
his Majesty's own hand, with several Interlinings. Morever his Majesty King
Charles the I. told me, Sure Levet, you design to get this Book by heart;
having often seen me reading of it. I can testify also, that Royston the
Printer told me that he was imprisoned by Oliver Cromwell the Protector, because
he would not declare, that K C. I. was not the Author of the said Book.

Signed and Sealed October 16. 1690 WILLIAM LEVET.

III. Mr. Long, who was Prebendary of Exeter when Dr. Gauden was Bishop of that
See, and continues still Prebendary there, declares, in his Examination of Dr.
Walker's Account, That he has often heard Dr. Gauden when Bishop of Exeter,
affirm, that he was fully convinced that Icon Basilike was entirely King
Charles I 's Work. And mentions one Particular time, viz. on the 30 of January
in the Evening in the Bishops Parlour, standing by the fire. This discourse was
occasioned by the Bishop's having preached in the morning of that Day on Jonah
1.14. and Mr. Long in the Afternoon on Isa. 49.23. on which occasion Mr. Long
quoted several passages out of Icon Basilike to show the Piety, and Clemency of
K.C I. for which the Bishop thanked him, and then declared as above. This
single Testimony utterly destroys whatever Dr. Gauden says to the Contrary, as
also what Mrs. Gauden, Dr. Walker or the Memorandum say, they pretending to
have received ail they say from Dr Gauden only.

The Substance of a Memorial sent to Mr. Wagstaff by Mr. Cudworth.
IV. Sir, in a Manuscript of Sir Tho. Herbert, now in the Hands of Madam
Edmonds of Worsbrough in Yorkshire, there is an account, that he having been
one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, he took particular notice or
most of his Majesty's behavior during his Solitude; and he tells you, that his
Majesty gave him some Books, and among the rest the MS. Copy of Icon Basilike
writ with his own hand, which he knew very well.

V. The Testimony of Richard Royston the Kings Bookseller is, this, That the
October before the King ( viz. K. C. I.) sent a message to him to prepare all
things ready for the printing some papers which he purposed shortly after to
convey to him, and which was this very Copy of Icon Basilike brought the twenty
third of December next following.

VI. The Testimony of Mr Thomas Milbourn printer in Jew-Inn-street, now living,
is, That in the year 48. he was an Apprintice to John Grisman a p inter, when
Mr. Symonds by Mr Royston. sent the King's Book to be printed, and that his
Master did print it. That Mr. Symonds alvvys had the name of sending it to the
press; that it came to them as from the King, and they understood it no
otherwise; that they had printed several other things with C. R. to them, and
that it looked to them like the same hand, and the same sort of paper with
others that were so marked, and looked upon as the King's papers; for the King
kept the Original by him, and Mr. Odert the Secretary transcribed them.

VII. To the same part of with Mr. Milbourn Testifies Mr. Clifford, now living
at the Chapter house at St Paul's who assisted Mr. Milbourn in the printing it,
with this farther addition. That the King entitled his Book the Royal Plea. but
Dr. Jeremiah Tailor, coming accidentally to Mr. Royston's Shop, he having an
assured confidence in him, showed him the first proof from the press, which
when the Dr. Viewed under that title, he told him the Title would betray the
Book -- That Dr Tayor wrote to the King, to let him know that it would be in
Danger of Suppressing by two Informers, Chrisenham and Jones, who would
understand the Book by the Title: and therefore he thought Icon Basilike would
be a better Title, and less taken notice of by the Informers, being Greek, and
agreeing with the Title of his fathers Book, called Basilikon Doron, and to
which the King consented -- and adds farther, That he never heard; nay, that he
is sure, that Dr. Gauden never was concerned in that Copy, by which Milbourne
and himself printed it, and that they had no part of the Copy from Dr Walker,
for it was that transcribed by Mr Odert, (the King's Secretary) they printed it
by.

VIII. Mr. Barry Councellor of Gray's Inn, in a Letter to a friend dated April
28. 1699. has a Memorable Story, which in substance is this, That Sir William
Morton told him that King Charles. I. marching his Army near Stow in
Gloucestershire, (upon an occasion too long here to relate) gave Sir William
(who was then a Colonel under him, and afterward a Judge) a paper out of his
Pocket to write an Order upon to Sir William Vavasor, upon which were writ the
following words with the King's own hand: As to the Rebels taking of my
Letters, as it was an advantage they could not well expect, so they knew not
how with civility to use, for always amidst the greatest advantages are the
greatest obligations, and such should I have esteemed the concealment of my
Letters, which challenge a privacy from all who are not wholly barbarous. Which
very Words begin his Chapter occasioned by the Parliaments publishing his
Letters taken at Edgehill fight.

IX. Mrs. Ellen Spanne, formerly Wife of the Reverend Mr. Edward Symonds,
Rector of Rain, deposes in substance, That about the year 48, she saw her
Husband, Mr. Symonds, reading some Papers writ in a hand she did not know, and
thereupon she asked him whose they were, and he told her, with some caution,
that they were the Kings, and that he must get them printed: which she
declares, her Husband told Dr. Bathurst his Physician (who importuned him to
declare the truth in that matter) as he (her Husband) was upon his death Bed,
he did, and that it was entirely the King's Book, he having printed it just as
it came from the King without Addition or Diminution: And this she attests
under her hand to be the truth, and that she verily believes Icon Basilike to
be the King's, tho she was told by one Mr. Robinson behind the Exchange, that
it would be for her advantage to say that her Husband was the Author of it.

Ellen Spanne.
Signed Feb. 15. 91/2. in the Presence of Rich. Hughes. Tho. Spanne.


The Substance of a Letter from Dr Canaries now in the hands of Mr. Wagstaff.
X. Mr. James Wood being sent by the Kirk of Scotland to treat with King
Charles the II. at Breda, that King took him aside and said, Mr. Wood, I hear
that some are pleased to say that my Father was not the Author of Icon
Basilike; but it is no great wonder that those, who have been so injurious to
him in all other respects, should not spare his Memory in an Affair of this
Nature; however I will let you see how great a Calumny this is. Whereupon the
King took Mr. Wood into his Closet with him, and there he showed him the whole
Book written all in his Fathers hand, together with a Letter from his Father
concerning it to him: then the King said, But, Mr. Wood, that you may not
entertain any scruple about the hand, here are several of my fathers Letters to
me, all written in his own hand, take any of them, and compare the hands
together. So Mr. Wood compared the hands, and then said to the King, That he
was fully convinced, that the Book and the Letter about it, were all written in
his Fathers hand. Upon which the King said to him, Now, Mr. Wood, I appeal to
you, whether or no my Father would have ever written over a Book, that was not
his own, and have sent such a Letter to me about it. Mr. Wood answered, that he
was highly obliged to his Majesty for the honor he had done him, in having
showed him such Authentic proof of his Father's being the Author of that Book:
he had indeed heard that some persons did question it; but now he was so
parswaded of the truth of it, that he thought himself obliged in conscience to
do the King his Father justice, by vindicating his Memory in that point, as he
should have any occasion for doing it.

After Mr. Wood's return to Scotland, he told my Father, who was very intimate
with him, That he was as much convinced that King Charles the First was the
Auhor of that Book, as he could be that one was the Author of a Book which he
had not seen him write. This account I had many times from my Father; and in
the Words and Circumstances wherein I have set it down, as near as I can
possibly remember. And as to what concerns my share in this Testimony namely
that I had it from my Father, I am ready to depose it upon Oath before any
Court of Judicature in the World, whenever I shall be called to do it. And,
Sir, I allow you to make any use of this you shall think convenient.

Abingdon in Berks July 17th 1693. I am Sir your most humble Servant JAMES
CANRIES

The Substance of a Letter from Mr. Le Pla Minister of Finchingfield, to Dr.
Goodall. Nov. 27. 1696.
XI. Sir, William Allen Servant to Dr. Gauden during the Civil Wars, and
afterward married to one of the Drs. Family, gave me this following account of
his own knowledge touching the King's Book. He said most people thought his
Master to be the Author of it, or to that purpose. I told him I could never
believe it, for some reasons I then gave him. Whereupon he smiled and told me,
He believed he could say more to that business than any man besides him, for
that Dr. Gauden told him he had borrowed the Book, and was obliged to return it
by such a time; That (besides what other time he might employ in it) he sat up
one whole night to transcribe it. That he (William Allen) sat up in the Chamber
with him, to wait upon him, to make his fires and snuff his Candles. This I am
ready to depose, if required. I think he said the Book was borrowed of Mr.
Symonds of Rain one of the Kings Chaplains; but it being some time ago, I
cannot be so positive in that, and several other Circumstances as I should have
been, had I suspected his death so nigh. One thing I had forgot, viz. That to
my knowledge Allen could read and write very well, and so could not easily be
deceived, either in the Book, or in his Masters hand, though the Doctor had not
told him that it was none of his.

XII. Mr. Richard Duke's Letter to Dr. Charles Goodall, June 15. 1692 in these
Words. Sir, I heard Major Huntington say more than once. That whilst he
Guarded Charles I. at Holmby-house (as I remember) he saw several Chapters or
Leaves of that great Kings Meditations, lying on the Table several Mornings,
with a Pen and Ink with which the King scratched out or blotted some lines or
words of some of them: Upon which I must also confess, that I concluded they
were originally from the King; but others have drawn a contrary Argument from
the King's correcting the Papers; yet I put this under my Hand, that the Major
told me that he did suppose them originally from that learned Prince, Which is
the totum that can be intimated from

Sir, your humble Servant RICHARD DUKE.

XIII. To the same purpose Mr. Cave Beck in a Letter to Dr. Hollingworth, thus;
Major Huntington at Ipswich assured me, that so much of Icon Basilike, as
contained his Majesty's Meditations before Navesby Fight, was taken in the
Kings Cabinet; and that Sir Tho. Fairfax delivered the said papers unto him,
and ordered him to carry them to the King: and also told me that when he
delivered them to the King, his Majesty appeared very joyful, and said He
esteemed them more than all the Jewels he had lost in the Cabinet.

XIV. Which Testimonies are recapitulated by Sir William Dugdale, a most
faithful Historian in his short view of the late troubles in England (p. 380.)
To which large, full and particular account of his I refer the Reader.

XV. Besides these there are the Testimonies of two Authors, Eye and Ear
witnesses of Charles I. his being Author of Icon Basilike, who in the year 49,
immediately after Milton's Iconoclastes and other Pamphlets came out, writ in
Vindication of the K's Book, and were never answered, their Assertations being
then taken as full proof of the matter of Fact. The one Entitled Icon be
piste, has these remarkable Words; The Author (viz. of Icon alethine, a
virulent pamphlet) might have informed himself of diverse, who have seen the
Original Copy manuscribed by the King himself, he might have seen it himself
for asking. And afterward, I take it to be the Kings Book, I am sure of it, I
knew his hand. I have seen the Manuscript, I have heard him own it. The other
was the Author of a Book called the Princely Pelican writ on purpose (as he
says) to satisfy the world that the King was Author of Icon Basilike. In p. 4.
he has these Words, He (the King) was pleased some few days after he had
retired from his Parliament, to communicate his thoughts in his Garden at
Theobald 's, to some of his Gentlemen who were nearest to him, and of whose
intimacy and abilities he stood most confident, how he had set pen to paper to
vindicate his innocence, in the first place, by showing the Reasons he had of
receding from the Parliament, and that not so much as one line had fallen from
his pen, which with Honor he might not confirm: And then told us his next
Essay should take its discourse from the faithfullest Servant and most
incomparable Statesman that any Prince could rely on, meaning the E. of
Strafford, and then gives us the Kings particular discourse, condemning himself
for suffering his hand to thwart the resolution of his heart, etc. And
particularly writes at large the Discourses of his Attendants on that Subject
with his Majesty. He tells us further (p. 19.) that the King told him, that as
his morning Devotions took up the first part of the day, so he ever reserved
the next for these Meditations he had now in hand. The Author yet further tells
us, p. 21.) That at Navesby, those Divine Meditations were siezed by the Enemy,
with other Papers of concern, being enclosed in a Cabinet reserved for that
purpose; and that by the Benignity of the Conqueror, or Divine Providence
rather, it was recovered above all Expectance, and returned to his Majesty's
hand; and which infinitely cheered him. And further (p. 22.) That a Person of
high Command in the Rebel Army gave this censure of it, Saying, It was an
Handsome piece of Hypocrisy.

XVI. To these are added usually, some Expressions Drawn from the Book it self,
which show that no man Living but the King himself could write it; but being
too many to insert here I shall refer the Reader to a Book entitled The
Vindication of King Charles the Martyr, for satisfaction in that, Point.

WITNESSES for Dr. Gauden.
I. Dr. Gauden's Wife, who is said to have left behind her some Papers in which
the following account, they say, is found: 1st a Letter to my Lord Chancellor
Hyde December. 28. 1661, and a Copy of a Petition to the King, setting forth how
kind he had been to his Fathers Friends, and urging That what was done as a
King should have a King-like Retribution. Another Letter there is to the Duke
of York, dated Jan. 17. 1661. urging his great Services. As also a Letter from
the Lord Chancellor Hyde to the Bishop, of the Chancellor's Handwriting, dated
March. 13. 1661. Importing the Receipt of several Letters from him, that he was
uneasy under the Bishops importunity. And toward the Close has this
expression; The particular you mention has indeed been imparted to me as a
Secret, I am sorry I ever knew it; and when it ceases to be a Secret, it will
please none but Mr. Milton.

Among these Papers there is said to be, A Letter of Mrs. Gauden's after the
Death of her Husband, to her Son John Gauden, in which she speaks of the Book
commonly called the King's Book, and calls it the Jewel, and adds, Her Husband
hoped to make a Fortune by it, and wonders it should be doubted whether her
Husband wrote it; but says, she has a Letter of a very great Man to clear it
up. There is also (said to be) a long Narrative of Mrs. Gauden's Handwriting,
showing, that her Husband wrote the Book, and sent it to her Son with the
Letter. This Narrative sets forth, that after her Husband had wrote the Book,
he showed it to the Lord Capel, who approved it, and was for the Printing it,
but wished the King might have a sight of it: that an opportunity was taken to
convey it to his Majesty by the Lord Marquess of Hertford, when he went to the
Treaty at the Isle of Wight.

That the Marquess after his return from thence, told her Husband, that he gave
the Book to the King, and his Majesty did well like it, but was for putting of
it out, not as his own, but another; but it being urged, that Cromwell and
others of the Army, having got a Reputation with the People for Parts and
Piety, it would do best to be in the King's name. His Majesty took time to
consider of it.

That her Husband not hearing the King's Pleasure about it, and finding Dangers
hastening on him, he having kept a Copy by him, sent it by one Mr. Symonds to
the Press, together with a Letter: That Mr. Royston was the Printer, but did
not know but the King wrote it: That part was seized in the Press, together
with her Husband's Letter, and Mr. Symonds was taken. That nevertheless the
Work was carried on and finished a few days after his Majesty's Death; that
when it was Published the Parliament was enraged; and her Husband, conceiving
his Life and Estate in danger, fled to Sir John Wentworth's near Yarmouth,
intending thence to pass the Seas, but Mr. Symonds falling sick, and dying, and
her Husband not being discovered, he altered his purpose, and returned home.

That the Title first intended, was Suspiria Regalia, but changed to Icon
Basilike; and that there were two Chapters added.

That the Marquess of Hertford, and the Lord Capel, Bishop Duppa, and Bishop
Morley, were at first the only persons privy to it.

That Dr. Duppa Bishop of Winchester being very sick, her Husband went to the
King, and acquainted him that he was the Author of that Book, and for the truth
thereof appealed to Bishop Duppa his Majesty's Tutor, who was yet living, and
made an Apology for Printing it without his Majesty's Father's Order, or his,
but pleaded the Circumstances of Time, and the King's Danger; that his Majesty
told her Husband, That till then he never knew that he wrote it, but thought it
was his Father's, yet wondered how he could have time, and observed, that it was
wrote like a Scholar, as well as like a King: and said, if it had been
published sooner, it might have saved his Fathers life: that at the same time
the King gave him a promise of the Bishopric of Winchester.

That he afterward acquainted the Duke of York that he was the Author, etc.
This is the Sum and Substance of Mrs. Gauden 's Evidence.

II. The next is Dr. Walker, the Substance of whose Evidence is as follows: 1st
That Dr. Gauden, sometime before the whole was finished, acquainted him with
his Design, and showed him the Heads of diverse Chapters, and some of the
Discourses written of them, and after sometime spent in the perusal, he asked
his Opinion concerning it; and he (Dr. Walker) told him he supposed it would be
for the King's Reputation, but he expressly added he stuck at the Lawfulness of
it: and asked him how he satisfied himself to impose upon the World. To which
he replied, Look upon the Title, it is the pourtraicture, etc. and no man draws
his own Picture, etc. That he explained to him a passage in the Second Chapter,
and that he meant it of Dr. Jaxon.

2 That he went with Dr. Gauden to the Bishop of Salisbury's, and as they came
back Dr. Gauden told him, the Bishop had promised to write two Chapters more to
be added to the Book, viz. that on the Ordinance against the Common Prayer, and
the denying his Majesty the Attendance of his Chaplains.

3. Upon Dr. Walker's asking Dr. Gauden after the King was murdered whether the
King had ever seen the Book, Dr. Gauden answered, I know it certainly no more
than you, but I used I my best Endeavors that he might, for I delivered a Copy
of it to the Marquess of Hertford when he went to the treaty at the Isle of
Wight, and entreated his Lordship, if he could obtain any private Opportunity,
he would deliver it to his Majesty, and humbly desire to know his Majesty's
Pleasure concerning it. But the violence which threatened the King hastening so
fast, he ventured to print it, and never knew what was the issue of sending it,
for when the thing was done, he judged it not prudent to make further noise
about it by enquiry.

4. Dr. Walker asking him And adds in a Parenthess; For we seldom were in
private but somewhat was discoursed of this Book, even to the last time I saw
him after he was Lord Bishop of Worcester elect) whether King Charles II. knew
that he wrote it. He answered, I cannot positively and certainly say he does,
because he was never pleased to take express notice of it to me; but I take it
for granted he does, for I am sure the Duke of York does, for he has spoken of
it to me, and owned it as a seasonable and acceptable service; and he knowing
it, I question not but the King also does.

5. Mrs. Gauden the Drs. Wife, Mr. Gifford and Dr. Walker believed it as much
as they could believe any thing, and were as much assured of it as it is
possible they could be of any matter of fact.

6. Dr. Gauden delivered to him with his own hand what was last sent up, (after
part was printed, or at least in Mr Royston's hand to be printed) and after he
had shevved it him and sealed it up, gave him caution to deliver it, which he
did on Saturday December 23. 48. in the Evening, according to direction, to one
Peacock, (Brother to Dr. Gauden's Steward) who was instructed by what hands to
deliver it to Mr. Royston, and in the same manner, as the Impression was
finished, he received six Books by the hand of Peacock as an acknowledgement,
and one of them he has still by him.

III. King Charles II. and the Duke of York did both in the last Session of of
Parliament 1675. (when I showed them in the Lords House the written Copy of
this Book, wherein are some Corrections written with the late K. Charles I's
own hand) assure me, that this was none of the said King's compiling, but
made by Dr. Gauden Bishop of Exeter, which I here insert for the undeceiving
others in this point, by attesting so much under my hand. ANGLESEY.

As to this Memorandum, no man that has not bid an utter defiance to reason,
can believe it to have been written by my Lord Anglesey; 1. Because, my Lord,
who understood as well as any man living what would pass for good Evidence,
would never have left it unattested and with so uncertain a Date, if he had
designed to undeceive the World by it, as the Memorandum pretends. 2. If he had
designed to undeceive the World, he would not have taken such extraordinary
care to hide it from the World, as appears by his never having communicated it
to his Countess, His Children, his Relations, his Friends, nor any Body else
that we can hear of, but hiding it in the vacant Page of a Book, and then
putting it up again into its place in his Study, leaving it to ten thousand
chances whether it should ever be seen or no; and indeed I verily believe, had
any body beside, Mr. Millington had the selling my Lords Liberary, it never had
been seen. But it Mr. Millington will Pardon me, I will offer one probable
conjecture why he might be more diligent in finding it out than any body else.
It might be to remove part of the Odium which lies upon the Name, by his --
Gilbert Millington's having been one of the Judges of the High Court of
Justice, and who was present at the Trial and Condemnation of King Charles I.
Author of Icon Basilike, for which after the Restoration he was tried and
received sentence of Death.

Lastly, To asperse the memory of K. Charles I. it has been alleged that
Pamela's Prayer is taken word for word out of Pembroke's Arcadia. To which it
has been answered, That it was not in the first Editions of the Book, and
therefore could not be Printed by the King's order: But that one Dugard, a
friend of Milton's, being taken printing the Book, which was at that time a
very high crime, made his application to Milton, who together with Bradshaw,
told him they would procure his Pardon, and Liberty, provided he would put
Pamela's Prayer into it, which accordingly he did, and was set free, and this
is attested by Dr. Bernard and Dr. Gill. who had it from one Mr. Hill Printer
to Oliver and the Army. And Mr. Hooker, Corrector in 1648 to Mr. Dugard's
Press, deposed before Mr. W -- ff March, 30, 91. Trat Icon Basilike was Printed
at Mr. Dugard's Press, and that he (Mr. Hooker) corrected the same: That Mr.
Dugard being known, was thrown into Prison, and turned out of his Place of
Merchant Tailors School, and that Mr. Hooker, to save himself, went to Travel
for several Years. Yet such is the Infatuation of some people, that they are
sure King Charles I. could not be the Author of Icon Basilike, but strenuously
assert him to have made use of this Prayer, and that he caused it to be
Printed: For this only reason, as may be supposed, That the first would redound
to his Reputation, the Letter to his Disgrace.

Short NOTES upon the Evidence for Dr. GAUDEN.
1. Mr. Wagstaff has judiciously observed that Mrs. Gauden and Dr. Walker
contradict one another in thirteen particulars of chief matter of Fact.

2. It Is not likely that the E. of Anglesey. Dr. Gauden himself, or any other
communicated the Secret of Dr. Gauden's being the Author, to King Chapter II. or
the D. of York: or if it was communicated to them, it is certain they did not
believe it true; as appears by both their Letters Patent to Mr. Royston and Mr.
Chiswell for Printing Icon Basilike as their Fathers.

3. It Is very probable the whole Evidence for Dr. Gauden is pure contrivance,
and designed on purpose to bring a discredit upon the Memory of King Chapter I.
which, is the rather to be believed because these upstart Evidence never
appeared till King Chapter I. and my Lord Capel were murdered; my Lord Chancellor
Hide, the Marquess of Hertford, Mr. Odert the Kings Secretary who transcribed
it for the King, Mr. Symonds who brought it to Mr. Royston to Print, Bishop
Morley, and all those they thought could contradict them in it, were Dead.

4. Dr. Gauden himself, after the Restoration, and after he was Bishop of
Exeter, did often declare to Mr. Long, then and now Prebendary of that Church,
That he was fully convinced that Icon Basilike was entirely King Charles the I
's. Work; and this has been and is still ready to be attested by Mr. Long.

5. It Is not likely that Dr. Gauden, if he had had such a Design, would have
trusted Dr. Walker with the Secret, whom he knew to be an Enemy to that King
and his Cause.

6. Should all that these Witnesses and Memorandum say be true, yet still they
had it but from Dr. Gauden himself; and we see Mr. Long still living testifies,
that Bishop Gauden declared to him often that he (the Bishop) was fully
conconc'd that Icon Basilike was entirely King Charles I. Work; and therefore
not his own, whatever he might say to gain Credit with his wife and Chaplain.

7. Toland's Story in Amyator about King James's denying his Letters Patent, to
Mr. Chiswel, is all Lie, not a word of Truth, as appears from Sir Roger
L'Estrange's Letter of May 5. 1699 to Mr. Wagstaff, who only could know the
truth of that matter.

8. My Lord Clarendon in his Letter of May 5. 99. to Mr. Wagstaff, declares
that he is of opinion his Father (my Lord Chancellor Hyde) and Bishop Morley
looked upon it to be King Charles his own Work, because Bishop Morley, with
whom he was very intimate, desired him to tell his Father that there were ill
Men about King Charles II. who endeavored to persuade him his Father was not
Author of Icon Basilike, which the Bishop would never have said had he known
Dr. Gauden to be the Author: And when he told his Father, he said Good God, I
thought the Marquess of Hertford had satisfied the King in that matter; which
says his Lordship (and We must allow his Lordship the best to understand his
Father's meaning) I understood he meant the Marquis had told him his Father was
the Author of it.

9. Mrs. Gauden says, That when Icon Basilike was published, it enraged the
Parliament so, that her Husband, concerning his Life and Estate in Danger, fled
to Sir John Wentworth 's near Yarmouth, intending thence to pass the Seas; but
Mr. Symonds falling Sick and dying, and her Husband not being discovered, be
altered his purpose, and returned home. Now if ever Dr. Gauden did, as Mrs.
Gauden here says, or is made to say he did, this seems to be the plain English
of it: None but Mr. Symonds knew that Doctor Gauden had taken a Copy of the
King's Book (which as things then stood was a very high Crime, if the Party
should be discovered who had testified so much affection to the King as to
transcribe it) the Dr. therefore fled, but hearing Mr. Symonds was dead, who he
knew was the only man could hurt him by a discovery, he returned home: And this
is the more probable interpretation of what Mrs. Gauden says, Because had Dr.
Gauden really been the Author of the Book, he must have been in Danger of a
discovery from my Lord Chancellor Hyde, My Lord Capel, the Lord Marquess of
Hertford, Bishop Duppa, Bishop Morley, Dr. Walker, Dr. Gifford, Mrs. Gauden,
Mr. Peacock, etc. (who are all said to have been privy to Dr. Gauden 's being
the Author, tho, by the way, it was never said so till after they were all
dead) as much or rather more than from Mr. Symonds, who was the Kings Chaplain
and one of his fastest Friends, even to Death: Therefore had Dr. Gauden been
afraid of being discovered for the Author (not the Copier) he would not have
returned till all the above named persons had been dead as well as Mr. Symonds,
or at least till a change of Government came when it should be more safe to
return.

London, Printed and are to be Sold by J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. Price
three Pence.


