BY HIS EXCELLENCY Richard Earl of Bellomont. Captain General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same
A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas His most Excellent Majesty has received Advice, That several Ships
of Force, fitted out of Scotland, were designed to settle themselves in some
parts of America; and lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his
Majesty has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial
to any of his Majesty's Colonies in America, His Majesty has been pleased to
signify his Royal Pleasure to Me, That I should strictly forbid all his
Majesty's Subjects, or others, inhabiting within the Districts of my
Government, that they forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any
assistance to any of the said Persons, while they are engaged in the aforesaid
Enterprise; and that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other necessaries
whatsoever, be carried from hence ^o them, nor be permitted to be carried,
either in their own Vessels, or any other Ship or Vessel for their Use. In
pursuance of his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure, I have thought fit, by
and with the Advice of his Majesty's Council of this Province, to publish and
Declare his Ma^esties said Pleasure, and by these Presents do strictly Charge
and Command all and every of his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this
Province and Territories depending thereon in America, That they forbear
holding any Correspondence with, or giving any assistance to such Person or
Persons, who have been fitted out of Scotland in manner aforesaid, and are said
to have ^ettled in a certain place, which they have called Caledonia That no
Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried
either in their own Vessels, or in any other Ship ^or Vessel for their Use,
from this Province, or any part thereof. And his Majesty's Collector and
Receiver General, and all other Officers of his Majesty's Custom-House, are
hereby Required ^o take notice hereof accordingly.

And I do further strictly Charge, Command and Forbid (by and with the Consent
of his Majesty's Council, as aforesaid) all his Majesty's said Subjects, and
others within this Province, That they neither by themselves, nor by any other
Persons, Authorized by them, contrary to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any assist^nce, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce with such Persons as are said to be settled in Caledonia
aforesaid. And if any Person or Persons within this Province, by themselves,
their Factors or Agents, shall contrary too, and against the true intent and
meaning of this his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure signified unto me, as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any ^ssistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce, in manner aforesaid, then all such Person or Persons so
acting, as aforesaid, shall incur such Pains, Penalties, and Fofeitures, as by
Law in ^uch Cases are provided. And all his Majesty's Subjects, and others,
within this Province, are ^ereby Required to take due Notice hereof, and to
Observe His Majesty's said Royal Will and PLEASURE in All and Every of the
Premises, as they will Answer the Contrary at their peril.

Given at Fort William Henry in New York, the 15th day of May, 1699. And in the
Eleventh Year of His Majesty's Reign. Bellomont.
By Order

B. Cose: Cl. Concilii.



GOD save the King.
Printed by W. Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, in
New York. 1699.


