Apanthismata.

MEMORIALS OF Worthy PERSONS Lights and Ornaments OF THE Church of England.

Two new Decads.

Neque omnia, neque nihil. OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. Lichfield, and are to
be sold by S. Thomson at the Bishops-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1664.

Nobilissimo Adolescenti, D. EDVARDO HYDE, Ex Aede Chapter

Illustrissimi Viri EDVARDI Comitis de CLARENDON, Regni ANGLIAE and Acad.
OXONIENSIS CANCELLARII Honoratissimi, Filio non degeneri: C. B. Ejusdem
Cancellarii benignitate Rector de Naunton in Agro Gloc. Libellum suum, Animi
non immemoris indicem, Humillime D. D.

Magni propago Seminis, Collegii
Henriciani, Matris ac almae decus,
A Matre posses sumere exemplum Tibi,
Nisi esset instar omnium Clarus Pater.
Haec nostra non erunt inutilia tamen:
Sunt ista fortiora quae plures docent.
The Persons.
1. K. Edward 6. 2. La. Jane Gray. 3. Sir John Cheek. 4. Arch B. Whitgift. 5.
Mr. Rich. Hooker. 6. Bishop Andrews. 7. Bishop Brounrig. 8. Mr. Tho. Gataker.
9. Dr. H. Hammond. 10. Bishop Smith.
Ad Librum.
Vade, Liber, pede felici: Lectoribus esto Delicium, tantis auree Nominibus

To the Ingenuous Readers.
GENTLEMEN,
THe Persons here presented, are worthy, certainly, of an honorable
Remembrance: the particulars collected are such as, to me, seemed most
remarkable. More you may find, if you desire, in the Authors to whom I refer
you: For I would be taken only for a faithful Collector. The benefit to be
received hence (which I do principally aim at) is, that you may worthily esteem
of our Church, adorned with such excellent examples; and that, by your
imitation of these, your selves may deserve to be, hereafter, added to the
Catalogue.

Your affectionate Servant, C. B.
Oxon. Apr. 23. Die Coron. R. Car. 2. 1662.
EDOUARD VI.


MEMORIALS. I. K. EDWARD VI.
Out of Dr Heylyns History of the Reformation, etc.
1. EDward, the only surviving Son of K. Henry VIII. was born at the Royal
Palace of Hampton Court, Oct. 12. 1537. of Q. Jane Seymour the next wife to K.
Henry after Anne Bollen. Some Ladies who had seen the Pictures of both Queens
at Whitehal Gallery, have entertained no small dispute to which of the two they
were to give preeminence in point of beauty; each of them having such a
plentiful measure of perfections, as to entitle either of them to a
superiority. If Q. Anne seemed to have the more lively countenance, Q. Jane was
thought to carry it in the exact symmetry, which showed it self in all her
features. Love which seemed to threaten in the eyes of Q. Jane, did only seem
to sport it self in the eyes of Q. Anne. There was more Majesty in the garb of
Q. Jane Seymour, and more lovelynesse in that of Q. Anne Bo^en: yet so, that
the Majesty of the one did excel in loveliness, and that the loveliness of
the other did excel in Majesty. In a word, Q. Jane had in her all the Graces of
Q. Anne, but governed with an evener and more constant temper.

2. It has been commonly reported and no less generally believed, that the
child being come unto the birth, and there wanting natural strength to be
delivered, his Mothers belly was ripped open to give him a passage into the
world. But there are extant two several letters to evince the contrary. Though
questionless, she had a very hard labor, which brought her first into a very
high distemper, and after into a very great loosnesse, which accelerated the
approach of death, to the General lamentation, November. 12.

Her Epitaph.
Phoenix Jana jacet, nato Phoenice. Dolendum est, Secula Phoenices nulla
tulisse duas.

3. The Prince having attained unto the age of six years was taken out of the
hands of his women, and committed to the Tuition of Mr John Cheek (whom he
afterward Knighted, and advanced him to the Provost-ship of Kings Coll. in
Cambridge) and Dr Richard Cox (whom afterward he preferred to the Deanery of
Westminster, and made chief Almoner.) These two being in Authority, employed
themselves to his advantage in their several kinds; Dr Cox, for knowledge of
Divinity, Philosophy and Gravity of Manners; Mr Cheek for Eloquence in the
Greek and Latin Tongues. Besides which two, he had some others to instruct him
in the modern languages, and thrived so well amongst them all, that in short
time he perfectly spoke the French tongue, and was able to express himself
significantly enough in the Italian, Greek and Spanish. And as for the Latin,
how early a Proficient he was therein (with reference to the times wherein he
lived) is yet to be seen in some Latin ^pistles of his written to the King and
others, before he was eight years old.

4. For a Companion at his book, or rather for aproxy to bear the punishment of
such errors as either through negligence or inadvertency were committed by him,
he had one Barnaby Fitzpatrick. He had a very easy substitution of it. And, if
it sometimes happened, as it seldom did, that the servant suffered punishment
for his Masters errors; it is not easy to affirm, whether Fitzpatrick smarted
more for the fault of the Prince, or the Prince conceived more grief for the
smart of Fitz-patrick. Certain it is, that the Prince entertaind such a real
estimation of him, that when he came unto the Crown, he acquainted him by
letters with the sufferings of the Duke of Sommerset, instructed and maintained
him for his travels in France, endowed him with fair lands in Ireland, his
native Country; and finally made him Baron of upper Ossory: which honorable
Title he enjoyed till the time of his death, in the later end of Q. Elizabeth's
reign; at which time he dyed a zealous and Religious Protestant.

5. One thing I must not pretermit to show the extraordinary piety of this
hopeful Prince in the days of his childhood; when, being about to take down
somewhat, which seemed to be above his reach, one of his servants proferd him a
bossed plated Bible, to stand upon and heighten him: Which, when he perceived
to be a Bible, with holy Indignation he refused to do; but took it, and kissed
it, and laid it in its place, sharply reprehending him that made the offer. A
strong assurance of that dear esteem and veneration, in which he held that
Sacred book in his riper years.

6. Having attained the Age of nine, there were great preparations made for his
solemn Investiture in the principality of Wales: But scarce were the provisions
ready, but the Kings sickness brought a stop, and His death shortly after put
an end to those preparations; the expectation of a Principality, being thereby
changed to the possession of a Crown.

7. It cannot be denied, but that King Henry left the Church, in many respects,
in a better condition then he found it; not only in order to the Reformation of
Religion, which none but such a masculin Prince durst have undertaken, but also
in the policy and endowments of it. The Monasteries and Religious Houses might
possibly be looked upon no otherwise, then as so many excrescences upon the body
of the Church: but, Bishoprics being more essential to the Constitution of the
same, he did not only preserve, as before he found them, but increase their
number. Six of the wealthier Monasteries he turned into Episcopal Sees, i. e.
the Abbeys of Westminster, ^eterborough, Bristol, Gloucester and Chester, with
that of Ousney, for the Sea of the Bishop of Oxon; assigning to every new
Episcopal See its Dean and Chapter, and unto every such Cathedral, a competent
number of Quire-men and other officers, all of them liberally endowed and
provided for. And that the Church might be continually furnished with
sufficient Seminaries; he founded a Grammar School in every one of his
Cathedrals, either old or new, with Annual Pensions to the Master and some
allowance to be made to the Children yearly; and ordained also, that in each of
the two Universities there should be public Readers, in the faculties of
Divinity, Law and Physic, and in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues: all which he
pensioned, and endowed with liberal Salaries, as the times then were. Besides
which public benefactions, he confirmed Cardinal Wolsey's College in Oxon, by
the name of Kings College first, and of Christ-Church afterward; and erected
that most beautiful pile of Trinity College in Cambridge: Those being the two
fairest, and most magnificent Foundations in the Christian World. And as for
the polity of the Church, he settled it in such a manner, that Archbishops and
Bishops might be chosen, consecrated, and all the Subjects relieved in their
Suits and Grievances, without having such recourse to the Court of Rome, as
formerly had drained the Realm of so much Treasure.

8. The Earl of Hartford (after, Duke of Somerset) the young Kings Uncle, is
chosen Governor of his Person, and Protector of his Kingdoms, till he should
come to the Age of eighteen years. The Protector and other Grandees of the
Court presently entertain some thoughts of a Reformation. In which they found
Archbishop Cranmer, and some other Bishops to be as forward as themselves:
but, on different ends: endeavored by the Bishops, in a pious zeal for
rectifying such things as were amiss in God's public Worship* but by the
Courtiers, on an hope to enrich themselves by the spoil of the Bishoprics.

9. Commissioners are sent forth into all parts of the Kingdom, armed with
Instructions to enquire into all Ecclesiastical Concernments, in the manner of
a Visitation; directed by the King, as Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of
England. Which Commissioners, being directed into several Circuits, were
accompanied with certain learned and godly Preachers, appointed to instruct the
people, and to facilitate the work of the Commissioners in all Towns and
Places, where they sat. And, that the people might not cool or fall off again,
in, and from that which had been taught them by the learned Preachers, they
were to leave some Homilies to the same effect with the Parish Priests: which
the Archbishop had composed; not only for the help of unpreaching Ministers,
but for the regulating and enstructing even of learned Preachers. The Preachers
were more particularly instructed to persuade the people from praying to
Saints, from Adoring of Images, from praying in unknown Language, and some
other like things whereunto long Custom had brought a Religious Observation.
All which was done to this intent; That the people in all places being prepared
by little and little, might with more ease and less opposition admit the total
Alteration in the face of the Church, which was intended in due time to be
introduced. Among the Injunctions sent with the Commissioners were these
following. viz. That the laws for abolishing the Popes usurped Power be
observed: That the people be exhorted to works of Faith, Mercy and Charity:
That Images be taken down: That the Bible in English, and Erasmus Paraphrase be
placed in the Church: That Ecclesiastical persons ptomoted give exhibitions to
poor Scholars in the Universities: That no Ecclesiastical person haunt
Alehouses. That none preach without license: That no Curate admit to the
Communion such who are in malice with their Neighbors: That the Holy Day be
wholly given to God, except in times of harvest: That Tithes be not detained:
That Priests be not abused, etc.

10. The famous Preacher at Court was Father Latimer: who drew such multitudes
of people after him to hear his Sermons; that being to preach before the King
on the first Friday in Lent, it was thought necessary, that the Pulpit should
be placed in the Kings Privy-garden, where he might be heard of more then four
times as many Auditors, as could have thronged into the Chapel. In which place
was erected afterward a fixed and standing Pulpit for the like occasions:
especially for Lent-Sermons on Sundaies in the Afternoon: and has so continued
ever since, ti^l these later times.

11. In the second of his reign, An. 1548. his Majesty declared by
Proclamation September. 23. That for the settling of an Uniformity and Order
throughout his Realm; and for putting an end to all Controversies in Religion,
He had caused certain Godly Bishops and other notable learned men to be
Congregated, or called together. And thereupon does infer: That,
notwithstanding many of the Preachers, formerly licensed, had behaved
themselves very discreetly and wisely, to the Honor of God and the
contentation of his Highness: Yet till such time, as the said Order should be
generally set forth throughout the Realm. His Majesty did thereby inhibit all
manner of Persons, whatever they be, to preach in open Audience, in the Pulpit
or otherwise, by any sought color or fraud, to the disobeying of his
Commandment. And this he did to the intent; That the Whole Clergy in the mean
space might apply themselves to prayer to Almighty God for the better
atchieving of this same Godly intent and purpose; Not doubting but that all his
loving Subjects in the mean time would occupy themselves to Gods honor, with
due prayer in the Church, and patient hearing of the Godly Homilies: and so
endeavor themselves, that they may be the more ready, with thankful Obedience
to receive a most quiet, godly and uniform Order throughout all his Realms and
Dominions.

12. Here it is to be observed, That those who had the chief directing of this
weighty business* were before hand reso^ved, that none but English heads or
hands should be used therein: le^t otherwise it might be thought, and perhaps
objected, That they rather followed the example of some other Churches, or were
swayed by the Authority of those foreign Assistants, then by the Word of God,
and the most uncorrupted practice of the Primitive Times. And though it was
thought necessary, for the better seasoning of the Universities in the
Protestant Reformed Religion, that Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr, two eminent
Divines of the foreign Churches, should be invited to come over: yet we find
neither of them here, till the end of November (1548) when the Liturgy had
been approved of by the King and Council, if it had not also passed the
Approbation of both Houses of Parliament.

13. The Book being finished and subscribed, it was with all due ^everence
humbly presented to the ^ing: by whom it was received to his great Comfort and
Quietness of mind, as the Statute tells us: and being by him commended to
the Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament. They did not only give his
Highness most hearty and lowly Thanks, for his Care therein; but, on perusal
thereof, declared it to be done by the aid of the Holy Ghost: and thereupon it
was enacted, That all Ministers in the Kings Dominions should say Common and
open prayer in such order and form, as is mentioned in the same Book, and no
otherwise.

14. The reign of this Young King was indeed remarkable for the progress of
the Reformation, but otherwise tumultuous in it self, and defamed by Sacrilege,
and so distracted into sides and factions, that in the end the King himself
became a prey to the strongest party.

15. The Physicians that attended him on his death bed whispered: That neither
their Advice nor Applications had been at all regarded in the course of his
sickness: That the King had been ill dealt with, more than once or twice: and,
That, when by the benefit both of his Youth and careful means, there were some
fair hopes of his Recovery, he was again more strongly overlaid than ever. It
is affirmed by a Writer of the Popish party, (who could have no great cause to
pity such a calamitous end) that the Apothecary who poysond him, for the
horror of the offense, and the disquietnesse of his Conscience, did, not long
after, drown himself.

16. In his dying prayer (as it was taken from his Mouth) we have those pious
words: Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wretched life, and take
me among thy Chosen. Howbeit not my will, but thine be done. Lord, Bless my
people, and save thine inheritance. Defend this Realm from Papistry, and
maintain thy true Religion.

Ob. 6. Jul. An, D. 1553. Aet. 16.

Nata 1537. cc Regina Declaritur Guildfordice Dudley 1553 Iul: 10. Conjugata
Capite Plectitur 1553. Maij. 1553/4. Feb: 12.


Printed for Richd. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard.

II. The Lady JANE GRAY.
Out of Dr Heylins History of the Reformation.
1. SHe was eldest Daughter of Henry L. Gray, Duke of Suffolk. Her Mother was
the Lady Francis, daughter, and in fine one of the coheires of Charles
Brandon, the late Duke of Suffolk, by Marie his wife, Queen Dowager to Lewis
12. of France, and youngest Daughter of K. Henry VII. She seemed to have been
born with those Attractions, which seat a Soveraigntie in the face of most
beautiful persons: yet was her Mind endued with more excellent Charms, then the
Attractions of her Face: Modest and Mild of Disposition, Courteous of Carriage,
and of such Affable Deportment, as might entitle her to the name of Queen of
Hearts, before she was designed for Queen over any Subjects.

2. These her Native and obliging Graces, were accompanied with some more
profitable ones, of her own acquiring: which set an higher value on them, and
much increased the same, both in Worth and Luster. Having attained unto that
Age, in which other young Ladies used to apply themselves to the sports and
exercises of their Sex, She wholly gave her Mind to good Arts and Sciences;
much furthered in that pursuit by the loving Care of Mr Elmer: under whose
charge she came to such a large proficiency, that she spoke the Latin and Greek
Tongues, with as sweet a fluencie, as if they had been natural and native to
her: exactly skilled in the liberal Sciences, and perfectly well studied in
both kinds of Philosophy.

3. Take here a story out of Mr Ascham's Schoolm. p. 11. in his own words: One
example, Whether love or fear does work more in a child, for virtue and
learning, I will gladly report: which may be heard with some pleasure, and
followed with more profit. Before I went into Germany, I came to Brodegate in
Leicestershire, to take my leave of that noble Lady Jane Gray, to whom I was
exceeding much beholding. Her Parents the Duke and the Duchess, with all the
Household, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, were hunting in the Park: I found her in
her Chamber, reading Phoedon Platonis in Greek, and that with as much delight,
as some Gentlemen would read a merry tale in Bocace. After salutation, and duty
done, with some other talk, I asked her, why she would leese such pastime in
the Park: Smiling she answered me; I wisse, all their sport in the Park, is but
a shadow to that pleasure that I find in Plato: Alas, good folk, they never
felt what true pleasure meant. And how came You, Madam, quoth I, to this deep
knowledge of pleasure, and what did chiefly allure You unto it, seeing not many
women, but very few men have attained thereunto. I will tell you, says she, and
tell you a troth, which perchance ye will marvel at. One of the greatest
benefits that ever God gave me, is, that he sent me so sharp and severe
Parents, and so gentle a Schoolmaster. For, when I am in presence either of
Father or Mother, whether I speak, keep silence, sit, stand, or go, eat, drink,
be merry, or sad, be sowing, playing, dancing, or doing any thing else, I must
do it, as it were, in such weight, measure and number, even so perfectly, as
God made the world; or else I am so sharply traunted, so cruelly threatened, yea
presently sometimes, with pinches, nips and bobs, and ways, (which I will not
name, for the honor I bear them,) so without measure misordered, that I think
my self in hell, till time come, that I must go to Mr Elmer: who teaches me so
gently, so pleasantly, with such fair allurements to learning, that I think all
the time nothing, whiles I am with him. And when I am called from him, I fall
on weeping, because, whatsoever I do else, but learning, is full of grief,
trouble, fear and whole misliking unto me. And thus my book has been so much
my pleasure, and brings daily to me more pleasure and more, that in respect
of it, all other pleasures, in very deed, be but trifles and troubles unto me.
I remember this talk gladly, both because it is so worthy of memory, and
because also it was the last talk that ever I had, and the last time that ever
I saw that noble and worthy Lady. Thus far Mr Ascham.]

4. By this eminent proficiency in all parts of learning, and an Agreeableness
in Disposition, she became very dear to the Young K. Edward: to whom Fox not
only makes her equal, but does acknowledge her also to be his Superior in
those noble studies. And for an Ornament superadded to her other perfections,
she was most zealously affected to the true Protestant Religion, then by law
established; Which she embraced, not out of any outward compliance with the
present current of the Times, but because her own most excellent Judgment had
been fully satisfied in the Truth and Purity thereof. All which did so endear
her to the King, that he took great delight in her Conversation.

5. Thus lived she in these sweet Contentments, till she came unto the years of
Marriage, when she, that never found in her self the le^st spark of Ambition,
was made the most unhappy Instrument of another Man's. The proud and aspiring
Duke of Northumberland treats with the Duke of Suffolk, about a Marriage
between the Lord Guilford Dudly his fourth Son, and the Lady Jane. The Marriage
is concluded, and by Northumberland's policy; the Crown is transferred from K.
Edward to his Cousin the Lady Jane, his two Sisters the Lady Mary and Lady
Elizabeth being passed by. Memorable is the Speech she made to the two Dukes,
when they owned her for Queen, to this effect: That the Laws of the Kingdom,
and natural Right, standing for the Kings Sisters, she would beware of
burthening her weak Conscience with a yoke, which did belong to them: That she
understood the Infamy of those, who had permitted the violation of Right, to
gain a Scepter: That it were to mock God, and deride Justice, to scruple at the
stealing of a shilling, and not at the usurpation of a Crown. Besides (said
she) I am not so young, nor so little read in the guiles of fortune, to suffer
my self to be taken by them. If she enrich any, it is but to make them the
subject of her spoil: If she raise others, it is but to pleasure her self with
their Ruins. What she adored but yesterday, is to day her pastime. And if I now
permit her to adorn and Crown Me, I must to morrow suffer her to crush, and
tear me in pieces, etc. But the Ambition of the two Dukes was too strong and
violent, to be kept down by any such prudent Considerations. So that being
wearied at last with their Importunities, and overcome by the entreaties of her
husband, whom she dearly loved, She submitted unto that necessity which she
could not vanquish, yielding her head with more unwillingnesse to the ravishing
Glories of a Crown, then afterward she did to the stroke of the Ax.

6. The Acclamations at the proclaiming of Queen Mary, were heard by the Lady
Jane (now no longer Queen) with such Tranquillity of mind and composedness of
countenance, as if she had not been concerned in the Alteration. She had before
received the offer of a Crown, with ^s even a Temper, as if it had been
nothing, but a Garland of flowers: and now she lays aside the thought thereof
with as much contentedness, as she could have thrown away that Garland when the
sent was gone. The time of her Glory was so short, but a nine Days wonder,
that it seemed nothing but a Dream, out of which she was not sorry to be
awakened. The Towr had been to her a prison, rather than a Court, and
interrupted the Delights of her former life by so many Terrors, that no Day
passed without some new Alarm to disturb her Quiet. She does now know the worst
that fortune can do unto her: and having always feared, that there stood a
Scaffold secretly behind the Throne, She was as readily prepared to act her
part upon the one, as upon the other.

7. Her Death is resolved upon: but first She must be practiced with to change
her Religion. To which end Fecknam is employed: a Man, whose great parts
ptomised him an easy victory over a poor Lady of a broken and dejected Spirit.
But it proved the contrary. For, so well had She studied the Concernments of
her own Religion, and managed the Conference with him, with such a readiness
of wit, such Constancy of Resolution, and a Judgment so well grounded in all
helps of Learning; that she was able to make Answer to the strongest Arguments;
as well to her great Honor, as his Admiration. So that, not able to prevail
with her in the change of Religion, he made offer of his service to prepare her
for death. Which, though she thankfully accepted of, as finding it to proceed
from a good affection; yet soon he found, that she was also aforehand with him
in those preparations, which are fit and necessary for a Dying-Christian.

8. Friday, 9. Febr. was first designed for the day of the Execution: but the
Desire of gaining her to the Church of Rome procured her the short respite of
three days more. On Sunday night, being the Eve unto the day of her
Translation, she wrote a Letter in the Greek tongue, at the end of a Testament,
which she bequeathed as a Legacy to her Sister the Lady Katharine, which being
such a lively Picture of the excellent Lady, some lines thereof are worthy to
be presented here: I have sent you a Book (dear Sister) which although it be
not outwardly trimmed with Gold, yet inwardly it is more worth then precious
stones. If you with a good mind read it, and with an earnest desire to follow
it, it shall bring you to an immortal and everlasting life: it shall teach you
to live, and learn you to die: it shall win you more, then you should have
gained by your woeful Fathers Lands. You shall be an Inheritor of such Riches,
as neither the Covetous shall withdraw from you, neither Thief shall steal,
neither yet the Moths corrupt. Desire with David (good Sister) to understand
the Law of the Lord God. Live still to die, that you by death may purchase
eternal life. Defy the world: Deny the Devil: Despise the Flesh; and delight
your self only in the Lord. Be penitent for your sins, and yet despair not. Be
strong in Faith, and yet presume not. And desire, with Saint Paul, to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, with whom, even in death, there is life. And
as touching my death, rejoice as I do (Good Sister) that I shall be delivered
of this Corruption, and put on Incorruption, For I am assured, that I shall,
for losing a mortal life, win an immortal one. The which I pray God to grant
you, and send you of his Grace, to live in his fear, and to die in the true
Christian Faith: from the which, in Gods name, I exhort you, that you never
swerve, neither for hope of life, nor for fear of death.

9. The fatal Morning being come, the Lord Guilford earnestly desired the
officers, that he might take his Farewell of her. Which, though they willingly
permitted, yet, upon notice of it, she advised the contrary, assuring him, That
such a Meeting would rather add to his Afflictions, and her presence rather
weaken then strengthen him: That he ought to take courage from his Reason, and
derive constancy from his own heart: That he should do well to remit this
Interview to the other World; that there indeed Friendships were happy, and
unions indissoluble, and that theirs would be eternal, if their souls carried
nothing with them of Terrestrial, which might hinder them from rejoicing. All
she could do, was to give him a Farewell out of a window, as he passed toward
the place of his dissolution: which he suffered on the Scaffold on Tower Hill,
with much Christian meekness.

10. The Lady was led to a Scaffold within the Tower, by Sir Henry Gage the
Constable; who desired her to bestow some small gift upon him, as a Memorial of
her. To gratify which desire, she gave him her Table Book: in which she had
written three sentences, in Greek, Latin and English; as she saw her Husbands
Body brought unto the Chapel; which she besought him to accept as her last
Bequest. The Greek to this effect: That, if his executed body should give
testimony against her before Men; his most blessed soul should give an eternal
proof of her Innocence in the presence of God. The Latin added: That Humane
Justice was against his Body, but the Divine Mercy would be for his Soul. The
Conclusion in English: That, if her fault deserved punishment, her Youth at
least, and her Imprudence were worthy of Excuse; and, that God and Posterity
would show her Favor.

11. Conducted by Fecknam to the Scaffold, she gave not much heed to his
Discourses, but kept her eyes upon a Prayer Book of her own. And, being mounted
on the Throne, from which she was to receive a more excellent Crown, then any
which this vile Earth could give her, she addressed her self in some few words
to the standers by, letting them know; That her offense was not for having laid
her hand upon the Crown, but for not rejecting it with sufficient Constancy:
That she had less erred through Ambition, then out of Reverence to her
parents; yet such Reverence deserved punishment: That she would willingly admit
of death, so to give satisfaction to the injured State: And that she had justly
deserved this punishment, for being made the Instrument, (though an unwilling
Instrument) of Another ambition. Then, having desired the people to recommend
her in their prayers to the mercies of God, being ready for the block, with the
same clear and untroubled Countenance, wherewith she had acted all the rest of
her Tragedy, she said aloud the Psalm of Miserere mei Deus, in the English
Tongue, and so submitted her pure neck to the ^xecutioner. An. 1553.

Miraris Janam Graio Sermon loquntam?
Quo primum nata est tempore, Graia fuit.
Camd. in Reliq. III. Sir JOHN CHEEK.
Out of his Life prefixed to The hurt of Sedition, written by Dr. Langbane.
1. THIS learned and worthy man fell immediately, from the womb of his Mother,
into the lap of the Muses; being both born and bred within the liberties of
that famous nursery of good Letters, Cambridge. He seems to have been of no
vulgar extraction, for two of his Sisters were fairly matched, one to Dr.
Blithe, the Kings professor of Physic; and Mary, another of them, to William
Cecil, afterward Lord Burghley, a most able Minister of State.

2. Certainly, his deserts were so far above vulgar and ordinary, that they
quickly purchased him a Fellowship in S. John's College: and it may be
disputable, whether in point of learning, he owed more to the place, or the
place to him. His eminency was so generally taken notice of by the Ingenium
magni moderatus Principis exul CHECVS, at inconstans in Pietate ^uit ^
whole University, that they pitched upon him for the sole manage of two
weighty, but honorary employments, of their public Orator and Greek Reader.

3. In the discharge of this later he went over all Sophocles twice, all Homer,
all Euripides, and part of Herodotus, to his Auditors benefit and his own
credit: which was all the Salary he then had: till King Henry VIII of his royal
bounty endowed that and the other Chairs with the liberal Allowance of XL
pounds per annum; and, upon the sole Commendatories of his former deservings,
conferred that honor on him, to be the first Regius professor of the Greek
tongue in Cambridge, as Sir Thomas Smith was of Law.

4. These two especially by their advice and example brought the study of
Tongues and other politer learning first into request in that University. Upon
hopes of facilitating the Greek Tongue, they attempted to reduce it to the
ancient, but obsolete manner of pronuntiation: an innovation quickly observed
by B. Gardener, the Chancellor, and repressed by a strict Injunction, May 21.
1542. And though at last, after several Writings, Mr. Cheek was content to
submit to that one unanswerable Argument of the Chancellors Authority; yet his
Rules and Practice had taken such deep root in his Auditors, that by them it
was propagated through this whole Kingdom: and that we Englishmen speak Greek,
and are able to understand one another, we must acknowledge it to be a special
effect of Mr. Cheek's rare ingeny.

5. That famous King, Henry VIII, thought it sit to call this great light of
Learning out of the shadow: and so he did July 10. 1544. and to his Custody he
then committed the most precious Jewel of the Kingdom, the young Prince Edward,
being at that time not full seven years of age. What progress he made under
this Director of his studies, appears by those noble Relics of his industry
und sufficiency, both in Greek and Latin, which are still preserved in his
Majesty's Library at S. James.

6. It may be truly said, that under God Mr. Cheek was a special Instrument of
the propagation of the Gospel, and that Religion which we now profess in this
Kingdom. For he not only sowed the seeds of that Doctrine in the heart of Prince
Edward, which afterward grew up into a general Reformation when he came to be
King; but by his means the same saving truth was gently instilled into the Lady
Elizabeth, by those who by his procurement were admitted to be guides of her
younger studies. Such were, first William Grindall, and after him Roger Ascham,
who had fomerrly bin his Scholar in the Coll. and successor in the Orators
place in the University: a man dear unto him for similitude of studies, but
more for his zeal to the true Religion.

7. An. 1547. When the young King was well settled in his Throne, he admitted
Mr. Cheek to be one of his privy Chamber. This accrue of Honor to her son made
his learned Mother the University a suitor to him for protection in those
stormy times: who in her Letters to him gives him such an Elogie, as must not
be omitted here. This it is: Ex universo illo numero clarissimorum virorum
(Clarissime Chece) qui ex hac Academia in Remp. unquam prodierunt, Tu unus es,
quem semper Academia, prae universis aliis, and praesentem complexa est, and
absentem admirata est: qnam Tu vicissim plusquam universi alii and praesens
ornaveras, and absens juvas.

An. 1551. When his Majesty was pleased to make a doal of Honors among his
deserving Subjects; Mr. Cheek was not forgotten: He, with his Brother in Law
Secretary Cecil, were then Knighted, This was but a foundation upon which the
grateful Prince had a purpose to erect higher preferments, had not the hand of
Providence so soon snatched him away into another Kingdom, to invest his temples
with a more glorious Crown. This was done July 6. 1553. not long after he had
called Sir John Cheek to sit at the helm of State, the Council Board. In this
common loss of so good a King, He, good man, had more then a common share.
Being clapped up in prison July 27. he was stripped of the greatest part of his
honors, and all his fortunes: ^ut his Person was set at liberty Sept. 3. and
not long after we meet with him in Germany, either a forced or a voluntary
exile.

9. From thence he passed into Italy, and by the way left those adversary
Epistles of Winchester and himself with his Friend Coelius, who put them in
print without the Authors privity. At his return to Germany, he was kindly
entertained at Strasburg, where he took up his old trade, and set up shop
again, being chosen Professor of the Greek tongue in that place. This was a
treasure which maintained him in his exile: this he had not confiscate to the
Queen: this escaped the diligence of the Searchers, when he conveyed it out of
the Kingdom.

10. Here he lived about two years in good repute, till I know not what unlucky
stars put him upon a journey into the Low Countries. Some have said it was to
marry a wife: but what need of that, when he was already matched to a young
Lady; who lived to see many happier days after his decease, and dyed well nigh
threescore years after him, An. 1616. Sleidan tells us he went into low
Germany, ut uxorem educeret, to fetch his wife thence, who belike was lately
come over out of England, and meant to settle with him at Strasburg. But in his
return from Bruxelles to Antwerp, May 15. 1556, both Sir John Cheek and Sir
Peter Carew were waylaid by the Provost Marshall for K. Philip, beaten from
their horses, tied hand and foot to the bottom of a Cart, and so conveyed
hood-winkt to the next Haven; where they were shipped under h^tches, and their
first landing place was the Tower of London, where they were committed to close
prison. Sir Peter Carew outlived his Troubles, and under-went many honorable
services under Queen Elizabeth, and dyed An. 1575.

11. Sir John Cheek's lot was somewhat harder: he was put to this miserable
choice, either to forgo his life, or what is far more precious, his liberty of
Conscience. No mean: neither his great Learning, nor his known integrity, nor
the intercession of his friends, and among them Abbot Fekenham (a man which
could do somewhat with Queen Mary) could compound for his pardon at any lower
rate, then the recantation of his Religion. Upon this he was soon restored to
his liberty, but never to his content. The sense and sorrow for himself, and
the daily sight of that cruel butchery which was exercised upon others for the
constant profession of the truth, made such deep impressions in his broken
soul, as brought him to a speedy, but comfortable end of a miserable life.

12. He dyed at London in the house of Peter Osbern Esquire; Sept. 1557. He left
one Son, which bare his name, a comely young man and a stout, slain in his
Princes service in Ireland 1580. but the issue of his brain was more numerous;
De pronuntiatione Graecae linguae, Panegyricus Edvardi VI. De obitu Buceri, De
Eucharistiae Sacramento, Maximi Monachi Asceticus, etc. His Body lies buried at
Saint Albans, Wood-street, with this Epitaph:

Doctrinae Checus linguaeque utriusque Magister,
Aurea naturae fabrica morte jacet.
Non erat e multis unus, sed praestitit unus
Omnibus, and patriae flos erat ille suae.
Ge^ma Britanna fuit: tam magnum nulla tulerunt
Tempora the saurum: tempora nulla ferent.
JOHANNES WHITGIFTVS ARCHEP. Whitgiftus rup^^is vinclis Romana relinguens Sacra
pius, sese meliores vertit ad vsus ^


IV. Dr. JOHN WHITGIFT Archbishop of Canterbury.
Out of his life written by Sir George Paul, Controller of his Graces household.
1. HE came of the ancient family of Whitgift of Whitgift in Yorkshire, the
eldest son of a Merchant Henry Whitgift of great Grimsly in Lincolnshire, and
was there born An. 1530. He was taught (among other young Gentlemen) by his
Uncle Robert Whitgift Abbot of Wellow. In which time (as he was pleased often
to remember) he heard the Abbot say: That they and their Religion could not
long continue; because (said he) I have read the whole Scripture over and over,
and could never find therein that our Religion was founded by God.

2. His Uncle finding an extraordinary forwardlynesse in him, sent him
afterward, to London, where he became a Scholar in S. Anthonies School, and
boarded at his Aunts House in Paul's Churchyard. From thence he repaired to
Grimsly to his Parents, being thrust out of doors by his Aunt, because he would
not go with her to Mass, imputing all her domestic misfortunes to her
harboring such an Heretic in her House: and for a Farewell told him; That she
thought at the first, she had received a Saint into her House, but now she
perceived he was a Devil.

3. His Parents finding his proficiency, by the direction of his Uncle, sent
him to Cambridge. Dr. Ridley made him Scholar of Pembroke Hall: thence, Dr.
Pearn chose him Fellow of Peter house: Being there fallen grievously sick, the
Doctor (who loved him for his good parts) placed him with a good woman near the
College, visiting him often, and charging her to spare no cost for his recovery:
If he lives (said he) he will be able to pay you himself: if he dye, I will
satisfy you.

4. After his recovery, Dr. Pearn, finding he purposed to travel Beyond Sea to
avoid the Visitors sent by Queen Mary, conferred with him, and seeing him
resolute in his Religion, upon many good and sound reasons (as the Doctor often
acknowledged) willed him to be silent, and quiet, and he would so order the
matter, that he might keep his Religion and not leave the University: which the
good old man justly performed.

5. After he was entered into the Ministry (which was upon the year 1560) being
to preach his first public Sermon in S. Mary's, he chose for his Text that
excellent saying of S. Paul, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, etc.
Wherein his singular method, choice of matter, and judicious handling thereof
were such, that his whole Auditory, especially the Chief of the University,
grew into great Admiration of those great parts in so young years.

6. From being Fellow of Peter House, he succeeded Doctor Hutton in the
Mastership of Pembroke Hall, and being Chaplain to Doctor Cox Bishop of Ely, he
had a Prebend there. He was also chosen the Lady Margarets Professor of
Divinity, and afterward the Queens. The Queen, having heard him preach, said
he had a White gift indeed, made him Master of Trinity College, and caused him
immediately to be sworn her Chaplain, An. 1567.

7. He governed the College for five years space with great quietness, until
Mr. Tho. Cartwright (a Fellow of that College) his last return from beyond the
Seas. Whose first coffeehouse grew from the Queens neglect of him at a
Disputation before her Majesty in the University.

8. The Master being from home, Mr. Cartwright with some of his adherents made
three Sermons upon one Sunday, and so vehemently inveighed against the Surplice
and other Ceremonies, that they of the College at Evening Prayer, laid aside
their Surplices, three only excepted.

9. Doctor Whitgift, after that Mr. Cartwright had broached his dangerous
Doctrine, used to confute it in the same Church, the next Sunday following, and
settled the judgment of many; and foreseeing these sparks of sedition, if not
timely quenched, would grow to a great flame, often sent to Mr. Cartwright, and
in friendly manner advised him to surcease from those courses: but finding him
wilful and obstinate, highly conceited of himself and a despiser of others
that were not of his mind, and a refuser of any fair trial of his cause by
Conference or writing; caused him to be expelled the House, and deprived
likewise of the Margarit Lecture: An. 1570.

10. Not long after, the Disciplinarians published a seditious Treatise
entitled, An Admonition to the Parliament: the summary of their opinions and
slanders. And in regard of the applause it found among the greener heads, given
to novelty, Doctor Whitgift answers it. Cartwright replies, and Doctor Whitgift
defends his Answer. A second Reply being published by Cartwright, the Doctor
addresses himself to answer that too, but is dissuaded by his judicious
friends, and especially by Doctor Whitaker in a Letter, wherein are these among
other words concerning the Author: Veris ludit, sententiis dormitat, and plane
indignus est, qui a quopiam docto refutetur.

11. In his ten years Government of Trinity College, Doctor Whitgift bred many
excellent Scholars (six whereof were in his time Bishops, and some great
Statesmen: he procured an Amendment of the Statutes of the University; and as
the causes he dealt in were always just, so his success was ever prosperous,
through his wisdom and stoutnesse. And yet that stoutnesse was so well tempered
and mingled with his other virtue of mildness and patience, that Mr. Hooker
made this true observation of him; He always governed with that moderation,
which uses by patience to suppress boldness, and to make them conquer that
suffer: which well suited with his Motto, Vincit qui patitur.

12. An. 1577. He was chosen to be Bishop of Worcester, consecrated 21. Apr.
and having taken leave of the University and College by preaching of peace
publicly and privately, he was in June following attended on his way to
Worcester by a great Troup of the chiefest persons, full of sorrow for their
loss of so excellent a Governor. The Queen, to show her Bounty and Love,
forgave him his first fruits, and gave him the disposing of all the Prebends of
that Church during his Continuance there.

13. He found the Bishopric at his first coming much impaired by his
Predecessors, in long Leases and Grants: but that which most troubled him was
the letting of the Rent Corn of his two best Manors, Hollow and Grimley, the
chief upholding of the Bishops hospitality. To redeem the said Corn from a
powerful Tenant, the Bishop was contented, by way of Composition to give three
hundred pound out of his own purse to have the lease surrendered.

14. There was such mutual love between the Gentlemen and the Bishop, that they
delighted to converse much together. And if the Bishop understood of any jar or
discord, he ^ould send for both parties (under pretense of some service to be
done) and make them friends. If they were froward against persuasion, he would
interpose his Authority, as Vice President of Wales (which place her Majesty
bestowed on him shortly after he was made Bishop) and threaten the obstinate
with imprisonment.

15. He had a special care of his own family (as behoved him) and of his
Attendants near unto him; and to avoid all color of corruption would never
receive informations or petitions in his private Chamber but abroad, by the
Petitioners themselves; in so much that a Gentleman of his Bedchamber making
request he might have the delivery of Suitors Petitions, and indorse their
Answers, he grew into such dislike, that he presently discharged him.

16. Her Majesty out of her experience of his wise and prudent Government, was
pleased (upon complaint of the many discords and disorders in the two Cathedral
Churches of Lichfield and Hereford) to direct two Commissions unto him for the
visiting of the said Churches. He reformed them both, and ordained them
Statutes for their better Government.

17. Archbishop Grindal, labored him in most earnest manner to accept of the
Archbishopric, being himself contented to shake off his cares, and receive
from her Majesty some yearly Pension: which Bishop Whitgift utterly refused,
and in presence of the Queen her self besought pardon in not accepting thereof,
upon any condition whatsoever, in the life time of the other. Whereupon the
Queen was graciously pleased to say: As she had made him an Archbishop, so he
should dye an Archbishop: As he did shortly after.

18. He was advanced to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, Sept. 24. 1583. At
his first entrance he procured an Order for the abatement of his first fruits:
he recovered from the Queen a thousand Acres of Land, and by abating the fines
of his Impropriations increased the Pensions of Curates.

19. Her Majesty commanded him to be vigilent and careful for the reducing of
Non-Conformists, much strengthened by his Predecessors connivency. Wherein he
had much ado, many conflicts, and was opposed by some great Personages.
Concerning whom he thus writes: I trust those that love me indeed, will not so
lightly cast off their old friends for any of these new fangled and factious
Sectaries, whose fruits are to make division. -- If my honorable friends
should forsake me, when I think to deserve best and in a manner consume my self
to satisfy that which God, her Majesty and the Church requires of me, I
should be evil rewarded. Sed meliora spero. -- The slanderous tongues of this
uncharitable Sect, reported that I am become a Papist: but it proceeds from
their leudness, not any desert of mine, etc. But how is it possible that I
should perform the charge, which I have undertaken, after so long liberty, and
lack of Discipline, if a few persons, so meanly qualified (as most of these
factious Sectaries are) should be countenanced against the whole state of the
Clergy of greatest account both for learning, years, staidness, wisdom,
religion and honesty; and open breakers and impugners of the Law, young in
years, proud in conceit, contentious in disposition, should be maintained
against their Governors seeking to reduce them to order and obedience, etc.
The day will come, when all men's hearts shall be opened. In the mean time I will
depend upon him, who never fiaileth those, that put their trust in him.

20. An. 1587. Tho. Bromley (the then Lord Chancellor) dyed. Whereupon it
pleased her Majesty to discover her gracious inclination, to have made the
Archbishop Lord Chancellor of England. But he excusing himself in many
respects, that he was grown into years, and had the burden of all
Ecclesiastical businesses laid upon his back (which was as much as one man
could well undergo, considering the troubles with so many Sectaries that were
then-sprung up) desired to be spared; and besought her Highness to make choice
of Sir Christopher Hatton, who shortly after was made Lord Chancellor in the
Archbishops house at Croydon; thereby the rather to grace the Archbishop. His
advancement did much strengthen the Archbishop and his friends, and withal,
the Earl of Leicester and his designments came soon after to an end.

21. An. 1588. Upon the death of the Farl of Leicester, the Chancellorship of
Oxford being void, diverse of the Heads and others of the University made known
unto the Archbishop their desire to chufe him their Chancellor, although he
was a Cambridge man. To whom he returned this Answer; That he was already their
friend, whereof they might rest assured, and therefore advised them to make
choice of some other in near place about the Queen, that might assist him on
their behalf; and both at the Council Board, and other places of Justice, right
them many ways, both for the benefit of their University, and of their
Colleges. And therewithal recommended unto them Sir Christopher Hatton, being
sometime of that University. Whom accordingly they did choose for their
Chancellor, and whom the Archbishop ever found a great Assistant in bridling
and reforming the imtemperate humor of those Novelists, who by the Countenance
of some great personages were now grown to a strong head.

22. It was in their Assemblies Classical and Synodical concluded, that the
Discipline should, within a time limited, be put in practice, and erected all
in one day by the Ministers together with the people: whom those
Disciplinarians bragged ^o be already enflamed with zeal to lend so many
thousand hands, for the advancement of their Cause. In their public Sermons
and Exhorcations (as in their private Conventicles) they did alienate the
hearts of their Auditors from all obedience of the Ecclesiastical Magistrates.
As namely Mr. Cartwright: who also in his prayer before his Sermons, used thus
to say: Because they (meaning the Bishops) which ought to be pillars in the
Church, do band themselves against Christ and his truth; therefore, O Lord,
give us grace and power, all as one man, to set our selves against them. Which
words, by way of Emphasts, he would often repeat. And does not ^dall threaren,
that the Presbytery shall prevail, and come in by that way and means, as shall
make all their hearts to ache, that shall withstand or hinder the same.

23. Great was the temper and moderation of the good Archbishop in handling
these b^sines^es. In his time Brown was changed from his fancies, and
afterward obtained a Benefice called Achurch in North-Hamptonshire, where he
became a painful Preacher. He did not, though he might have blemished with her
Majesty the reputations of some in great place for favoring the Libellers and
Libels, which had stowage and vent in their Chambers. He procured at her
Majesty's hands both pardon and dismission for Mr. Cartwright and the rest out
of their troubles. For which Mr. Cartwright held himself much obliged, and in
his letters acknowledges his bond of most humble duty so much the straiter,
because his Graces favor proceeded from a frank disposition, without any
desert of his own.

24. The Archbishop has been heard to say, That if Mr. Cartwright had not so
far engaged himself, as he did, in the beginning, he thought verily, he would
in his later time have been drawn to Comformity. For, when he was freed from
his troubles he often repaired to the Archbishop, who used him kindly, and was
contented to tolerate his preaching in Warwick diverse years, upon his promise
that he would not impugn the laws, orders and government in this Church of
England, but persuade and procure, so much as he could, both publicly and
privately, the estimation and peace of the same. Which albeit he accordingly
performed, yet when her Majesty understood by others, that Mr. Cartwright did
preach again (though temperately, according to his promise made to the
Archbishop:) She would by no means endure his preaching any longer without
subscription; and grew not a little offended with the Archbishop for such
conniving at him. Not long after Mr. Cartwright dyed rich, as it was said, by
the benevolence and bounty of his followers.

25. An. 1592. After the death of Sir Christopher H^tton, Sir John Puckering
was made Lord Keeper, who showed himself a friend to the Church, to the
Archbishop and his proceedings, and acknowledged him a furtherer of his
Advancement. Sir Thomas Egerton Master of the Rolls succeeded him, 6. May.
1596. a lover of learning, and a most constant favourer of the Clergy and
Church Government established: as also a faithful loving friend to the
Archbishop in all his affairs: In so much as after his advancement to that
honor, and that the Earl of Essex and the Archbishop concurred together,
being also further strengthened by the friendship and love of Sir Robert Cecil
Principal Secretary, he began to be fully revived again. And her Majesty
finding in him a zealous care, and faithful performance of his duty, laid the
burden of the Church upon his shoulders, telling him: That, if any thing went
amiss, be it upon his soul and conscience to answer it: for she had rid her
hands, and looked that he should yield an account, on her behalf, to Almighty
God.

26. And now, though the Archbishop was in this singular favor and grace with
his Majesty, so that he did all in all for the managing of Clergy-affairs, and
disposing of Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical promotions; yet was he never
puffed up with pride, nor did any thing violently against any man. For he ever
observed this rule, That he would not wound, where he could not salve. So that
it was truly noted by the Earl of Salisbury a great Counselor, in the
Star Chamber when Pickering was there censured for libelling against him after
his death: That there was nothing more to be feared in his Government
(especially toward his later time) then his mildness and clemency. And some
younger spirits were of opinion that he was much to blame in that kind, and
sometimes would be bold to tell him: That he knew not his own strength with her
Majesty.

27. As you may perceive his clemency toward the irregular sort, so, toward
the conformable, he was carried with an exceeding tender respect and kindness.
He loved a learned Minister, virtuous and honest, with all his heart, framing
himself unto that rule of Aristotle, which directs a good Magistrate, to be
as careful in encouraging good men according to their merits, as in punishing
the bad according to the quality of their offenses. If he found a Scholar of
extraordinary gifts or hopes, that out of wants grew discontented, and inclined
to Popery or Puritanism (as most of their discontentments and way-wardnesse
proceeds thence) him would he gain both with supplies of money out of his
purse, and preferments of his own gift, or otherwise as opportunity served.

28. Neither was his Bounty wanting to men of learning and quality of foreign
Countries. Sundry times sent he money to Mr. Beza out of his own purse, besides
the general Collections for Geneva. Upon which occasion many letters passed
between them. In his letter Mar. 8. 1591. Beza confesses: That he never
intended to touch, or impugn the Ecclesiastical policy of this Church of
England, nor to exact of us to frame our selves or our Church to the pattern of
their Presbyterial Discipline, etc. That as Queen Elizabeth was the true
nursing Mother of the Church of Christ, so England and our English Church was
both the harbor of the Godly, and the preserver of all other Reformed
Churches. So far was he also from esteeming the Archbishop an Antichristian
Prelate, as he never omitted to term him, A most Reverend Father in Christ, and
his most honored good Lord. I wish that our Disciplinarians, who seem to
direct themselves by the rule of Geneva, would learn thus to Discipline their
tongues with him, and imitate his Modesty.

29. Although Monsieur Buse, a French Minister, who read weekly a Lecture in
Latin in his Chapel, by his French pronunciation and want of good delivery,
did somewhat blemish the goodness of the matter which he handled, yet the
Archbishops property ever was, to cherish and encourage him, and all others
that preached before him, and was never heard to give the Preacher distaste, but
rather would commend, or excuse him against other men's censures; saying, If he
were young, better experience would correct his defaults: and if he were in
years, he was in that respect to be borne withal: alleging for both, that
some would take exceptions sometimes, rather to satisfy their own too much
curiosity, then for any just cause of dislike in the Preacher.

30. As his continual endeavors were to reward those of best gifts, and to
encourage those of meaner; so (as often as Church and Stateaffairs gave him
leave) he was industrious in propounding wholesome Doctrine to the people, and
a worthy pattern of true Divinity and diligence unto all others of the Clergy.
When he was Bishop of Worcester (unless extraordinary businesses of the
Marches of Wales hindered him) he never failed to preach upon every Lord's Day;
many times riding five or six miles to a Parish Church, and after Sermon came
home to dinner. The like he did also when he was Archbishop, and lay at
Croydon, the Queen being in her Progress. No Sunday escaped him in Kent, where
the Gentlemen would exceedingly resort unto him: and he would often preach so
early in the morning in some Parish Church, both in Worcester and Canterbury,
that he came afterward to the Sermon in the Cathedral-Church.

31. His gift that way was excellent, as if you had heard Saint Augustine
himself, or some of the ancient Bishops in the primitive Church: his gesture
and action in the Pulpit so grave and decent, his words coming from him so
fatherly and comely, and though plainly (for the most part) and without
affectation, yet always elegantly, with special choice, and substantial
matter, full of good and sound learning; plentiful in Authorities out of
Scripture, Fathers and Schoolmen, so singularly applied, that he much affected
his Auditory therewith. And his pious life was answerable to his religious
Sentences. He never preached, but he first wrote his notes in Latin, and
afterward kept them during his life. For he would say, that whosoever took that
pains before his preaching, the older he waxed, the better he should discharge
that duty; but if he trusted only to his memory, his preaching in time would
become prattling.

32. When he was Bishop of Worcester, he did much good also by his often
conference and conventing of the Papists, whom he used with mild and temperate
speeches, and thereby got many of them to conform themselves, both Gentlemen
and others: whereby, as at his first coming he found many Recusants, so he left
very few at his coming thence. Immediately after he came to be Archbishop, he
convented before him the chiefest, and most learned Recusants throughout all
England: He also wrote letters to the Bishops, his brethren, within the
Province of Canterbury, to proceed with the Recusants by their Authority
Ecclesiastical, and censures of the Church, and called yearly upon them for an
account of their doings.

33. An. 1600. In the time of Essex's disloyalty, the Archbishop sent
threescore men well armed to show themselves before the Court: of whose arrival
Secretary Cecil, with the rest of the Lords of the Council were right glad, and
said He was a most worthy Prelate. They had speedily a leader appointed them,
and marched presently, and were the first that entered into the Gates of Essex
house: and in the first Court made good the place until the Earl yielded
himself, and was by the Lord Admiral brought to Lambeth house, where he
remained an hour or two, and was from thence conveyed to the Tower. The
Arch*bishop had like^ise in readiness forty Horsemen well appointed, and
expected directions from the Court, how to dispose of them. The next morning,
he sent a Gentleman to know how the Queen did, and how she rested all night. To
whom she made Answer, That she rested and slept the better for his care the day
before: but I beshrew his heart (said she) he would not believe this of Essex,
though I had often told him, it would, one day, thus come to pass. But indeed,
the Queens own recommendation of the Earl had wrought that good opinion of him
in the Archbishop.

An. 1602. Mar. 24. dyed Queen Elizabeth. And although the Arch bishop was much
dejected and grieved for the loss of his dear Sovereign and Mistress, who had
so highly advanced him: yet he with the rest of the Lords, repaired immediately
to Whitehall, and after two hours sitting in Council, about the penning of the
Proclamation, He principally (as his place required) with a cheerful
countenance, and the rest of the Lords in like sort, accompanying him, first at
the Court gate at Whitehall, with the applause and unspeakable comfort of all
the people, proclaimed her most rightful Successor, King James. Afterward in
like cheerful sort, the Archbishop with the rest of the Lords, trouped up to
the Cross in Cheapside, and there with like acclamation of the Lord Mayor and
Citizens proclaimed him again. The People and Citizens took great comfort in
the presence of the Archbishop, as if they nothing doubted, but that all went
well for the State in that Council, among whom He was present.

35. Besides the pains, which he took himself, many years, with a number of
worthy young Gentlemen in reading to them thrice a day, he took into his house,
besides his Chaplains, diverse of quality to instruct them in the Mathematics,
and other Lectures of sundry Arts and Languages; giving them good allowance and
preferments otherwise, as occasion was offered. And besides the many poor
Scholars, whom he kept in his house till he could provide for them, and prefer
them, he also maintained diverse in the University, at his own charge.

36. He kept also for the exercise of Military Discipline, a godly Armory, and
a fair Stable of great Horses: insomuch as he was able to arm at all points
both horse and foot, and diverse times had one hundred foot, and fifty horse of
his own servants mustered and trained: for which purpose he entertained
Captains, etc. His house, for the Lectures and Scholastic exercises therein
performed, might justly be accounted a little Academy, and in some respects
superior, etc. His Domestic Chaplains, both before and since his death,
attained to the chiefest honors and dignities in our Church and Commonwealth;
namely, Bancroft, Ravis, Barlow, etc.

37. He carried himself with great Resolution and courage in the determination
of Causes belonging to his proper Cognizance. When a Gentleman of good note
told him once, that the Lords of the Council were of another opinion then his
Grace: What tellest thou me (said the Archbishop) of the Lords of the Council?
I tell thee, they are in these Cases to be advised by us, and not we by them.
He would upon such occasions oftentimes say unto his private friends, toward
his later time: That two things did help much to make a man confident in good
causes: namely, Orbitas and Senectus: and (said he) they steed me both.

38. He gave Audience unto Suitors twice a day, and afforded them set hours for
their dispatch: at which time, he would so courteously entreat them, giving so
mild and gentle Answers, that even they that sped not in their suits, did
depart without coffeehouse. Wherein I may justly compare him unto Titus, qui
neminem unquam a se tristem dimisit. He often feasted the Clergy, Nobility, and
Gentry of his Diocese and Neighborhood: at Christmas, especially, his Gates
were always open, and his Hall set twice or thrice over with strangers. Every
year, he entertained the Queen at one of his houses (and some years twice or
thrice) who besides other favors, would bid him Farewell by the name of her
Black Husband, etc.

39. His Charity is testified by that notable Monument, his Hospital of the
blessed Trinity in Croydon, which he built very fair and Colledge-wise, for a
Warden and eight and twenty Brothers and Sisters. He builded also near unto it
a goodly free School, with a Schoolmasters house, allowing to the
Schoolmaster twenty pounds by year for ever. And when he had finished and done
the whole work, he found himself no worse in his estate, then when he first
began, which he ascribed unto the extraordinary blessing and goodness of God.
After which, when the French Ambassador (by whom he was reputed a peerlesse
Prelate for piety and learning,) enquiring what Books he had written, was told,
He had only published certain Books in the English tongue, in defense of the
Ecclesiastical Government, and that he had founded an Hospital and a School:
The Ambassador replied, Profecto Hospitale ad sublevandam paupertatem, and
Schola ad instruendam juventutem, sunt optimi libri quos Archiepiscopus
conscribere potuit.

30. 1603. Ap. 28. He was the principal Mourner at the funeral of Queen
Elizabeth; crowned and anointed King James Jul. 25. being visited by his
Majesty in his sickness, spoke to him earnestly in Latin, and by his last
words, pro ecclesia Dei, pro ecclesia ^ei, was conceived by the King to commend
unto his royal care (as he had done sundry times before) the Church of England.
Ob. ult. Feb. hora 8. pomerid. An. Dom. 1603. Aet. 73.

M. Richard Hooker. Author of the Books of ^cclesiasticall Politye.


V. Mr RICHARD HOOKER.
Out of his life, written by the R. R. Bishop of Exeter, Dr Gauden.
1. HE was born in the West, either in, or not far from the City of Exeter, An.
1550. (A Country that is, as Mr Cambden observes, ferax ingeniorum.) But with
what presages of his future eminency, there is not any notice to be had. One of
his Uncles, was Chamberlain of Exeter, in Mr Hookers Youth, and contributed
both care and cost toward his Education in the free School there. His Parents
need no other monument of honor, then this, that they were blessed with so
worthy a Son.

2. This excellent Person had a body and soul every way so adjusted and suited
to each other, that they were like meet pairs happily married together, and
living peaceably. His outward aspect and carriage was rather comely than
Cou^tly, his looks always grave and reserved: his soul more looking inward
then exspatiating at his eyes, or taking the outward prospect of his senses. He
went always, as if he meditated some great and good design: what he designed
he industriously acted, without affectation or ostentation.

3. His words were always sober and wellordered: not more in number, then
weight. He was like an hive full of honey, of a plain outside, and a narrow
access and orifice, but heavy, as having in him all manner of good literatute,
industriously gathered and aptly digested. His friends or Confidents were few,
but choice, as one that had no great opinion of himself, nor sought the
applause of others.

4. While he continued in Corpus Christi College, few men of any note in
either University, but promised more than he did, as to any great and public
undertaking: not that he wanted a public spirit, or excellent Abilities in
nature and education: but he was so locked up and reserved by a natural
modesty, and self-distrust, that he seemed to think it reward sufficient to
have the conscience of weldoing, and pleasure enough, to see himself daily
profit in his studies; and preferment even to envy, to enjoy virtue, though
never so cloistred and confined to his own breast.

5. Mr Hooker did not look upon the ease and ^uietnesse of a College life, as
the ultimate design of his studies: nor did he say with the Apostle, It is good
to be here, as in a settled Tabernacle; but gently embraced those small offers
of Ministerial Employments in the Country, which were made to him, by such as
thought them somewhat proportionate, if not to his worth and learning, yet to
that humble plainness and simplicity of his Genius and mode of living. His
first living was Boscomb in the West, to which the College presented him: his
next in Lincolnshire, called Drayton Beauchamp, An. 1584.

6. The ^oise, which some Non-Conformists made, kept this good Country Parson
awake; who, however he could bear with patience and silence the reproaches cast
upon himself as a private man, yet he thought it stupor to hear, without just
indignation, his Mother reviled by ungrateful children. Hence sprang that
excellent work of the Ecclesiastical Polity. Wherein, he has justly obtained
this Encomium from all intelligent Readers, That never any man undertook a
better cause (since the ancient conflicts of the Fathers) nor handled it with
an honester heart, an abler judgment, or an eloquenter style.

7. His first five Books he lived to publish: providence in time brought forth
those esteemed Abortive, the three last Books, with such lineaments of their
fathers virtue and vigor on them, that they may be easily and justly owned for
genuin: although they had not the last politure of their Parents hand: The
seventh book, by comparing the writing of it with other indisputable papers, or
known Manuscripts of Mr Hooker's, is undoubtedly his o^n hand throughout: The
eighth is written by another hand (as a Copy) but interlined in many places
with Mr Hooker's own characters, as owned by him.

8. An. 1592. He had the Dignities of a Prebend in Salisburie and the
Subdeanrie bestowed on him: and by the Queen he was preferred to be Master of
the Temple, i. e. the public preacher in that great Auditory, which requires
an excellent preacher, and where he may well deserve an honorable maintenance.
Mr Travers was popularly chosen by the Society to be Lecturer in the
afternoon, a man of esteemed piety and good learning, but a Nonconformist. In
comparison of whom, Mr Hooker was much undervalued by the vulgar hearers.

9. These two, although they differed in some matters, yet they corresponded in
the main of sound Doctrine and holy life: like generous rivals, they honored
and loved what they saw good in one another. Hence that very worthy speech of
Mr Travers, when being asked, what he thought of some vile aspersion cast upon
Mr Hooker; he answered, In truth, I take Mr Hooker to be a very holy man.

10. An. 1594. He was removed to his last station at Bishopsburn in Kent, and
was made also Prebend of Canterbury by the favor of the Archbishop Whitgift,
whose valiant and able Second he was in that Conflict, which he so notably
maintained against the Disciplinarian faction, or the unruly Non-conformists.

11. This was the period of Mr Hooker's promotion, much below indeed his merit,
but adequate, it seems, to the retiredness of his temper, and most suitable to
the policies of those times, where Church-Governors were to be rather active
than contemplative spirits. And from this something rising, but not very high
ground, did this excellent person take his ascent and rise to heaven, the only
preferment worthy of him, dying with great comfort at his parsonage in Kent
about 50 years old, An. 1599, says Mr Camden, An. 1603, says his Monument. He
was interred in the Chancel of Bishopsbourn, where a fair Marble and Alabaster
Monument (no way violated or deformed in all our late years of confusion) was
long after erected to his Memory, An. 1634. See the rest in the eloquent
Bishop, before the Eccl. Pol.

ADDITIONS.
Out of Dr W. Covel's Defense of Hooker, 1603.
12. A Letter (which is here answered) was published by certain Protestants (as
they term themselves) which I hear (how true I know not) is translated into
other tongues: This they presume has given that wound, to that reverend and
learned man, that it was not the least cause to procure his death. But it is
far otherwise: for he contemned it in his wisdom (as it was fit) and yet in his
humility would have answered it, if he had lived. -- But first of all he was
loath to entermeddle with so weak adversaries, thinking it unfit (as himself
said) that a man that has a long journie, should turn back to beat every
barking curre; and having taken it in hand, his urgent and greater affairs,
together with the want of strength, weakened with much labor, would not give
him time to see it finished. -- Death has taken from us a sweet friend, a wise
Counselor, and a strong Champion. Others are fit enough to live in the midst
of error, vanity, unthankfulness and deceit, but he was too good. p. 13.

13. As, profoundly to judge with sound variety of all learning, was common to
him with diverse others; so, to express what he conceived, in the eloquence of
a most pure style, was the felicity almost of himself alone. That honorable
Knight Sr Philip Sidney, gave a taste in an Argument of Recreation, how well
that style would befit an Argument of a graver Subject: which it may be is more
unpleasing in the taste of some, because the manner is learned, and the subject
is not agreeing to their humor. Doubtless the perfecting of a style, and
especially of our English style (which, in my opinion, refuses not the purest
ornaments of any language) has many mo helps, than those honorable places of
learning, the Universities can afford. And therefore in those things which they
conceive (and some of them conceive much) there are found in the Princes Court,
diverse most purely eloquent, whom even the best in the Universities may despair
to imitate. And (if I may speak without offense) I am fully persuaded, that Mr
Hookers style (if he had had less learning: a strange fault: for the weight of
his learning made it too heavy) had been incomparably the best that ever was
written in our Church. If our English story had been born to that ^appinesse,
ever to have been attired in such rich ornaments, she might worthily have bin
entertained in the best Courts that the World has. But all Countries know our
actions have been better done, then they have been told.

14. His Arguments, you say, are found in the Answer of that Reverend Father
unto Mr Cartwright. If there were no difference, yet the consent of their
Arguments were reason enough for you to allow Mr Hooker, seeing you h^ve given
your approbation of the works of that most Reverend Father: (whose worthiness,
no doubt, can receive little honor from your praise:) yet you know, that the
whole subject of Mr Hooker's first four Books, is an argument, as, full of
learning, so directly heretofore not handled by any, that I know. Concerning
those three Books of his, which from his own mouth I am informed that they were
finished, I know not in whose hands they are, nor whether the Church shall be
bettered by so excellent a work. For; as the Church might have been happy, if
he had lived to have written more, so she were not altogether so much harmed,
if she might but enjoy, what he has written. p. 150.

15. The government of his passions was in his own power, and he was able to
rule them. For he was truly of a mild spirit, and an humble heart; and
abounding in all other virtues. Yet he specially excelled in the grace of
Meekness. The Gravitie of his looks, was cleared by those that did sit or
converse with him; least he should be burdensome unto them; but a full laughter
few ever discovered in him. Some such our church had in all ages, a few now
alive, which are her ornament, if she can use them well, but more that are
dead, whom she ought to praise. For all these were honorable men in their
generations, etc.

* While this was under the Printers hand, I had the happiness to be in Dr
Pococks company, (sometimes Fellow of C. C. C.) and heard him, amongst other
good Discourse, tell a story of Hooker to this effect: That He, with some
others of the college, journeying on foot (as the manner then was) into their
country, by the way visited Bishop Jewel (sometime of the same Coll.) The
Bishop understanding some Scholars desired to see him, (or as we now speak more
courtly) to wait upon his Lordship; said, They should be welcome. It was added,
They were of Corpus Christi: They shall be the more welcome to me, said the
Bishop. To omit the rest of their entertainment, when the Scholars took their
leave, the Bishop gave them, every one a viaticum, some money to bear their
charges, and especially to Hooker: upon whom also, he pleasantly said, he would
bestow his own Nag, and brought forth, and gave him an old staff, which had
been his companion in his Travel. -- Te nunc habet iste secundum. Had I that
staff, I should esteem it no less than a very Sacred Relic.*

VI. Dr. LANCELOT ANDREWS Bishop of Winchester.
Out of his Funeral Sermon by John Bishop of Ely.
1. HE was born in the City of London, of honest and godly Parents; who besides
his breeding in learning, left him a sufficient Patrimony and inheritance,
which is descended to his heir, at Rawreth in Essex.

2. His life was well composed and ordered ever from his childhood. In his
tenderest years, he showed such readiness and sharpness of wit and capacity,
that his two first Masters (Mr. Ward and Mr. Mulcaster) contended for him, who
should have the honor of his breeding, that after became the honor of their
Schools, and all Learning.

3. Mr. Ward first obtained of his Parents, that he should not be an
Apprentice: and at length Mr. Mulcaster got him to Merchant Tailors School, The
right reverend Father in God Lancelot, Bishop of Winchester, and Praelate of
the Garter.
Vaughan sculp.

He accounted all time lost, that he spent not in his Studies. He out-stript
all his equals. His early rising at four in the morning procured him the
displeasure of the Vshers, because he called them up so soon.

4. Their pains and care he so carefully remembered all his life long, that he
studied always how to do good to them and theirs. In which gratefulness he
promoted Dr. Ward to the Parsonage of Waltham: and ever loved and honored his
Master Mulcaster during his life; and was a continual helper to him and his
Son. And as if he had made Mr. Mulcaster his Tutor or Supervisor, he placed his
picture over the door of his study: whereas in all the rest of the house you
could scantly see a picture.

5. From Mr. Mulcaster he went to Cambridge, to Pembroke Hall, and was there
admitted one of Dr. Wats Scholars: (a notable Grammarian, well entered in the
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew tongues, and likewise in Geometry, and some of the
Mathematics:) and after, a Fellow there, in which he passed over all Degrees
and places in such sort, that he ever seemed worthy of higher, and would in the
end attain the highest: for his abilities and virtues were mature and ripe for
greater employments.

6. He often lamented that he never could find a fit opportunity to show his
thankfulness to Dr. Wats, his Patron, nor to any of his Posterity. Yet he did
not utterly forget him in his will, having ordered that the two Fellowships to
be founded by him in Pembroke-Hall, should always be chosen and filled, out of
the Scholars of Dr. Wats Foundation (if they were found fit) of which himself
had been one.

7. Being in holy Orders, he attended the noble and zealous Henry Earl of
Huntington, President of York, and was employed by him in often preaching and
conference with Recusants, both of the Clergy and Laity: In which God so blessed
his endeavors that he converted many.

8. After this Mr. Secretary Walsingham takes notice of him, and obtained him
of the Earl, intending his preferment, in which he would never permit him to
take any Country-benefice, lest he and his great learning should be buried in a
Country-Church. His intent was to make him Reader of Controversies in
Cambridge, and for his maintenance he assigned to him (as I am informed) the
lease of the Parsonage of Alton in Hampshire: which after his death he returned
to his Lady; which she never knew or thought of.

9. After this he obtained the Vicaridge of S. Giles without Creeple-gate,
London, and a Prebend Residentiaries place in Paul's, and was chosen Master of
Pembroke-Hall, and afterward was advanced to the Deanery of Westminster: and all
this without any ambition or suite of his own, being promoted for his great
worth.

10. His knowledge in the learned and modern Tongues, to the number of fifteen
in all (as I am informed) was admirable: His Memory great: His Judgment
profound: His pains and Industry was infinite. In the works he wrote, he used
no man to read for him (as Bellarmine and others employed whole Colleges to
read and study for them:) he only used an Amanuensis, to transcribe that, which
himself had first written with his own hand.

11. As he was himself most learned, so he was a singular lover and encourager
of Learned men: which appears in his liberality and bounty to Mr. Casaubon,
Mr. Cluverius, Mr. Vossius, Mr. Grotius, Mr. Erpenius, whom he attempted with
the offer of a very large stipend out of his own purse to draw into England, to
have read and taught the Oriental Tongues here.

12. When the Bishoprics of Eli and Salisbury were void, and some things were
to be pared from them, some overture being made to him to take them, he refused
them utterly: He seemed to answer, Nolo episcopari, quia nolo alienare: I will
not be made a Bishop, because I will not alienate Bishops Lands.

13. After this, by some persuasion, he accepted of Chichester; yet with some
fear of the burden: and after that, of Eli: and last of this of Winchester.
(Whence God has translated him to Heaven.) In which he freed himself and his
Successor of a Pension of 400 per an. Which many of his Predecessors had paid.
He was Almoner, Dean of the Chapel, and a privy Counselor to King James, and
King Charles: In which he spoke and meddled little in Civil and temporal
Affairs, being out of his profession and element: but in causes of the Church
he spoke fully and home.

14. Wheresoever he lived, all places were bettered by his providence and
goodness. S. Giles was reduced by him to a Rate toward the better maintenance
of the place, and the house repaired. He found nothing in the Treasury in
Pembroke-Hall: he left it in ready money a thousand pound: being Prebend
Residentiary in Paul's, he built the house in Creed-Lane belonging to his
Prebend, and recovered it to the Church: he repaired the Dean's lodging. When
he came to Chichester he repaired the Palace there: at Eli, he spent on the
Bishops houses two thousand pound. Besides, he refused to make some Leases in
his last years, which might have been very beneficial to him, for the good of
his Successor. His reason was, Many are too ready to spoil Bishoprics, and few
enough to uphold them.

15. He was always a diligent and painful Preacher: most of his Solemn
Sermons he was most careful of, and exact; I dare say, few of them, but they
passed his hand and were thrice revised, before they were preached: and he ever
misliked often and loose preaching, without study of Antiquity: and he would be
bold with himself and say, When he preached twice a day at S. Giles, he prated
once.

16. After he came to have an Episcopal House with a Chapel, he kept monthly
Communions inviolably; yea though himself had received at the Court, the same
month. In which, his Carriage was not only decent and religious, but also
exemplary. He ever offered twice at the Altar, and so did every one of his
servants: to which purpose he gave them money, lest it should be burdensome to
them.

17. He was such an enemy to Simony, that he endured many Troubles by Quare
impedit, and Duplex querela. As for himself, he seldom gave a Benefice or
Preferment to him that petitioned for it: he rather sent for men of note, that
he thought wanted preferment, and gave them Prebends and Benefices, under Seal,
before they knew of it; as to Mr. Boys and Mr. Fuller.

18. Sacrilege, he did abhor, as one principal cause among many, of the
foreign and civil Wars in Christendom, and invasion of the Turk. And at home,
he wished some man would take the pains to collect, how many Families, that
were raised by the spoils of the Church are now vanished, and the place thereof
knows them no more.

19. He was a great Almes-giver. When he lived at St. Giles, his certain Alms
there was ten pound per an. paid quarterly by equal portions: and twelve pence
every Sunday he came to Church and five shillings at every Communion, etc. The
total of his pious and charitable works mentioned in his will, amounts to the
sum of six thousand three hundred twenty six pound: He gave in private Alms in
some few years before his death, to the sum of one thousand three hundred and
forty pound.

20. A great part of five hours every day did he spend in prayer and devotion
to God: and a good while before he sickned he spent all his time in prayer: and
in the time of his sickness he continually prayed, until it pleased God to
receive his blessed Soul to himself.

Lo here a Prelate, in whom Light, and Heat
Learning and Zeal, Meekness, and Courage met,
In Gods cause, and ye: Kings, our Brownrige was
A Boanerges, though a Barnabas.
W: Faithorne sculp.



VII. RALPH BROVNRIG Bishop of Exeter.
Out of Doctor Gauden's Sermon at his Funeral.
1. BIshop Brounrig was a person of that soundness of Judgment, of that
conspicuity for an unspotted life, of that unsuspected Integrity, that his life
was virtutism norma (as St. Jerome of Nepotian) Ita in singulis virtutibus
eminebat, quasi caeteras non habuisset: so eminent in every good and perfect
gift, as if he had had but one only. I never heard of any thing said by him,
which a wise and good man would have wished unsaid or undone; yet I had the
happiness to know him above thirty years.

2. The spring of this so fair, so deep, so clear, so noble a stream of
Learning, Piety and Wisdom, was at Ipswich, a Town of good note in Suffolk:
where he was born An. 1592. His parents of Merchantly condition, of worthy
reputation, and of very Christian Conversation. When he was not many weeks old,
God took away his earthly Father, that himself might have the more tender care
of the Orphan. By the prudence of his pious Mother, his Youth and first years
of reason were carefully improved for his breeding in all good Learning.

3. He was sent in his fourteenth year to Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge. There,
his Modesty, Pregnancy and Piety soon invited preferment. He was first made
Scholar of the House, and after Fellow, a little sooner then either his years
or standing in rigor of Statute permitted: but the College was impatient not
to make sure of him, by grafting him firmly into that Society, which had been
famous for many excellent men, but for none more then Brounrig.

4. When King James (that most learned Prince) was pleased to honor the
University of Cambridge by his presence, and to make Exercises of Scholars the
best part of his Entertainment, this person (then a young man) was one of those
who were chosen by the University to adorn that Reception of the King. The part
he performed was Jocoserious (of praevaricator) a mixture of Philosophy with
Wit and Oratory. This he discharged, to the admiration more then the mirth of
the King, and the other learned Auditors: who rejoiced to see such a luxuriancy
of Wit was consistent with innocence; that jesting was confined to convenience,
and Mirth married with that Modesty which became the Muses.

5. Among his learned and accurate performances in public, I cannot but
observe, that when he took the Degree of B. D. the Text upon which he chose to
preach his Latin Sermon was prophetic and preparatory to his after sufferings:
Phil. 1. 29. Vobis autem datum, etc. To you it is given on the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. Which
eloquent and pious Sermon he afterward was to fulfill indeed. Quod docuit
verbo, firmavit exemplo: He made his Doctrine good by his practice, taking up
the cross of Christ and following him.

6. He was preferred to be Prebend of the Collegiate Church of Eli, by the
favor and love of the then Bishop of that Seat, Doctor Felton, a very holy and
good man. He had also a good living at Barlow, not far from Cambridge, a
Country Village; where he condiscended in his preaching and catechizing to
ordinary capacities: (He often deplored the disuse and want of Catechizing:)
After that, this great Lamp was set and shined in a Sphere more proper and
proportionate, being chosen Master of Katharine Hall. Here, it was wonderful
to see, how the Buildings, the Revenues, the Students and the studiousness of
that place increased, by the care, counsel, prudence, diligence and Fame of
Doctor Brounrig; who had such an eye to all, that he oversaw none, frequenting
the Studies, and examining even younger ^cholars, that they might be encouraged
in Learning and Piety.

7. He kept up very much, as good Learning and good Manners, so the honor of
Orthodox Divinity, and orderly Conformity: He kept to the Doctrine, Worship,
Devotion, and Government in the Church of England: Which, he would say, he
liked better and better, as he grew older. If any, out of scruple or
tenderness of Conscience, was less satisfied with some things, no man had a
more tender heart, or a gentler hand to heal them. He would convince, though he
did not convert Gainsayers; and if he could not persuade them, yet he would
pity and pray for them.

8. He could endure differences among learned and godly men, in opinions,
especially sublime and obscure, without distance in affection. He thought that
Scripture it self was in some points left unto us less clear and positive,
that Christians might have wherewith to exercise both Humility in themselves,
and Charity toward others. He very much venerated the first worthy Reformers
of Religion at home and abroad: yet was he not so addicted to any one Master,
as not freely to use his own great and mature Judgment. He hoped every good Man
had his Retractations, either actual or intentional; though all had no time to
write them, as Saint Austin did. He had the greatest Antipathy against those
unquiet and pragmatick Spirits, which affect endless Controversies, Varieties
and Novelties in Religion, to carry on a party, and under that skreen of
Religion to advance their private Interests and politic Designs.

9. For the Liturgy, though he needed a set form as little as any, yet he had a
particular great esteem of it: 1. For the honor and piety of its Martyrly
Composers: 2. For its excellent matter, and prudent Method: 3. For the good he
saw it did to all sober Christians: the want of which he saw was not supplied
by any Ministers private way of praying and preaching. Not, that the Liturgy is
unalterable: but he judged all such Alterations ought to be done by the public
spirit. As for Bishops, he was too learned a man to doubt, and too honest to
deny the universal Custom and practice of the Church of Christ, in all ages and
places for fifteen hundred years, according to the pattern (at least) received
from the Apostles: who, without doubt, followed, as they best knew, the mind of
Christ.

10. He was by the favor of King Charles, and to the great liking of all good
men made Bishop of Exeter, Anno 1641. Whereupon, a certain Gentleman told me;
He wondered Doctor Brounrig would be made a Bishop, whom he had heard sometime
declare his judgment against Episcopacy. Which, as I no way believed, so
relating it soon after to the Bishop, He with some passion replied; I never
thought, much less said, as that person has falsely averred. I thank God, I
took the office of a Bishop with a good Conscience, and so I hope by his Mercy
I shall both maintain and discharge it.

11. And however this excellent Bishop enjoyed not the benefit of the Kings
favor and munificence, as to his Bishopric, or any other preferment, after
the Troubles of the times; yet he was ever most unmovable in his royal respects
of fidelity, gratitude, love and obedience. Accordingly, when O. P. with some
show of respect to him, demanded his judgment in some public affairs, the
Bishop with his wonted Gravity and Freedom replied: My Lord, the best Counsel
I can give you, is that of our Savior, Render unto Caesar the things that be
Caesar's, and unto God the things that be Gods. With which free Answer O. P.
rested rather silenced then satisfied.

12. This Grave personage, when forced to retire, was useful to those that
were worthy of him, and knew how to value and use him, either as a Bishop, or
as a Divine, or a Counselor, or a Comforter, or a Friend. Among those, that
gave him a liberal and noble entertainment, Thomas Rich Esquire; of Sunning in
Bark-shire, deserves with honor to be thus registered, That he was the special
friend to Bishop Brounrig. Indeed none could be hospitable to him gratis: He
always paid largely for his entertainments by his many excellent Discourses.

13. He was always, when in health, as cheerful (as far as the Tragedies of
the Times gave leave) as one that had the continual feast of a good Conscience;
and as content, as if he had had a Lords estate. All diminutions and
indignities, which some men put upon so worthy and venerable a person, he
digested into patience and prayers. Thus he was in some degree conformable to
the primitive Bishops, which were poor and persecuted, yea to the great Bishop
of our Souls, Who for our sakes made himself of no reputation.

14. About a year before he dyed, he was invited with much respect and civility
to the Honorable Societies of both Temples, to bless them, as with his
constant Residence, so with his Fatherly Instructions and Prayers. To show the
Reality of their love and value to his Lordship, they not only allowed an
annual honorary Recompense to express their Thanks, but they provided handsome
Lodgings, and furnished them with all things necessary, convenient and comely
for a person of his worth. Such as could hear him preach rejoiced at his
gracious words: such as for the crowd could not come nigh enough to hear him,
had pleasure to stay and behold him, conceiving they saw a Sermon in his looks,
and were bettered by the venerable Aspect of so worthy a person.

15. God was pleased to exercise him with bodily pains, indispositions and
distempers, sometimes with sharp fits of the Stone; but under all these God
supported him with his Grace, and spirit, as always humble, devout and pious,
so for the most part sociable, ferene and cheerful, till he had lived to his
sixty seventh year. He had more frequent Infirmities, as gentle monitors, a
little before his death, of which he would speak to my self and others, as one
that by dying daily was well acquainted with death: and would say, That it was
a very cheap time now to die: there being so little temptation to desire life,
and so many to welcome death: since he had lived to see no King in the State,
no Bishop in the Church, no Peer in Parliament worthy of that name. He only
hoped and prayed that God would favor him so far with an (...), as to let him
die without pain: as indeed he did. For after his spirits were in ten days
decayed and wasted, he slumbred much, yet had vigilant Intervals; at which
times he gave himself to prayer and meditation and holy Discourses: And being
full of the Grace and peace of God, and confirmed in it by the Absolution of
the Church (which belongs to all that dye in the true faith, and blessed hope
of penitent sinners) he placidly rendered his holy, devout and precious Soul to
God that gave it, Dec. 7. 1659. vid. fin.

16. His Body for stature and figure was somewhat taller and bigger then
ordinary, yet very comely. No man ever became the Preachers Pulpit, or the
Doctors Chair, or the Episcopal Seat (it was called of old Thronus Episcopalis)
better then he did; carrying before him such an unaffected State and grandeur,
such a benign gravity, and a kind of smiling Severity, that one might see much
in him to be reverenced, and more to be loved: yet what was venerable in him
was very amiable, and what was amiable was very venerable.

17. If you please to add to your former favors (while he lived amongst you)
this last, of giving order and leave to adorn your Chapel with any Monument
for him, you need be at no more cost, then to inscribe, on a plain Stone, the
name of BISHOP BROUNRIG: This will make that Stone Marble enough, and your
Chapel a Mausoleum.

Naz. Orat. 23. (...).

VIII. Mr THO. GATAKER.
Out of the Narrative annexed to his Funeral Sermon.
1. HE was a branch of an ancient Family, so firmly by Gods providence planted
in Shropshire, that the stock has continued in the same House, carrying the
name of its owner, and known by the title of Gatacre-hall, by an uninterrupted
succession from the time of K. Edward the Confessor.

2. His Father was household Chaplain to Robert Earl of Leicester, and Pastor of
S. Edmunds in Lumbardstreet London. In that parsonage-house, by his Wife
Margarit, being of an honest Family of the Pigots in Hertfordshire, among other
children, he had this Son Thomas, born Septem. 4. 1574.

3. In his childhood, he was so addicted to learning, that he needed a bridle
rather than a spur. This love of learning joined with an admirable capacity, a
nimble wit and vast memory, adorned with sober manners, advanced him from the
Grammar School to the University, (where he was by his father placed in St
John's College, in Cambridge) in the 15 year of his Age, 1590.

4. Here, not from mere favor, but from merit (upon proof of his learning) he
was chosen Scholar of that worthy Society: wherein he continued his studies
with unwearyed diligence and happy success, till with abilities answerable to
his Degree, he commenced Master of Arts.

5. Take for an instance of his Industry this: That he was a constant Auditor
of that eminent light of learning Mr Jo. Boys: who read a Greek Lecture in his
bed to certain young students, that preferred antelucana studia before their
rest and ease. The Notes whereof he kept as a Treasure, and being visited by Mr
Boys many years after, he produced them to the no small joy of the good old
man, who professed himself made some years younger by that entertainment.

6. Such esteem he was of in the University, that he was chosen to be Fellow of
Sidney College, while it was in building. Mean while, he retired to a
Gentleman's house in Essex, where he expounded some part of Scripture every
morning. At which exercise, Dr Stern, suffragan of Colchester, at a time
happening to be present, and approving his endowments, exhorted Mr Gataker to
take holy Orders. But he well weighed the burden of that Calling, and modestly
judging of his own Abilities, deferred the matter, till by the advice of Mr
Alvey, formerly his Tutor, and by a second instance of the Doctor, he assented
to be Ordained by the said Suffragan.

7. Sidney Coll: being finished, he betook himself to his station there, and
was happy in seasoning Young Students with principles of piety and learning. He
was also a partner to some other charitable Divines, in a pious Design of
preaching in places adjacent to the University, where need was. And for half a
year he preached at Everton every Lords day.

8. After this, he removed from Cambridge, to Sr William Cooks Family, then
resident in London, where he made a more public discovery of his Ministerial
gifts, and was invited to the Lecturers place in Lincolns Inn. But he,
according to his usual Modesty declined it, till Dr Mountague, Mr of Sidney
Coll. then in London, with an intention to call Mr Gataker back to the College
to read the Hebrew Lecture, laying that aside, encouraged him against his own
diffidence, and with his Authority and Arguments wrought him at last to an
Assent.

9. At Lincolns Inn he spent ten years to the advancement of piety: and in the
Vacations resided and preached in the Family of Sir William Cook; to whose Lady
he was near in blood: and so dear to both, that in consideration of his pains
freely taken, they settled upon Mr Gataker an Annuity of twenty pounds. This he
enjoyed some few years, but after (for some reasons) generously remitted unto
the Heir of that Family, forbearing to use the right he had, and forbidding his
Executour to claim any Arrears of that Annuity.

10. An. 1611. being called to the Rectory of Redrith in Surrey, commending his
former charge to the Grace of God, he betook himself to the sole attendance on
that Flock of which God had now made him Overseer. His Industry in discharge
thereof was constant and great, notwithstanding an almost perpetual headache,
wherewith God had exercised him from his very youth. To the work of his
preaching on the Lords day, he added a weekly Catechetical Lecture on Friday in
the Evening, which he continued, accurately and methodically, till he had gone
through the whole body of Divinity, and gave it over when he observed his
parishoners grown to a neglect his of free labors in thatkind. Solent
ultroneae putere merces. Hieron.

11. An. 1620. Having a justifiable curiosity to see our neighbor Church in
the United Provinces, and something of the other Provinces in Belgium, he took
the advantage of the Truce then between the Spaniard and the Hollander, for a
free passage between both Countries. In this travel he showed himself a good
preacher to the English Church at Middleburgh, and a good Disputant to the
English Papists in Flanders. God prospered his journey; and within a month,
having viewed the most considerable places in the Low Countries, he returned
safe.

12. An. 1643. Being scarce recovered from a violent fit of the Colic, he was
called into the Assembly of Divines: where his modest and peaceable behavior
was remarkable. During his attendance there, the Mastership of Trinity Col. in
Cambridge, the greatest preferment in that University, was offered him. But this
good man (though often importuned by many friends to accept of the motion)
according to his accustomed Modesty refused to undertake that place of much
honor and advantage, pleading, together with his unworthiness, his old age
and weakness of body.

13. His Gifts of edification may be seen in his Works extant, viz. Of the
Nature and Use of Lots. A volum of Sermons in fol. De Novi Test. stylo
Dissertatio. Comment. in M. Anton. Imp. and many more. His Polite literature
was much esteemed by learned men abroad, Salmasius and others, with whom he
held correspondence: And the exercise of it, with condescension to children,
has been admired at Tunbridge School in the Visitation of it. He had a
felicity to make his human literature (as it ought to be) subservient to
Religion.

14. His graces of Sanctification were also very eminent: His piety, in the
care of Gods ordidinances, and love to Gods House: His Charity, in his tender
sense of the Churches Afflictions, and abridging himself of his liberty in some
lawful things to please the weak: His Humility, in a low esteem of his
Abilities, and declining of dignities and preferments: His Meekness, in
conversing with the meanest, and descending to them in the way of Counsel and
satisfaction of their doubts: His patience, in bearing the afflictions on his
body; and his Faith, in commending his soul into the hands of God. Satur Vitae
tanquam conviva recessit. An. D. 1654. aet. 80.

(...).
-- He is gone,
Learnd in all here, where more is to be known.
DR. HENRY HAMMOND, From an Original Picture in the Hall of Magdalene College,
Oxford. Pub. 1 Nov. 1796. by E and S* Harding Pall Mall.


IX. Dr. H. HAMMOND.
Out of his life written by Dr. John Fell, Dean of Chapter Chapter
HE was born in Surrey, 18. Aug. 1605. the youngest son of Doctor John Hammond,
Physician to Prince Henry, and from him had the honor at the font to receive
his Christian name. Being yet in his long coats, he was sent to Eton School;
and at thirteen years old, to Magd. Coll. in Oxford. Being to proceed Master of
Arts, he was made Reader of the natural Philosophy Lecture there. An. 1629,
^eing twenty four years of age, he entered into holy orders. An. 1633, having
preached at Court for Dr. Frewen, he was preferred by the Earl of Leicester to
the Rectory of Pensehurst.*

1. In the discharge of his Ministerial function (at Pensehurst) he satisfied
not himself in diligent and constant preaching only (a performance wherein some
of late have phansied all Religion to consist) but much more conceived himself
obliged to the offering up the solemn daily Sacrifice of Prayer for his people,
administering the Sacraments, relieving the poor, keeping Hospitality,
reconciling of Differences amongst Neighbors, visiting the sick, catechizing
of the Youth.

2. As to the first of these, his Preaching, 'twas not at the rate of the
Times, an unpremeditated, undigested effusion of shallow and crude conceptions;
but a rational and just discourse, that was to teach the Priest as well as the
Lay-hearer. His Method was (which likewise he recommended to his Friends) after
every Sermon to resolve upon the ensuing Subject; that being done, to pursue
the course of study which he was then in hand with, reserving the close of the
week for the provision for the next Lord's Day. Whereby not only a constant
progress was made in Science, but materials unawares were gaind unto the
immediate future work: for, he said, be the Subject treated of never so
distant, somewhat will infallibly fall in conducible unto the present purpose.

3. The offices of Prayer he had in his Church, not only upon the Sundays or
Festivals and their Eves, as also Wednesdayes and Fridayes, according to the
appointment of the Rubric (which strict duty and ministration, when it is
examined to the bottom, will prove the greatest objection against the Liturgy)
but every day in the week, and twice on Saturdays and Holy Day Eves: For his
assistance wherein he kept a Curate, and allowed him a comfortable Salary. And
at those Devotions he took order that his Family should give diligent and
exemplary attendance: which was the easilier performed, it being guided by his
Mother, a woman of ancient virtue, and one to whom he paid a more then filial
obedience.

4. As to the Administration of the Sacrament, he reduced it to an Imitation,
though a distant one, of Primitive frequency, to once a month, and therewith
its anciently inseparable Appendant, the Offertory: wherein his Instruction and
happily insinuating Example so far prevailed that there was thenceforth little
need of ever making any tax for the poor. Nay (if the report of a sober person
born and bred up in that Parish be to be believed) in short time a stock was
raised to be always ready for the apprentising of young Children, whose
Parents condition made the provision for them an equal Charity to both the
Child and Parent. And after this there yet remained a superplusage for the
assistance of the neighbor Parishes.

5. For the Relief of the poor, besides the forementioned expedient (wherein
others were sharers with him) unto his private Charity, the dedicating the
Tenth of all Receipts, and the daily Alms given at the door, he constantly set
apart over and above, every week, a certain rate in money. Yet farther, an other
Art of Charity he had, the selling Corn to his poor Neighbors at a rate below
the Market-price: which, (though, as he said, he had reason to do, gaining
thereby the charge of portage) was a great benefit to them, who, besides the
abatement of price and (possibly) forbearance, saved thereby a days work.

6. He that was thus liberal to the necessitous poor, was no less hospitable
to those of better quality: and as at other times he frequently invited his
Neighbors to his Table, so more especially on Sundays, which seldom past at
any time without bringing some of them his guests: but here beyond the weekly
treatments, the Christmas Festival had a peculiar allowance to support it. He
knew well how much the Application at the Table enforced the Doctrines of the
Pulpit, and how subservient the endearing of his Person was to the recommending
his instructions, how far upon these motives our Savior thought fit to eat
with Publicans and Sinners, and how effectual the loaves were to the procuring
of Disciples.

7. As by public admonition he most diligently instilled that great
fundamental doctrine of Peace and Love, so did he likewise in his private
address and conversation, being never at peace in himself till he had procured
it among his Neighbors; wherein God so blessed him, that he not only attained
his purpose of uniting distant parties unto each other, but, contrary to the
usual fate of reconcilers, gained them to himself: there having been no person
of his function any where better beloved then he when present, or lamented more
when absent, by his flock. Of which tender and very filial Affection, in stead
of more, we may take two instances: the one, that he being driven away, and his
books plundered, one of his Neighbors bought them in his behalf, and preserved
them till the end of the War: the other, that during his abode at Pensehurst he
never had any vexatious Law-dispute about his dues, but had his Tithes fully
paid, and not of the most refuse parts, but generally the very best.

8. Though he judged the time of sickness an improper season for the great
work of Repentance, yet he esteemed it a most useful Preparative, the voice of
God himself exhorting to it: and therefore not only when desired made his
Visits to all such as stood in need of those his charities, but prevented their
requests by early and frequent coming to them. And this he was so careful of*
that after his remove from Pensehurst, being at Oxford, and hearing of the
Sickness of one of his Parishioners, he from thence sent to him those
Instructions which he judged useful in that Exigent, and which he could not
give at nearer distance.

9. For the Institution of Youth in the Rudiments of piety, his Custom was,
during the warmer season of the year, to spend an hour before Evening prayer in
Catechizing, whereat the Parents and older sort were wont to be present, and
from whence (as he with comfort was used to say) they reaped more benefit then
from his S^rmons. Where it may not be superfluous to observe that he introduced
no new form of Catechism, but adher*d to that of the Church, rendering it fully
intelligible to the meanest capacities by his Explanations. (It may be useful
withal to advert, that if in those times Catechetical Institution were very
seasonable, 'twill now be much more; when Principles have been exchanged for
dreams of words and notions.) Besides all this, that there might be no
imaginable assistance wanting, he took care for the providing an able
Schoolmaster in the Parish, which he continued during the whole time of his
abode.

10. And as he thus labored in the spiritual building up of Souls, he was not
negligent of the material Fabric committed to his trust: but repaired with a
very great expense (the annual charge of 100 l.) his Parsonage house; til from
an incommodious ruin he had renderd it a fair and pleasant dwelling, with the
adherent conveniences of Gardens and Orchards.

11. While he was thus busy on his Charge, etc. But I earnestly desire the
Reader to peruse the whole story of this excellent Divine excellently written
by the Venerable Dean. Only, I will take leave to add here some of his Rules
and Sayings.

12. He scarcely recommended any thing in his advices with that concern and
vigor, as, To be furnished always with somewhat to do. This he proposed as the
best expedient both for innocence and pleasure, assuring, That no burden is
more heavy, or temptation more dangerous, then to have Time ly on ones hand:
adding, The idle man's brain is the Devils shop.

13. He professed, He had no such way of enjoying any thing, as by reflection
from the person whom he loved: so that his friends being happy was the readiest
way to make him so.

14. The principal thing he contracted for in Friendship was a free use of
mutual Admonition: which he extended even to undecencies, saying, It was a poor
design of Friendship to keep the Person he admitted to his breast only from
being scandalous; as if the Physician should endeavor only to secure his
patient from the plague. And this he gave as a general rule, and enforced by
his Example, Never to reprove in Anger, or the least appearance of it.

15. He would say, He delighted to be loved, not reverenced; thinking that
where there was much of the later, there could not be enough of the former;
somewhat of restraint and distance attending on the one, which was not well
consistent with the perfect freedom requisite to the other.

16. To the performances of friendship he ha^ed all mercenary returns, whereof
he was so jealous, as hardly to leave place for gratitude, Love, he said, was
built upon the union and similitude of minds, and not the bribery of gifts and
benefits. So generous was he herein, that he has often professed, He admitted
retributions of good turns, yet not so much on any score, as that his friend
might have the pleasure of being kind.

17. When any one had sent him a slight present of Apples or the like, his
Reward would usually much exceed the value; and he would be so well pleased to
have such an occasion of giving to a servant, saying, Alas, poor Soul, I
warrant he is glad of this little matter, that this seemed a part of the
senders courtesy.

18. He was used to say, That 'twas a most unreasonable and unchristian thing
to despise any one for his poverty. And, That 'twas one of the greatest
sensualities in the world, to Give: Upon which consideration he often took
occasion to magnify the exceeding Indulgence of God, that had annexed future
rewards to that which was so amply its own Recompense.

19. He gave this for a Rule to those of his friends that were of estate and
quality, To treat their poor Neighbors with such a cheerfulness, that they
may be glad to have met with them.

20. To show how high a value he put on the Souls of men, he often broke out
into words of this effect, which had with them still in the delivery an
extraordinary vehemence, O what a glorious thing, how rich a prize for the
expense of a man's whole life were it, to be the instrument of rescuing any one
Soul!

20. His Motto of instruction to young persons was, Principiis obsta, and, Hoc
age; to withstand the overtures of ill, and be intent and serious in good: to
which he joined a third advice, To be furnished with a Friend.

21. For serenity and calm of Mind, he laid this Rule before him, which proved
of great use, Never to trouble himself with the foresight of future events,
being resolved of our Saviors Maxim, Sufficient to the day is the evil
thereof.

21. If he saw any perplexed about the manage of their difficult affairs, he was
wont to ask them, When they would begin to trust God, or permit him to govern
the World. And to himself and friends he was wont solemnly to give this
mandate, Quod sis esse velis, nihilque malis; in his English, to rather
nothing: Not only to be content or acquiesce* but be resolved the present
estate to be the very best that could be wished or phansied.

22. He looked upon the Kings return with pity and compassion, as bringing him
to that uneasy, if not insuperable Task of ruling and reforming a licentious
people. It will be a blessing to his people, but unto him can not be so, but
only on this score, by having opportunities through glorious self-denyals to do
good.

23. When the Change approached, discoursing of occurrents, he broke forth into
these words, I must confess, I never saw that time in all my life, wherein I
could so cheerfully say my Nunc dimittis, as now. Indeed I do dread prosperity,
I do really dread it. For the little good I am now able to do, I can do it with
deliberation and advice: but if it please God I should live and be called to
any higher office in the Church, I must then do many things in a hurry, and
shall not have time to consult with others, and I sufficiently apprehend the
danger of relying on my own judgment.

24. In his last sickness he comforted his sad friends, saying, He should
leave them in God's hands, who could supply abundantly all the assistance they
could either expect or desire from him; and who would so provide, that they
should not find his removal any loss.

25. When in his sharp agonies his friends betook themselves to their
extemporary ejaculations, he composed those irregularities by saying, Let us
call on God in the Voice of his Church.

26. At the Communion, hearing those words of the Apostle, Jesus Christ came
into the World to save sinners, he pathetically rejoined, Of whom I am chief.

23. To the good Lady of the house, who asked him, what he would chiefly
commend to her, he briefly answered, Uniform Obedience.

28. A few minutes before his death, he breathed out those words which best
became his Christian life, Lord make have.

Ob. Apr. 25. 1660.

X. Dr MILES SMITH. Bishop of Gloc.
Out of the Preface before his Sermons, published by Mr Jo. Stephens.
1. FOr the manner of his life and the constant tenor of it, this I can
affirm, that therein he showed forth the fruits of the Spirit, such as the
Apostle speaks of, Love, Joy, Peace, etc. Add hereunto that sincerity and
godly pureness that appeared in all his actions, striving not so much to seem,
as verily and indeed to be a pattern of gracious deportment, and it may be said
of him, as our Savior testifies of Nathaniel, Behold an Israelite in whom was
no guile.

2. He always showed himself most ready to minister to the necessity of the
indigent and needy, having a tender touch even naturally that way. Yearly
pensions he allowed whilst he lived, as his great charge would give him leave,
to be distributed to the poor, as of the place where he was Bishop, so in other
places where he had means; besides the daily relief they of the City found at
his gates. Exhibition of maintenance he continued to diverse poor Scholars in
the University of Oxford, whose parents were not able to sustain that charge;
and was ever forward in succouring and relieving poor strangers and travelers
that came unto him. Whether his Alms were great or small, they were always
mixed with alacrity and cheerfulness.

3. And as he was pitiful to the poor, so very charitable toward all, and apt
to forgive wrongs and injuries done unto him, hardly to be digested in the
stomach of a carnal man. The virtuous and religious he always praised and
encouraged, using instruction and rebuke to the contrary minded; not in the
voice of thunder, in an over zealous strain, but soft words of meekness, the
most likely, if not the only winning way. And in matter of doubt, the byas of
his good inclination still hanged (as every good man's should do) toward the
better sense. (...). Naz.

4. His piety must not be forgotten, his care of Gods true worship and zeal
unto his house. It was his joy to see a company of well-devoted people to meet
together to praise God; and to that end, he did not only continue a Lecture
(begun in his predecessors time) to be read in the Cathedral weekly on the
Tuesday, by the gravest Orthodox and Conformable Preachers within his Dioces,
from the time of his entrance into that See, till he dyed; being full twelve
years and upward: but did usually present himself in the assembly at divine
prayers and Sermons, both on the Lords Day and Lecture days, if urgency of
occasions hindered not. And certainly there is nothing that ties the hearts of
the people so close unto their guides and governors, and makes them so
faithful each to other, as a joint harmony and consent therein. Hence he gained
from men a reverend esteem, he was honored and beloved of all sorts, and God,
I doubt not, in Christ, has given him to find the fruit of his holiness in
the fruition of his blessed presence.

5. Touching the things of this world, he carried himself as though he looked
not after them; never looking for any preferment that he had, before it was by
Gods providence cast upon him. Surely, the Bishopric of Gloc. was conferred
upon him unsought for, unlooked for, at the suit of the Archb. of Cant. That of
Naz. may be verified of him: (...).

6. And now for his sufficiency in learning, as therein I suppose he was
inferior to none, either for knowledge in Divinity, or skill in the Eastern
Tongues: So joining to the height of his knowledge the Humility of his mind,
for my part I must confess, that I never knew or heard of his match. Of his
exactness in those languages, this may be a sufficient testimony, that he was
not only thought worthy by King James of blessed memory, to be called to the
Translation of the Bible, but was one of the twelve by whom it was revised; and
at last it was referred to the final Examination of Bishop Bilson, and this our
Bishop: Viri eximii and ab initio in toto hoc opere versatissimi (Synod. Dord.)
who happily concluded that worthy labor. The work being finished, Bishop Smith
was commanded to write a Preface, and so he did, in the name of all the
Translators (the same that is now extant in our Church-Bible) the Original
whereof I have seen under his own hand.

7. Though he were so useful an instrument, so strong a helper in the former
work, as also the Sole-authour of this latter, the Preface: (a comely Gate to
so rich and glorious a City:) yet could I never hear that he did at any time
speak of either, with any attribution to himself more then to the rest. So that
as the Sun, the nearer it comes to the Zenith, the less shadow it causes; so
certainly the higher he mounted into the mysteries of Divine and Humane
knowledge, the lower and less he seemed to be in his own eyes (...). As Naz.
spoke of Athanasius.

8. And now concerning the course of his studies (wherein I would propose him
as a Pattern to be imitated by young students in our ^niversities) he constantly
applied himself from his youth (as they that were then acquainted with him
know) to the reading of ancient Classical Authors of the best note in their
own languages: Wherewith, as with the Neoterick, he was plentisully stored, and
lufted after no worldly things, so much as books: Nullius rei praeterquam
librorum avarus, was sometime his own speech merrily, but (as I persuade my
self) truly, for there was scarcely a book (in so great a number) to be found
in his Library, especially of the Ancients, that he had not read over, a capite
ad calcem, as has been observed by those that had the perusal of them since
his death.

9. He ran through the Greek and Latin Fathers, and judiciously noted them in
the margent, being sitted for that purpose by the dextrous use of his pen,
wherein he came not short even of P^ofes^ots themselves in that faculty. The
Rabbis also, so many as he had, with their Glosses and Commentaries, he read
and used in their own id^om of speech: and so conversant he was and ex^^^t in
the Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic, that he made them as familiar to him almost,
as his own native Tongue.

10. But for the Hebrew, this I can affirm from credible relation, that being
upon a time sent unto and requested (whilst he was a Residentiary in the
Cathedral Church of Hereford: which city was also honored with his birth) by
the then Dean of the same Church, upon special occasion to read the first
lesson at evening prayer there, he yielded thereunto; and having with him a
little Hebrew Bible (the same I suppose that he afterward used to his death)
of Plantins impression sine punctis; he delivered the Chapter there in the
English Tongue plainly and fully, to that learned and judicious Auditory: (Far
be from us any suspicion of Ostentation in him for that act, who never knew to
boast of himself, or any thing that he had, or any thing that he did.)

11. Stories of all times he knew, and for his rich and accomplished furniture
in that study, had this Elogium given him by a grave and learned Bishop, B.
King, to be a very walking Library. And he was so well acquainted with the site
of places, Topography, and observed so well the time when every thing of note
was done in those several places, that he has caused great Travelers and
Scholars falling into discourse with him, to depart away with admiration of his
skill.

Additions out of Mr. Priors Sermon at his Funeral.
12. His merit in the new Translation of the Bible, preferred him to this place
of Government in the Church. For, with Basilius Magnus, Non ex majoribus, sed
ex propria virtute nobilitatem duxit: He ennobled himself with his own worth
and virtue.

13. Two singular ornaments crowned him, which seldom meet in one man, Learning
and Humility. On a time (and many such I could tell you) a poor Minister
sending in to speak with him, abruptly he brake off a most serious discourse,
saying, But the Minister must not stay, lest we should seem to take state upon
us. Therein imitating the great Athanasius, being, (...). Nazianz.

14. When in his sickness, one hoped for his recovery, he gave the answer that
St. Ambrose gave to the Nobles of Milain, that desired him to pray for life:
Non ita inter vos vixi, ut pudeat ms vivere; nec timeo mori, quoniam dominum
bonuns habemus.

15. Not many hours before his departure (for non obiit sed abiit) I found him,
as me seemed, victorious upon some conflict (Quis sarctorum sine certamine
coronatur?) I drew near his bed, he reached for my hand and greezed it, saying,
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day. This occasioned something
about relyance on God by Faith: Yea, said he, I had fainted, unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. And again,
The mercies of the Lord are from generation to generation, on them that fear
him. Mercy brought in thoughts of Christ: Oh (says he, in the words of that
holy Martyr) none but Christ, none but Christ! Being told how pretiously the
Lord esteems the death of such: He replied, Right dear, right dear in the
sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints. Some prayers made for him upon
his desire, at conclusion, he said: Amen, I thank God: Amen, enough: Amen, I
thank God.

16. When he was leaving this life he looked on his daughter, and on the rest
of his children in the chamber present, and said: Christ bless you all. And
like that old Patriarch, he moved himself upon the bed, and cried, Christ Jesus
help, and so Christ took him, and conclamatum est. ^is soul is now at rest: his
Name is among the Worthies of our Church.

His Motto.
(...).

Ob. A. S. 1624. aet supra 70.

FINIS.
A Letter.
To fill up this void leaf, or rather to promote conformity, which is partly
the design of these Memorials, I take leave to translate hither out of the
Oxford-book, very worthy to be Reprinted,

A Letter of the Vice Chancellor and others the Heads of the University of
Cambridge, to the Vice Chancellor and others of the University of Oxford,
October. 7. 1603.

E Latino.

WHen ne^ly, and indeed very late, there came unto us a report of the Petition
for Reformation (forsooth) of the Church of England, offered to his Majesty
(as is pretended) by a thousand Ministers: though we found in it nothing new,
and what has been answered heretofore a thousand times; Yet, because they
boast of their number, that these Millenaries may know, if Saul has his
thousand, David in this cause will never want his ten thousand, we were
desirous (notwithstanding the work was altogether unworthy of it) to provide an
answer. Whilst we were meditating thereof; there is brought unto our hands,
that most Elegant answer of the University of Oxford, being a most rational and
brief confutation of all that had by those men so laboriously been framed and
feigned: upon sight whereof, nothing seemed to remain for us (whom in this best
of causes, the zeal and industry of our Brethren easily able to refute such
Adversaries, had prevented) but this, to add unto the weight of their Arguments
(because those men glory most in their multitudes) the number of our Suffrages.
This we did formerly (as it were divining) both foresee and provide for. For
when, after the death of our Excellent Queen Elizabeth, always the same and
most constant (a singular and incomparable example in a woman) in this best of
causes, those men did not so much deplore the loss of a most Religious
Princess, and the case of Religion it self (if not dying with her, yet at least
in very great hazard) as meditate, and every day attempt Innovations against
the new Kings approach: Our University very opportunely judged her aid to be
needful, and a decree to be made in a full and solemn Convocation: That,
whosoever shall in the University of Cambridge publicly oppose, in word or
writing or any other way, the Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England,
or any part thereof, by Law established; He shall be excluded from taking any
degree, and be suspended ipso facto from the degree he has taken. Which
decree, even by Unanimous consent of the whole House, voted and recorded
publicly, Jun. 9. 1603. we do now desire to publish to the whole World, that
all may be assured, what is the judgment, not of some Opiniasters in their
corners and Conventicles, but of almost all the Cantabrigians in open senate,
concerning that Discipline which we have not forced on us, but freely received
and entertained. Whose consent so fraternally and sweetly concurring with the
Oxford-answer, with Scripture, Fathers and Councils, with the decrees of our
Princes, our Laws and Parliaments; Away with those thousand Ministers, let them
go and answer at thousand Books of ours, already written and set forth for
their satisfaction, before they do so impudently obtrude their Crambe so often
boiled, upon so wise a King, and so excellently learned. Or if they would have
Suffrages rather to be numbered then weighed, let the poor Fellows, forsaken of
the Universities and Muses, bethink themselves, of how little account, what
nothings they are.

Thus we take our leave of our most dear Brehren in Christ; and, as we and our
University, beng united to you, both by similitude of studies and manners, are
most fitmly Yours; So we entreat you, always to continue your love to Us.

Camb. Oct. 7. 1603.

