(...) It helps a Stomach that is Weak, Cold, Weak, Cold Stomachs of hard
digestion, and (...).
and of Hard Digestion, and does greatly strengthen the same, Consumes corrupt
Phlegm, and helps concoction, being taken with White-Bread and Sugar, two or
three spoonfuls at a time. A double Linen cloth may be dipped in the warm
Spirit, and applied to the Cold and Weak Stomach, for it helps difficulty of
concoction, stops vomittings, and mitigates all pains, and Sobbings (or
Hickoughs) which proceed from a cold temper, or windy humor.

It is observable that weak and cold Stomachs are oftentimes oppressed after
moderate eating, and sometimes the strong, Surfeit
by some contrary meat, or ill Cookery, whence proceed Surfeirs, which if not
prevented, many times beget Fevers, and so death. Very large experience of
this Spirit, has been found in this case for many years; it never failing to
remove any such inconvenience from the Stomach, if timely used; for which
purpose, take One or Two Ounces, once in 6 hours, or 12 hours, until no more of
the undigested matter remains in the Stomach; which it commonly expels, at
first or second taking.

It is of great virtue in Diseases of the Intestines, Bowels.
for by means of its Diaphoretick quality, it dissipateth not only in the
Stomach, but also in the bowels all tough and clammy Phlegm, with other viscid,
thin, or serous humors.

It warmeth by its penetrating heat, the Entrals, Cholick.
made cold by drink, air, or other accidents; expels wind, and both inwardly
taken, and outwardly applied, it asswageth those vehement pains which arise
from the Colic, which Disease has been in a short time dissipated by this
means, in one, with whom it was familiar, and upon the least occasion bred.

It is of great profit in all Fluxes of the Bowels, Lienter. Diarhaea. Diseuter.
which are occasioned by the weakness of the retentive faculty of the Stomach,
and Intestines, proceeding for the most part from a cold and moist distemper,
therefore two or three spoonfuls of it may be given in Sugar, as often as shall
be needful, with a Tossed of Rye or Wheat bread, and let a double Linen cloth
be moistened in it, and applied warm to the Stomach and Bowels.

In the obstructions of the Mesentery, ^^^^ructions (...) Me^^^^ry, Liver and
Spleen.
Liver, and Spleen, from whence proceed the Scurvy, Yellow and Black Jaundice,
after the humors have been sufficiently carried away by proper Medicines, this
Spirit very fitly takes place, which opens the stoppages and crammings of the
Mesentery, Liver, Milt, and Gall, cuts and prepares the thickness of humors,
and by its penetrating virtues provokes Sweat,

In the Scurvy after purging and cutting Medicines, Scurvy.
the greatest hope of health is placed in evacuating the Serosities, by
sweating, for which purpose a quantity of this Spirit may be taken, according
to the Constitution, as often as need shall require.

In the Dropsy and Timpany, Dropsy.
when the Body is emptied by proper Medicines, as aforesaid, if the Liver be
not hot, nor the Urine red, this Spirit may be used with good success; two or
three spoonfuls, more or less in two or three ounces of the water of Elder
Flowers, and one ounce of the Syrrup of Elder berryes. Then in bed provoke
Sweat. Also two or three spoonfulls of the Spirit, may be taken alone, at any
time, with a Tossed made of white bread and sweetened with Sugar.

In the stoppage of the Monthly Terms, Terms stop^^^^.
after the body has been disburthened by some Purging Physic of that putrid
filth, which is occasioned by the obstruction, this Spirit is very useful,
which by its subtility passes through the whole body, and through the least
Vessels thereof, cutting and attenuating the grossness of the humors: it may
be taken the same time the Courses use to flow, one, two, or three spoonfuls in
White Wind, and Sugar, Mornings and Evenings.

In the Suffocation of the Matrix, Suffocation of the Matrix.
the Womb being first purged of the malignant and foetid humors, one or more
spoonfuls of this Spirit greatly avails, both out, and in time of the Fit;
for it powerfully discusses those cold, and poisonous vapors, evacuates by
Urine, vindicates the more noble Entrals from their infection, and restores
freer breathing.

Take of the Pith that is in the middle of the Elder-stick, Stone.
and of Juniper berries of each four ounces, which put together into a strong
glass bottle that will hold a pottle, pour thereon a quart of this Spirit, stop
it very close, and let it stand 7 days in a bath of warm water, or in the Sun,
at Summer; then dress it strongly, and keep it in a glass close stopped, The
use of this is excellent in breaking, and expelling the Stone, some spoonfuls
of it being taken in a glass of White Wind and Sugar, as often as there shall
be occasion, the Stomach and bowels, having by purging Medicines, been first
cleansed of the thick slimy Phlegm, and Tartarous humors,

The Gout is so stiff and stubborn a Disease, Gout.
that oftentimes it contemns the best prescriptions; wherefore to hinder the
increase of those serous humors which most commonly do occasion it, and also
to evacuate those which are already sprung up, Purging Medicines must be often
taken at the Spring and Fall; and sweating used once or twice a Month, after
the body has been treated with some convenient Purgative. The serous matter
gathered in the body, is easily discussed by sweat; and as soon as natural or
artificial sweat appears, there is great hopes of safety: for which purpose
take one ounce of this Spirit with ^ntimon. Diaphoret. and Hartshorn prepared
without burning, of each ten Grains, in a glass of good wine in the morning,
cover your self warm in your bed, and sweat after as long as may be convenient.
If it be taken a little before the Fit, it disappoints it.

It has been the common practice of some, for many years, as soon as any one is
taken suddenly sick, whether Children, or Persons of riper years, to give from
one spoonful of this Spirit to six spoonfuls, according to the age and
Constitution, and to cover them warm on their bed; which soon expells whatever
hurtful matter occasioned their sickness, although they have oftentimes
appeared to be affected with much violence.

THe Tarter Diet drink opens all obstructions in any part of the body, cleanses
and purifies the Blood, causes a fresh and lively habit of the body, procures a
cheerful frame of Spirit, corrects all evil humors, and effectually purges
Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, and waterish humors, from all parts. It frees the
head from what ever annoyeth it; quickens the senses; removes any humors which
affect the Sromach, Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, strengthening them
exceedingly: It is very available in Agues of all sorts, (the use of it has
oftentime cured Quartans) in the Hypocondriack Melancholy, Scurvy, Madness,
Jaundies, Green Sickness, Dropsy, Sciatica, Gout, pain in the Joints, Cholick,
Fluxes, the King's Evil, Rheumes, Coughs, Shortness of breath, Whites, Worms,
and Rickets. It cleanses the Reigns, Kidneys and Bladder, provokes Urine,
expels Wind, and by removing all superfluous humors, prevents whatsoever
diseases usually proceed from them, or may be occasioned by them.

It may be used by Men, Women, and Children, according to their several ages,
and its operation, from one spoonful to half a Pint, or more. For the
prevention of Diseases, take it at Spring and Fall, in the morning fasting, for
many days together: For the keeping off, and removing any distemper, take it
at any time, when cause shall be seen, whether it be Summer, or Winter. In
Quartan Agues, Scurvy, Dropsy, Hypocondriack Melancholy, and such lasting
diseases, it must be used fifteen or twenty days, and that either without any
intermission, or once every other day, or twice a Week, until the Humors be
overpow'red and the disease mastered. In very hot weather, it is good to avoid
whatsoever motion might occasion sweat, and in Extreme Cold to keep your self
by the fire, or if neither of these happen, you may do as at other times. He
that will eat a dish of Broth, drink a draught of Whey, warm Posset, Beer or
Ale, 2 hours after taking the Dyet-drink, may use which is best liking to him,
and he that regards neither, may forbear: it is good to eat some warm Broth,
and Meat for dinner.

Take a Firken that will hold between three and four Wine Gallons, fill it with
good Beer from the Kyve, well hopped, and boiled, so as it may keep long; when
it has done working, put into it a thin linen Bag, and let the mouth thereof
hang out of the Bung, until all the Ingredients in the Paper are put in; then
tie it fast, and let it lie in the Firkin, stopping it close, the string being
left out of the Bung, when it is a Fortnight old begin to use it, which, before
it grows low and flat, bottle, and keep in a cold place for use: The Firkin may
be filled again with good Beer from the Kyve, and when it is clear, and fit to
drink, may be used any time upon an empty Stomach, what quantity shall be seen
convenient.

Tinctura Mirabilis Purges all Viscous and Clammy Humors without trouble, as
also Choler Phlegm, and Melancholy; is an Excellent Medicine in the Dropsy, in
all Diseases of the Brain, Nerves, Joints, Breast and Lungs; and therefore is
to be exhibited to Persons affected with Fluxes of Rhume, Old Coughs, the Gout,
Colic, Scurvy, the Jaundies, Agues of all sorts, Apoplexy, Epilepsy, and
Vertigo. It is said to be a perfect cure of the Gonorhaea, the use of it being
continued until the party is well; it is likewise of great benefit, and very
helpful in all accidents of Venereal diseases: the Dose is three spoonfuls,
but it may be varied according to the strength and constitution of the Patient,
from one spoonful to four. Take it in the morning fasting, in a glass of Sack,
or strong Beer; or by it self, drinking a glass of either, as soon as the
Tincture is down; two or three hours after, eat a dish of warm Broth, and for
dinner something that is warm, and of easy digestion. If it gives not three or
four Stools that day, take three spoonfuls of it also at night going to bed,
three hours after a light Supper: Continue the use of it every morning, or
other morning, without any other observation, but follow your business as at
other times, until the desired benefit be found. It Is a familiar Medicine,
agreeable unto Nature, leaves no nauseousness in the stomach is Cordial,
reviving, and chearing the Spirits, removing whatever clogs and annoys them.

THe Aromatic Tincture purges Choler, Phlegm, and all corrupt, stinking and
putrid humors from the Stomach, Entrals, Hypocondria and Mesentery. It clears
the Senses, restores a good Color to those that have lost it, cleanses the
Blood, opens Obstructions, and strengthens the Stomach and Bowels exceedingly;
kills Worms, cures all Headaches, leaves no impurity in the body, and is found
to be good in Agues by removing those humors which continually nourish them;
it is very Cordial, and exceedingly helps such as are troubled with Faintings,
and subject to Vomiting and Purging. It is a very familiar and safe Medicine,
friendly to Nature, and may be used by all ages and sorts of people, at any
time of the year. The Dose is from half a Child's spoonful, to three or four
large spoonfuls, according to the age and constitution: Take it in Beer, or
Wine, or alone, if what is taken in the morning, works not, the like, or a
sufficient quantity may be taken at night going to bed, three hours after
Supper, or you may take it at any time on an empty stomach, two or three hours
before Meals, a dish of warm Broth is best to be eaten the next thing after
it, and what else you have most mind unto, so as it be warm, and of good
digestion.

THe Lenitive Electuary gently opens the Bowels, and Purges all humors without
any trouble, an Ounce of it being taken at night going to bed; Eat some Broth
the next morning for Breakfast, and walk abroad as at other times: It Is
profitable in Fevers to keep the body soluble, and to carry off the offending
humors: It may be safely used by all persons, and in all distempers where
gentle opening means are required, Mornings, or at any time upon an empty
stomach.

THe Spleen Pills do gently purge Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy, from the
Stomach, Head, and Bowels, they are with good success used in the ill habit of
the body, and all defects of the stomach, proceeding from foulness, an
abounding of Humors, and Wind, in the Jaundice, Dropsy, long lasting putrid
Fevers, Worms, and Agues of all sorts: They open the obstructions of the
Liver, and Spleen, and are an excellent Medicine against all Melancholic and
Windy distempers, proceeding from the Womb, Spleen, or any other part. The
frequent use of them works good effects in the Scurvy and Hypochondriack
Melancholy; they may be given without danger to all Constitutions, Ages and
Sexes. Take out of the Mass a quarter of an Ounce, make twelve Pills and
swallow down three of them every night, or other night, three hours after a
light Supper, or twice a week, so long as the distemper lasts: the next morning
for Breakfast eat a dish of Herb Pottage, and follow your business, as at other
times, if the three Pills taken at night, give not three or four Stools the
next day, three more may be taken next morning, and so continue the use of them
Mornings and Evenings.

THe Common Pills do purge Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy, with other moist,
tough and gross Humors from the Head, Stomach, Breast, Liver, Spleen, Womb,
Bowels, Veins, Joints, Sinews, and Muscles, or any other part of the body; and
so, they remove all Diseases occasioned by the abounding of such like humors,
as Pains, Giddiness or Swimming of the Head, all defects of the Stomach and
bowels, Coughs, Shortness of breath, the Cholick, Gout, Sciatica, and other
pains of the Joints and Sinews, the Jaundice, Dropsy, and all other
Melancholic Diseases. The Pale Color in Girls proceeding from obstructions,
with Agues of all sorts. They open the stoppages of the Liver, Spleen, and
other parts; strengthen all the inward faculties, and may be used with safety
in all cases where purging is necessary, having been found by long experience
and much use, to conduce greatly to the preserving of health, and to the
removing of many stubborn Diseases. Take one Dram at a time, in the morning
fasting, made into six Pills, once in four days; about two or three hours
after, rise from your bed, drink warm Posset or broth and keep in. Take them
three or four times following, or oftener if need require. A person of
reasonable strength may take one Dram, others half as much, or two Scruples,
made into 3 or 4 Pills.

THe Strong Pills purge all humors from the deepest and remotest parts of the
body, as the Brain, Nerves, Muscles, Joints, Breast and Womb. They may be used
for inveterate pains of the head, Apoplexy, Falling sickness, Palsy, Madness,
or any difficult distemper throughout the body. Give them only to strong
Constitutions, half a Dram, two Scruples, or one Dram at a time, in the morning
fasting: two or three hours after, drink warm Posset or broth, and keep in:
the use of them may be repeated three or four times, or oftener, if there shall
be occasion.

THe Purging Powder is known by long experience to be a safe and good Medicine,
purging gently Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy and Waterish humors, from the Head,
Stomach, Lungs, Liver, Spleen, and Bowels: It cleanses those parts of evil
humors, opens all Obstructions, strengthens the Senses, procures Mirth,
purifies the blood, causes a fresh and lively Habit of the body, and is good in
all sorts of Agues: Persons of ripe years may take one Dram and half at a time
in the morning fasting, in White Wind. Syder, or Posset; fast two hours after,
then drink now and then some warm Posset, and keep within doors. Take it once
in two or three days, for three or four times. Children may take from ten
Grains to a Dram, according to their age, and strength. It Is a proper Medicine
to be given after the Small Pox and Measles, to prevent the inconveniences
which oftentimes happen by the neglect of purging Physic.

THe Rheum Pills have a mavelous operation in all manner of Thin and Subtle
Defluxions and Distillations of Rheum, whether it falls upon the Breast and
Lungs with a Cough, or into the Teeth, or any where else, they procure sleep,
and have been known absolutely to cure any new Cough, though never so violent,
in four times taking. In the incurable Cough they give much ease, free the
Breast from foul humors, open Obstructions, and strengthen the body
exceedingly. Take three of them at a time every other night going to sleep, for
four times: or until the Cough be gone, using the Drink made of Liquorice,
Figs, and Anniseed, half a Pint, or more at a time warm, mornings and evenings,
first and last. Those nights you take the Pills, the drink may be used an hour
or two sooner.

THe Pectoral Roles are an excellent Medicine; they very much open the Wind
pipe, and help its roughness, wheesings, hoarsness, and difficulty of
breathing: Ripen the Cough, bring forth Phlegm, quench thirst, are good against
sour and offensive belchings, the heat of the Mouth and Stomach, as also the
heat in the breast, called by some Heart-burning, all griefs of the Chest, and
Lungs, Ptisick and Consumption. Hold some of them in your mouth, to dissolve,
at any time, especially at night in bed.

Pectoral Drink.
TAke of Figs a quarter of a Pound opened; Liquorice one Ounce bruised,
Anniseed half an Ounce, boil them in three quarts of water to two quarts,
strain it, and take it warm half a Pint or more at a time, Mornings and
Evenings, first and last, for Coughs of all sorts. The use of this has often
proved very successful. For Stuffing of the Breast and Lungs with Phlegm, add
to a pint of this Liquor two Ounces of Syrup of Scabious, and take a good
draught at a time.

Pectoral Drink.
TAke of Fair water Four Quarts, dried Hysop one handful, Liquorice half an
Ounce, Raisons of the Sun stoned and Figs of each two Ounces, boil all gently
till a quart is consumed, strain it, and add of Honey a quarter of a pound;
boil it again a turn or two, Scum it well, bottle it, and use it as the former
for the same purposes, with Syrup of Scabious, or without it, as there shall be
cause.

THe true Elixir Proprietatis, so highly esteemed for its great virtues, and
sold at so many places in London, is here also to be had, rightly and exactly
Prepared; whose Virtues follow. It is moderately hot and dry, preserves from
putrefaction, is admirably effectual against corrupted Air, and affects of the
Head, Breast, Stomach, and Lungs. It expels crude humors from the Stomach,
procures a good Appetite, and Digestion, strengthens a weak stomach very much,
and is profitable in Rheums, Coughs, Shortness of Breath and Consumptions: it
comforts the Heart, strengthens the Memory, revives the Senses, drives away
Dimness of sight, dissolves the Stone of the Reins, preserves from the Palsy
and Gout, removes Melancholy, causes Cheerfulness, cures all sorts of Agues and
Fevers, heals all inward Wounds and Ulcers, expels all Crudities, and other
inconveniences occasioned by excess in eating or drinking; it is said to be the
Balsom of the Ancients; by most strong conservation it hinders Age from
surprising Youth too soon, and may with good success be used by Aged persons
against whatever Malady they are subject unto. It cures every Disease both hot
and cold, which is incident to the body of man, neither is there any Vegetable
Medicine that exceeds it. The Dose is from six to twelve drops, or more, in
Wine, Ale, or any other appropriated Liquuor.

MIthradate and Venice Treacle have been esteemed of all other Confections the
most renowned, and worthiest, for more then 1600 years. The admirable effects
they have, and do still produce, is the cause they are so much in use, and
disposed of in such vast quantities, throughout the greatest parts of the
world. Mithridate is good against Poison, the stinging of Adders and bitings of
Mad dogs, being taken inwardly in the largest quantity, and applied outwardly;
expels from the body all ill humors, and Diseases coming of cold and wind,
from head to foot; warms and strengthens the Brain, removes the stopping of the
passages of the senses, by cold; heals the infirmities of the Mind, drives away
vain fears from persons affected with Melancholy, helps a cold waterish
Stomach, and strengthens it much, is profitable for such women as cannot
Conceive by reason of cold, provokes sweat, has a peculiar power to preserve
against bad Airs, the Plague, and all Pestilential Diseases, opens the Breast,
allays the Cough, and provokes the tough humors to be coughed up. It is good
to remove all Agues in the beginning, and all bruises caused by falls, or other
ways. The same directions are to be observed in the taking of it, as are
prescribed in Venice Treacle, and the same quantity to cause Sweat, the Virtues
of both being the same. Mithridates King of Pontus, a most Potent and Learned
Monarch, was the Inventor of this Noble Antidote, who being vanquished by
Pompey, and fearing he would lead him in Triumph to Rome, took Poison, from
which he received not the least trouble, having before made frequent trial of
this Medicine for the prevention of such poisonous practices, which he
suspected might treacherously be used against him, and it proved indeed so
great a Counter-poyson, that although he wanted not skill to frame his deadly
Potion, yet could not his body feel any ill effect by it, whereupon he called a
Soldier to him, desiring him to kill him, whose slow and trembling hand
Mithridates himself forced to his own slaughter. Amongst his Treasuries and
Spoils, a great many Medicinal Receipts were found, which the King had laid up
most safely, as great secrets. Pompey brought these to Rome and gave them to
Damocrates and Andromachus Roman Physicians, who approved of all the Remedies,
but especially of the Mithridate, whose description Damocrates set forth, and
therefore it is called by the Ancients Mithridatium Damocratis. This Mithridate
has been most in use until the last great Plague, since which time, in some
parts of the Country, Venice Treacle (called Theriaca Andromachi, because it
was set forth by Andromachus, one of Nero's Physicians) has been in greater
request. Mithridates is justly made the Author of both, for Damocrates and
Andromachus only disposed the matter whereof they consist, more orderly, and
added some few things. It is not without good Ground that they call Mithridate
the Father, and Theriack the Mother of Medicaments, seeing in Dignity and
Excellency they far exceed all others, and comprehend all others Faculties; for
there is scarce any preternatural affection whereunto one of these, duly
prepared does not conduce.

THeriaca Andromachi, or Venice Treacle resists all Poison, Diseases, and Evils
which may happen unto the Body of Man. Cures Headaches, Giddiness, Dullness of
Sight and Hearing, the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Difficulty of Breathing, Old
or New Coughs. Helps Concoction, Cold Stomachs, all Gripings and Wind in the
Bowels, the Jaundice, Dropsy, Gout, hardness of the Spleen, Vain Fears and
Melancholy, Pains in the Joints and Kidneys; It kills Worms, represses the
immoderate beating of the Heart, comforting and fortifying it greatly, together
with the Brain, and whole Body. Is good against Swoonings and Weakness,
preserves from Contagion in Pestilential times, Expels the Monthly Flowers,
casts out the Dead Child, as also the Stone in the Reins and Bladder. It helps
the bitings of Mad Dogs, and Stinging of Adders, if inwardly given, and
outwardly applied. It opens all Obstructions, gives a good and lively color to
those who want it, and has been found upon long Experience to be of singular
use and benefit in the beginning of all sorts of Agues, and Fevers, especially
Quartans. In Fevers, Agues, all cold Distempers of the Limbs, and Joints and
other inconveniences occasioned by cold and Bruises, a Man or Woman may take
One Dram and half, or Two Drams, in Carduus Posset, or Mace Beet; to Children
the quantity must be proportioned according to their several ages. Cover your
self warm in the Bed, and Sweat three or four hours, or so long as shall be
thought convenient, drinking either Carduus Posset, or Mace Beer in the time of
Sweating, at the end of which, have an hot Shirt in readiness to be put on, and
wipe off the Sweat with warm Clothes. In other cases a Dram or half a Dram may
be taken at a time Mornings and Evenings, in Sack or Beer: To preserve from
Contagion, mix one Ounce of the Confection of Gilliflowers with half an Ounce
of this, and take the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time, Mornings and Evenings, or
when there shall be occasion.

DIascordium is an Exccellent Cordial in the Plague and Pestilential Fevers;
settles and composes the Spirits when disturbed by Feverish, or any other
Distempers. Allays the pains of the Head, and is good to be used by Women in
Child bed to hasten their Labor, and help their usual Sickness at that time.
It stops Fluxes, strengthens the Stomach and Heart, and provokes Sleep. VVeak
People and young Children may take from five Grains to a Dram; those who are
stronger, a Dram and half, or sometimes two Drams.

LOndon Treacle is a good Antidote in Pestilential times, resists Poison, helps
Digestion, strengthens cold Stomachs, and is a good Cordial in any Disease
whatever. A quarter of an Ounce, or half as much may be taken at a time, or it
being mixed with an equal quantity of Confection of Gilliflowers, the quantity
of a Nutmeg, or more may be taken, Mornings and Evenings, or once in six hours.

COnfection of Gilliflowers is of a temperate quality, and a very choice
Cordial. It resists the Plague or any Venom, the Smallpox and Measles, as also
any sort of Fever or Ague: strengthens Nature. and is good against
Consumptions, and all other Weaknesses. Give the quantity of a Wallnut, so
often as cause shall be seen. If one Dram of Confection of Hyacinth be mixed
with one Ounce of this, it will add to its Cordial virtue in Fevers; and if
one Dram of Confection of Alkermes be mixed with a like quantity, it will
render it the more Effectual in any kind of Weakness. One Ounce likewise of
this Confection being mixed with half an Ounce of Diascordium, Mithradat, or,
Venice Treacle, and the quantity of a Nutmeg taken, when there shall be cause,
will be of great benefit in such cases, wherein those Medicines may be used; as
also a good preservative against any Infection, or ill and Corrupted air.

THe Tincture of Roses corrects and strengthens the Stomach mightily, is an
approved Medicine in violent Vomitings and Purgings, also when digestion is
Weak, and Natural Appetite to Meat Defective. It is highly profitable in the
Disease called Cholera, which is a violent Vomiting and Purging both at once,
and uses to kill very suddenly. But in this case it must be taken in a great
quantity at a time, as Glasful after Glasful, till a Quart, three Pints or more
be drankt, and if the party happens to Vomit up the first draughts, he ought
nevertheless to keep on drinking, until it stays in the Stomach. It causes
even to admiration, a wonderful calm in the Body, by appeasing of those hot
Tempests, which sharp Choleric humors have stirred up; and by mixing it self
with the humors offending, and taking away whatever is acrimonious in them.
Also it is a very pleasing and useful Liquor in all hot Fevers, continual or
intermitting, to be used for ordinary Drink; its constant use being that, which
takes away the cause of those Diseases, and this being done, the effects must
necessarily cease.

To make this Tincture, take of dried red Rose leaves one Ounce, put them into
a stone or well-glazed Earthen Vessel, with as much boiling Water as will
moisten them, drop in leasurely four Scruples of Spirit of Vitriol, continually
agitating and moving the Rose leaves: after which, pour upon them four Pints of
boiling Water, cover it close until it be cold, then let it run through a
Flannel Cloth, or Filter Bag, and add to the Liquor half a Pound of White
Sugar.

Barley Water.
TAke two Ounces of French Barley, boil it a Turn or more, in two Quarts of
Spring Water, then throw it away, and put to the Barley so much more Water,
boiling it the second time, as at first, throw away that Water likewise, and
Once more add to it the like quantity, which boil gently, till a third part be
consumed; let it stand to settle, after which pour off the clear Water into a
Bottle, and mix with it Syrrup of Violets and Wood Sorrel, of each three
Spoonfuls, Spirit of Vitriol thirty or forty drops. It moistens, cools and
cleanses the body, allays the Acrimony of sharp humors, and is an excellent
Drink in Fevers, hot affections of the Stomach, Liver, Reins, or any other
part. It may be used for all those intents and purposes to which the Tincture
of Roses does conduce; and should be taken in a large quantity at a time by
which small and gentle means, extraordinary effects have been oftentimes
produced: for as fierce and blustering winds and tempests are frequently
allayed by a sudden shower of Rain: so in like manner, the greatest commotion
imaginable, in the Microcosm, discovering it self by continual Vomitings,
Purgings, and Swoonings, have been many times quelled by such drinks as this,
and the former, when the highest Cordials have procured no better an effect,
than the return of the fainting Fit. If the Constitution of body, and the
Disease require it, you may mix Cinnamon or Bezoar water, Spirit of Elder, or of
Mints, in such a proportion, that the largest Dose of them, may serve for as
much of the Barley water as you take at once.

The Decoction of Hartshorn, in the next place to be spoken of, greatly avails,
being mixed and used in all respects, as Barley water.

RAsped Hartshorn helps Putrefaction, corrects Malignity, provokes Sweat; stops
Vomiting, Fluxes of the Womb, and Bowels; kills Worms, and strengthens the
Natural Balsom in our bodies, is very good in the Small Pox, and Measles, in
Putrid and Malignant Fevers, allayeth all sharp humors, and is exceeding
useful for Children, as well as for persons of riper years. Take one Ounce of
Rasped Hartshorn, boil it in two quarts of water close covered, to one quart:
strain it, and add half an Ounce of Sugar, with two or three spoonfuls of
Rose Water, then let it be bottled, and give it plentifully instead of drink.
Being boiled with Vinegar, it helps Ringworms; being warmed and steeped in
Vinegar and applied to the Gumms it strengthens them, helps the pain of the
Jaws, caused by the breeding of Teeth; and also fastens loose Teeth.

THe Hartshorn Balls are very good for Children, and those of riper years, in
the Small Pox, Measles, Fevers, Worms; and in any Malignant Distemper. They
are good in all Fluxes, Loosnesses, Spitting of Blood, and Dysentery; they dry
up all moist humors, strengthen much, and may safely be given to Children in
any Disease that shall happen unto them: Take from ten to sixty Grains,
Mornings and Evenings, or once in six hours, in any convenient mixture, or in a
spoonful of the above-prescribed Drink, taking a draught of it presently after.
If you mix them with Unguentum Pomatum, and anoint the Lids and Corners of the
Eyes with it, it helps their Ulcers and Defluxions. The Teeth being rubbed with
the powder of the Balls, upon a cloth, every day, will be whitened by it, and
the Gumms strengthened.

SPirit of Hartshorn is an excellent Remedy to cleanse the whole mass of Blood,
by Urine and Sweat, and by insensible Transpiration. It is a true Specific
against the Scurvy, and all other Diseases which proceed from alteration of the
blood. It refisteth Putrefaction, comfort Nature, and opens Obstructions.
Good effects have been found by it in Fevers, Plurisies, stoppings of the
Spleen, Coughs, distempers of the Brain, Epileptical Fits, Madness, the Worms,
Quartan Agues, etc. It may be taken from six drops to twelve in Carduus water
sweetened with Sugar, or in Beer and Sugar. A Child may take one, two, or more
drops, according to the age, but before the use of it, it is good to cleanse
the body by some purging Medicine, in those cases where it may be done safely.

THe Hysterical water is very good against Fits of the Mother, provokes the
Terms, and cleanses the Womb exceedingly: It expels both Birth, and
Afterbirth, and is likewise an excellent Remedy if afterward any stoppage
happens, or Nature be defective in throwing forth what it ought in Childbirth;
to forward the birth, and when there appears an inability in Nature to expel
it, you may give three spoonfuls of this, with a spoonful or two of Cinnamon
water, and in this case, once taking of it does oftentimes produce the defired
effect; provided, that it be made use of in due time, for if otherwise used,
whether too soon, or out of season, the aforesaid effects cannot be expected.
The same quantity may be taken for expelling the Afterbirth, and for removing
any stoppage occasioned by taking cold, or other accident. In Fits of the
Mother, and such like affects it may be used as often as there shall be cause.
Women with Child must by no means meddle with it, until the fullness of time
be come, for the Child to be born.

TReacle water is very good in Fevers of all sorts, especially Pestilential.
It is an admirable Remedy against the Plague, Poison, the biting of Adders, or
any Venomous Beasts. It expels Venomous Humors, by Sweat, fortifieth the
Heart and Spirits against them, and is of singular use in the Small Pox and
Measles. One, two, three or four spoonfuls may be taken in Carduus water,
sweetened with Syrup of Gillislowers, and lie to Sweat.

PLague water is a Sovereign Cordial for the Heart, and an excellent Antidote
against the Plague, Pestilential and Malignant Fevers, Poison, the biting of
Mad Dogs, also stinging of Adders; and may be used with good success before the
Fits of Agues, to hinder their coming, and to drive them away. It Is an
Excellent Remedy for a Surfeit, also for the Wind, and other cold griefs of the
Stomach. It helps inward Bruises, and discusses Congealed Blood. Take two or
three spoonfuls of it, for a Surfeit, once in six hours until the undigested
matter in the Stomach be concocted: For the Wind, and all other griefs of the
Stomach, and to comfort the heart, a spoonful may be taken at a time, or more
when cause shall be seen: In all other cases three spoonfuls or more, may be
taken in warm Posset, or some proper water, when you first find your self to be
ill, being covered warm in the bed to sweat well afterward.

Cinnamon Water is very Cordial, comfort a weak and cold Stomach, helps
Griping pains in the Bowels, occasioned by cold, causes a fresh and lively
color in the Face, provokes Urine, and the Terms. It sweetneth the Breath,
resists Poison, stops Fluxes and Vomitings, hastens the Birth, helps the
fainting Spirits, and trembling of the Heart, strengthens the Retentive
Faculty, comforts the Brain and Sinews, and is exceeding good for Cold and
Moist bodies,

Spirit of Mints comforts the Head and Memory, warms the Stomach and Bowels,
expels Superfluous Humors, causes Digestion, stirs up the Appetite, stays
Vomiting, and the Hiccough; helps a Cold Liver, and removes its Obstructions.
It is also good for women in Childbearing, in their hard and sore labors.

BEzoar water is a very great Cordial; it expels from the Heart and Spirits
evil Vapors, and Humors, which annoy them. It drives forth Pestilential and
Malignant Fevers by Sweat; resists Melancholy, and wonderfully relieves the
Spirits being overwhelmed therewith. It is Excellent in Swooning Fits, a
spoonful being taken at a time, mixed with Borrage water, and a little Syrup of
Gilliflowers: it may be taken otherwise, alone, or in Sack, or in any Cordial
water: but in Swoonings, and to provoke Sweat, if there be cause, two or three
spoonfuls may be taken at a time.

AQua Coelestis does exceedingly help such as are laden and oppressed with
Melancholy, by expelling annoyances from the Heart, and cheering the Spirits.
It enlivens the dull and stupid Senses, is available in all Malignant Fevers,
and in swoonings, half a spoonful being taken at a time in a draught of the
Decoction of Hartshorn, or in cold distilled, Cordial, or Imperial Water, and
sweetened with Syrup of Gilliflowers.

AQua Mirabilis comforts and strengthens the Heart, Stomach, and Brain, and is
of great use in Faintings, and Swoonings, and for Women in Travail with Child;
for which purpose, mix with it Cinnamon water, Spirit of Mints, Bezoar water, or
Aqua Coelestis, and Imperial water, which being sweetened with Syrup of
Gilliflowers, or fine Loaf Sugar, give two or three spoonfuls at a time, as
often as there shall be cause.

IMperial water is of a Mild and Moderate Temper, and may safely be used, two
or three spoonfuls with Syrup of Gilliflowers, at any time, against Faintings
and Swoonings, and is a Preservative against Consumptions.

TIncture of Ambergreise Strengthens, Comforts, Warms, and Refreshes the Brain,
and Senses exceedingly, quickens the dullness of them; eases the pains of the
Head, dissolveth the Cold Defluxions of Humors, which fall thereon, and on the
Nerves and Sinews. It likewise strengthens the Memory, and is very beneficial
to the Heart, and Fainting Spirits, takes away the Passions and Tremblings of
the Heart, making it Merry and Joyful: It expells Sadness, removes Barrenness,
proceeding from a cold cause, and is accounted conducible to Venereous actions;
it most conveniently agrees with Aged Persons, for it Warms, Comforts, and
Strengthens their Cold Decayed Spirits. A few Drops of this Tincture will
Perfume any Cordial water, Wine, or other thing, and impregnate it with its
Virtue. It is made thus: Take of Ambergreise two Drams, Musk half a Dram; let
the Amber be very finely shaved, or cut as thin as may be; put it into a thin
Linen bag, tie it close, and let it ly in a strong Glass bottle, with half a
Pint of the best Spirit of Wine, stop it well with Cork and Bladder, and set it
in a warm Bath, or in the Sun for a Fortnights space, then pour off the
Tincture and keep it in a Bottle close stopped, for use: put to the Ambergreise
half a Pint more of Spirit of Wine, stop it close, and set it in the Sun, as
before, after which preserve it for your use.

BEzoar Stones are much commended against the bitings of Venomous Beasts,
stinging of Vipers, and against all Contagious Diseases, as the Small Pox,
Measles, Pestilence, Malignant Fevers, and the like. They also cure Swoonings,
long Sorrows, Hysterical Passions, with many other ill Affections. A Man or
Woman may take ten or twenty Grains at a time. A Child three or four Grains, or
more, according to the Age.

GAscoign Powder is good in all sorts of Fevers, in the Small Pox, Measles,
Swoonings, and Tremblings of the Heart. It cheers the Heart, and Vital Spirits
exceedingly, and is a safe and harmless Medicine, which may be given in any
case, six eight or ten Grains at a time to Children, and twenty or thirty
Grains to Persons of full Age. Take it in any thing you like best, once in six
hours, as long as there shall be cause.

THe Red Cordial Powder is a special remedy, and is given with great success in
all Malignant and Pestilential Diseases, in Fevers of all sorts, Small Pox and
Measles. It is very profitable against Poison and stinging of Adders, resists
Putrefaction, strengthens the Heart and Brain, purifies the whole Mass of
Blood, and is an excellent powder to dissolve congealed Blood, occasioned by
Falls, Bruises, Imposthumes and the like. It may be taken from Ten to Sixty
Grains according to the age, in any convenient mixture, which is most proper to
the occasion.

MEtheglen is a Drink, which the ancient Britains did put an high value upon,
keeping it in their Houses as Nectar, and affirming thar it was more precious
than Malmsey: for when it is old, it is reckoned a wine most agreeable to the
Stomach, which it strengthens exceedingly; it potently concocts cold Humors,
hinders Crudities, restores the lost Appetite, and is good for those who are
troubled with the Cough, and shortness of Breath. It helps Expectoration,
Expells Wind, Mitigates the Pains of the Colic, is profitable in the Yellow
Jaundies, in Diseases of the Brain, and in those which proceed from Melancholy,
as the Quartan Ague, Scurvy, etc. It conduces much to cold Constitutions, is
very nourishing to the Body, and by the use of it, many have lived to extreme
old Age: Pertinent hereunto is that relation, of one of an Hundred Years Old,
who being demanded by Augustus Caesar, what means he chiefly used to preserve
that Vigor of mind and Body, which he was observed at that time very briskly to
retain; made this reply to the Emperor, that he imputed his long continued
health to naught, besides this Drink, which he verily thought to be the
greatest cause thereof. Mr. Butler discoursing of it, in his Treatise of Bees,
says that as good and Old Metheglen Excels all VVines, both for
pleasantness of taste, and preserving of Health: so being burnt, it is better
than any burnt Wine whatsoever, to comfort and settle a Weak Stomach, and to
procure natural heat. The manner of burning it, is first to set on the Fire a
deep Skillet, or Kettle almost full of Water; when it boils, put in a Pewter
Pot full of Metheglen, which you must Skum before it begins to boil, and put
into it two or three bruised Cloves, with a branch of Rosemary; then beat the
Yolk of an Egg in a Dish, and mix with it a spoonful of cold Metheglen,
stirring all together to keep the Yolk from Curdling; add to that a spoonful of
the hot Metheglen, after which another, and another; always beating them
together. Afterward, by degrees pour all into the Pot, continually stirring it
about; as soon as it boils, take the Pot out of the Kettle of Water, and pour
the Metheglen into another warm Pot of the like bigness; Fireing it, as it
passes from one to the other; which must be done until the Flagration cease,
and it will burn no longer. A Metheglen Posset has the same virtues.

JUniper Ale Comforts the Brain, Strengthens the Memory, and all the Senses, is
good against the Palsy, and Convulsions, the Cough, Shortness of Breath; with
other Diseases of the Breast and Lungs. It Strengthens the Stomach very much,
Dissolves the Swellings, and Windinoss thereof, and Eases the Griping Pains and
Torments in the Belly. It provokes the Terms and Urine, and greatly avails
against the Stone, Strangury, Hysteric Fits, Dropsy, Scurvy, the Quartan, and
all other cold Agues, the Gout, and Sciatica. It fortifies all the Members of
the body, and (to be short) is effectual for all Diseases proceeding from a
Cold Cause, and is likewise a very good preservative in Pestilential times.

To every Ale Gallon of good Wort, well Maulted, put One Ounce and half of
Juniper Berries, bruised, and a sufficient quantity of Hops: Let it be well
boiled, and when it is cold, strain it; afterward ripen it, and when it comes
to be fit for drinking, you may take of it at any time. It will be convenient
to have it Bottled in due season.

DAucus Ale breaks Wind, cures Stitches in the Sides, asswages the Tormenting
Pains of Gripeing in the Guts, provokes Urine, and the Terms; breaks, and
expels the Stone and Gravel. It is good against the Dropsy, and for those
Persons whose Bellies are swollen with VVind, also against the Strangury,
Painful making of water, and the rising of the Mother. It helps Conception,
and is good to ripen an Old Cough.

To every Ale Gallon of good Beer, well boiled, and hopped, put one Ounce and
half of the Seeds of wild Carrats bruised, in a thin linen Bag; as soon as it
has done working, and when it is come to Maturity Drink of it at any time.

Scurvy Grass Ale.
Scurvy Grass Ale or Beer, is a very ancient Drink of this Isle, against the
Scurvy; it was held in great esteem by the old Britains, who accounted it the
most approved Liquor in the World, and later Experience has conferred much to
their opinion, by the good effects it has produced in that Disease. It opens
Obstructions, Evacuates Cold, Clammy and Phlegmatic Humors, from the Liver
and Spleen, softens and takes away the Hardness, and Swelling of those Parts,
and reduces the Body to a more cheerful and lively Color. To make it; put a
Peck or more of bruised Scurvy Grass into half an Hogshead of Ale or Beer,
while it is working: Then put into a thin Bag, long Pepper, Grains, Anniseed,
and Liquorice of each two Ounces, which hang in the Ale, and when it is clear,
Drink of it at any time.

TO take away Redness in the Face, Sun-burn, Morphew, Freckles, Pimples,
Pushes, or any Inflammation: Take of Sacchar. Saturni, and Sal. Gem. of each
half an Ounce, dissolve them in two several bottles, in each of which put a
quarter of a Pint of Plantain Water, afterward when there is an occasion to
use it, mix an equal quantity of both in another Glass, and it will be like
Milk.

The INDEX.
THE Spirit. 1 The Tarter Dyet-drink. 6 Tinctura mirabilis. 7 The Aromatic
Tincture. 8 The Lenitive Electuary. ibid. Spleen Pills. 9 Common Pills. ibid.
Strong Pills. 10 The purging Powder. ibid. Rheum Pills. 11 Pectoral Rolls.
ibid. Two Pectoral drinks. 12 The true Elixar Proprietatis. ibid. Mithradat. 13
Venice Treacle. 14 Diascordium. 15 London Treacle. 16 Confection of
Gilliflowers. ibid. Tincture of Roses. ibid. Barley water. 17 Rasped Hartshorn.,
18 Hartshorn Balls. 19 Spirit of Hartshorn. ibid. Hysterical water. 20 Treacle
water. ibid. Plague water. ibid. Cinnamon water. 21 Spirit of Mints. ibid.
Bezoar water. 22 Aqua coelestis. ibid. Aqua Mirabilis. ibid. Imperial water. 23
Tincture of Ambergriese. ibid. Bezoar stones. 24 Gascoign's Powder. ibid. The
Red Cordial powder. ibid. Metheglin. 25 Juniper Ale. 26 Daucus Ale. ibid.
Scurvygrass Ale. 27 Saccharum Saturni and Sal Gemm. ibid.
ERRATA
Page 1. Line 11. for crumbs or Whitebread, read of. p. 2. l. 30. for root, r.
roots. p. 5. l. 12. for dress, r. press. p. 7. l. 2. for felf, r. self. p. 10.
l. 18. for it, r. they. p. 12. l. 4. for first, r. first. p. 13. l. 16. for
world, r. world. p. 13. l. 29. for fall, r. falls. p. 15. l. 6. for cast, r.
casts. p. 15. l. 21. for and, r. an. p. 15. l. 24. for of a Gilliflowers, r. of
Gilliflowers. p. 15. l. 26. for of Nutmeg, r. of a Nutmeg.


