A LETTER to a Member of Parliament concerning the Suppression of Piracy.
London, March 20. 1699/700. SIR,
I Cannot but think it my duty (perceiving that your Honorable House is
considering of means for the preventing and punishing both Pirates and illegal
Traders) to give you a short hint of the Reasons why they have grown to a
greater height in the English than in other Colonies on the Main of America,
and a Proposal for the future prevention of them.

It may be almost needless to acquaint you that several of our American
Plantations are like petty Soveraigntys, having the Choice of Governors, the
Power of calling Assemblies, making Laws, raising Money by some former Grants
from the Crown, or at least the pretensions of them.

Each of these, Interest being their chief Mover, are restlesly ambitious of
advancing their Estates by drawing away the Trade and Inhabitants from other
Colonies that are contiguous to them, and more especially from those that are
under the immediate direction of the Crown, as the Proprietary Colonies to the
Westward, from the Colonies of New York and New England.

In order to this they vie with each other, who shall allow their People the
greatest Privileges, or most exempt them from any Customs or Duties on Goods
exported or imported; which the King's Governments, especially New York, cannot
avoid, it being a most necessary Supply for the maintenance of the Government,
the guard of the Frontiers from the Insults of those Indians that otherwise
would prove fatal in time of War, not only to them but to the neighboring
Colonies.

Hence it is that in all the Proprietary Colonies the People pretend to an
absolute exemption from Customs and Duties, but what is laid by Act of
Parliament in England, and in most to the Choice of all Officers both Civil and
Military, in some not excepting the Council nor the Governor.

These Officers thus annually chosen, endeavor to do nothing that may
disoblige their Electors, lest the next year they are deprived of their
Dignities.

The Inhabitants of the Plantations abroad are too much addicted to abet and
encourage both Pirates and illegal Traders, as the Persons that they gain no
small advantage by corresponding with.

Hence it is that these Criminals meet with their Encouragement, those Officers
that should apprehend, being but too negligent of their Duties, and this from
personal Advantages and Gains they receive by them, or through fear of the
People by whose favor they stand.

The Remedies then seem to be plain and easy, the Bill already read in your
Honorable House will undoubtedly give a very great discouragement to Piracy,
tho illegal Trade still remains to be suppressed, the Duties accruing to the
King to be more effectually preserved, and the Frontiers of the Government
better protected against foreign Insults; which I am humbly of opinion might be
done, if in the Bill that yet lies before you for the punishing of Governors,
etc. you would be pleased by some Clause,

To lay all the Colonies on the Continent of America, that carry on the same
Methods of Trade, under the same equal Customs on Goods exported and imported,
for the maintenance of their distinct Governments, or the defraying a more
general Charge.

To cause that the Confusion and Anarchy which now so much prevails in some of
the Colonies (insomuch that the Council in their Letters home complain they are
hardly safe in their Persons or Estates; if by a due and vigorous execution of
the Law against Pirates or illegal Traders, they should incense the People
against them) may be succeeded by an exact obedience to their superior
Officers, which cannot be expected, until a greater Authority than any
Proprietary Commission shall appear there.

That to obtain this (since Property may be alleged by some, and a right of
commissionating and sending of Governors, which they seem to be so fond of,
that the most plain Arguments drawn from the inevitable necessity thereof,
their own Profit and Advantage* the Peace and Prosperity of the People, and the
entire Suppression of Pyracy, etc. cannot prevail) I hope you will be
instrumental in finding out some ways to bring all these Colonies to a more
immediate dependence on the Crown, by giving the King the Nomination and
Commissionating of the Governors and Officers Civil and Military in the
respective Colonies, and yet reserving all the Rights and Properties that
either the Proprietors at home, or the People there may have to the Lands or
Plantations in the said Colonies by virtue of their former Grants from the
Crown.

I am SIR, Your most humble Servant, J. B.

A LETTER to a Member of Parliament concerning the Suppression of Piracy.


