A WORD to the Wiser JACOBITES, Worthy their Perusal Over a Sober Dish of
Coffee.
Being a SHORT THEORY of the Present Establishment, Showing its Righteousness;
That all may Rejoice, and Pray in Faith, for its PEACE. 22. Oct. 1697.
By W. B.
IN War, all things in Effect follow the Will of the strongest, so far as his
force reaches; but in Peace, Right must Rule; otherwise Peace is so far lost,
or turned into a Confederacy in Iniquity. That Peace may therefore be a
Blessing, and do us good in the issue of Things; it must be in Conjunction with
Righteousness. But because some think this impossible in the Peace of the
Present Establishment, others are doubtful about it, others believe it may be,
but upon such Principles, as being practiced upon, would destroy all Peace: To
secure therefore the Blessing of our Peace the better (since God has at last
granted it to the Prayers of good Men) it may be of some use, briefly to show
the Righteousness of the Present Establishment, by its accord with the natural
Laws of Right in God's Kingdom over Men.

To me it seems very plain, that a Man's Right in a thing is nothing but the
Command, which his Will has over that thing; and I know none otherwise minded:
And it being so, (1.) I cannot understand, how the thing that is at the Command
of no Man's Will, is in any Man's Right, and if it be not, it is in a State of
Immunity. And, (2.) If any fingle Man comes afterward to have a thing such at
the Command of his Will, he has the Right in it; therefore nothing but
Possession, which is the having a thing at the Command of ones Will, is in
Nature the Original Title of Right. This Possession happens either by natural
Donation, or by Acquisition, which Acquisition is either by the exercise of a
Man's natural Power, or the Act of another.

1. Excepting Parental Rights, or supposing them remitted by the Mancipation of
the Child; pure Nature in the first instance makes a Man himself, and none
other; the Master and Owner of his own Body and its Members, by putting them
under the Command of his Will, and consequently gives him a Right and Property
in them. Overlooking this, gave the fatal Occasion to an irreligious. Man, to
draw up that monstrous Doctrine of Hobbs his Politics. For though it be not
more evident, that the Boughs in the Wood belong to that Tree, which they grow
upon, and none other; then it is evident, that Nature has put my Limbs under
the Command of my own Will, and of none others; yet he will have it, That
Nature makes nothing one Man's (that is at the Command of one Man's Will) more
than another.

2. If I command these Limbs by the Dictate of my Will to procure natural
Sustenance, I do but make use of my own Right; and it is Just, because the Use
of a natural Right; and it is Good, because it is to save a Life; and doing
what is Just and Good, is the Exercise of a Virtue: So far Dominion is founded
in Grace; for excepting a Man's Right in his own Body, or Rights conferred upon
him by the Act of another; a Man has no Dominion over any thing, but by the
Exercise of this Virtue of Industry.

3. If by this exercise of Virtue, he compasses any thing (in a State of
Immunity) useful for Life, a Beast, a Fowl, a Fish, Fruit, or the like; that is
then reduced under the Command of his Will, and he has therefore a Right in
it; which Right being gained by the use of his natural Powers, may be called an
acquired natural Right.

4. But that any thing was then in a posture and place where he could mancipate
it, was to him a Contingency by the Disposition of Divine Providence: God
therefore brought such a thing to him, and delivered it into his Hand, and
consequently gave him a Right to it by this providential Disposal, as he did to
his own Body by framing his Humane Nature, from whence results the sacredness
of natural Rights, and the Divine Blessing in them.

5. The Possession of a thing acquired by the voluntary Act of another, gives a
Right liable to be rebated, and is actually rebated, so far as the several
Cases make it.

6. If another Man sees me to want what he possesses, and will spare, and out
of Commiseration puts the thing into my Hand, this Possession makes the thing
in my Right: For though I ought to bless God for blessing him with such Store,
and inclining his Heart, and thank the Man for bestowing it upon me; yet if I
pay neither of these Debts, the thing is no less in my Right, and he would
deprive me of my Right, should he take it from me for this neglect of my Duty
to God and him; because this was not the Condition of the things being put into
my Power, but was left to the Pious and grateful Sense of my own Mind.

The same Measures held, and somewhat more strongly on both sides, if I receive
his Alms upon my humbly Entreaty, because I did hereby abuse my self to him,
and he condescended to one, that was not only broken in his Fortune, but in his
Spirit likewise.

7. If some grateful Sign of acknowledging it a kindness be stipulated for, as
the Condition of delivering the thing into my Hand: Should I upon the Receipt
of it fail in this he has a Right to require it of me, and I ought to restore
it; but he has no Right to take it from me by Violence or Surreption, and he
deprives me of my Right, if he does.

8. If he signifies, he would not deliver it into my Hand, unless I will
restore it, or an equivalent to him again; I am bound, if I take it, to
Restoration accordingly; and if I do it not, he has a Right of making
Reprizals upon me, and I have none to hinder him.

9. But though I received it upon Condition of Restoration and no otherwise,
should any other Man take it out of my Possession; he deprives me of my Right.
And if he that possessed me of it, should Die without Heirs, before I actually
had restored it; I am the proper Owner of it, merely by having it in my
Possession. So much for Rights founded upon the Title of Possession, which are
the Rights from which all others are derived.

10. If then another does not actually put me into Possession of the thing, but
Promises he will at such a Time; I have at that time a Right to the thing, but
no Right to take it from him, but he is bound to deliver it unto me. But if I
have given him a valuable Consideration for doing of it, and he does it not, I
have a Right of Reprizal, and he has none to hinder me; so that all Rights of
this Nature, when the thing is not in the Owners Possession, are Pactitious: of
which there are two Kinds, either explicitly, or implicitly; and if Candor,
Equity, Sincerity, etc. be Virtues, there is no difference in the Obligation of
an explicit or implicit Pact; and upon one of these two, are grounded all the
Rights betwixt Subjects and Governors, and cannot be understood otherwise, for
ought ever I could see.

11. Whether the Late King James dispossessed himself of his Kingdom, or was
dispossessed by others, seeing he certainly now is not in the Possession of it;
but another is, he can have no natural Right now by the Title of Possession;
and therefore King James has no Right at all, unless what is Pactitious: But
no Man has any Right by Pact, but what is agreed to by the Parties
contracting; now the Political Compact in England (since the Crown is Imperial)
can have no Parties in it, but the King and the People; and therefore it must
be either betwixt the King and the People, of else betwixt the People one with
another.

12. Amongst these it is agreed, the People being distributed into Lords and
Commons, shall give their Consent in two Estates; and unless these two Estates
in Parliament with the King agree in the Matter, nothing shall be had to be an
Article of the Agreement by the Authority of the Kingdom, which the Subject by
his Allegiance or Duty of Subjection to the Sovereign is bound to observe. And
therefore it is agreed, that the King shall govern thus by Laws, Quas Populus
ipse sibi elegerit.

13. But it was never agreed explicitly or implicitly, betwixt King James and
the People of England, that the Government should be administered by Popish
Officers; but on the contrary, King James and the People were expressly agreed,
that the Government of the Land should not be administered by Popish Officers.
When therefore the Late King James after Monmouth's Invasion, did in his Speech
declare to the People in Parliament (that is, the other Party in the Contract)
that he would not Govern without Popish Officers, nor suffer any one to
gainsay him in it, and proved he was in very great earnest by the rest of his
whole Reign; he expressly disagreeing to the known and owned Agreement betwixt
the King and People of England, there was thence forward no Agreement betwixt
the King and People (the Parties Contracting) there was therefore no Government
at all agreed unto betwixt them; not a Government administered without Popish
Officers, for that the King had solemnly disagreed unto, and resolutely
persisted in, all his Time: Not a Government administered by Popish Officers,
for that the People (the other Party) had not consented to, and therefore (as I
said) there was then no Government agreed to betwixt them: And because no
practicable Government was agreed upon, there could be no Governor actually
agreed to: For to Consent to a Governor, and not to the Government, is to
Consent to nothing, but an insignificant Word.

14. As we see the People in a Political State, all making one Party
contracting, did not Consent in Parliament: So in their natural Persons its
certain, they had not agreed one with another, that the Government should be
administered in King James his Reign by Popish Officers; wherefore there being
no Agreement in the Nation about the Government of it, King James could from
thence have no Right by Agreement; that is, he had no Pactitious Right to the
Government; and since he has none by the natural Right of Possession, its
plain he has no Right now to the Government of England.

15. When King James refused to stand to the National Compact, the People were
put into a State of Deliberation; whether they would agree to King James his
Government, or not; but there is no Reason to doubt, but they had their Choice,
being certainly in no Agreement with King James about any Government at all:
But though they could not be bound by the Rights of an Agreement about the
Government, when there was no such Agreement; yet were they bound to observe
all the private natural Rights by Possession, and the Pactitious Rights by
Private Contracts amongst themselves.

16. And for the Re-establishing of the Government, the measures to be observed
in a State of Deliberation (wherein Men must be supposed free) are Counsels
directed by the Rule of Charity; the Sum of which is, to do that, which upon a
true Estimation of all Particulars, is best for the whole: What that is, was
difficult to be Resolved, whilst King James was upon the Throne; and therefore
its no wonder, if even good Men differed in their Opinion about it, some being
for establishing a new Governor, others not. But when that King was out of
Possession, the Case was but thus (it being equally Just to have either)
whether was most for the Good and Benefit of England, to have King James, or
the Prince anti Princess of Orange established in the Government; and the Body
of the Nation being Protestants, this was no hard Question to be Resolved.

17. King James his Refusal to stand to the Agreement taken precisely, is in
strict Propriety not to be called a wrong to the People of England; but unkind,
unmerciful, ungrateful, uncharitable, etc. For though the People are bound
absolutely to obey according to the Agreement, yet the King by the Contract is
not bound to govern, no not by the Coronation Oath; but only, if that he will
govern, to govern no otherwise then is agreed; but he may Resign when he will
without Violation of his Oath; which if he does, and the People have another
Sovereign; if he would reassume his Government, we are Traitors and Rebels, if
we assist him to recover his Late Right: If he will attempt it by Force, he is
to be Resisted as an Enemy; and so he is, if he attempt it, being fallen from his
Right any other Way.

18. Because not the owning, but the sitting in a Seat, fills the Seat; if no
one sits in the Seat, the Seat is empty, though it has an owner; for he that
sits in the Seat, has the Seat in Occupation or Possession; if then no one
has the Throne in Possession, the Throne is plainly Vacant, whether it be
Hereditary or no. But, unless the then Prince of Orange by taking upon him (at
the Request of the Lords and others) the Administration of Public Affairs, was
in Possession of the Throne; it is certain, when King James had withdrawn
himself out of the Kingdom, in the Manner he did; neither He, nor any one else,
was in Possession: Therefore the Throne was then Vacant, according to the Lords
and Commons Vote.

19. Both Houses acknowledging the Crown Hereditary; we must first observe,
every Heir that inherits, enters by Virtue of a Right, that was inherent in the
Dying Person, and by Death, and no other Way, immediately devolves upon him. So
that no one can enter upon the Government by the Title of King James his Heir,
whilst himself is Living; and since King James has lost his Right (as was
showed above) no Right of Governing inherent in him at his Death ( rebus sic
stantibus) can be derived from him to any Heir whatsoever; and because it is
thus impossible for any to Inherit the Crown from King James Living or Dying;
when that King parted with the Right of the Government, as he did from himself,
he likewise parted with it from his Heirs; having made it naturally impossible
for the Crown to descend at all by the Right of Inheritance.

20. The Ground being Cleared, The Convention were to take Care to re-establish
the Government for the good of the Nation. If then they left us not in Anarchy,
but set up a Government, and that Monarchical, not Aristocratical, or
Democratical; Hereditary, not Elective, in the Royal, and no other Family; by
the next in the Right Line, as far as can be known, taking no Notice of one, of
whom no Notice was or could be given sufficient for the reasonable belief of
the main Body of the Nation; that is, if they placed one as the Presumptive
Heir (when there was in Truth no Heir Apparent) upon the Throne of the Kingdom,
and established the same Rights, Laws, Liberties, Privileges, and Religion,
nothing could be more wisely ordered, so far as Man can see.

21. If the Throne was not filled by Virtue of the Heirs Title, as in an
ordinary Case; King James, having rendered that impossible to be done in Nature,
must bear the blame of that, the People of England are Free. The present King,
and then Prince of Orange, had merited an Admission into a Confort-ship in the
Sovereignty with his Wife, by the Judgment and Joyful Acknowledgment, of the
next in the Right Line; and the People, which accordingly was consented to by
them the Parties in the Covenant. And the Princess being a Subject of England,
as such, Consents to the Acts of the Legislator; and therefore all her
Political Rights in the Kingdom, are secured, and none violated by the present
Establishment; wherein, because all Rights are saved, which King James left
naturally possible to be saved, may Heaven and Earth say Amen, Amen, to its
Peace and Prosperity.

London: Printed by S. B. And Sold by most Booksellers of London, and
Westminster, 1697.


