A Proposal for Raising the Public Credit, By Setting up an OFFICE for
Transferring and Discounting TALLIES.
THE Design of this Proposal is, To raise the Value of Tallies to such a
Proportion, that all Tallies may be discounted for five or six per Cent. and
that the worst of them being those at the greatest distance to be paid, shall
be the best; which is done by the Profit that is gained from the often
disposing of them.

The Method is thus:

I. THat an Office be settled by Act of Parliament for Transferring and
Discounting Bills drawn on Tallies: These Bills to be so limited, that they
may not exceed the Value of the Tallies, and so distinguished, as to be known
upon what Funds they are drawn, that it may appear when they are paid off by
their several Funds, and when to be brought to the Lords of the Treasury to be
Cancelled.

II. That all Persons have liberty to subscribe their Tallies to this Office,
which is to be the Stock of the Office, every Hundred Pound Tally, being One
Hundred Pound Stock; and at the time of such Subscription, Five Pounds per
Cent. in Money be paid into the Office for every Hundred Pound Tally, to raise
a Fund of Money to discount the Bills.

III. That these Bills be made payable by the Office upon a Months Notice, and
not at demand: That they be drawn on the Value of the whole Stock, by equal
Proportion of Ten per Cent; and that they be delivered to the several Owners of
the Stock, at such distance of time, as never to exceed the Money in the Office
that lies to discount them.

IV. That after the Rate of Five Pounds per Cent. be allowed for Discounting
the Bills, and be paid to the Office at the time of the Months Notice; and that
Five Pounds per Share, be paid upon Transferring the Stock of the Office, with
other small Fees for entering the Bills and Transfer's not exceeding five
Shillings per Cent; which Fees are to belong to the Owners of the Stock, and
are to increase the Fund of money for discounting Bills.

V. That there be a Clause in the Act of Parliament, that no Obligation or
Promise to Transfer any Bill or Stock of the Office shall be good in Law, or
oblige to Transfer them; and that only the actual Transferring in the Books of
the Office shall pass the right of any Bill or Stock: This will effectually
prevent Stock-jobbing, which would lessen and disturb the value of the Bills
and Stock; And, if not prevented, will frustrate the whole design: For the
Bills and Stock of the Office, would be continually sold by Contracts and
Policies, to avoid paying Fees, as is usual in other Stocks.

From these Considerations, that the five per Cent' paid for discounting the
Bills, will increase the money deposited for discounting them; and with the
Interest, will be always more than Ten per Cent. of the Stock, that the Bills
being made payable upon a months notice, the Office will know a month before,
what is to be paid; and therefore can the better provide for Payment; and that
from delivering the Bills to the Owners of the Stock, in such proportion of Ten
per Cent, as never to exceed the money that lies for discounting them. It
plainly appears, that there will always be a sufficient Fund of money in the
Office, to discount these Bills; and that these Bills will always be punctually
paid; because of the Profit by discounting them; and therefore will have an
undoubted Credit.

These Bills having gained a Credit, will pass current betwixt man and man,
after the rate of Ninety five Pounds for one hundred; because upon Payment of
five Pounds, the hundred Pound Bill will certainly be paid by the Office; which
makes the same reckoning as if the Bills passed for one hundred; and there can
be no Loss by them; because being at first delivered to the Owners of the
Stock, if they pass them away after the rate of ninety five for one hundred,
they receive the five Pounds again in the value of their Stock, when ever the
Bills are discounted.

Besides, the five Pound, paid for Transferring the Stock, will increase the
value of it; and the oftener it is Transferred, the greater will be the value.
Whereas otherwise the great necessity for money at this time, that the general
Scarcity of it will occasion many Sellers, which would very much sink the value
of the Stock, as in all other cases the many Sellers and few Buyers makes
things cheap; and the Stock would be of the same value or worse than the
Tallies now are, whereof many of them cannot be discounted for Thirty, nor
Forty per Cent.

But if it be considered what great Profit the Office may probably get, by the
often discounting of Bills, and Transferring of Stock: That if the Bills should
be delivered out to half the value of the Stock, and the Stock should be
Transferred ten times, the first value of the whole Stock would be paid to the
Office; and that if the Profit should not be so great, it will be always
certain without any Loss: It is very evident, that all the Tallies subscribed
to this Office will so rise in their value as to be current money, upon paying
the Charge of Transferring them (being five per Cent'); and those that are now
the worse Tallies, will be the best, because they continuing longest in the
Office before they are paid off, will receive the greatest Share of Profit
which may be so great in time as to Double the first value.

Thus by Settling this Office, the Public Credit may be Raised, and
Paper-Credit Restored. But if these Tally's should be Subscribed to the Bank of
England, it would be very uncertain whether it can be done, though they should
endeavor to follow the same method; because the Subscribers will never be able
to Raise so much Money, at this time of Scarcity, as will be sufficient to
Discount the Bank of Englands Bills, and those drawn on Tally's; which cannot
be less than near Two Millions, to pay off the Bank of Englands Bills, besides
what will be necessary to discount their Own.

For, though it may be supposed, that the Bank of Englands Bills, may be taken
into the Subscriptions with the Tally's, and then less money will serve, that
cannot be Relied on, unless those that have the Bills are forced to Subscribe;
which would be Unreasonable: For, it being a known Truth, that their credit can
never be Raised without Paying their Bills; those that have them will not
Subscribe; because they know when the Bank is engaged in such a Design, they
will be under a necessity to pay their Bills with Ready Money: And this
consideration will be an obstruction to the Subscribing the Tally's; because
they will be Apprehensive, that the ready money, that they deposite, for the
Discounting of their own Bills, will be made use of to pay off the Bank of
England's; which will make the whole design Uncertain.

And, besides the danger of Relying on such an Uncertainty, at a time when the
Nation so much wants credit, from the ill consequences, if they should not
succeed; it may be as dangerous, on the contrary, to the Nation, if the Bank of
England should succeed; for then by the Conjunction of Seven or Eight Millions,
they would have so great credit, as might give them such a Power, as to make
them dangerous to the Constitution of England; and let the Inconveniency be
found hereafter never so great, it may be out of the power of the Government to
Remedy; because they are founded upon a PERPETVITY not redeemable, but upon a
Great Sum of Money; which will be very difficult for a PARLIAMENT to raise, when
such a Powerful interest may join to oppose the Raising of it. Whereas, if this
Office be Settled, it will in time determine of it self, when the Tally's are
paid off, and the power in the interim may be so limited, as no such Jealousy
may arise from their Constitution.

N. B.


