A Confutation of Atheism From the Structure and Origin of Human Bodies.

PART I.

A SERMON Preached at Saint Martin's in the Fields, May 2. 1692.

Being the Third of the Lecture Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.

By RICHARD BENTLEY, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God,
EDWARD, Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1693.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse, R. Rmo in Christo Patri ac Dno Dno Johanni Archiep Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
May 7. 1692.
ACTS XVII. 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, and find him: though he be not far from every one of us; for in him we
Live, and Move, and have our Being.
I Have said enough in my last, to show the fitness and pertinency of the
Apostle's Discourse to the Persons he addressed to: whereby it sufficiently
appears that he was no Babbler, as some of the Athenian Rabble reproached him;
not a (...), a busy prating Fellow; as in another language they say Sermones
serere, Plautus. Virgil. Livius.
and Rumores serere in a like mode of Expression; that he did not talk at
random, but was thoroughly acquainted with the several humors and opinions of
his Auditors. And as Moses was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, so
it is manifest from this Chapter alone, if nothing else had been now extant,
that St. Paul was a great Master in all the Learning of the Greeks. One thing
further I shall observe from the words of the Text, before I enter upon the
Subject which I proposed; That it requires some Industry and Consideration to
find out the Being of God; we must seek the Lord, and feel after him, before we
can find him by the Light of Nature. The search indeed is not very tedious, nor
difficult; He not far from every one of us; or in him we live, and move, and
have our Being. The Consideration of our Mind and Understanding, which is an
incorporeal Substance independent from Matter; and the contemplation of our own
Bodies, which have all the stamps and characters of excellent Contrivance;
these alone, though we look upon nothing abroad, do very easily and proximately
guide us to the wise Author of all things. But however, as we see from our
Text, some Thoughts and Meditation are necessary to it; and a man may possibly
be so stupid, or wilfully ignorant or perverse, as not to have God in all his
thoughts, or to say in his heart, There is none. And this being observed, we
have an effectual answer to that Cavil of the Atheists; who make it an
objection against the Being of God, that they do not discover him without any
Application, in spite of their corrupt Wills and debauched Understandings. If,
say they, such a God as we are told of, had created and formed us, surely he
would have left upon our Minds a native and indeleble Inscription of Himself,
whereby we must needs have felt him, even without seeking, and believed in him
whether we would or no. So that these Atheists being conscious to themselves,
that they are void of such Belief, which (they say) if God was, would actually
and necessarily be in them, do bring their own wicked Doubting and Denying of
God, as Evidence against His Existence, and make their very Infidelity an
argument for it self. To which we reply, That God has endu'd Mankind with
Powers and Abilities, which we call Natural Light, and Reason, and Common
Sense; by the due use of which we cannot miss of the Discovery of his Being;
and this is sufficient. But as to any other original Notion and Proposition,
that God is, actually imprinted on us, antecedently to all use of our
Faculties, we may affirm against the Atheists, that the absence of such a
Notion does not give the least presumption against the truth of Religion;
because, though God be supposed to be, yet that Notion distinct from our
Faculties would not be requisite; nor is it pretended to by Religion. First, it
would not be requisite; because, without any such primitive Impression, we can
easily attain to the knowledge of the Deity by the sole use of our Natural
Reason. And again, such an Impression would have rendered the Belief of a God
irresistible and necessary, and thereby have bereaved it of all that is good
and acceptable in it. For as by taking away the Freedom of Human Will, and
making us mere Machins under fatal Ties and Impulses, it would destroy the very
nature of Moral Virtue; so likewise as to Faith, there would be nothing worthy
of praise and recompense in it, if there were left no possibility of Doubting
or Denying. And secondly, such a radical Truth, that God is, springing up
together with the Essence of the Soul, and previous to all other Thoughts, is
not pretended to by Religion. No such thing, that I know of, is affirmed or
suggested by the Scriptures. There are several Topics there used against the
Atheism and Idolatry of the Heathens; such as the visible marks of Divine
Wisdom and Goodness in the Works of the Creation, the vital Union of Souls with
Matter, and the admirable Structure of animate Bodies, and the like. But if our
Apostle had asserted such an anticipating Principle engraven upon our Souls
before all Exercise of Reason; what did he talk of seeking the Lord, if happily
they might feel after him and find him: seeing that if the knowledge of him was
in that manner innate and perpetual, there would be no occasion of seeking, nor
any hap or hazard in the finding. Such an Inscription would be self-evident
without any Ratiocination or Study, and could not fail constantly to exert its
Energy in their Minds. What did he talk of the Unknown God, and ignorantly
worshipping; when if such an Original Signature were always inherent in their
hearts; God could not be unknown to, or ignorantly worshipped by any? That
primary Proposition would have been clear, and distinct, and efficacious, and
universal in the minds of Men. S. Paul therefore, it appears, had no
apprehension of such a First Notion; nor made use of it for an argument; which
(seeing that whosoever has it, must needs know that he has it) if it be not
believed before by the Adversary, is false; and if it be believed, is
superfluous; and is of so frail and brittle a texture, that whereas other
arguments are not answered by bare denying without contrary Proof, the mere
doubting and disbelieving of this must be granted to be ipso facto the breaking
and confuting of it. Thus much therefore we have proved against the Atheist;
that such an original irresistible Notion is neither requisite upon,
supposition of a Deity, nor is pretended to by Religion; so that neither the
Absence of it is any Argument against the Being of God, nor a supposed false
Assertion of it an objection against the Scripture. It Is enough that all are
furnished with such Natural Powers and Capacities; that if they seriously
reflect, if they seek the Lord with meditation and study, they cannot fail of
finding and discovering him: whereby God is not left without witness, but the
Atheist without excuse. And now I haste to the Second Proposition deduced from
the Text, and the Argument of my present Discourse, That the organical
Structure of humane Bodies, whereby they are fitted to live, and move, and be
vitally informed by the Soul, is unquestionably the workmanship of a most wise,
and powerful, and beneficent Maker.

First, It Is allowed and acknowledged by all parties, that the Bodies of Men
and other Animals are excellently well fitted for Life, and Motion, and
Sensation; and the several Parts of them well adapted and accommodated to their
particular Functions. The Eye is very proper and meet for seeing, the Tongue
for tasting and speaking, the Hand for holding and lifting, and ten thousand
Operations beside: and so for the inward Parts; the Lungs are suitable for
Respiration, the Stomach for Concoction, the Lacteous Vessels for the Reception
of the Chyle, the Heart for the Distribution of the Blood to all the parts of
the Body. This is matter of Fact, and beyond all dispute; and in effect is no
more than to say, that Animals are Animals; for if they were deprived of these
Qualifications, they could not be so. This therefore is not the matter in
Question between us and the Atheists: But the Controversy is here. We, when we
consider so many constituent parts in the Bodies of Men, all admirably
compacted into so noble an Engine; in each of the very Fingers, for example,
there are Bones, and Gristles, and Ligaments, and Membranes, and Muscles, and
Tendons, and Nerves, and Arteries, and Veins, and Skin, and Cuticle, and Nail;
together with Marrow, and Fat, and Blood, and other Nutritious Juices; and all
those solid Parts of a determinate Size, and Figure, and Texture, and
Situation; and each of them made up of Myriads of little Fibers and Filaments,
not discoverable by the naked Eye: I say, when we consider how innumerable
parts must constitute so small a member, as the Finger, we cannot look upon it
or the whole Body, wherein appears so much Fitness and Use, and Subserviency to
infinite Functions, any otherwise than as the effect of Contrivance and Skill,
and consequently the Workmanship of a most Intelligent and Beneficent Being.
And though now the Propagation of Mankind is in a settled method of Nature, the
instrument of God: yet we affirm that its first Production was by the immediate
Power of the Almighty Author of Nature: and that all succeeding Generations of
Men are the Progeny of one primitive Couple. This is a Religious Man's account
of the Frame and Origination of himself. Now the Atheists agree with us, as to
the Fitness of Man's Body and its several Parts to their various Operations and
Functions (for that is visible and past all contradiction) but they vehemently
impugn, and horribly dread the Thought, That this Usefulness of the Parts and
the Whole should first arise from Wisdom and Design. So that here will be the
point in debate, and the subject of our present Undertaking; Whether this
acknowledged Fitness of Human Bodies must be attributed, as we say, to a wise
and good God; or, as the Atheists averr, to dead, senseless Matter. They have
contrived several tricks and methods of Deceit, (...). Ephesians. 4.14.
one repugnant to another, to evade (if possible) this most cogent Proof of a
Deity; All which I will propose and refute: and I hope to make it appear, that
here, as indeed every where, but here certainly, in the great Dramatick Poem of
Nature, is dignus Deo vindice Nodus, a necessity of introducing a God.

And first, I will answer what Exceptions they can have against Our account:
and secondly, I will confute all the Reasons and Explications they can give of
their Own.

1. First, I will answer what Exceptions they can have against Our account of
the Production of Mankind. And they may object, That the Body it self, though
pretty good in its Kind and upon Their Hypothesis, nevertheless does not look
like the Workmanship of so great a Master, as is pretended by Us; that infinite
Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power, would have bestowed upon us more Senses than
five, or at least these five in a much higher Perfection; that we could never
have come out of the Hands of the Almighty, so subject to numerous Diseases, so
obnoxious to violent Deaths; and, at best, of such a short and transitory Life.
They can no more ascribe so sorry an Effect to an Omniscient Cause, than some
ordinary piece of Clock-work with a very few motions and uses, and those
continually out of order, and quickly at an end, to the best Artist of the Age.
But to this we reply: First, as to the five Senses, it would be rash indeed to
affirm, That God, though he had pleased, could not have endued us with more.
But thus much we may averr, That though the Power of God be infinite and
perfect, yet the Capacities of Matter are within limits and bounds. Why then
does the Atheist suspect that there may possibly be any more ways of Sensation
than what we have already? Has he an Idea, or Notion, or Discovery of any
more? So far from that, that he cannot make any addition or progress in those
very Senses he has, further than they themselves have informed him. He cannot
imagine one new Color, or Taste, or Smell, beside those that have actually
fallen under his respective Senses. Much less can he that is destitute of an
entire Sense, have any Idea or Representation of it; as one that is born Deaf
has no Notion of Sounds; or Blind, of Colors and Light. If then the Atheist
can have no Imagination of more Senses than five, why does he suppose that a
Body is capable of more? If we had double or triple as many, there might still
be the same suspicion for a greater number without end; and therefore in both
cases it is equally unreasonable and groundless. Secondly, we affirm, that our
Senses have that degree of Perfection which is most fit and suitable to our
Estate and Condition. If the Eye were so piercing, as to descry even opake and
little Objects a hundred Leagues off, it would do us little service; it would
be terminated by neighboring Hills and Woods, or in the largest and evenest
plain by the very Convexity of the Earth, unless we could always inhabit the
tops of Mountains and Cliffs, or had Wings too to fly aloft, when we had a mind
to take a Prospect. And if mankind had had Wings (as perhaps some extravagant
Atheist may think us deficient in that) all the World must have consented to
clip them; or else Human Race had been extinct before this time, nothing upon
that supposition being safe from Murder and Rapine. Or if the Eye were so
acute, as to rival the finest Microscopes, and to discern the smallest Hair
upon the leg of a Gnat, it would be a curse and not a blessing to us; it would
make all things appear rugged and deformed; the most finely polished Crystal
would be uneven and rough: The sight of our own selves would affright us: The
smoothest Skin would be beset all over with ragged Scales, and bristly Hairs.
And beside, we could not see at one view above what is now the space of an
Inch, and it would take a considerable time to survey the then mountainous bulk
of our own Bodies. Such a Faculty of sight so disproportioned to our other
Senses and to the Objects about us would be very little better than Blindness
it self. And again, God has furnished us with Invention and Industry, so that
by optical Gasses we can more than supply that imaginary defect of our own
Eyes, and discover more remote and minute Bodies with that assistance than
perhaps the most whimsical Atheist would desire to do without it. So likewise
if our Sense of Hearing were exalted proportionably to the former, what a
miserable condition would Mankind be in? What whisper could be low enough, but
many would over-hear it? What Affairs, that most require it, could be
transacted with secrecy? and whither could we retire from perpetual humming and
buzzing? every breath of Wind would incommode and disturb us: we should have no
quiet or sleep in the silentest nights and most solitary places; and we must
inevitably be stricken Deaf or Dead with the noise of a clap of Thunder. And
the like inconveniences would follow, if the Sense of Feeling was advanced to
such a degree, as the Atheist requires. How could we sustain the pressure of
our very Clothes in such a condition; much less carry burdens and provide for
conveniences of Life? We could not bear the assault of an Insect, or a Feather,
or a puff of Air without pain. There are examples now of wounded persons, that
have roared for anguish and torment at the discharge of Ordnance, though at a
very great distance; what insupportable torture then should we be under upon a
like concussion in the Air, when all the whole Body would have the tenderness
of a Wound? In a word, all the Changes and Emendations that the Atheists would
make in our Senses, are so far from being Improvements, that they would prove
the utter Ruin and Extirpation of Mankind.

But perhaps they may have better success in their complaints about the
Distempers of the Body and the Shortness of Life. We do not wonder indeed, that
the Atheist should lay a mighty stress upon this Objection. For to a man that
places all his Happiness in the Indolency and Pleasure of the Body, what can be
more terrible than Pain or a Fit of Sickness nothing but Death alone, the most
dreadful thing in the world. When an Atheist reflects upon Death, his very
Hope is Despair; and it is the crown and top of his Wishes, that it may prove
his utter Dissolution and Destruction. No question if an Atheist had had the
making of himself, he would have framed a Constitution that could have kept
pace with his insatiable Lust, been invincible by Gluttony and Intemperance,
and have held out vigorous a thousand years in a perpetual Debauch. But we
answer; First, in the words of St. Paul: Nay but, O Man, who art thou, Romans
9.20.
that reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
Why have thou made me thus? We adore and magnify his most holy Name for his
undeserved Mercy toward us, that he made us the Chief of the visible Creation;
and freely acquit his Goodness from any imputation of Unkindness, that he has
placed us no Higher. Secondly, Religion gives us a very good account of the
present Infirmity of our Bodies. Man at his first Origin was a Vessel of
Honor, when he came first out of the Hands of the Potter: endued with all
imaginable Perfections of the Animal Nature; till by Disobedience and Sin,
Diseases and Death came first into the World. Thirdly, The Distempers of the
Body are not so formidable to a Religious Man, as they are to an Atheist: He
has a quite different judgment and apprehension about them: he is willing to
believe, that our present condition is better for us in the Issue, than that
uninterrupted Health and Security, that the Atheist desires; which would
strongly tempt us to forget God and the concerns of a better Life. Whereas now
he receives a Fit of Sickness, as the (...), the kind Chastisement and
Discipline of his Heavenly Father, to wean his Affections from the World, where
he is but as on a Journey; and to fix his thoughts and desires on things above,
where his Country and his Dwelling is: that where he has placed his Treasure
and Concerns, there his heart may be also. Fourthly, Most of the Distempers
that are incident to us are of our own making, the effects of abused Plenty,
and Luxury, and must not be charged upon our Maker; who notwithstanding out of
the Riches of his Compassion has provided for us store of excellent Medicines,
to alleviate in a great measure those very Evils which we bring upon our
selves. And now we are come to the last objection of the Atheist, That Life is
too short. Alas for him, what pity it is that he cannot wallow immortally in his
sensual Pleasures! If his Life were many whole Ages longer than it is, he would
still make the same Complaint, Brevis est hic fructus homullis. Lucret. l. 3.
For Eternity, and that is the thing he trembles at, is every whit as long after
a thousand years as after fifty. But Religion gives us a better prospect and
makes us look beyond the gloomy Regions of Death with Comfort and Delight: When
this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality.
We are so far from repining at God, that he has not extended the period of our
Lives to the Longaevity of the Antediluvians; that we give him thanks for
contracting the Days of our Trial, and receiving us more maturely into those
Everlasting Habitations above, that he has prepared for us.

And now that I have answered all the Atheist's Exceptions against Our account
of the Production of Mankind, I come in the next place to examine all the
Reasons and Explications they can give of their own.

The Atheists upon this occasion are divided into Sects, and (which is the mark
and character of Error) are at variance and repugnancy with each other and with
themselves. Some of them will have Mankind to have been thus from all Eternity.
But the rest do no^ approve of any infinite Successions, but are positive for a
beginning; and they also are subdivided into three Parties: the first ascribe
the Origin of Men to the Influence of the Stars upon some extraordinary
Conjunction or Aspect: Others again reject all Astrology; and some of these
mechanically produce Mankind at the very first Experiment by the action of the
Sun upon duly prepared Matter: but others are rather of opinion, that after
infinite blundering and miscarrying our Bodies at last happened and jumped into
this Figure by mere Chance and Accident. There Is no Atheist in the World, that
reasons about his Infidelity (which God knows most of them never do) but he
takes one of these four Methods. I will refute them every one in the same order
that I have named them: the two former in the present Discourse, reserving the
others for another occasion.

1. And First, the Opinion of those Atheists that will have Mankind and other
Animals to have subsisted thus eternally in infinite Generations already past,
will be found to be flat Nonsense and Contradiction to it self, and repugnant
also to matter of Fact. First, it is contradiction to its self. Infinite
Generations of Men (they say) are already past and gone: but whatsoever is now
past, was once actually present; so that each of those Infinite Generations was
once in its turn actually present: therefore all except One Generation were
once future and not in being, which destroys the very supposition: For either
that One Generation must it self have been Infinite, which is Nonsense; or it
was the Finite Beginning of Infinite Generations between it self and us, which
is Infinity terminated at both ends, which is nonsense as before. Again,
Infinite past Generations of Men have been once actually present: therefore
there may be some one Man of them given, that was at infinite distance from us
now: therefore that man's Son likewise, suppose forty years younger than his
Father, was either at infinite distance from us or at finite: if that Son too
was at infinite distance from us, then one Infinite is longer by forty years
than another; which is absurd: if at finite, then forty years added to finite
makes it infinite, which is as absurd as the other. And again, The number of
Men that are already dead and gone is infinite, as they say: but the number of
the Eyes of those men must necessarily be twice as much as that of the men
themselves, and that of the Fingers ten times as much, and that of the Hairs of
their Heads thousands of times. So that we have here one Infinite number twice,
ten times, and thousands of times as great as another, which is contradiction
again. Thus we see it is impossible in it self, that any successive duration
should be actually and positively infinite, or have infinite successions
already gone and past. Neither can these Difficulties be applied to the Eternal
Duration of God Almighty. For thou we cannot comprehend Eternity and Infinity;
yet we understand what they are not. And something, we are sure, must have
Existed from all Eternity; because all things could not emerge and start out of
Nothing. So that if this prae-existent Eternity is not compatible with a
successive Duration, as we clearly and distinctly perceive that it is not; then
it remains, that some Being, though infinitely above our finite comprehensions,
must have had an identical, invariable Continuance from all Eternity; which
Being is no other than God. For as his Nature is perfect and immutable without
the least shadow of change; so his Eternal Duration is permanent and
indivisible, not measurable by Time and Motion, nor to be computed by number of
successive Moments. One day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day.

And Secondly, this Opinion of infinite Generations is repugnant likewise to
matter of Fact. It Is a Truth beyond opposition, that the universal Species of
Mankind has had a gradual increase, notwithstanding what War, and Famine, and
Pestilence, and Floods, and Conflagrations, and the Religious Profession of
Celibracy, and other Causes, may at certain periods of time have interrupted
and retarded it. This is manifest from the History of the Jewish Nation, Vide
Observations upon the Bills of Mortality.
from the account of the Roman Census, and Registers of our Own Country, where
the proportion of Births to Burials is found upon observation to be yearly as
Fifty to Forty. Now if Mankind do increase, though never so slowly, but one
Couple suppose in an Age; it is enough to evince the falsehood of Infinite
Generations already expired. For though an Atheist should contend, that there
were ten thousand million couple of Mankind now in being, (that we may allow
him multitude enough) it is but going back so many Ages, and we descend to a
single Original Pair. And it is all one in respect of Eternal Duration yet
behind, whether we begin the world so many millions of Ages ago, or date it
from the late Era of about Six Thousand years. And moreover this recent
beginning of the World is further established from the known Original of
Empires and Kingdoms, and the Invention of Arts and Sciences: whereas if
infinite Ages of Mankind had already preceded, there could nothing have been
left to be invented or improved by the successful industry and curiosity of
our own. The Circulation of the Blood, and the Weight and Spring of the Air
(which is as it were the Vital Pulse and the great Circulation of Nature, and
of more importance in all Physiology, than any one Invention since the
beginning of Science) had never lain hidden so many myriads of Generations, and
been reserved for a late happy Discovery by two great Luminaries of this
Island. I know the Atheist may endeavor to evade this by supposing, That
though Mankind have been from everlasting, and have perpetually increased by
generation; yet at certain great periods there may be universal Deluges, which
may not wholly extinguish Mankind (for, they will say, there is not Water enough
in Nature for that) but may cover the Earth to such a Height, that none but a
few Mountainers may escape, enough to continue Humane Race; and yet being
illiterate Rusticks (as Mountainers always are) they can preserve no Memoirs of
former times, nor propagate any Sciences or Arts; and so the world must needs
be thought by Posterity to have begun at such periods. But to this I answer,
First, That upon this supposition there must have been infinite Deluges already
past: for if ever this Atheist admits of a first Deluge, he is in the same
noose that he was. For then he must assert, That there were infinite
generations and an infinite increase of mankind before that first Deluge; and
then the Earth could not receive them, but the infinite Bodies of Men must
occupy an infinite Space, and then all the Matter of the Universe must be
humane Body, and other absurdities that follow it, which are infinite too. But
if he says, That there have been infinite Deluges heretofore, this is
impossibility again; for all that I said before against the Notion of infinite
past Generations, is alike applicable to this. Secondly, Such Universal Deluges
(seeing the Deity is now excluded) must be produced in a natural way: and
therefore gradually, and not in an instant: and therefore (because the tops of
Mountains, they say, are never overflown) the civilized people may escape
thither out of Villages and Cities; and consequently, against the Atheist,
Arts, and Sciences, and Histories, may be preserved, and derived to the
succeeding World. Thirdly, Let us imagine the whole Terraqueous Globe with its
Atmosphere about it; What is there here, that can naturally effect an Universal
Deluge? If you would drown one Country or Continent with Rains and Inundations,
you must borrow your Vapor and Water from some other part of the Globe. You can
never overflow all at a time. If the Atmosphere it self was reduced into Water,
(as some think it possible) it would not make an O^b above 32 foot deep, which
would soon be swallowed up by the cavity of the Sea, and the depressed parts of
the Earth, and be a very feeble attempt toward an Universal Deluge. But then
what immense Weight is there above, that must overcome the expansive force of
the Air, and compress it into near the thousandth part of the room that it now
takes up? We, that acknowledge a God Almighty, can give an account of one
Deluge, by saying it was miraculous; but it would be a little strange to see an
Atheist have recourse to a Miracle; and that not once only, but upon infinite
occasions. But perhaps they may endeavor to prove the possibility of such a
natural Deluge, by borrowing an ingenious Notion, and pretending, That the face
of Nature may be now quite changed from what it was; and that formerly the
whole Collection of Waters might be an orbicular Abyss, arched over with an
exterior Crust or Shell of Earth; and that the breaking and fall of this Crust
might naturally make a Deluge. I Will allow the Atheist all the fair play in the
world. Let us suppose the Fall of this imaginary Crust. First, It seems to be
impossible, but that all the Inhabitants of this Crust must be dashed to pieces
in its Ruins. So that this very Notion brings us to the necessity of a new
production of Men; to evade which it is introduced by the Atheist. Again, If
such a Crust naturally fell, then it had in its own constitution a tendency
toward a Fall; that is, it was more likely and inclinable to fall this
thousand years, suppose, than the last. But if the Crust was always gradually
nearer and nearer to falling; that plainly evinces, that it had not endured
eternally before its Fall. For let them assign any imaginable period for its
falling, how could it have held out till then (according to the supposition)
the unmeasurable duration of infinite Ages before? And again, such a Crust
could fall but once; for what Architect can an Atheist suppose, to rebuild a
new Arch out of the ruins of the other? But I have shown before, that this
Atheist has need of infinite Deluges to effect his design; and therefore I Will
leave him to contrive how to make infinite Crusts one upon the back of another;
and now proceed to examine in the second place, The Astrological Explication of
the Origin of Men.

2. If you ask one of this Party, what Evidence he is able to produce for the
truth of his Art, he may perhaps offer some Physical Reasons for a general
influence of the Stars upon terrestrial bodies: but as Astrology is considered
as a System of Rules and Propositions, he will not pretend to give any reason
of it a priori; but resolves all that into Tradition from the Chaldeans and
Egyptians, who first learnt it by long observation, and transmitted it down to
Posterity; and that now it is daily confirmed by Events, which are experienced
to answer the Predictions. This is all that can be said for Astrology as an
Art. So that the whole Credibility of this Planetary production of Mankind must
depend upon Observation. But are they able to show among all the Remains of the
Chaldaick Observations for Four hundred and seventy thousand years (as they
pretended) any Tradition of such a Production? So far from that, that the
Chaldeans believed the world and mankind to have been from everlasting, which
opinion I have refuted before. Neither can the Egyptian Wizards with their
long Catalogue of Dynasties, and Observations for innumerable Years, supply the
Atheists with one instance of such a Creation. Where are the fragments of
Petosiris and Necepso, that may countenance this Assertion? I believe if they
had had any example of men born out of the Soil, they would rather have
ascribed it to the fruitful Mud of the Nile (as they did the breeding of
Frogs, So Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. c. 2. (...), etc.
and Mice, and Monsters) than to the efficacy of Stars. But with the leave of
these Fortunetellers did the Stars do this feat once only, which gave beginning
to Human Race? or have they frequently done so, and may do it again? If
frequently, why is not this Rule delivered in Ptolemy and Albumasar? If once
only at the beginning, then how came it to be discovered? Who were there then
in the world, to observe the Births of those First Men, and calculate their
Nativities, as they sprawl'd out of Ditches? Those Sons of Earth were very wise
Children if they themselves knew, that the Stars were their Fathers. Unless we
are to imagine, that they understood the Planets and the Zodiac by instinct,
and fell to drawing Schemes of their own Horoscopes, in the same Dust they
sprung out of? For my part I can have no great veneration for Chaldaick
Antiquity; Vitruvius, lib. 9. c. 4. Lucret. lib. 5. Vt Babylonica Chaldaeum
doctrina, etc. Apuleius de Deo Socratis: Seu illa (Luna) proprio and perpeti
fulgore, ut Chaldaei arbitrantur, part luminis compos, part altera cassa
fulgoris.
when I see they could not discover in so many thousand years, that the Moon
was an opake Body, and received her Light from the Sun. But suppose their
Observations had been never so accurate, it could add no Authority to modern
Astrology, which is borrowed from the Greeks. It Is well known that Berosus, or
his Scholars, new modelled and adapted the Babylonian Doctrines to the Grecian
Mythology. The supposed Influences of Aries and Taurus for example, have a
manifest relation to the Grecian Stories of the Ram that carried Phrixus, and
the Bull that carried Europa. Now which of these is the Copy, and which the
Original? Were the Fables taken from the Influences, or the Influences from the
Fables? the Poetical Fables, more ancient than all Records of History; or the
Astrological Influences, that were not known to the Greeks till after Alexander
the Great? But without question those Fabulous Tales had been many a time told
and sung to lull children asleep, before ever Berosus set up his
Intelligence-Office at Coos. And the same may be said of all the other
Constellations. First, Poetry had filled the Skies with Asterisms and Histories
belong to them; and then Astrology devises the feigned Virtues and Influences
of each, from some property of the Image, or allusion to the Story. And the
same trifling futility appears in their XII Signs of the Zodiac, and their
mutual Relations and Aspects. Why no more Aspects than diametrically opposite,
and such as make aequlateral figures? Why are the Masculine and Feminine, the
Fiery and Airy, and Watery and Earthly Signs all placed at such regular
distances? Were the Virtues of the Stars disposed in that order and rank, on
purpose only to make a pretty Diagram upon Paper? But the Atheistical
Astrologer is doubly pressed with this absurdity. For if there was no Counsel
at the making of the world, how came the Asterisms of the same nature and
energies to be so harmoniously placed at regular intervals? And how could all
the Stars of one Asterism agree and conspire together to constitute an
Universal? Why does not every single Star shed a separate influence; and have
Aspects with other Stars of their own Constellation? But what need there many
words? As if the late Discoveries of the Celestial Bodies had not plainly
detected the imposture of Astrology? The Planet Saturn is found to have a great
Ring that encircles him, and three lesser Planets that move about him, as the
Moon does about the Earth: and Jupiter has four Satellites, which by their
Interposition between him and us make some hundreds of Eclipses every year. Now
the whole Tribe of Astrologers, that never dreamed of these Planets have always
declared, that when Jupiter and Saturn come about again to any given Point,
they exert (considered singly by themselves) the same Influence as before. But
it is now manifest, that when either of them return to the same point; the
Planets about them, that must make up an united Influence with them, have a
different situation in respect of us and each other, from what they had the
time before: and consequently the joint Influence must be perpetually varied,
and never be reducible to any Rules and Observations. Or if the Influences be
conveyed hither distinct, yet sometimes some of the Little Planets will eclipse
the Great one at any given point; and therefore intercept and obstruct the
Influence. I cannot now insist on many other Arguments deducible from the late
Improvements of Astronomy; For if the Earth be not the Center of the Planetary
Motions, what must become then of the present Astrology, which is wholly
adapted to that vulgar Hypothesis? And yet nevertheless, when they lay under
such wretched mistakes for many Myriads of Years, if we are willing to believe
them; they would all along, as now, appeal to Experience and Event for the
confirmation of their Doctrins. That Is the invincible Demonstration so the
Verity of the Science: And indeed as to their Predictions, I think our
Astrologers may assume to themselves that infallible Oracle of Tiresias,

O Laertiade, quicquid dico, aut erit, aut non. There Is but a true and a false
in any telling of Fortune; and a man that never hits on the right side, cannot
be called a bad Guesser, but must miss out of design, and be notably skillful
at lighting on the wrong. And were there not formerly as great pretensions to
it from the superstitious observation of the Entrails of Cows, of the flying of
Vulturs, and the pecking of Chickens? Nay, the old Augurs and Southsayers had
better reason to profess the Art of Divining, than the modern Astrological
Atheist: for They supposed there were some Demons, that directed the
Indications. So likewise the Chaldean and Egyptian Astrologers were much more
excusable than He. It was the Religion of their Countries to worship the Stars,
as we know from unquestionable Authority. They believed them Ingelligent
Beings, and no other than very Gods; Maimonides More Nevochim De Zabiis and
Chaldaeis. Plato in Cratylo. Diodorus, lib. 1. c. 2. Eusebius Demonst. Evangel.
lib. 1. c. 6. (...).
and therefore had some Reason to suspect, that they might govern Human
Affairs. The Influence of the Stars was in their apprehensions no less than
Divine Power. But an Atheist, that believes the Planets to be dark, solid and
senseless Bodies, like the brute Earth he treads on; and the Fixed Stars and the
Sun to be inanimate Balls of Fire; what Reasons can He advance for the credit
of such Influences? He acknowledges nothing besides Matter and Motion; so that
all that he can conceive to be transmitted hither from the Stars, must needs be
performed either by Mechanism or Accident: either of which is wholly
unaccountable, and the latter irreconcilable to any Art or System of Science.
But if both were allowed the Atheist; yet as to any production of Mankind, they
will be again refuted in my following Discourse. I can preserve a due esteem
for some great Men of the last Age, before the Mechanical Philosophy was
revived, though they were too much addicted to this nugatory Art. When Occult
Quality, and Sympathy and Antipathy were admitted for satisfactory Explications
of things, even wise and virtuous Men might swallow down any Opinion that was
countenanced by Antiquity. But at this time of day, when all the general powers
and capacities of Matter are so clearly understood; he must be very ridiculous
himself, that does not deride and explode the antiquated Folly. But we may see
the miserable Shifts that some men are put to; when that which was first
founded upon, and afterward supported by Idolatry, is now become the tottering
Sanctuary of Atheism. If the Stars be no Deities, Astrology is groundless: and
if the Stars be Deities, why is the Astrologer an Atheist? He may easily be no
Christian; and it is difficult indeed to be both at once: because, as I have
said before, Idolatry is at the bottom; and by submitting Human Actions and
Inclinations to the Influence of the Stars, they destroy the very Essence of
Moral Virtue and the Efficacy of Divine Grace: Council. Laod. Can. 36. Conc. 6.
in Trullo. Can. 61. Cod. Just. lib. 9. tit. 18. Cod. Theodos. l 9. tit. 16.
(...) lib. 60. tit. 39.
and therefore Astrology was justly condemned by the Ancient Fathers and
Christian Emperors. An Astrologer, I say, may very easily be no Christian; he
may be an Idolater or a Pagan: but I could hardly think Astrology to be
compatible with rank Atheism; if I could suppose any great gifts of Nature to
be, where either do reside. But let him be what he will, he is not able to do
much hurt by his Reasons and Example. For Religion it self, according to his
Principles, is derived from the Stars. And he owns, it is not any just
Exceptions he has taken against Christianity, but it is his Destiny and Fate;
it is Saturn in the Ninth House, and not Judgment and Deliberation, that made
him an Atheist.

FINIS.

