A LETTER TO A Person of Quality, WRITTEN BY Mr. Edward Bagshavv, The Day
before his COMMITMENT Close-Prisoner to the GATEHOUSE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

A LETTER to a Person of Quality, written by Mr. Edward Bagshaw.
Noble Sir,
I Believe you will be much surprised, when you understand that I write this,
just as I am going to London, in obedience to a Warrant wherewith I was served
last Saturday. And, that I may not qualify, but heighten your wonder, I
purpose to give you a brief Account of my Life and Studies, wherewith I think I
shall not only satisfy you, but likewise the World (if you think fit to
communicate this Paper to them) that my carriage has been such as did not
deserve this rigor, to make it publicly taken notice of.

When I came, or rather when I was driven out of Ireland, on September 17. (by
the violence of some men, who could neither preach themselves, nor permit it in
others) I took up a resolution (as David sometimes did, when he was tired out
with Readiness persecution) that as soon as ever I arrived to some fixed place of
abode, I would quit that Calling of the Ministry, which hitherto (almost ever
since my undertaking it) had only engaged my pains, and exercised my patience;
and so betake my self to some other employment, whereby I might perhaps equally
profit others, and likewise certainly procure more advantage, at least more
quiet, to my self. Nor did I think this resolution could be blamed in me by
any, especially by those of the Episcopal Persuasion, since they without any
such necessity lying upon them, yet make no scruple to mix some Temporal with
their Spiritual Employment, or rather so much attend the first, that they leave
themselves very little time for minding of the other.

But how plausible soever my Change might be, yet in so important a matter
(wherein the whole course of my Life and method of my Studies was to be
altered) that I might do nothing rashly, I thought it my duty to communicate my
design unto my Father, whose consent could I once obtain, I purposed then to
address my self unto the study of the Law, in which his known abilities made
him so good a guide, that I promised my self much happiness in having his
Assistance, as a Clue, to lead me through all those tedious Labyrinths and
Meanders of our English Laws.

Being full of these thoughts, I arrived at Morton, my Fathers house, on October.
4. and within few hours obtained not only his Assent to, but his Approbation of
my Design, which I waited only his Recovery effectually to pursue. But it
pleased God to dash all this Project, by putting an end to my Father's days,
who within ten days after my arrival, exchanged this Life for a better, and
now in an higher and most impartial Court, has received that Reward for his
Piety and Loyalty, which on Earth he neither had, nor hoped for.

With him, my Plot upon the Law proved abortive, and died too; and now more
than ever, I thought my self obliged to attend the Study of Divinity, as being
hopeless of ever attaining to any competent knowledge in the other, since my
Director was taken away, who alone was both able and willing to smooth those
rugged ways, and make them plain to my enquiry: And thus I bad the Law adieu;
first, blessing God, for his mercy in that, what I thought to be an harsh
Providence, viz. my removal out of Ireland, was by God overruled, merely to
bring me home, to receive the last words and Blessing of my honored Father;
who, rather dissolved by Age than broken by Sickness, in a most calm and
Christian manner expired in my Arms.

The Funeral Solemnities were no sooner over, but I went up to London, partly,
to fit my self with Mourning, but principally, to take my final leave of that
Honorable Family to which I was formerly related, and within eight days I
returned to discharge a double duty, both to my Mother that was living, and to
my Father that was dead, part of whose last words were, that I should love my
Mother; which I thought I could not more effectually manifest that I did, than
by continuing with her in her solitude.

Accordingly I brought all my Books to Morton, and being now fully settled upon
the exercise of my Ministry, I laid hold of such opportunities for Preaching,
which in that place the absence of the Minister did afford me: To which,
besides the Invitation of the People (who were as Sheep scattered without a
Shepherd) I had these Motives.

First, The very Office of the Ministry is by the Apostle called a Stewardship,
which shows that the gifts whereby any is qualified for the discharge of it,
are entrusted not for his use that has them, but for theirs who need them.
Stewards must not lay up, but lay out their Lord's Money; which the Apostle
implies, when having premised, that he would have himself and others so
accounted, as Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor.
4. 1, 2. he presently subjoyns (...), what remains, it is required in a Steward
that he be found faithful. Now that this faithfulness is nothing else, but a
careful and diligent ministering of what he has received, appears in that the
Apostle says in another place, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17. Yea, woe unto me if I preach
not the Gospel, for a dispensation, or, as in the Greek, a Stewardship is
committed to me; so that without incurring that Woe, I did not see how I could
silence my self, or surcease from Preaching.

Secondly, The nature of Ministerial gifts, requires a continual Exercise for
the improvement of them; for they increase by using: To him that has, i. e. to
him that well uses what he has, more shall be given; whereas the slothful
servant, who pretended fear, and therefore would not employ his Talent, had it
presently taken from him: as Fire, if not blown up, insensibly decays; or as
Water, if it has not a constant current, dryes up, or else corrupts and
putrifies: So these Gifts of God's Spirit, which are compared to Fire and
Water, if they be not employed for the Edification of others, for which end
they were imparted, they are withdrawn, as the Kingdom of Heaven was from the
Jews, and given to those who bring forth the fruits of them.

Thirdly, In my most impartial thoughts, I could see no reason why I should
forbear Preaching, but merely such prudential motives, which, though many
little streams, yet at last resolved themselves into that great Channel,
namely, the fear of men, against which there are such special Caveats, such
positive Threats, such consolatory Promises, in Scripture, that of the two, I
thought I did most like a Christian and a Divine, if I chose to be wholly
biased by the fear of God, in which alone I promised to my self a final peace,
and since I have found the happy effects of it.

Upon these and suchlike Arguments (which I would enlarge, were I not confined
to the limits of a Letter) whilst I stayed at Morton, I constantly preached,
and that in the Church, so often as the place was unsupplied by others; and that
I might give an Evidence to the World, how little factious or humoursome I was
in my Opinion (although I have but little reverence for Church Holy Days, yet,
that I might be instant out of season, as well as in it) I did on Christmas Day
give the Parish a Sermon, though there has been none for above twelve years
before.

Thus far I enjoyed a quiet, a greater than which I could not be ambitious of,
when on the sudden I was alarmed, first with flying Rumors, then with certain
Information that there were Warrants issued out to apprehend me; and this I
heard above a fortnight before that any was actually served upon me.

I had time and leisure enough in this interval to take advice, what in that
juncture of time would best become me to do: and though many of my Friends did
counsel me to withdraw my self, urging that of Solomon, A prudent man
foreseeth the evil, and hides himself; but a fool rages, or rusheth on, and
is confident: and this they enforced both by our Saviors advice to his
Apostles (when they persecute you in one City, fly to another) and by his
practice in himself, who frequently concealed himself from the Peoples rage,
and at last when the Pharisees had fully concluded of his Arraignment and
Trial, it is said expressly, That Jesus therefore walked no more openly among
the Jews, but went thence into a Country near to the Wilderness, and there
continued with his Disciples, Joh. 11.54. These Examples joined with the
Entreaties of my nearest Relations, might have warranted me, should I have
taken that way to secure my self, which the Law of Self-preservation (without
any other inducements) does prompt most others unto. Yet with me none of these
Arguments did prevail, but I continued fixed in my Resolution, to abide where I
was, and wait the issue of all these Reports; and that

First, Because I was not conscious to my self, that I had done any thing to
deserve either death or bonds, and therefore I would not by flight betray my
own innocence, or by concealment give too just an occasion of suspicion.

Secondly, Because I had writ many things concerning matters now in
controversy, for which perhaps I might be questioned, and should I have fled
from the Trial, I could never make amends to the Truths I had formerly
asserted; since he scarcely deserves the name of a Christian Writer, who, in
the things of God, is not willing to die, for what he has once upon good
grounds defended.

Thirdly, I had frequently exhorted others, not to decline Afflictions, but if
the cause was for Righteousness sake, to look upon all such Trials as marks of
honor; and should I my self have flinched, and because trouble was near, I
should not only have contradicted the truth of my Doctrine, but likewise,
amongst all my hearers at least, have discredited the sincerity of my
Profession.

Fourthly, I found upon survey and measuring of my own strength, (I mean my
own, no otherwise than as given me by God) that death was not at all terrible
to me, but a Prison was very dreadful; for having been so long used to the air
of liberty, I could scarcely with any patience, think of Confinement. This
Weakness I durst not indulge, and therefore resolved to wait and see what God
would call me to; of whom I might the more confidently beg assistance, when I
had done nothing for my own ease, to avoid his disposal. Nor had the contrary
Arguments much weight in them; For,

First, That Speech of Solomon's, as most of his Proverbs, holds true only in
Political Distempers, or State Commotions; then indeed it is prudence for a
wise man to escape the danger; but has no place at all in Christian Trials,
where he that suffers when he is called to it, is always on the safest side,
as acting most sutably to Gospel Principles.

Secondly, Our Saviors advice to his Apostles, was only temporary for that
season, till they had finished their Ministry in Judea, and possibly at that
time there might be some respect had to their weakness, by comparing this place
with that in Matthew. 9.15, 17. but after our Saviors Resurrection, we read no
more of their flying, but of their persisting in Jerusalem, even when the
violence of the Persecution had scattered others.

Lastly, Our Savior knew the exact and critical manner and minute of his
death, and therefore it is said more than once, that he did this and that,
because he knew all things that should befall him, and his time was not yet
fully come; and this might occasion his frequent removal: whereas our ignorance
of what is to come, ought to make us conceive, that every Trial which God in
his Providence brings upon us, ought without demur to be encountered and
undertaken by us, as that whereby he intends himself some glory, which, by
careing for our selves, we may, intentionally at least, defeat him of.

Being thus resolved, I waited with patience, to see what would be the issue of
all these Rumors; but after a fortnights stay, finding no effect of them, I
concluded, the whole fame to be false and frivolous, and therefore went on
Saturday, Jan. 3d. to a Noble Kinsmans house of mine (whose Name and Worth you
know) to fetch home my Sister, who had there spent her Christmas; within less
than an hour after my arrival there, one that was Clerk to Sir John Bernard, a
Justice of Peace in our County, brought the Warrant to me, and that very night,
about eight a clock without more a-do in obedience to it, I rode six or seven
miles to Sir John Bernard's house; and now from thence, to use the Apostle
Paul's words with a little alteration, I go bound in the Spirit to London, not
knowing the things that shall befall me there, save that my Friends are ready to
conjecture, that bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move
me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course
with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the Grace of God, Acts 20.22, 24.

Thus wishing you all happiness, and begging your Prayers, that I may be endued
with courage equal to my innocence. I rest ever, Noble Sir, Your most
affectionate, and humble Servant, Edward Bagshaw.
Dunstable, Jan. 5. 1662. POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Have read this Letter (though hastily writ) once over, and in case you are
not satisfied with the Reasons I give against flying from Persecution; pray
consider them not as universally intended for all Persons, but only to show
what grounds I had for my stay: hereafter, if it please God to give me life and
liberty, I may state the whole Question more fully.



FINIS.

