Strage and Wonderful PROPHESIES Foretelling The Alterations of the Time As
also the Changes that will happen in the World.

As First, What Wonderful things will come to pass concerning this Kingdom; to
the great Amazement of all mankind.

Secondly, One strange and wonderful Prophecy, which particularly does mention
what shall happen Yearly to several Kingdoms in the World, both by Sea and
Land.

By that Famous Astrologer Dr. Bouram, Student in Physic and Astrology, and
others Profound Aarts and Sciences, Living near Darford in Kent.

In the Year, 1696.

Sent in a Letter to a Merchant in London

With Allowance according to Order.

London, Printed by N P. in Fleetstreet.

Strange and Wonderful Prophesies, etc.
Relating what past, present, and to come, particularly concerning the Subduing
o France, and the downfall of the Tyrant the French King.

Prophesies and Prognostications have been in all Ages of the World Esteemed by
Authors of the greatest Credit imaginable, and great regard has been formerly
had to them, and several of them (since the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists
fell a sleep) has been extraordinary token notice of, which according have so
fallen out as they were predicted by Men of Sense and Knowledge in the
Celestial Orders.

PROPHESIES Written by Dr. Bouram, Student in Physic and Astrology and other
profound Arts.
HE Prophesied in the Year 1696. How many Popes there should be, giving their
names several titles and matters relating of them, which hitherto has been
exactly verified, there being, according to his account, twenty-five as yet to
come; and that in 1896. Popery shall cease.

Dr. Bouram's Prophecy of Months, signifying what shall happen in the Year
1696, and 97. to the general Amazement of all Mankind in diverse places.
January.
God bless the Kingdom of England and the Rulers thereof, in their various
Counsels and Debates under consideration, for matters of great Consequence are
now in Agitation. If the Trine of the Sun and Jupiter, and the Trine of Mors
and Mercury be of any Credit, the most generous and active Spirits of on Nation
act vigorously, not only to prevent impending Evils, but to settle Affairs, and
to remove their Obstructions which at this time are in way to our Prejudice.

February.
Good News arrives; and things seem to come to a happy conclusion, which have
been long under consideration. The Conjunction of Saturn and Mercury will
stimulate some scandalous and injurious Policies, Books or Writings, chiefly
intended by the Authors and Promoters thereof to introduce Sedition, Jealousy
and fears, but the Trine of Jupiter and Mercury, with the Trine of Mars and
Venus will set all in order again.

March.
The main Sea shall boisterously swell with mighty tempests, so that the banks
being overthrown, the waves shall in many parts overflow their bounds, and
cause great Inundations, one Island shall be quite overflowed by the sea, where
the Double Cross has the Government, the sins of the Prince or Rulers thereof,
being so extreme high against the Majesty of God.

April.
In the South-East part of the world, a nation shall fight a great battle in a
wrong cause, to defend an evil man, but the vengeance of God will rain down
showers of Fire from the Throne of Heaven, and consume that Army wholly, with
all their wealth and treasure, even as they abide in their tents.

May.
War and bloodshed over all the earth, a certain nation shall send so many men
for the wars, that it shall for a time be even desolate of men, so that twelve
women shall be glad of one man, nay, hardly procure one young man amongst them.

June.
So great a drought and want of water, will appear, that multitudes of people
will dye in many places for thirst, Soldiers shall not be able to carry their
Armor, the Earth shall be so dry and so parched with the Sun, that it shall
not yield ought to feed the Cattle.

July.
A terrible Sea Fight, such as has not been before, causing the waters to look
more red than the Red Sea, the water all turning like blood.

August.
Great Plagues and mortality will cover the face of the earth, and so destroy
mankind, that there will want Laborers to get in Harvest, or the fruits of the
earth.

September.
The season of this month will be unnatural, and the Earth so unfit for
tillage, that Cattle will rot on the ground, which will breed such store of
Flies and Vermin, that the Earth will be impoysoned, and receive no Fruit to
increase.

October.
A great Famine and Dearth of Corn will overspread some nations of Europe, so
that the Child shall starve at the Mothers breast, the mother having no food to
nourish her self.

November.
One appears unexpectedly, a great Conqueror; the world filled with the Fame of
this man, who suddenly, like Augustus, gives Peace to the whole Earth.

December.
All wars end, Religion truly Preached Universally over the world; a general
Peace, no more treason or rebellion, not long after, the trumpet sounds, and
the world dissolves.

Another by the same Astrologer.
An ancient friend of his asking him, amongst other discourse, what he thought
of a persecution of the church, of which he had heard some so earnestly speak?
to which the Astrologer feeling replied, that such a Persecution was to come
upon the church of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as likewise upon all the
protestants of Europe, and that he might certainly expect it, to which the
Gentleman answered, that he believed the civil wars might have terminated the
Prediction, to which he answered, no, for that it should be by the Papists,
saying, Fool not your self, for I tell you, all that you have yet seen, has
been but a beginning of sorrow, to what is yet to come upon the Protestant
Churches of Christ, who will, e're long fall under a sharper Persecution than
has been ever yet upon them, and a Worshipper in the temple for Christ will
measure those that profess his Name, and call themselves his people, and the
outward worshippers he will leave out to be trodden down by the Gentiles, the
outward court, says he, is the Formal Christian, whose religion lies in
performing the outside duty of Christianity, without having inward Life and
power of Faith and love, uniting them to Christ, and those God will leave to be
trodden down and swept away by the Geotiles. but the worshippers within the
temple, are those who indeed worship God in spirit and in truth, whose souls
are made his temples, and he is honored and adored in the most inward thoughts
of their hearts and sacrsfice their lusts and vile affections, yea, and their
own wills to him; and these God will hide, whilst the Evil be over-past, and
this shall be one great difference between this last and all other proceeding
Persecutions, for in the former the most Eminent ministers and pious Christians
did suffer most, but in this last Persecution they should be preserved of God
as a seed, to partake of that glory which shall immediately after come upon the
church, even as soon as the storm is blown over; for as it shall be the
sharpest, so it shall be the shortest p^^rs^^^^i^^ (...) and shall only take
away the gross Hypocrites, and formal Professors, but the true Spiritual
believers shall be preserved till the dreadful Calamity cease.

This famous Astrologer did likewise predict the Destruction of a great many
Cities and towns in France.
That William of Nassaw, King of Great Britain, should sail over into his
territory of France, and should make a great Conquest there, and reduce his
Rebellious subjects entirely to his Obedience, and that James Stuart (the late
Monarch, for not walking in the ways of his Father) should be taken prisoner,
and so remain for six months, and then fall sick and dye. But yet the wars
among the European Princes would not be ended for one year after, till another
great person was subdued, which shall be looking over a Castle-wall, and a shot
shall take him through the head, and then the Castle shall be surrendered upon
terms, and all other places that stood out should immediately surrender; so that
then England, Scot^^^^ (...) the nations that God will delight in, and bless
them with peace for many years.

Another strange and wonderful Prophecy.
IT is not unknown to most who are pleased to take cognizance of wonders and
strange miracles, which this present age does frequently represent, that of
late years we have been exceedingly astonished at several (to us strange and
seldom heard of) much to be admired wonders But now prepare your ears to hear
the most amazing and most unparalleled miracle that ever England was made
sensible of, or I think the whole world was ever made acquainted with; nay, so
wonderfully strange, and seemingly impossible to be true, that though it be
attested with manifold assertions it cannot lodge in the breast of the
incredulous, as an unquestionable verity. But to proceed to the matter
intended, and not too much to derogate from my designed business, let this
inform the most doubtful and unbelieving Reader, that there is lately an
account Tent from Flanders of the strange manner of the coming of one man into
a City of Germany eminently known by many travelers, to be one of the Cities
not lest accounted of in Germany, this person of such an age (as he says he is)
no less to be admired for his great age, than for his strange kind of
Prophesies, which he daily parts with; and his manner of coming into the City,
which we are informed was invisible; but to come to particulars, this person
does affirm, that his age is greater than ere was heard of, for he does say he
is above two hundred and fifty year old; and says that he has the spirit of
truth in him; with many other assertions, no less full of wonder than that you
have already heard of in the preceding lines: His manner of apparel is no less
to be admired than his manner of discourse, of such habit as we are informed he
does wear, was never seen by mortal eyes, his Deportment is also very strange,
for he walks up and down the City, preaching and admoning to serious
Repentance, and giving admirable advice to the people to forsake their
iniquities, and to return from their evil ways, For (says he) the wrath of
(...). He also adds, that the City of Rome is a second Sodom; and that the
transgressions of the people have ascended up to the Heavens, and approached
the ears of the Almighty and that nothing can preserve them from approaching
misery, but speedy and unfeigned Repentance; without which, he does assert, and
in three years the City shall be utterly destroyed and consumed by fire: by our
last advice we are informed that this man had continued there for the space of
eight days, preaching about the City: the Magistrates being offended at his
Doctrine, have forbid him to preach; but he took no more notice of it than to
return this answer, that he was sent from God to move the people to Repentance,
and to abandon those iniquities, which if not deserted, would doubtlesly pull
down vengeance upon them in a short time. After this order was given for his
confinement; which being performed, he was frequently visited by several
Jesuits, who discoursed with him in several tongues, namely, the Latin,
Hebrew, and Caldean, wherein he was exquisitely perfect. He also acknowledges
that he knows well such as live loose and wicked lives He is not over curious
in his Diet, (...) ^cate and general food is nothing but dry bread; and his
strongest drink is water only. He prophesies of many strange things, and the
time when all the wickedness in the world should have an end, and every one
shall serve the Lord and worship the God of Heaven; then nation shall no more
rise against nation, nor Kingdom against Kingdom, all the world shall be at
peace: being asked by some of the amazing people, whose astonishments were as
great as his answers strange How long it would be before this blessed day would
come? his reply was absolute, and about the 1699 should certainly be the end of
all wickedness in the world: all Nations shall live in the fear of the Lord,
all the world shall be at peace. His strange and unknown coming into this City
was admired by all; at last he was examined by the Magistrates from whence he
came: he answered, that he came from a place called Galadiam in Damas, a City
of Gallilea, and a messenger of the Almighty, sent to preach Repentance to the
sinful world. but the Jesuits not at all pleas^^ (...) Discourse, have
pr^v(...)y persuaded their magistrates to condescend to what they so earnestly
Requested, which is, that he is very well acquainted with what shall be his
Portion, and what shall become of him; and that he looked upon it altogether
unnecessary to be so loaded with questions but did acknowledge that he was very
desirous to see the Pope, and so without any difficulty and with great ease,
breaking out into a passion, he filled the Spectators with astonishment, as
Report of the wonders will certainly fill with amazement, all those to whom
this matter shall be communicated.

He also Prophesied as here follows.
A Certain Prince as Religious as a Turk, shall overspread that Peoples
territories, and War and Desolation will be occasioned by the unruly Nobility,
who by their Civil Dissentions shall occasion the Ruin of the French monarcy?
and if you would know near the time of this great mutation, it shall be when a
certain King called William is twice made a King, and a Duke of Florence turns
Protestant, this Prophecy seems to hint at the present juncture, though
written so many years since, in consideration the English and Scottish Nation
have unanimously proclaimed and submitting their crowns to William Henry his
present majesty; so that he may be said twice to be made a King.

FINIS.
Zodiac Man



