To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Dread Sovereign,
HAving seen a Proclamation wherein your Majesty complains of the Injuries you
receive in your Customs, I could not withhold, but, as in duty bound, humbly
present you with a few of those malignant roots from whence they spring,
whereby Navigation and Trade are also much decayed, their luster being much
concerned in the well management of your Customs: for those wholesome Laws
provided for the increase of Navigation, and advance of Trade, are entrusted in
the same hands your Customs are; so that he that shall be Ignorant, negligent,
or corrupt in the one, cannot be understanding, faithful, and diligent in the
other: Therefore it being of so great concernment not only to your Majesty's
Receipt, but to the public good, I humbly crave your Consideration in the
premises following, wherein it will appear that the most readiest ways that can
be invented for the ruin of your Customs is now practiced.

First, All Officers are left at liberty, without Bonds, Security, or Oath,
given for the faithful Discharge of that Trust imposed on them, which does
greatly encourage them to act their will and pleasures toward your Revenues
ruin, for their own benefit.

Secondly, As if this were not sufficient to lead them to betray that Trust
imposed on them, they are enforced by mere necessity to fraudulent practices,
their Salleries being reduced so low, they cannot live upon it; so that it is
become a Proverb between the Merchant and Officer, Live, and let live: Which
is, the Merchant and Officer to share your Majesty's Revenue, so far as they
make it not public to every eye.

Thirdly, To enforce them to make the quicker and greater spoil of your
Majesty's Receipt, their Places are made so uncertain in the enjoyment of them,
that let them be never so able and faithful, a slanderous Accusation, laid by
such as are either great, or in favor, outs them without audience, which
inforces them to provide for the future, and, as the Proverb is, To make Hay
while the Sun shines.

Fourthly, The number of supernumerary Officers being great, and necessitated,
will be supplied by your Revenues ruin, which makes the spoil the greater.

Fifthly, Their bestowing Places by favor, without regard had to the persons,
parts, and abilities fitting the place or no; by their carelessness herein great
prejudice to your Receipt does ensue: For by the ignorance of one Officer there
may be as much loss, as by the knavery of another; your Customs varying as the
quality of Goods does, and one commodity having various denominations, the one
sort shall pay three or four times the duty of the other, and through the
ignorance of an Officer, the best shall pass under the worst denomination.

Sixthly, The cutting Masters of Ships off in their Portage draws an
inconveniency upon your Tidesman: for formerly, upon the allowance all Masters
had for Portage, the Tidesman, who has the whole charge of your Receipt
aboard, and cannot stir without prejudice to it, could aboard have commanded
things necessary and convenient, as his Diet, or the like; but now is enforced
to comply with the Master, to do him some favor for what he receives.

The only Persons that are by these practices discouraged, and necessitated,
are those in whom the sole Trust of the Income of your Revenue lies; who are
the two main props and pillars that keep up your Revenue, if faithful; if
corrupt, lets it fall to the ground; which persons are only two, your
Land-Waiter, and Tidesman: For from the first Entrance of any Ship or Vessel
into any Port, until delivered, your whole Revenue, night and day, lies under
the Tidesmans charge; and what he does faithfully preserve and keep, is to be
delivered by your Land-Waiter, according to the true quantity and quality for
which the Custom is paid: If the Coast, which is most shamefully slighted,
were secured to conveigh your Receipt into the Ports, and your Tidesman and
Land-Waiter but faithful and diligent, your Customs would have a vast
improvement: but if necessity and opportunity will make a Thief, it is
impossible your Officers can be honest, by what they are now, through
discouragements and necessity, put upon.

NOw that your Majesty may have able, faithful, diligent Officers, which are
the support of your Revenue; and that they may be so preserved and kept, these
following Proposals I tender.

Let a Pardon first be past for all Offenses hitherto committed; and the reason
is, I be^ieve very few Officers, either in London, or the Out-Ports, but have,
as I may say, sold themselves to the Merchants: And if any Action hitherto they
have done, the knowledge whereof will make them incapable of their employment,
without a Pardon they must be slaves for the future, not daring to be any
other, for fear their former frauds and bribes be discovered; therefore first
set them free, and I doubt not but these following preserves them honest.

First, Let no Officer be emp^oyed in the Customs, but what are bound in good
Sums, with good Sureties, for the faithful Discharge of their Duty; and he that
shall betray the trust on him imposed, to the prejudice of your Majesty's
Receipt, to forfeit his Bond, and lose his Place, never to be employed more;
for the taking them in again, after once convicted, dot^ but imbolden others to
commit the like crimes.

Second^y, Let your Officers be allowed a sufficient Sallery, if it be
something extraordinary, more than a competency, your Majesty cannot better
improve what you give, except the Merchant were so honest he would freely pay
his Customs: But otherwise, if that it be advanced by your Officers
faithfulness and care, or spoiled by his negligence and corruption; to
enco^rage them to the one, and prevent them in the other, is to allow them a
sufficient Sallery.

Thirdly, Let them have an assurance of the certain continuance of their
Places, so long as faithful; for the parting with understanding men, and taking
in the ignorant, does but strengthen your Adversaries, and weaken your Receipt:
for none knows how better to deceive your Majesty, and help the Merchant, than
those that have served you.

Fourth^y, Let the number of Officers be lessened, who being necessitated, and
not able to live, must make the greater spoil: therefore let them be reduced to
as many as are needful; and the extraordinary charge your Majesty is put to
with supernumeraries will very much supply the extraordinary charge of those
Officers necessary.

Fifthly, That your Majesty may for the future have able Officers, let none be
taken into your Customs (I mean, below-stairs) above a Tidesman; and in case a
Surveyors place be made void by death, or otherwise, let the eldest Land-Waiter
enjoy it; if a Land-Waiters place, the eldest Tidesman: this future hopes of
bettering their condition will be a strong tie to keep them faithful; besides,
by this means your Officers will be fitted with parts and abilities, not only
for the place they enjoy, but also to judge and instruct those beneath them;
and it will the more deter them beneath from fraudulent practices, having them
above them that have past through their places, and understand their ways and
opportunities.

Sixthly, Let Masters of Ships have their former allowance for Portage, and the
Mariners something, as your Majesty shall think fit, according to the
proportion of the Receipt of their Cargo; then shall your Tidesman have no
engagement lie upon him for those things necessary he receives, and the rugged
Sailer will be more respective, and timorous in acting for the Merchant to your
prejudice, for fear of losing what is his own.

These things considered; First, A competent Livelihood; Secondly, An assurance
of the certain continuance thereof; Thirdly, The future hopes of a better
condition will undoubtedly make that man faithful, that has either any spark
of honesty, or common reason in him: But if there should be any so foolish, as
not to value these, which I think there is none but will; yet the forfeiture of
his Bond, and the certain loss of his employment for ever, will undoubtedly
deter him from the breach of that Trust imposed on him.

Let but these Remedies be forthwith applied, and you will find in this
Vintage what a vast improvement of your Customs will be made hereby, and what a
vast spoil has been made in your Revenue; to make which appear, this I
propound, That there are many Ships gone for Bordeaux, and other places, for
Wines this year, which came laden home the last year; at their return let a
strict care be taken at the delivery of them, and by comparing last years
Entries with this, it will be found, how shamefully short they made out their
Tunnage, besides the great quantities of Wine entered for Vinegar; Vinegar
paying but 5. s. per Tun, and Wine 6. l. per Tun: To make this appear, if your
Majesty think fit, I shall use my weak endeavors, and give satisfaction herein:
If then it shall appear, that a vast loss has been in Goods of such bulk and
danger in removing, what must there be in fine Goods, and others, that are to
be conveyed away with more ease and safety.

I know not whether I am the first in this Work, or no, but I judge I may, the
number being so few that understand it; and of those that do, few but are
benefited by the spoil of it, besides the discouragements they shall meet with
that undertake it, their adversaries being so many and great; so that, if not
supported by your Grace, it will soon be smothered, and the Author, or any
other, for the future discouraged. There are several other things practiced,
which are very destructive to your Receipt, which at present, for fear I should
be too prolix, I omit. Therefore I shall add no further at present: But if
these few lines, clad in a Russet style, may find acceptance with your
Majesty, he shall further enlarge himself, that is

Your Majesty's most humble, faithful, and obedient Servant, RICHARD BOWER.


