BLOODY NEVVES FROM Portsmouth: Being a true Relation of a great and desperate
Onset given by Major Randol, on Friday Morning last: With the particulars
thereof, the manner of the Engagement, and the number killed and taken
prisoners.

Also, the re-inforcing and securing of Ports Down Fort by the Parliaments
Forces. And a Declaration of Sir Arthur Hasilrig* and Vice Admiral Lawson: With
Proposals to the People, Army, Navy, and the Militia of London, and the
Country.

Likewise, a Message from General Monck, to the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and
Sheriffs, in the Northern parts; And their Answer thereunto.

London, Printed for Alexander Friar, 1659.

A MESSAGE FROM General MONCK; To the Knights, Sheriffs, and Justices, in their
respective Shires, Cities, Towns, and CORPORATIONS.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving a Call from God and his people to march into England to assert and
maintain the Liberty and Being of Parliaments, our ancient Constitution, and
therein the Freedom and Rights of the people of these three Nations from
arbytrary and tyrannical Usurpation upon their Consciences, persons, and
Estates, and for a Godly Ministry. I do therefore expect from you the Nobility,
Gentlemen, and Sheriffs, and the Justices of peace, and each one of you, that
you do preserve the peace of the Commonwealth in your shire. And I do hereby
authorize you to suppress all Tumults. Stirrings, and unlawful Assemblies, and
that you hold no correspondency with any of Charles Stuarts party, or
adherents, but apprehend such as shall make any disturbance, and send them in
to the next Carrion: And do further desire you to countenance and encourage all
the Godly Ministry, and all that truly fear God in the Land: and that you
continue faithful to own and assert the Interest of Parliamentary Government,
in your several paces and stations, I hope my absence will be very short: but I
do assure you that I will procure from the Parliament what ever may be for the
good Government and relief of this Nation; and doubt not but to obtain
abatements in your Assess, and other public burdens, according to the
proportion of England. And what further service I may be able, I shall not be
wanting in that which may promote the happiness and peace of this afflicted
people. I shall not trouble you further, but beg your prayers, and desire you
to assure your selves that I am

Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, George Monck.
Edinburgh, November. 15. 1659.

To which the Lord, Knights, and Gentlemed, returned an answer by the Larl of
Glencairn, and Sir James Stuart, That they are satisfied with his Lordships
Engagement, and Grounds thereof, and that they were resolved to concur with his
Lordships desires, in a mutual and affectionate concurrence, and in a positive
owning of the Parliament, and disowning all other Interests whatsoever.

This answer being returned, his Lordship gave them thanks, and ordered them to
convene and assemble in the Parliament House on the 12th instant: and the
additional Forces being come from the Highlands, and other parts of the Nation
a Rendezvous was a pointed, and Proclamation made at the Head of each
respective Regiment, both of Horse and Foot, For all Persons whatsoever, either
Officers and Soldiers, throughout the army, that could not freely, willingly,
or consciously, engage with Him, in this present Expedition to lay down their
Arms and depart the Army; and that for his own part, he had a deep sense of
this great and National Affair, having just grounds of dissatisfaction, and
that he could not comply with any, who should refuse, or seem dubious, to stand
or adhere to a warrantable concurrence: His Undertakings being such, that the
cannour of his Heart bore him Testimony and Evidence of the justness of his
Cause; and that he ought not to violate the Authority of Parliaments, whose
Legislative Power and Freedom, every individual Member were bound to ass^rt and
maintain, after such solemn assurances of faithfulness and obedience; and to
assert the honor and integrity of such Noble Patriots, who for many years had
undergone a Labyrinth of Troubles, and stood even in the very Gap and Gulf of
the Ruins, Desolations, and Miseries, that for many yeaars threatened these
distracte, divided, and bleeding Nations.

Proclamation being thus made by sound of Trumpet, the Army drew off in
Regimental way, General Monck leading the Van, and Major General Morgan
bringing up the Rear; and the Northern Avisoes speak them to be about nine
thousand Foot, two thousand Horse and twelve hundred Dragoons: This seems high,
and to exceed in Numeration; for the Letters from Newcastle import otherwise,
and carry a contrary Dialect.

Upon their advance to Berwick, the General commanded Colonel Ogle to march
over the Bridge into Northumberland, he having he Conduct of the Scots and
Highlands, his appointed station being at Alnwick: The rest of his Forces are
quartered about Fenwick, and the parts adjacent; observing not only a vigilant
posture at the several passes and Avenues, but also a strong Guard near the
Holy Island.

The Gentry Ministry, and Commonalty, throughout the whole Country of
Northumberland, had declared a mutual concurrence, and the Lord Lambert is
approaching toward the Confines of Berwick.

General Monck having sent a Letter to Vice Admiral Lawson, desiring his
concurrence for restoring of the Parliament, and to remove the Interruption put
upon them the 13th of October last; receive this answer, That nothing should be
wanting in him to compose all differences, and to obliterate all things
whatsoever, by person or persons, concerned in the late difference betwixt the
Parliament and Army.

Since which time, the said Vice Admiral has declared, That through the Lords
assistance, he will in all Christian ways and means, Endeavor the begetting a
right Understanding betwixt the Parliament and Army, and happy composure (if it
may be) without bloodshed: But if there by yer an endeavor by Force to hinder
the Parliament, from returning to the Exercise and Discharge of their Trust,
who have so often bin declured the supreme Authority of these Nations, That
then he will to the utmost of his power, with his life, and all that is dear to
him, use his whole Interest for the removing of that Force, and restore Them to
their Freedom and privileges. Further declaring, (as in the presence of the
Lord) That he has no aim nor ends to advance particular Interests, but the
Interest of Christ, and the good and weal of all the people of God, in their
Rights, Civil and Religious, and of these poor suffering Nations in general;
utterly disclaiming the Interest of Charles Stuart, and all his Adherents; or
the Interest of any single person whatsoever, of House of Lords; doubting not
but to find the concurrence and assistance of all the faithful and
upright-hearted in the Land. For whose sakes, next to the Cause of Christ, (God
being his Witness,) he has engaged.

And he therefore invites all Brethren of the Churches, Army, Nay, and Militia
of the City of London and Country, and that profess love to God, and his
people, to join with him, and give their Christian aid and assistance in the
performance of the premises, which the Lord has called them unto; least when
too late, They have cause to lament the non-improvement of the Opportunity that
God has put into his hands, once more to assert the privileges of Parliament,
and Liberty of the good people of this Nation.

In pursuance of these Resolutions, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, and the rest of the
Parliament men at Portsmouth, have declared, That they intended not to levy or
raise any war in the Nation, thereby to open a breach for the Common Enemy to
enter, being more concerned against him, then to afford him such advantage, but
that the Treaty being on foot betwixt the Army and Genesis Monck, the Commander in
chief of the Parliaments Forces in Scotland, the gaining of that place might be
a means to facilitate it, and balance the affair, and that they hoped it would
produce a right understanding and unity so much desired by all good men.

To which the Townsmen answered, That they would stand by them in these their
Intentions, and afford them all the assistance they can.

The Town is well fortifyed and provided, the Soldiery unanimous, and the
Inhabitants very cheerful and resolute to go through with them, and to bear
part of the Duty, hoping by their cordial concurrence to engage the rest of the
considerable places of the Nation to do the like. They have already reinforced
Port. Down fort with four pieces of Artillery more, and have lodged there a
convenient Garrison, They have also six Companies of Foot of the Army, and have
raised two Troops of Horse in the Town.

There are ten gallant Men of War in the Harbor, who have declared themselves
for the Parliament, two whereof have set sail with Commission upon the State
affairs. Vice Admiral Lawson is expected daily with the Fleet under his Command
to their assistance. The Marston-Moor, Phoenix, Lion, and Pelican Frigates, are
rigging. Mr. Wallop, the most considerable Gentleman in those parts is gone
into Portsmouth, with 50 Horse, most of them his Tenants.

Sir Arthur has further declared, That nothing will be done by Treaty at
Newcastle, without a preliminary Article for restoring the Parliament to a Free
Session without any other condition.

By an Express from Portsmouth on Saturday night last, it is certified, That
Major Randol having raised about forty choice and selected Horse, with stout
Riders, and well armed, on Friday last made his approach within 5 or 6 miles of
Portsmouth; (...) was forced to fight his passage through two Troops of Horse,
and several Companies of Colonel Gibbon's Regiment of Foot, leaving five of his
men behind, two being slain, and three taken prisoners, having their horses
shot under them. Some few were wounded, but got off to Ports Down fort, where
the Bridge being let down, they marched over to Portsmouth, with their Red
Standard and one Trumpet sounding, devoting their service to Sir Arthur
Hasilrigg, who treated and entertained them with a friendly acceptance,
welcoming them in with a Volley from the great Guns. Many of the Army-forces
have reinforced Faeram, and the Towns adjacent, having very bad quarters, some
lying in Barns, and other Out-places, yet they are very unanimous, and desirous
of action,

FINIS.

