Breviate of the Lamentable Case of the late Sir William Dick in Scotland his
Estate, and of his sole Son, Executor, and General Successor: With their
numerous dispersed desolate Families, for the Commonwealth.
THe late Sir William Dick in the beginning of these troubles and commotions in
the Commonwealth, did appear first of all men of his quality in the three
Nations, to stand in the gap; and for preservation of pure Religion from carnal
Prelacy, and the thousands of Israel from Arbitrary Government, and the just
privileges of Parliaments, their Representatives, in their due luster and
liberty, Did offer up Himself, Children, and Friends, at home and abroad, with
all their Fortunes, Credit, and Estate, in Sacrifice to the service of the
Public, most cheerfully, and constantly all the days of his life, in that Good
old Cause, then the Prayers of the Saints, and scope and mark of all true
Public Spirits.

That for these his unparalleld disbursements, for the Nations, jointly in the
bonds of Brotherhood, and no otherways (and lately stated by the then Power and
Government to Sixty seven thousand and three hundred pounds, to wit, Thirty
nine thousand and five hundred pounds due by England, out of the Navy, Papists,
and Delinquents Estates, and Twenty seven thousand and eight hundred pounds by
Scotland out of the Excises and Assessments there.) He had all solemn Promises
and Protestations, Rights and Securities of Parliaments, as Humane Faith,
Christian Bonds, or Law could devise for his thankful payment. And more
particularly, Orders of Parliament dated 28 November, 1648. and October 1,
1653. with several Reports of Committees of Parliament, in September 1649. and
March, 1652. yet little or nothing recovered these Fifteen years past after all
painful and expensive solicitation and attendance: But by such unexpected
disappointments of that well-deserving Debt, his precious time lost, his life
wearied, and died at last in the way through heart-break, in all misery and
want. His Children, Executor, and Friends cast in all disgraceful prisons,
their former plentiful Estates seized upon by the Creditor for the Public; and
their numerous Families, with their desolate Wives, Orphans, and Widows, ready
to perish for want of Bread, by such eminent actions and services in that Good
old Cause: Ah, let not this be heard in Gath, nor published in the streets of
Askalon.

The sole Son, Executor, and general Successor, with these poor languishing
Families of the late Sir William Dick his Father, Do now, if not for Justice
and Righteousness sake, Honors sake, general and particular Promises sake; yet
humbly pray for Christ's sake (by whom this present Parliament, after long
interruption in the secret purpose of Gods will, is now again by wonderful
divine Providence, set down to judge his little ones, as their glory) That
after so long delays and disappointment, and so many unsupportable sorrows and
pressures passing strength, right and equity may be done to him at last;
Promises and Protestations performed, Ordinances and Orders of this present
Parliament kept and obeyed, and he paid and satisfied of these unparalleld
disbursements for the Public, in all the possible ways as the present juncture
of affairs may grant, and the deplorable condition of the Executor may agree
to. To the farther praise and commendation of Reformed Religion, the honor and
glory of the Commonwealth, the greater encouragement of the godly and
well-affected party to the Government, to adventure the like services presently,
and hereafter, in the time of Public streights and difficulties for the
people, and the Cities of our God; and the undeniable proof and
Sunshine-evidence of this honorable Parliament, their sincerity and uprightness
of heart in their Declaration dated 7 May last, for the Work of Reformation by
their Righteousness and Justice to all men.


