A SERMON Preached at St. Bride's Church, Dublin, April 17. School.

Upon Occasion of a RESOLUTION Taken in This City, Of Putting The Laws in
Execution AGAINST Vice and Immoralities.

By PET. BROWN, B D. Sen. Fellow of Trin. Col. DUBLIN.

Dublin, Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be Sold at his Shop in Skinner-Row
MDCXCVIII.

The Reader is desired to take Notice, That the Third Head was Omitted in the
Speaking, and part of the Second for Brevity. And that the Sentences under the
Second Head in an Italick Character, are Mr. Boyse' s, in his Sermon Dedicated
to the SOCIETIES FOR REFORMATION.

NUMBERS XXV. 11. Phinehas the Son of Eleazer, the Son of Aaron the Priest,
has turned my Wrath away from the Children of Israel (while he was Zealous for
my sake among them) that I Consumed not the Children of Israel in my Jealousy.
WHen the Israelites came to their last Station in order to pass over Jordan,
the Neighboring Countries were terrified with their Numbers; and therefore the
King of Moab combined with the Midianites against them. And, as was very usual
with most Heathen Princes upon the like Occasions he sends for Balaam a Man
famous for Divinations, to consult about the Event, and Encourage his People
with a Promise and Assurance of Success. But by the Order and Inspiration of
GOD, he prophesies quite the contrary, and fore-tells the Destruction of Moab,
and the Neighboring Countries by the Israelites; for which he was sent home
with Disgrace.

But tho he could not speak any thing to the King but what GOD had put in his
Mouth, yet his Affection for the Midianites (who were probably his Countrymen,
because we read he returned home, and afterward was Killed among them) made
him give their Enemies the only Advice which could possibly injure the Children
of Israel; and that was, To send many of their Women into the Camp, which by
their Beauty and Allurements might entice the Israelites first to Unlawful
Marriages and Whoredom, and then to profane the Name and Worship of GOD by
their Idolatry. And accordingly the Wile took, and as we read in the first
Verse of this Chapter, The Men began to commit Whoredom with the Daughters of
Moab.

Upon this, GOD sent a Plague among them; and Moses by his Command, gave
positive Orders throughout the Camp to all the Governors and Leaders, that
they should put to death all those who were guilty of these Crimes. But as
appears from the manner of the Relation, the Number and Quality of those who
fell in League with the Heathen Women was so great, that Execution was delayed;
so that they out-brav'd the Laws, and struck a Terror into all those who were
well affected, and had refrained from those lewd Practices. Insomuch that
Zimri, a Person of Quality among them, in open Contempt of the Laws and
Magistrates, brought a Midianitish Woman along with him in the sight of all the
Congregation. Phinehas seeing this, follows them into the Tent, and kills them
both in the very Act of Fornication: Then the Plague was stayed, and this
Action of Phinehas said to be the Cause of it, For Phinehas the Son etc.

Being at this Time to discourse concerning those Persons, who have bravely set
themselves to give Vice and Immoralities an open professed Opposition in this
City, and to stem that current of Wickedness which threatened to over-whelm us;
I have made choice of these words, that I might propose to you this Excellent
Pattern of Zeal; that you might see how this was commendable in him, and how
far it is imitable by you. And that I might lay before you those several things
which in this Text are suggested, as well for your Direction and more Prudent
Management, as for your Encouragement in that Worthy Design of yours; which if
rightly managed, must be very pleasing and acceptable to GOD and all good
Christians. And therefore,

I. The first thing observable from these words is, That Persons even in a
Private Capacity, may and ought to show their Zeal for GOD against open and
barefaced Impiety. For though Phinehas was the Highpriests Son, yet we read of
no Place nor Power that he had, till he was afterward employed as Commander
against the Midianites. So that this Action was not proper either to his Place
or Quality, but as he was an Israelite; and he had the Execution of the Laws in
his Power no otherwise, than by virtue of that General Command at the 5th
Verse, which was common to others as well as him. And accordingly tho Moses
mention only Phinehas, as being the first that led the way; and Zimri as being
a Person of the greatest Quality of those that were slain: yet Josephus
relating this Passage says, That a great number of other young Men being
Animated by this courageous Action, took heart, and rose up in open Opposition
to the Transgressors, and Executed the Sentence of Moses upon them all.

But though this Command was General, yet there was this Peculiar in that Action
of Phinehas, that the Command being directed to the Judges and Leaders to
destroy every one their Men (i. e.) to punish those under their Jurisdiction
Zimri being Head of a chief House among them, and therefore not so immediately
under the Power of others, thought to carry it with a high Hand; to practice
his Wickedness openly himself, and by that means to encourage it in others. But
Phineas being acted with a Zeal for GOD and the Command of Moses, undertook the
Exploit, and Executed that Sentence upon him, which he neglected to Execute
upon others.

Now this gave occasion to the Sect of the Zealots among the Jews, whose Power
was for a long time very sacred among them; and they had a right to execute the
Sentence of the Law upon any Person they apprehended in the very act of
Blaspheming, or Profaning the Temple etc. which was all built upon a tradition
they held from Moses grounded as they conjectured, upon this action of Phineas.

And we have some instances in Scripture of particular persons, who upon
extraordinary occasions have by a Zeal inflamed and a mighty Impuls upon their
Spirits, become the Executioners of God's immediate Vengeance upon Bold and
Scandalous Sinners. As particularly that of Elias destroying all the Prophets
of Baal; and Matathias slaying the Jew that offered Incense upon a Heathen
Altar. And that action of our Saviors twice repeated, of driving the Buyers
and Sellers out of the Temple, tho he did it by the privilege of his Kingly
Power; yet he was supposed by the Jews to do it upon this principle of
Zealotism: For otherwise they had a fair Accusation against him for a Riotous
and Illegal Assault; and being but a private Person taking upon him the Office
of a Magistrate.

Now this fiery temper of the (...) lots was very commendable, and sometimes
necessary under the Law; yet it is not practicable in that degree under the
tender and merciful Spirit of the Gospel. For then their Obedience was
external, and therefore required suitable Punishments in this life; But now the
inward purity of our Souls is required, and nothing can make Men afraid of
sinning in their Minds but a clear revelation of Hell, and a full prospect of
eternal damnation; and therefore these are the only tertors of the Lord now. In
the first times of the Gospel indeed, death was inflicted upon malicious
obstinate Offenders by a supernatural power; but this, with all the other acts
of God's extraordinary dispensations have ceased, so that all such mighty
impulses pretended now adays are only from the Devil.

The Gospel proposes no temporal Punishments for the sins of Men, but such as
follow the nature of the Sins themselves; And therefore the severest
Ecclesiastical Censures are the Exposing Men to shame, and Cutting them off
from the Body of the Church, and so consigning them over unto the judgment of
the Great Day. But tho it be now utterly unlawful in us to punish Vice in
others, unless where we have Authority our selves, or derive it from the Laws
of the Land: Yet thus much is very evident from this action of Phineas, and
those other instances of Zeal consequent to it; that all Men may, and ought to
show their Zeal for the glory of God, and discouragment of Vice, by all those
means which are permitted by the Gospel. And there are several ways of doing
this, As by showing our dislike to it at all times, and in all persons; by
reproving the sins of others whenever it is proper and seasonable, and that we
have any hopes our Reproofs will do good; and lastly by doing all that in us
lies, to promote the Execution of those good and wholesome Laws which are Enacted
against impudent Profaness and Impiety.

And that which makes this last way of showing our Zeal so necessary now, is
because multitudes who go by the name of Christians, have cast off all fear of
any thing else but Temporal Laws; all the Methods of the Church against such
Scandalous Offenders have quite lost their force.

There was a time, and O! that we might see it in our days, when Men knew the
strength of Ecclesiastical Censures; when they were sensible that God was with
his Church in all its Judiciary Proceedings, ratifying all its just Sentences,
binding of them in Heaven, and recording of them there to be produced at the
great Day of Accounts. But now they regard nothing but what they feel, so that
there is no way left of dealing with them, but by those Human Laws which they
dread more than Damnation; and the Power of the Civil Magistrate, which they
fear more then that God who is a Consuming Fire.

II. The second thing I shall observe from these words is, That the nature of a
true Zeal consists in our Indignation at what is plainly against the Laws of
God, and evidently sinful. That instance we have of a true Zeal here was
against Adultery, Fornication, and the Idolatrous worship of Baal Pehor; which
as one observes from the signification of the name, was an Idol purposely
contrived to excite People to Lewdness and Impurity by the sight of it: and
therefore his Zeal was approved by God in these words, while he was zealous for
my sake among them. This of being incensed at the known and uncontested sins of
Men is the being truly zealous for the sake of God; and not when People are
transported against things dubious, and of no great moment; when they lay out
all their Zeal against Circumstances, and things in their own nature lawful or
indifferent. There is more required in order to a true Zeal than mere heat of
our Blood, and a great indignation of mind: People may be thus far zealous in a
bad, as well as a good Cause; For the Midianites were no doubt very zealous
against the Israelites, when they prostituted their Women of greatest Quality
to destroy them. So that being levelled at things which are plainly against the
Laws of God, is the only distinguishing mark of a true Zeal. And it is more or
less true according to the evidence and plainess of those Precepts of God
against which the sins are committed. When the things against which we are
zealous are dubious, our Zeal if violent is blamable; if the things are of no
great moment or indifferent, then our Zeal is trifling and frivolous; if the
things are in their own nature lawful, then our Zeal is downright sinful.

Now Fornication and Adultery, Cursing and Swearing, Blasphemy and Profaness,
Drunkenness and Gluttony, Unjust Gain and Oppression, Rebellion and
Disobedience to Laws and Government, Breaking of Amity among Christians, and
Dissolving of Unity in the Worship of GOD; These and suchlike are openly and
palpably against the express Commands of GOD: and therefore these are the
things against which our Zeal should be levelled. For otherwise we have just
cause to suspect that it proceeds from Natural Temper, or Humor, or Interest,
or Ignorance and Mistake, or from the Delusions of the Devil, and our own
Imaginations: But in things of that gross* nature, our Zeal is always Safe and
Commendable.

And therefore here, by the way, I ought not to omit the Just Commendation of
the late Zeal of our Dissenting Brethren, in their hearty Endeavors, and
liberal Contributions for carrying on this Design of putting the Laws in
Execution against such of those Vices as are made liable to Temporal
Punishments. Had they begun this Work, no one could have said, That it was the
Factious Design of a Party, but a True and Regular Zeal; because the Instances
are such as are plainly and directly against the Laws of GOD, as well as those
of the Land; and not such as are Dubious and Indifferent in their own nature:
No, we commend them for their hearty Concurrence with us, and we hope not to be
outdone by them in this good Work.

But since all this visible Piety, and Zeal against Irreligion and Profaness,
has first appeared among the Members of the Established Church, it must be
Acknowledged that our Constitution and Principles are better Calculated for the
Encouragement of all Virtue and Goodness, and the Suppression of Vice among
them; and nothing can possibly be a greater Inducement to all well-disposed
People to join in its Communion, than to see what a Natural Tendency it has to
make People truly Good and Virtuous.

We must both of us with Sorrow of Heart confess, That our Separate Communions
have been the immediate Natural Cause of all that Torrent of Profaness and
Irreligion, Immorality and Lewdness, which during the two late Reigns came in
upon these Lands with an Irresistible violence; which has so broke the Sinews
of all Ecclesiastical Discipline, and deprived the Church of that Power
Originally inherent in it by a Divine Right derived from Christ himself; that
we are both of us now forced to fly to Temporal Laws for the Suppression of
such Sinners, who having no fear of GOD before their Eyes, must necessarily
despise the Church.

And it is a Melancholy Consideration, that the Incorporation of the Church
into the Civil State, by a Constitution of Government in it self so Excellently
Contrived, as to reserve to the Apostles Successors, all their Divine Right and
Primitive Authority in Matters purely Ecclesiastical; and yet in a due
Subordination to the Civil Magistrate; should, by our Divisions, be brought to
this, that they shall now act rather as Members of the State, than as
Governors of the Church. And that the Addition of Temporal Laws in a Kingdom
of Christians, which were designed to give strength to her Censures, should by
this means come to have a quite contrary Effect, to swallow them all up, and
Resolve them almost wholly into Civil Power: Insomuch that she has only her
Doctrine left for Ornament, but little of that Original Power of Defending her
self, and Excluding all Impudent Impiety, Profaness, and Irreligion out of the
Fold of Christ. So that there were generally better Christians in the Church,
when it was among Infidels, than now that there are so many Infidels suffered
to be professed and actual Members of the Church.

We must both I say acknowledge that these open and scandalous Sins of professed
Christians, are the dismal Consequences of our Divisions; and therefore that
there is a heavy and unsupportable Load of Guilt, wherever the just and true
Cause of them lies: And that it will lie either on their side or ours, is so
plain a Truth that we can neither of us avoid it. I am not now going to dispute
where, But it follows from hence, that it is matter of infinite Concern to each
of us to be very well Assured, that it does not lie at our Door. There is not
any thing in the world that we ought to be better resolved in; For if there be
not such a manifest violation of the known positive Laws of GOD required
amongst us, that they cannot communicate with us, without plainly transgressing
of them; then all their Zeal for Purer Worship will never be accounted a Zeal
for the sake of GOD. And if the Constitution of our Church does oblige them to
the committal of one Sin contrary to the known positive Laws of God, and the
Interest of Practical Holiness, then we must take all that load of Guilt upon
our selves.

Sure I am on which side soever the Cause lies, that our Uniting in the Worship
of God, and Celebration of the Sacraments, would be the most effectual means of
Suppressing all this insolent and hardened Impiety; and nothing else can do it
entirely and lastingly. And since we are all United In the main Interest of
Practical Holiness, what then remains toward the perfecting our Concord, but
that in all these things which do not relate to Practical Holiness, we in all
Humility submit to the Wisdom of our Superiors? Who as is confessed require us
to be guilty of nothing which is contrary to it. And therefore I hope all
People are now convinced that they may join with us without committing a Sin:
And if so, this Inference is very plain, That it is a Sin not to join with us.

And since we are so happily agreed in all those things that are great and
valuable, why should we break Communion for those that are not so? O! that GOD
would put it into the Hearts of our Dissenting Brethren, to weigh these heavy
Consequences in the Balance, against those few small Differences in Opinion or
Practice for which we yet differ, that what remains might no way obstruct our
Joint Communion, and hinder us any longer from going into the House of GOD as
Friends together. This would strike an Awe upon bold and hardened Sinners; and
then would the Reformation of these Scandalous Vices we now set our selves
against begin where our Corruption did before: And thus by becoming an United,
we should become a Flourishing and Happy People. GOD grant that our United
Endeavors for the Prosecution of Vice and Wickedness, may be a happy Means of
Uniting us, not only in our Affections to one another, but in the Public
Worship of GOD, and Celebration of his Sacraments; which is the Necessary
Condition of that Unity which alone will render us one Church and People in the
sight of GOD.

III. The Third thing observable from this Passage is, That our Zeal for the
cause of God in all instances whatsoever, should contain it self within those
bounds prescribed by himself. As it must be against things plainly contrary to
the Laws of God, so the manner of expressing it must be agreeable to them too.
Phinehas is not commended here because he was too hasty to expect a legal
Process, for the Command was positive that they should not stay for it; but for
the speedy execution of an express Law with the hazard of his life, and because
he took it upon him when no one else dared to do it. And therefore that must
needs be a blind and preposterous Zeal which sets up for reformation either of
Manners, or Discipline by methods unwarrantable, either by the Laws of God or
Man. The Zealots among the Jews were very good and useful in their first
original, and therefore in great veneration while they kept within the just and
prescribed limits of the Law: But afterward they became a most dangerous and
pernicious Sect to the whole polity of the Jews, they committed all manner of
Villainies under pretense of Reformation, and put to death many of the chief and
worthiest men of the Nation.

And therefore men cannot be too cautious in this point, for whenever our Zeal
prompts us to act in opposition to any of the Laws of God, or the innocent Laws
of Men, it is all madness and fury. Our Zeal may carry us beyond the Commands of
God, but not contrary to any one of them: as in this action of Phinehas, it was
more than his duty to slay one of another Tribe, but it was however according
to the express Command, for otherwise it had been an act of Murder. Our Zeal in
many instances may prompt us to do more than God requires of us, but never to
do any thing that he forbids, for this will be reforming the sins of Men by
others in our Selves.

Now as to your observance of human Laws in the management of your Zeal against
Offenders, I need say but little they are a Fence to themselves, and they
regard every Man has to his own quiet and safety, will oblige him in prudence
not to come under the lash of them, by taking any course of Fraud or Violence
that is unwarrantable.

But as to the Laws of GOD, the most effectual way of keeping within due Bounds
in this Undertaking, is by a Preservation of your Sincerity and Humility.

1. And first as to your Sincerity in this good Work, you must take care that
you are prompted to it out of a true Concern for the Glory of GOD, and
Veneration for his Laws; together with a Concern for the good of your Country,
a tender Regard for the Souls of other Men, and the discharging of a good
Conscience in doing all that in you lies to the promoting of these Ends. If
these be the Motives that spur you on to give insolent Profaness and Impiety an
open Opposition, it is a glorious Enterprise; and you may hope that GOD who has
begun this good Work by you, will bring it to a good Perfection. This of a pure
Intention alone can Entitle you to the Blessing of GOD both here and hereafter;
and it is a great Pity that any one should be the Instrument of so substantial a
good, and yet lose the Reward of it.

2. And secondly, As to your Humility, this is to be secured both in respect of
your selves, and in your Deportment to others. As to the first, You must not
value your selves upon this, as being more holy than other Men; for Zeal
against the Sins of other People, tho it be good and commendable, yet is a very
bad Rule of judging of the degrees of Piety in our selves; and yet of all
Virtues it has the directest Tendency to raise Men's Opinions of their own
Piety, and puff them up with Spiritual Pride. Therefore let the notice we take
of the Sins of others, make us rather reflect upon our selves, who are Sinners
as well as they, tho perhaps not in the same Instances, or in the same degrees.
And the most effectual way of preserving an humble Sense of our own Religion
and Performances, is to compare our selves with the Law of GOD, and not with
the Lives of other Men; then we shall see so many Defects in our selves, that
we shall never be proud of not being as wicked as other Men are.

As it respects Others, you must show your Humility by Obedience and Submission
to the Magistrates in all your Proceedings; and by paying all Deference and
Respect to your Superiors, notwithstanding your Evidence against them; by
avoiding all Affectation of Singularity and Moroseness, and never insulting or
expressing any indecent Passion against Peoples Persons; for it is not them, but
their Sins you prosecute. There is a manner of accusing People which tho it
want no Courage or Resolution, yet discovers Meekness and Humility; and then it
becomes the brightest Zeal when it has this Undaunted Resolution, without any
mixture of the Heat and Fire of our Temper.

There is a way of Prosecuting the Sins of Others so as to convince even
themselves that it is from no Prejudice to their Persons, but a Zeal for the
Glory of GOD, and a tender Concern for the good of their Souls: And therefore
whenever this End can be effected without it, and that you have just ground to
think that their Conversion can be wrought by Secret Admonition, you are not to
expose them to Public Disgrace and Punishment. And you are to have such a
tender Regard to the Reputation of others, that you accuse not any Person upon
groundless Reports, or mere Suspicions; for the bringing an hundred guilty
Persons to Punishment, will not recompense the Injury done to one who is
wrongfully accused.

And in the zealous Prosecution of other Peoples Sins, you must ever have a
just regard to the Preservation of your own Innocence. Some Sins are of that
infectious Quality they catch like the Plague, and especially those of
Lasciviousness in Youth, where there is a Disposition to be wrought upon: Can a
Man take Fire in his Bosom, and not be burnt? says Solomon to this same
purpose; to show us the nature of this Temptation is such, that there is no way
of Safety, but by cutting off all Opportunities of it. So that to seek
Occasions of sinning your self, for the Discovery of other People, is not safe;
and to gain their Consent to a Sin by any means of Allurement or Circumvention
is not innocent; since this is a degree of Guilt in them, equal to Actual Sin.
This will harden People in their Vices rather than work their Reformation; And
therefore leave all these Methods to those Evil Spirits, the common Enemies of
Mankind whose proper Quality it is, first to entice People into Sin, and then
upbraid and accuse them for it. This is the only Objection that is or can be
made against your Endeavors: And if you take care to prevent this, you will
remove all suspicion from those who are truly zealous against Vice, and forward
to promote the Discouragement of it, by all fair means of Prosecution and
Discovery.

And let all this be done by you as true Sons of the Church and Members of its
Communion, and let no Opinion of your own Piety or Devout Performances among
your Selves insinuate any Disesteem of the service of the Church, which is much
more acceptable to Almighty GOD. Therefore be exact in the observance of its
Customs and Constitations, nor endeavor to be more Holy by reparing for more
frequent, or purer Worship to those Congregations which have Separated from Us.
You of all People cannot do this without being a contradiction to your selves;
for to the great Credit not only of Christianity but of the Established Church,
you have made it appear, that People may in all respects be as Virtuous and
Holy within the Bosom of the Church, as it is possible for them to be out of it:
So that you have effectually cut off from your selves all pretense of
Separation for ever; this makes it utterly needless, and therefore without
Excuse.

One thing more I would recommend to You under this Head, and that is, That in
all your Designs for the promoting of Virtue and Holiness, you never abound so
much in your own sense, as to decline the Advice and Concurrence of the Bishop
and your respective Ministers. If you have a true Zeal, this is the only
effectual way to have it according to Knowledge: But without their Guidance and
Conduct, you will run into Errors before you are aware; and one Error in things
of this nature is pregnant of many more. The Zealots among the Jews by assuming
to themselves what did not belong to them, proceeded at last to Elect and
Ordain the High Priest, despising the Rules of Birth (says Josepbus) by which
they were to Succeed; putting in Illiterate and Obscure Men, such as were
prepared with Ignorance and Superstition enough to back their Proceedings; For
having once broke in upon the Office and Privileges of the Priesthood, they
knew not where to stop.

IV. Another thing contained in these words is, That the Suppression of Open
Scandalous Impiety, is the most effectual means of diverting GOD's Judgments
from a Nation. There seemed here to be a full purpose of GOD utterly to consume
the Israelites in his Jealousy; and while the Number and Quality of those who
defiled themselves with the Midianitish Women hindered the Execution of the
Law, the Plague took off Four and Twenty Thousand of them. But the Zeal of this
Excellent Person in putting it in Execution, stopped the Plague in the midst of
its Rage, and turned away the Wrath of GOD from the whole Congregation.

Now the Reason why this Action was of so much Power and Efficacy to prevail
with GOD in all likelihood was, Either because he was one of the greatest
Quality of those that were guilty, and therefore influenced many Others by his
Example: Or else, which is not improbable, because this Courageous Action of
his in beginning the Execution, gave occasion to the rest of the Youth to
follow his Example, and clear the whole Camp of Israel of the Offenders. And
without doubt this was the reason why Phinehas was afterward sent Commander of
the Army against the Midianites, because GOD was likelier to bless that Hand
with Success which had thus led the way, and signalized it self by such an Act
of Exemplary Justice.

This same Method of GOD's Dealing by whole Nations, according to that visible
Appearance of Piety and Open Face of Religion that is among them, is very
discernable in the whole Series of GODs Dispensations to the Jews. And if we
could see the Secret Hand that manages all the Affairs of this World, we should
find this to be at the bottom of them all, as the main Spring by which all
Nations and Governments, all Cities and Communities undergo that great variety
of Changes and Revolutions.

Now the Wisdom and the Justice of GOD in this is very Accountable by us,
notwithstanding that the Good are promiscuously involved in the same Calamities
with the Wicked. For,

1. Since good and bad People, according to our Savior's Similitude, grow
together like the Tares and the Wheat, they must therefore undergo all the
several Changes of Weather in common, let the Cause be what it will; His Sun
must shine, and his Rain descend upon both alike. So that He has no other way
of dealing with whole Communities, but by sending Temporal Blessings or
Judgments upon all together. And that GOD might appear Just and True in all his
Dealings by the Children of Men, the Cause of these things must be something
that is common to them both; and that can be only this general Appearance of
Goodness, or open Permission of Scandalous Vices. For Secret Piety and
Sincerity is proper only to the Good, and Rewardable in another World: And
therefore as the Eternal Welfare of Men hereafter depends upon their own Secret
Piety, so the Prosperity of whole Nations proceeds from the Open Profession of
Religion and Morality. So that in great Strictness Men are in all senses, the
true Cause of all the Misfortunes that befall them either in this World, or the
next.

GOD has no other way, I say, of Dealing with whole Nations and Societies of
Men now, so as to proceed without all Exception, and preserve his Attributes
inviolable. But when these little Ties and Temporary Obligations which Unite
Men into Bodies here shall be Dissolved, and Mankind New Modeled into two Great
and Opposite Parties never to mix again; then there will be full scope for the
Exercise of all the Goodness of GOD upon the one, and of his just Vengeance
upon the other.

2. The Judgments of GOD may very Justly come upon the Good for want of a
Zealous Endeavor of Suppressing those Scandalous Vices in others. Persons may
be truly Virtuous and Holy in themselves, and yet be without a good measure of
Indignation at Open Impiety and Lewdness; so that they deserve to share in the
Consequences of that Impiety they did not use their utmost Endeavors to
suppress. And accordingly no question but the Plague swept away many of those
who were not guilty of the Sin that caused it; and would have destroyed many
more even of those that were innocent, if this speedy Suppression of those
Vices had not prevented it.

Nay tho we should suppose no want of Zeal in those that are Innocent, yet
there is no Injustice in their Suffering for the Sins of others: First, Because
there are no Temporal Judgments can befall them, but what are the due Reward of
their own Sins; and Secondly, Because tho they were not, but that they suffered
wrongfully; yet this may be designed by GOD, in order to an ample Recompense
hereafter: Whereas if the Bad should fail of a Reward in this Life, there is no
room left for it in another World.

3. Another Reason why barefaced Impiety and open Profaness have such a
Tendency to bring down Judgments upon all in Common is, Because they are a
direct Affront and Challenging of GOD. Public Scandalous Sins when they grow
general become a National Quarrel with him; and therefore lay a sort of
Necessity upon GOD to vindicate his Honor, and visit a Nation while it is
such, for those bold and open Defiances of Heaven, since there can be no
opportunity for this hereafter.

Besides, This of openly expressing the inward corruptness of Men's Souls seems
to be accidental to the guilt, for it is no more than proclaiming and giving
vent to what was hidden before; and therefore we cannot conceive how it can have
so direct an Influence upon Men's Future State. For their greatest Misery will
then be the Natural Result of their inward Depravation of Mind and Conscience;
and therefore the other seems necessarily to require some Punishment in this
Life, tho the many Evil Consequences of Scandalous Sins may hereafter be
punished by a positive Act of Justice. And therefore it is those Open Sins which
are not to be concealed from the knowledge of Men, such as Cursing, Swearing
and Adultery, etc. for which a Land is said to mourn.

Hypocricy, tho it is a base and detestable thing, yet it seems to have some
sense of GOD and Goodness left, tho it preposterously Act contrary to them
both. It is commendable in this, that *it is ashamed of its own Deformity; and
the wearing the Mask of Religion, is a tacit Acknowledgment they would be
sincerely good, if this could be had with the same Ease: And it shows they
would hide their Wickedness from GOD too, as well as from Men if it were
possible. But open Debauchery, and professed Impiety renounces all the intrinsic
worth of Religion; it is a direct Affront to Heaven, and a Daring of GOD: And
therefore when he is thus Challenged, he is constrained to Punish for the
Justification of his Honor. But when on the contrary they appear outwardly to
be Holy, the Honor of GOD is however preserved and the dangerous Consequences
prevented. Tho they have nothing of true Religion at the heart, yet it shows
some Veneration for Him and his Laws; which tho it be that of Slaves and
Vassals and not of True Subjects, yet it is not left without a Recompense proper
for it.

A mere form of Godliness and empty pretense of Piety often meets with a
suitable Recompense; so that what our Savior says of particular Hypocrites is
true of greater Bodies and Communities of them, That they have their Reward. A
famous instance of this is not out of the Memory of some yet alive; a time when
all solid Virtue, and moral Honesty was drein'd from Christianity, and nothing
left but the outside of it; yet this was proof against all the opposition of
those who had more of the substance, but too little of the outward show and
profession of it. This gave them such Success, that they overcame all
Difficulties, till at last Hypocrisy assumed the Throne, adored by all its
Votaries; and reigned till the Varnish came off the gilded Idol, and
discovered nothing but Clay and Rottenness all within.

And now if they had Ears to hear, I would speak something to those bold and
resolute Sinners who are the occasion of all this Trouble and Charge; But they
are so far past feeling, that none of the Terrors of God can touch them, and
therefore I must leave them to other methods. I shall only mind them here (if
ever they are disposed to consider it) that besides the proper guilt of their
own sins, they will in the day of Judgment be accountable for all those Evils
upon their Country, which have been the consequences of their sins in this
life: and that tho they may escape the hand of Justice here, yet Damnation
expects them, and they are only Reprieved till the Judgment of the Great Day.

V. The last thing I shall observe from hence is, That as the Suppression of
Scandalous Wickedness diverts the Judgments of God from a People in general, so
it brings down particular Blessings on the Heads of those which are the
Instruments of it. For this action of Phinehas, Behold says GOD I give him my
Covenant of Peace, by which Interpreters understand Prosperity, and all
Temporal Blessings: And besides it follows, that GOD would give him the
Covenant of an Everlasting Priesthood, ( i. e.) confirm it in the same Line to
him and his Posterity. But Eli afterward forfeited the Priesthood for the
contrary reason, because his Sons made themselves vile and he restrained them
not. A tenderness to his own Children made him disregard the Public Good, and
prefer the Ease and Quiet of his Private Family before the Public Welfare of
the Church: Whereas Phinehas in all likelihood, ran a great hazard of his Life,
since Zimri and Cosbi were considerable Persons, One the Head of a Chief House,
and the Other a Prince's Daughter of Midian; and therefore probably there
wanted not People to endeavor a Revenge. And the Success must have been very
uncertain at a time when their general Lewdness, as appears by this action of
Zimri's, out-brav'd the Laws and Magistrates, and therefore as it is Psalm. 106.
This was counted to him for Righteousness through all Generations for evermore.

This was a Rare and Admirable Instance of a truly generous Zeal and Public
Spirit, than which nothing is more acceptable to Almighty God; because it
places Him and his Cause uppermost in our Minds, and makes all things
subservient to his Will: this is the greatest indication of a sincere love of
God, and is truly the highest pitch of Virtue. Even the Heathens had a mighty
sense of the excellence of this concern for the common Good, as appears from
the many Brave and Generous Actions they did for their Superstition. And the
wise Athenian Lawgiver being asked Which was the most effectual means of
preserving Justice and Equity in a City? answered, That those who receive no
Injury by unlawful things, be equally incensed as those who suffer by them. And
gave this as the surest sign of the decay of any Community, when every one is
eagerly bent upon their own welfare, without regard to any thing beyond
themselves.

The Gospel improves and encourages this Excellent Temper, and requires such a
disposition of heart, and mutual Concern for the good of one another in all its
Members, as if they were but one Family; and teaches to prefer the glory of
God, above all that is near and dear to us. The description of our Savior's
Temper in the 69 Psalm, is, That the Zeal of Gods House had eaten him up (i.
e.) the Zeal and Concern he had for the glory of GOD and his Church, even
preyed upon his Spirits.* It follows, And the Reproaches of them that
reproached thee is fallen upon me (i. e.) I have as quick and feeling a sense
of any reproach or dishonor done to Thee, as if it were done to my self.

Let therefore the same Spirit be in us, and let us lay to heart the daily
Profanations of GOD's holy Name among us, the open Reproaches of his Divine
Truths, and the manifold Transgression of his Laws with a hardy Insolence and
Public Defiance. And let us not be wanting to do all that in us lies for the
Glory of GOD, and the Dignity of his Laws; at a time when we have so fair an
Opportunity given us of showing our Zeal for GOD, our Indignation at the Vices
and Immoralities of the Age, and to promote a General Reformation of Life and
Manners.

Why Men should not be as Zealous in the Execution of Laws made against Vice,
as of those that are made in favor of their Temporal Interests, is hard to
tell, unless it be, that they love the World better than they do GOD. And why
giving of Evidence in these Cases should be more condemned, than in any Case of
Injustice done to our selves, I know not; there can be no Reason given, but
because People are more Tender of their Worldly Concerns, than they are of the
Glory of GOD. What were these good Laws made for? Nay, what have we a Religion
for? Certainly not for mere show and formality. therefore all who had any hand
in making these Pious Laws, are bound to forward and promote the Execution of
them, as they will defend us all from the Imputation of a Solemn National
Hypocrisy. It Is a shame to see with what Fierceness and great Expense of Time
and Money, Men will prosecute an Affront done to themselves, and yet leave all
those Excellent Laws that are made against the Public Reproaches of GOD's holy
Name and his Religion, to lie neglected and trampled upon.

GOD be praised there is now a Spirit of Zeal and Fervor, answerable to that
of Phinehas stirred up among us, with the true Qualifications and Temper of the
Gospel; in opposition to that growing Spirit of Irreligion and Infidelity which
has bid open Defiance to GOD and Goodness. If we Cherish and Encourage it, we
may promise our selves the Victory in the End: For true Virtue is then only in
danger when it is attacked with Methods of Treachery, and it is never safer than
when it has declared open War with Vice. The contest is now with Men's Vices,
and not with their Opinions; it is not the Interest of a Party, but the common
Cause of Christianity. And it is a Noble Enterprise, for by removing these
Immoralities, we strike at the very Root of Socinianism, which is now grown a
many-Headed Monster, and improved into a strange variety of Profane and
Atheistical Principles; all which look one way, and agree to make a Body
against all revealed Religion, and the Mysteries of the Gospel. It Is a tedious
way about to grapple with every one of them singly, and by this means we find
they multiply upon us: But this is to cut them off all at once, for make People
but truly Moral Men, and then it is easy to make them Good and Believing
Christians.

Let not therefore any of those, who are the more immediate Undertakers of this
Good Work, be discouraged with any Opposition they meet with; they have but Two
great Difficulties to struggle with, and by the Blessing of God they will
overcome them both; The Jealousies of good People, and the Fury of those that
are prosecuted.

As for the Suspicions and Jealousies of good People, they will all wear off by
degrees, when they consider what have been already the good Effects of your
Zeal for GOD and Goodness. When they consider that face of Piety and Devotion
which of late is visible in our Public Worship in the Congregation; the great
increase in the number of Communicants in all our Churches; the sensible
Decrease of Public and Scandalous Vice in this City, etc. Let them but lay
these things, which are a substantial present advantage to our Church and
Nation, against those groundless surmises of some ill Consequences they know
not when, nor how. Let us but thoroughly reform the Vices of this Age, and that
is the surest way of preventing ill Consequences in the next. And indeed what
Consequences can be more formidable then that of open Cursing and Swearing,
Adultery and Whoredom, and all that Impudent and Barefaced Impiety which, with
the Encouragement of the Magistrates and Contributions of good People, they may
be the happy means of suppressing.

As to the other Difficulty you are to grapple with, you must expect the work
will not be very easy; for the Rage and Fury of Persons crossed and disturbed in
their Vices, is very well likened by Solomon to the fierceness of a Bear when
she is robbed of her Whelps. But comfort your selves with this, that they have
no other Objection against you, but what the Devils made to our Savior, That
you come to torment them before their time.

Do you however appear as resolute for the Cause of God, as they do for that of
the Devil; The World is come to that pass, that it is impossible to be truly
Good without Courage and Resolution. Let us but remain Undaunted, and this
Impudent Impiety will loose Ground daily, till the Numbers of its Votaries grow
so small that they will be ashamed of it. The worst of Men have a secret Awe
and Veneration for Virtue and Holiness; there is so much of GOD in it, that
they can no more raze out all Veneration for it in their Minds, then they can
the Existence of a Deity: And there is so much of the innate quality of the
Devil in all Vice and Wickedness, that if we do resist it manfully it will fly
from us, and we shall surely be Conquerors in the end.

FINIS.

