Bibliotheca Parochialis: OR, A SCHEME OF SUCH Theological Heads BOTH General
and Particular, AS ARE More peculiarly Requisite to be well Studied by every
Pastor of a Parish.

Together with a Catologue of BOOKS Which may be Read upon each of those Points.

PART. I.

By THOMAS BRAY, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, and are to be Sold by John North,
Bookseller in Dublin. MDCXCVII.

TO THE Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in GOD, HENRY Lord Bishop
of LONDON, AND One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
MY LORD,
THAT I presume to lay these following Papers at Your Lordship's Feet, is out
of the high Veneration I have to Your Lordship's Great Conduct and Goodness (in
which Your Diocese have been so long happy) and out of that deep sense of Duty,
which will always make me entirely submit to Your Censure and Correction,
whatever Measures I shall take for the Good of that Church, to whose Service
You are pleased to design me.

And how can it be, but that upon this occasion I should propose and endeavor
something more than ordinary for the Good of the Place I am going to? For though
indeed the Glory of God, and the eternal Happiness of the Souls of Men are
Considerations sufficient at any time to animate Christians to such Attempts,
as shall conduce thereunto; yet when Providence places such Governors at the
Helm in Church and State, as being of a Public Spirit, do themselves most
vigorously pursue such Blessed Ends; and being easy of Access, do with the
utmost Candor and Condescension (of which truly Noble Excellencies, Your
Lordship is an extraordinary Example) give ear to the Overtures of Inferior
Persons, upon the same Designs; it seems as if God did then intend to be
propitious to the Undertaking.

Now, my Lord, the whole Aim of what follows is to make a provision for the
implanting such Measures and Degrees of Christian Knowledge, as it is requisite
every one who professes Christianity, should be acquainted withal, and that the
Minds of Men may happily be delivered from that Ignorance wherein lies the
strength of Satan's Kingdom.

Knowledge is the fairest Ornament of the Soul of Man, and whosoever is endowed
therewith, let it be of what kind soever, fails not of Respect amongst all
sorts of Persons; but especially Knowledge is then valuable, when it is in
things of the greatest Moment and Consequence. And that the Knowledge which I
have endeavored in these following Papers to provide for, is such, is too
evident to need Proof or Illustration. For why? It is a Knowledge that is
conversant about the greatest Objects, viz. God and our Selves; and that about
the grandest and most concerning Truths relating to those Objects. It is a
Knowledge to which the most considerable of other Sciences are some way or
other Appendent and Subservient: But above all, it is the only Knowledge which
can Conduct us safe through the Mazes and Labyrinths of this World, to our Rest
and Happiness in the other.

Nor will the Advantages to Mankind of such a Design as this be less
conspicuouus, if we look upon the contrary Evil from which it tends to deliver
the Minds of Men, viz. Ignorance of Divine things. For why? The Power of the
Prince of this World, is by no other Character so muoh known, as by the Title
of the Kingdom of Darkness. And what Sins and Miseries are there, which this
Ignorance and Darkness is not the fruitful Parent of? It were enough to set
Ignorance out as the most dreadful Evil, to say that it is the cause of all
those Slavish, Barbarous, and Savage Superstitions that are in the World.

But alas, it is not of one single Sin, or sort of Misery that Ignorance in
Christianity is productive; but it is the natural Parent of all those fearful
Crimes, and outrageous Wickednesses that are committed upon the Face of the
Earth, and when it once prevails over a whole People, it is so fruitful in
Misery also, that the State of such Men becomes a perfect Emblem of Hell, as
will easily occur to the Observation of any that are at all acquainted with the
state of the World, so as to be able to compare one People with another, with
respect to their Knowledge of God and Religion.

For Instance, let but any one compare the People of this Nation, amongst whom
(praised be the infinite Goodness of Heaven for so invaluable a Blessing) the
Light of the Gospel shines with a Meridian Brightness; if we do but compare
these with the Naked Indians, the African Cannibals, or rather with the
Georgians, a Degenerate Race of Christians in Asia, Sir John Chardin's Travels.
amongst whom the Notions of God and Religion are in a manner quite extinct;
and amongst our selves there are some tolerable degrees of Humanity, Honesty,
and Goodness; whereas the others are so much worse for Bloodshed, Lust,
Cruelty, Revenge, and whatever Brutish and Savage Manners, than Wolves, Bears,
and Tigers; inasmuch as being Rational Creatures, they have greater Cunning and
Capacity of doing Mischief one to another, than those Bruits have.

And indeed in any part of the World we shall find that proportionably to the
Increase or Decrease of Christian Knowledge, do Vice or Virtue make their
Advances respectively; so that as on the one side innumerable are the Miseries
and horrid are the Sins, the Barbarities, Cruelties, Perjuries, Murders,
Adulteries, and whatever other Violations of the Laws of God, Nature, and
Nations, that proceed from the bitter Fountain of Ignorance of the true Nature
of God and Religion: So unspeakable on the other side would be the Benefits
consisting in Justice, Mercy, and Peace; in Piety to God, and well ordered
Affections as to our selves, were but the World thoroughly enlightened with the
Knowledge of God, and the true Nature of pure and undefiled Religion.

And now if we consider these things, how strange is it there should be those
amongst us, who, as much as they owe their Security and Happiness at home, to
the Influence that Religion has upon our Public Laws and Private Actions; yet
are perfect Enemies to the propagation thereof abroad. But yet it is not to be
wondered, that some should hate the Light, it is because their Deeds are Evil.
I shall say no more to 'em, but that the Day will come, when they will find
their Omissions in promoting, or rather their Obstructions to the Progress of
Christianity, the most terrible part of all their Accounts.

But God be praised, as Lukewarm in Religion as this worst of Ages is, I must
not forbear to acknowledge it to the Honor of some, that they have already
showed themselves to be of a contrary Spirit by their Liberal Benefactions to
our present Design, by whose means we have been able to lay a good Foundation
to our Parochial Libraries, and to send some over already into MARYLAND.

And as our Success is in a great measure owing to the Liberality and
Countenance given to the Design, by several Great Men of Your Lordship's Order;
and by Your self in particular; so that God may long preserve amongst the rest,
so great a Patron of Learning and Religion, so firm a Pillar of our Church, and
so great an Ornament to Your Sacred Order, shall be the Hearty and Devout
Prayers of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's, most Humble, and most Obedient Sevant, THO. BRAY.

To the Reverend, THE Parochial Clergy OF ENGLAND and IRELAND.
Reverend Sirs,
HAving been so well acquainted, by being concerned in a Parochial Cure my
self, with the Method of Indigent Travelers, who always make first to the
Minister of the Parish; and besides his own Charity, desire him to recommend
'em to such as are well disposed Persons therein; I presume the more to apply
to you in the same manner, in the behalf of your Brethren going abroad into the
Plantations to serve the Great Master of us all, our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and who having a Zeal for his Work, want only those means for the
propagating of Christian Knowledge, viz. good and proper Books, without which
it is scarcely conceivable how they should be either furnished with a
sufficient measure thereof themselves, or impart it to others. I have little
reason indeed to doubt of your own Liberality in this matter, the Charity and
Generosity of the Clergy being so very apt upon most occasions, to out go their
Ability. And the Members of our Universities particularly, if we consider the
Noble Donations and Additions which have been made by them to their Libraries,
Chapels and other Buildings, they will be found to have erected more Monuments
of their Zeal for the Advancement of Learning and Religion in a few years last
past, than any other Persuasion or Body of Men (not the Romanists excepted)
have done in many Ages heretofore.

Nor shall we despair of a savourable Answer from those to whom we would desire
your Application on our behalf, provided they are seasoned with any tolerable
measure of Zeal for the Glory of God and of true Religion, for those who are
really Pious, cannot but easily receive the Impression, when they are given to
understand that there is no Charity in the World whereby they can so much
contribute to the Honor of God, and the good of Souls, as this; That it is an
Apostolical Work to have an hand in converting Souls to God, and that there is
no way whereby the Laity can have so immediate a hand therein, as that which is
here offered to them.

I could urge how that in agreat measure from the Colonies abroad, our Citizens
and Merchants have had their prodigious Wealth, and that hither it is that the
Countryman and the Tradesman do vend their Manufactures and Commodities; and
it were but reasonable to propose it also to the Consideration of our Persons
of Honor and Quality, as a thing not unworthy their Reflection, that since the
Discovery of the Plantations, their Rents have been advanced, and their
Splendour increased treble to what their Noble Ancestors before 'em were
acquainted with. And upon all this, it were natural enough to expostulate with
'em; what reason there can be, that they should reap all the advantages to
themselves from the Dangers and Fateigues of other Men, and repay nothing back
toward their chiefest well-being.

But that which I would desire might be chiefly considered and suggested to all
Ranks and Degrees of Men, is this, That as scarce any People have received
greater Advantages from the Foreign Plantations, than we have done; and no
Nation in the World, I am sure, has a better Religion to requite them with, for
the same than we have; yet to the no small Discredit both of our Country and
Religion, no Persuasion of Men upon Earth have been hitherto so cold and
wanting to promote it, ^s we have been. Insomuch that whereas a Neighboring
State* which we do often reproach as having once (some of them) ^^n'd their
Country with the disavowing of their Religion, ^o expend 20000 l. per Annum in
the East Indies alone in ^ropagating Christianity, I can hear of little Charity
of that nature that goes from hence; which, whether it may not have been a
provocation for those terrible strokes of Providence that some have lately
felt, and those but as warnings, that they may not by such an unconcernedness
for the cause of Christianity, provoke the Divine Indignation to follow the
blow with greater, is no more than what becomes Christians to consider.

Now I can scarcely believe that a People who profess so much Zeal, and that
most deservedly, for the Protestant Religion, as the English do, should be so
insincere in their Professions, and have really so little esteem for it, as to
be unconcerned for the same abroad; especially in those Colonies which are as
much English, and as much the parts of His Majesty's Dominions, as these
Islands are wherein we live.

Much less can I think, that the Merchants, a Rank of Men of as great
Generosity as any of what Quality soever, and who do daily signalize the same
by many Noble Gifts to Pious and Charitable Uses; and from whom it is expected
to do more for the encouragement of Religion in the Plantations, than others,
it (being the Plantations which in so great a measure have enriched them:) Much
less is it to be imagined, that they should be unconcerned for the propagation
of Christianity therein, but for want of being more put in mind of the
necessity thereof, and of being excited thereto; and give me leave to speak it,
of our frequent and earnest Applications made to 'em to that purpose.

I crave leave to say, for want of Applications to 'em by us; for so it is,
that the Romish Clergy having heretofore in this Nation, and continuing so to
do to this day, in other Nations, most grossly abused the Credulity of the
Laity, by Preaching up nothing scarcely but the Merit of good Works; and that
to such a Degree, as to make a Donation to their sort of Pious Uses (as they
would have 'em thought) sufficient to atone for all the Atrocious Villainies of
a most Flagitious Life; we on the other side, out of an excess of Modesty, as
little as we baulk other Duties, and forbear to warn our People of other Sins;
yet it is rarely that we are found much to mind 'em of works of Piety (as those
we do here endeavor to promote, are really such) and to do which is a Duty as
necessarily Incumbent upon all Men, according to their Ability, as any other
Duty whatsoever, and the omission as much a Sin. Particularly, and especially
it is seldom they are put in mind how much it lies upon 'em to contribute
toward the support and extent of the Christian Name: And that the slighting
the Opportunities which God has given us of setting up the Banners of Christ's
Kingdom, where Satan does still solely govern the Minds of Men, is a great Sin;
and indeed, since the Divine Providence has been so propitious to us in our
Temporal Concerns and Interests, as to extend the English Dominions to the
Remotest parts of the Earth, such an Ingratitude to God, as is not the least
amongst those National Sins we are guilty of, and are to Answer for.

I must confess indeed, that where People will be so sinister in their
Interpretations of what we do or speak, as to call our Discourses and
Persuasions to Works of Piety, a Preaching of our selves, and our own
Interests, it is hard enough for generous Spirits, who scorn what does in the
least savor of Selfishness, to be found in such Arguments. And therefore I
believe it is, that though our Parsonages, and Vicarages do continually suffer
greater Diminutions by far in their Dues, from the Sacrilegious Invaders of the
Churches Patrimony, and from pretended Modus's and Prescriptions (not to speak
of grosser Methods) than our poorer Vicarage Houses do by their Dilapidations,
yet it is seldom or never that any of us trouble our Auditories with asserting
our own Rights, and in warning our People least they rob God in his Tithes and
Offerings, as careful as we are to Preach up amongst 'em that Justice to one
another which concerns the Preservation of their own Meum and Tuum. The reason
is the reluctance we find in our selves to be thought, or so much as suspected
to seek our selves in the Dispensation of our Ministry: And hence also it is
not without difficulty that we can be persuaded to trouble Mankind with those
ungrateful Arguments which would draw any thing from 'em toward the support
and service of the best of Churches amongst us. But here in the Case we are now
upon, there is no danger of such Imputations, since what goes into the
Plantations goes too far from You, Reverend Sirs, to terminate upon your selves.

But however, we are secure enough in the Nature of the thing here desired, for
with as evil an Eye as the World looks upon the Preferments of the English
Clergy (not considering the insupportable Charges appendant to the greatest
part of them) and hate to see us Rich, yet to do the Layty right, I never knew
any of 'em envy us Books, Learning, Knowledge; much less can it be supposed
they will, when the Books we desire are of such a Nature, and do so directly
enable us to impart useful Knowledge and Instruction to themselves, as the
following Catalogue in the whole Composition of it, is designed to do. So that
the case of the Plantations we are thus Bold to commit to your Management, we
do humbly conceive is what You may with a good Grace, and Assurance enough
solicit in our behalf.

And indeed, since I am so thoroughly persuaded, that nothing can so directly
tend to encourage Good Men, and Lovers of Souls, to venture themselves in the
Labors of the Gospel abroad, as good Books; and nothing can so immediately
tend to render 'em Good and useful when they are there, as the same. I must
therefore conjure you my Brethren, as you will approve your selves to our
Heavenly Master, to have had his Glory principally in your Eye, that you will
assist with the utmost of your Power and Eloquence in the obtaining what you
can toward the providing of these Libraries, as a principal Means of promoting
the Interest of Christ's Kingdom.

I cannot tell what Apprehensions other Men may have of these Matters, but for
my own part I am so fully persuaded of the usefulness thereof, that since it is
not easy in such Times of Public Necessities as these are, to get Libraries
for all the smaller Vicaridges of this Kingdom (as the Noble Sir Roger Twisden,
did so worthily and piously project) whereby the Ministers thereof might be in
a Capacity to Instruct the People with sound and solid Doctrine in all the
Essentials and Necessaries of Christianity; The next Good thing, even equal, if
not beyond the Endowments of their Vicaridges, I could wish for the good of
God's Church amongst us, is, that there were but a Library in every Deanary of
the Kingdom, and that placed either in the Center of the Deanary, or rather in
some Market Town, where it lies convenient for the Clergy to borrow Books out
of it, when at any time they shall have occasion to Read upon any Important
Point of Religion, in order to clear their apprehensions therein, that so they
might with Judgment and Safety to the Peoples Souls, treat thereof to 'em; and
those Lending Libraries having the Books marked upon the Covers to what Deanary
they belong, and locked up in Book-Presses made on purpose to keep 'em in, and
Reposited with the Rural Dean, the Minister, or the Schoolmaster of such Town,
they might with very little Trouble be sent for on any Market Day, and as
easily returned within a convenient Time, (as there ought to be a limited time
for it, as a Month for a Folio, a Fortnight for a Quarto, and a Week for an
Octavo.)

In the first place, The having of these Libraries dispersed throughout the
Kingdom, for the use of the Clergy, would most manifestly and directly tend to
the good of the Laity; who in such cases might promise themselves a full
Instruction in all the Points of Faith and Practice, whereas with the present
Provision, all that they can expect to hear are general Exhortations to
Religion, and some Motives to the Practice of the Duties thereof: But without a
very considerable number of very good Authors, it is morally impossible they
should have their Judgments truly and thoroughly Informed in the Nature and
Extent of all the Duties to God, their Neighbor and themselves, which cannot
be done without much Reading: Much less shall a Minister be able, without good
Skill in the Scriptures, and being much conversant in several Critical and
Dogmatical Writers, be able to explicate and enforce all the Doctrines and
Principles of Christianity; without the Knowledge and Belief of which, and a
Virtuous Practice acted upon those Principles, the greatest Regularity in
Manners cannot be called a Christian Life, nor entitle those that live, though
never so agreeably to the Rules of Morality, to a Christians Reward: which two
things being well considered by the Laity, viz. That they can neither be duly
Instructed in Faith nor Practice, except the Clergy shall be sufficiently
provided of Books for that purpose: And withal, that it is the business of a
Pastor, not only to Feed his Flock, with wholesome Instruction, but also to
defend 'em from the Contagion of Erroneous and Heretical Doctrines, which
cannot be done without a competent Skill in Modern Controversies, and those not
a few; even the Laiety would then think themselves extremely concerned to have
such a Provision of necessary and useful Books made for the Clergy.

And then Secondly, As to the Clergy themselves, I am so fully persuaded of the
Benefit to them, of these Lending Libraries, that they seem to me to be the
most likely means, and to be in a good measure sufficient, to restore even
those of the lowest Capacities in the Ministry, from both those Evils, which
the Author of the Contempt of the Clergy says, are the Causes of our Contempt,
viz. Ignorance and Poverty. And,

I. As for Ignorance in our proper Calling, it must indeed of necessity cause
the Contempt of those who are found to be such. In any Calling a Person is
valued proportionably to his Knowledge and Skill therein; especially in ours.
And yet I do not see how it is possible for most of us but to fall short of a
complete Knowledge in the whole Body, even of Preachable Divinity, as the Case
stands with most of us; for one Third of the Livings of England come not up to
50 l. per Annum, which I am sure will afford but very little, if any thing at
all, to purchase Books with, when Domestic Charges, and Public Payments are
satisfied; and yet without the Reading of such Books, at least, as are of more
immediate use to inform ourselves in all the Terms of the Covenant of Grace,
that so we may be able to instruct others, how is it possible (now that
Inspiration is ceased) but that we should be ignorant to our own extreme
Disgrace, and the infinite Prejudice of those Souls committed to our Charge?
And again, except we shall have a Collection of such Books, either of our own,
or somewhere near at hand, whence we may borrow 'em, how is it possible we
should ever read 'em?

II. And the having of these Lending Libraries near at hand, I do also humbly
conceive, will contribute not a little, to prevent that other occasion of our
Contempt, viz. Poverty, at leastwise, as to many of us: For this I am very
certain of, that many of the Clergy in Poorer Livings, who are Bookishly given
(and it is pity that ever any should enter into Holy Orders who are not of this
Spirit) can scarce keep themselves clear of the Booksellers Accounts, nor Money
in their Pockets for their necessary Occasions, because of their Charges that
way; which yet I think are as much their Necessaries as Meat and Drink, which
give Nourishment only to the worser part of us.

Well, and if there be any Truth in that other Imputation, as the Cause of our
Contempt, which the Adversaries of our Church are so apt to charge us withal:
viz. The scandalous Immoralities, which perhaps it may be too true that some
may be guilty of; I do humbly conceive that this Scandal also may be in a great
measure removed, by the same means of having Lending Libraries. For whence is
it that many seek for Company and Diversion abroad, but for want of the better
Society of good entertaining Authors at home: The Truth of it is, there are a
sort of Writers which are traditionally handed down from one Old Study to
another, who are not such a good Humored and Inviting Society as to make one
delight much in their Conversation: But what Man of Spirit or Education, had he
a Justin Martyr, a Tertullian or Cyprian; a Sanderson, a Hammond or Tillotson,
come to visit him, would leave such Men of Sense for the Society of the Sons of
Belial.

Not to say, that our Acquaintance with such Excellent and Noble Authors, will
render our Society when we do meet together such as becomes Men of Education
and Learning; will elevate our Thoughts and Discourse above the vulgar and
usual Conversation, in which it is much below us to be found, will supply us
with those Notions and Matter for Discourse, as will render us not despicable,
but venerable amongst those we shall happen to converse withal.

In short, I look upon the thing of Libraries to be the great Desideratum, even
here in England; and yet so sanguine am I, that I am fully persuaded I could
propose those ways to the Reverend Clergy of the Kingdom, whereby they might be
provided therewith with very little Charge to themselves or others. But to let
that pass; and I shall think my self sufficiently happy, if I can accomplish a
Design of this Nature elsewhere; the reason I so much insist upon the
Usefulness of 'em here, is to prove the Necessity thereof in the foreign
Plantations; for here some few of the Clergy are able to buy a sufficient Stock
of Books for themselves, but it is very rarely that those who go into America
are in such a Condition; for Men of Interests and Fortunes love their Native
Country too well, to venture themselves abroad.

But the great Objection against our Design, will be the chargeableness
thereof, in which respect when the Catalogue is read over, it will appear
almost impossible to be accomplished. There are several Books laid down upon
particular Heads, and the Charges of such a Library for every Parish will
amount to many Hundred, if not some Thousand Pounds. But the Method I design to
take in the disposing of these Libraries, will take off very much from the
Formidableness of this Objection; for whereas there are sometimes a score of
several Authors prescribed upon the same Subject, it is intended, that not
above one or two upon every Point shall be allotted into each Private Library;
and those who will not be satisfied without reading all that has been written
by Authors of any Eminency upon every Theological Head (whose Noble Curiosity,
Industry, and Thirst after useful Knowledge, I cannot but highly commend) those
Worthy Persons may borrow of their Neighboring Clergy the Books they
themselves want, and they again of these; by which means there will also this
Good acrue, that hereby a mutual Correspondence with one another will be
maintained by the Clergy; a Correspondence in Re Literaria, the most useful and
noblest Correspondence in the World, and which will render 'em as considerable
in Learning and Knowledge, as others are for their Wealth and Riches. And if
over and above these lesser Libraries cantoned into so many Parts, we can
obtain but one General Library in the Province, consisting but of the whole set
laid down in the following Catalogue: This is the utmost of our Expectation or
desires.

And here in these general Libraries alone it is that we shall dispose of the
Ancient Writers, whether Fathers, or Philosophers mentioned in the Catalogue. I
thought fit indeed to specify the particular Tracts written upon the several
Heads by those Venerable Authors, as well as those which have been made by
Modern Writers, as the most likely means I could think of, in order to their
being read by the Lower Form of our Clergy. For as it is the same thing to the
Learned part of the World, whether some Manuscripts and Pieces of the Ancients
be really and utterly lost, or whether they be buried in dust in unfrequented
Libraries, till now that some Persons of a Great and Noble Genius, are
searching 'em out, in order to give us a Catalogue thereof: So the great
Reason, as I apprehend, why the Lower Form of the Clergy are not more
conversant in the Ancient Writers, is because several perhaps are not much
acquainted, that many of the Subjects they have written upon, are the very same
they themselves do daily Preach to the People: Whereas for instance, he that
considers that Tertullian, Ambrose and Chrysostom have written upon Repentance,
who amongst us would not ride some Miles to a Public Library to consult the
Sense of those Perspicatious Writers before we put Pen to Paper our selves.

And now Reverend Sirs, I must earnestly request your Candor in passing a
favorable Censure upon what follows. I have had but very little leisure, and
was constrained to a very short time to draw up this following Catalogue: And
at the best do pretend to very small Skill for such an Undertaking; But being
designed for the Service of the Plantations by my Superiors, at whose absolute
disposal I so much am, that I should think it a sin to dispute their Commands
into any part of the World, where I have any reason to think it may be to the
Service of God's Church to be sent by them; I did not know how I could be any
ways serviceable in the Place I am designed for, without sending before me, or
carrying over with me, for the use of the Church, I go to, some Provisions of
this nature.

But now my Hand is in, if I should find this part accepted, I do further
design to draw out into a more particular Scheme, those two great Conditions of
the Covenant of Grace; The several Articles included in our Creed, which we are
to believe; And the various and numerous Duties included in Obedience, which we
are to practice; And in the same Method as before, to subjoin the several
Authors of best account, both Ancient and Modern, who have written upon those
more particular Subjects.

And also to this Part, I would add a List of all the most Considerable, both
amongst the Ancient Homilies, and Modern Sermons, which have been published
upon all the foregoing Heads of Pulpit Divinity, whether General or Particular.

And when I shall have thus far provided Directions to those of my Brethren, I
am likely to be concerned with beyond Sea, as to give 'em an entire Scheme of
what I humbly conceive more immediately necessary for 'em to understand
themselves, and to instruct others in, in order to Salvation; I should be glad
if some abler Pen, one that can pretend to Universal Learning, would give us a
draught of those Studies, which tho not so immediately necessary, are next
thereunto, viz. exceedingly useful to perfect a Divine, such as the whole
course of History, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; Physiology, and several other
parts of Humane Litherature, which are of no small concernment to the Ministers
of Christ's Church to be Masters of: But if no one else should undertake this
part tho I have not Skill my self, I have Zeal enough to attempt any thing, tho
above my Power, for the good of God's Church, and the Honor of his Clergy, the
great Interest of which, I think I can, and hope I shall be ever able to prefer
to any of my own.

ERRATA.
PAge 27. line 7. read Idololatria, p. 28. l. 3. r. Anonymum, p. 29. l. 16. r.
Xenophon, ib. l. 29. r. Antoninus, ib. l. ult, r. Macrobii, p. 34. l. 8. r.
Hieronymi, p. 37. l. 23. r. fodder, p. 38. l. 3. r. Judaeorum, p. 41. l. 6. r.
Bey. ib. l. 7. r. praefecturis, p. 41. l. 5. of the last of the inner Notes, r.
331. p. 43. l. 5. r. Scapula's, ib. l. 18. r. Glassii, p. 44. l. ult. r.
Studio, p. 48. l. 3. dele it was, ib. l. 22. dele our, p. 50. l. 19. r. ad
Relationem, p. 54. r. Mediation, p. 64. l. 26. r. Legantur, p. 70. l. 7. r.
Legantur, p. 74. l. 16. r. digesta, p. 75. l. 31. r. subjungi, p. 76. l. 1. r.
Institutiones Justiniani, p. 78. l. 18. r. Ignoratio, p. 65. l. 15. r. than, p.
74. l. 1. of the inner Note, r. speret, and l. 5. Obsecret, p. 93. l. 21. r.
Instructiones, p. 100. l. 28. r. Constitutions.

THE INTRODUCTION
THE Design of Publishing the following Proposals, and Catalogue, is in hopes
that falling into the Hands of such who are Piously disposed, they may be
thereby wrought upon to contribute toward the promoting the two best Things in
the World, Religion and Learning, in those Parts which are most uncultivated
therewith, the American Plantations.

And indeed it is scarcely to be imagined, that those Persons who are thoroughly
seasoned with true Piety, and are sensible of the inestimable Benefit which
they themselves have received by the Preaching of the Gospel (by which alone
they are distinguished from those Barbarous Indians, whose Spiritual Condition
is truly deplorable; and whose Conversion is one thing herein aimed at, as well
as the Instruction of those of our own Colonies.) It is not to be Imagined, I
say, but that they should be hearty Well-wishers to such a Design, and
contribute so far as they are able, toward carrying it on. It was Emphatically
spoke to St. Peter by our Blessed Savior, When thou art Converted, strengthen
thy Brethren, Luke 22.32. For a Soul thoroughly Converted, and burning with a
fervent Love to God, will not only wish well to the Labors of others, but by
all possible means will it self endeavor, that the Image of that God he loves,
may be impressed likewise upon other Men's Souls; and that all the World may join
with him in the Adoration and Praises of that Blessed Savior, from whom he
does receive such unspeakable Benefits.

Now, in reference to our Foreign Plantations, the Subject of our present
Concern, I humbly conceive, there is scarcely any more effectual way to
testify our Love to God, or the Souls of Men, by promoting the Glory of the
one, and contributing to the common Salvation of the other, than by imparting
something toward the providing of such Libaries therein, whereby the Clergy
sent thither, may be enabled to instruct those People in the Doctrines of sound
Belief and good Morals; the two great constituent parts of Christianity.

For this in the first place, I will be bold to assert, That however some
Persons, whose Enmity to the Clergy proceeds from their want of Love and
Veneration to that God and Religion, to whom they do Minister (as is notorious,
if we consider the Principles and Practices of those Men;) notwithstanding, I
say, such are pleased to traduce the whole Order as useless, and a burden to
the World; yet it is evidently owing to the Men of that Tribe, that Mankind has
been so happily recovered from the Ignorance, Barbarity, and Brutish Manners
into which it was sunk; and that Licentiousness, Rapine and Violence have given
way to Purity, Justice and Humanity in those parts of the World where Pure and
Genuine Christianity is taught; Nay, and it is owing to them, that where Humane
Sacrifices were once offered, now the Reasonable Service that the Gospel
prescribes, which is to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, has prevailed in
the World; and that where whole Provinces were Slaves to the Devil, they are
now the Servants of God. And should a Nation, through the heavy Judgment of
Heaven, become destitute of a Learned and a Pious Clergy, and be delivered up
to the Malignant Principles of those who hate the Profession; Good God, to what
Impurities, Rapines and Murders must such a wretched People be inevitably
exposed! Such an inestimable Benefit to Mankind, are a Clergy that do thoroughly
understand, and industriously preach the Genuine Doctrines of Christianity.

Next, I presume I may safely assume this, that as the Clergy are more or less
useful to those Excellent Ends of Improving and Perfecting the Minds of Men,
accordingly as they are more or less Masters themselves of that Divine
Knowledge which they are to Teach others; so it is not possible according to
the present Dispensation of Divine Providence, that they should thoroughly
understand it themselves, without the help of such Books as treat of all the
Sacred Truths of Christianity. For now the Gospel being fully revealed,
Inspiration is ceased, and Persons of all sorts, Clergy as well as Laity, are
left to Study and Reading, as the only Means, whereby, together with God's
Blessing, they can attain to that measure thereof, which is sufficient to
inform themselves and others.

And therefore Lastly, from hence it does follow, that such Charitable Persons
as shall contribute toward the furnishing of the Clergy designed for the
English Colonies abroad, with such means of Knowledge, as we propose, cannot
but have a proportionable share both in the Virtue and in the Reward of that
Blessed Work, whereby God's Kingdom is exalted in the World, and the Devil
dispossessed of that Usurped Dominion he has gained over so great a part
thereof. Such will in some measure, be accounted to have been Evangelists
themselves, and will partake in the Reward of those who have turned many to
Righteousness, by carrying the Gosspel to other Nations.

And who is it that is piously Ambitious of being high in the Favor and Love
of God, and of being exalted to a higher Station amongst the Blessed Saints
above, that would not at the Charge of a Moderate Benefaction, be so
Instrumental as this may render him, toward the Salvation of a considerable
part of Mankind? The Apostles we do all know, are to sit upon Twelve Thrones
judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel. And wherefore is it that they shall be
thus Honored above all Men, but because they were the Grand Propagators of
Christianity, and spared not to spend, and be spent in that Service, 2 Cor.
12.14. to reduce Mankind to the Obedience of God? And may not then those
Persons expect a proportionable degree of Honor and Reward above their
Brethren, who shall offer of their Substance toward the same Noble and Blessed
End? Charity, indeed of whatsoever kind it be, will have its Reward. He that
gives Alms to the Poor, He that Clothes the Naked, or Feeds the Hungry, will
find ic upon his Account at the Day of Judgment. But then as there are
different ways of doing Good; so to provide Spiritual Food for the Souls of
Men, is a Charity of as much a more exalted Nature, as the Spirit is more
Excellent than the Body.

Nor will this Charity terminate only on the Minds of those that receive it,
but will also have a most happy Influence to the procuring of their Bodily
Comforts, for wheresoever the Gospel of our Savior prevails, it takes off that
Ferity of Nature whereby Mankind become Beasts of Prey, even Wolves and Tigers,
to one another, and renders 'em Benign and Kind to all those who have to do
with 'em; and ready to do all manner of good Offices to their Brethren in
Humane Nature. So that you may ever observe, that proportionably as Divine
Knowledge prevails in the World, in the same degrees do Barbarity, Rapine,
Violence and Brutality decrease, and Humanity, Justice and Order gain ground
amongst Men. And if the Authors from whence this Knowledge is derived, are not
corrupted with such Principles as undermine Morality (which is visible in the
Writings of some sort of Men) the tendency of Christian Books, as such, is to
improve Mankind in all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and Body, to a
similitude with the Holy Angels themselves; and indeed to render 'em Partakers
of the Divine Nature.

This I say, if the Authors from whence this Knowledge is derived, be
themselves good; for Men are generally such in their Principles, Tempers, and
Dispositions, as the Books and Company are with which they Converse, since Evil
Communications in either way do Corrupt good Manners: but such as do truly
represent the Nature of that Covenant we have made with God in our Baptism, and
do show us from thence, the indispensable Obligation lying upon us to a Holy
Life; such as do set forth the Principles of our Religion as the most forcible
Motives to live according to the Dictates of Right Reason, and the Improvements
of Revelation; such Authors as these do manifestly tend, not to Debauch the
Manners, but to Improve the Morals of Mankind, to that degree, as to bring down
a kind of Heaven here upon Earth, and to render the Inhabitants thereof
Guardian-Angels to one another.

And this has been the great Aim in that Collection of Books here Recommended,
as proper to enable our Clergy to Advance the Blessed Work proposed in those
Plantations where they are to Minister. It is hard to be answerable for every
thing contained in all of 'em. There is no Humane Writing free from Faults or
Defects in some kind or other; But however there are no Errors in any of those
Books here Proposed, which the Orthodoxy of others in the Catalogue will not
rectify. And take 'em in the whole Bulk, they are thought to be some of the
most useful in their kind, to give a competent Understanding of the whole Body
of Christianity, and all its Parts. And as it is endeavored, together with the
Catalogue of Books here exhibited, to give a Scheme of Christian Truths in that
Order wherein they do most naturally lie; so the very studying of 'em in such a
Method, may probably tend, not a little to the Improvement of our American
Clergy in Christian Knowledge, and to enable 'em the better to Edify others.
For as the Studying of any Science incoherently, begets nothing but confused
Apprehensions of things in our own Minds; so it will render us incapable to
give clear and adequate Representations thereof to other Men.

And indeed it ought not to be dissembled, that this Catalogue is published
with some design to help our Young Students in Theology, even on this side the
Water, since it maybe a piece of Service to some of them, to direct 'em in the
Choice of such Books, as will be of most necessary and immediate use to them in
their Ministerial Instructions to the People, and which yet by the brevity of
the Catalogue may be had, (some one at least on each Head) without any great
and insupportable Charge. True it is, there have been various Methods of Study
given us by learned Men, with a List of those Authors they would Recommend to
our use: But it is the general Complaint, that few or none seem to have Adapted
their Catalogues to the Proper and Immediate Business of a Parish Minister, as
he is one who must instruct his People in all things belonging to his
Salvation; much less to the Circumstances of the greatest part of that Body,
whose small Livings, especially if they have Families, will not afford 'em
wherewith to Purchase a third part of the Books Recommended to them in those
Catalogues.

Nor indeed, if they could buy them, would it be very agreeable to the Nature
of their Business to do it; for either these learned Directors give us Lists of
all the Authors that have Writ upon each Subject, or at least of as many as
they have perused and read themselves, and this generally through all the
general parts of Learning, however remote and unnecessary to the particular
business of a Preacher or Catechist; or if they have confined their Catalogues
to such Books as are more Immediately Useful and Practical, yet they do not
seem to have designed 'em in any great Order, whereby the Rationale of their
Catalogue may clearly appear with respect to a Parish Minister, as if they
intended thereby a Provision, especially for a through and entire Information
of Teacher or Hearer in all the necessary and essential points of Christianity
And hence it is that many Young Divines, if you come to examine their shelves,
will be found either to have laid out what they could spare, in Books of a more
remote concern, and thereby to have disenabled themselves to purchase those of
a more immediate Importance. Or if they have expended their small Stock in
Practical Divinity, yet their Collection will seem to be very Rickety, having a
great redundance in Authors upon some points, and as great a deficiency on
others. Whereas those in the mean Livings by cutting off Superfluities, might
be able by degrees to purchase one or two Books at least, upon every of those
Heads of Doctrine wherein it is necessary they should instruct the People; and
for want of which, all the Terms of the Baptismal Covenant, are scarcely
Preached over to them in many places, I fear, in the whole Course of some Men's
Ministry.

And probably it is from this Observation, that some have been so importunate
with me to Print the following Catalogue of Books designed for Parochial
Libraries in the Foreign Plantations, upon which consideration I hope, it will
not be imputed to me, as Arrogance, to offer what looks like a Direction in
this case, especially when it is to my Brethren of the lowest Form in the
Church that I do herein apply my self.

And yet so far am I from assuming to Dictate what Books, it may be sufficient,
even for the most Inferior Rank of our English Divines to read, that I do thus
far Retract what I have said with respect to any advanced to Holy Orders in
this part of the World, where good Literature does so much flourish, and makes
such a distinction in the value we put upon Men, that I do freely acknowledge
it were much to be wished that every one of the Clergy here in England, should
Launch out far into the vast Ocean of Universal Learning. For besides that we
live here in a very Inquisitive Age, wherein Persons of all Ranks and
Professions have arrived to great Seize in all the parts of Knowledge;
and it is not a little indecent to see a Gowns-Man, whose very Garb denotes him
one Devoted to Study, outdone by any ordinary Laik, in Philology, Philosophy,
Mathematics, Antiquity, or any part of useful Learning (except by Persons in
their own proper Profession, to whom it is as decent on the other side to
submit) besides this, I say, the Business of a Divine is of that comprehensive
extent, that good Skill even in Nature, Mathematics and Laws, which may seem
most remote from his Business, is not only Accessory and Ornamental to his
Profession, but of exceeding great use for the Explication and Proof of some of
the principal Subjects he is to Discourse upon to the People, and also for the
Defense of the most Fundamental Articles of Faith, that he is to maintain
against the Atheist and Anti-scripturist.

The Knowledge of Nature affords the best, the plainest, and the most
demonstrative Proofs of the Existence, and Providence of God, to the
Establishing of our Faith, and the Raising the Admiration and Devotion toward
the Divine Majesty, both of the most Intelligent and of the Meanest of the
People. Mathematical Knowledge is in some measure necessary, to enable one to
give a Rational Account of the Truth of the Mosaic History of the Creation and
Deluge; and to answer the Cavils and Exceptions of the Superficial and
Half-learned Atheist, (as has in the Instance of the Ark, been unanswerably
done by Bishop Wilkins, and in the like Cases bv other Pens.) And a competent
Knowledge of the Laws, especially of the Civil Law, and of the Law of Nations,
enables a Divine with the most convincing Arguments and Reasons to Establish
the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, one of the principal Articles of
Revealed Religion. Insomuch that Crellius himself confessed before his Death,
that he had never Written against Grotius upon that Subject, Didici, paulo
antequam motenetur, dixisse Crellium, se nunquam contra me Scripturum fuisse,
si ante Scriptionem legiss^t mea de penarum Communicatione in Jure Belli and
Pacis Ep. 556. 2 part.
had he first seen his Chapter de Communicatione paenarum. And indeed, many of
the Social Duties of the Civil Life, are not likely to be so exactly stated by
any, as by one well acquainted with the Laws and Customs of Nations. So that it
is very requisite, that every Pastor of a Flock, especially in this Curious and
Incredulous part of the World, should give himself up to farther Enquiries into
Universal Learning, still making this his Rule, that he spends most of his Time
and of his Thoughts upon what is Essential and immediately necessary to Man's
Salvation, viz. the Terms of the Covenant of Grace; since to pursue any other
Knowledge to the neglect of this, would in him be to gratify a sinful
Curiosity.

But as for those who are to serve in the Plantations, I do no not at this
distance foresee the necessity of their being provided of more than such a Set
of Books, as shall be of absolute necessity to enable 'em to declare the whole
Will of God, so as may suffice to the Information of Plain and Illiterate Men,
that so they may be able with St. Paul, speaking to his Converts, to call the
Consciences of those committed to their Charge, to attest also to them, that
they are pure from the Blood of all Men, not having shunned to declare unto
them all the Counsel of God. Not but that we could wish to have one Library of
more Universal Learning, to have recourse to upon occasion, in every Province,
and shall especially endeavor to have one in the College which is now Erecting
in Virginia, by the Favor and Bounty of his most Excellent Majesty and our
late B. Queen, and by the Liberal Benefactions of many Right Reverend, Noble,
and Generous Persons, and by the Especial Industry, Care, and Expense of one of
the best Provincial Governors in the World.

But however, as it is fit we should be contented with small Beginnings, so we
shall be deeply sensible of what Assistance shall be given us toward Parochial
Libaries, and shall study in all manner of ways to express our Gratitude to our
Benefactors for the same: particularly, as in order to the preservation of
those Books, besides the Lettering upon their Covers to what Parish they
belong, and the making of several Registers of 'em; one to be left with our
most Honored Diocesan the Lord Bishop of London; one with His Majesty's
Governor in each Province; one with the Suffragan or Commissary; and one to be
deposited in the Vestry of each Parish; as all this to preserve 'em from Loss
or Imbezelment, or in order to recover 'em if any wise diminished; so in gratam
rei Memoriam, there will be moreover added in each of these Registers, a List
of our Benefactors, and of their respective Benefactions.

But that which I am sure will be most grateful to such Lovers of Religion and
useful Learning, we will by the Grace of God, make that good use of 'em we
ought, to the purposes designed. We shall indeed think it hard to be sent to
Work in the Brik-kilnes without out Allowance of Straw, but give us Materials
and Tools, and we'll endeavor to be answerable to God and Man for our Fidelity
and Labor.

A general View of those Heads of Divinity, wherein it is necessary for every
Pastor of a Flock to be well Read himself, that he may be able to Instruct the
People committed to his Charge, in all the necessaries to Salvation, and may be
sufficiently provided to defend 'em against the Infection of Heresy and Error.
I.
The Belief of the Divine Existence and Providence being the Foundation of all
Religion, as well Natural as Revealed; it is very necessary in such an Age as
this, wherein the very Foundations of both are tore up; that every Pastor of a
Flock should not only be fully persuaded in his own mind of these most
important Truths, but should be also very able to give the most convincing
Evidence to all others of the same, and in order to that end, that he should be
supplied with the Learned Writings of the best Authors both Philosophers and
Divines, upon those points. But,

II.
Natural Religion, or that Train of Religious Principles, and Duties resulting
from 'em, which by a due use of Reason, Experience and Consideration alone,
without the Discoveries of Revelation; a Man may conclude he is obliged to
Believe and Practice: This being the Religion that all Mankind, merely as
Rational Creatures, are obliged to, and without the knowledge and observation
of which, the very Pagans themselves will be without excuse: It will be very
requisite, that every Divine should well understand the extent and end thereof,
both that he may be able to warn his People, least under all the Advantages and
Improvements in the Principles and Practice of Virtue made by Christianity,
they fall short of the very Heathens in both; and especially that they may
perceive themselves, and let others see the inestimable advantages we
Christians have received in manifold respects, by the Light of the Gospel,
which gives us a much better Rule to walk by, and proposes infinitely greater
Rewards for our encouragement in so doing; and to this end therefore it will be
very requisite he should be furnished with some or other of those many Books
which have been so excellently written upon that Subsect.

III.
The mere Light of Nature being not sufficient to discover to us the Knowledge
of God and our selves, much less to direct us to the enjoyment of this God, and
all those unspeakable blessings wherein consists our future happiness; and the
Holy Scriptures being the Fountain of Divine and Saving Knowledge, from whence
the Pastor of the Flock of Christ is to draw forth the Waters of Life both for
his own and others benefit: It is principally requisite he should be provided
of such Books as shall enable him, 1. To know the Text it self, and that both
in the Original and Vulgar Tongues, 2. To understand the meaning of it; and 3.
To apply it skilfully to the Edification of others.

IV.
The design of God's revealing to us the Holy Scriptures, and that whole
Evangelical Doctrine contained therein, being it was to destroy the Kingdom of
Satan, which ever since the Fall, that rebelious Spirit had begun to set up in
the World, in opposition to God's; and had advanced to almost an Universal
Monarchy over Mankind, by that time the Son of God descended from Heaven to
reduce us to the obedience of our Maker: And on the other side, its Design
being to advance the Kingdom of God, consisting in Righteousness and true
Holiness, and withal to humble us with a sense of our own Imperfect
Righteousness, by making us depend solely upon the Mediation of Christ with the
Father, for the Acceptance thereof to our Justification; This, I say, being its
Design, and Satan being therefore enraged, that his Usurped Dominion should be
wrested from him: So it is, that the Church-Militant is ever since, through his
Instigation, and the Malignity of his Agents, in that unhappy State, that like
the Walls of Jerusalem, it must be defended with a Sword in one hand, whilst
Built with a Trowel in the other. All which considered, it is very requisite
that our American Pastor should, next to his Knowledge in the Holy Scriptures,
(out of whose Materials he is to build) be provided of those defenfensive
Weapons wherewith he may be enabled to oppose the Gainsayers to that
Christianity he is to propagate in the World: And for this End that he should
be furnished with those Apologies, both Ancient and Modern, which have been
written in defense of the Authority of the Scriptures, and of the Truth of
Christianity; And also with such Discourses as Illustrate those Noble and
Blessed Ends abovementioned, which it was designed to serve.

V.
Our American Pastor being thus far prepared toward his great Work of
Preaching the Gospel, as to know and understand the Scriptures, and to be
convinced himself, and to be able to convince others, both of their Truth; and
of the great Designs, they, and the whole of that Religion contained in 'em,
are to serve: He may be supposed capable by this time to take a comprehensive
View of the whole Scheme of Christianity; and also to form a true Judgment of
all that which really does, or is pretended by the several Parties of
Christians to belong thereunto. And indeed since it is generally accounted the
best Method in the pursuit of any Knowledge, to begin first with some general
Institution, and then to descend to inquire into the particular Parts thereof:
For the more comprehensive Knowledge of the whole Body of Christian Theology,
and that all Divine Truths may be understood in that natural Order and
Connection wherein they depend upon, and add Strength one to another; it is
much desired that our American Pastor might be furnished with some few Bodies
of Divinity, and that both Scholastical and Catechetical.

VI.
But though the Priests and Ministers of Religion, whose Lips should preserve
Knowledge, are to take in a much greater Compass thereof, than is necessary
they should Instruct all Christians in; nay, and though those narrower Bodies of
Divinity, which under the last Particular we termed Catechetical, because they
treat only of Points necessary to Salvation: Though Books of this Nature, I say,
are what all who pretend to teach others, ought to be well acquainted with
themselves (be the Method they proceed in what the Author pleases) yet since
the Covenant of Grace, that Covenant, which was obtained for the fallen Race of
Man from God the Father, by the sole Mediation of his only Begotten Son, and
that with no less a Price than his own most precious Blood; since this
Covenant, we are sure and certain, contains the full Sum and Substance of what
God has promised to us, and what we have engaged to God; This Covenant must
therefore be that Subject, which every Minister of the Gospel ought to
penetrate above all others, to the very Bottom, and to be most exquisitely
skilled in the Nature, Terms and Conditions thereof; and in every the least
circumstance pertaining thereunto. And therefore, since of all the Catechisms
that the Church of God has at this day, that of the Church of England does most
fully, without the Defalcation of any Article of this Covenant, and yet most
sincerely, without the mixture of any Heterogeneous, Disputable, or
Scholastical Tenets, and (that no perfection may be wanting) most Methodically
also, handling this noble Subject first Generally, and then particularly; Since
the Catechism of the Church of England, I say, has delivered to us the Covenant
of Grace so very full, defecate, and methodical; it must be therefore the
concern of every Minister of Religion, as to comprehend entirely this Blessed
Covenant; so to study thoroughly this excelleent Catechism; and all this with
the utmost Application, till he shall make both one and the other the
Masterpiece of his Knowledge. And therefore, in order to a complete and exact
understanding of Both, we cannot forbear here most importunately to desire that
our Indian Clergy should be provided of such Authors, as pursuant to the Method
of our Church Catechism, may accordingly inform 'em in this Covenant of Grace,
and thereby enable 'em to instruct the People in all its weighty Parts, so as
every Private Christian may fully understand his Baptismal Vow, as well in the
general extent of the whole, as in the particular Articles of every Branch
thereof.

VII.
But since it is not enough for a Christian to know his Covenant Engagements
toward God; but he must be also acquainted with the means whereby he may
effectually perform all those Conditions prescribed for the obtaining the
Pardon of his Sins, and eternal Life and Happiness; It Is therefore very
requisite, that every Pastor of a Flock should be furnished with such Books as
Treat most Judiciously both of that Divine Assistance, which is the
supernatural Means whereby we shall be enabled to discharge our Obligations
toward our Maker, and also of Prayer and the Sacraments, which are the Moral
and Positive Means; the former of which is prescribed by God as the way to
obtain, the latter ordained as the means to convey this Grace to the Souls of
Men, whereby they may be enabled to perform all the Conditions required of them
by Christ in the Covenant of which we are now speaking.

VIII.
Furthermore, being the End of that Divine Knowledge before-mention d, is to
enable the Pastor to feed his Flock with all that is necessary to Salvation;
and since Preaching (now that Catechizing is so much neglected, more is the
pity) is become, in a manner, the sole Method of Public Instruction: The
better to enable our American Pastor most skilfully and successfully to apply
thereby that knowledge he has made himself Master of, to the greatest good of
those Souls committed to his Charge, it will be very requisite he should be
furnished with the best Presidents and Assistances to that Purpose; if not with
the ancient Homilies of the most Renowned Preachers amongst the Primitive
Fathers (which are easier wished than obtained) at leastwise with the Sermons
of later Writers: But especially I must insist upon having some of the Modern
Sermons of our English Divines, which as they are (many of them) incomparably
the Best, and the exactest Performances of that Nature, and there are scarce
any of the forementioned Subjects of Practical Divinity which have not been
handled in 'em; so the best Discourses of that kind are doubly necessary for
our Indian Pastor; namely, both to the farther Improvement of his own
Understanding in those great Terms of Man's Salvation, and also for his
Imitation in his own Composures in that Nature for the Edification of his
People.

IX.
Hitherto we have been providing only for a Peaceable and Practical Divinity,
whose whole tendency being to reduce us from the Slavery of Satan to the
Obedience of God; to promote in us a Holy Life: And then to humble us in the
sense of its Imperfection, by sending us to the Mediation of Christ for the
Acceptance thereof to our Justification; these being, I say, the noble Ends of
the Christian Religion; it is pity we, who are its Ministers, should be troubled
with any Amusements to distract us from being serviceable in such its Glorious
Designs, to the Reformation and Benefit of Mankind: And therefore it is not
without the greatest regret, that I can think of admitting Polemical Discourses
into our Foreign Libraries, wishing that the Church of God might be Built like
Solomon's Temple, without the Noise of Axes and Hammers: But since through the
Artifice of Satan the corrupt Seed of Heresy and Error has heretofore, and
will be hereafter sowed in the Church, to the subversion of a sound Faith, and
the good Life of too many; to obviate or cure the Poison thereof, there is too
sad an occasion for admitting some Controversial Divinity even into our
Parochial Libraries.

X.
And since it has been found by Experience in every Age, that the success of
all our Labors, whether in Preaching or Disputing, depends entirely, in a
manner, upon the Holiness of our Lives: And through the Malignity of the World,
(which is more quicksighted to discern the minutest Failures, than the most
shining Virtues of the Ministers of Religion) the scandals of one vicious Clark
shall Influence a Parish to more Wickedness, and occasion the Peoples running
more into Heresy and Schism, than the Industry and Piety of Ten the most
Virtuous and Laborious of the Clergy shall be able to retrieve from either. To
complete our American Clergy for the Purposes of their Ministry, and our
Libraries also, for the Purposes also of making 'em fit for it, and successful
in it: lt is desired they should have always before 'em such Authors as will
first direct 'em in their Studies, Offices, and Duties, and excite them to Care
and Vigilance in the Practice of them. Secondly, as will lay before them the
Best Examples of each to be a Copy and Pattern for them to follow: And lastly,
such Materials and Helps for Devotion, as will advance 'em to the highest
degrees of Perfection in a Holy and Spiritual Life.

These foregoing Heads are a train of such Theological Points, as with
submission to better Judgments, are thought to be of more Immediate concernment
both to Minister and People; to the former, to be thoroughly read, to the
latter, to be well instructed in. There are besides these other parts of
Knowledge also, which may be very subservient to Theology, but they being
rather to be esteemed accessory, and in some measure useful, than absolutely
necessary for the Physician of Souls to be skilled in, they may perhaps have a
particular draught made of them distinctly by themselves.

The foregoing General Heads of Theology drawn out into Particulars, with a
Catalogue of Books proper to be Read upon the several Points contained therein.
I.
THE Belief of the Divine Existence and Providence being the Foundation of all
Religion, as well Natural as Revealed, it is very necessary in such an Age as
this, wherein the very Foundations of both are tore up, that every Pastor of a
Flock should not only be fully persuaded in his own Mind of the certainty of
these Important Truths, but be very able likewise to give the most convictive
Evidence of their Verity to all others: And in order to that End he ought to be
supplied with the Learned Writings of the Best Authors, as well Philosophers as
Divines, upon each of these two Fundamental Points, viz.

I. The Divine Existence and Providence.
Dr. Cudworth's Intellectual System. Fol. Dris. Sam. Parkeri Disputationes de
Deo. 4 o.
N. These or any of 'em are proper to be the first Read upon this Subject, as
giving an Historical Account of Atheism and its Authors, as well as a
Confutation of their Opinions. And there is no coming to a true understanding
of the state of any Question, without first knowing the History thereof; After
which may be read,

First, Amongst the Ancient Writers.

Cicero de Natura Deorum Lib. 3. -- de Divinatione Libri 2. Plutarchus de iis
qui tarde a Numine Corripiuntur. Juvenalis Satyrae 10 and 13. Seneca cur Bonis
Viris mala accidunt. Lactantius de Opificio Dei. Sancti Basilii de Providentia
Concio 22. Sancti Chrysostomi Orationes 5 de Providentia Divina. -- de
Providentia Dei ad Stagirium Monachum Lib. 3. Sancti Theodoreti de Providentia
Orationes 10. Salvianus de Gubernatione Dei.
N. Vide Minutii Faelicis Octavium p. 16. etc. ex Ed. Ouzelii. Lactantii Inst.
Lib. 1. 2.

N. As to the Editions both of the Fathers and Philosophers hitherto and
hereafter to be mentioned, I referr the Reader to Dr. Cave 's Historia
Literaria, Ellies Dupins New Ecclesiastical History, and Sir Thomas
Pope-Blounts Censura Authorum, which as they are Books that ought not to be
wanted, if possible to be obtained; so they give the fullest Account of the
various and best Editions.

Secondly, Amongst later and more modern Writers.

Sir Charles Wolesley against Atheism. 8 o. Dr. Henry Moor's Antidote against
Atheism. 8 o. Bp. Ward's Essay toward an Eviction of the Being and Attributes
of God, 8 o. Gerar. Vossius de Theologia Gentili and Physiologia Christiana,
sive de Origin ac progressu Idolatriae, deque Naturae Mirandis quibus Homo
adducitur ad Deum. Fol. Sir Matthew Hales's Primitive Origination of Mankind.
Fol. Dr. Bates's Considerations of the Existence of God. 8 o. Dr. Bentley's
Sermons at Mr. Boyle's Lecture. 4 o. Mr. Boil of Final Causes. 12 o. Mr. Ray's
Wisdom of God in the Creation of Man. 8 o. Dr. Pelling's Discourse on the
Existence of God. 8 o. Dr. Sherlock upon Providence. 4 o. Mr. Charnock upon
Providence. 8 o. or at the End of the Attributes. Lessius de Numine ejusque
Providentia inter Opuscula. Fol. Hackwel's Apology. Fol. Dr. Henry Moore's
Divine Dialogues concerning Providence. 2 Vol. 8 o. Mr. Edward's Discourse on
the Existence and Providence of God, 8 o.
N. Vide Joh. Damascenum de Fide orthodoxa. Lib. 1. Petr. Lomb. Lib. 1.
Distinct. 3. And all the other Summaries and Systems of Theology hereafter
mentioned, in the common Places de Deo, and de Providentia. As also the
Expositions of the Creed upon the first Article thereof: Particularly Dr.
Barrow on the Creed, from p. 87. to p. 139. Dr. Scot 's Christian Life, Part 2.
from p. 81. to p. 271. Origenes Sacrae from p. 361. to p. 533. Mr. Smith 's
Select Discourses, from p. 1. to p. 165. and particularly with respect to the
Atheistical Tenets of Hobbs and Spinoza may be read;

Dr. Tenison against Hobbs. 8 o. Gisberti Coquei Hobianismi Anatome. 8 o.
Regneri a Mansfelt adversus Anonimum Theologo-Politicum Liber singularis, in
quo omnes and singulae Tractatus Theologo-Politici Dissertationes Examinantur
and Refelluntur, cum praemissa Disquisitione de Divina per Naturam and
Scripturam Revelatione. 4 o. Poireti Cogitationes de Deo. 4 o.
II.
Natural Religion, or that Train of Religious Principles and Duties resulting
from them, which, by a due use of Reason, Experience, and Consideration, a Man
may, without the Discovery of Revelation, conclude he is obliged to Believe and
Practice: This being the Religion that all Mankind, merely as Rational
Creatures, are governed by, and without the knowledge and observation of which,
the very Pagans themselves will be without Excuse: It will be very requisite
that every Divine should well understand the extent and end thereof; and that
for these two Reasons, First, That he may be able to warn his People, least,
under all the Advantages and Improvements in the Principles and Practice of
Virtue made by Christianity. they fall short of the very Heathens in both: And
Secondly, That he may perceive himself, and show to Others, the inestimable
Advantages we Christians have received by the Light of the Gospel, which gives
us a much better Rule to walk by, and proposes infinitely greater Rewards for
our Encouragement in so doing; And therefore, for the Ends aforementioned, it
will be requisite our Divine should be furnished with some or other of these
following Books:

I. Of the Ancient Philosophers.
Diogenes Laertius de vitis Philosophorum.

N. I place him first, renitente Chronologia, amongst this Set of Writers,
because it may be very useful to know the History of our Subject, before we
enter upon farther Inquiries therein; and therefore for that Reason I shall
also adventure to place here, though so much more remote in point of Time.

Stanley's Lives of the Philosophers, Fol. Ger. Vossii de philosophia and
Philosophorum Sectis Libri 2. 4o. Isocrates. Zenophon. Platonis Opera.
Aristotelis Opera. Aeliani Varia Historia per Kutinium. Stobaei Opera.
Ciceronis Opera. Valerius Maximus. Seneca per Lipsium. Maximus Tyrius.
Epictetus cum Scholiis Simplicii and Ariani. Plutarchi Moralia. Salustius
Graec. and Latin. Inter Galei Opuscula Mythologica, 8o. Cant. 1971. M.
Antoninas Tn Kath' eautn per Gatakerum. Plotinus. Hierocles. Macrobrii Opera.
Jamblicus. Proclus De Theologia Platonica.
N. And to these may be also added those amongst the Ancient Poets, in whom
there is found such Excellent Morality, as Ovidius. Cum Notis Variorum, aut In
Usum Delphini. Horatius. Cum Notis Variorum, aut In Usum Delphini. Juvenalis.
Cum Notis Variorum, aut In Usum Delphini. Persius. Cum Notis Variorum, aut In
Usum Delphini. Senecae Tragediae. Cum Notis Variorum, aut In Usum Delphini.
Phaedri. Fabulae. Aesopi. Fabulae.


N. In these Heathen Moralists may be seen, how far the mere Light of Nature,
without the help of Revelation, could direct those that attended to its
Dictates, in the Knowledge of God and themselves, and in the Practice of
Virtue; except it be said as to some of the later Platonists since our
Savior's Time, that they having had a sight of the Gospel, they were taught
thence to refine their Theology and Morals.

II. Of the later and more Modern Writers upon Natural Religion.
Pfhanneri Systema Theologiae Gentilis Purioris, qua quam prope ad veram
Religionem Gentiles accesserint per cuncta fere ejus Capita, ex ipsis praecipue
illorum Scriptis ostenditur, 4o. Bishop Wilkins of Natural Religion, 8o.
Raymundi de Sabunde Theologia Naturalis, 8o. Dr. Scot 's Christian Life, Part
2. Vol. 1. Ld. Chapter J. Hales 's Knowledge of God and our Selves, Part 1. A
Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion, or the Light of Nature a Guide to
Divine Truth, 8o. London 1691.
N. To these it may be also thought proper to add that Set of Authors who have
written upon the Laws of Nature, as Grotius, Puffendorf, etc. But these Learned
Writers considering the Duties that Natural Reason dictates, In Theologia, Lex
consideratur prout innexam habet divinam promissionem, and quandam rationem
Foederis inter Deum and Homines. Abs qua consideratione jus Natural abstrahit,
quod finis Disciplinae Naturalis tantum ambitu hujus Vitae includatur, adeoque
ea hominem format prout hanc Vitam sanabilem exigere de beat. Puffendorf. de
Off. Hom. and Civis Ep. ad Lec.
not as respecting God and another World, but as relating to the well-being of
the Animal and Social Life here upon Earth: These Duties as handled by them,
will scarcely come under the Notion of Religious: Or if they do, they are but
one part of Natural Religion, and fall under our consideration properly enough
when we shall come to that Article of the Covenant, Evangelical Obedience;
whereas our Design is in this Place to set down those Authors both Pagan and
Christian, who have delivered to us, as well the Principles of Natural
Religion, as the Duties resulting from them.

III. And for a Nexus between Natural and Revealed Religion.
Mr. Boil of the Use of Reason in Religion. -- Excellency of Theology compared
with Natural Philosophy, 8 o. Velthusius de Usu Rationis in rebus Theologicis,
4 o. Mr. Glanvil's Vanity of Dogmatizing, or Confidence in Opinions, manifested
in a Discourse of the Shortness and Uncertainty of our Knowledge and its
Causes, 4 o. -- A seasonable Recommendation and Defense of Reason in the
Affairs of Religion against Infidelity, Sceptiscim, and Atheism of all sorts, 4
o.
N. To which also may be added, such as discourse of those Dispositions of Mind
necessary to the Reception of Divine Truth, especially of the Christian
Doctrine: To which End may be read Mr. Smith of the True Way and Method of
attaining to Divine Knowledge, in his Select Discourses, from p. 1. to p. 21.
Dr. Jackson in his Works fuse.

III.
The mere Light of Nature being not sufficient of it self, to discover to us
the full Knowledge of God and our Selves, much less to direct us how to attain
to the Enjoyment of God, and all those unspeakable Blessings wherein consists
our future Happiness: And the Holy Scriptures being the Fountain of Divine and
Saving Knowledge, from whence the Pastor of the Flock of Christ is to draw
forth the Waters of Life, both for his own and others Benefit: It is
principally requisite he should be provided of such Books, as shall enable him,
I. To know the Text it self, and that both in the Original and Vulgar Tongues;
II. To Understand the meaning of it; And, III. To apply it skilfully to the
Edification of others.

I. For the Knowledge of the Text it self.
First, It will be requisite to have it in its several Languages.

1. In the Original and Learned Languages.

Athias's Heb. Bible, Ed. per Leusden, 8 o. Or, Arias Montanus's Interliniary
Bible, Fol. The Septuagint Bible, Camb. 12. or Amstel. 40. Beza's Greek
Testament, Fol. Or, Novum Testamentum, Graec. Curcellaei variis Lect. 8 o Novum
Test. Graec. Oxonii variis Lect. 8 o. Or, Novum Test. Doctoris Millii Variis
Lect. when Published, Fol. Biblia Vulgata Sixti 5 ti. Romans 1590. Or, since this
is scarce. Biblia Vulgata Clementis Octavi, often Printed.
N. Both these last are declared by the Church of Rome to be Authentic, tho
they contradict each other. Or instead of all the former (as containing the
rest for the most part, and a great deal more, and of as easy a Purchase as
all of them will be.)

Biblia Polyglotta. Waltoni cum Ap. 6 Vol. Fol. Biblia Lat. Junii and
Tremellii, Fol. or 4 o.
2. In the Vulgar Tongue.

An English Bible.

N. Of which the the most useful at present is that with Bishop Usher 's
Chronology, and Dr. Scattergood 's References in the Margin, Fol. or 4 o.

Secondly, It will be requisite to distinguish the Canonical Books and Parts
thereof from those bound up with it, which are Apocryphal.

Dr. Raynolds de Libris Apocryphis, 2 Vol. 4 o. Bishop Cosin's Scholastical
History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture, 4 o. Alexander Morus de Canone
Scripturae, 4 o.
N. Here may be read the Controversies with the Papists hereafter mentioned
upon the Title de Canone Scripturae; as also Elies Dupin 's Preliminary
Dissertation about the Authors of the Bible in the 1st. Vol. of his New
Ecclesiastical History, from p. 1. to p. the 50.

II. To understand the meaning of the Text, it will be requisite to have,
First, Such Books as give preparatory Directions for the Understanding, and
Explaining, and the Profitable Reading of the Holy Scriptures.

1. Amongst the Fathers and Ancient Writers.

Augustini de Doctrina Christiana Libri 4. Hieronomi Ep. ad Paulinum.
2. Among the Later and more Modern Writers.

Hyperius de Sacrae Scripturae Lectione, 8 o. Bishop Patrick's Search the
Scriptures; A Treatise showing that all Christians ought to Read the Holy
Books; with Directions to them therein, 8 o.
Secondly, Such as Interpret and Assoil the Difficulties that Occur in Reading;
whether those Difficulties lie in Understanding, First, the Subject Matter of
some of the more extraordinary and uncommon Things contained in the Scriptures;
or Secondly, in the Language or Expression wherein the Holy Writ does declare
the Will of God to Mankind; or Thirdly, in both Matter and Expression.

1. As to the Difficulty of understanding some of the more uncommon Matters
contained in the Scriptures, such as the Mosaic History of the Creation and
Deluge; the Scripture-Geography, Chronology, and History; the Structure and
Dimensions of the Ark and Temple, Jewish Laws, Rites, Customs, Worship and
Sacrifices; The Nature of Sacred Dreams, Visions, Oracles and Prophesies;
Scripture-Coi^s, Weights, and Measures; and lastly the Natural History of
Scripture Animals, Plants, and also Diseases; These Matters being purely
Scriptutural, it is requisite a Divine, as he would aim at being perfect in his
Profession, should have some competent Skill therein. And for that End,

First, Upon the Mosaic History of the Creation and Deluge may be Read,

Sir Matthew Hale's Primitive Origination of Mankind, Fol. Dr. Woodward's
Natural History of the Earth, 8 o. Mr. Whiston's New Theory of the Earth, 8 o.
N. Here also Read Origines Sacrae, Book. 3. Chap. 2, 3, 4, 5.

Secondly, Upon Scripture-Geography.

Adrichomii Terrae Sanctae Descriptio, and Tabula Chorographica. Item. Jacobi
Bonfrerii Annotationes in Adrichomii Descritionem; and Joh. Lightfoot
Animadversiones in Tabulas Chorographicas Terrae Sanctae. Haec tria in Ap. Bib.
Polyglot. Walton. Bocharti Geographia Sacra, cum Stephani Morini Dissertatione
de Paradiso Terrestri, Fol. Ludg. Bat. 1692.
N. Nota Quod huic Editioni accesserunt variae Dissertationes and Epistolae de
Paradisi Terrestris situ, ex Epistola ad Bochartum. Initio libri.

Gas. Varerii de Ophira Disputatio inter Crit. Sac. Tom. 8. p. 459. Fuller's
Pisgah-Sight of Palestine, and the Confines thereof: with the History of the
Old and New Testament acted thereon, Fol. Dr. Lightfoot's Chorography and Map
of Canaan, Jerusalem, and of the Temple, in his Works. More's large Map with
Dr. William's Amendments. A Map of St. Paul's Travels.
Thirdly, For Scripture-Chronology.

Ludovici Capelli Chronologia sacra a condito Mundo ad Captivitatem per
Romanos, Deducta ex sola Sacra Scriptura, perpetua Serie Concinnata, Certis
krterioi ex ea deductis quantum fieri potest, Firmissime comprobata, Aliquot
Tabulis cum eorum probationibus Comprehensa. In Ap. Bib. Polyglot. Wall.
Lightfoot's Chronicle, and the Order of the Times of the Old Testament, with
his Harmony, Chronicle, and Order of the New, which with the rest of his Works,
are in 2 Vol. Fol. London, 1674.
Fourthly, For Scripture History.

Josephus. Sulpitii Severi Historiae Sacrae Libri 2. And for both Scripture and
concurrent History also, together with a more exact Chronology. Vsseri Annals
Vet. and Nov. Testamenti cum Sacra Chronologia Par. 1673. Spondani Annals
Sacri a Mundi Creatione usque ad Redemptionem. Lugd. 1659.
N. Spondani Annals ad haec Tempora, Extant 5 Vol. Fol.

Saliani Annalium Ecclesiasticorum Vet. Testamenti Epitome. Par. 1664. Fol.
Robinsoni Annals Mundi Sacri and Seculares. Land. 1677. Fol. Jani Bercherodii
Lumen Historiae Sacrae Veteris and Novi Testamenti per Tabulas Chronologicas.
Fol.
N. My Design here being only to provide for the better Understanding of the
Scripture; I do not in this place make a Draught of Chronology aend History
below the Scripture Times; which however being a most necessary Accomplishment
to a Divine, must be done elsewhere in its proper place.

Fifthly, Upon the Dimensions of the Ark and Temple.

1. Of the Structure and Dimensions of the Ark.

Mathoei Hosti in fabricam Arcae diligens Inquisitio inter Crit. Sacr. p. 103.
Buteonis Arca Noe, cujus formae Capacitatisque fuerit Libellus ib. Tom. 8. p.
83.
N. That that part of Bishop Wilkins's Real Character, wherein he gives an
account of the Dimensions of the Ark, and demonstrates its Capacity to contain
all the Creatures, which are related by Moses to have been received therein,
together with their Food and Fother, necessary for their Sustenance, ought
especially to be read upon this Subject.

2. Of the Temple.

Ludovici Capelli Templi Hierosolymitani triplex Delineatio, una ex Scriptura,
juxta mentem Villalpandi, and Descriptionem ab eo factam; Altera ex Josephi
mente and Descriptione; Tertia ex Judaeorum in Talmude Descriptione, and juxta
mensuras ab ipsis istic traditas. In Ap. Bib. Poliglot. Wa.l Dr. Lightfoot's
prospect of the Temple, especially as it stood in the Days of our Savior, in
his Works, 1 Vol. p. 1049.
Sixthly, Upon Jewish Laws, Rites, Customs, Worship and Sacrifices.

Joh. Buxtorfii Synagoga Judaica de Judeorum fide, Ritibus and Ceremoniis.
Basil 1661. 8 o. Spencer de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus and earum Rationibus.
Land. 1689. Fol.
N. But as many Learned Men will advise, Caute Legendus, and especially on the
Subject of the following Author who has performed excellently upon it.

Dr. Outram de Sacrificiis. 4 o. or 8 o.
N. See also Mr. Thorndike's Religious Assemblies, wherein there is much of the
foregoing Argument per totum. And also Dr. Hooper on the Lent-Fast, from p.
149. ad finem.

Seventhly, Upon the Nature of Sacred Prophesies, Dreams, Visions, and Oracles.

Molinoei Vates. 8 o. Amyraldus of Divine Dreams. 8 o.
N. Here also may be read Mr. Smith 's Select Discourses, wherein he Treats of
Prophecy, from p. 169. to p. 280. Origines Sacrae, from p. 149. to p. 250.
Hermanni Witsii Miscellanea Sacra quibus fuse agitur de Prophetia and Prophetis.

Eighthly, Upon the Jewish Sects.

Drusius de Sectis Judaicis Commentarius. 4 o.
N. Vide Goodwin 's Antiquities.

Ninthly, Upon Scripture Weights and Measures.

Mr. Brerewood de ponderibus and pretiis Hebraicorum, Aliorumque veterum
Nummorum, eorumque cum Recentioribus Collatione. Briani Waltoni Supplementum de
Siclorum formis and Inscriptionibus, cum eorum explicatione. Tractatus de
Antiquis ponderibus, monetis and mensuris Hebraeorum, Graecorum, Romanorum, ex
variis Authoribus. Haec Tria Opuscula in Ap. Bilior. Polyglot. Bishop
Cumberland's Scripture Weights and Measures. 8 o. Dr. Bernard de mensuris and
Ponderibus Antiquis. 8 o.
N. Those who cannot have Leisure, nor think they are much concerned to be
Critics upon this Subject; may take up with the Account of Scripture Weights
and Measures given 'em at the latter end of the Fol. and Qu. Bibles Printed of
late Years at Oxford.

Tenthly, Upon the Natural History of Scripture Animals, Plants, and Diseases.

Valesius de Sacra Philosophia. Bochartus de Animalibus Scripturae, opus
Bipartitum, cujus Pars prior Libris 4 de Animalibus in genere, de
Quadrupedibus, Viviparis and Oviparis, pars posterior. Lib. 6. de Avibus,
Serpentibus, Insectis Aquaticis, and fabulosis Animalibus agit. 2 Vol. Fol.
Lugd. Bat. 1692. Sir Thomas Brown's Observations upon several Plants mentioned
in Scripture being the first of his Miscellany Tracts, 8 o. or amongst his
Works Collected into a Fol. Guliel Ader Med. D. Enarrationes. Enarrantur
Aegroti Nov. Test. quorum dum Explicantur morbi; ex eorum patria, temperies,
Aetas, and Vitae conditio inquiritur, hosque art Medica Incurabiles fuisse
demonstratur. Inter Crit. Sac. Tom. 9.
Lastly, Upon the preceding, or any other parts of Jewish Antiquities, whether
Reducible or not, to the foregoing Heads.

Philonis Opera Varia. Ariae Montani Antiquitatum Judaicarum Libri 9. In queis
praeter Judaeae, Hierosolymorum, and Templi Solomonis Accuratam Delineationem,
praecipui Sacri, ac profani, Gentis Ritus describuntur.
N. Inter Crit. Sac. Tom. 8. p. 524.

Cornelius Bertramus de Repub. Hebraeorum Recensitus, Commentarioque
Illustratus, Opera Constable. L'Empereur. ib. p. 750. Cunaeus de Repub. Hebraeorum.
ib. p. 818. Sigonius de Repub. Hebraeorum. 4 o. Goodwin's Jewish Antiquities. 4
o. Joh. Dieterici Antiquitates Biblicae de Rebus Judaeorum and Gentilium 2 Vol.
Giessae Hassorum. Fol. 1671. Herm. Witsii Miscellaneorum Sacrorum Libri
Quatuor. Quibus agitur de Prophetia and Prophetis, de Tabernaculi Mysteriis, de
Synedriis Hebraeorum, de cultu Molochi, de Seculo hoc and futuro. 4 o.
Hospinianus de Festis and Templis Judaeorum, Ethnicorum, and Christianorum.
Fol. Seldeni varia hujus Argumenti, viz. De Diis Syris Syntagmata duo cum
Briero, 2 Vol. 8 o. De Successione in Pontificatum Hebraeorum Franc. ad Oderam
1673. 4 o. De Anno Civili and Kalendario Judaico, Lugd. Bat. 1683. 4 o. De
Synedriis and prefecturis Vet. Heb. Lib. 3. Amst. 1679. 4 o. Uxor Hebraica sive
de Nuptiis and Divortiis Lib 3. Franc. 1673. 4 o.

N. It will not be wondered at that so many Writers upon Jewish Antiquities
should be prescribed, when it is considered that many Christian Institutions
are derived by our Savior and his Apostles from Jewish Vsages; nay, the whole
Economy and Government of the Church under the Gospel is taken from the
Synagogue, and carries an express Analogy and Similitude to the legal
administration of those Times. So the Baptizing of Children bears Relation to
the Baptizing the Children of the Proselytes, and is undeniably to be Justified
from that Usage; the Lord's Supper answers to the Paschal Lamb; Liturgies
amongst Christians to Forms of Prayer amongst the Jews; Presbyters and Deacons
to Priests and Levites; the Twelve Apostles to the Twelve Heads of Tribes. And
St. Clemens Romanus under the Title of High Priest, Priests and Levites, Epist.
prima ad Corinthios p. 119 Ed. Colomesii.
does manifestly design the Bishop, his Priests and Deacons. In short,
Ordination by Imposition of Hands is derived from their Ordinination in the
Synagogue, and the Christian way of Excommunication is expressly taeken from
theirs. And the Learned Lightfoot, as he has observed and proved much of this
Nature throughout his Works; so of the whole Writings of St. Paul he tells us,
that in all his Epistles, especially in that to the Hebrews, he uses exceeding
much, Lightfoot, Vol. 1. p. 341 or as it ought to be Printed, 333.
not only of the Jews Dialect, Language and Learning; but also of allusion and
reference to their Opinions, Traditions, and Customs: So that it will be a
thing of great Consequence for a clear comprehension of the Gospel, to be well
seen in the Jewish Antiquities, both Sacred and Civil; the want of which, in
these unhappy bleeding Times, has been the cause of so many wild, and to
knowing Men, ridiculous Disputes, about Excommunication, Ordination, Infant
Baptism, etc.

2. As to the Difficulty of understanding the Language and Expressions wherein
the Holy Writ does declare the Will of God to Mankind; To Master this it will
be requisite,

First, To understand something in general of the Nature, Origin, Division,
Number, Mutations, and use of Tongues.

Briani Waltoni in Biblia Polyglot. Prolegomena in Appar. Crinesius de
Consusione Linguarum. Chr. Cellarii Sciagraphia Philologiae Sacrae Linguarum
Orientalium usum Genuinum delineans Jenae 1678. 4 o.
Secondly, It will be requisite to have some Glossaries and Lexicons for both
Hebrew and the Hellenistical Greek.

1. For the Hebrew.

Castelli Lexicon Heptaglotton 2 Vol. Fol. necessary for those who have the
Polyglot Bible. Buxtorfii Lexicon Talmudicum, Chaldaicum, Rabbinicum, etc.
which he calls his Opus Triginta annorum, and will not only serve for a
Dictionary, but is a great Thesaurus Criticus of all Talmudidical and
Rabbinical Words and Customs, as well as of purer Hebrew. Fol. Robertson's
Thesaurus Linguae Sanctae. 4 o.
2. For the Hell^nistical Greek.

Hesychius Or, Su^das, Or, Phavorinus. Stapula's Lexicon. Robertson's Thesaurus
Linguae Graecae, useful also for the Greek Testament. 4 o.
Thirdly, It will be of singular use toward the thorough understanding of the
Scripture Language, to know the Idiotisms, Phraseology, and Schemes of Speech
peculiar to the Sacred Penmen, and to that purpose to have ready at hand the
Explicatio Idiotismorum seu proprietatum Linguae Hebraicae and Graecae, quae
saepius in Scripturis occurrunt. In Ap. Bib. Polyglot. Leigh's Critica Sacra.
Fol. Glassi Philologia Sacra veteris and Novi Testamenti, de Stylo and
Rhetorica Sacrae Scripturae. Amst. 1694. 4 o. Flaccii Illirici Clavis
Scripturae. Joh. Drusii classes duae in quibus explicantur Proverbia Sacra, and
ex Sacris l^teris orta; Item sententiae Solomonis, Allegoriae, etc. Item Adagia
Hebraica. Opus necessarium Theologis. Inter Crit. Sac. Tom. 8. 1596. And also
single by it self. Delrii Adagia Sacra. Vet. and Nov. Test. 2 Vol. 4 o. Andreae
Schotti Adagia Sacra N. T. 4 o.


3. To clear the difficulties that shall occurr in Scripture, both as to the
Matter and Expression, it will be necessary to be furnished with Commentators.

First, General, upon the whole Bible; of which some to be read all over,
together with our daily course of reading the Holy Scripture.

Grotius, 3 Vol. N.
His Theological Tracts make the fourth Vol.

Heideggeri Enchiridion Biblicum, Analysi Generali singulorum Vet. and N. Test.
Librorum, and capitum Argumento, unice inserviens. Ed. Amstel. 1688. 8 o.
Clark's Survey of the Bible, or an Analytical Account of the Holy Scriptures. 4
o.
N. One or other of these Analyzes may be also read in a course, to give us the
Method of Scripture, a thing so useful for the Memory, and for the distinct
Apprehension and full Comprehension of the Matter thereof.

Others to be consulted upon occasion.

Critici Magni London. 9 Vol. Fol. Or, Critici Magni Amstelodami, quorum duo
Vol. jam Extant. Or, Poole's Synopsis Criticorum, 5 Vol. Fol.
N. Which may be instar omnium; and seems to be done with good judgment in
placing the Opinions of the several Expositors, in such-an Order, that one
strengthens and explains, or Corrects and refutes the other. Or, Poole's
English Annotations, 2 Vol. Fol. Musculus upon several Books of Scripture. N.


Audio partium non addictus.

Calvin upon several Books of Scripture. N.
Vbi been nemo melius.

Secondly, Particular upon the more necessary and momentous parts of Holy Writ.

1. Upon the Pentateuch, or some parts thereof.

Aynsworth upon the Pentateuch. Fol. Rivetus in Genes. and Exodum 4 o.
N. Inter Opera Riveti. Fol.

Bp. Patrick upon Genesis. 4 o.
2. Upon Job, Psalms, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes.

Bp. Patrick, 5 Vol. 8 o. Dr. Hammond upon the Psalms. Fol.
3. Upon the Prophets.

Calvin ut supra. Dr. Pocock upon Hosea, Joel, Micah, Malachi. Fol.
4. Upon the New Testament.

Dr. Hammond's Annotations. Fol.
N. To be read in our daily course of reading the Scripture.

Maldonatus in 4. Evangelia. Fol. Estius on the Epistles; Fol. Or, The Oxford
Paraphrase on St. Paul's Epistles. 8 o.
N. This later especially Convenient to be perused in our daily course of
reading the Scriptures, when we come to that so considerable a part thereof,
St. Paul 's Epistles, as giving at the beginning of each Epistle a general and
accurate View of the Occasion and Matter thereof, and of the Apostles Scope and
Method therein.

5. Upon the Revelations.

Mr. Mede on the Revelations, with his Clavis Apocalyptica.
Thirdly, More particular upon the more difficult Parts, Passages, and Texts of
Scripture, whether they be such as labor in Reconciling the seeming
Repugnances that are found in Holy Writ, or those that criticize upon some
particular Parts or Texts of a difficult Nature.

Cornelii Bertrami specimen Expositionum in difficiliora utriusq, Testamenti
Loca. Estius in difficiliora loca, Fol. Spanhemii dubia Evangelica, 2 Vol. 4 o.
Mr. Gregory's Observations, 4 o. Dr. Lightfoot's Horae Hebraicae inter Opera,
Fol. Mr. Mede's Diatribe, Fol. Lud. de Dieu Critica Sacra, sive animadversiones
in loca quaedam difficiliora vet. and Nov. Test. Fol. Mr. Edwards upon
Difficult Texts, 2 Vol, 8 o.
III. For the more skilful Application of Scripture according to various
Occasions.
First, A Concordance of Things.

Jac. Comis promptuarium Biblicum, ubi totus textus biblicus in suos locos
digestus ordine Alphabetico via Concordantiae dispositus est. Pet. Ravanelli
Bibliotheca Sacra, cum additamentis, 3 Vol. Wilson 's Christian Dictionary,
Fol. Hen. Wit Repertorium Biblicum Rigae, 1689. 4o.
Secondly, A Concordance of Words.

1. In the Learned Languages.

First, For the Hebrew.

Buxtorfius, 4o.
Secondly, For the Greek.

1. Of the Septuagint.

Kircherus, 4o.
2. Of the New Testament.

Schmidius, Fol.
N. The chief use indeed of these Concordances in the Original Tongues, is much
the same as of Glossaries, and of Concordances of Things, that is, to find out
the different Acceptations of the same Word, in order to clear an Obscure or
Doubtful Text. For in these Concordances every considerable Word of Scripture
being presented to the Eye in one View of all those Places where it occurs; it
will be easily gathered, by considering the Nature, Circumstances, and Scope of
these several Places, what are the different senses it will bear, and what it
most properly signifies in any of those, which by an ill rendering are made
either Doubtful or Obscure. But however this being a part purely Critical, for
which not many of our American Pastors may have leisure, the want of these may
be easily dispensed with, and may be supplied by the Glossaries and
Concordances of Things beforementioned. But Concordances in the Vulgar
Languages are useful in another way, and necessary for all. To proceed then,

2. In our Vulgar Tongue, or in English.

Newman 's Large Concordance for both Scripture and Apopocrypha, Fol. Or, The
Cambridge Concordance, Fol.
IV.
The Design of God's revealing to us the Holy Scriptures, and that whole
Evangelical Doctrine contained therein; being it was to destroy the Kingdom of
Satan which ever since the Fall, that Rebellious Spirit had begun to set up in
the World, in Opposition to God's; and had advanced to almost an Universal
Monarchy over Mankind, by that Time the Son of God descended from Heaven to
reduce us to the Obedience of our Maker. And on the other side its Design being
to advance the Kingdom of God, consisting in Righteousness and true Holiness,
and withal to humble us with a sense of our own Imperfect Righteousness, by
making us depend solely upon the Mediation of Christ for the Acceptance thereof
to our Justification; This, I say being its Design, and Satan being therefore
enraged, that his Usurped Dominion should be wrested from him: So it is, that
the Church-Militant is ever since, through his Instigation and the Malignity of
his Angels in that Unhappy State, that like the Walls of Jerusalem it must be
defended with a Sword in one hand, whilst built with a Trowel in the other: All
which considered, it is very requisite that our our American Pastor should,
next to his Knowledge in the Holy Scriptures (out of whose Materials he is to
Build) be provided of those defensive Weapons wherewith he may be enabled to
oppose the Gainsayers to that Christianity he is to propagate in the World:
And for this End that he should be furnished with those Apologies, both Ancient
and Modern, which have been written in Defense of the Authority of the
Scriptures, and of the Truth of Christianity; And also with such Discourses, as
illustrate those Noble and Blessed Ends abovementioned, which it was designed
to serve.

I. Ancient Apologists.
Justini Martyris Paraenesis ad Graecos; Oration ad Graecos; Apologia pro
Christlanis, prima and secunda. Liber de Monarchia Dei. Dialogus cum Tryphone
Judaeo. Epistola ad Diognetum.
N. This last is questioned by some whether Genuine, but owned by Dr. Cave. But
whoever was the Author, it is an Excellent Apology, most pathetically
representing the Innocence and Admirable Virtues of the Primitive Christians,
and the Malignity of their Enemies.

Athenagorae Atheniensis Philosophi Christiani Apologia, seu Legatio pro
Christianis. De mortuorum resurrectione. Theophilus Contra Christianae
Religionis Calumniatores. Tatiani Assyrii Oration ad Graecos quod nihil Eorum
quibus Graeci Gloriantur studiorum, apud ipsos natum, sed omnia Barbaris
Inventa sint. Hermae Philosophi Gentilium Philosophorum Irrisio.
N. All these foregoing Apologies are placed in the same Order they lie in the
Paris Ed. of Justin Martyr, 1636. Cologn. 1685. Fol.

Clementis Alexandrini Protrepticon ad Gentes in quo Gentiles redarguit, eosque
ad Christianam Philosophiam amplectendam hortatur. Stromata. Tertulliani
Apologeticus adversus Gentes. Ad Nationes Libri Duo. De Testimonio Animae. Ad
Scapulam. Adversus Judaeos. Minutii Faelicis Octavius. Originis Contra Celsum,
Libri 8. Sanctus Cyprianus de Idolorum Vanitate Liber ad Demetrianum:
Testimoniorum ad Quirinum adversus Judaeos Libri Tres. Arnobii adversus Gentes,
Libri 7. Lactantii Institutionum Libri 7. De mortibus Persecutorum. Eusebii
Praeparatio Evangelica Demonsstratio Evangelica
-- Lib. contra Hieroclem, qui ex Philostrati Historia Comparavit Apollonium
Tyanaeum Salvatori Nostro Jesu Christo. Extat ad ^alcem Eusebii de Demonstr.
Evang. Ed. Parisien. 1688. and Colon. 1688. Constantini M. Oration ad Sanctorum
Coetum; extat ad Calcem Librorum de Vita Constantini, in Ecclesiastica Historia
Eusebii. Athanasii Oration contra Gentes. Oration de Incarnatione Verbi. Ambrosii
Responsio Relationi Symmachi, ad imperatores contendentis, veteres Ritus circa
Deorum Cultum servandos esse. Epistolar. Lib. 2. Chrysostomi adversus Judaeos,
Libri sex. -- Contra Gentiles seu de Vita Babilae, Liber. Prudentius contra
Symmachum ac Veterem Deorum Gentilium Cultum, Libri 2. Poeta Christianus.
Augustini de vera Religione Liber. -- De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae, Libri 2.
-- De Civitate Dei, Libri 22. -- Oration adversus Judaeos. -- Oration ad
Catechumenos adversus Judaeos, Paganos and Arianos. Theodoretus de curandis
Affectionibus Graecorum, Lib. 12.
N. This Set of Writers had the Kingdom of Satan visibly before their Eyes,
that Arch-Rebel having in their Times, and in those Parts where they lived,
erected his Idolatrous Temples and Altars; and brought it about that his
Impious Ceremonies and Rites of Worship were become the Established Religion
over all the World, except Judaea: And therefore the Primitive Fathers did
exert themselves upon no other Argument, with that Strength of Learning and
Force of Reason, as upon this, namely, in laying out the Absurdities and
Vileness of the Pagan Superstition, and the admirable Nature and Tendency of
the Christian Religion. Besides it is to be considered that in these Writings
of theirs, possibly we meet with the fullest and ezactest Accounts of the
Purity of the Doctrine, Manners, and Discipline of the Primitive Church; and as
of the Purity of its Doctrines, so of the Holiness of its Professors; upon all
which Reasons, immediately after the Holy Writ, our next Acquaintance ought to
be with these Writings.

II. Modern Vindicators both of the Authority of Scripture, and of the Truth of
Christianity.
First, Against Infidels and Anti-Scripturists in general.

Bishop Stiliingfleet's Origines Sacrae, 4 o. -- Letter to a Deist, 8 o. Mr.
Boyl's Authority and Style of Scripture, 8 o. Sir Charles Wolesley of
Scripture-Belief, 8 o. Mr. Edward's Authority and Style of Scripture, 2 Vol. 8
o. Dr. Alix's Reflections upon the Books of H. Scripture to establish the Truth
of the Christian Religion, 2 Vol. 8 o. Dr. Nichols's Conference with a Theist,
8 o. Lowth's Vindication of the Divine Authority and Inspiration of the Writers
of the Old and New Testament, 8 o. Du Plessis de Veritate Religionis
Christianae, 8 o. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christianae, 12 o. Huetii
Demonstratio Evangelica, Fol. or 2 Vol. 8 o. Dr. Hammond of the Reasonableness
of the Christian Religion. At the End of his Practical Catechism. Parker's
Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Christian Religion, 4 o. Bishop
Patrick's Witnesses to Christianity, 2 Vol. 8 o. Abady's Vindication of the
Truth of the Christian Religion, 8 o. Wilson's Discourse of Religion, showing
its Truth and Reality; or the Sutableness of Religion to Humane Nature, 8 o.
Dr. William's Sermons at Mr. Boyl's Lecture.
N. It is a sad Sign of the Deplorable State of the Christian Church at this
day, that there should be more Vindications written in this one last Age, if
one were to reckon them all, in Defense of the Holy Scriptures, and of the
Christian Religion, against Atheists, Deists, and Socinians, than there were
Apologies written in all the first Ages of the Church (so far as does appear)
against Jews and Pagans. But so it is, that there has been too great a Cause
for Learned Men to write such Books: And therefore there is as great a
Necessity for every Minister, who is earnestly to contend for the Faith against
such Pestilent Gainsayers, to read them, that he may be ready always to give an
Answer to every one that asks him a Reason of the hope that is in him.

Secondly, Against Jewish and Mohammedan Infidelity in Particular.

Raimundi Martini pugio fidei adversus Judaeos and Mauros. Fol. Quadragnoli
Apologia pro Christiana Religione, qua respondetur ad objectiones cujusdam
Mahomedani. 4 o. Bp. Kidder's Demonstriton of the Messiah. 8 o. Limborchi Amica
Collatio cum Erudito Judaeo. 4 o.
N. Upon the whole foregoing Argument may be also read Dionysii Petavii Dogmata
Theologica, Lib. 16. Cap. 7, 8, 9, 10. Bp. Wilkins's Natural Religion, Chap.
first and last. Dr. Barrow on the Creed, from p. 188. to p. 233. Bp. Ward's
Philosophical Essay, from p. 74. ad finem. Discourse of Natural and Revealed
Religion, from p. 178. to p. 290.

III. Discourses setting forth the Design of Christianity.
First, As its Design is to dispossess Satan of his usurped Dominion and
Tyranny over Mankind, which before our Savior's coming into the World, was
almost universally enslaved to him by Idolatry, Superstition, and filthy Lusts.

The Ancient Apologists beforementioned in quibus fuse de hac re agitur.
Tenison of Idolatry, as also of the means which God has vouchsafed toward the
cure of it by the Shechinah of his Son. 4 o.
Secondly, As its Design is to Restore us to the Image of God, consisting, not
in an outward and legal Righteousness, but a true, inherent and real Holiness,
which by Sin is defaced, and to exalt us to the Divine Life: To illustrate this
its Design, ought to be read, Bp. Fowler's Design of Christianity. 8 o. --
Christian Liberty also. 8 o. Dr. Hen. Moor's Mystery of Godliness. Fol.


N. Here also may be read Dr. Scot 's Works per totum. Mr. Smith's Select
Discourses, most of which have much of this Argument, particularly from p. 285.
to p. 452. And to show how well the Christian Law is fitted in its self to
rectify our Nature, and to what perfection we may be restored, by the
Influence thereof, may be here also read, Dugard of the true Nature of the
Divine Law. 8 o. Dr. Lucas's Enquiry after Happiness in several Parts. 8 o.


Thirdly, As its Design is withal to humble us with the sense of our manifold
Failings, and to manifest the Goodness of God, in accepting through Christ, our
imperfect Righteousness; I could be glad if I knew of any who have written just
or direct Discourses upon that Subject: Passim there is something of this
nature to be found in the Orthodox Writings upon the Satisfaction of Christ,
and especially in that excellent piece of Dr. Scot's Christian Life, Part 2.
where the Doctrine of our Savior's Meditation is so admirably explained and
proved.


N. There is nothing of mightier Importance in our Inquiries after Truth, and
toward a through understanding of any Institution, than to have fixed in our
Minds a determinate and distinct knowledge of the Design it drives at. This is
what our Blessed Savior prescribed as the most sure and certain way to
discover the Erroneous Doctrines of Seditious Heretics, bidding us to beware
of false Prophets, which come to us in Sheep's Clothing, but inwardly are
Ravening Wolves, and telling us, that we might know them by their Fruits, that
is, by the tendency of their Doctrines, which if they were naturally productive
of such ill Fruits, as Christianity is designed to destroy, must therefore
necessarily be Erroneous or Heretical. And this very Rule has a peculiar
Aptitude in it to discover the three great Errors, which have so much corrupted
Christianity at this day, viz. Popery, Antinomianism, and Socinianism; Popery
being a Superstition that makes the nearest approaches to the Pagan Idolatry,
and tends to Indulge Men in Impurity; Antinomianism being a Scheme of Divinity
also that manifestly undermines a Holy Life: And Socinianism tending to make us
value our selves too much upon it, by taking us off from our dependence on
Christ, for the Acceptance thereof. All which considered, As there is the
greatest necessity, that before we enter upon our Enquires into the whole Body
of Christian Doctrine, we should be fully possessed with this Notion concerning
it, that the whole and adaequate Design thereof is to destroy the Power of
Satan, Idolatry, and Sin, and restore and advance the Kingdom of God, and
instead of an external Legal Righteousness, to implant an inward and real
Holiness amongst Men: And withal, so to Humble the best of us, as to make us
depend solely upon the Mediation of Christ with God the Father, for the
Acceptance thereof to our Justification; so especially this Notion of
Christianity ought immediately to precede our Reading the several Systems of
the differing Parties amongst Christians at this day: In most of which, as
there are several unsound Hypotheses advanced; so without this Test, we shall
not so easily distinguish between their Heterodox and Orthodox Opinions. Not to
say, that by thus having our Eye always on the Design of Christianity, and by
bringing every particular Doctrine delivered to us, as Christian, to this
Touchstone, we shall know how to judge concerning those that are true, which
are more, which less considerable in the Body of Christian Doctrine, that so we
may be able accordingly to put a different value upon 'em, a thing of no small
consequence to the Peace and Unity of the Christian Church.

V.
Our American Pastor being thus far prepared toward his great Work of
Preaching the Gospel, as to know and understand the Scriptures himself, and to
be able to convince others both of their Truth, and of the great Design, they,
and the whole of that Religion contained in 'em, are to serve, he may be
supposed capable by this time, to take a comprehensive View of the whole Scheme
of Christianity, and also to form a true Judgment of all that which really
does, or is pretended by the several Parties of Christians to belong thereunto.
And indeed, since it is usually accounted the best Method in the pursuit of any
knowledge, to begin first with some General Institution, and then to descend to
enquire into the particular Parts thereof: For the more comprehensive Knowledge
of the whole Body of Christian Theology: And that all Divine Truths may be
understood in that natural Order and Connection wherein they depend upon, and
add strength one to another, after having, both for a farther Antidote against
the Poison of Heresy and Error (a thing so Pestilential and deadly to the
Souls of Men, and of which therefore we cannot be too Cautious) and to prevent
or Cure whatsoever Heterodoxies may be found in any System contrary to genuine
and pure Christianity, and the Apostolical Doctrine and Discipline of this our
Church; After having, I say, for these Reasons, been.

I. Provided of the
Thirty-Nine Articles, with Rogers upon the Thirty-Nine Articles, or rather,
Dr. Ellis's Latin Edition of the Thirty-Nine Articles, with Objections and
Solutions therein. 12 o.
II. It is much desired they should be furnished with some Bodies of Divinity,
and that both
First, Scholastical, of which sort, one at least, according to the different
Sentiments of the several most considerable Parties of Christians in the World.

1. For the Papists.

First, Such as have laid the Foundations of their Novel Doctrines; or at
leastwise who have first introduced them into their Schemes and Bodies of
Divinity.

Johan. Damasceni de fide Orthodoxa, Libri 4.
N. Claruit Anno 730. and primus fuit inter Graecos, qui Theologiam ad
Accuratiorem Methodum revocavit, ejusque Dogmata in proprias classes
distribuit. Cave Historia Literaria. p. 695. He writes clearly and
methodically, was a subtle Divine, and an able Compiler, says Dupin, Vol. 6. p.
106. he was a great Propugner of Images, and of the Worship of them, of the
perpetual Virginity of the Virgin, of Relics, etc. And having comprehended the
whole substance of Divinity in a Scholastical and Methodical manner, he may
very well be ranked here.

Petrus Lombardus.
N. Libros 4. Sententiarum ex Patrum, praecipue Augustini scriptis, compilavit;
ex quo inter Latinos novam faciem induere cepit res Theologica, ad formam
Elencticam, dubiisque in orbem recurrentibus inservientem, reducta; ad
Philosophicum and Acroamaticum dicendi Genus restricta, in Quaestiones
infinitas, membratim discerpta, rationibus in utramque partem agitatis, curiose
nimis, pene usque ad ineptias, ventilata, methodo nihilominus brevi, nec usqucq
aque inconcinna, and ad subtilem Argutamque de quaestionibus Theologicis
disputandi rationem, satis apt composita. Cave Hist. Literar. p. 695. Prodiit
hic Liber Ludg. 1618. cui Ed. ad calcem Operis subjiciuntur Articuli erronei
Parisiis olim damnati, adjectis nonnullis ipsius Magistri in quibus communit^r
non Approbatur.

Durandi Commentaria super Libros 4. sententiarum. Quae Juvenis Inchoavit,
Senex absolvit. venet. 1571. Fol. Thomae Aquinatis summae. Cajetani Commentaria
in totam Summam Thomae.
N. Lombard and Aquinas, are the Text to the rest of the Schoolmen, who under
two general Classes Comment upon them, some on the Sentences, others on the
Sums. And of these Commentators, these now mentioned are of the chiefest
Repute, and may serve instead of more. And as to my placing 'em in the first
Rank of Popish Systems, our Learned Dr. Cave will justify me in that, whose
words are Quantum ad plura Romanae Ecclesiae placita Stabilienda contulerit
nova haec Scholastica Theologia, caecus sit, oportet, qui non videt. His.
Literaria p. 696. And indeed, as in this Shop of the Schoolmen most of the
corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome were first forged, and for several Ages
were in hammering, and increasing upon the World, so they received their
finishing stroke and stamp of Authority in the Council of Trent. And concerning
the Original and Progress of 'em may be read, Danaeus in primum Librum
Sententiarum. c. 1. -- 6. 8o. Genesis 1589. Hospiniani Hist. Sacramentaria. Tom.
1. Lib. 4. p. 401.


Secondly, Such as having written their Bodies of Divinity after the Heretical
and Erroneous Doctrines of the Church of Rome were arrived to their full
growth, and received their establishment in the Council of Trent; have
Incorporated all of 'em into their Systems.

Catechismus ad Parochos ex Decreto Concilii Tridentini. Gregorii de Valentia.
Or, Vasquez. Or, Becanus. Or, Suarez. Or, Ludovici Abelli Medulla Theologiae. 2
Vol. 8o. Du Hamel 's Theologia speculativa and Practica. 8o.
2. For the Lutherans.

Melancthonis Opera. Fol. Or, Chemnitii Loci Communes. Fol. Or, Brochmandi
Universae Theol. Systema. Fol. Or, Gerhardi Loci Communes. 2 Vol. Fol.
3. For the Calvinists.

Calvini Institutiones. Vrsini Catechismus a Paraeo Edit. Or, Turretini
Institutio Theologiae. 3 Vol. 4o. Or, Turretini Compendium. 4o.
4. For the Arminians.

Arminii Opera. Episcopius.
N. Caute Legendus in some things, and particularly in the Articles of the
Trinity, and not without Dr. Bull's Judicium Ecclesiae Catholicae de
necessitate credendi quod Jesus Christus sit verus Deus, 8o. Oxon. 1694. And
the like Caution is to be given about other Authors of that Set; and the rather
because being Learned Men, and clear Writers, their Heterodoxies are in greater
danger of being unwarily imbibed.

Philippi a Limborch Theologia Christiana. Fol.
5. In the middle way, as Reconcilers.

First, Between Papists and Protestants.

Georgius Cassander. Grotii Annotata ad Consultationem Cassandri. Inter
Tractatus Grotii. quarto Vol. -- Votum pro Pace. Thorndyke 's Just Weights and
Measures. 8o. Forbesii Considerationes Modestae and Pacificae. Land. 1658. 8o.
N. Anton. a Dominis Ep. Spalatensis may be also rekcon'd amongst these
Reconcilers.

Secondly, Between Calvinists and Arminians.

Le Blanc 's Theses. Fol. Theses Salmurienses. 4o.
N. These Scholastical Bodies take in not only what is purely essential to
Christianity, but also the Controverted and Disputable Tenets espoused by that
Party of Christians, the Compiler himself happens to be of: And here, in these
their several Bodies, the best View of their different Hypotheses is to be
seen, because here they lie in that Series and Concatenation wherein they
support one another, better than when standing naked by themselves; so that a
true Judgment cannot be made, as of Christianity it self; so not of any Sect of
Christians, by examining their Principles separately, so well as by considering
'em connected in their several Bodies: And it is a Justice due to all Parties
to see their Opinions in the clearest Light, and to consider them in their full
strength. And as to that general prejudice which has been of late Years taken
up against all Systems of Divinity whatsoever; It seems considerable to me what
has ^e^en spoken by a Learned Prelate upon that Point in his Pastoral Care, p.
167. viz. That there is a vast Error in the first forming of our Clergy, that a
contempt has been cast on that sort of Books. Indeed, to rise no higher than to
a perpetual Reading over different Systems is but a mean pitch of Learning; and
the swallowing down whole Systems by the Lump, has helped to possess Peoples
Minds too early with Prejudices, and to shut them up in too Implicit a
following of others. But the throwing off all these Books, makes that many who
have Read a great deal, yet have no entire Scheme or Method, and so are
ignorant of some very plain things which could never have happened to them, if
they had carefully Read and Digested a System into their Memories.

6. And for a Nexus between Scholastical and Catechechetical Bodies of Divinity.

Corpus Consessionum Fidei quae in diversis Regnis and Nationibus Ecclesiarum
Nomine fuerunt authentice editae; in celeberrimis Conventibus exhibitae,
publicaque Authoritate comprobatae; 4o.
N. I place the Confessions of the Reformed Churches here, as being of a
Nature, not altogether so Controversial as Scholastical, nor yet of so simple a
Nature, as Catechetical Theology is, or ought to be. And I do not rank them
under that Great Article of the Covenant, following; namely, Points necessary
to be believed in order to Salvation, because though styled Confessions of Faith,
yet are esteemed by the respective Churches whose Confessions they are, rather
as containing Terms necessary to Communion therein, than as absolutely
necessary to Salvation with God.

Secondly, Catechetical, or Bodies that design to treat only upon Practical
Points, and such as are more immediately Necessary and Fundamental to be
understood by every Christian; and therefore to be taught by every one that has
the Cure of Souls. Of which sort,

1. Amongst the Ancients may be read, Clementis Alexandrini Stromata, with his
-- Padagogus. Sti. Cypriani Testimoniorum ad Quirinum, Libri 3. Lactantii
Institutionum, Libri 7. Sti. Augustini Enchiridion ad Laurentium de Fide, Spe
and Charitate.


N. Scarce any of these indeed can be pretended to be entire and complete
Bodies of Practical Christianity; nor perhaps do the Doctrines and Duties of
our Religion lie therein in so exact an Order and Method, as in our later
Composures; yet however there are many, both Articles of Faith, and Duties of
Christianity delivered in them; and what is wanting in the exactness of the
Composure, is abundantly made up by the Piety of the Discourses, the constant
prospect of Death before the Eyes of those Primitive Saints, by reason of
frequent Persecutions, to which they were exposed, and the severity of the
Christian Discipline in those Days, rendering their Discourses very Heavenly,
and giving 'em such a Spirit and Force, as few of our modern Writings do come
up to.

2. Amongst the later and more modern Writers.

Dr. Hammond 's Practical Catechism; with which may be also joined his other
Practical Discourses, Fol. as Enlargements upon the same Points. Sir Matthew
Hales 's Knowledge of God and our selves. 8o. Cradock 's Knowledge and
Practice, with a Supplement. 4o. Dr. Lucas 's Practical Christianity. 8o. Dr.
Scot 's Works, 4 Vol. 8o.
N. By Catechetical Doctrines, I mean no other than such as are necessary to be
known, believed and practiced by every Christian; And therefore do take the
liberty, notwithstanding the Title, to range the Catechismus ad Parochos and
Ursin's Catechism under the former Head of Scholastical Systems, rather than
here; And in like manner I should have disposed of, even that called the
Assemblies Catechism, if I had had occasion to mention it; as containing many
Doctrines, viz. concerning Praedestination, Election, Reprobation, Grace, and
Free Will, which are Points fitter by much to be Problematically discussed in
the Schools, than Dogmatically treated of from the Desk or Pulpit.

VI.
But tho the Priests and Ministers of Religion, whose Lips should preserve
Knowledge, are to take in a much greater Compass thereof, than is necessary
they should instruct all Christians in; nay, and tho those narrower Bodies of
Divinity, which under the last Particular, we termed Catechetical, because they
treat only of Points necessary to Salvation; Tho Books of this Nature, I say,
are what all who pretend to teach others, ought to be well acquainted with
themselves (be the Method they proceed in what the Authors please) yet since
the Covenant of Grace; that Covenant, which was obtain d for the fallen Race of
Man from God the Father, by the sole Mediation of his only Begotten Son, and
that with no less a Price than his own most precious Blood; since this
Covenant, we are sure and certain, contains the full Sum and Substance of what
God has promised to us, and what we have engaged to God: This Covenant must
therefore be that Subject, which, above all others, every Minister of the
Gospel ought to penetrate to the very Bottom, and to be most exquisitely
skilled in the Nature, Terms, and Conditions thereof; and in every the least
Circumstance pertaining thereunto. And therefore, since of all the Catechisms
the Church of God has at this Day, that of the Church of England does most
fully, without the defalcation of any Article of this Covenant, and yet most
sincerely, without the mixture of any Heterogeneous, Disputable, or
Scholastical Tenants; and that no Perfection may be wanting, most methodically
also, handling this Subject, first generally, and then particularly; since the
Catechism of the Church of England, I say, has delivered to us the Covenant of
Grace so very full, defecate and methodical; it must be therefore the Concern
of every Minister of Religion, as to comprehend entirely this Blessed Covenant,
so to study thoroughly this Excellent Catechism; and all this with the utmost
Application, till he shall make both the one and the other the Master-Peice of
his Knowledge: And therefore, in order to a complete and exact understanding of
both, we cannot forbear here most importunately to desire that our Indian
Clergy should be provided of such Authors, as pursuanr to the Method of our
Church-Catechism, may accordingly inform 'em in this Covenant of Grace, and
thereby enable 'em to instruct the People in all its weighty Parts, so as every
Private Christian may fully understand his Baptismal Vow, as well in the
general Extent of the Whole, as in the particular Articles of every Branch
thereof. And,

I. To understand the General Nature of the Covenant of Grace, or our Baptismal
Covenant, may be read,
Coccaei Summa Doctrinae de Faedere and Testamento Dei, 12 o. Mr. Thorndike's
Discourse of the Covenant of Grace, being the 2d in his Book styled the
Epilogue, Fol. Mr. Allen's Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the
two Covenants, 8 o. Joseph Truman's Grand Propitiation, 8 o. The Benefits of
our Savior to Mankind, 4 o.
N. Here also may be read. Dr. Hamond's Practical Catechism, Initio. whole Duty
of Man, Preface. Mr. Mede of the Difference between the Old and New Covenant,
p. 252. Mr. Smith's Select Discourses, p. 308. Dr. Moor 's Mystery of
Godliness, Book 9th. Chap. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

II. To understand the particular Articles thereof; namely,
First, The Mercies on God's part, viz.

1. Justification or Pardon of Sins, may be read Mr. Allen against Ferguson, 8
o. and -- on Justification, 8 o. Doctoris Bulli Harmonia Apostolica, 4 o.
Joseph Truman's Endeavors to rectify some prevailing Opinions contrary to the
Doctrines of the Church of England, 8 o. Doctoris Tullii Justificatio Paulina,
4 o. Doctoris Bulli Examen Censurae quo Trumanno respondit a pagina, 149. usque
ad 173. and Tullio in Apologia sua pro Harmonia quae ad Calcem Examinis
Censurae extat, 4 o. Dr. Bates's Sermons of Forgiveness, 8 o.


N. Legatur and Dionysiii Petavii Dogmata, Lib. 10. Cap. 16.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Expositions of the Creed upon the Article of the Forgiveness of Sins. The
Systems also in Locum de Justificatione.

2. Divine Grace and Assistance, upon which may be read.

Vossii Historia Pelagiana, 4 o. Augustini Polemica contra Pelagianos.
Hieronymi polemica contra Pelagianos. Mr. Allen of Divine Assistance, 12 o. Dr.
Claget of the Operations of the Holy Spirit, 2 Vol. 8 o.
N. Here also Read the Expositions of the Creed upon the Article of the Holy
Ghost, Dr. Scot 's Christian Life, Part 2. p. 578. Dr. Hammond 's pacifick
Discourse of God's Grace and Decrees, among his practical Discourses, p. 551.
Petavii Dogmata, Lib. 10. The Summists and Systems in Locum de Gratia.

3. Everlasting Life and Happiness.

Lactantius de Vita Beata, Instit. Lib. 7. Chrysostomus de praemiis Sanctorum.
Bellarminus de Aeterna faelicitate. Lessius de Summo Bono inter Opuscula. Mr.
Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest, 4 o. Bishop Taylor's Contemplations of the
State of Man, 8 o.
N. Hic etiam Legatur Virgilii Aeneid. Lib. Sextus, quo tota Doctrina Paganorum
de justorum Gaudiis, Impiorumque suppliciis habetur. Item Cicero Ora. pro
Archia Poeta, and Lib. 1. Tusculan. Questionum de contemnenda morte: As also
the Expositions on the Creed upon the Article Everlasting Life. Mr. Mede of
Different Degrees of Reward in the Life to come, B. 1. Disc. 23. p. 48. The
Sums and Systems also in Locum de summo bono.

Secondly, The Conditions to be performed on our part, viz.

1. Faith and the Doctrines thereof contained in the Apostles Creed. And since
on this Subject the first thing to be considered, is the Nature and Properties
of Justifying Faith; The second, the Objects or Articles to be believed, vix.
those contained in the Apostles Creed; toward the full understanding therefore
of this great Article of the Covenant.

First, Upon the Nature and Properties of Justifying and Saving Faith.

Basilius de Vera and Pia Fide.
N. And amongst the Moderns it will be proper to read on this prime Subject the
several Expositors of the Creed immediately hereafter specified, which treat
upon the words, I believe; and particularly Dr. Barrow 's Exposition thereof,
from p. 1. to p. 68 Mr. Allen 's Discourse on the two Covenants; especially his
Appendix to the Discourse touching the Nature of that Faith which is
Justifying, and that which is not; and the Reason of that Difference. Dr. Bull
's Harmonia Evangelica; as also his Examen Censurae Harmoniae Evangelicae. Dr.
Jackson, Tom. 1. from p. 1. to p. the 10th, and from p. the 601. to p. the 832.
In the Oxford Paraphrase, the Preface to the Ep. to the Romans As also the
several Summaries and Systems herein mentioned on the common place de Fide. But
more especially Dr. Hammond of Faith in his Pract. Cat. Le Blanc's Thesis prima
de Fide.

Secondly, On the Objects to be Believed, it is wished they may be supplied
with.

1. Historical Discourses of the Antiquity and Authority of the Creed.

J. G. Vossius de Tribus Symbolis. 4 o. Usserius de Romanae Ecclesiae Symbolo
Apostolico vetere and aliis Fidei formulis. 4 o. Ashwel's Fides Apostolica,
with his Double Appendix, the 1st touching the Athanasian, the 2d the Nicene
Creed. 8 o.
N. Here also read Ellies Du Pin 's New History of Ecclesiastical Writers, Vol.
1. p. 9. Dr. Heylin 's Preface to his Theologia Veterum. Dr. Cave 's Lives of
the Fathers of the fourth Century, in which there is so ample an History of
Creeds.

2. With Expositions upon all, or most of the several Articles of the Creed it
self.

First, The Expositions of the Ancient Fathers. Cyrilii Hierosolymi^ani
Catecheses 18. Gregorii Nysseni Catechetica magna Oration. Sancti Epiphanii
Anchoratus; qui complures Fidei par^es continct. Ruffini Expositio Symboli ad
Laurentium Episcopum. Extat ad calcem Cypriani. Augustinus de Fide and Symbolo.
-- Enchiridion ad Laurentium de Fide, Spe, and Charitate. -- De Agone
Christiano Liber. N. In quo ad finem, Symbolum Exponitur, and Haereses
Contrariae refelluntur. -- De Symbolo sive Regula Fidei ad Catechumenos.
Ambrosii in Symbolum Apostolicum Tractatus. Theodoretus Haereticarum Fabularum
Libro Quinto.


Secondly, The Exposition of the later Writers.

Dr. Heylin's Theologia veterum. Fol.
N. I place him first, because giving something of the History of the several
Articles.

Petavii Dogmata 5 Vol. Fol. Dr. Jackson's Works. 3 Vol. Fol. Bp. Pearson on
the Creed. Fol. Dr. Towerson on the Creed. Fol. Dr. Barrow on the Creed. Fell.
Mr. Kettlewel's Practical Believer. 8 o. Dr. Hen. Moor's Mystery of Godliness,
Fol. Dr. Scot's Christian Life, 2d Part. Vol. 1. and 2d.
N. These two last Pieces may be reckoned amongst the Expositions of the
Apostles Creed; since they treat upon all or most of its Articles, though not
altogether in the same order as they lie therein.

2. Evangelical Obedience, to understand the true State and Extent of which
vast and comprehensive Article of that Covenant entered into betwixt God and us
at our Baptism, and so indispensable a condition of our Salvation, as this is;
First, Because all Duty is measured by some Law, as its Rule; and a Duty is
more or less necessary or incumbent upon us, according to the Nature and
Obligation of the several kind of Laws that may oblige us thereunto; Secondly,
Also because the Acts of some Duties do so nearly border upon Vices, and the
Duties themselves interfering; it is necessary we should be able to state the
measures and extent of every single Duty, and to know according to the variety
of Circumstances occurring, to which of the interfering Duties the preference
in practice is to be given; And Thirdly, Since through the course of a Man's
Life (especially where our People are conscientious, and to render all Men
such, is the work we are to mind) there will arise several Cases of Conscience
(especially in their Sickness, a time of Doubts and Fears) which every Pastor
of a Flock ought to be able to Resolve: And these Cases being Doubts about the
Lawfulness, or Unlawfulness, or Indifference of Actions, arising either from
the interfering of several Laws, and different Duties, or from the Ignorance of
the Force and Obligation of those several Laws respectively, and of the just
Limits of every Duty; it is not possible the Case should be resolved with
safety of the Penitents Innocence, or the Tranquillity of his Mind, if we are
ignorant of the Nature and Obligation of the Laws obliging, and the Duties
resulting from them; All these things considered, I humbly conceive it is very
requisite, as it is expected we should be useful to the World, that we should
be very well provided of some of the best Authors upon each of these
particulars: That is, First, Upon the Nature and Obligation of Law in general,
and of the different kinds of Laws in particular: Secondly, Upon Duties
obligatory upon us from those several kinds of Laws: Thirdly, Upon Casuistry,
whereby the Difficulties that shall upon any occasion perplex Persons
Consciences, with reference to those Laws, and the Duties resulting from
thence, may be resolved. And,

First, As to the Nature and Obligation of Law in general, as also the Nature,
Division and Obligation of the several kinds of Laws in particular; To great
Use and Purpose, may be read upon this Subject, and accordingly it is desired
our Pastor should be provided of.

Suarez de Legibus. Fol. Dawson's Origo Legum: Or, a Treatise of the Origin of
Laws, and their obliging Power: As also of their great Variety; And why some
Laws are Immutable, and some not, but may suffer Change, or cease to be, or be
suspended, or Abrogated, Fol.
N. Hic etiam Legatur Aquinatis summae, 1. 2. a Quaestione 90. usque ad 109.
Gerson Tract. de Vita Spirituali Lect. 2. and sequent. Et si Ciceronem
audiamus, nullo in genere disputandi, quam de jure, magis honest patefit, quid
sit homini tributum Natura, quantam vim rerum optimarum men's humana Continent,
cujus muneris colendi, efficiendique causa nati, and in lucem editi simus, quae
sit conjunctio hominum, quae Naturalis societas inter se. Cicero de Legibus
Lib. 1. Sect 4.

Secondly, As to the Duties Obligatory upon us from these several Laws.

1. From the Law of Nature: such as are deducible from the Law written in our
Hearts, may be seen.

First, In the Ancient Philosophers, viz.

Plato de Legibus. Cicero de Legibus. -- De Officiis.
N. As also in all, or most of the Ancient Moralists above mentioned: For as
Suarez prooemio ad Lib. de Legibus. Aristoteles licet proprium Opus de Legibus
non reliquerit in suis moralibus multa sparsim de Legibus tradidit, sicut and
Seneca, Plutarchus, and Alii.

Secondly, In the later Writers upon the Laws of Nature and Nations.

Gulielmus Grotius de Principiis Juris Naturalis. 12 o. Hugo Grotius de jure
Belli and Pacis. 8 o.
N. And especially upon this Subject ought to be read those Books, which have
been particularly written to Antidote Men against the Poison of Hobbs 's
Principles.

Doctoris Henrici Mori Ethica 8 o. Bp. Cumberland de Jure Naturae and Gentium.
4 o. Mr. Tyrril's Epitome of Bp. Cumberland's Law of Nature. 8 o Sharrock de
Officiis secundum Naturae Jus; Seu de Moribus ad Rationis normam conformandis
Doctrina, unde Principia, item and Rations Hobbesii ad Ethicam and Politicam
Spectantes, quatenus huic Hypothesi contradicere videantur, in Examen Veniunt.
8 o. Puffendorf de Jure Naturae and Gentium. 4 o. -- De Officio Hominis and
Civis. 8 o. Parker's Demonstration of the Laws of Nature. 4 o. Lowd's Discourse
of the Nature of Man, both in his Natural and Political Capacity, both as he is
a Rational Creature, and Member of Civil Society; with an Examination of some
of Mr. Hobbs's Opinions relating hereunto. 8 o. Dr. Echard's Dialogues between
Timothy and Philautus. 8 o.
Thirdly, And for a Nexus between the Laws Natural and Revealed, may be read.

Seldom de Jure Naturae and Gentium Juxta Disciplinam Hebraeor. 4 o. Mosaicarum
and Romanarum Legum Collatio ex Integris Papiniani, Pauli, Ulpiani, Gaii,
Modestini, Aliorumque veterum Juris Auctorum Libris, ante Tempora Justiniani
Imperatoris desumpta. Inter Crit. Sacr. Tom. 8. p. 160. Crellii Ethica
Aristotelica and Christiana, cum Dissertatione praemissa de virtutis Ethnicae,
Hebraeae, atque Christianae invicem comparatione.
2. From the Written and Revealed Laws of God. And the Duties enjoined us
therein are treated upon,

First, By Ancient Writers.

Philo Judaeus de Decalogo. Clementis Alexandrini Paedagogus. -- Stromata.
Cyprianus Libro tertio Testimonior. ad Quirinum. Basilii Ethica, Item and
Ascetica. Grego. Nyssenus de Beatitudinibus Orationes 8. Ambrosius de Officiis.
N. We shall indeed scarcely find many just and entire Bodies of Morality in
the Writings of the Fathers; but what is wanting in the Art and Accuracy of
their Composures, is abundantly recompensed in the Excellency of their Matter,
for those admirable Persons speaking as they lived; as their contempt of the
World, and their Mortifications of the Body, were wonderfully great, so their
Thoughts were very sublime and elevated, and their Morality pure and refined.
There are, true it is, many more pieces of Morality interspersed in their
Works; but these being for the most part, upon particular Subjects and Duties,
they will fall in to be ranged properly under the several Heads of Duty, of
which I design hereafter, God willing, in a Second Part to draw a particular
Scheme, and to exhibit a List, as well of the Ancient, as more Modern Writers
upon each single Duty.

Secondly, By later Authors: and those,

First, Such who have Written Expositions and Discourses upon the Decalogue and
Beatitudes.

Bp. Andrews. Fol. Grotius in 20 Cap. Exodus Inter Annotata. Andreae Riveti
Expositio in 20 Cap. Exodus 4 o. Dr. Towerson. Fol. Rawlet on the Decalogue. 8
o. Bp. Hopkins's Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 4 o. Dr. Barrow's
Exposition of the Decalogue. 12 o. Buck on the Beatitudes. 8 o. Norris on the
Beatitudes. 8 o.
N. And to prevent or Cure the Pestilential Infusions of Antinomian Heretics,
who would erase out of the Minds of Christians all sense of Obligations upon
'em to observe, even the Duties of the Moral Law, may be properly and usefully
enough here read, both the Discourses against the Antinomians hereafter
mentioned, and also Suarez, de Legibus, Lib. 1. Chapter 18. 19. Petavii Dogmata,
Lib. 10. C. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Dr. Henry Moor 's Mystery of Godliness,
Book 8. Chapter 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Measures of Christian Obedience, Book 1.
Chapter 1. Preface to Mr. Allen 's Discourse on the two Covenants.

Secondly, Others who have written more complete Tracts of Christian Morality
upon the whole Body of Christian Duties.

Danaei Ethica Christiana. 4 o. The whole Duty of Man, together with the other
Pieces of that Author. Fol. Bp. Taylor's Holy Living and Dying. 8 o. Dr. Scot's
Christian Life. Part 1. and 4. Ketlewel's Christian Obedience. 8 o. Mr.
Baxter's Christian Directory. Fol. Sam. Cradock's Knowledge and Practice, with
the Appendix. 4 o. Rawlei's Christian Monitor. 8 o.
N. Hic etiam legantur Magistri sententiarum Lib. 3. a Distim. 37. usque ad
finem; etiiam Thomae Aquinatis Secunda Secundae, quae Anro contra non
aestimanda, Item Commentarii in Sententias and in summam supra nominati.

3. From the positive Laws of Man.

First, Ecclesiastical; and that both

1. General, or from the Canon Laws of the Church in general.

Arnoldi Corvini Jus Canonicum per Aphorismos explicatum, 8 o. Francisci de
Roye Institutiones Juris Canonici. 8 o. Par. 1681.
2. Particular, or from the Canon Law more especially in force in our own
Country; As all that is said to be, which is not repugnant to the Prerogative
Royal, and to the Common and Statute Laws of this Kingdom.

Rich. Cosini Ecclesiae Anglicanae Politeia in Tabulas digestas. Fol. Linwood's
Provinciale. Fol. Reformatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum. Hen. 8. Ed. 6. Godolphin's
Repertorium. 4 o. Book of Canons. Sparrow's Collection of Canons. 4 o.
N. Nor will it be thought that these are Authors in which a Divine is not
concerned, when it is considered, that many Important Cases, De Sponsalibus, de
Nuptiis, etc. are no more determinable in foro Conscientiae, than in foro
Contentioso without a competent Skill therein.

Secondly, Civil.

1. General or Imperial: Jus scilicet Civil seu Caesareum quod ab Imperiali
Majestate pendet, quo omnes fere populi utuntur.

Zouche's Elementa Juris-Prudentiae. 12 o. Justiniani Institutiones. 12 o.
Sheidewinus in Institutiones. 12 o. Or, Corvinus in Institutiones. 12 o. Or,
Vinnii Commentarius in quatuor Libros Institutionum. 4 o. Or, Julii Pacii
Isagogica in Institutiones Imperiales, Digesta, Pandectas, Codicem, and
Decretales. 8 o.
N. How very useful some degrees of knowledge at least, in the Civil Law may be
to a Divine, will presently appear, when we come to speak of what Preliminaries
are necessary to make a Casuist: But that a through Understanding in all the
Parts of that Noble Faculty is necessary, is more than I dare affirm, being
deterred from that, more perhaps by the formidable Prospect of so vast a Field
of Knowledge to be traversed over, than by the reason of the thing. But
however, that we may have a general View how large it is, take this Account
from a Learned Civilian, Julius Pacius in his Isagogica. p. 1. Jus Civil a
Justiniano Imperatore in tria Volumina redactarum est: Primum Institutionum,
quo Juris Epitome Isagogica continetur: Alterum Digestorum seu Pandectarum,
Digesta vocantur quia Tituli non sunt temere congesti, sed ordine digesti.
Pandectae vero appellantur, quia universam fere juris artem ac pene omnes
ligitimas decisioones complectuntur.
quod ex veterum Jure consultorum Libris compositum est: Tertium Codicis, quo
Imperatorum Constitutiones continentur, exceptis ipsius Justiniani Novellis,
non uno tempore post compositionem Codicis promulgatis, quae in unum volumen a
nescio quo relatae fuerunt. His sabjugi solent Feudales a privatis quibusdam
Doctoribus literis Mandatae. Or as he elsewhere speaks, ib. p. 46.
Institutioues tantum prima Juris elementa continent, Codex practicas Decisiones
habet; in Digestis tam Legis Theoria quam Praxis plene habetur. And now if the
two later are thought necessary to be searched into by those only who are
Practitioners in foro contentioso: However the former; viz. Institutiones
Justinia with some Commentators thereon, wherein are contained the Principia
Boni and Aequi, are what it becomes no Divine to be a Stranger to. And that he
may be sufficiently prepared for his Enquiries therein, I shall crave leave to
add the Advice of that Great Man Hugo Grotius, which he gave his Brother, as
the best Method wherewith he ought to begin his Studies of the Civil Law.
Auctor sum ut recte informeris ad Juris Disciplinam, antequam attingas
Scholasticos, Grotii Ep. 1751.
diligenter perlegas secundum Ethicorum, Nichomacheorum, and quintum apud
Aristotelem, aut ejus Optimum Paraphrasten a D. Heinsio Editum. Deinde ejusdem
Aristotelis Rhetorica, quae seorsim extant cum erudito satis Commentario. Mox
Ciceronis Officia, Paradoxa, de finibus, and de Legibus. Item Topica, and de
Inventione. Inter legendum vero cuipiam aut excerpas, aut diligenter ad
Marginem Libri annotes ea, quae ad jus Naturae and Gentium, ad Legum ac
Magistratuum originem, denique ad Rempub. and jus tam publicum tam privatum
pertinebunt. Thus this Great Man prescribes what is requisite to precede our
entrance upon the Study of the Civil Law. And as to what Books are to be always
ready at hand, when we are actually upon the study thereof; It will be
necessary to have such Glossaries and Law Dictionaries as explain the Terms of
Law, such as Jo. Calvini Lexicon magnum Juris Caesarii and Canonici. Fol.
Bernardi Brissonii de Verborum quae ad Jus pertinent significatione Lib. 19
Francofurti. 1683. Fol.


2. Particular, or the Municipal Laws of our own Country; To have a general
Insight into which, and to know the Reason and Grounds of 'em, as I do think it
by no means foreign to the business, even of a Parochial Minister; so I shall
adventure to lay down these following Books, as proper to be read by him upon
the Subject, viz.

Cook's Institutes. 4 Vol. Fol. Doctor and Student, being two Dialogues between
a Doctor in Divinity, and a Student in the Laws of England, of the Grounds of
the said Laws, and of Conscience. 12 o. Wingate's Maxims of Reason, or the
Reason of the Common Law of England. Fol.
N. To which must be added for the Interpretation of Law Terms, Cowel's
Interpreter, and Manley. Fol. Blount's Law Dictionary, Fol.


N. And to Apologize for prescribing Books of this Nature, I must take leave to
Muster up both Authority and Reason for so doing. And I think Suarez, though a
very Great Man, is not more considerable for his Authority, than for the weight
of his Reason in this case: Whose words are these: Nulli mirum videri debet, si
homini Theologiam prositenti, Leges Incidant disputandae. Suarez Prooemio
Tract. de Legibus.
Imo si res ipsa recte dispiciatur, palam erit, ita Legum Tractationem
Theologiae ambitu concludi, ut Theologus subjectum ejus exhaurire non valeat,
nisi legibus considerandis immoretur. Theologicum enim est negotium
Conscientiis prospicere viatorum; Conscientiarum vero rectitudo stat legibus
servandis, sicut and pravitas Violandis, cum Lex quaelibet sit regula, si ut
oportet servetur, aeternae salutis Assequendae; si violetur, amittendae; ergo
and legis inspectio, quatenus est conscientiae Vinculum ad Theologum
pertinebit. Tandem Catholica fides non solum docet quatenus parendum sit Deo
supernaturaliter praecipienti, sed etiam quid natura vetat, Jubeat, vel
permittat; and quatenus obediendum sit potestatibus sublimioribus, ut Paulus
dixit, atque adeo quatenus parendum sit tum Ecclesiasticis Legibus, tum laicis,
ante Oculos nobis ponit. Ergo ex his fidei fundamentis Theologi est Colligere,
quid in hoc, aut in illo Legum genere sit habendum.

And another Ingenious Author in speaking of those Studies which are necessary
for all Men of Ingenions Birth; Mr. Fleury History of the Choice and Method of
Studies, p. 123, etc.
As to the Law, he tells us, that every private Person is obliged to know so
much of it as is necessary to keep what he has, and to do nothing against the
Laws. Every one is thus far obliged by the Laws themselves, which presume that
all Citizens are instructed therein, since they impute the Ignorance of them as
a fault, and punish it, either by the loss of Goods, if they have failed to
observe the Laws in getting or preserving them, or by more severe Punishments,
if this Ignorance has betrayed 'em to some Crime.

And as to such an indifferent Knowledge thereof as is necessary to all, he
makes it to consist in these three particulars: First, In understanding the
Terms of Business, and which we meet in the Ordinances, Customs, and other Law
Books. Secondly, In Learning the most general Maxims of the Law which relate to
particular Subjects, as of Tutelage, Successions, Marriages, the most usual
Contracts, without entering into the Subtilties of the Law, or much affecting
that Method: And lastly, the manner of prosecuting ones Right in Courts of
Judicature, he tells us should be understood. And without descending to all the
particulars of the Process, the order of it in general should be observed, and
the necessity there is, of exactly observing in Judicial Proceedings, the Forms
established. Thus far my Author.

But thus much is farther than I dare venture to declare my Mind, as being
aware how jealous the World are, least we should be over skilful in this sort
of Knowledge, Cicero de Leg. Lib. 1.
though if we may believe a great Judge, Potius Ingnoratio Legis Litigiosa est
quam Scientia.

And indeed, my great Design in prescribing thus much for the Knowledge of the
Law, as I have done, is in order to enable us to discharge a quite contrary
Duty to Litigiousness. It is doubtless our Duty above all others to be
Peacemakers amongst our Neighbors; and in order to that, to offer our
Assistance to compose their Differences: But how shall we be able to do that
without some general Skill in the Grounds and Reason of our Laws, and
especially in the governing Maxims of it, which in few words do concisely
Instruct us in the Equity that pertains to most Cases. I say, in the governing
Maxims of our Law, which alone will enable us to Arbitrate equitably betwixt
Man and Man in most Cases: For as a Gentleman Learned in that Profession tells
us; The vast multitude of Cases which the Follies or Passions, or Necessities
of Men have obliged us to be acquainted with, Mr. Wingate's Maxims of Reason.
Initio.
are all Accountable and Reducible to some few Theses; which being prime
Emanations, and Grand Maxims of Reason, govern and resolve the subordinate
Miscellany of Queries, and may serve for a Clue and Conduct through the
Labyrinth of that perplexed Variety: Saving us the labor of charging our
Memories with every Particular, which in the Result is less apt to profit, than
to burden and confound us.

Thirdly, As to Casuistical Divinity whose Office it is to determine the
Particulars and single Instances of Christian Duty, and to resolve the
Difficulties that shall at any time perplex Persons Consciences, with Reference
to such Laws as prescribe their Duty, and to the particular Instances of the
Duties themselves, which arise from the Obligation of such Laws:

1. As preliminary to the Attainment of so excellent, useful, and necessary a
sort of Knowledge, it is clear that Aristotle's Rhetoric. Aquinas Secunda
Secundae. And, Tully's Offices are such.


N. I take it to be clear, to a demonstration, that these Books, being well
Studied, are excellent Preparations for a Casuist, because the Incomparable
Bishop Sanderson owned that these were the Books he Studied most when he laid
the Foundation of his great and clear Learning, especially in this way. Bishop
Sanderson 's Life, by Isaac Walton.
And it may also appear from the Life of the same Bishop, That Zouches Elementa
Juris prudentiae, 12 o. will be very useful hereunto. And indeed, for the same
Reason, All, or any of those forementioned Books upon the Nature and Obligation
of Laws, and of the Laws of Nature and Nations, must have a singular Tendency
this way. And if I may have leave to add but another, I know nothing more
wanting as preliminary, to make a Man a good Casuist than a good Writer or two
upon that Important Title in the Civil Law Lib. 50. Digestor Tit. 17. De
Diversis Regulis Juris Antiqui. This Title contains very many Maxims of Law and
Reason, such as are so many Principles and Maxims of greatest Evidence and
Authority. And if this Prince of Casuists now mentioned may be our Pattern, it
is certain that by virtue of such Postulata and self-evident, uncontested
Principles of Reason and Morality, he was wont so satisfactorily to determine
what was Lawful in the most knotty and intricate Cases. And those who have
explicated and limited these Regulae Juris, have been.

Jac Cujacius. 8 o. Philippus Decius. 8 o. Everand. Bronchrest. 12 o.
2. To Perfect a Casuist may be read.

First, Generally; To enable him to resolve whatever Cases and Doubts may arise
at any time in the Course of a Man's Life.

Sanderson de Obligatione Conscientiae; also, -- His Cases, and his Sermons.
Bp. Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium. Fol. Lessius de jure and Justitia. Fol. Or.
Lessii Compendium. 8 o. Amesius de Conscientia and ejus Jure. 12 o. Perkins's
Cases of Conscience. Fol. Bp. Hall's Cases of Conscience. Fol. Dr. Hammon's
Resolution to 6 Quaeries. In his Practical Discourses. Fol. Bp. Barlow's Cases
of Conscience. 8 o.
Secondly, More particularly to render him a good Confessor to the Sick and
troubled in Mind.

Mr. Kettlewel's Companion to the Penitent. 12 o. -- Death made Comfortable. 12
o. Dr. Wake's Preparation for Death. 8 o. Go in Peace, being Directions to a
Young Divine to Administer Discourse to the Necessities of the Sick. 8 o.
N. Upon this Occasion ought also to be perused, Lohneri Instructionis
Practicae Institutio Tertia, complectens varios and Solidos modos Juvandi and
consolandi Diversorum Statuum personas Afflictas, praecipue aegras and
Captivas. Item and Quinta Complectens de Confessionibus rite and fructuose
Excipendis Doctrinas, tam Generales quam Speciales, ad Varios Hominum Status
accommodatas: As also Tailor 's Holy Dying, being the Second Part of his Book,
Entitled Holy Living and Dying. And that useful Table of self Examination at
the end of the Whole Duty of Man.

Now that most unreasonable and pernicious reservedness of Persons, in not
opening their Consciences to the Ministers of our Church, especially as they
ought, in times of Sickness, when it concerns 'em so much to take all the Care
immaginable, and to require all the Assistance possible to help 'em to state
their Accounts with God against the great Audit. Such Contempt, I say, in the
People, of our Ghostly Counsel and Advice, has made this part of Penitential
Divinity to be so much uncultivated by our English Divines. The Romish Church
indeed, as they are in nothing more voluminous that in this, so they abound in
Confessories and Penitentials: But instead of tying up the Conscience to the
strictest Rules of Holy Living, the more peculiar business of a Casuist, by
their great Doctrine of Probability, and some others of the like nature, their
Moral and Casuistical, tend as much as their Doctrinal Divinity, to encourage
Licentiousness, and to make Men's Consciences easy in a course of unrepented
sins; as is evident to those who have either read their own Authors, or what is
Collected to our hands, out of 'em, even by the Jansenists, Men of their own
Communion, In the Jesuits Morals. Fol. And the Mystery of Jesuitism. 8 o. 5
Vol.


So that the Romish Casuistical and Penitential Divines, for the most part, can
be read to little purpose of benefit, but with great danger of Corruption,
except it be by Learned Men, to enable them to demonstrate to the World, how
far that Church is Apostatized in all respects; Morals, as well as Doctrinals
from the Truth of Christianity. However the Author abovementioned, seems to me
to have discharged this part of giving us Directions concerning our Visitation
of the Sick, with tolerable Honesty, as to most particulars. And to supply the
Paucity of Authors of our own upon this Subject, we must make up the defect by
such as have written upon the next, and last general condition of that Covenant
established by the Mediation of Christ, betwixt God and Man, viz.

3. Repentance concerning which it is requisite our Indian Clerks should be
furnished.

First, With some of the Writings of the Ancients upon that Subject, if
possible to be had.

Tertullian de Paenitentia. Basilii ad Amphilochium Epistolae Canonicae Tres.
Ambrosii de Paenitentia contra Novatianos Libri duo. Chrysostomus de
compunctione Cordis ad Demetrium. -- Ad Stelichium de eodem Argumento. -- Ad
Theodorum Lapsum Paraenesis. -- De Paenitentia plurimae Homiliae
N. These and the like Books written by the Primitive Fathers upon the Subject
of Repentance and Penance, do infinitely deserve to be read through and
through, by every Minister of the Church of Christ; and that not only, as they
do most admirably describe the Nature and measures of true Repentance; But also
the Discipline of the Ancient Church, with reference to those who had lapsed
into heinous Sins. An Account of which, if it were but represented to the
People in our Discourses upon that Subject, how far would careless Sinners be
from thinking that a slender Sorrow, and a Lord have mercy upon me, would be
sufficient to reconcile them to God after a very wicked Life, and that only
upon a Deathbed?

The Penitents for their parts, out of an Holy Indignation against themselves,
for the sins they had committed, did in those days furrow their Cheeks with
continual weeping, and became pale as Ghosts, by perpetual fasting; Tertul. de
Paenitentia Lib.
and did day and night supplicate the God of Heaven for his Mercy in their
Pardon.

Volo veniam reus sperat, petat eam Lacrymis petat gemitibus; petat populi
totius fletibus: Ut ignoscatur and obsecrat: and cum secundo and tertio fuerit
dilata ejus communio, credat remissius se supplicasse, fletus augeat
miserabilior, postea reversus teneat pedes brachiis, osculetur osculis, lavet
fletibus, ut de ipso dicat Dominus Jesus: Remissa sunt Peccata ejus multa
quoniam dilexit multum. Ambrose de Paenitentia Lib. primo.
And such was the sense that the Church then had of the dishonor done to God
by a flagitious Crime, such as they accounted Fornication, Adultery, Perjury,
Murder, etc. that though the Penitents did prostrate themselves at the Church
doors, and with Lamentations and Moans besought the Prayers of all that
entered; embraced the Knees and kissed the Garments of the Brethren, imploring
their Intercessions with God for Pardon, and that they might be admitted here
on Earth to Communion: Yet it was not without repeated Importunities,
Mortifications, and long continued Penances, that they were again received.

And indeed how would it awaken the stupid Wretches in these worst of Ages, to
find how long the Penance of such who had fallen into the more deadly sins, was
to continue, before they could be admitted to the Peace of the Church? Upon
Fornication, Vide Basilii Epistolas tres ad Amphilochium Canones Paenitentiales
de his and hujusmodi Criminibus continentes.
was imposed a Penance of four years. Upon a Woman that had procured an
Abortion, ten. Upon Adultery fifteen. For Perjury eleven. Even for an
involuntary Murder, such as we call Manslaughter, eleven; and for voluntary
Murder was imposed a twelve years Penance. And not to mention more: Those who
renounced the Faith of Christ, were not to be admitted till the hour of Death.
And though having been taken by Barbarians, they were forced thereunto by
Torments, yet they were obliged to a Penance of eight years before they could
be admitted to Communion with the Faithful.

And what then would they have imposed upon those Miscreants of our days, who
without force or compulsion; nay, who contrary to our Laws, and in defiance to
their Authority and Penalties, do every day, out of the malignity of their own
Hearts, deny the everlasting God, and their only Savior Jesus Christ; And that
with all the spite and scorn, not only in Transient Discourse, but in lewd
Songs, and profane Plays, (which being edged with Wit, and flying abroad, do
corrupt the Minds of thousands, beyond their power ever afterward to retrieve
from the horrid Principles they have infused into 'em) what lasting Penances I
say, would they have imposed upon such? Would they have looked upon it as a
wonderful Honor forsooth, to God and Religion, to have such whisper privately
upon their Deathbed a few Penitential Confessions within their Curtains? and
then upon this would they administer to them the Sacrament of Reconciliation,
though they offer not so much as a public and solemn Recantation of those
impious Principles they have so industriously propagated, to the infinite
Dishonor of God, and Destruction of those Souls for which the Son of God died?
Would they not at leastwise have required so much toward the Reparation of the
mischief done, Tantum fiat conversio ut qui Deum non Agnoscebamus, ipsi eam jam
aliis demonstremus. Amb. de paenit. Lib 1.
as a public and sorrowful Confession and Declaration to all the World of the
sincerity of their Conversion? True it is, as our Church complains in the
Office of Commination, that the Primitive Discipline, as much as it is to be
wished, is not easily to be restored; but however it is still, and ever will be
in our Power to declare to Fornicators, Adulterers, Perjured Persons, Murderers
and Blasphemers, as she does, the true state of their Case, and to let 'em know
the Judgments of God hanging over such, as do not in the highest measure they
can, make Reparation for the Dishonor they have done to God, and the Mischief
they have brought to other Men's Souls. This we may do by letting 'em know, in
the Discourses we make, and the state we give of true Repentance, that such a
Reparation toward God is as necessary, as Restitution to Man, to render their
Repentance acceptable. For though it be commonly said in the modern way of
stating the Nature of Repentance, that God not suffering by whatever we can do
against him, Remission will follow upon our hearty Sorrow and Amendment only,
but that our Neighbor being really damaged by the injuries done to him,
Restitution must be part of that Man's Repentance, who has any wise wronged him
in his Reputation or Estate; yet, with Submission to better Judgments, I do
humbly conceive, that God is as capable of suffering Injury from us as Man. All
the Malignity indeed of Men and Devils cannot make Him suffer in his Essential
Perfections, in his Nature and Happiness, as to Himself; but his Honor and
Authority in the World, which was so dear to Him, that He sent his only
Begotten Son into it to Reinstate Him in his Dominion over it, may certainly be
impaired by the scandalous Impieties of desperately Wicked Men. And therefore
if the Good Name of our Neighbor, of which he has been Robbed by us, must as
openly, that is, to all the Purposes of putting Him right in the Opinion of the
World, be justified by a Penitent, as it was formerly Defamed by him; for much
greater Reasons must a Blaspheming or Profane Atheist be put upon the solemn
and most open Declaration of his Repentance, and upon such a Recantation of his
Principles and Practices, as will reach as far to the setting God right in the
Opinions of Men, as his Lewd Speeches, Songs, Plays, or Books have fled abroad
to the Dishonor of Him. Thus a late (and till then an unhappy) Gentleman, Sir
Duncomb Colchester did; and till such others as he was, do the like; as,
notwithstanding the utter loss of Public Discipline, it is still in, and
cannot be out of our Power to refuse Private Communion to such enormous
Sinners; so I do humbly conceive we ought not to give 'em the Sacrament of
Reconciliation till they have done it. But to proceed,

Secondly, As to our Modern Authors upon the Subject of Repentance, it is
requisite our Indian Clerks should be furnished with,

Bp. Taylor's Discourse of Repentance. 8 o. Or in his Polemical Discourses. Dr.
Ingelo upon Repentance. 8 o. Dr. Goodman's Penitent Pardoned. 8 o. Dr. Pain
upon Repentance. 8 o. Dr. Hammond of late, or Deathbed Repentance. In his
Pract. Disc. Mr. Ellis of the necessity of Serious Consideration, and speedy
Repentance, as the only way to be safe both Living and Dying. 8 o.
Thirdly, And as Appendant to the Doctrine of Repentance, nothing is more
Requisite, than that they be furnished with Tracts both Ancient and Modern.

1. Upon Fasting and the Lent-Fast.

First, Amongst the Ancient Writers.

Tertullian de Jejuniis. Basilii de Jejunio Sermones tres. Ambrosius de Elia
and Jejunio. Chrysostomus de Jejunio and Eleemosyna. -- Homiliae plurimae.
Secondly, Amongst the Later and more Modern Writers.

Dallaeus de Jejuniis Quadragesimalibus. 4 o. Bp. Gunning of the Lent-Fast. 4
o. Bp. Patrick on the Lent-Fast. 8 o. Dr. Hooper's Discourse concerning Lent. 8
o.
2. Upon the Power of the Keys, and of Binding and Loosing.

Chrysostomus de Anathemate. Dr. Hammond of the Power of the Keys, or of
Binding and Loosing. Amongst his Pract. Disc.
N. Here also may be read, Thorndike's Epilogue Passim. Likewise Dodwel of
Schism, Passim. In which there is much of this Argument.

VII.
But since it is not enough for a Christian to know his Covenant Engagements
toward God; but he must be also acquainted with the Means whereby he may
effectually perform all those Conditions prescribed for the obtaining the
Pardon of his Sins, and Eternal Life and Happiness; It Is therefore very
requisite, that every Pastor of a Flock should be furnished with such Books as
treat most judiciously, both of that Divine Assistance, which is the
supernatural means whereby we shall be enabled to discharge our Obligations
toward our Maker; and also of Prayer and the Sacraments, which are the Moral
and Positive Means; the former of which is prescribed by God as the way to
obtain, the latter ordained as the means to convey this Grace to the Souls of
Men; whereby they may be enabld to perform all the Conditions required of them
by Christ in the Covenant, of which we are now speaking. And accordingly it is
requisite he should have under his Perusal; As,

I. Concerning Divine Assistance.
The Authors beforementioned, p. 64, and 65. So,

II. Concerning Prayer, especially the Lord's Prayer.
First, Amongst the Ancient Writers.

Tertullian de Oratione. In quo Tractatu exponit etiam Orationem Dominicam.
Cyprianus de Oratione Dominica. Origenes de Oratione.
N. In quo Libro de Natura, Vi, Variisque Orandi generibus, and de Oratione
Dominica accurate satis agit, praeter quod quaedam haud satis sana Dogmata,
idque gumn t kephal profert, and quae vix ullis coloribus excusari possunt Dr.
Cave Hist. Liter. p. 83.

Gregorii Nysseni de Oratione Dominica Homiliae 5. Synopsis Patrum in Orationem
Dominicam. Trever. 1643. Ecloge ex diversis Sancti Chrysostomi Homiliis de
Oratione. Par. 1647.
Secondly, Amongst the Later Writers.

Amyraldus in Orationem Dominicam. Dr. Towerson on the Lord's Prayer. Fol. Bp.
Hopkins on the Lord's Prayer. 4 o. Dr. Bright on Prayer. 8 o. Pettis on Prayer.
8 o. Bp. Patrick's Discourse concerning Prayer. 8 o.
N. As also Sir Matthew Hales at the latter end of his Contemplations, Part 2.
Rawlet in his Book on the Decalogue: And also Dr. Barrow in his Book on the
Decalogue. On which Subject also may be read, the Systems and Bodies both
Scholastical and Catechetical in locum de Oratione.

III. Concerning the Sacraments.
First, For explaining the general Nature of Sacraments.

Dr. Towerson of the Sacraments in general.

N. The Schoolmen have written with much subtilty and niceness upon the
Subject, and may be usefully enough read in locum de Sacramentis. And there is
also much excellent Learning on this Subject in Dodwel on Schism, Passim.

Secondly, Particularly for the Explication of each Sacrament distinctly.

1. Of Baptism.

First, Amongst the Ancient Writers.

Tertullian de Baptismo. Sti. Paciani Libellus de Baptismo ad Catechumenos.
Sti. Basilii de Baptismo, Lib. 2. Gregorii Nazianzeni Oration in Sanctum
Baptisma. Ambrosii de Initiandis Liber. -- De Sacramentis Libri 4. Joseph Vice
Comes de Antiquis Baptismi Ritibus.
Secondly, Amongst the Later and Modern Writers.

Vossius de Baptismo, 4 o. Harduini de Baptismo Quaestio triplex. 4 o. Bp.
Patrick's Aqua Genitalis, at the end of Mensa Mystica. Dr. Towerson's Fourth
Part on the Catechism. Fol. Dr. Hammond of Infant Baptism. In his Pract.
Discourses. Dr. Hicks's Case of Infant Baptism. In the London Cases Walker's
Plea for Infant Baptism. 8 o. Indecency and Unlawfulness of Baptizing in
Private without necessity. 8 o.
N. Here also may be read the Schoolmen with other Bodies both Scholastical and
Catechetical upon the Sacrament of Baptism.

Thirdly, And as Appendant to the Doctrine of Baptism, it will be very
requisite to have Writers upon the Doctrine of Confirmation.

Bp. Tailor of Confirmation. 12 o. Dr. Hammond de Confirmatione. 12 o. Mr.
Baxter of Confirmation. Mr. Camfield of Confirmation. 8 o.
N. Here also may be read Dr. Cumber upon the Office of Confirmation in his
Companion to the Temple, as also Bp. Patrik 's Discourse upon it, in his Aqua
genitalis, from p. 489. to the end.

II. Of the Lord's Supper.

First, Amongst the Ancient Fathers.

Chrysostomi plurimae Homiliae.
N. There is little to be found of set Discourse toward the Explication of
this Sacrament, in the Writings of the Fathers, by reason of the Humor then
amongst them to conceal the Mysteries (for so they then affected to call this
Sacrament especially) from the Infidels and Catechumens.

Secondly, Amongst later and more Modern Writers.

Hospiniani Historia Sacramentaria, 2 Vol. Fol. Dr. Cudworth, 8 o. or Fol. At
the end of his Intellectual System. Dr. Towerson. Bp. Patricks Mensa Mystica 8
o. Glanvil on the Sacrament. 12 o. Dr. Pelling's Discourses on the Sacrament. 8
o. Dr. Horneck's Crucified Jesus. 8 o. Kettlewel on the Sacrament. 8 o. Rawlet
on the Sacrament. 8 o.
VIII.
Farthermore, being the end of all that Divine Knowledge before mentioned, is
to enable the Pastor to feed his Flock with all that is necessary to Salvation,
and since Preaching (now that Catechizing is so much neglected, more is the
pity) is become in a manner, the sole Method of Public Instruction; The better
to enable our American Pastor both skilfully and successfully to apply thereby,
the Knowledge he has made himself Master of, to the greatest good of those
Souls committed to his Charge, it will be very requisite he should be furnished
with the best Precedents and Assistances to that purpose; if not with the
Ancient Homilies of the most Renowned Preachers amongst the Fathers (which are
easier wished than obtained) at leastwise with the Sermons of later Writers;
But especially I must insist upon having some of the Modern Sermons of our
English Divines, which as they are (many of them) incomparably the best, and
the exactest Performanes of that nature, and there are scarce any of the
forementioned Subjects of Practical Divinity which have not been handled in
them; so the best Discourses of that kind are doubly necessary for our Indian
Pastor, namely both to the farther improvement of his own Understanding in
those great Terms of Man's Salvation, and also for his Imitation in his own
Composures of that Nature for the Edification of his People.

1. As to Ancient Homilies.
Sancti Basilii Homiliae. Sancti Gregorii Nysseni Homiliae, Conciones and
Orationes. Gregorii Nazianzeni Orationes. Sancti Johannis Chrysostomi Homiliae
quamplurimae. Sancti Augustini Homiliae. Alcuini Collectio Sermonum veterum.
Combeficii Bibliotheca Patrum Concionatoria, 8 Vol. Fol.
N. That wonderful, and that incomparable Spirit of Piety, Force and Energy, so
remarkable in the Discourses of these Holy Fathers; This I say, in Conjunction
with the great Accuracy of our Modern Composures, would render our Discourses
such, as for their Authority and Weight, would be fit to be uttered by the
Messengers of God, and by their Heavenly Air, Life and Spirit would demonstrate
we our selves t no phronen.

II. As to the later and more Modern Discourses of this kind.
First, Latin.

Hoornbeck Theologiae practicae Tomi 2. 4 o.
Secondly, English Sermons.

Bp. Sanderson's. Sermons. Bp. Wilkin's. Sermons. Farrindon's. Sermons. Dr.
Litleton's. Sermons. Sir Matthew Hales. Sermons. Bp. Ward's. Sermons. Bp.
Hopkin's. Sermons. Dr. Outram's. Sermons. Needham's. Sermons. Dr. Claget's.
Sermons. Dr. Calamy's. Sermons. Glanvil's. Sermons. Dr. Burton's. Sermons. Dr.
Barrow's. Sermons. Dr. Conant's. Sermons. Marchs. Sermons. Kettlewel's.
Sermons. Arch-Bp. Tillotson's. Sermons. Bp. Stillingfleet's. Sermons. Dr.
South's. Sermons. Dr. Wake's. Sermons. Dorrington's. Sermons. Norris's.
Sermons.
N. To which might be also added many others of Persons now living, but want to
be Collected.

IX.
Hitherto we have been providing only for a Peaceable and Practical Divinity,
whose sole tendency being to reduce us from the Slavery of Satan to the
Obedience of God; to promote in us an Holy Life: And then to humble us in the
Sense of its Imperfection by sending us to the Mediation of Christ for the
Acceptance thereof to our Justification; These being I say, the Noble ends of
the Christian Religion; it is pity that we who are its Ministers, should be
troubled with any Amusements to distract us from being serviceable in such its
Glorious Designs to the Reformation and Benefit of Mankind: And therefore it is
not without the greatest regret that I can think of admitting Polemical
Discourses into our Foreign Libraries, wishing that the Church of God might be
built like Solomon's Temple, without the noise of Axes and Hammers: But since
through the Artifice of Satan, the Corrupt Seed of Heresy and Error has been
heretofore, and will be hereafter sowed in the Church, to the Subversion of a
sound Faith, and the good Life of too many; to obviate or cure the Poison
thereof, there is too sad an occasion for admitting some Controversial
Divinity, even into our Parochial Libraries. And to begin.

I. With the Papists, to understand the State of that Controversy
First, As preparatory, it will be requisite to read Historical Accounts.

Forbesii Instuctiones Historico-Theologicae. Fol. Fasciculus Rerum Fugiendarum
and Expetendarum, 2 Vol. Fol.
N. Here in this later we may see how sensible the best Men amongst the
Ante-Trent Papists were of the Corruptions of their Church, and how desirous of
their Reformation.

F. Paul's History of the Counsel of Trent. Fol. Steidan's General History of
the Reformation of the Church from the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of
Rome. Fol. Bp. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, 2
Vol. Fol. Stripe's Life of Archbishop Cranmer, Fol. Lud. Seckendorf
Commentarius Historicus, and apologeticus de Lutheranismo, sive de Reformatione
Religionis Mart. Lutheri contra Lud. Maimbourg. Fol. Spanhemii Christianae
Religionis apud Genevos restitutae Historia. 4 o.
N. It is necessary in order to make a true Judgment of the different
Persuasions of Men, to know the History of their Occasion, Interest, Rise,
Progress, etc. by which alone we may see a great way into the Nature and
Tendency of their Doctrines, proportionably to the Good or Evil of which, they
are worthy to be received or rejected.

Secondly, To enter into the Merits of the Cause, it will be requisite to have
more or less of the following Works.

Chemnitii Examen Concilii Tridentini. Fol. Dan. Chamieri panstratia Catholica,
sive Controversiarum de Religione adversus Pontificios Corpus, 2 Vol. Fol.
Epitome Panstratiae Cath. Chamieri per Spanhemium, Fol. Vorstii
Anti-Bellarminus. M. Anton. de Dominis Archiep. Spal. de Rep. Christiana, 3.
Vol. Fol. Field of the Church, Fol. Joh. and Francis White's Works, Fol.
Dallaei varia, viz. De Sacramentali sive Auriculari Confessione, 4 o. De
Confirmatione and Extrema Unctione Latinorum, 4 o. Adversus Latinorum de Cultus
Religiosi objecto Tradition. 4 o. De vero usu Patrum, 4 o.
Bp. Usher's Answer to the Jesuits Challenge, 4 o. Archbishop Bramhal's Works,
Fol. Bp. Taylor's Disswasive against Popery, 4 o. Chillingworth against Knot.
Fol. Archbishop Laud against Fisher. Fol. Bp. Stilling fleet's Vindication of
Archbishop Laud. Fol. -- Idolatry of the Church of Rome. 8 o. -- Defense of
it. 8 o. Rawlet's Dialogue and Answer to a Popish Catechism. 8 o. Dr. Barrow of
the Pope's Supremacy. 4 o. Or in his Works, Fol.
Cases of the London Divines against the Papists; with some of the other most
considerable Tracts Written in the last Reign against Popery.

II. Against the Socinians.
First, As Preparatory to understand and confute that Heresy, it may be
requisite to read,

1. The Ancient History of the Antitrinitarians as we find it in Eusebius,
Socrates, Sozomen, etc. Dr. Cave's Ecclesiastici, or Lives of the Fathers in
the Fourth Century.


2. Testimonies and Writings of the Fathers against the Heretics who denied
the Doctrine of the Holy and ever Blessed Trinity.

First, As to the former, viz. The Testimonies of the Ante-nicene Fathers
concerning the Orthodox Faith in this matter; A Learned Collection of these may
be seen in,

Doctoris Bulli Defensio Synodi Nicenae. 4 o. -- Judicium Ecclesiae Catholicae
trium primorum seculorum, de Necessitate Credendi Jesum esse verum Deum. 8 o.
Secondly, As for the Writings of the Fathers who lived at, or soon after, the
Council of Nice, and who have written in Defense of the Catholic Faith, it may
be of good use for those who can be so far Masters of them, to perufe,

Polemica Athanasii. Basilii Magni. Gregorii Nazianzeni. Ambrosii. Chrysostomi.
Hieronymi. Augustini.
Contra Arianos.

Secondly, To enter nearer into the Merits of the Cause, it is exceedingly
necessary at this time, that the Clergy should have under their perusal, some
at least, of these following Books.

Dr. Addison's Historical Account of the Heresy, denying the Godhead of Christ.

Ashwel de Socino and Socinianismo. 8 o.
N. Herein we have an Historical Account of the Author of that Heresy, and his
Artifices and Methods in propagating his wicked Principles.

Cloppenburgii Compendiolum Socinianismi Refutatum. 4 o.
N. cui premissa est Prefatio Historica de Origin and progressu Socinianismi.

Synopsis Errorum Socinianorum sub Praeside Jo. Oleario Lipsiae, 1695. 4 o.
Smiglecii nova monstra Socinianismi. 4 o. Jo. Hoornbeck Socinianismi Confutati
Tom. Tres. 4 o. Dr. Edwards's Preservative against Socinianism. 4 o. Gregory's
Divine Antidote. 8 o. Milbourn's Vindication of the Mysteries in Religion. 8 o.
Norris's Account of Reason and Faith, in relation to the Mysteries of
Christianity, 8 o. Bp. Stilling fleet's Sermon concerning the Mysteries of
Faith. -- A Discourse in Vindication of the Trinity, with an Answer to the late
Socinian Objections against it from Scripture, Antiquity, and Reason. 8 o. --
Of the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. 8 o. Amyraldus de Trinitate.
Archbishop Tillotson concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed
Savior, 8 o. Dr. Williams's Vindication of the Archbishops Sermons concerning
the Divinity and Incarnation of our B. Savior, and of the Bp. of Worcester's
Sermon on the Mysteries of our Christian Faith. 4 o. Bisterfieldius de uno Deo
contra Crellii Librum de Deo Patre. 4 o. Placaei Disputatio de Incarnatione J.
Christi. 4 o. Dan. Whitby de vera Christi Deitate. 4 o. Grotius de
satisfactione Christi. 12 o. Outram de Sacrificlis Judaeorum, Gentium
profanarum, necnon de Sacrificio Christi adversus Socinum, Land. 1677. 4 o.
Chr. Wittichii Causa Spiritus Sancti in Tertia Persona asserta. 12 o.
N. Here also may be seen in Bp. Barlow's Remains, p. 73. Syllabus Quaestionum
praecipuarum quae inter Socinianos reliquosque Ecclesiae Reformatae, simul ac
Pontificiae Theologos ventilantur.

III. Against the Dissenters from our Church.
First, In General, against all of 'em, of what Denomination soever.

1. Upon the Account of their Errors in Faith and Practice, by reason of those
Antinomian Doctrines so rife amongst that Party of Men especially; though some of
them, it must be acknowledged to their Honor, have worthily labored to expel
the Poison of that Pestilential Heresy.

History of Antinomians. 4 o. Mr. Baxter's Aphorisms of Justification and the
Covenant. -- Catholic Theology. Fol. Dr. Sherlock's Knowledge of Jesus Christ,
2 Vol. 8 o. Dan. Williams's Gospel Truth stated and vindicated; wherein some of
Dr. Crisp's Opinions are considered, and the opposite Truths stated and
confirmed. 8 o.
N. To which purpose may be also read those Authors mentioned above, p. 73. in
the first Note.

2. Upon the Account of their Separation and Schism from our Communion and
Service; and in Defense therefore of our Liturgy and Worship.

Dr. Comber's Scholastical History of the Primitive and General use of
Liturgies in the Christian Church, with an Answer to David Clarkson's Discourse
concerning Liturgies in Two Parts 8 o. -- Examiner Examined, being a
Vindication of the History of Liturgies. 8 o. Dr. Durel's View of the
Government and Public Worship of God in the Reformed Churches beyond Seas also
Historically showing their Conformity and Agreement with the Church of England,
as it is Established by the Act of Uniformity. 4 o. Sir Hammond L'Estrange's
Alliance of Divine Offices. Fol. Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. Fol. Dr.
Hammond's View of the New Directory, and a Vindication of the Ancient Liturgy
of the Church of England. In his Pract. Discourses. Falkner's Libertas
Ecclesiastica, or a Discourse Vindicating our Liturgy and Worship. 8 o. Bp.
Stilling fleet's Mischiefs of Separation. 4 o. -- Unreasonableness of
Separation. 4 o. Dr. Sherlock's Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness
of Separation. 8 o. -- A Vindication of the Defense. 8 o. Dr. Williams brief
Defense, in answer to Mr. Mather's Brief Discourse. Cases against the
Dissenters, by the London Divines. Fol. Bp. King's Inventions of Men in the
Worship of God, with the Defense. 8 o. Mr. William Allen's Persuasive to Peace
and Unity amongst Christians. 8 o.
N. Here also may be read, St. Cyprian de Unitate Ecclesiae.

Secondly, In Particular, against the several Sects, with reference to their
particular Principles respectively,

1. Against the Quakers.

History of the Quakers. 8 o. The Quakers set in their true Light, by Francis
Bug, 4 o. George Keith's several Discourses, showing how they Allegorize away
all the Principles of Christianity. A Friendly Conference between a Minister
and his Parishioners. 8 o. -- Vindication thereof. 8 o. Mr. William Allen's
Discovery of the danger of Enthusiasm in an Ep. to the Quakers. 8 o. The Snake
in the Grass, or Satan transformed into an Angel of Light, discovering the deep
and unsuspected simplicity of many of the Principal Leaders of the Quakers. 8
o.
2. Against the Ana-Baptists.

Historia Ana-Baptistarum. 4 o. Authoritates Patrum contra Ana-Bapt. Collectae
a Timanno Borckense Col. 1671. Mr. William Allen's serious and friendly Address
to the Nonconformists, beginning with the Ana-Baptists. 8 o. Mr. Baxter's
Review of the State of Christian Infants. 8 o. -- More Proofs of Infant Church
Membership, and consequently of their Right to Baptism. 8 o.
N. Here also read Dr. Hammond 's fourth Query in his Pract. Discourses. Walker
's Plea for Infant Baptism. Dr. Hick 's Case of Infant Baptism, ut supra.

3. Against Independents.

Walker's History of Independency. 4 o. Mr. William Allen's Catholicism, or
several Enquiries, touching visible Church Membership, Church Communion, the
nature of Schism, and usefulness of National Institutions, for the furtherance
of Religion. Amongst his Works. 8 o. Mr. Lamb's fresh Suit against
Independency.
4. Against the Presbyterians, in Defense of Episcopacy.

Vsserius de Ecclesiarum Christianarum Successione and statu. Fol. Bp.
Pearson's Vindiciae Ignatii Epistolarum. 4 o. Bp. Lloyd's account of the
Church Government in these Kingdoms. 8 o. Bp. Stilling fleet's Origines
Eccesiasticae. Dr. Heylin's History of the Presbyterians. Fol.
N. These for the Historical part, whether in reference to the Catholic Church
in General, or the Churches of Britain in Particular.

Dr. Hammond adversus Blondellum. Mr. Woodhead's Account of Ancient
Church Government. 4 o. 1662. Dr. Maurice's Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy, in
Answer to Mr. David Clarkson. 8 o. Campegii Utringiae Archysynagogus
observationibus novis Illustratus, quibus veteris Synagogae Constitutio tota
traditur, inde deducta Episcoporum Presbyterumque Primae Ecclesiae Origin.
1685. 4 o.
X.
And since it has been found by Experience in every Age, that the success of
all our Labors, whether in Preaching or Disputing, depends entirely, in a
manner, upon the Holiness of our Lives: And through the Malignity of the World,
(which is more quick-sighted to discern the minutest Failures, than the most
shining Virtues of the Ministers of Religion) the scandals of one vicious Clerk
shall Influence a Parish to more Wikedness, and occasion the Peoples running
more into Heresy and Schism, than the Industry and Piety of Ten the most
Virtuous and Laborious of the Clergy shall be able to retrieve from either: To
complete our American Clergy for the Purposes of their Ministry, and our
Libraries also, for the Purposes of making 'em fit for it, and successful in
it: It is desired they should have always before 'em such Authors as will first
direct 'em in their Studies, Offices, and Duties, and excite them to Care and
Vigilance in the Practice of them: Secondly, As will lay before them the Best
Examples of each to be a Copy and Pattern for them to follow: And Lastly, such
Materials and Helps for Devotion, as will advance 'em to the highest degrees of
Perfection in a Holy and Spiritual Life.

I. As to the Ministerial Instructions, relating to the Discharge of our
Office, Preaching and Practice.
First, Amongst the Ancients may be read, Gregorii Nazianzeni Apologeticus de
Fuga sua. Ambrosius de Officiis. Jo. Chrysostomi de Sacerdotio. Lib. 6. Sti.
Nazianzeni de Theologia Oration prima. Stus. Hieronimus de Vita Clericorum ad
Nepotianum. Augustini de Pastoribus in Ezekielis, Cap. 34. Liber. -- De ovibus
in eundem locum Liber. Gregorii Pastorale. Sententiae Patrum de Officio very
Rectoris Ecclesiae.


Secondly, Amongst the Later and more Modern Writers.

1. As to the proper Directions to form our Studies and Reading.

Jo. G. Vossius de studiorum Ratione. Grotius aliique de studiorum Ratione. 12
o. The History of the Choice and Method of Studies. 8 o. Stephanus Gaussenius
de Ratione Studii Theologici. 12 o. Johannes Mabellonius de Studio Theologico.
Mr. Dodwel's two Letters of Advice. 1. For the Susception of Holy Orders. 2.
For Studies Theological, especially such as are Rational. 8 o. Mr. Penton's
Apparatus ad Theologiam. 8 o. Bp. Barlow's Remains. 8 o.
2. As to Directions for Preaching and Catechizing.

First, As Preparatory to Preaching, Erasmus in his excellent Book de Ratione
concionandi, p. 254. prescribes and prefers before others, Demosthenes. Et
Cicero.


N. Nullus est, quem Demostheni and Ciceroni praeferamus, vix etiam quem
Conferamus sane quod attinet ad dictionis virtutes. Aristoteles ad Judicandum
and cognitionem conducit plurimum, ad popularem dictionem non ita multum. Plato
long ad hoc accommodatior, fusus and Jucundus, and per similitudines veluti
manu deducens ad very cognitionem. In Livianis tamen Orationibus, aut si eas
non explicet, in proponendis consiliis, plurimum est tum prudentiae, tum
Eloquentiae. Cornelius Tacitus alioqui duriusculus, in orationibus acutus est
and copiosus.

Secondly, As to the Books more immediately useful for the Composing of Sermons.

Causabon of Preaching as anciently used. 4 o. Bp. Wilkin's Ecclesiastes. 8 o.
Mr. Glanvil's Essay concerning Preaching. 8 o. And for Directions to Catechize.
Augustinus de Catechizandis Rudibus. Dr. Addison's Primitive Institution. 12 o.
3. As to Directions which concern both the Exercise of our Ministry in
Preaching and Catechizing, and the conduct and innocence also of our Lives.

Erasmi Ecclesiastes, sive de Ratione Concionandi. Libri 4. Mr. Herbert's
Country Parson. A Book inestimable for its Piety. 12 o. Mr. Baxter's Gildas
Salvianus. 8 o. Bp. Burnet's Pastoral Care. 8 o. The late Visitation Charges of
the present A. Bp. of Dublin. Bp. of Worcester. Bp. of Chester. Bp. of Bath and
Wells. Bp. of Rochester.
Lohneri Instructio Practica. 6 Vol. 8 o. Dilingiae. 1682.
N. This Book in Indifferent Latin contains very good Instruction, I shall here
subjoin an account of the subject Matter thereof in the Authors own Words: Hi
Libri constant novem partibus sive Instructionibus, prima de Missae Sacrificio
juxta Ritum Ecclesiae Romanae Offerendo; Secunda de Horis Canonicis juxta
Rubricas Breviarii Romani Recitandis: Quo utroque Argumento parum quidem est
quod ad Institutum Ministrorum Reformatorum attinet, at Sequentibus non ita.
Tertia enim Institutione agit de Conversatione Apostolica a Curatoribus
Animarum pie and fructuose instituenda; Complectens varios and solidos modos
Juvandi and Consolandi diversorum Statuum Personas afflictas, praecipue aegras
and Captivas. Quarta continet Doctrinas and Industrias, ad Pastorale Munus pie,
fructuose, ac secure obeundum pertinentes, una cum casibus frequentibus circa
idem officium occurrere solitis, and ex communiore Doctorum sensu decisis.
Quinta complectitur de confessionibus rite and fructuose excipiendis Doctrinas,
tam Generales, quam speciales ad varios Hominum status accommodatas. Sexta
Institutiones Quintuplicis Theologiae, positivae, Asceticae, polemicae,
Speculativae, and Moralis complectitur. Septima est de Munere Concionandi,
Exhortandi, Catechizandi. Octava continet Institutiones Theologiae Mysticae. Et
Nona denique agit de Sacerdotii Origin and praestantia, variis item
industriis, and praxibus, quibus Sacerdotes boni ad Dei Gloriam, suamque and
proximi salutem promovendam usi sunt; Malorum quoque sacerdotum Infelici
Interitu, radicibus, and remediis; To which may be added, as of more particular
concernment to those who are Missionaries.

Josephi Acosta de natura Novi Orbis Libri duo, and de promulgatione Evangelii
apud Barbaros; sive de procuranda Indorum salute. 8 o. Godwyn's Negro's
Advocate. 8 o. Th. Gonzales Manuductio ad Conversionem Mahumetanorum. 4 o.
II. As to such Writings as lay before the Clergy the best Example in all the
Parts of the Ministerial Office (a kind of Reading of exceeding good use, the
influence of Examples, which is a living Rule, being vastly beyond the power of
Precepts, which in respect of the other, are but a dead Letter) upon this
Subject therefore it may be very requisite that the Orthodox Clergy of our
Church should have always before their Eyes, such as follow, viz.
Bp. Taylor's Life of Christ, Fol. Dr. Cave's Lives of the Apostles and
Primitive Fathers, 3 Vol. Fol. Ellies Du Pin's new Ecclesiastical History, 7
Vol. Fol. Melchior Adamus de Vitis Theologorum Exterorum principum qui
Ecclesiam Christi Superiori seculo propagarunt, and propugnarunt, 8 o.
Camerarii Vita Melancthonis. Humphrey's Life of Bp. Jewel. Bp. Burnet's Life of
Bp. Bedel, 8 o. Bp. Fell's Life of Dr. Hammond, 8 o. or before his Practical
Discourses. Jackson's, Bramhal's, Mede's, Lightfoot's, Barrow's Lives before
their Works Vernon or Life of Dr. Heylin. Bernard's Life of Dr. Heylin. Jsaac
Walton's Lives of Dr. Don, Mr. Herbert, Sir. Henry Wooton, Bp. Sanderson.

N. Here also I would particularly recommend to the reading of a Minister, all
those virulent Books that are Written by our Enemies on all Hands, on purpose
to bespatter us. For as the Excellent Plutarch in his Book de capienda ex
Hostibus Utilitate, shows, the best Rules and Measures for an ex^^t Government
of our Lives, are to be taken from our Enemies, who do narrowly watch our
Failings. Quid Impedit quo minus gratis docentem magistrum admittentes
inimicum, utilitatem capiamus, t Kolei didskalon misthon labnta, tn chthrn,
etc. Plu. ib.
and aliquid eorum quae nos latebant discamus, multa enim inimicus amico
facilius sentit, cum amator, ut Plato Ait, caecutiat in amata re. And that we
may the better know how to reap advantage from our Enemies, I cannot too much
commend to our perusal the Book now named, viz. De Capienda ex Hostibus
utilitate Plutarchi Libellus. Inter Moralia.

III. As to such Writings as will more immediately serve our Devotion, and tend
to advance us to the highest Degrees of Perfection in the Spiritual Life.
First, For Reading.

Ephraem Syri Opera Omnia cum Scholiis Ger. Vossii. Sancti Basilii Ascetica and
Moralia. Sancti Hieronymi Ascetica and Moralia. Sancti Augustini Ascetica and
Moralia. Bibliotheca Patrum Ascetica, sive Selecta Patrum de Christiana and
Religiosa perfectione Opuscula, 3 Vol. 4 o.
N. Per Scientiam Asceticam intelligitur ea quae ad perfectionem obtinendam,
atque ad Vitia Eradicanda, Vertutesque plantandas Ordinatur: tantoque magis
necessaria est Pastori, quanto magis proprium est illius Officium, Animas sibi
commissas dirigere and Juvare, ut quisque perfectionem suo statui convenientem
consequatur. Lohneri Instruc. Pract. 4 ta. p. 24.

Bernardi Opera. Thomae a Kempis Opera, praecipue de imitatione Christi.
Gersonis Cancellarii Parisiensis Opera. Erasmi Enchiridion Militis Christiani,
12 o. Drexellii Opera. Sales Bp. of Geneva's Introduction to a Holy Life, 12 o.
Bellarmini Opuscula, viz. De Ascentione Mentis ad Deum. De Aeterna faelicitate
Sanctorum. De Gemitu Columbae. De 7 Verbis Christi in Cruce. De Art been
Moriendi.
Robert Parson's Christian Directory or of Holy Resolution, 8 o. Card. Bonae,
Manuductio ad Coelum. Principia and Documenta Vitae Christianae. Via Compendii
ad Deum. De Divina Psalmodia, 4 o. Horologium Asceticum, 4 o.
Lud. Granatensis Opuscula Spiritualia Varia. Causin's Christian Diary, 12 o.
-- Entertainments for Lent, 12 o. Drellincourt on Death 8 o. Dr. Sherlock on
Death, 8 o. -- Judgment, 8 o. Dr. Horneck's Great Law of Consideration, 8 o. --
Happy Ascetick, 8 o. -- Delight and Judgment, 12.
N. These and the like Books in which there is found a more than ordinary
Spirit of Piety, Devotion and Heavenly-mindedness, are such as will scarcely
fail to mould those into a like temper of mind, who are much conversant in
them; even as we are insensibly formed into the Habits and Manners of those
persons with whom we constantly converse; and therefore I think that Books of
this nature cannot be too much under our Eye.

Secondly, To promote Religious Conference amongst us, ought to be often read.

Dr. Goodman's Winter Evenings Conference, 3 Parts, 8 o.
N. Christianity being the highest and noblest Philosophy, as the Primitive
Fathers where wont to style it, and loved to call it, it becomes us who are its
Ministers, upon all occasions, and in all manner of becoming Methods, to
express our Sentiments of it as such; And therefore if we scarcely ever find
two or three of the Ancient Philosophers met together, but the Result was some
excellent Disquisition upon Morality, as may be seen in Cicero, Plutarch, and
others; How infinitely becoming our Character and Profession is it, to make the
great things of another World the Subject of our Conversation, and never to
break up, till (as a great Prelate of our Church was wont to call upon his
Friends to do, before they parted,) we have warmed each others Hearts with an
Affection to the things above. And therefore as to create in us a contempt of
all Discourse when we meet together that savours in the least of Froth and
Levity; and to inure our selves to a Manly Conversation, as it would be of good
advantage in our reading of Plato 's, Cicero's, and Plutarch 's Morals, nicely
to observe the ancient way of Dialogues, that we may learn how with dexterity
to introduce, and with a right management to carry on a Philosophic and
Elevated Conversation; so to perfect it by making it Religious and Divine, we
cannot too often read the now mentioned Winters Evening Conference, as also Dr.
Hen. Moor 's Divine Dialogues, recommended above, p. 26. if it were only on
purpose to form our Souls into the like Divine Spirit and Genius with those
Excellent Writers.

Thirdly, To direct us in the Excellent Art of Divine Meditation: Barth.
Riccius de modo recte Meditandi de rebus Divinis, 8 o. Lud. Granatensis de
Oratione and Meditatione, 12 o. Bp. Hall's Art of Divine Meditation, in his
Works. -- Meditations, in his Works. -- Contemplations, in his Works. Gerardi
Meditationes, in his Works.


Lastly, Helps for Actual Devotion.

1. For the better Performance of Public Worship.

Bp. Sparrow's Rationale on the Common Prayer, 12 o. Dr. Beveridge's Sermon
concerning the Excellency and Usefulness of the Common Prayer. Dr. Comber's
Companion to the Temple. Fol.
2. Helps for private Devotion.

Bp. Wittenhal's Enter into the Closet. 12 o. Bp. Wilkins's Gift of Prayer. 8
o. Dr. Sherlock of Winwick, his Practical Christian, or Devotions in Four
Parts. 8 o. Bp. Patrick's Devout Christian. 8 o. Inet's Guide to the Devout
Christian. 8 o. Bp. Andrew's Manual of Private Devotions. 8 o. -- Gr. and Lat.
e Theatro. 12 o. A. Bp. Laud's Devotions for the Hours of Prayer. 8 o. Bp.
Cosins's Hours of Prayer.
N. These latter have provided Devotions for the several Hours of Prayer, which
is both a Primitive, and most excellent Method of Devotion. As to its
Antiquity, see Cardinal Bona de Divina Psalmodia, who C. 3, etc. De varia Diei
and noctis Divisione, does treat upon that Subject. And as for the excellency
of this Primitive Method of Devotion, I suppose it must needs tend to maintain
alive the Fire of the Altar, to have it so frequently stirred up; besides, that
the determinate Times call upon us to that, which, if left to be performed at
pleasure, will be in great danger of being forgot or neglected, through the
multitude of business. And I could wish that there were some short Ejaculations
and Prayers collected out of our Psalms and Collects for the Country People,
which by the frequent hearing of 'em in our Divine Service, would be easily got
by Heart. And as the shortness thereof would make it easy for 'em to lift up
their Souls in Pious Thoughts, without Interuption to, nay in the midst of
their worldly Employments; so that constant Exercise of such Devotion recurring
every third Hour in the Day, would elevate their Spirits Heavenward, and keep
'em up in a perpetual Elevation above the things of this World. But to proceed,
there only wants to complete the Provision of Books I would desire for
Devotion, and with that the first Theological part of our Parochial Libraries,
to have some of the best Sacramental Devotions, of which the Piety of Learned
Men of our own Church have furnished us, of late Years, with such excellent
choice; as, Bp. Patrick's Christian Sacrifice, 8 o. Weeks Preparation for the
Sacrament.


N. Also upon this occasion may be used, Sacramental Devotions at the end of
the Whole Duty of Man; as also, Kettlewel 's Help and Exhortation to Devout and
Worthy Communicating.

A Draught of Books made out of the foregoing Catalogue, and upon all, or most
of the foregoing Heads, and in the same Order and Connection as they there lie;
consisting of one or two upon each Theolological Point, and given here as a
Specimen, how it is intended to divide the whole Catalogue amongst the several
Parishes.
I. Upon the Divine Existence and Providence.
Dr. Pelling's Discourse on the Existence of God. Dr. Sherlock upon Providence.
II. Upon Natural Religion.
Bp. Wilkins of Natural Religion. Mr. Boil of the use of Reason in Religion.
III. Upon the Scripture.
First, For the Text it self.

Novum Testamentum. Grae. Oxon. Var. Lec. English Bible. 4 o.
Secondly, To understand the meaning of the Text.

1. To understand some of the more important parts of Scripture-Matter, as the
Scripture and concurrent History, Chronology, Geography, and Jewish Customs.

Vsserii Annals Veteris and Novi Testamenti. Fol. Dr. Lightfoot's Works. 2
Vol. Fol.
2. To explain difficult places of Scripture.

First, Commentators upon the whole Bible.

Heideggeri Annalysis Generalis singulorum V. and N. T. Librorum. Pool's
Synopsis Criticorum. 5 Vol.
Secondly, Expositors of some of the more concerning Parts thereof.

Bp. Patrick upon Genesis. Upon Job, Psalms, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes. 5 Vol.
Dr. Hammond upon the New Testament. Oxford Paraphrase upon St. Paul's Epistles.
Thirdly, For the more skilful Application of Scripture, according to various
Occasions.

Petri Ravanelli Bibliotheca Sacra: Being a Concordance of things. Cambridge
Concordance for Words.
IV. To prove the Truth, and to understand the Design of Christianity.
First, To prove the Truth of Christian Religion.

Bp. Stillingfleet's Origines Sacrae. Dr. Williams's Sermons at Mr. Boyle's
Lecture. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Christian
Religion.
Secondly, To understand the Design of Christianity.

A. Bp. Tenison of Idolatry. Bp. Fowler's Design of Christianity. Dr. Henry
Moor's Mystery of Godliness.
V. For Bodies of Divinity.
First, Scholastical.

Philippi a Limborch Theologia Christiana. Turretini Compendium Theologiae. Le
Blanc's Theses.
And to secure the Reader from Imbibing the Heterodoxes of either of which,
contrary to the Doctrine of our Church, may be added,

Joh. Elis Articulorum 39 Ecclesiae Anglicanae Defensio, una cum eorundem
versione.
Secondly, Catechetical.

Dr. Hammond's Practical Catechism together with his other Practical
Discourses. Dr. Scot's Works. 4 Vol. 8 o.
VI. Upon the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace.
First, General.

Mr. Allen's Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the two
Covenants.
Secondly, Upon the Particular Articles.

1. The Mercies on God's part.

First, Justification or Pardon of Sins.

Mr. Allen's Christians Justification stated.
Secondly, Divine Grace and Assistance.

Mr. Allen of Divine Assistance. Dr. Claget of the Operations of the Holy
Spirit. 2 Vol.
Thirdly, Everlasting Life and Happiness.

Mr. Baxter's Saints everlasting Rest. Bp. Taylor's Contemplations of the State
of Man.
2. The Conditions to be performed on our part.

First, On the Doctrine of Faith, and the Articles necessary to be believed.

Bp. Pearson on the Creed. Dr. Barrow on the Creed. Kettlewel's Practical
Believer.
Secondly, On the Doctrine of Evangelical Obedience.

Whole Duty of Man. Kettlewel's Measures of Christian Obedience.
And as Appendant thereunto for Casuistical Divinity.

Bp. Sanderson de Obligatione Conscientiae. -- His Cases. Bp. Taylor's Ductor
Dubitantium.
More particularly, in order to assist the Sick.

Kettlewel's Companion to the Penitent. Dr. Wake's Preparation for Death.
Thirdly, On the Doctrine of Repentance.

Dr. Ingelo on Repentance. Dr. Goodman's Penitent Pardoned.
And as Appendant thereunto, upon Fasting.

Bp. Patrick on the Lent-Fast. Dr. Hooper's Discourse concerning Lent.
VII. On the Means enabling us to perform the Covenant.
First, Divine Grace and Assistance.

Mr. Allen and Dr. Claget ut supra.
Secondly, Prayer.

Bp. Patrick concerning Prayer. Dr. Barrow on the Lord's Prayer.
Thirdly, The Sacraments.

1. Baptism.

Bp. Patrick's Aqua Genitalis. At the end of his Mensa Mystica. Dr. Hicks's
Case of Infant Baptism. At the end of the London Cases.
And as Apendant to the Doctrine of Baptism, or Confirmation.

Dr. Hammond de Confirmatione. Camfeild on Confirmation.
2. On the Lord's Supper.

Bp. Patrick's Mensa Mystica. Rawlet on Sacramental Covenanting with God.
VIII. Sermons.
Dr. Barrow's Sermons. Dr. Calamy's Sermons. Arch-Bpishop Tillotson's Sermons.
Mr. Dorrington's Sermons.
IX. Controversies.
First, With the Papists.

Chillingworth against Knot Abridg'd. Rawlet's Dialogue and Answer to a Popish
Catechism.
Secondly, Against the Socinians.

Bp. Stillingfleet's Sermon on Mysteries. -- A Discourse in Vindication of the
Trinity. -- Of the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction.
Thirdly, Against the Dissenters.

1. In General of what Denomination soever they be, who are,

First, Doctrinally Erroneous, viz. Antinomians.

Dr. Sherlock's Knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Vol. Baxter's Aphorisms of
Justification and the Covenant.
Secondly, Schismatically such.

Bp. Stillingfleet's Mischiefs and Unreasonableness of Separation. Cases
against the Dissenters by the London Divines. Bp. King's Inventions of Men in
the Worship of God.
2. In particular against the several Sects in reference to their peculiar
Principles.

First, Against the Quakers.

Mr. William Allen's Discovery of the Danger of Enthusiasm in an Ep. to the
Quakers. The Snake in the Grass.
Secondly, Against the Anabaptists.

Mr. William Allen's Serious and Friendly Address to the Nonconformists
beginning with the Anabaptists. Dr. Hicks's Case of Infant Baptism, ut supra.
p. 89.
Thirdly, Against Independants.

Mr. William Allen's Catholicism, or general Enquiries touching Visible
Church Membership, Church Communion, the Nature of Schism, and Usefulness of
National Constitutions for the furtherance of Religion.
Fourthly, Against the Presbyterians, in Defense of Episcopacy.

Woodhead's Account of Ancient Church Government, 4 o. Dr. Maurice's Defense of
Diocesian Episcopacy in Answer to David Clarkson.
X. Ministerial Instructions.
First, For such as direct us in our Studies, and in the Discharge of our
Offices and Duties, and excite us to Care and Vigilance in the Practice of 'em.

Bp. Burnet's Pastoral Care. The late Visitation Charges, ut supra, p. 105:
And as Appendant thereunto, but of more particular Concernment to those who
are Missionaries.

Josephi Acosta de procuranda Indorum Salute.
Secondly, For such Writings as lay before the Clergy the best Examples to be a
Copy and a Pattern for 'em to follow.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Apostles and Primitive, Fathers. Ellies Du Pin's new
Ecclesiastical History. Isaac Walton's Lives ut supra p. 106.
Thirdly, As to such Writings as will more immediately serve our Devotion, and
tend to advance us to the highest Degrees of Perfection in the Spiritual Life.

1. For Reading.

Dr. Sherlock on Death. -- Judgment. Dr. Horneck's Great Law of Consideration.
2. To promote Religious Conference amongst us.

Dr. Goodman's Winters Evening Conference.
3. To assist us in Divine Meditation.

Bp. Hall's Art of Divine Meditation. Gerardi Meditationes.
4. Helps for Actual Devotion.

Bp. Patrick's Devout Christian. Arch-Bp. Laud's Devotions for the hours of
Prayer.
And lastly, as Apendant thereunto, to assist us in our Sacramental Devotions.

Bp. Patrick's Christian Sacrifice. Kettlewel's Help to Devout and Worthy
Communicating.
PROPOSALS For the Encouragement and Promoting of Religion and Learning in the
Foreign Plantations; And to Induce such of the Clergy of this Kingdom, as are
Persons of Sobriety and Abilities to accept of a Mission into those Parts.
WHEREAS the Propagation of the Christian Faith, and the Increase of Divine
Knowledge, amongst all sorts of Persons in His Majesty's Foreign Plantations,
are the Wishes, Desires, and Prayers, of all Pious and Serious Christians, and
such as are Zealous of God's Glory, and the Salvation of Men's Souls. AND
WHEREAS that Blessed Work, next under God, does principally depend upon the
Abilities of the Clergy in those Parts, the Exemplariness of their Lives, and
their Industry in Teaching others; WHEREAS ALSO the Clergy, that are already in
the Plantations, as well as those who are to be sent thither, cannot (Humanly
speaking) be so capable of Informing themselves, and of Instructing others in
the design of Christianity, in the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, in the
Meaning and Importance of the Articles of our most Holy Faith, and in the
Nature and Extent of all Christian Duties, without the Assistance of some good
Commentators upon the Holy Scriptures; and one, at least, or more of those
Authors, who have best treated upon each, and every of those Points. WHEREAS
ALSO for the supply of that Want, Men of Parts and addicted to Study, will
hardly be induced to leave the Expectations they may have of better
Encouragement and Improvement in their Native Country, to go to remote Parts
and Climates less agreeable, without such Advantages, as will over-balance all
Considerations inclining 'em to stay at home; and, especially, not without a
competent Provision of such Books, as are necessary for their Studies in those
Places where they are to serve: (Few of them that go over from hence, being
able to furnish themselves with so many Books as they shall need.) AND, LASTLY,
WHEREAS Insufficiency and Scandal in the Clergy of those places, in all
probability, would he most successfully prevented, both in this and future
Ages, should every Parochial Minister in the Plantations have a sufficient
Library of well-chosen Books, of all those kinds beforementioned, in which he
might spend his time to his own Satisfaction, and with Improvement and Profit
to himself and others.

TO PROMOTE THEREFORE so Blessed and Noble an End, as the propagation of
Christian Knowledge in those Parts; and as well to encourage those who are
there already employed in the Ministry; as also to invite over other able
Ministers, and to furnish both, with proper Means for accomplishing so good a
Work; IT IS HUMBLY offered to all that are hearty Well-wishers to the Souls of
Men, and the Honor of their Savior, to consider, and as they shall see Cause,
to favor these Proposals following.

1. THAT a Catalogue being made of what particular Books are judged most
immediately and necessarily Useful, for a Parochial Minister, wherewith he may
be sufficiently enabled both to Inform himself, and to Instruct others, in all
the Necessary and Essential parts of Christianity; so many of such Libraries be
sent by the Lord Bishop of London, by the Hands of such as his Lordship shall
Commission for that purpose, to be Appropriated and Affixed, one to each Parish
in the Foreign Plantations, particularly those of Maryland, and farther as the
Fund to be be raised shall enable.

2. THAT every Parochial Library shall be Affixed in a decent and large Room of
the Parsonage-House of such Parish, there to remain to the sole Use of the
Minister thereof for the time being, unto all future Generations, and to be as
UNALLIENABLE as any other the Rights and Dues of the Church, which are
Ascertained by Law.

3. THAT in Order to the Preservation of every such Library to succeeding Ages
without Loss (as far as can be Humanly provided in any thing of that kind)
there be made an exact Catalogue of the Books belonging to the Library of each
Parish; and that every such Catalogue be fairly written in four Books of Vellum
provided for that purpose: The first whereof to be left with the Lord Bishop of
London for the time being; a second with his Comissary, or some chief
Clergyman in every of those Plantations where such Libraries are provided; and
a third to remain in the respective Libraries themselves: and a fourth to be
deposited in the Vestry of each of the said Parishes.

4. THAT the COMMISSARY be obliged, at least once in three Years, Personally to
make a Parochial Visitation; And then, besides the Charge of his Duty in other
respects, that it be incumbent also upon him, particularly to Inspect the
Parochial Libraries, and to see that none of the Books be Imbezell'd or Lost:
And that the Churchwardens of each Parish be also obliged, every Year, before
the Visitation, to inform themselves in what Condition the said Books are, and
to Present accordingly at the Visitation.

5. THAT for further Security to preserve them from Loss and Imbezelment, and
that they may be known wherever they are found; in every Book, on the one
side of the Cover, shall be Lettered these Words, SUB AUSPICIIS WILLIELMI III.
on the other side the Name of the Parish to which these Books do belong: EX.
GR. E. BIBLIOTHECA DE MARY-TOWN: E. BIBLIOTHECA DE JAMES-TOWN, etc.

6. THAT the Minister of each Parish, his Heirs and Administrators, may be
obliged, by Virtue of an Act of Assembly provided and made for that purpose, to
make good what Books shall be Imbezelled or Lost by his fault.

MEANS of obtaining such Parochial Libraries.
1. THat Application be made to the Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, for their
Charitable Contributions to so Pious a Work; and especially that the Merchants
and Traders to the Foreign Plantations be earnestly called upon, as Persons
principally concerned, to encourage this Design: It being most reasonable to
expect, that in Gratitude to God, and the Inhabitants of those Plantations, the
more plentifully they have reaped of their Temporal Things, the more liberally
they should sow to them in Spiritual Things.

2. That Application be also made to such Learned Authors as are now living,
that they would bestow some of their own Books, which shall be judged useful to
the Purposes aforesaid.

Lastly, In Gratitude to the Benefactors toward this Pious Design, all those
who shall Contribute any thing thereunto; shall have their Names and respective
Sums; And the Authors shall have the number of Books given by 'em, transmitted
to Posterity, by being Registered in Books kept for that purpose in each of the
Libraries, and deposited in the Vestry of every Parish.

THE CONCLUSION, Showing the Present State of the Protestant Religion in
Maryland, and what farther is now doing in that Colony toward the Promoting
the same, taken from the Account of His Majesty's Secretary in that Province.
SInce it gives the greatest Encouragement to contrive good for a People, that
they appear disposed to receive it; I cannot conclude this Discourse more
appositely, than with a short Representation of what is now actually doing in
the Colony where these Libraries are designed, toward promoting of Religion
and Learning; and that by the Inhabitants themselves, under the Influence of an
excellent Governor.

In the Year 1691. His Majesty having graciously thought fit to take the
Government of Maryland into his own Hands, and the Province into His immediate
Care, in May 1692. An Act of Assembly passed for the Establishment of the
Protestant Religion there, and for dividing the Ten Counties thereof into five
and twenty Parishes, each of which are endowed with a Competent Maintenance for
a Minister; But the Execution of that Act was in a manner wholly neglected,
till it pleased His Majesty to Confer the Government on the most Worthy and
Excellent Person Francis Nicolson, Esquire; who since his Arrival in August 1694.
with an indefatigable Industry and Zeal to Promote His Majesty's Honor, the
Interest of the Protestant Religion, and the Good of the whole Province, has
Revived and Reinforced the said Act by another additional one, for the Increase
and Maintenance of Religion, has Collected the Arrears, and is now Building
several Churches, besides one fine Church at Annopolis in Arundel County, with
a Parsonage-House to every Church; toward all which, His Excellency, the
Council, and other Inhabitants of the Province have Generously and Largely
Contributed.

And that a perpetual Succession of Protestant Divines of the Church of England
may be provided for the Propagation of the True Christian Religion in the said
Colony; His Excellency has by the Consent of the Council and Burgesses in
Assembly, Promoted a Law, Vesting a Power in certain Trustees for Erecting one
Free School in each County: One of which is already begun at Annopolis, and is
endowed with 100 l. per Annum, for the Maintenance of one Master and two
Ushers, for the Instructing the Youth of the said Province in Arithmetic,
Navigation, and all useful Learning; but chiefly for the fitting such as are
disposed to Study Divinity, to be farther Educated at his Majesty's
College-Royal in Virginia, in order upon their Return, to be Ordained by the
Lord Bishop of London's Suffragan, Residing in the Province, both for that
purpose, and to Supervise the Lives of the Clergy thereof; for whose Support
also at the Request and Recommendation of the Assembly, His Excelltency has
settled a Fair and Competent Maintenance.

This may be sufficient to show such as are disposed to Good Works, and whose
Duty it is to be Discreet and Prudent in ordering their Charity to the best
Purposes, as well as to be Bountiful according to their Ability; that here are
a People as well disposed to receive Benefit by a Learned and Industrious
Clergy, as can be wished or desired. And therefore to induce Sober, Serious and
Studious Young Divines to go to the Foreign Plantations, and to Qualify 'em to
Answer the Ends of their Mission, I could not think of so proper a Means, as to
provide them, each with a Collection of Choice and Useful Books; and to
perpetuate an Useful Clergy there, to fix these Parochial Libraries in the
Parsonage-Houses, for the perpetual Use of those who shall succeed them.

And surely a more suitable encouragement to Men of Good Parts and
Inclinations, to go upon so Blessed a Mission scarcely can be thought of; for
as it is Good Books alone which will encourage the most Studious, Virtuous, and
consequently the most Useful Persons to go over; so it is an Encouragement that
is in a manner necessary to be provided in the Foreign Plantations; Since few
or none at their first going over, are in a Condition to provide themselves
therewith: And when they are there, Books are not to be met with by those who
shall be able buy 'em; and yet without a Competent Provision of several Useful
and Necessary Books, (I cannot forbear often to repeat this) it is Morally
impossible that any should be enabled to Instruct their People.

And now that such excellent Works are begun and carried on by an excellent
Governor, and well disposed People, what a happy Conjuncture is this for
Persons who are Piously disposed, to give their helping Hand toward such
Blessed and Glorious Designs, as the Propagating of True Christian Knowledge
and Practice in Places formerly so much uncultivated therewith? Surely, if he
who Converteth a single Sinner from the Error of his ways, shall hide a
multitude of sins, What abundant matter of Comfortable Reflection upon a
Deathbed shall that Person lay up, who shall Contribute toward providing of
the most Proper and Genuine Means, next to the Divinely Inspired Writings, of
Converting many poor Souls, not only in this, but in all future Generations,
even so long as the Sun and Moon endures.

FINIS.

