blazon or coat of arms
Serenae veritatis gratia.
THere having lately been scattered abroad by Richard Lowndes Bookseller, a
scandalous Paper, touching those so Famous and long approved Lozenges, made and
publicly sold by Theophilus Buckworth Gent. the first true Author and Inventer
of them: the said Mr. Buckworth to vindicate himself from the scandalous
aspersions of the said Paper, and to undeceive the people from the traducements
of Lowndes, Peircy, and all other pretenders; does publish this short paper to
satisfy the World once for all, the whole truth; desiring all people hereby to
rest satisfied, whatever untruths, or abusive pretenses the said Lowndes,
Peircy, or any of their Accomplices shall hereafter forge or imagine; the said
Mr. Buckworth will rest silent; accounting them not worthy an answer: But to
their late scandalous paper, Entitled, (An Advertisement of Concern to this
City and the whole Kingdom.) Mr. Buckworth says;

That he never heard of any such man as Doctor Moor, nor believes that ever
Peircy was his man.

He denies not but that he did formerly inhabit at Saint Faiths near Norwich,
and did sometimes employ his Stock and Servants in the Trade of Mal^ing, which
he thinks is no disparagement to any Gentleman to do.

Whiles he lived at Saint Faiths he knew such a man as Peircy, a person of such
demeanor, as he never had, nor would have any intimacy with: and for making use
of his Lozenges, or any thing that he should gain from Peircy, he utterly does
abhor and detest: And for Peircy's being famous amongst the Nobility and Gentry
in that Country, truly he never knew nor heard whiles he lived there, but his
intimacy was with Tapsters and Ostlers, and such like persons: and for his
Lozenges, there is a Gentleman has a Receipt of them, written with Peircy's
own hand, with whom Mr. Buckworth hopes to prevail to get Printed, to let the
World see what his Lozenges are.

The said Mr. Theophilus Buckworth, and his Brother Edmund Buckworth, have made
these Lozenges above these Twenty four years.

Lowndes in Saint Paul's Churchyard has put Mr. Buckworths Lozenges to sale
for him, ever since the first publication of them, many years before ever
Peircy was heard of; and the said Lowndes lately Printed a Bill himself, to
vindicate Mr. ^^^^^orth; and thereby published the said Peircy to be a Cheat
and a Counterfeit, and his Lozenges dangerous; and for that cause the said
Lowndes preferred a Bill of Indictment against Peircy, in Mr. Buckworths name
at the Sessions, without his consent or knowledge.

The said Lowndes would never have taken part with Peircy, but because Mr.
Buckworth would not let him have his Lozenges at so mean a rate as Peircy does.
The said Lowndes came to Mr. Buckworth, and asked him if he would allow him a
pound of L^zenges more into ten pounds worth; which Mr. Buckworth denying him,
well says Lowndes, then I will sell Peircy's, for I can have his cheaper: and
being told that Peircy's Lozenges were not so good as Buckworths, his answer
was, he cared not, his Sign was the White Lion still, and his Shop was so
generally known the Kingdom through, for selling Lozenges, that he could ven^
them if they were Brick-bats.

That since Mr. Buckworth would not consent to Lowndes his demands, he has
confederated with Peircy; and in Peircy's name it is true they have contrived a
Bill of Indictment against Mr. Buckworth: but it is false to say he never
appeared to justify himself; for (notwithstanding he has lately been very
week with sickness) he appeared, and has defended it, and is prosecuting his
Traverse in the Kings Bench.

This is briefly the whole truth of all transactions, since the original making
and publication of the said Lozenges by Mr. Buckworth: if any desire further
satisfaction, the Author Mr. Buckworth lodges at the house of Mr. Thomas Rooks
a Stationer, at the Holy Lamb at the East end of Saint Paul's Church near the
School, where he will give them a more clear information, and there his said
Lozenges are always ready to be sold.

Directions for taking the so much approved Lozenges, with their several Cures,
and the Partis names that sell them.
TAke the quantity of a small Nutmeg at night going to bed, and in the morning
when you rise, or at any other convinient time, letting them dissolve in your
mouth, so that you may eat a quarter of a pound in four or five days. The Cures
are Consumptions, Coughs, Cathars, Asthma's, strongness of Breath, Hoarsness,
Colds in general, Ptissicks, and all othet diseases incident to the L^ngs; as
also a great Antidote against the Plague and all other contagious diseases.
They are only made by Mr. Theophilus Buckworth, and sealed up with his Coat of
Arms upon every quarter of a pound, with 2 s. 6 d. on the same paper. And for
more convenience for those that live remote in and about the City of London,
quantities of them are constantly to be had at the Authors said Lodging at Mr.
Rookes, Mrs. Anne Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, Mr.
Melward at Westminster Hall Gate, Mr. William Place at Grays-Inne Gate in
Holborn, Mr. Thomas Clarke late Shop of Mr. Bourn at the entrance of the Royal
Exchange, Mr. Joseph Cranford at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the
Shop of Mr. Lowndes, Mr. Speed at the Printing-Press in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and at Mr. Magnus in Covent Garden, where the Post Letters are left.


