modern bookplate with illustration of Swarthmore Hall FRIENDS HISTORICAL
LIBRARY SWARTHMORE COLLEGE PENNSYLVANIA
Swarthmore Hall
FOR WHATSOEVER THINGS WERE WRITTEN AFORETIME WERE WRITTEN FOR OUR LEARNING

A DECLARATION TO ALL THE WORLD OF Our Faith, And what we Believe who are
called QUAKERS.

AND This is written, that all People upon Earth may know by whom, and how we
are Saved, and hope for Eternal Life; And what we Believe concerning God,
Christ and the Spirit, and of the things that are Eternal, appertaining to all
Mankind to know and Believe.

Also, what MINISTERS and MAGISTRATES we own, and what, and whom we deny.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson.

Concerning God, Christ and the Spirit, thus we Believe.
FIrst, That there is only one true God who is a Spirit, and his Presence
fills Heaven and Earth, and he is Eternal and Everlasting, the Creator and
Preserver of all things, that Heaven and Earth, and all things therein by Him
were framed and brought forth, and all things remain unto this day by his
Power, and whatsoever he wills in Heaven and Earth, he brings to pass by his
Word and Power. And we Believe that this God only is, and ought to be Feared,
Loved, Obeyed, and Worshipped by all Creatures, and no other thing besides him
in Heaven and Earth; And we Believe that his Worship and Obedience, and Fear,
and Love, is to be given in Spirit, even in what his own Spirit moves and
leads his people unto. And we Believe his true Worship required and accepted
of him is, not by the Tradition of men in outward observances, or set days or
places, but he is Worshipped only in Spirit and Truth, without respect of time,
places or things, and that none can Worship him in Righteousness, but his
Children who are Born of his Spirit, and are led and guided thereby. And we
Believe that this God has given his Son Jesus Christ into the world, a free
gift unto the whole world, and that every man that comes into the world is
lighted by Him, that every man may believe and be saved; And we Believe that he
is given into the world, and no Nation, Country, or people excepted, but to all
mankind he is given of God, and has lightened them; and every man through the
world, that believes in, and receives Christ, who is the wisdom and Power of
the Father, shall be saved with Eternal Salvation; And every one that believes
not in him, shall be damned, and shall possess everlasting misery. And we
Believe that Salvation, Justification and Sanctification, is only in Him,
wrought by Him and no other; for there is no other Name given under Heaven but
him alone, by which Salvation is; and we Believe all that receive Him, and
believe in Him, are reconciled to God, and are made alive to God, to live to
him in all things, and do receive the forgiveness of Sins, and are set free
from all unrighteousness, and from the body of sin and death, and have the
Witness of the Spirit in them, and the Spirit of the Father they have received,
and it witnesses in them of the Father and of the Son, and of the things that
belong to their Peace; and it is the earnest of the Inheritance, and the Seal
of the Promise of Eternal Life, and by it are the deep things of God revealed
to mankind, and by it the Father and the Son dwell in the Saints, and by it
they have fellowship one with another, and the Father, Son and Spirit are one;
And this we faithfully Believe.

Again concerning Christ, we believe that he is one with the Father, and was
with him before the world was, and what the Father works it is by his Son,
for he is the Arm of Gods Salvation, and the very power and wisdom of the
Creator, and was, is, and is to come without beginning or end. And we believe
that all the Prophets gave testimony of Him, and that he was made manifest in
Judea and Jerusalem, and did the work of the Father, and was Persecuted of the
Jews, and was Crucified by his Enemies, and that he was buried, and rose again
according to the Scriptures. And we believe he is now ascended on high, and
exalted at the right hand of the Father for evermore; And that he is glorified
with the same glory that He had before the World was; and that even the same
that came down from Heaven, is ascended up to Heaven; and the same that
descended, is he that ascended.

And we believe, Even he that was dead, is alive, and lives for evermore, and
that he comes, and shall come again to Judge the whole world with
Righteousness, and all people with equity, and shall give to every man
according to his deeds at the day of Judgment, when all shall arise to
Condemnation or Justification he that has done good, shall receive life, and
he that has done evil, everlasting condemnation.

And we believe he is to be waited for in Spirit, to be known after the spirit,
as he was before the world was, and that is the knowledge unto eternal Life,
which all that believe in Him does receive, and he subdues death, and destroys
him that has the power of it, and restores from Death to Life, and quickneth
by his Spirit all that the Father has given Him, and we believe such he
justifies and sanctifies, and such are taught of him, but he condemns all
that believe not, and continue in unbelief, and are not taught of him; And this
we faithfully Believe.

And we believe that unto all people upon the face of the whole earth, is a
time and day of visitation given, that they may return and be saved by Jesus
Christ, who is given of the Father to call the worst of men to repentance, and
the most ungodly of sinners are convinced by Him of their ungodly deeds, that
they might believe, and be converted and saved. And we believe herein is the
love of God manifested to all mankind, and that none is shut out by him before
they were born into the world; But unto all men is a visitation given, and they
that do perish, it is because they do not believe in Christ, and destruction is
of a man's self, but salvation is of God, through believing in his Son who takes
away sin, and renews into his own Image, that they may become heirs with him;
And we believe that there is a Crown of Eternal Glory, and an Inheritance of
Eternal Life to be enjoyed for evermore, by all that believe and are chosen of
God; And that there is an everlasting misery and destruction to be possessed by
all that believe not, but continue in the state of Reprobation, and are not
changed from the ways of sin and death, but walk after the ways of their own
hearts lusts, fulfilling the will of the flesh in the evil of this world, and
follow not Christ the Light of the World that they may be saved; and we believe
upon all such the Wrath of God abides, and that they have no part in the
Inheritance of God. And we believe that it is only he that is born again of the
Spirit, and that walks after the Spirit who is changed from death to life, and
who is redeemed out of the world and all its ways, such only must inherit the
kingdom of God, and they only have right thereunto and none besides, even they
that are washed and cleansed from all unrighteousness by the Blood of Jesus, by
which their sins are Remitted; for his Blood cleanses them from all
unrighteousness and sin, all such as walk and abide in the Light which Christ
Jesus has lightened the world withal. And we believe that the Saints upon
earth, may receive forgiveness of sins, and may be perfectly freed from the
body of sin and death, and in Christ may be perfected and without sin, and may
have victory over all temptations by Faith in Christ Jesus. And we believe
every Saint that is called of God, ought to press after perfection, and to
overcome the Devil and all his temptations upon Earth; and we believe they that
faithfully wait for it shall obtain it, and shall be presented without sin in
the Image of the Father, and such walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, and are in Covenant with God, and their sins are blotted out and
remembered no more, for they cease to commit sin being born of the Seed of God;
And we believe the Gospel of Christ is the Power of God unto Salvation, and
that it ought to be Preached freely unto all people, and Christ to be held
forth to all Mankind by the Ministry sent of him. And we believe this Ministry
is received by the gift of the Holy Ghost, and all they that receive it, are
lawfully called to the Ministry, and they may Preach the Gospel of Christ
freely, as they have received it freely; and this Ministry is not of man but of
God, and is made powerful to the converting of sinners, and to the bringing of
people to God, and to the knowledge of his ways. And we do not believe that
any man is a Minister of Christ, without the gift of the Holy Ghost, or that
the Gospel can be received by natural learning or education. And we believe
such as preach for hire, and have hire for preaching, are not the lawful called
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ; such as are proud and high-minded, and
covetous men, who do not profit the people at all, such as have run, but never
were sent of Christ, who calls by his Spirit into the work of the Ministry;
and as every one has received the gift of that his Spirit, so he may
administer to others.

Concerning Rulers and Governors, we believe that there ought to be Rulers and
Governors in every Nation, City, Country or Town, and they ought to be such men
as fear God, and hates every evil way, who will judge for God, and not for
man; and will judge righteously, equally and justly, and will give true and
sound judgment unto all men, without bribery, or respect of persons, not
regarding the rich above the poor, but being a praise unto all that do well,
and a terror to all evil doers whatsoever, having knowledge in the pure Law of
God, and themselves continually exercised therein. And we believe that every
Law of man, ought to be grounded upon the Law of God, pure reason and equity
being the foundation thereof, that God's witness in every man may answer to it;
and the Law ought to be known unto all people, before transgression be charged
or punished in any man. And we believe that every transgression ought to be
punished according to its nature, and that the punishment exceed not the
greatness of the Transgression, neither ought any Transgressor to escape
unpunished, neither ought any upon false suspicion or jealousy, to be caused
to suffer without the Testimony of true men, or the confession of the party.
And we believe that the Executors of the Law ought to be just men, and not
given to Pride, Drunkenness, or any other evil whatsoever. And we believe that
all Governors and Rulers ought to be accountable to the people, and to the
next succeeding Rulers, for all their actions which may be enquired into upon
occasion, and that the chiefest of the Rulers be subject under the Law, and
punishable by it if they be Transgressors, as well as the poorest of the
people. And thus true Judgment and Justice will be brought forth in the earth,
and all that do well will have praise, and live in rest and peace, and all evil
doers whatsoever, may stand in awe and be afraid of God, and just Men, and the
Execution of good Laws.

Concerning Religion; We believe that it is only the Spirit of the Lord that
makes men truly Religious, and that no man ought to be compelled to, or from
any exercise or practice in Religion, by any outward Law or Power, but every
man ought to be left free, as the Lord shall persuade his own mind in doing or
leaving undone, this or the other practice in Religion, and every man of what
profession in Religion soever, ought to be protected in peace, provided himself
be a man of peace, not seeking the wrong of any man's person or estate.

And we believe that to reprove false Opinions, and unsound Doctrines and
Principles, seeking to convince them that oppose themselves by exhortation or
sharp reproof, by word or writing, ought not to be counted a breach of the
Peace, and to strive about the things of the Kingdom of God, by men of contrary
minds or judgments, this ought not to be punishable by the Magistrates and
their Laws; for we believe that the outward law and powers of the earth, is
only to preserve men's persons and estates, and not to preserve men in Opinions;
neither ought the law of the Nation to be laid upon men's Consciences to bind
them to, or from such a judgment or practice in Religion. And we believe that
Christ is, and ought only to be the Lord and Exerciser of men's Consciences,
and his Spirit only must lead into all Truth.

And we believe that obedience and subjection in the Lord, belongs to
Superiors, and that Subjects ought to obey them in the Lord that have rule over
them, and that Children ought to obey their Parents, and Wives their Husbands,
and Servants their Masters in all things which is according to God, which
stands in the exercise of a pure conscience toward God; but where Rulers,
Parents, or Masters, or any other commands or requires subjection in any
thing which is contrary to God, or not according to him, in such causes all
people are free* and ought to obey God rather than man; and we believe that
herein God will justify them, being guided and led by his Spirit in all that
which is good, and out of all that which is evil.

Again, we believe concerning Election and Reprobation, that there is a state
of Election, and state of Reprobation, a state chosen of God, and a state
rejected of God, and that all mankind are in one of these states; all that are
Elected, are Elected in Christ; and all that are out of him, are in the state
Reprobate, bringing forth fruits of death and darkness, being children of wrath
and disobedience, in the alienation and separation from God in the
transgression, unreconciled to God, the enmity ruling in the heart being in the
fall, and not restored to God again, but ignorant of his Power, and of his
Wisdom, having the understanding darkened, that they cannot see nor perceive the
things that are Eternal: and in this condition his best works are sin, and
whatsoever he does, he cannot be accepted with God, for he is dead to God and
alive to all evil, bringing forth all his works out of that ground which is
cursed. This is the condition of all mankind upon the face of the earth in the
first Adam; and this is the state of Reprobation, and all that abide herein are
rejected of God, and shall never inherit Eternal Life, but go into perdition;
yet have all such a day of visitation, that they may turn out of the state of
Reprobation; but hating knowledge, and despising the Love of God, they continue
in the state Reprobate, and the wrath of God abides upon them; but they that
are chosen of God, are delivered from wrath, for they believe in the Light, and
become children of the Light, and are renewed in mind and heart, and receive
the Love of the Father, and become planted into Christ the second Adam, and are
chosen in him to bring forth fruit unto the Father, and all their Fruit
springs from that ground which is blessed; for they are led by the Spirit of
the Father, and such are in the state of Election, who are made heirs with
Christ of the everlasting Inheritance that never fades away. And this we
faithfully believe, that Mercy is not showed to the Reprobate, nor Judgment to
them that are chosen of God.

And this to go abroad into the world, that all people may understand what we
Believe, and what we have received of God; and they that believe this, and walk
therein by the Spirit of the Father, shall be saved; but they that believe not,
but are disobedient to the Truth shall be condemned, because they do not
believe. Much more might be written, but in short this is given forth by one
that has Believed, and received the knowledge of these things from God, a
friend unto all people.

E. B.

To all that say we (whom the World do in scorn call Quakers) do deny Ministers
and Magistrates; These things I write unto you, to give you in short an
understanding what Ministers and Magistrates we own, and what, and whom we deny.
FIrst, Such Ministers as are made by God, who are Sanctified by his Word and
Power, who have freely received perfect gifts from God, and so by the Spirit
and Power of God are sent forth into the world to turn the people from darkness
to Light, and from the power of Satan, to the Power of God; who freely minister
unto others, without coveting any man's Gold, or Silver, or Apparel, not seeking
theirs, but them; warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that
they may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Such as minister from the
Spirit, and have the Word of God abiding in them, who are never unprovided, but
at all times and seasons, and in all places, do speak and declare the truth as
they are moved and instructed, and as the Spirit of Truth does give them
utterance: Such Ministers we own, and have in great esteem for their Works
sake, Gal. 1.1.12. Joh. 15.3. Ephesians. 4.7, 8, 11, 12, 13. Act. 26.15, 16, 17, 18.
Mat. 10.8. Act. 20.33. 2 Cor. 12.14. Col. 1.27, 28, 29. 2 Cor. 3.6. Joh. 15.3,
4, 5, 6, 7. Joh. 4.10, 14. and 7.38, 39. 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. Act. 2.4.

But such as are brought up at Schools and Colleges, and so made Ministers by
the will of man, who have not freely received perfect gifts from God for
perfecting of the Saints, but denies perfection, and so denies the Ministers
work; neither do Minister freely, but seek for gain from their quarters, and
will not preach without a price, who are not Sanctified by the Word of God, but
pleads for a continuance in sin, while people walk upon the Earth. Such as
minister from the Letter, and not from the Spirit, who cannot Preach except
they have a time to study, and so by their industry provide themselves, and are
not provided of the Lord (such a Ministry is of works, and not the free gift
from God) such cannot profit people, but leads them captive in an empty and
dead form, always learning, but never able to come to the true knowledge of
God; such called Ministers we do deny, and turn from them, and testify against
them, as the holy men of God formerly did, read Isa. 56.10, 11. Jer. 5.30, 31.
Mica. 3.11. 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 26, 27, 28, 29. and chap. 2.10, 11. Jer. 23.22,
30, 31, 32. Isa. 56.10, 11. Phil. 3.18, 19. Jude 11. Joh. 8.24. 1 John 3.8.
Jer. 23.15, 16, 17. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ezekiel. 34. chap. Hos. 6.9.
Mat. 23. chap. 1 Timothy 5.6, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 3. chap. 2 Pet. 2. Jude 11.

2. Such Magistrates who Rule for God, who be men of Truth, fearing God and
hating covetousness, who execute true Justice and Judgment in the earth without
partiality, not respecting the persons of the rich, nor despising the persons
of the poor, but in truth and equity giving to every one his due and proportion
according to the Law of Equity, who neither seek nor receive honor from men,
but seeks the honor that comes from God only, who are a terror to evil doers,
and a praise to them that do well; such Magistrates we own, and in the Lord
honor, Exodus 18.21. Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20. Joh. 3.41, 44. Romans 13.3, 4.

But such Magistrates who be Proud and Lofty, who Rule not for God, but for
themselves; who love the praise of Men, and Judge for gifts and reward, and
love Money which is the Root of all evil, who respect the Rich in their gay
clothing, above the Poor in vile raiment, who seek and receive honor from men
(and if they be not honored with that which they seek for, turns Judgment
backward, that Equity cannot enter) such as be wrathful and malicious cannot
Rule for God, such are encouragers of vice and wickedness, and turns their
sword backward against the upright and Innocent, who reproves sin in the gate;
such Magistrates we do deny and testify against; for when the wicked bears
Rule, the righteous mourns, and the evil doers rejoice over them, and mock and
reproach them, Isa. 2.11, 12, etc. Isa. 1.21, 23. Joh. 6.43. Mica. 3.11. Jam.
2.1, 2, 3, 4, 9. Joh. 5.44. Isa. 59.13, 14, 15. Isa. 29.21 Prove. 29.2.

Such as live in Pride and Pleasure, and follow ungodly Lusts, and wicked
Practices, denies God, though in words they may profess him, even so, all such
as do evil, who follow drunkenness, oaths, games, vain sports and pleasures,
and such like ungodly actions, do deny, and disgrace, and greatly dishonor
both Ministers and Magistrates, though in words they may own them, and bow the
hat and knee, and give flattering Titles to them, Tit. 1.16. Psalm. 15. Hos. 4.
Jam. 1.25. Job. 32.21, 22.

To walk Soberly, Righteously, and doing justly, according as the grace of God
which brings Salvation does teach and direct, is a sweet savor to the Lord,
and a true owning, and in the Lord honoring true Ministers and Magistrates,
Mica. 6.8. Tit. 2.11, 12. Psalm. 51.17. Isa. 57.15. Romans 13.3.

But to walk loosely and profanely, doing wicked and unjust actions, turning
the grace of God into wantonness; such are an ill savor to God, and denies,
and dishonours true Ministers and Magistrates, Jam. 3.14, 15, 16. Jude 4. Isa.
59.2, 3, etc.

True honor does not consist in bowing the hat and knee, and such like things,
(for that is the honor below, which men seek and receive one of another, which
is in the unbelief) but in the obedience of the Magistrates just commands, who
are a terror to wickedness, but a praise to them that do well; for the Law was
not made for the Righteous, who fear God and live uprightly, but for the
Lawless, who are out of Gods fear; who live wickedly, casting the Law of God
behind their backs, Joh. 5.44. Romans 13.3, 4. 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10. Psalm. 50.16, 17.

So this may certify all whom this may come unto, That we do not deny Ministers
nor Magistrates who are made and ordained by God, but honor them in the Lord,
let our lives and conversations and that of God in all your Consciences judge;
for if all were brought into our life, the Magistrate should live at peace; and
so as the eyes of your understandings comes to be opened with true light, you
will see that those who live soberly and righteously, do own and honor
Ministers and Magistrates, though they cannot for conscience sake respect their
persons, nor give them flattering Titles, as your Highness, your Lordship, your
Worship, and such like; for such belongs to God: For (Christ Jesus said) I
receive not honor from man; And says he, How can you believe that receive
honor one of another, and seeks not the honor that comes from God only? Gal.
1.1.12. Romans 13.1. Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19. Joh. 1.9. Jam. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 9. Joh. 5.41,
44.

Read with understanding, prove all things, hold fast that which is good, 1
These. 5.21.
A. P.

THE END.

