The CASE of Ewelm Hospital, Appellants, in Relation to Wayhil-Fair, against
the Corporation of Andover.
THAT William De La Pool, Duke of Suffolk, being heretofore seized of the
Manor of Ramridge in Hampshire, did in King Henry the Sixth's time, by License
Found the Hospital of Ewelm in Oxfordshire, which he appointed to consist of a
Master, Schoolmaster, and Thirteen poor Men, and Endowed it with the said
Manor of Ramridge, and other Lands, reserving only to himself the Nomination
of the said Master, etc.

That Wayhil-Fair (being a Fair by Prescription) has been held time out of mind
about Michaelmas-Day on part of the said Manor called Ramridge-Down, and some
part of it on a place called Blissomer-Hall-Acre, and the rest of the Fair on
the Glebe of the Rectory of Wayhil, the Advowson whereof was given to
Queens-College, Oxon by King Charles the First, and the Incumbents thereof have
ever since the Twenty Sixth of Henry the Eighth, paid Forty Shillings to the
Crown in the First Fruits for the casual Profits of Standing of the Fair, which
of late Years have been worth to the Incumbent Sixty Pounds a Year.

That ever since the Hospital had the Manor, they or their Tenants have yearly
received about One Hundred and Twenty Pounds for the Pickage and Stallage for
Stalls, Booths, Penns and Hurdles for Sheep in the said Fair, which has been
the chief Support of the Hospital by Fines, on granting Leases and great Rents.

That the Corporation of Andover, observing that no Toll or Show-Money was paid
for Goods, Cattle, or Sheep sold therein, did in the One and Fortieth Year of
Queen Elizabeth procure a Grant to them of the Fair at Wayhil, with a Court of
Pye-Powder, and License to take Toll, Show-Money, and other usual Perquisites
of a Fair, and they got inserted in their Grant likewise the Profits of Pickage
and Stallage.

That after this Grant the Fair was always held in the same place as formerly,
and the Corporation of Andover did never pretend to any thing more than to the
Care and Government of the Fair, and the Toll and the abovementioned
Perquisites.

But the Pickage and Stallage was always paid to the Hospital or their Tenants
for breaking the Ground, etc. as Owners of the Soil, the Corporation having no
Land there, whereby to have any such Pickage and Stallage.

That the Corporation of Andover, observing the Advantages of Pickage and
Stallage to be so considerable, did by their Interest in 1683. procure a New
Charter, (on the Surrender of their former for that purpose) and thereby got a
Clause surreptitiously added, (not in their old Charter) to hold the Fair on
any part of Wayhil which they could procure, and as they should appoint; and in
pursuance of it, did keep the Fair on Chalderton-Lanes in the Parish of Amport,
and not on Wayhil.

That William Drake Esquire; being Tenant of the said Manor, having settled it on
Mr. Goddard in Trust for his Wife for her Jointure, in Consideration of a very
Considerable Portion he had with her, this very Hospital-Lease of the Manor of
Ramridge, and Profits of Pickage and Stallage of this Fair, having from the
Family of the Noise (from whom Mr. Drake is descended) been ever since King
Henry the Eighth's time enjoyed by them.

Mr. Drake and his Wife, and Mr. Goddard, did prefer their Bill in Chancery to
quiet them in the ancient Usage of the Fair, and to hinder the Corporation from
Removing the Fair to any other place; and the Corporation insisting, That they
being Lords of the Fair, and by their Grant had a Right to take Pickage and
Stallage, and a liberty to appoint the Fair in what Place they pleased; The
Chancery, after hearing the Cause, (wherein 'twas proved unquestionably the
Hospital and their Tenants Right to have the Fair held on the old Place) did at
the Corporations Request, direct a Trial at Law for the Ascertaining it; and at
Winchester Assizes 1683, a Verdict passed for the Right of the Hospital, but
the Corporation obtained a new Trial at the Exchequer Bar, by a special Jury of
Hampshire Gentlemen, and there it was found too for the Hospital, and Mr. Drake
(in Right of the Hospital) had thereupon the Injunction of the Court for to
quiet their Possession therein, and till the late King James's time they
received the Pickage and Stallage, though the Corporation brought their Quo
Warranto.

That the Corporation did afterward bring on the Cause again before the Lord
Chancellor Jefferies, (who had been a little before incensed against Mrs. Drake
for some Words she spoke) notwithstanding the two Verdicts, and the Locality of
the Action, the Lord Jefferies did direct it to be Tried again at the
King's Bench Bar, before the Lord Chief Justice Wright, by a Middlesex Jury, and
there notwithstanding a full Evidence, and particularly an ancient Presentment
Recorded in the Third year of King Henry the Eighth, that Thomas Noise, then
Tenant of the said Manor, and his Predecessors, time out of mind, had the
Right to the Pickage and Stallage, and the place of the Fair, set out
particularly, that there could not be the least doubt of it; And
notwithstanding there was at the Trial likewise produced an ancient Almanac
made in the Year 1570, (which was in time long before Queen Elizabeth's Grant)
which mentioned Wayhill to be then a principal Fair; and the place and usage
proved by above twenty old Witnesses, yet (notwithstanding these clear
Evidences) by Chief Justice Wright's Direction, the Jury gave a Verdict for the
Corporation, and the Lord Chancellor Jefferies did Order, That Mr. Drake, the
Hospitals Tenant should account for the Three Years preceding Profits of
Pickage and Stallage to the Corporation, (notwithstanding they did not pretend
any Right to the Soil where the Fair those Years was held) without which Right
no Man can in Law or Reason pretend to Pickage or Stallage; but nevertheless by
compulsion, the said three Years Profits were paid.

That since Their Majesty's Accession to the present Government, the Hospital,
and Mr. Drake, did bring their Bill of Review against the Corporation; and the
Lord, Commissioners of the Great Seal heard the Cause, and directed it to be
Tried again by a Jury of Hampshire Gentlemen at the Kings Bench Bar; and after
a long Evidence, a Verdict passed for the Hospital, viz. That the Corporation
had Right to hold the Fair on the Hospital Down Lands, parcel of the Manor of
Ramridge, and on the Glebe Lands of the Rectory of Wayhill, and
Blissomer-Hall-Acre, but had no Right or Power to have, or keep, the Fair on
any other place at Wayhill at their Pleasure.

That on the 22d of May last, the Lords Commissoners on the return of that
Verdict, did declare themselves fully satisfied therewith; and did Decree an
Injunction, That the Corporation should not hold, or keep the Fair on any other
places than in the Verdict, and ordered the Corporation to repay the Money back
with Interest that the Lord Chancellor Jefferies had Decreed Mr. Drake to pay,
(which plainly shows the Sentiments of the Court then were, That the Fair
should be held in the same Places as formerly) and in pursuance of that Order,
the Corporation paid back the Money with Interest accordingly.

That in pursuance of this Decree, Mr. Drake the Hospital Tenant, in September
last, did provide Penns and Hurdles for Sheep, and erected several Booths on
the Hospital Lands, called Ramridge-Down, and laid out Ground for to fasten the
Hurdles, and to make Penns for Sheep; and to set Booths and Stalls on the Down,
in the same Places as formerly, and did not question but to Receive the benefit
thereof on Michaelmass Fair following.

But the Corporation laying claim to the use of the Glebe-land, by virtue of
certain Articles made in the Lord Jeffeies Time, and having lately agreed with
the Owner of Blissomerhall-Acre, for a small Sum, did appoint the empty
Wagons, the Horse-Fair, and other unprofitable things to be set on Mr. Drakes,
the Hospital-Ground, of Rambridge-Down; but the Booths and Stalls for Chapmen,
the Penns for Sheep, and other beneficial things, (the greatest part whereof
were heretofore set on the Hospital Ground) they appointed to be set on the
Glebe and Blissomer-Hall-Acre, and several other Lands whereon no part of the
Fair ever stood before, whereby the Corporation has got all the Profit of the
Fair; which plainly eludes the Verdict and the Decree: And Mr. Drake, the
Hospital-Tenant, who formerly made an Hundred and Twenty Pounds a Year by the
Pickage and Stallage, did not, last Michaelmas-Fair make any think at all.

That Mr. Drake, in pursuance of the Decree, as he thought, did appoint
Servants to Erect Booths and fasten Penns on the Hospital-Ground, against the
Time of the Fair, and the Corporation served them with the Decree of the
Chancery, which the Servants (supposing the right of their side) unknown to Mr.
Drake, used some disrespectful words to the Persons that served the Process,
and of the Commissioners of the Great Seal; whereupon the Corporation, by
Petition, on the 15th of Sept. last, informed the Lords Commissioners of Mr.
Drakes setting up Penns in other places than the Corporation appointed; and
likewise of the Workmens contempt of the Process; whereupon Their Lordships, on
the Two and Twentieth of the same September last, in the first place did commit
to the Fleet, the Workmen, for a supposed Contempt, and did order, That Mr.
Drake, the Hospital-Tenant, should not set up any Pens or Booths on the
Down-Lands, otherwise than as the Corporation should appoint; so that Mr. Drake
durst not Erect any Penns or Booths on the Hospitals own Ground, left the Lords
Commissioners should construe it as a contempt and breach of their Order.

That Mr. Drake and the Hospital looking on this last Order to vary from, and
to evade all the benefit of the Decree and Verdict, do therefore pray, That the
said Order may be Reversed by the House of Lords; and that the Defendants may
be enjoined to hold the said Fair as they have held it formerly (even from the
41st of Queen Eliz. to the 1st Year of King James the Second) and on the same
Places; And that your Petitioners may have the Privilege of setting up Booths,
Stalls, and Penns for Sheep, and other things on the Down-Lands, and of
receiving the Profits thereof as formerly; whereby the Rights of the Hospital,
and Rectory of Wayhil will be preserved, and a great advantage will redound to
a considerable part of the Nation, who resort to this Fair; and who, upon the
removal of it from off the ancient Places, may be driven from it.


