THE CASE Of some Thousands of the PEOPLE called QUAKERS, in Great Britain, who
Conscientiously Scruple the present AFFIRMATION.
WE Desire, with Great Humility, to Represent to the Legislature, That many of
Our Friends in diverse Parts of this Kingdom, have long Labored under Great
Difficulties, by Reason of some Words in the Present Affirmation: And that it
is now become more necessary for Us, than it has been heretofore, to Apply for
Relief; because the late Act for laying a Duty upon Hides, etc. (which requires
the taking of an Oath, or the Present Affirmation) has already been the
Occasion of the Ruin of some, although they have Paid the Duty, without Fraud,
to the Proper Officer; and apparently tends to the Ruin of many more, who Trade
in those Commodities, and cannot Use the Affirmation.

Because in the present Affirmation, We are Obliged to mention the Sacred Name
of ALMIGHTY GOD; for whose Name We have so Great and Awful a Reverence, that We
Conscientiously Scruple to Use it in Cases of Evidence, etc. Conceiving it to
be of an Higher Nature than the Simplicity of Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, which Our
Blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST Commanded His Followers to Observe
instead of an Oath: That Simplicity We are afraid to exceed: Our LORD in this,
as in other Cases, designing to Exalt the Veracity, and Righteousness of the
Gospel, far above that of the Law.

We beg Leave to Say, That We Apprehend the Granting Our Request, will neither
make the Government, nor any Person We Deal with, less Secure: For We believe
Our Selves as firmly Bound in Conscience to speak the Truth, as any others
esteem Themselves Obliged to Swear the Truth; and also, liable to as Severe
Punishment from the Great and Just GOD, if We Affirm Falsely as they are who
Forswear Themselves. And We willingly submit to the same Penalties, if ever any
of Us should Falsify Our Words, which are now by Law Inflicted in Cases of
Perjury.

And Permit Us to add, The Indulging Us herein, may be for the Benefit of Our
Fellow Subjects, who are not of Our Persuasion; since many of Our Friends,
before they were Quakers, have been Witnesses in Matters of Importance, to
Deeds, etc. And if the Affirmation be not made more Easy, those who cannot
take it, will not be admitted to give their Evidence in any Courts of
Judicature, which may tend to the Damage of many who may stand in need thereof.

Wherefore, for Our Relief; and also for the Sake of those who may want Our
Evidence: We Humbly Entreat, That such an Affirmation may be Granted Us,
wherein the Sacred Name of GOD may not be Used: And that the Benefit thereof
may be made Extensive to Our Brethren in NORTH-BRITAIN, who are Generally under
the like Dissatisfaction, and some of them under present Suffering.


