The Case of the King and Public. With JOSEPH BRUXBY's Petition, and
Proceedings with the Lords of the Treasury, and the Commissioners of the
Excise, in the years 93 and 95. or a short Breviate thereof.
M^st humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable House of Commons.
MOST Worthy Senators, I having seriously confider'd what His Majesty had and
did do for us in the greatest of Hazards, and, being a Brewer, made
Observations on the great Abuse done to him in the Revenue of Excise; which
tended not only to a present Loss to the Crown, but to the bringing the Revenue
and Trade to little, as appears, and the Ruin of unconceivable numbers of good
Families; I did in 93 offer the Lords of the Treasury, to make that Revenue
clear first 50, then 100000 l. per Ann. more than the then managers did, and
thereby make his Majesty's loving Subjects more easy than under that
management, and that without putting the King to a penny mere charge than he
then was at, nay further, to give my own Time, and to forfeit first Estate,
then Life, if I did it not. But to set forth how I were sent from one to
another, tossed about, and ordered to wait from time to time, with the bantering
Reflections, needless Questions, with being threatened to be sent to Prison by
one of the now Lords of the Treasury, as they were most unbecoming his Person,
Places, and Character, (...) too many and not fit here to mention, a fair
Hearing face to face being most to be credited, a^^ will give clear light how
the King and Public have been and are served by persons, etc. contrary to the
12 k. 2. c. 2. and the true intent of a statute made in the 5 and 6 year of
Edw. 6. c. 16. and the Oath, etc.

I did in the year 95, give His Majesty an account of his Loss and the
grievance of his People thereby, and set forth in my Petition, that his Majesty
lost to term it, etc. at least 50000 l. per Ann. and what was the cause
thereof. -- His Majesty at a convenient time was graciously pleased to take the
same Petition into Council, and made a Special Order thereupon, and commanded
the Lords of the Treasury to make a speedy Inspection into the truth of the
matters in the Petition alleged, and commanded that they should give him an
Account or Directions therein whether the same were true or false: but this
Petition was taken from the Clerk by one of the Lords of the T. as he told me;
but to set forth the stir I had to hear where it was, how when hearing, I
offered him not only to spend my time but 500 l of my own money, to serve the
Public. How I was ordered to wait from time to time; how when promissed me
their Answers, they only made me a proposal contracy to an Act of Parliament,
as appears by their own minute Book, and as soon appeared by what Brewers of
great worth offered them they could not perform. But to set forth how I went to
Kensington to acquaint his majesty with the Proceedings, how by their believes
of the Truth of my Allegations, and the fair promises of one of the Lds. of the
Treasury to do the King and his People Justice, I was sent to his Friend and
persuaded from acquainting the King, would be too tedious. Well at last
according to his Majesty's Command, a Hearing there was with the Commissioners,
who in short, as the most modest excuse for the loss of 50 or 100000 l. per
Anr. did consess the Allegations in the Petition were true, but excused
themselves as being ignorant thereof as a Child: But to set forth how I offered
the Lords, in presence of the Commissioners, to make it appear the next day,
(if Empowered) That there was such that cheated hie Majesty of 50 odd Barrels
of Strorg out of 70 odd, 3 times, and sometimes more in a week. How the Lords
said they were satisfied that the Allegations in my Petition were true; How
they ordered me to desire 2 more (one of which was Ld. Mayor of London not long
since) to come to them in order to receive Powers to manage, etc. What a Jest
we were made of notwithstanding all truth appeared to the believes, confession,
and satisfaction, of all concerned. But the King and Public shall have
Justice, if it agrees with the Interest of some Persons and their Friends,
while I doubt not of the Honor and Honesty of others of the then and now Lords
of the Treasury, but the greater number may out-ballence the lesser.

However those ignorant Gentlemen were rewarded with a safe return to their
Places, while his Majesty was not thought, etc. to be informed of the truth,
according to his Royal Command on the Petition, (to which I refer this
Honorable House and my self for more certainty;) unless by a non-Language, and
the Loss of some hundred thouland Pounds thereby. Yet the Commissioners will
hardly complain of their over much judgment, little or many times no attendante
or service, the taking the most effectual way to bring a Trade and Revenue to
little; nor the charging their Messenger, that if I mist but one hour of paying
my Excise. to seize my Brewhouse and all that I had; nor yet of my zeal for the
good of the Public, which was rewarded with my being left in their hands, and
the unjust Refusal of my money when tendered within time; and their having my
Brewhouse seized the next day when the Office was shut up that no money could
be paid; a poor management, and a bad reward. Good Friends are best known in
time of need. While we have the unparraled Privilege of an Honorable House of
Commons to judg^ their own and the Nations Grievances, It Is pity that 50 or
100000 l. per Ann. the keeping up of Trade with the real Good of the Public,
should not be of equal Esteem with the Interest of a few private Persons. There
is those of unspotted Reputes in the Brewing Trade, and worth many thousands of
pounds, that promised me to, but dreading my usage, dare not acquaint his
Majesty with his Loss, and the intolerable Grievance of the Public thereby, of
whom this Honorable House will be fully satisfied when knowing them.

I Having acquainted his Majesty with most of these particulars by word of
mouth and writing, before and since his last return from Holland, (but it
cannot be though he should understand all the Trades out of which his Revenues
arise, so as to know whether or what Persons are rightly Qualified for the
management thereof;) by reason of which the Public suffers, and Trade and
Revenues come to fall and sinck.

And since his Majesty's Special Order in Council availed nothing as to the
procuring himself and People Justice, I am advised to lay all my Proceedings
before this Honorable House, who need not further be put in mind of his
Majesty's willingness and readyness to accept of your Advice and Information in
matters which so extremly concern the Good of the Public.

I had given this Honorable House this short Account sooner, as I was advised,
but being put off from time to time by, etc. and being desired by a very worthy
Person one of the Commissioners of Excise, to wait upon the Commissioners at
the Excise Office, some of whose worths needs not to be spokan of; I was told
by one of them, that he did believe no person was so fit or capable to prevent
the Frauds of the Brewers as one bred up a Beewer was. I told them that as in
93 and 95 I offered to serve the Public at my own Charge, but being so ill
Requited, as being forced out of my Trade. in the loss of some thousand Pounds,
by having my Brewhouse seized when I tendered my Money at the Excise Office the
day before, I could not now spend my time for nothing, but if they would make
it worth my while to ^ngage in it, I would engage to manage it with half the
Charge, and put an effectual stop to the Frands of the Brewers. They offered me
a Warrant to one of their Officers, I suppose to Instruct him, and promised to
reward me according as they should think I deserved, or words to that effect.
For me to learn a peron a Trade which cost me so dear, for what they shall
think fit, seems to me very unreasonable. I want (...) such Service, but (...)
if there were (...) Commission, (...) who being a Brewe^, know, how to manage
that part, in^ (...) contr^d^ct (...) ^^feriour (...) thereto relating, w^^ch no
one of the present Comissioners knows how to (...) ^ither, with su^mission, can
it reasonably be expected (...) should; which is the great reason of the Fall
of the Excise.

The premises thus in short hinted, the consideration thereof is most humbly
offered and ^itied (...) just and Honorable Assembly, who if thinking the same
worthy the time, trouble, and (...) into these Affairs, I shall be most glad to
give my time in procuring to m^utmost (...) Public, in giving such Light into
Affairs as may be of lasting advantage to the (...)

Your Petitioner humbly prays, for your ^wn satisfact^n and (...) Works of
Darkness, you would bear (...) ^bated, (...) the Publ^ be promoted, and himself
and all his (...) House.

(...) Princes-street in (...) Moorfields, and shall be (...) to this (...)
House, etc.


