The CASE of Thomas Air Esquire; Respondent to the Petition of Thomas Air,
William Ing, Henry Balgay Esquires, and other Appealants.
KING Charles the First of ever blessed Memory, in the Tenth Year of His Reign,
was seized of the Forest of High Peak in the County of Darby, then and before,
plentifully stored with Red Deer, that there were Forresters there, and the
Forest Laws continually put in execution; that the Freeholders and Tenants of
the several Towns within the said Forest, viz. of Bowden, Middle-cale, Chapel
in la Frith, Shalcross, Fairfeild, Fernaly, Castletan, Mellor, Hope, Bradwell,
and Wormhill, finding themselves much aggreived, not only with the Deer by
eating up their Corn and Grass, but also with the Severity of the Laws of the
said Forest, did Petition His said Majesty to destroy the said Forest, and
improve his Wastes and Commons there, which were very large, whereupon the King
was most Graciously pleased to condescend to the destruction of the same, to
which purpose he iss^ed forth his Commission out of His Duchy, to enquire as
well of His as of the Tenants claims within the said Forest, with power to
the Sheriff to Impanual Juries, and likewise Power to swear them to that
purpose, and instructions were annexed to the said Commission, what particulars
should be given in Charge to the Jury; and one Jury did present that the King
might reasonably employ one Moiety of the Wastes within the said Forest, after
which Presentment Mr. Woodroff a Counceller at Law of the Inner Temple, who
lived in Hope aloresaid, and had Land in Hope and Bradwell aforesaid, worth 400
l. per Annum, was entrusted by all the other the said Towns, as well as Hope
and Bradwell, to manage all their Affairs concerning their improving the said
Commons, with the Lord Newburgh then Chancellor of the Duchy; and in the Year
1639 as appears by the said Mr. Woodroffs Letter, the Lord Newburgh directed
Agents should be sent up, to Treat and Agree with his Lordship for the Commons,
which accordingly was done, and all the said Towns sent up their respective
Agents, and the Towns of Hope and Bradwell, did then particularly Employ and
Entrust for the purposes aforesaid, the said Mr. Woodroff, and one Thomas Air
of Shatton, whose Charges were born by the said Towns, and the Town of Wormhill
did send up and entrust one Bandoll Brock then Servant to Rowland Air Esquire; and
one Thomas Harrold whose Charges were likewise born by that Town, and all the
several Agents for the respective Towns within the said Forest for which they
were entrusted, did Consent and Agree, that His then Majesty should have a
Moiety of their Wastes, at which time the Agents for Bowden, Middle-cale, did
Contract and Agree for the Kings Moiety within them for a Fine and Yearly Rent,
all the said Commons were Surveyed, and most of them divided into Two equal
parts, one for His then Majesty, and the other for the Tenants; before the said
Agents were sent to treat with the then Chancellor for the purpose aforesaid,
and the Agents for the Towns within the said Forest having all Agreed and
Consented that the King should have one Moiety of the Commons, and Bowden
Middle-cale having Contracted for the Kings Moiety within them, His then
Majesty being on His part to destroy the said Forest, accordingly did destroy
the same, and any Person after the first Days Hunting had liberty to kill Deer
there, and the Forresters from the remote parts of the said Forest did fetch
in the Deer into the Campain or the plain part of the Forest that they might
the more easily there be killed and utterly destroyed, and so His Majesty had
then performed what on His part was to be done, and presently after that the
late horrid Rebellion broke out, which put a stop to His then Majesty's
Improving or Farming His Moiety of the said Commons, and the now Appealants
ever since that time do enjoy all the Profits of the said Commons, as well the
Kings as their own part, so that His said late Majesty never received any
Profit or Compensation for the destruction of His Forest, all which
proceedings as aforesaid being transacted at the then Chancellors House, most
of the Records relating to that matter, are either lost or mislaid.

And to prevent all just Accusations of a project or surprise of the Country,
the restored Fourteen Years, and then obtained Grants from the Queen Dowager,
of the said Moiety belonging to the Grown, being part of Her said Majesty's
Joincture under a Yearly Rent, with a clause of Determination in theGrant for
non-payment of the Rent, and likewise obtained a Grant of the reversion from
His said late Majesty King Charles the Second, and then the Relator Air entered
upon the same, and the Freeholders in all as well as in these Towns of
Bradwell, Hope, and Wormhill, did deny the Kings Right, and claimed all to be
their own but the Soil, Whereupon the late King and Queen Dowager by their
Attorneys the now Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of Chesterfeild, the Lord Chief
Baron Mountague, the King and Queens surviving Trustees, the Relator Air, and
George Shaw, in the Year 1674 exhibited an Information, etc. the Inhabitants of
Bowden, Middle-cale, and after a long Suit upon very good proof of all the
matter before recited did obtain a Decree for the Kings Moiety whithin that
Town, and on re-hearing the same Cause the Decree was confirmed, after which
another Information was exhibited against all the Freeholders in the Towns of
Castletan, Mellor, Chapel in la Frith, Shalcross, Fairfeild, Fernaly, Hope,
Bradwell, and Wormhill, which Information was to the same effects as the
former, and after another long and tedious Suit, upon the very same proofs as
in the former Suit obtained a Decree, which upon a re-hearing was likewise
confirmed, and the now Appealants William Ing, Thomas Air, Henry Balgay, etc.
were all served with Privy Seals out of the Duchy Court but did not appear,
but stood in contempt till after the Decree upon the said last mentioned
Information wherein they were named parties, and then came and prayed that they
might be heard, whereupon a Third Information was exhibited against them, and
after several hearings obtained a Decree for the Kings (...) within the Towns
of Hope, Bradwel, and Wormhill, which Decree last mentioned upon re-hearing was
confirmed; These Three Towns which now complain are the best Land, and did lie
in most of the spoil of the Deer, would have all those Towns as Bowden,
Middle-cale, Mellor, Shalcross, which are very Barren and Boggy Land to be
bound by the Agreement, and theirs being the best Land to be unconcerned, and
would after Forty six Years, the Deer being destroyed as aforesaid in execution
of the said Agreement on the Kings part, and the King having performed His part
of the said Agreement, they endeavor to compel His Majesty to try this
Agreement at Law made Forty six Years since, and by such Trial design to
overthrow the said Decree so solemnly made in a matter properly examinable and
determinable in equity, in the said Court of Duchy, being the Kings Court of
Revenue as well as a Court of Equity, having proper Jurisdiction of the said
Cause, and having so deliberately heard and determined the same.


