THE CONFIDER In FALSEHOOD CONFOUNDED. Being an ANSWER to An Abusive BOOK Lately
published by William Wright of Dublin, against Thomas Carleton his Tenant in
the first place: And Will. Edmondson, John Burnyet, Abraham Fuller, and Franc.
Randall, Arbitrators, in the second place; equally chosen to end some
difference between the said William Wright and Thomas Carleton, etc.

Printed in the Year of our Lord 1684.

The Confider in Falsehood confounded: being an Answer to an abusive Book lately
published by William Wright of Dublin, against Thomas Carleton his Tenant, etc.
THE first thing I observe in his Book, is, That he would make the World
believe that the Quakers deceived him; and with this news he would tingle their
Ears, thereby to make his Monologies, or Book of Bables, more taking with the
Reader; and the reason he lays down in the 9th page of his Book: he considers
that in all reports that are spread abroad amongst men, be they never so false,
there are some that believe them, especially where the party concerned stirs
not in vindication of himself. These and the like considerations moved him, as
he says, to do what he did.

And in the 20th page he says, one man's story seems fair and honest till
another be heard; so that from his own saying it may be concluded, be his
reports never so false, they will seem fair and honest, and be believed for
truths by some whilst Carleton and the Arbitrators say nothing for themselves;
and no doubt many such his Book may meet with in the world as will be ready to
give judgment before they hear both parties.

But the Quakers did not deceive him, for it was his own false heart, and
leaning to lies for refuge, and for his great transgression against God, that
he was deluded and decieved, and fell into great and fore temptation: If we may
believe his own report of himself and what he has written with his own hand;
in the first page of a Book he writ against his own Wife about 7 or 8 years
before this Arbitration was; so what can we expect when he cannot conceal the
infirmities of his own flesh; but writ Books, yea black Books as he calls them,
against his own Wife and spread them abroad. And to my knowledge it has been
his practice for many years to write Libels and scandalous scroles against
diverse men he has had to do with, which he dare not publish in print as he
does the Quakers; but like a Serpent in the dark would impeach other men's
honesty and advance his own; but such black, dark Books and scroles must needs
proceed out of the bottomless pit where all such things are hatched.

But to come to my purpose, that is to answer to his high charges, and to give
a little more light and understanding to the unbiassed Reader, that he may not
err in judgment by believing all W. W. has put in print; for I remember it was
said of old, He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his neighbor
comes and sercheth him out.

Page the 4th. He says God defend that he should either wittingly or willingly
write one word but what shall be real truth.

So if the Reader will take his serious assertions for truths, he may be
deceived; for I am able (the truth being on my side) to make it appear in
several places of his Book, that he has both wittingly and wilfully writ that
which is not true against Carleton (though some may be apt to think W. W. is no
such man) for all his large pretense to the contrary; yea things that he knew
was not true long before his Book was writ; but I see by experience men that
stand in disobedience and rebellion against Gods witness in themselves, grow
worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

Now I shall proceed to examine his high and false Charges one by one, and give
my Answers as truly and briefly as possible, without tautology or needless
reiterations as he has often done in his Book.

Charge 1. page 4. I let to Carleton, says he, 184 Acres of Land, and there
being some odd Acres, part whereof being Turf-bog, I reserved to my self for
firing for my other Tenants, and also for Clay for my own use, and that I
should sell his Clay, hinder his Tennants from digging Turf, and dig Turf there
my self, and also my Tenants, etc.

Answ. That he reserved any odd Acres, either of Turf-bog or Clay, by any
express Covenant in my Lease, or any express words in our bargain, that I
absolutely deny: It is true, there are several Exceptions and Reservations in
my Lease, (which hitherto I have duly observed and kept) but not a word of any
odd Acres of Land or Bog, etc, so why should that reservation be wanting (if
any part of our bargain) when the other was put in; he knows, and I know, very
well, he would have excepted 4 Acres when we were about the bargain at C. W.
his house at Clahamman; and I would either have all as it was entirely fenced
in (as says my Lease) or I would have none; upon which we broke off, and paid
our reckoning at the Inn; and after he was out of doors and ready to take
Horse, he turned in again and said he would not break with me for them. I
should have them, and so granted me the whole, all within the Fences to my
understanding, and others that were by, and into the whole put me in
possession, and the whole I have enjoyed these five years last, and have
nothing but my bargain, both by the bounds of my Lease and plain express words,
which J. N. can witness who was then standing by; also T. A. who before treated
with him upon the same bargain, broke off for 4 or 2 Acres of Bog some days or
weeks before, as I was like to have done, if he had not granted them; without
any further reservation or exception: for confirmation of this take T. A. his
Certificate as follows.

This is to certify all whom it may concern, That I went to Ballynicargie to
take it of William Wright, and he showed me the very Lands that Thomas Carleton
now enjoys, and he and I agreed of the price, and I was to have a lease
according to the bounds, and when he came to write Articles he would have
accepted 4 or 2 Acres of Bog; upon which I left him and it, because I could not
have it as we had agreed.

Witness my Hand this 17 th. day of May 1684. Thomas Anslow his mark.

And whereas he accuses me of selling Clay, I never did, by positive Sale; only
the Clerks of the Iron works gave me something, what they pleased themselves,
in consideration for the Clay they got: And if I had, I sold none of his, for
the Land being mine the Clay was not his.

Charge 2. page 4. Carleton to spare his own Wood in the Year 1680, set his man
Charles Smith to cut down and take away all the Birch Trees that grew upon a
new double Ditch of Wrights: says he some of them being above 3 foot in
circumference. And in page 9. he says, They were cut out of season for the
stumps are dead.

Answ. That my man cut 3 or 4 Birches I suppose may be true, though some of
them, as I understand, was dead, or dying before; but that the Ditch was his,
that is a lie, for the double Ditch was mine, and with no little trouble have I
maintained it these several years; for the Wood-cutters, Fellers, Stripers and
Colliers made several ways over it to my great damage, often occasioned my
Cattle to go out: But what had Wright to do with Birches, or any other Wood
upon the Land during my Lease; he excepted none but Oak, and but some of that
too, as by my Lease may appear: but he wanted matter to make me criminal, and
to aggravate it the stumps are dead; so were hundreds more cut by him or his
people before I came there, and by diverse of his Tenants since, who for years
together I could not restrain until I served one of them with a Writ, which is
another Charge in his Book: one thing I shall here mind the Reader of, which
was an express bargain between him and me, in behalf of William Fettrel, the
man that bought the Oak Wood of him; which was that I should let the said W. F.
have Birches to build a Bark-Mill; and he promised to give me as much Oak,
number for number, when they were stripped. They had of Birches 96 pieces,
besides 6 or 7 pair of Couples and Knees, but to this day he never gave me one
stick of Oak in consideration, which is (besides the abundance his Tennants out
off for 2 or 3 years,) far more considerable than twice 3 or 4 in my own Hedge;
but breaking word and promise is made a laughter with him, for when I have
charged him with his promise he would laugh, and say, there is never a promise
made, but it is either broke or kept.

Charge 3. page 4 and 5. Carleton, says he, is bound by Covenant in his Lease
to keep all the Houses, Walls and Ditches in good repair, which he failing to
do, Wright is damnified at least 30 shillings in his Bedding and Papers in a
Closet he reserved for himself.

Answ. That he reserved liberty of that Closet to himself, I grant, but upon
what terms, viz. when he came there about the ordering and disposing of Timber
and Bark, most of which was over and disposed of from him 4 years ago, he was
but to have that liberty when he came upon that occasion, and not otherwise: so
if he had cleared the Room as he ought to have done when he went away, there
could have been no such damage to him; which as I am informed is not for want
of repair neither, but rather by Moth, Mice or Rats, for this is the effects of
Fraud and a wrongful detainer; for he has detained this Closet and two others
from me and my Assigns ever since I came there, contrary to the Covenant of my
Lease, for which I want satisfaction, for I have the great damage and wrong,
though he has made first complaint, etc. So this is the way he requites me for
my kindness and forbearance; so I think it is now high time for me to amend
that matter, and let him take his Moth-eaten-Clothes and Papers away, and pay
for the time he has detained them unjustly.

Charge 4. page 5. That he and I went to one Pridham a Clerk, and how I would
not pay one half of the Charge for engrossing the Lease in Parchment.

But he should have said himself would not; for I no sooner proposed to do it,
being I was to stay in Town, but he quickly closed with it, and sent O. W. to
one Tailor a Cousin of their own for Parchment to engrose the Lease; so I saved
him his part of the 18 shillings the man demanded: I think it is very fit he
should now pay that would pay me so for my forbearance, with so many base and
abusive aggravating exclamations, as may be seen page 5, 7, 9, 22, etc. of his
Book, where it is multiplied as so many various actions to make me the more
criminal; which was, that I should deceitfully, and like a dishonest man,
contrary to the trust imposed in me, thrust several things into the Lease, that
was not, says he, in the Original rough draught; nor never spoke of, says he,
in making the bargain, to the best of his knowledge; and all these several
things being examined, (by a judicious Reader) is but one thing nominated in
all his Book, and that is this, page 7. that I should put in these words, Save
only what Oak-Timber the said Tho. Carleton his Executors or Assigns shall
have need of, or shall have occasion to use or expend upon the Premises, which
he or they is to have while it is there. This is all, and all this is more than
is true, ( ergo a lie) for I thrust it not in, it was agreed on before; for I
have yet to show, and that to my comfort now, in the first Articles of our
Bargain, writ, signed and sealed with his own hand, where he himself has
granted that Covenant of the Timber, and three Witnesses to the said Articles,
viz. James Underwood an Attorney at Law, Tho. Trafford and Will. Errat; take T.
T. his Certificate.

Whereas Will. Wright in his Book lately printed has charged Th. Carleton of
deceitfully thrusting in into his Lease that clause of liberty for Oak Timber,
etc. This is to certify the truth to all, that I was present when the said
Wright and Carleton did sign Articles of their said Bargain, and that the said
Articles were writ by Wright's own hand, and that the said Covenant for the
Timber was in it, and I was a subscribing Witness thereunto.

Given under my hand this 2d. of the 4th. Month, vul. June 1684. Tho. Trafford.

Also take this Certificate following.

This is to certify all whom it may concern, That we have this day seen
Articles of Covenant and Bargain made the 19th. day of April 1679. between W.
W. and T. C. wherein he the said W. W. has granted to the said T. C. what
Oak-Timber he has occasion to use upon the premises, and he is to have it so
long as it is there: And we are well satisfied the said Articles are writ,
signed, and for ought we know sealed too with W. W. his own hand.

Given under our hands the 23d. of May 1684. Thomas King Michael Holme.


And further I am persuaded that this Covenant is in one of the rough draughts
still, if it could be seen; but, says he, not in the Original; and thus he
would delude the World to make Carleton odeous: Which he calls the Original is
the question? for there were three rough draughts; one was corrected by my
hand, which was the last of the three; so let all the World judge what honesty
appears in this allegation, and whether this is not wittingly and wilfully
done. And if he were not a vexatious and letigious man, he would have been
ashamed to have shown his folly and deceit so far, as to shuffle from the
covenant of a Deed under hand and seal to a rough draught of his own subtle
devising. Does People use to make void a complete and perfect Lease, five years
after it is made, by the abrupt and crooked lines of a rough draught, sure the
man is hard put to it, that nothing short of Printing could serve to make
himsef and his actions rediculous to the world, and that which is worst of all,
must spread his own infamy in City and Country, with his own hand. And further,
when Covenants under hand and seal are thus wilfully wrested, by making wilful
lies, what usage may I expect in other things? let all the World judge.

Charge 5. page 5. Carleton, says he, made Spars to his Fulling-Mill, all of
fine straight young Oak Saplings, from which Wright himself was prohibited by
Henry Temple, Esquire; and besides, says he, he lost the bark.

Answ. A pack of lies who e're invented them; he is the man that now has
printed them. By his words he had nothing to do with the Timber, and
consequently nothing to do with the Bark; so what is this to him, the Trespass
(if any were) were against H. T. Esquire; only he would make his wilful lies
manifest by his own scribbling hand, and show his wicked malice against me; for
there is not one Oak-Spar in all the Mill-house that we built the first year
before he sold the Timber, (which is the house he means) as by this following
Certificate may appear.

This we certify that there is not one Oak Spar in all the Tuck-Mill house
that Tho. Carleton built upon the Lands of Ballynicargie the first year he came
there; and though W. Wright says they were all fine, straight, young Oak
Saplings, there is not one, and we are sure the house was never stripped, nor a
Spar altered, since it was first set up.

Given under our hands this 23d. of May 1684. Edmond E. Chadwick. Simeon Bins
Nicholas Richardson.


Charge 6. is about a Dunghill, (which had they been right placed should have
contained all his 12. or 21 before they went to the Press) which, says he, he
preserved to himself; neither by Word or Writing, say I; (this is some of his
subtle mental reserves) for he can scarce make any Bargain without some hidden
underhand reserve, reach or other. As for the Dunghill, he a great while after
begun to say he would have one of them; I said I thought it was fit it should
stay upon the premises; for the other Land was set to Lease, and so was that it
laid upon, and this was all the hindrance I made: I put no body off from the
work, nor see no body about to take it away; neither did I convert it all to my
own use, as he says, for I left a great deal of it there when I removed to the
other side of the Land: however a story of a Dunghill will serve to fill a Book.

Charge 7. Yate Bars, and other materials, with Boards of diverse sorts, and
Wain Axletrees, left in Carletons custody, were by him, his Servants or Workmen
wasted, destroyed, and made away, and how he suffered his Carpenter to cut some
of the seasoned Axletrees, and made Helves of it for Axes, Augures and
Chissels; Yate Bars and Boards were disposed of for several uses for the said
Carleton, some whereof Wright saw cut to repair a pailed Fence, which Carleton
or some of his family had either burnt or carelessly lost for want of a Pin, etc.

Answ. In this Charge is couched several Lies or subtle Assertions; one Yate
Bar and two Boards I made use of in the Parlor Chimney to break the wind off
the Fire when my Wife was sick, and this by him or his Wife is reputed little
less then felony, though I have often proffered either to pay or return them;
and all my Servants, People or Workmen that he can instance in his subtle and
large Charge, is only a Carpenter that cut a piece of a slit Ash for Chissel
Helves, neither for Ax nor Augur that I know of; nor was it a seasoned
Axletree, as he says, only a slit Ash seasoned without door under the drop of
a House Eves, where for ought I know it and its fellows stood till some of them
were rotten. And as for the Gate Bars and Boards he saw cut to repair a pailed
Fence, which Carleton or his family (why not some, or no body) had either burnt
or lost, etc. This is another of his witting and wilful lies, for he knew in
his Conscience this was a Lie; for the man that prepared the pailed Fence, did
confess it to him before my face in Jo. Newbies house in Dublin, that he did it
when the Arbitration was; and he knew long before, that most of this Charge,
and several others, was false, and wilfully (contrary to his own knowledge)
laid against me; for the parties he knew that had confessed to him some years
before, that they did those things unknown to me, and for their own private
concerns, and not mine; and still he wilfully and wickedly lays them to my
charge; and what had I to do to drive a Pin in dry weather; it was another man's
Fence; another man let it fall down, and another man made it up; and this he
knew well enough; but who is so wicked as them that presumptuously sins against
their own knowledge, as this man in many things has done, which I am able to
prove by more testimonies than my own? yet who is so oily and smooth to
strangers as Will. Wright?

Charge 8. Is about Twenty shillings mistake in Accounts, etc.

Answ. Upon the ballancing of Accounts in Thomas-street, as he says, there I
answered all he could charge (and more then I thought was due) and he was then,
and is yet, Four shillings in my debt; and after, he comes over again with
this, I have bid him often make it appear just and due and I would pay it him,
though I know it was seen in his Pocketbook put down with his own hand, that I
paid it once to his own Ditchers, and that one would think was often enough.

But in short, let him produce such Papers and Bonds which he long since took
away from me, whereby all those Accounts may be examined, and this shall be
rectified, for I have no reason to pay it twice.

Charge 9. Is about serving a Writ upon one of his Tenants for a Bundle of
Wattles, etc.

Answ. This is another lie; for I gave the man leave to get Wattles; in his
Charge to the Arbitrators he calls them Two penny worth, here he says a
Bundle; I believe it was several Bundles, for it was as many as wattled two
Chimnies; for that I did not serve the Writ, but for Injuries, Trespasses, some
just Debts and other abuses I served a Writ upon him and some others which I
never repented to this day; and I never served another, neither was I ever
served with any upon my own account (save once for Tithes) in England nor
Ireland in all my life; and I have dealt and exchanged several hundreds of
Pounds before I dealt with him, ergo not so much given to vexatious Suits as
himself; so if serving a Writ be any error or sin, I believe his Conscience is
far more defiled with that sin than mine is; witness his many letigious Suits
for many years in most of the Courts in Dublin. Then he tells a tale of Nuts; I
never had a Nut upon any such account: but I think, as himself says in his
Book concerning the Arbitrators, he is drunk, but no with Wine.

Charge 10. Is but the 4th over again to make them numerous, and fill a Book,
or else the man forgot himself.

Charge 11. Thomas Carleton said to James Eustace one of Wrights Tenants, that
his Landlord would serve him as he served sixteen poor men in the County of
Catherlough, who were indicted upon Wrights account, and he let them all go to
Prison, and never regarded them, but they were glad to shift for themselves,
etc.

Answ. This is an absolute Forgery as it is laid down; for I never heard of so
many being inindicted, nor of any one of them going to Prison; what I had was
from William Wright his own mouth in Carloe streets, I believe he told me then
of nine, I am certain I never spoke of their going to Prison, neither of so
many being indicted. I sometimes tell what I hear, but never what I hear not,
nor know not; I remember I told Eustace (who then came as he said by W. Wrights
order to dig Turf upon my Land, and he came to my bed side where I was lying
lame to tell me what he intended to do,) so I charged him not to do it without
my leave, for he had no Land there; I told him there were several poor men
indicted upon his account at Carloe, and I bid him not be so confident, for if
I should indict him for it, it might be he would not bear him out, but leave
him to snift for himself; and upon this he forged that story against me; and
this is the sum of all the Reproaches, Scandals and Lies with which he has so
often stuffed the leaves and lines of his Book, which he seems to lay down as
the first motive of all our differences; so now let the Reader judge. But I I
know there was another thing was the occasion of all, which had I answered, all
these things had never been alleged, nor the world never heard so much of our
difference; and that was my refusing to turn Tenant to his Son Ebenezer, who
came with a Deed of Gift from his Father, in which Deed of Gift he mentioned
all the conveyances of the Reversions of that Lease by which he holds
Ballinicargie, and by which he sets it to me; I say he makes a recital of all
to himself, but makes no mention of me or any other Tenant upon the Land,
neither binds his Son to perform any Covenant of his to the present Tenants,
and after reserves power to himself to revoke or disanul the same Deed of Gift
at any time hereafter by giving his said Son a Twenty shilling piece of Gold;
which had I done, and once altered my property, I suppose I might then have
been Tenant at will, and repented at my leisure: so because I would not be
taken in this snare have produced all these occasions; and since that, in a
Letter I have yet to show under his own hand, he says he made it his business
both in City and Country to inform himself what I had said against him; so that
it seems he wanted occasion till then. So now let the world judge what usage I
have had, or am like to have.

Charge 12. But to aggravate his reflecting malice against Wright, says he, he
said to Thomas Booth that his Landlord would serve him as he served Francis
Thornhill, to whom, says he, Wright never did the last injury to the value of
a farthing.

Answ. Whether I might say any such thing to Booth I do not well remember. I
examined Booth and he denied once or twice that he told him any such thing, but
since I perceive he does say it; but in short Francis Thornhill complains loud
enough of the wrongs he had by him, which I shall not now argue: but to
strengthen his Plea against me he went to Francis Thornhill to get something
under his hand to clear him, who told him he had rather his Hand was cut off
then ever it should do such a thing, This I had since from Francis Thornhill
his own mouth.

In page 9. he demands satisfaction for advising Thomas Booth to dig Turf in
his Meadow; there is but a Ditch between it and my Bog, and though it was once
laid up for Meadow, it was so bad that it is now turned to pasture again as
mine is, and for ought I know was as good Bog and as fit for Turf as mine is.

And further he says, I said this to aggravate my reflecting malice against
Wright, etc.

What I said to Booth (if ever I said it) was long before, for ought I know a
year or years before I hindered Eustace to dig Turf; but if I should reckon what
provocations and aggravations he has given me, of far greater moment then
this, I might make large Volumes; whether it was not malice in him to keep all
these things in store, and read them amongst his familiars over his Cups in an
Alehouse.

In page 8. he says He has put down but about half, and what he has put down
is all true: So here the World has his word for it, believe it that will; when
any one has tried him so far as I, then they will know better what to believe.

Further, He says he has left out nine or ten for brevity sake: But rather
for want of being true, say I.

Page 9 and 10. He makes a repitition of 8 or 9 of them over again; only I
suppose either to make his Book or my Crime bigger.

Next thing I take notice of is page 17. where, he says, he had set one
hundred forty Acres of Ballynicargie to Stephen Racks and Robert James seven
years before ever Carleton was concerned, which, says he, if I had let to
Carleton were to bring an old house over my head, and I were a fool and a mad
man.

Who would think such a man that is so serious, and stands so much upon his
reputation, and professes so much honesty, truth, and just dealing in words,
could be contradicted.

For such a Fool and a Madman is William Wright, for all his vapor of seeming
honesty, that he set forty Acres of that same one hundred forty to Thomas
Trafford but one year before Carleton was concerned with all that Carleton now
holds, took his earnest, drew Articles, has his earnest yet, but to this day
would never perform his Bargain. See what honesty is here; Is not this to bring
an old house over his head? so now see the impudence of the man. For further
satisfaction take Thomas Traffords Certificate.

I do hereby certify that William Wright did set to me in the Year 1678. all
the Lands of Ballynicargie that Thomas Carleton now holds, and 40 Acres more
which he has since set to Stephen Racks and Robert James; I drew an Article of
our bargain, and I was to have a Lease accordingly for a considerable number of
years, and was to pay Thirty five Pounds per Annum, but to this day I could not
have my bargain, (which I can make appear was worth one hundred Pounds) but
has shuffled me off from time to time, in hopes to make more of it. And I can
truly say it was not my seeking, but he and his Wife did often urge it upon me;
if this be honest dealing let the impartial Reader judge.

Given under my Hand the second of the 4th. Month called June, 1684. Tho.
Trafford.

And again Thomas Ansloe who here before has certified, did treat with him
about them forty Acres, and so did Carleton himself; that very time that
Carleton and he bargained, and the Lease to these two men was but made after
Carleton came there, for he had the perusal of it before it was sealed; so if
he had set them seven years before (which he knows is not true) as he has
lately confessed; then such a Fool and a Madman was he as set them over again
to one, and treat about them with two more that very Spring Carleton was
concerned: So his easiest and safest way to come off, is honestly to confess he
has wittingly and wilfully printed a lie.

But, and if he had set this Land twice, it was but as he did about the Timber,
and when I pleaded the Covenant of my Lease, then he forged that Lie, that I
deceitfully put it in; and having forged it, must persist to maintain and
publish it in print; and this snare of the Devil he is fallen into.

Page 22. He says I never did so much as demand a stick of Timber, to the best
of his remembrance. And yet in page 23 he half grants it; however, I do affirm
I did do it, and can bring witness of it if need be, (which is more than I was
bound to do by Covenant) I asked him for Timber to repair the old
Mansion House; he bid me let it go down: I desired him give me something under
his Hand to keep me undamnified, upon which he turned away from me as his
manner is.

Page 26. He says, the Arbitrators were partial, and awarded for Carleton, and
against him, whose charge, says he, against your Brother Carleton was every
word true. See how positive the man is in his own commendation; I grant it
might seem so till Carleton was heard, for he knows how to set a smooth face
upon a bad matter: But the truth of his twelve Charges I now recommend to every
impartial Reader to judge of. And if these twelve, of his head choice, or
rather ill choice where there is no better, be so false and frivolous, what can
any one suppose his other nine or ten may be which he forbears to mention, I
suppose from a consciousness in himself of their falsehood and impertinency.

Page 30. He says Covetousness would not suffer Carleton to be content. He
should have taken that to himself; for Carleton was content well enough if he
could have enjoyed that which he paid honestly for, and paid before hand too,
and can make it appear, (if it were not for being tedious both to my self and
the Reader) for I confess this kind of work is not pleasant, but that I am
engaged in my own and the Truths defense to take away those blots and stains he
by his book of lies and bables would bespatter me and my Principles with before
the World; but for that, and for giving satisfaction to diverse who waits to see
what I will say for my self before they conclude me guilty of all. I could have
sat silent, with a quiet and clear Conscience, notwithstanding all he has
done, and could have left Judgment and Vengeance to the Lord, who will one day
give true judgment between him and me. I say I can make appear how he has
endeavored (after he has got my money) to deminish my bargain every year since
I came there; so it is covetousness in him will not let me enjoy several
particular things which I bargained for (though he was paid for five years
before hand) which I am able to prove. It is covetousness in him will not let
him keep his Word, Bond, or Bill of Arbitrament under Hand and Seal to stand to
the judgment of four men, of whom he in a manner begged that service, both by
words and a Letter yet to be seen. When I and John Burnyet did often desire him
to take men of other Judgments; and when they have not answered his covetous,
will, then asperse and abuse them at this rate, so far as either Tongue, Pen or
Print can go: So I would have all warned how they arbitrate for him least they
come under the same doom.

And further, for all this great complaint he casts upon them, as being no
Christians, but deluded, and men led with a spirit of delusion, worse then
Turks, Jews or Infidels, and says they wanted nothing but Canibals teeth to
have eaten him up, etc. and all this from varying very little from his own
counsel and advice, as may be seen in his Letter, page the 13th. which rightly
considered by judicial and impartial Readers, does consound and make void a
great part of his own Book, and of his large complaints, both against them and
Carleton; for by their Award they answered his own mind and desire in every
thing save two.

The first, they orderered two Surveyors to be equally chosen, and what Acres
they do find over and above 184 Carleton was to pay proportionable as he does
for the rest; and Wright would have it quite off from Carleton, not allowing
him it for payment.

The second thing was, that Wright must pay both the Surveyors. This is all
they have varied from his own counsel and advice; and yet see how he exclaims
and renders them.

Can it be paralleled for many Generations, that a man out of mere malice and
envy, for such trivial impertinent occasions should traduce men (that even
three days before he pitched upon for honesty and fidelity, and as he grants
could have put his life in their hands; but sure if they had caused one finger
to bleed he would soon have changed his note;) should I say traduce men so
hatefully to the World? So we may see what some men's fair tongues and
profession is worth; and though he say they gave more heed to Carletons lies
(and yet cannot prove he told them one) then to his just and true Complaints,
whereas indeed they gave heed to his own counsel in his own Letter, which was,
that if Carleton would wave his Complaints he would wave his, as is to be seen
page 13. of his Book. And if they had been Men that would have been biassed and
led by the Nose either by him or Carleton: they were not fit for Arbitrators,
but such as he that (will have their own will or nothing) should take some base
Sons of Belial, and no honest upright men for Arbitrators; for I remember he
told the Messengers that delivered the Award upon the first sight that he would
spend one hundred Pounds upon Carleton, but he would have it as he would have
it.

Also further at Wicklow Sessions about the beginning of October last Thomas
Trafford, and he and I discoursing of our differencs at the Sessions House door
before diverse of the Country, I then and there proffered him whatsoever
differences were between us I was willing to abide of any two Justices upon the
Bench; his answer was, he would abide the Judgment of never a Justice in the
Country.

But now take Wrights resolution or conclusion, or to speak his own phrase, his
pretty Rhyme and Reason, which is worth the noting, viz. if Carleton had
continued to have been so kind as he was the first two or three years, viz.
made him welcome to Meat and Drink several Weeks at a time, and several times
in a year which is against my disposition (both in truth and nature) to mention
or upbraid him with, but that he seems to boast how well he has satisfied me,
it may be he would not have printed this scandalous Book, etc.

But this the Reader may note in his Book, or I shall note it for him, that
during that two or three years kindness he even then gathered up these
impertinent crimes against me, and kept them to this use, either in a dirty
Heart or Closet, and never had that moral civility to acquaint me in the least
with many of them until he brought them before the Arbitrators; and yet he
elsewhere says he thinks he satisfied me: If this be his good satisfaction and
gratifying kindnesses received I have enough and am over paid; this I
acknowledge to the whole world, other satisfaction I had none, save one Barrel
of Rye that I remember.

Lastly what I have here writ and committed to print, is but to answer his high
and false charges, and to take off those loud and large exclamations and
complaints, or rather bundle of lies, whereby he designs to render me and my
Principles odious to the World, and thereby gratify his wilful and malicious
humor; but I see the Lord has blasted it already, before I put pen to paper.
Wise men, and men of understanding of several professions and ranks sees
through it and beyond it, and does very much condemn the man's conceited folly,
thinking he had been wiser then to have committed such a bundle of bables to
print. However, for satisfying of weaker capacities who may not have so deep
inspection into things of that nature, but may conclude, all must be true,
because he has asserted it in print: I say, as for clearing my innocence both
as to person and principles, I have done what here I have done. And
notwithstanding all the provocation he has given me, shall not yet (as he has
done) commit to print the many injuries and wrongs I have received from him for
these 5 years last past, which had I known the man's temper so well before as I
do now, I should never have concerned my self so much with him; for even in the
time of my greatest kindness to him (as he himself has confessed) when he sat
very kind and familiar at my Table, and by my fire side, yet even then did he
gather and pick up, or otherwise forge these impertinent crimes against me for
want of weightier matters; so that the world may see the hollowness of the man;
so that from my heart I have reason to thank God I have so well escaped his
snares, (for anguis sub herba latet.) And from such I desire the Lord my God
may ever preserve me, that they that waits for, and seeks occasion as he has
done, may be disappointed.

Thomas Carleton.
Written at Ballynicargie the 4th. (...) Month, vulgarly June, 1684.

