THE CASE OF John St. Ledger Esquire; RESPONDENT IN THE APPEAL Of John Barret, from
a Decree in the Chancery of Ireland.
SIR William Barret, being in England, but having a considerable Estate in
Ireland (part whereof he apprehended might be entailed.)

Made his Will in Writing and leaves all his entailed Land to Mr. Barret (his
Heir Male) and those not entailed to Mr. St Ledger, 16. Feb. 72.
his Uncle and his Heirs Males, making him Guardian of Mr. Barret; but yet he
had a very little regard for him, declaring often the Respondent Mr. St. Ledger
should have his Estate.

At first Mr. St. Ledger apprehended also that part of the Lands might be
intailed, but afterward discovering that they were not, exhibited his Bill in
the Chancery in Ireland, to discover the Writings, and prove the Will, and
examine the Witnesses, the Will being made here in England, and the Lands lying
in Ireland: And to have the Deeds delivered, and have the Benefit of
Depositions taken in a former Cause, but between other Parties, viz. The
Daughters of one Sir James Barret who claimed Portions out of the Estate, and
to be relieved upon the whole matter.

To which Bill the Defendant answered, and did not Object against the
Jurisdiction of the Court; but by answer prayed to have a Determination of the
Matter, saying he hoped it would appear at the Hearing, that the Estate was
intailed. Whereupon

The Cause was heard, at which time the Questions were, 21. May. 77.
whether the Estate were Old Andrew Barret's (an Ancestor of the Family of the
Testators) his Wife Katharines, and whether it was entailed? And the Court
after three days Hearing, directed a Trial upon these Issues.

Whether Andrew were seized in Right of his Wife Katharine of the Lands in
question, and whether there was any intail, and of what Lands.

In which Trial the Appellant joined, and after a full Trial at the King's
Bench-Bar,

The Jury found that Andrew was seized in Right of his Wife Katharine of
particular Lands: 17. Feb. 78,
And did not find he made any intayl, vid. the Judges Certificate.

After 13 several days hearing of Counsel on both sides, 20. June 77.
the Court Decreed the Lands in the Bill (being those found to be Katharines by
the Verdict) to the Plaintiff Mr. St. Ledger, and an Injunction for Possession,
but without prejudice to the Appellant, if any intayl should afterward be
discovered, and brought to light, provided he first give Obedience to the Order
of the Court.

Against which Decree Barret now Appeals, as if the Court had exceeded their
Jurisdiction in making a Decree. But it is conceived to be very Just, and
agreeable to Reason; and the Appellant's Preceedings against it very
unreasonable.

For the Plaintiff in the Decree Mr. St. Ledger could never have had any relief
without the help of a Court of Equity, either to discover what Lands were
Intayled, (which must be done by the writings if any were) or to have the
writings of the Fee-simple Estate out of Barret's hands, or to examine
Witnesses who lived in England, and elsewhere to use at Common Law, if Occasion
were. As also to have the Benefit of Depositions taken in another Cause between
other Parties, but touching the same Estate.

The Appellant joined to have the Cause determined in Equity (as before) and
did not Object against it,

There being an Issue directed, St. Legers's Right had been asserted upon the
Trial.

By the Decree the Appellant has all the favor showed him that was possible,
Katharine's Inheritance, and she outlived both her Husband and her Eldest Son
Sir James, and in truth did no Act to entail it, and neither her Husband, or
Son, without her could entail it.

But the great Trouble of the Cause is, that Barret finding the matter upon the
Intail to be against him; and that he fails in his expectation of making that
out, one Alderman Dean, now starts up to oppose the Decree. And he pretends
that he has purchased the Estate, of Barret. And so would render all that has
been done void.

But that is very ill done of him: for he knew of the Suit, and after Issue
joined in the Cause, has (as is pretended) purchased; so comes in pendente
lite. And so the Judges of Ireland have Certified. And therefore no
Consideration ought to be had of him.

And the Plaintiff in the Decree (as is humbly hoped) shall proceed for
possession of the Estate, having been hung up (now seven years) by this Appeal,
from proceeding on the Decree. And he hopes the Decree shall be Confirmed
having been so Solemnly made.

As to the Appellants Printed Case given out this Sessions, this Respondent
conceives it needs no Answer, the main of it being a scandalous Libel,
Reflecting on his Grace the Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and some of the Judges,
and on all the Jury.

He therein gives your Lordships some Lawyers opinions, hoping thereby to
persuade your Lordships into a good Opinion of an ill Cause: Nay, he Prints Sir
William Jones, and Sir Francis Pembertons Opinions, which if they ever did
give, was upon his mistaking the Case; for the same Persons have given their
opinion upon the Case truly stated, with their Reasons for the same.

That this Respondent was, and is well Entitled to have the Decree, against
which the Appeal is brought, and not only those two, but the late Chief Justice
Saunders, Judge Reymond, and Mr. Holt, have Concurred therein.

But this Respondent did not think fit to put the same in Print, because he is
well assured, he shall by his Council give your Lordships at the Bar such
Reasons, as will Convince your Lordships that the Appeal ought to be dismissed,
and the Respondents Decree confirmed.


