TO THE High Court of Parliament. A Vindication of the Protestant Religion, or
of the Innocence of the Martyrs, against the Pope's Supremacy, and against the
Errors of the Church of Rome.
Humbly Shows,
WITH all humble Submission to the Supreme Authority, and to all my Superiors,
hoping that no Protestant whatsoever will be offended at me, and Praying for
all your Honors favorable Construction of me, (there is an old saying, To
speak Truth is to shame the Devil, yea, and the Pope too, but I am for a
Veneration to Superiority, and so I am for the Protestant Religion to be
Esteemed above the Popish Religion, or I am for the Tripple Crown to be kept
under the Protestants,) and though a Protestant, a Presbyterian, a Papist, or
an Atheist, or a Muggletonian, (as if Money and Secular Interest makes one
Religion as good as the other, or all Religions alike,) or it is no matter what
Religion, or of what any Man is, if he has but a Sum of Money to purchase a
Place, as if Money was the God of all Honesty and Religion, in buying and
selling of Places; and there be too many that will make a Scoff and a Scorn of
Religion, as if there was neither God, Heaven, or Hell, as it is in 2 Pet. 3.3,
4. And so they are apt to look upon Religion to be a Politic Invention of our
Forefath^^s which is in our Veneration; and if a poor Man talks of Religion,
how will some Ridicule and make a ^^^^st and a Scorn of him, as to represent
him to be a Madman, or a Fop, or some such a kind of a Fellow: And though the
Blood of the Martyrs Cries aloud for Vengeance, and there is no doubt but that
Justice will be Impartially Administered, without any respect of Persons, and
that Ve^g^^nce shall be Executed upon the Pope at the great Tribunal of the
whole World; yet c^rtainly in this World the Innocence of the Martyrs ought to
be regarded; and accordingly, Loyalty to the King and Queen's Most Excellent
Majesty's, and of Their Design in coming into this Land ^or the Belief of all
the Protestants in England against Popery, ought to be regarded above and
before any thing whatsoever, so that if there was now a Law made for buying and
selling of Places, yet a Plea for the Innocence of the Martyrs ought to be
regarded and admitted above and before that Law; and as this is to the Comfort
and Consolation of all the Protestants in England, that they have not only
their liberty and freedom to wear any Ribbon with a Motto of No Slavery, No
Popery, and to Exercise and Enjoy their Religion, but that in their Days of
Jubilation, when they make Bonfires, they have now their liberty and freedom to
burn the Effegies of the Pope, so that certainly it is now no Crime for any of
the Protestants in England to write or speak against the Pope, or to vindicate
the Innocence of the Martyrs against the Pope's Supremacy, and against the
Errors of the Church of Rome. And as I ever was against the Pope, so I have
sufficient reason to show any Detestation of him; but with all humble
Submission to the Judicious, hoping that where they find any Error in what I
have now writ, they will Judge Charitably of me, and impute it to the Frailties
of Human Nature, (as considering that no Man lives without a fault,) and so I
humbly submit to the instruction of the Learned; for I have a desire, according
to my weak Capacity, to vindicate the Innocence of the Martyrs against all the
derisions of the World; and accordingly, when I wore the Ribbon at Oxford, with
this Motto, No Slavery, No Popery, it was only by way of Antipathy to the Pope,
and of the Popish Religion; and of which Motto of No Slavery, No Popery, as it
is the Original occasion of the late King James's Abdication of the Government,
as being a Papist, who is Dead in Law as to the Government of this Land; and of
King William and Queen Mary's Accession to the Crown, as being Protestants, who
are Justified by Law, and Gospel too, in the Regal Authority, so it is a
vindication of the Innocence of the Martyrs, and this is that which requires
the Will and Affection of all Protestants, as to bury all Animosities in
Oblivion, in order to a Universal Reconciliation of all Protestants against the
Pope, and all his Adherents that are for the Pope's Supremacy; for what is the
Popish Religion but Popery, and for any Man to be for No Popery, is to deny the
Popish Religion, and all the Errors of the Church of Rome, which is the very
Cause that the Martyrs of Old Died in; so that in this Plea of No Slavery, No
Popery, there is something Expressed, and something Implied; that which is
Expressed, is No Slavery, No Popery, and that which is Implied, is a Liberty
and Freedom against Popery and Idolatry, without any fear of Danger.

And certainly, now there is no Interest whatsoever ought to obstruct the
Liberty and Freedom of any of the Protestants in England against Popery, or in
their denial of the Popish Religion; and there is no Plea comparable to this
Plea of No Slavery, No Popery; for it is a good Plea for the King and
Parliament, or for a Protestant King and Government, against the Pope's
Supremacy, as it is a denial of the Popish Religion in defense of the Innocence
of the Martyrs; and now to Justify this Plea of No Slavery, No Popery, as that
it is a good Plea for the King and Country, and for the King and Parliament.

I begin with the Wisdom of Solomon, the wisest of Kings, Prove. 14.28. In the
multitude of People is the Kings Honor; And Prove. 11.14. In the multitude of
Counselors there is safety: These words are the words of wisdom, and
consequently from God himself, who is the Eternal Fountain of Wisdom. In the
multitude of People is the Kings Honor; Hence I infer, That the Kings Honor
cannot be alone in any one single person whatsoever, but that it is in a
general way in the whole Nation; and that it cannot be so much in a few
persons, as it is in a multitude of people; and this multitude of people may be
understood all the Protestants in England; and as the King and Queen are God's
Vicegerents, so God Almighty has Created a multitude of People for a
vindication of Their Majesty's Crown and Dignity; and so hoping that all the
Protestants in England will be Unanimous in a general Vote, That whatsoever all
the Protestants in England can do for the King and Queen, it is not comparable
to that inestimable kindness of the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's,
in securing and preserving the Protestant Religion against Popery, etc. And in
the multitude of Counselors there is safety, From hence I do also infer, That
there cannot be so much safety in a few Counselors, as there is in a multitude
of Counselors, and a multitude of Counselors, by the consent of the King and
of all his People in Parliament, is the support, power, strength, defense and
safety of the King and Kingdom, and then consequently, that Man that now denies
the Commons of England to be the greatest Interest of the King and Kingdom, he
is no better than a Cheat, and an Enemy to the King and Kingdom; for so it is
apparent by King Solomon the wisest of Kings, That in the multitude of
Counselors there is safety; that is to say, safety in point of Power to
Defend, safety in point of Plenty to Preserve, and safety in point of Knowledge
and Wisdom for the ratifying of Equity and Justice.

First, Safety in point of power to defend; A multitude of Counselors, by the
consent of the King, and of all h^s People in Parliament, is not only the
power, strength, defense and safety of the King and Kingdom, but it is an
Amicable Concord betwixt the King and all his Subjects.

Secondly, Safety in point of plenty to preserve; for there must be plenty to
preserve the King's Person, as well as power to defend Him, or else there
cannot be safety, and all this is Comprised in the Commons of England; for here
is plenty of People, of Treasure, and of all sorts of Provisions and
Necessa^ies for the support and defense of Their Majesty's Royal Persons and
Government, so tha^ here is that inexh^ustible Fountain of Treasure in the
Trade and Traffic of all the People of England, which is like the Tide that
Ebbs and Flows, so that whatsoever Taxes they pay, it returns to them again in
their way of Trade; and now whatsoever all the Protestants in England can do
for the King and Queen, it is not comparable to that inestimable Kindness of
the King and Queens most Excellent Majest es, in securing and preserving the
Protestant Religion against Popery, etc. And thus, as the Kings Honor is in
the whole Nation, so I am for all the Protestants in England to acknowledge King
William and Queen Mary to be supreme.

^hirdly, In the multitude of Counselors there is safety, in point of Knowledge
and Wisdom, for the ratifying of Equity and Justice, in order for the security
of Peace, and Tranquillity for all Men, to sit under their own Vine, and to
Reap the Fruits of their own Labor, and to render unto Caesar the things that
are Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods; and as the King and Queen
are God's Vicegerents, so God Almighty, the wise Creator and Governor of the
World, as he has Created a multitude of People for the King and Queens Honor,
so he has Constituted a multitude of Counselors for the safety of Their
Majesty's Royal Persons and Government; and now this is to the Glory of the
English Nation, that they are Governed by the King and Queen, together with the
Lords and Commons, the multitude of Counselors in Parliament, which is the
Knowledge and Wisdom of the Nation, according to the Protestant Religion, and
this is the happiest Government in the World. And as I do acknowledge King
William and Queen Mary, together with the High Court of Parliament, to be the
supreme Authority of the Nation, and that the King and Queens Honor cannot be
alone in any one single Person, but that it is in a general way in the whole
Nation, and that the King's Honor cannot be so much in a few Persons, as it is
in a multitude of People; and accordingly, it is not in the power of any one of
Their Majesty's Subjects to call a Parliament, to appoint any Member to sit in
Parliament without the consent of the King and the Country, and to appoint any
sitting Member to be Speaker to the House of Commons; for as it is in the King
and Queens Prerogative to call a Parliament, so it is in the Countries
Privilege to Elect their Representatives to sit in Parliament, and afterward,
as they sit by the King's consent, so it is in the House of Commons undoubted
Right and Privilege to Elect any sitting Member to be their Speaker, without
any Obligation to any one of Their Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, and now
whatsoever kindness any Member receives from any one of his Election in any
County, or Corporation, he is interested in the King and the Country; for it is
very well known, that the Pope would assume to himself such a Power h^re in
this Land, as to call a Parliament, to appoint Members without the consent of
the King and the Country, and to appoint any sitting Member to be Speaker to
the House of Commons, and consequently to put down all Parliaments, so that
none of the Protestants in England shall have any Right and Liberty, but what
they give Credit to the Popes Infallibility; for if it shall be allowed for any
Man to appoint any Member to sit in Parliament, and to appoint a Speaker,
without any liberty of the Subjects, the King has a power above the Pope, or
any Man whatsoever; but that Man that now denies the Commons of England to be
the greatest interest of the King and Kingdom, he is no better than a Cheat,
and an Enemy to the King and Kingdom, as aforesaid, which I have now proved
according to the Word of God in the Wisdom of Solomon, that in the multitude of
People is the King's Honor, and in the multitude of Counselors there is
safety; And as I do acknowledge King William and Queen Mary to be supreme, and
the High Court of Parliament the multitude of Counselors for safety, the
chiefest Counsel of the Nation against the Popes Infallibillity; so I do in the
first place protest against the Popes Supremacy, and whatsoever Holiness there
is in the Pope, it is a fraudulent invention of his own to pick Peoples Pockets
of the^r Money, concerning Indulgences and Absolutions; for the Pope undertakes
to Absolve any Man of his Sins for a Sum of Money, yea, and to renew his
Absolution for another Sum, so that if a Man has Money enough, he may have all
his Sins remitted for such a time, but when he has no Money he may go and be
Damned for all his Holiness; and besides, when the Pope is Mad it is not Money
or Submission that shall then obtain a Pardon, even as it was in the Bloody
Queen Mary's ^eign when a great many suffered Martyrdom for their Religion,
they promised to save those that would c^a^ge their Religion, but when they had
got them over to their Religion, yet notwithstanding they would take them and
Burn them, saying, that they should then Damn both Body and Soul, and th^s they
counted that they did God Service in killing of Heretics; and accordingly, if
the Pop^ could now have his Will, as it is not Money or Submission that should
then obtain a Pardon, so he would Execute his Revenge upon all the Protestants
in England with the greatest Barbarity he could invent, and when the Pope is
Mad, and cannot Execute his Revenge, then he Curses by Bell, Book and Candle,
which is the last Revenge of the Pope, when he shows his Teeth and cannot Bite,
and this is the Pope's Sanctity, or Sanctum Sanctorum, which is neither
derivative from Christ, nor from his Apostles, For Christ came not to destroy
Men's Lives but to save them, Luke 9.56. And now I hope no Protestant
whatsoever will be against me for acknowledging King William and Queen Mary to
be supreme, and denying the Pope's Supremacy. And I also deny all the Errors of
the Church of Rome, as their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, of changing the
Elements of Bread and Wine into the real substance of the Body and Blood of
Christ, and, as if Christ was Corporally and Personally present in their
Administation of their Sacrament. I confess, Christ was personally present when
he was upon the Earth, and Administered the Sacrament to his Disciples, but not
since; but however, if they can make Christ of Bread and Wine, they could have
done that many Years before Christ was upon the Earth, (if their Religion is of
such Antiquity,) for they will plead great Antiquity to their Religion; so that
it is very probable, their Opinion may agree to the Jews who do not believe
that Christ was ever upon the Earth, but do expect a Messiah to come; but this
is a Juggling Trick of the Priests, for them to drink up all the Wine, and to
content the People with a Bit of Wafer, or a Bit of Bread; whereas all Men may
be Astonished with Admiration at the infinite Condiscention of Christ in taking
our human Nature upon Him who was God manifest in the Flesh, 1 Timothy 3, 16. Yea,
to prove that Christ was upon the Earth, he was seen by multitudes, in working
of Miracles, and was frequent with his Disciples, and at that time when he
brake Bread, and gave unto them, saying, This do in remembrance of me, Luke
22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. So that the Administration of the Sacrament, is a
Pledge of the Death and Passion of Christ, in order for us to live upon him by
Faith, in hopes of Eternal Life, through the Merits of Christ, our Noble
Benefactor, to whom be ascribed all Gratitude, and Holy Adoration, for the
Benefits we have received by him: And so it is for the Confirmation of the
Faith of all true Believers, in a devout Commemoration of the Agony and Bloody
Sweat, of the Cross and Passion, of the Barbarous Crucifixion, and of the
precious Death and Burial of Christ, his Victorious Descention and Triumph over
Death, the Grave and Hell, Romans 6.9. Death has no more Dominion over him. 1
Cor. 15.54. Death is swallowed up in Victory, in his glorious Resurrection and
Ascension up into Heaven, where he siteth on the Right Hand of God, continually
making intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. Romans 8 34. Who has made an Atonement and
Expiation to God the Father, for the Sins of the whole World, to all that will
believe in him, 1 John 2.2. and John 3.15. (so that there is hopes of Salvation
by a true Faith, in the Merits of Christ, for the worst of Sinners, but there
is no Salvation in the Pope, who Exalts himself to be above Christ,) And that
he shall come again in Glory to Judge both Quick and Dead, at which Glorious
appearance of Christ, it shall be a Day of Jubilee to the Righteous, for then
all Tears shall be wiped away from their Eyes, as it is in Rev. 7.17. Isa.
25.8. Rev. 21.4. all Troubles, Commotions and Perturbations, shall be turned
into solid Peace and Tranquillity, so that they shall never suffer under any
more Misery of Tormenting Pains and Anguish, groanings of Pain, Grief and
Anxiety of Spirit; and then all Sorrow shall be turned into Mirth, for in that
Day Christ will say to those on his Right Hand, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World, Matthew.
25.31, 32, 33, 34. And thus Christ himself will receive them into the Celestial
Paradise, the Kingdom of Glory, where they shall receive Diadems of
Righteousness, of Life, Immortallity, Eternal Life, and of endless Bliss and
Glory, 2 Timothy 3.8. Rev. 2.10. For the Righteous shall be Crowned with Eternal
Glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. And thus they shall Enjoy Eternal Raptures of Joy and
Felicity, in being made Partakers of the Inheritance with the Saints in
immensity of Light and Glory, and in singing Halelujahs with all the Martyrs,
Saints and Angels in the Glorious Beatifick Vision of the Omnipotent Essence,
Isa. 28.5. But it will be a Day of Terror to the Wicked, when Christ shall
pronounce that dreadful Sentence upon them, Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Which is all in the Faith of the Worthy
Receivers of the Lord's Supper; and thus they are Established in their Faith,
and hopes ot Heaven, of this Crown of Righteousness, Immortallity, Eternal Life
and Glory, through the Merits of Christ, against the Fears of Hell; and so the
Sacrament to all true Believers, Is an outward visible Sign of an inward
Spiritual Grace. And so I do deny all Popish Idolatry, of their Worshipping
Christ upon the Cross, the Picture of the Virgin Mary, Beads and Crucifixes,
which is expressly forbidden, Exodus 20.3, 4, 5, etc. And I do likewise deny all
Popish Prayers to the Virgin Mary, Saints and Angels, to make Intercession; For
there is but one Advocate betwixt God and Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 John
2.1. Heb. 7.25. Acts 4.12. And I do also deny all the Papists Works of Merits,
and of their Ostentation in their Works of Supererogation, and though they have
the Proud Pharisee in the Gospel to vindicate them in their Works of Merits;
yet I having nothing to trust and hope in, but in and through the Merits of
Christ for Salvation; for whatsoever I can do, I am but sinful Dust and Ashes,
and so I may say with Job, Chap. 7. v. 20. I have Sinned, what shall I say unto
thee, Oh thou Preserver of Men? And Job 42.6. Wherefore I Abhor my self, and
Repent in Dust and Ashes. And so with the Publican, Luke 18.13. God be Merciful
to me a Sinner; and now that Man that says, he has no Sin, he acknowledges
the Popes Infallibility, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 1.8. And thus I
deny all Popish Absolution, for there is no Man can forgive Sins that is
committed against God, but God only, Dan 9.9. and Ephesians. 1.7. And so I deny all
Venial Sins, (among Papists) whose Guilt their bare Confession does Expiate;
and as any of them can obtain Absolution for a Sum of Money, upon a bare
Confession of their Sins, so when any of them desires to be Excused from
Confession of their Sins, it is but giving a greater Sum of Money to their
Priest, or Father Confessor, (or whosoever he is,) and he will take their Guilt
and Confession upon himself; and this is their Expiation, which is contrary to
the Word of God, Isa. 53.4, 5. Heb. 9.28. 1 John 2.2. And besides, we are to
Confess unto God, Romans 14.11, 12. And of their Extreme Unction, which is also
against the Word of God, 1 Cor. 1.21. 1 John 2.20. And of their Prayers for the
Dead, and Purgatory; for after the Soul is separated from the Body, it shall
remain so till the general Resurrection; at which time the Souls and Bodies of
all Persons shall be reunited, and shall receive according to their Works,
whether they be Good, or Evil, Eccles. 11.3. latter part. And whatsoever false
Doctrins and Errors of the Church of Rome I utterly deny. And now with all
humble Submission to all Protestants in general, I hope no Protestant
whatsoever will be against me for vindicating the Innocence of the Martyrs, in
denying the Errors of the Church of Rome; For Christ is the Propitiation for
the Sins of the whole World, so, That whosoever believes in him should not
Perish, but have Everlasting Life, 1 John 2.2. and John 3.15. Which implies,
that there is no Sinner whatsoever Exempted from a Faith in the Merits of
Christ, and that by a true Faith in the Merits of Christ, there is hopes of
Salvation for the worst of Sinners, but there is no Salvation in the Pope, who
Exalts himself to be above Christ; and so the Pope is indebted to all the
Protestants in England, upon account of Religion, for I know that the Pope is
against all the Protestants in England, because they are for the Word of God;
and so I having considered, that the Word of God being the Foundation of the
Christian Religion; so that it is that Word that no Man whatsoever can be saved
without it, because the Word of God is peremptory in it, John 3.18. 1 John
5.10. Acts 10.43. And it is the Word of God that vindicates the King, Matthew.
22.21. And it is the Word of God that vindicates a multitude of People, and a
multitude of Counselors, for the King and Queen's Honor, and for the safety
of Their Majesty's Royal Persons and Government, Prove. 14.28. and 11.14. And
thus it is the Word of God by which all the Learned Divines in the Land
maintains the Protestant Religion, against the Errors of the Church of Rome;
and as I do acknowledge God Almighty the Wise Creator and Governor of the
World, so I am for the Word of God. Therefore I humbly acquaint your Honors
with a definition of my Religion, and accordingly I do acknowledge and confess
my self a Protestant, and such a Protestant as does protest against all
Erroneous Ways and Principles, and consequently I desire to imitate that which
is most consistent to the Sacred Verbum Dei, and whatsoever is inconsistent, or
repugnant thereunto, I desire to utterly Detest, Abjure, Abandon and Abhor; or
thus, as I do acknowledge and confess my self such a Protestant as does Protest
against all Erroneous Ways and Principles, so I desire to practice and perform
all those Duties which are required and commanded in the Sacred Word of God,
and whatsoever is therein forbidden, or not implied as a Duty, I desire to
utterly Detest, Abjure, Abandon and Abhor, but as a denial of the Popes
Infallibility, there is Nemo sine Crimine Vivit, no Man lives without a Fault;
so that all Men are guilty in the sight of God, and that there is no hopes of
Salvation but in and through the Merits of Christ, and I being weak frail Flesh
and Blood, and subject to Infirmities, as other Men are, so I may say with the
Apostle Paul, That when I would do Good, Evil is present with me, Romans 7.21.
For there is Habemus inclinationem ad Malum and aversationem ad B^num; We have
an inclination to that which is Evil, and an aversion to that which is Good;
Romans 9.16. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows Mercy, whose Mercy is as far above the Mercy of the Pope,
as Heaven is above Hell; for the Mercy of the Pope is Cruelty, but the Mercy of
God is full of Clemency, Compassion, Forbearance and Long-suffering, Psalm.
57.10. For thy Mercy is great unto the Heavens; but the Mercy of the Pope is
Diabollical; but I hope God Almighty will have Mercy upon the King and Queen,
and all the Protestants in England, as to preserve us from the Mercy of the
Pope, whose Mercy is Cruelty, Matthew. 7.15. So that the Pope is the Devil's
Vicegerent here on Earth, who have their False Prop^ets in Sheep's Clothing,
but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves, and thus the Devil Rampant, like a
Roaring Lion, with his Vicegerent, goes up and down with their Sheep's Clothing
and Ravening Wolves s^^king whom they may devour, (and thus, as the Old Saying
is, To speak the Truth is to shame the Devil, yea, and the Pope too; but I am
for a Veneration to Superiority, and so I am for the Protestant Religion to be
Esteemed above the Popish Religion, or I am for the Tripple Crown to be kept
under the Protestants,) and accordingly, those that are now for a Popish King
and Governor, or a Popish Successor, they may go to Rome and there acknowledge
the Pope's Supremacy, and so pay Homage to the Pope, and Kiss his Great Toe,
and there is no doubt but that the Pope will give them his Benediction, and
call them i^^ good Children, but when I am to Kiss the Pope's Great Toe, if I
could I would bite it off; and ^^en afterward, those that have such an
Affection for the Pope, instead of Kissing his Great Toe, they may Kiss his
Backside; and this is Biteing off the Pope's Great Toe, that if the Pope is
living in Person, he is Dead in Law as to the Government of this Land, so that
no Papist whatsoever has any ^ight and Title to the Crown of England; and
accordingly, as I do acknowledge King William and Queen M^ry to be supreme. And
as the Parl^ament was called by the King and Queen, and do sit by Their
Maj^sties Prerogative, so it is not in the power of any one of Their Majesty's
Subjects whatsoever to c^ll a Parliament, to appoint Members to sit in
Parliament, or to appoint any sitting Member t^ be Speaker to the House of
Commons, and that the King's Honor cannot be alone in any one single ^erson,
but that it is in a general way in the whole Nation, and that it cannot be so
much in a few Pe^s^ns, as it is in a multitude of People, and as the Convention
Parliament denied the Pope's Supremacy upon their Coronation of King William
and Queen Mary, so I am for all the Protestants in England to acknowledge King
William and Queen Mary to be supreme, so that whatsoever all the Pro^e^tants in
England can do for the King and Queen, it is not comparable to that inestimable
Kindness of the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's, in securing and
preserving the Protestant Religion against Popery, etc. For it is the
Providence of God that has brought Their present Maj^sties to the Throne (whom
God grant long to Reign,) to preserve this Nation from an Inundation of Popery;
yea, further, that Man that is now for a Popish King and Governor, or a Popish
Successor, he is no better then a Sheep's Clothing or an Agen^to the Devil and
the Pope and inwardly he is a Popishly Affected Ravening Wolf; and accordingly,
though the Pope may be living in Person, he is dead in Law, and Gospel too, as
to the Government of this Land, so that no Papist whatsoever has any Right and
Title to the Crown of England; and thus I am for a Veneration to Superiority,
as that I am for the Tripple Crown to be kept under the Protestants, and for
the Protestant Religion to be Esteemed above the Popish Religion, so that none
of the Protestants in England may live in fear of their Religion, Lives and
Liberties, by the Crafty Machinations and Insinuations of any Ravening Wolf.
For the end and design of Christ's coming into the World, was for the
Redemption of Mankind, From the Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious Liberty
of the Children of God, Romans 8.21. And thus the end and design of Christ's
coming into the World, was for the advancement of his Kingdom to the downfall of
Antichrist, that Whore of Babylon the Pope, Psalm. 103.19. For his Kingdom
Rules over all. But the Pope is the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the
Earth, Rev. 17.5. and 18.2. and 19.2. and 6.10.

And so I Conclude, according to the Wisdom of Solomon the wisest of Kings, as,
That the King's Honor is Asserted in a multitude of People, and not in any one
single Person whatsoever; and thus I am for Their Majesty's Honor, that
whatsoever the whole Nation can do for King William and Queen Mary, who are
God's Vicegerents, it is not comparable to that inestimable Kindness of the
King and Queen's Most Excellent Majesty's, in redeeming them from Popery, etc.
And this is from him,

Who Prestrates himself to the Mercy of all Protestants, humbly praying, that
no Protestant whatsoever will now be Offended at him, for acknowledging King
William and Queen Mary to be Supreme, and denying the Pope's Supremacy, and the
Popish Religion. Abel Carew.


