Harvard College Library

The CASE of the BOROUGH of MARLBROUGH in the County of WILTS, concerning the
Election of Sir JAMES HAYES Knt. and JOHN WILDMAN Esquire; to be Burgesses for this
present Parliament.
THE 28th. of August 1679. the People of the Town being duly Assembled, they
cried up the Names of Sir JAMES HAYES, and Mr. WILDMAN; Then Silence being
commanded, the then Mayor demanded particularly of each of those Burgesses who
are sworn to the Mayor, in reference to the Corporation, [which are about 35.
in number,] for whom they were; And there was named amongst them the Right
Honorable the Lord Bruce, Mr. Daniel, Mr. Bennet, and Mr. Wildman: Thereupon
the great number of the Burgesses, lowdly cried out for HAYES and WILDMAN, and
demanded the Poll.

Then the Mayor forthwith departed from the place of Election, leaving the Body
of the Town there, without any Officer, save the Constables; who by the Peoples
desire, immediately took the Poll of the greatest part of the Electors, being
Householders, paying Scot and Lot, and about 150, (more being needless,) Signed
and Sealed an Indenture, showing the Election of Sir James Hayes, and Mr.
VVildman.

Then three Proclamations being made, Sir James Hayes and Mr. Wildman were
proclaimed Burgesses for that Borough for this Parliament: And the Indenture
was then offered to the then Mayor, but he Peremptorily refused to Seal and
Return it; But returned the Lord Bruce, and Thomas Bennet Esquire; upon pretense
they had the Votes of the major part of the aforesaid sworn Burgesses.

The only Question is, Whether all the Householders paying Scot and Lot in the
Borough, are the true Burgesses of the Borough, and of Common Right to Elect;
or such only to whom the Mayors of the Corporations, have given an Oath of
obedience, that have no Reference to the liberties of the Borough.

It Is agreed, that the whole Borough, and Town, and all its Householders were
expressly Incorporated by Charter in the 18th. of Eliz. and thereby made one
Community, or one Body of Burgesses, by the name of the Mayor and Burgesses of
Marlbrough, without Distinction, or Difference of the Burgesses or Inhabitants,
by Names, Powers, or Privileges, saving that of the Mayor, who is enabled
Yearly to name two Burgesses to be Justice of the Peace; Yet by the Communities
consent, Orders may be made for the better Government of the Corporation, but
such Orders never did, nor can restrain or alter the Common Right of all the
Burgesses, or Inhabitants to choose for the Parliament; Nor any other of the
Boroughs ancient Liberties.

The Charters of the Town did never make any Aldermen, Capital, or chief
Burgesses, or any Selected Body, or number of Burgesses under any style or name
whatsoever; Therefore there never has been any selected, restrained or
definite number of Burgesses in the Town, but those Householders that have been
sworn to the Mayor as aforesaid, have been sometimes a greater, and sometimes a
smaller number, and do acquire no Borough Rights by their Oath, all the
Householders having always enjoyed equally all the Exemptions, Liberties and
Advantages belonging to the Borough.

However the Corporation of Marlbrough has no Right to send Burgesses to
Parliament; nor did it ever pretend to have any such Grant. It is the Ancient
Borough of Marlbrough, [where a Parliament that confirmed Magna Charta, was
held above 400. years since,] that has the Right of sending Burgesses to
Parliament by Prescription; And all its Burgesses paying Scot and Lot, are by
Common Right the Electors, whose Right cannot be destroyed, or altered, by any
Incorporation or Charter; Neither can the Burgesses or Inhabitants surrender
their Right, or Forfeit it, or lose it by Non-usage, or otherwise, unless an
Act of Parliament should Disfranchize them, and take it away; many Parliaments
have so resolved in many cases, where some whole Boroughs, and the Inhabitants
of other Boroughs had not used their Rights for 200. years.

This ancient right of the Burgesles, is so distinct from any Privilege
granted to them by their Charters of Incorporation, that those Privileges may
be forfeited or lost, and the Corporation it self be extinct, or destroyed; Yet
nevertheless this right would remain untoutcht in the Inhabitants or Burgesses
of the Borough.

So it was lately at Taunton in Somersetshire, when their Corporation was
destroyed, upon a Quo Warranto brought against them, yet they chose Burgesses
for the Parliament by their Right of being an ancient Borough; So it is at old
Sarum, and in many Boroughs which are not Corporations.

The Burgesses of the Borough of Marlbrough, sent their Burgesses to Parliament
many Hundred years before they had a Mayor. And all the Householders of
Marlbrough have enjoyed for near 500 years, many Exemptions, Liberties,
Profits, of Common, and Privileges, under the name of Burgesses of Malrbrough,
which is conceived to be a clear and sufficient construction of the name of
Burgesses; and if this Right of choosing their Parliament Burgesses should be
taken from them, they must be Disfranchized, as having no Right to the Profits,
Liberties, and Privileges, so long enjoyed by them and their Predecessors

The great pretense of the present Sworn Burgesses, is to exclude all the other
Burgesses from Electing, (who are five times more considerable then
themselves,) because they are not Sworn Whereas it is evident, that the
Inhabitants of Ancient Boroughs always were, and are Burgesses, without taking
any Oath. And all the Inhabitants of Marlbrough, are also made Burgesses of the
Corporation by Charter, without mention of any Oath, or granting any Authority
to the Mayor, to give an Oath to that purpose.

Their other pretension is, that by Ancient Usage, the Sworn Burgesses only of
the Corporation, have Elected. Whereas, the Election belongs not to the Members
of the Corporation, (as such) and the beginning of the Corporation it self, is
far from being Ancient. And they do not, nor can allege, that it was ever
resolved by Parliament, or otherwise, that the Burgesses of the Borough have
lost their Original Ancient Rights; or that they ought not to Elect, or that
they were ever actually excluded from Election.

If it can be truly said, that they have many times suffered the Sworn
Burgesses of the Corporation to Elect without them, yet their neglect of using
their own right could not destroy it, much less vest it in the other; They and
their Fathers might forbear the use of their Right for many years, and use it
again lawfully when they pleased; Yet in those five lawful Parliaments, which
is all that have been for these 50 years past; In the Election of three of
them, the Burgesses of the Borongh not Sworn, have interposed to give their
Voices, and the Persons desired and declared for by them, have been Chosen in
two of them, without Contest, or Poll, and in the last Election, the Poll was
refused them, when lawfully demanded.

Whereupon the Borough, with those they have Chosen, fly to the Parliament for
Relief.


