Masora. A COLLECTION Out of the Learned Master JOANNES BUXTORFIUS 's
Commentarius Masorethicus.

By CLEMENT BARKSDALE.

Neque Omnia, neque Nihil.
Iota unum non peribit.
LONDON, Printed for Matthias Thurston, and are to be sold at his Shop next the
St. Johns-head Tavern within Ludgate. 1665.

PETRVS CVNAEVS, Of the Hebrew COMMONWEALTH, Lib. 1. Cap. ult.
WHat time the Christians understood scarce Three words of Hebrew, how easy
had it been for the Jews to corrupt those places which seemed to refute their
Follies; but Piety would not permit them; Religion forbad them to move or alter
any thing in the Sacred Text: And truly when I look upon the unwearied
diligence of the MASORITES, I am almost amazed: For all the parts of the Hebrew
Bible, being accurately revised and compared, they signed with Impressed Notes.
They observed not only how many Verses and Words, but also how many Letters
every Book contained. Wherefore, that afterward, when Barbarism orespread the
World, not one point of that Divine writing perished, we owe (next under God)
to them. The INDEX.
MASORA, whence so called. 2. What are Traditions. 3. Definition of Masora* 4.
The deligence of the Heb. Gods providence. 5. Who the Authors of Masora: two
opinions. 6. Aben Ezra, and Elias Levita. I.
7. The School of Tiberias: the Jerusalem Talmud. Rabbi Jehuda. 8. The
Babylon-Schools: their Talmud. 9. Hillel Hannasi, his new compute. Jos.
Scaliger. 10. Tiberias decayed. 11. St. Jerome, his Hebrew Doctor. 12 The
Masorites of Tiberias not Authors. 13. The Authority of the Babylon-Talmud. 14.
The Oral Kabala. 15. Masora more ancient then the Talmud. 16. 17. The points
before the Masoretic Notes. 18. Dages and Mappik. 19. The Accents noted. 20.
Masorites office. 21. Masorites the Ancients. 22. Vowels from one Prick. 23.
Punctation before Talmud. 24. Chaldee names of Points. 25. Need of Points. 26.
Vowel Points not from the Tiberians; why. 27. The Septuagint. 28. The Great
Synagogue. II
29. Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. High Priest, and Alex. M. 30. Scribes. Ezra praised.
31. Ezra, Haggai, Malachi, Zorobabel, etc. 32. Nehem. 8. 8. expounded. Tertul.
and Chrysostom. 33. Beginning of Masora. Division of the Bible, Lu. 24. 44. 34.
Subdivision into 22. 35. Distinction of Verses: Fiction of the Kabalists:
Septuagint. 36. Critical Learning: The first Masorites. 37. Reading of the
words: Vowels and Accents: Letters numbered. 38. Testimonies for the men of the
Great Synagogue. 39. Elias Levita: Succession of Masorites. Ezra the first
Author. 40. The Matter of the Masora. The number of the Verses in Genesis, etc.
41. Notes upon the Verses: Venice Edition of the Bible. 42. Notes upon the
Words. 43. The writing and reading. 44. Words written fully or defectively.
45. The place of Words. 46. Structure of Verbs. 47. Ambiguous signification
noted. 48. Vowels and Accents observed. 49. The Letters noted in their Figure
and Number. 50. Great Letters observed. 51. Little Letters observed. 52. The
Letter Nun inverted. 53. Pricked words. 54. The Letters numbered: The middle
Letter of the Law. 55. Raf. Saadia Gaon. 56. The Form of the Masora: The
Edition of Daniel Bomberg, and R. Jac. Ben Chajim. 57. The Great and Little
Masora: Textual and Final. 58. The end of the Masora: The hedge of the Law:
Testimonies of Jews. 59. Testimonies of Christians. 60. Conclusion.
MASORA.
I.
(...), Masora, Masoreth are Verbal Nouns derived from the Root (...), to
deliver, and are here taken for a Doctrine or Knowledge, which one delivers and
communicates to another, as it were from hand to hand: The correlative Verb is
(...), to receive, i. to perceive, know, and understand; for what is delivered
by word of mouth, is received with the Ear, and so transmitted to the Mind: So
the Hebrews have a saying; Moses received the Law from Sinai, and delivered it
to Joshua, Joshua to the Elders, the Elders to the Prophets, the Prophets
delivered it to the men of the great Synagogue. Cap. 1.

II.
In the New Testament (...) tradition or delivery, is usually taken for a
Doctrine or Institution about certain Rites and Ceremonies; so the Jews had
many Traditions invented and prescribed by the Scribes and Doctors for the
advancement of Piety, that is, to keep them by the observing of these in the
better observation of Gods Commands; whence in Syriac Tradition is called
Perfection, because they imagined that the Law of God, comprehended in writing
somewhat imperfectly, was perfected and completed by such Institutions; but
Christ has disapproved them, saying, Ye have made void the Law of God by your
Tradition, Mat. 15. 6. Cap. 1.

III.
Masora, as we take it here by a Synecdoche, signifies the Critical Doctrine
about the Holy Hebrew Text, and may be thus defined: A Critical Doctrine
concerning the Hebrew Text of Holy Scripture, ingeniously invented by the
ancient wise men of the Hebrews, whereby the Verses, Words, and Letters thereof
were numbered, and all the variety of them marked and showed in their several
places with the particular Verses recited, that so the constant and genuine
reading of the Text might be preserved, and for ever secured from all chang and
corruption: Hence is that saying of the Rabbis, The Masora is the Hedge or
Fence of the Law. Cap. 2.

IV.
In this Study, admirable was the diligence of the ancient Hebrews, their Zeal
in conserving the Text of Gods Word most ardent, inimitable, and without
example in any other Nation of the whole World was their Labor. No less to be
admired is the providence of God, shining forth toward the Gentiles, who were
to be called to the knowledge of him by the Scripture: For here, through East
and West, the Word of God is of one reading, the Books do all consent with
perfect Harmony, a Happiness granted to no other Nation, no other Books in the
World: That most ancient Writer of the Christian Church Justin Martyr, justly
ascribs it to the singular care and providence of God, that the Jews so
studiously in their Synagogues kept safe and sound the holy Writings for our
use and benefit, Sermon. ad Gentes: And St. Austin styles the Jews, our Servitors
to carry our books for us, in Psalm. 41. Cap. 2.

V.
The Authors of Masora are named by the Hebrews (...), in our Schools the
Masoreths, from their handling the Masora, or Critical Doctrine: Who they were
indeed, where or when they lived, is not easily to be determined. Two opinions
there are especially among the Rabbis; the one, that the Authors were the wise
men of the City Tiberias; the other, that the Masora was written by the men of
the Great Synagogue, or the great Council called by the Prophet Ezra, Cap. 3.

VI.
They of the first opinion do not only attribute the Masora to the wise men of
Tiberias, but will have them to be the first Inventors of the Points, Vowels,
and Accents. Among these, the first is R. Aben Ezra (he flourished in the year
of Christ 1150,) who in his Grammar plainly says, Thus was the Custom of the
wise men of Tiberias, for of them were the Authors of the Masora; and from them
have we received all the pointing; and often does he mention those wise men in
the same Book, and commends them several times for their skill in reading and
genuine pronuntiation; his second in this opinion is Elias Levita, a Jew of
Germany, and a Famous Grammarian in the Last age, and one that in the
explication of the whole Masora, and particularly in the curious handling of
this part, got the praise from all the Rabbis of his people. In sundry
Prefaces to his Masoreth Hammasoreth, his opinion touching the original of
Masora, and the Vowel points, is this in short: 1. That there were innumerable
Authors of the Masora in diverse ages. 2. That the time of the beginning of them
and the end is uncertain. 3. That the Hebrews of Tiberias first wrote the
Masora, and invented the points of Vowels and of Accents, after the Talmud was
finished, i. long after, 500. years since our Savior Christ. Cap. 3.

VII.
The City of Tiberias, which produced the Masoreth, of all the Jews most expert
in the Hebrew Tongue, was in the Land of Galilee, seated near the Lake of
Henne-Caroth, of whose Rise and Situation, Josephus that noble and most
ancient Writer of the Jewish Affairs informs us, Antiq. lib. 18. c. 3. And when
after the desolation of Jerusalem by the Roman Army, some Relics of the
Learned Jews escaped into Babylon, and some remained in Palestin; these by a
little and little in the more commodious places and cities, restored their
Schools and Assemblies, and this Tiberias was one of those Cities celebrated in
the writing of the Hebrews, and adorned with some Names of wise and learned
men, and enjoyed that honor till the year of Christ 230. after which time the
Chronicles of the Hebrews relate nothing very memorable concerning Schools, and
the Studies of good learning in Judea; for here Rabbi Jehuda, aftet the
publishing of the Jerusalem Talmud, died in the same or the following year, and
after his death, the Studens in Judea were dispersed, and the Schools
translated into Babylon. Cap. 4. and 5.

VIII.
Thus the Schools of Judea as it were expiring with R. Jehuda the Saint, their
Light and Life, and the principal Scholars being removed about the year 230.
out of Palestin into Babylon, there did they renew their Studies with great
Fervor; chiefly did the Profession of the Jewish Law flourish, comprehended in
the Book Mischna, their Corpus Juris as it were: This was the Subject of they
Lectures and Disputations, so that afterward, in the year after the destruction
of the City 436. as Elias puts it, that is of Christ 506, came forth the
Babylonian Talmund distinct into six principal parts, and Sixty three Books, by
which even until this day, the whole Nation of the Jews are governed. In the
year of Christ 1037, then the Babylonian Schools were altogether extinguished,
the wise Masters vanished thence, and fixed themselves in another Sphere, in
Spain and other parts of Europe, as R. Abraham and other Writers testify. Cap.
6.

IX.
It seems yet that all Learning did not die in Palestin with Rabbi Jehuda the
Saint; for though the Chronicles give us nothing memorable after him, yet the
Hebrew History makes mention of some Doctors of Schools in the Land of Israel,
as may be seen in Juchasin, fol. 106. In the year of Christ 340. Hillel Hannasi
was famous among the Jews, both a Philosopher and excellent Astronomer. so that
he made a new Compute: and Jos Scaliger in his Book of De Emendatione Temp. p.
544. says, The new Compute was the work of the Masters of Tyberias. We read
of none but this Hillel that reformed the Calendar: therefore by the Masters of
Tyberias we must understand Hillel: the rather, because all the Jews unto this
day do follow his Computation, and will follow it till the time of their
Deliverer whom they expect, as we see in Inchasin fol. 90. According to
Scaliger then, this Hillel lived in Tyberias, and to that time Tyberias was not
decayed. Cap. 7.

X.
That something of the Schools in Palestin remained till this time, appears
by Schalschelet fol. 34. He (R. Jehuda Nesia) was the father of Rabbi Hillel
the Prince, who was promoted into a Master in the Land of Israel, and the last
of the promoted, as may be seen in the Talmudical Book De Idololatria. And in
Tzemach David, where is mention of this Hillel fol. 47. The promoted in the
Jews of Israel ceased in him. Now if Scholastical promotion here ceased, it is
very probable that professions and public exercises ceased also; being those
Dignities are the rewards of an excellent learning, ordained for the
conservation and propagation of studies; which is made more probable, in that
the Chronicles of the Hebrews relate nothing at all, after this Hillel,
touching the Schools or Wise men of Palestin, but pursue the Schools of Babylon
to the last. Cap. 7.

XI.
Yet St. Hierom, a very ancient Writer of the Christian Church, carries us a
little farther. For he, when he translated the Hebrew Bible into Latin,
procured a Learned Jew from Tyberias, whose help he used in the interpretation
of the Book of Chronicles; a certain Doctor of the Law, admired among the
Hebrews, by whose assistance he was encouraged to go through with his
translation, as himself tell us in the preface to that Book. Now St. Hierom, as
our Chronologers say, ended his life at Bethelem in the year of Christ 420, or
422. I suppose he might be upon his interpretation about the year 400. being he
spent some years about it, and lived some years after it was finished, to hear
the censures of men for it or against it, and to make his defense at sundry
times. Cap. 7.

XII.
Thus we have searched into the studies of these Tyberians, and followed them
to the year 400. drawn on by some hope of finding the most wise College of
Masoreths at Tyberias. We have found indeed, that learning, after the waste of
Jerusalem, was a long time conserved in Palestin, and especially in the City of
Tyberias; but, being the Hebrew History pursues the course of studies and the
several generations of wise men to a thousand years in Babylon, and leaves off
in Palestin or the Land of Israel about the year 340, ending with Hillel the
Prince; it is no way credible, that after 500, or about 600. years from Christ,
or more, so many mighty Scholars were extant at Tyberias, who above all the
Jews were most exercised in the Reading of holy Scriptures, and were the
authors of an invention, so new, so admired, of such concernment to the most
sober and most weighty handling of the sacred Letters, and delivered the same,
without any witness, without any history, without any memory of Books;
delivered it, I say, as a divine Oracle to be accepted by all the Nation of the
Jews, yea by the whole world, wheresoever the Word of God was communicated or
to be communicated. Cap. 7.

XIII.
Moreover, being the Elaboration, Conscription, authors, and whatsoever
pertains to the history of these books of both the Jerusalem and
Babylon-Talmud, was observed and noted with great care by the Hebrews, how was
it possible they should conceal that which concerned the genuine, authentic
and everlasting reading of the sacred Scripture. Again being the most vaunting
and self conceited Jews of Babylon, dwelling in a most flourishing Empire, by
the authority and celebrity of their Doctrine, quickly obscured and at length
wholly extinguished, the Jewish Masters and their Schools left among the ruins
and rubbish of poor Palestin, how can we imagine, that after so many ages, in
such vigor and pride of their studies at Babylon, they would have given up the
eternal praise and glory of this Critical study about holy Scripture, and
permitted these Tyberians alone to enjoy it? Further, being the Babyloan Jews
overcame, darkened and brought almost to nothing the Jerusalem-Talmud by their
Babylonian-Talmud, and obtained so much authority to theirs, that thereby the
whole Jewish Nation under heaven must be for ever ruled, as it is this very
day, how could it be that they have not also procured to themselves the
authority, credit and renown of this Masoretical Learning! Cap. 7.

XIV.
Further yet, if the Tyberian Jews after the Babylon Talmud studies flourishing
a thousand years at Babylon, were the authors of the Masora and the points of
the sacred Reading, how were they able to do such a work without the knowledge
of the Babylonians, with whom all the Jewish learning was in its height! how
could they affect it, without their consent and common approbation? Surely,
that Reading which was tied to the external figures of vowels, and confirmed by
Masoretick notes, required the testimony and approbation of all the Jewish
Congregation to show its conformity and agreement with the old Mosaic and
prophetical authentic Reading, in all and every one of the letters and vowels,
even to the least prick. But of this either communication of Counsel or
approbation of the enterprise, there is not extant one tittle in all the
history of the Jews. No question, if the first writers after the Babylon Talmud
had wholly been silent, yet the oral Kabala would never so have suppressed it,
or withdrawn it from posterity, but that some time or other it would have been
discovered by some body. Lastly, by the confession of Elias himself, the
Authors of the Masora were in diverse generations almost innumerable, their
beginning and end uncertain; how then can the Tyberians alone be said to be the
Authors? how is the beginning thereof ascribed to the time after the
Babylon-Talmud? Cap. 7.

XV.
Aben Esra (as above) said, that the Masora and punctation proceeded from the
Wise men of Tyberias: Elias Levita defined the circumstance of time, and said
this came to pass, and the Masora was written by them after the Talmud. But if
both the name it self and the things contained in the Masora, as are the
distinction of the Text into verses, the noting of words according to their
diverse writing and reading, and the observation of the same words written fully
or defectively, the quality of letters, and the dinumeration of all the words,
and verses be mentioned in the Talmud: if also the Talmud sometimes determines
or disputes against the Masora: then it follows, that the use and knowledge of
the Masora, in the greatest part, was before the Talmud, and consequently the
sentence of Elias cannot hold. And these particulars are declared. Cap. 8.

XVI.
Elias says, the Tyberians invented the art of punctation, and wrote the
Masora, whence they were called Masoreths. But we may argue from the Masoretick
notes themselves, that the Masora now extant, and the points, had not the same
Authors. For example, Genesis 16. 13. it is written (...), and verse 15. (...),
where the Gloss of the Masoreths, every (...) is with Kametz (the little, i.
tzere) excepting six with Saegol. If the Authors of the Punctation and Masora
be the same, what reason had they to point six only of so many hundred, against
the common form? Why are those six here alleged in the Masora so pointed, and
no other? why have they discovered the irregularity themselves by adding a
note? surely, they were not the same men who made the Punctation and the
Masora; but the Masoreths who revised the Forms of words, and found it so in
the Copies pointed formerly, did therefore specify this Form; for they did not
give themselves this right, to change the least prick in the Sacred Text, nor
would permit that License to any, because the Authority of Holy Scripture,
ought to be inviolable, whose Form being Authentic and Divine, and so
acknowledged by them, no boldness of man could alter without extreme Impiety.
They put a Note therefore to these six, that even in the least the Text of
Scripture might evermore remain Inviolate, the only Scope of the whole Masora.
Cap. 9.

XVII.
Another example hereof, Genesis 19. 2. It is written (...); the Masorites, every
(...) of the signification of (...) is with Kametz (the little i. tzere) except
this one. Wherefore in so many places have they printed this word always alike,
this one place excepted? Wherefore have they, if themselves were Authors of this
Punctation, showed their Novelty by their Gloss? Why the Masoreths seeing this
word in their Copies printed so in this place formerly by others, added their
note that none might alter it, which every one might most easily have done
according to Grammar. Many more examples are set down. Cap. 9.

XVIII.
As of the Vowel-points, so also the inconstant use of the Points, Dages, and
Mappik, is observed and noted by the Masoreths, whence it may very probably be
concluded that the Masoreths, or the Authors of the written Masora, were not
withal the Inventors of these two points, and then wrote a Masora of them, but
judged of their Inconstancy in the Books formerly pointed, and added their
Masoretical Notes, that they founded it thus and thus in their Books; nor was
it lawful for any man to amend the least point in Holy Writ, least in time it
should by Degrees degenerate from a Divine to a Humane sense. For the boldness
of man, hardly contains its self within any bounds. The Rule is, that the four
Guttural Letters admit not Dages -- yet the Masoreths noted the Letter (...) to
be dagessed four times, for so they found it in their Books; Mappik has a
necessary use, yet the Masoreths have observed and noted the omission of it in
(...) thrice, once in the Law, once in the Prophets, once in the Hagiographa,
for the same reason. Cap. 9.

XIX.
Also from the diverse use of the Accents and the Notes upon them, it appears
that the Inventors of the Accents, and the Authors of the Masora, were not the
same persons; but the Masoreths, as they saw the use of the Accents in the
Books before pointed, so wrote the Masora of them, Genesis 30. 19. upon (...) the
Sixth Son, the Masoreths note, every Ben before Makkaph, has Pathach (the
little i. Saegol) except four; the other three are extant, 1 Samuel 22. 20. 2 Samuel 9. 12. Ezekiel. 18. 20. Again (...) with an Accent has always Tzere, except
six, which with an Accent have Saegol, just as if they were before Makkaph: The
places are cited in the Masora; Psalm. 27. 4. is written (...), the Masora. It
is not found elsewhere with Pathach and Athnach. If these Masoreths were also
the Printers, why did they not point it as elsewhere (...) Psalm. 104. 34. What
they found in their Books, that they noted. Cap. 9.

XX.
There are infinite examples of the like kind, and the whole Masora shows that
the Masoreths were not the Authors of the Vowels and Accents, but only noted
what was before invented; for otherwise why should they bring in so many
Anomalies to perplex the Reader, when they might easily have kept the Analogy
of the Tongue? but their office only was, to note the Form of the sacred Text
in the Verses, Words, and Letters, exactly, as they had it in their Copies, and
judged it to be Authentic, to the end it might remain to all Posterity
uncorrupted and unchanged; or if any diversity should happen by mistake or
negligence of Transcribers, it might by those Notes be corrected and restored.
Cap. 9. p. 72.

XXI.
Neither is it probable that the Inventors of the Points, and the Authors of
the Masora, lived at the same time; for then might they have enquired of them
the reason of the more notable Anonymies and Diversities, and set it down in
writing, that so Posterity might not have been perplexed with the common
Accidents of Grammar, in a Language otherwise plain. But seeing we have great
evidence that the principal parts of the Masora, and consequently the first
Masoreths were before the Jewish Talmud, and that a long time (for they are by
the Talmudists called (...) the Ancients, we may conclude that this part also
of the Masora touching the words arrayed with Vowel-points, and Accents, was
composed by those Antiens and their Successors before the Talmud, and not by
the Tyberians many ages after, when there was neither the same vigor of
Studies, nor the same Felicity of wits, nor so great convenience and frequency
of Schools, all things being disturbed by Wars and cruel Persecutions. Cap. 9.
p. 73.

XXII.
The Vowel points seem to be deduced from one single prick. A prick below the
Letter is Chireck; in the midst Schurck; above, Cholem; being doubled below the
Letter, and placed sidewise, it is Tzere, and by confluence Pathach; being
placed perpendicularly, one above the other, Sheva; being tripled in the Form
of a Triangle, Saegol, and by confluence Kamets, etc. Cap. 9.

XXIII.
In the Talmudical Book Nedarim, fol. 37. the Doctors dispute whether it be
lawful to teach the Law for a Reward? Some affirm, others deny, others
distinguish. Some said (...) a Reward of observation, and inspection of
Children, that they may keep home, repeat their Lessons, not run about, not be
wanton, is lawfully received: Another, R. Jochanan said, It is also lawful to
take reward for teaching the pauses of the Accents. The Gloss of R. Solomon,
for teaching the punctation and the Accents: But how could they teach these, if
indeed no Punctation was then extant? Cap. 9.

XXIV.
That the Points came from Mount Sinai, and were given to the people by Moses,
not a few of the Rabbis, and those of no vulgar Authority, have determined;
that the names of the points which are now used, and are partly mentioned in
the Masora, were also given by Moses from the Mount, they do not affirm; but
most of the Rabbis say, these names had their beginning from the Men of the
great Synagogue, who had good Skill in both Tongues, the Chaldee and the
Hebrew. And the Jews of the second Temple spoke (...) the Chaldee Language or
the Syriac; very many words also and names came new with them out of Babylon.
Its no wonder then, that the men of the great Synagogue made use of the Chaldee
in the tradition or delivery of the Points and the Masora. Wherhfore what Elias
objecteth from the Syriac and Babybolonic names of Zere, Segol, etc. is of no
force against us. Cap. 9.

XXV.
And as to what Elias says, that they had no need of Points, who were so
exercised and Skilled in the Hebrew Tongue, that they could read without them;
it may be true of the Men of the great Synagogue, amongst whom some Prophets
were intermixed; but of the Jews Universally, and of their posterity when
Prophecy ceased, and the Heavenly Doctrine by God's just judgment was decayed,
this can no wise be granted, as all times do testify, and is confirmed by
experience at this day. And whereas he says, that by the Tradition and
Protection of the Prophets, they accurately kept in remembrance and could tell,
where a pause was to be made, or the speech continued, it may be granted of the
Prophets immediately by God instructed; but that the following people even to
the Talmudists could do the same, after so many calamities and persecutions, is
altogether impossible. What humane wit, what memory was able to retain so
exactly the distinct pauses of many thousand Verses, the distinct pronuntiation
of so many thousand Words, so that no error should be committed in any Member,
in any Voice or Vowell, until Elias's Tiberian Masoreths? who can believe,
that those Tiberians, Men never famous, never mentioned with honor, had a
fuller measure and greater efficacy of the divine Spirit then the Men whose
Counsels and designs were happily conducted by the direction of the Prophets,
Zachary, Maelachy, and Esra? Cap. 9.

XXVI.
Plainly, if the Vowell-points and distinguishing Accents were added to the
Holy Scripture by those Tiberians, or such like Men of the Common sort, then
that sense which the Reading of the Vowell-Points and the distinguishing
exhibites, must necessarily be of humane authority, and consequently uncertain,
not Divine and Prophetical, and so Authentic; then those Points, in places
doubtful, ambiguous and difficult, may be changed by any other Learned Man,
and others substituted for them: There will be contention who shall be the more
Learned, and more Skillful in Correction: Then, everywhere will be great doubt,
the same Word by reason of but one Point changed passing into another sense:
Then, the Text consisting of naked Letters will be like Wax, mutable into
diverse forms: Then, in such debates will be no supreme Judge, and so no Canon
of the Sacred Scripture of the Old Testament, which may be the measure and the
end of controverted interpretation. Cap. 9.

XXVII.
Nor is it enough to say, the Text in the Letters is incorrupt and unchanged,
and that may be judge. For the Vowels, are the soul giving life to the distinct
Words, and the Word written with bare Consonants, cannot be read nor understood
without Vowels; and especially in dark and difficult places, one will add
these Vowels, another those, as every own shall attempt to draw forth the
meaning. Here is need of another Judge, the Word written with naked Letters
cannot speak for it self: The Greek version of the lxx. differs from the Hebrew
Text, not only in the reading of Vowels but Letters also, so that it cannot be
Judge. Where will you seek another? Shall the Servant give sentence upon the
Lord, the waiting Maid upon her Royal Lady? or shall the living and most clear
fountain be tried by the Taste and Color of the troubled and muddy stream? Cap.
9.

XXVIII.
The other Opinion of the Hebrews touching the Authors of the Masora is, that
the Masora was written by the Men of the great Synagogue, whom they style in
their Books, (...). This is the great Council gathered by Ezra the Priest, the
President thereof, after the Babylonian Captivity: by whose help and assistance
he restored the Church of Jerusalem and of all the Jews, purging and reforming
it from many corruptions, errors and vices, contracted in Babylon. For this
Office, when he departed from Babylon to Jerusalem, by the Grace of God, and
the Authority of King Artaxerxes was committed to him, as appears by the Kings
Letters Esr. 7. Not long after him the King sent away Nehemias also, as a most
faithful Colleague and zealous assistant; who being armed with the Royal
Commission and public authority, promoted the reformation of the City and the
Church with great fervor of affection, as the Book of Nehemiah shows. Cap. 10.

XXIX.
Esra and Nehemiah, associated to themselves others of the prime Men of the
people, and the wisest, so that the whole Council completed the number of 120.
Men; which Council is of most worthy memory, frequently in the Writings of the
Hebrews. Hence in the Chronicle Juchasin, fol. 13. It is read of this Counsel,
When Constitutions are named absolutely, they are from Esra. And the house of
Judgment of Esra, is that which is called the great Synagogue or the great
Council, which restored the Crown unto the ancient estate. The Hebrews had
three Crowns of the Law, the Priesthood and the Kingdom. The Crown of the Law,
i. the Study of Wisdom, and the knowledge of the Divine Law, was the greatest
of all, according to that Prove. 8. 15. By me (i. Wisdom) Kings Reign. This
Crown Esra which his Colleagues reduced to the Primitive Condition, i. e. He
reformed the Ecclesiastical Commonwealth from the filth, and pollutions of
Babylon, and reduced it to the old integrity, and purged the Holy Scripture
from the deceitful Books of the false Prophets, and from all corruptions.
Therefore in the Jerusalem Talmud, in the Book Megilla, c. 4. in fine: When the
men of the great Synagogue arose, they restored magnificence, i. The Crown of
the Law, then whose magnificence, none is greater. Don Isaac Abarbinel in the
preface to his (...) Commemorates the principal men of this Council, most of
whom came from Babylon and Jerusalem with Zorobabel: The Catalogue, says he,
of the men of the great Council are Hagaeus the Prophets, Zacharias the
Prophet, Malachias the Prophet, Zorobabel the son of Schealtiel, Mordecai,
Bilsohan; Ezra the Priest and Scribe, Jehosua the Son of Johotzedek the Priest,
Seraja, Realja, Mispar Bigaeus, Rachum, Bana, Nehemiah the Son of Chacilja.
These are the twelve prime Men, etc. The last man (says Rabbi Moses ben
M^jomen,) in whom the Council ended, was (...) Simeon the just, he who went
forth to meet the great Alexander, in bis Priestly habit, and inclined him to
show Clemency toward the City; which story is famous among the Hebrews. It
happened, according to their account, in the fourth year after the building of
the second Temple; whence we gather, that the men of this Synod supervived
beyond forty years. All this is to show, that the Hebrews esteemed this Synod
of very great Authority. Cap. 10.

XXX.
The head and President of this Synod, Ezra was, above all the rest, furnished
with singular gifts of God for these affairs: chiefly was he expert in the
Divine Law, in the interpretation and description of the Sacred Scripture most
exercised; for which he is commended Esr. 7. 6. He was a ready Scribe in the
Law of Moses, (...); A Scribe he is called, not so much a Scribendo, from
writing, as from declaring and explaining the things contained in the Holy
Scriptures. For (...) is a Book, (...) an interpreter of Books, a Doctor, a
Scribe. And by no Book was gotten greater praise, then by the Book of the Law:
whence (...) a Lawyer, who taught and interpreted the Law of God. So in the New
Testament they are sometimes styled (...) Scribes, who instructed the people,
sometimes (...) Skillful of the Law. Yet properly was he called (...) a Scribe,
who did write Letters, Instruments, Books, Contracts and such like, as in Psa.
45. 2. My Tongue is the Pen of a ready Scribe, (...); But Esra was excellent
both-wayes, being at once a Learned expounder of the Law, and a ready Writer of
it: For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it,
and to teach in Israel Statutes and Judgments, Ez. 7. 10. (...) Hence also they
compare him to Moses for the excellency of his Dignity, as we may read in both
Talmuds; and he was justly named Ezra, for (...) is help; St. Jerome renders it
Adjutor, a Helper.

XXXI.
Ezra therefore being sollicitous to help a decayed Church, and to reform it,
distributed Offices Ecclesiastical, instituted Sacrifices, consecrated Vessels
appointed for Divine uses, celebrated Solemn Feasts, proclaimed Fasts and
Repentance, cleansed the people from the Wedlock of Strangers, and endeavored
to order and compose all things after the Prescript of Divine Law; but that the
Law it self, and the whole Sacred Scripture might be extant amongst the people
of God in the genuine and pure Integrity; and that there might be a difference
between the Writings of many false Prophets, and the Books of the true, and
whatsoever spot by reason of the incommodities of their long Captivity had
blemished the holy Letters, might be stripped off; there was great need of
mature Advice, of the provident care of Learned men, exercised perfectly in the
reading of the Sacred Scripture, and of the vigorous aid of many Assistants. To
this purpose he had with him Divine Colleagues, endued with a prophetic Spirit;
Haggaeus, Malachias, Nehemias, whose fervent and most ardent affection is
testified openly by their Holy Sermons; He had with him that most valiant
Leader Zorobabel, whose Stock and Virtue is ennobled by the Genealogy of our
Savior Christ: He had with him the High Priest Jeschua, and other Chief
Priests and Levites, the companions of Zorobabel their Leader out of Babylon,
and he had also all that were Pillars of Piety among all the people. These were
the men designed for the Settlement of Religion, not only for the present time,
but for the eternal benefit of Posterity, from whom they knew the gift of
Prophecy was now departing. Cap. 10.

XXXII.
In this Synod they thought it not sufficient to have delivered the Sacred
authentic books unto the Church, but the manner also how to read them clearly,
and expound them, was most prudently prescribed. It appears by the learned
Hebrews exposition of that place in Nehemiah, chap. 8. verse. 8. (So they read
in the Book in the sight of all the people, and gave the sense, and caused them
t^ understand the reading) that in the public Synagogue they read first the
Text of the Book of the Law, in Hebrew, distinctly and understandingly,
according to the pauses, and then explained it in the Chaldee, which was now
the vulgar Tongue of the people, brought from Babylon. This Reformation of the
Sacred Scripture by Ezra was not unknown to Tertullian, a most grave Writer of
the first Antiquity in the Christian Church; for in his Book De Hab. Mul. he
says, After the overthrow of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, it is certain that
all the Instruments of the Judaic Literature were, restored by Ezra.
Chrysostom also ascribes unto Ezra the same work, where he writes, Attend
and Learn Gods mercy to us of old; He inspired Moses, and he wrote the Tables
of Stone; He determined him forty days in the Mount, and again so many days,
that he might give him the Law. In after times he sent Prophets who suffered
innumerable wrongs; War rushed in, it consumed all sorts of men, the Books were
burnt in the Fire. But again he inspired another man, that he might repair
those admirable Scriptures, I mean Ezra, and enabled him to compose the Law
anew out of their Relics, etc. Hom. 8. in Epist. ad Hebr. Cap. 11.

XXXIII.
Now and henceforth were the Foundations of the Masora laid; the work was begun
in the partition of the Sacred Books, in the distinction of the Text into
greater Sections, and into Verses, and in the dinumeration of them, as also of
the Letters, least one Prick or Tittle might afterward be changed or lost. For
first, having constituted the number of Canonical Books, and reduced them into
one body of Scripture, they divided it into three principal parts, viz. (...),
the Law, (...), the Prophets, and (...), the holy Writings or Hagiographa. This
Division was taken notice of by our Savior, and declared in that saying of
his; All things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law, and in the
Prophets and in the Psalms concerning me, Luc. 24. 44. where the Psalms are
put for all the Books in that part entitled Hagiographa, out of which also some
things are cited in the new Testament as fulfilled. Elsewhere he named only two
parts: The Law and the Prophets were until John, Luc. 16. 16. And in another
place a whole part of Scripture is set for one Book of that part, as, It is
written in the Prophets, Mark. 1. 2. Jo. 6. 45. That is, in that part of
Scripture which contains the Prophets in that Volumne of the Prophets. For that
which was cited, was not written in all the Prophets, but in one of them, the
first in Mal. 3. 1. the other in Isa. 54. 13. Thus, is this division usual in
the most ancient writings of the Hebrews. In the Masora, when any word is found
only thrice, and that in the three parts of Scripture, then they say: We meet
with it three times, once in the Law, once in the Prophets, once in the
Hagiographia. In the Talmudists, one binds up the Law, the Prophets and the
Hagiographa into one Book. Again, They brought unto us the Law, the Prophets,
the Hagiographa bound into one. Barabathra fol. 13. 2. Elias Levita in the
third preface to his Masoreth, where he speaks of the men of the great
Synagogue, and their labor in restoring of the Scripture, writes thus: For all
the twenty four Books were not bound up together, but they (the Men of the
great Synagogue) conjoined them, and made three parts of them, the Law; the
Prophets, and the Hagiographa, (...) Cap. 11.

XXXIV.
These three parts were afterward divided into others. The Law, according to
the diversity of the matter and the History, was subdivided into five Books,
which are entitled by us, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuternomy. The
Prophets were subdivided into (...) the former Prophets, and (...) the latter
Prophets. The former are four in number, which are named under the title of the
Books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings, or so called because in these Books
it is treated of the first Prophets. In these, Samuel was reckoned at first for
one Book, and the Kings likewise for one; which afterward were distinguished
into two. Hence Samuel is called a Prophet, as in that, He gave them Judges
until Samuel the Prophet, Act. 13. 20. The latter Prophets are also four*
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the Twelve Lesser. These last were
united in one Book, that they might not be in danger by their smalnesse to be
lost. Hence is that to be taken, Act. 7. 42. As it is written in the Book of
the Prophets, that is, of the lesser Prophets, to wit, Amos 5. 25. and hence
also we read in the Hebrew Doctors, Those eight Prophets were bound in one,
Barabathra fol. 13. 2. to wit, the four former and so many latter before
mentioned, as the Commentator there explains. The rest of the Books are the
Hagiographa, and they were styled in the Hebrew (...) Writings by a Synecdoche,
in as much as they were written by the Holy Spirit, (...), that is by immediate
instinct of the Holy Ghost, and not by a Prophetic spirit, or by Prophecy
properly so called. So Daniel and Esra are accounted as it were Historical,
composing the History of the Church by divine instinct; whither also pertain
the Paralipomena or Chronicles, whose Author Esra is supposed to have been.
David and Solomon have written, most part, things belonging unto piety, and
manners, and Doctrine in adversity and prosperity; albeit they have Prophetical
matters, David eminently, often times intermixed. The five small Books, which
they call (...) are likewise judged as Didactical and historical. The
Hagiographa therefore at first were accounted nine Books, Psalms, Proverbs,
Job, Canticles, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Esra, Chronicles: where Esra
comprehends also Nehemiah, and the two Books of Chronicles are taken for one.
The Book of Ruth was referred to the Book of Judges, for the continuation of
the History; and the Lamentations to Jeremy for the same Authors sake.
According to this distinction, the Books of the Bible in all were computed two
and twenty, agreeable to the number of the Hebrew Letters. Cap. 11.

XXXV.
After that they had defined and distributed the Canonica^ Books, the Men of
the great Synagogue further considered of the conformity of the Text, and the
verity and variety of the reading. Here first of all the Text was distinguished
into Verses, Notes of distinction being added, which they called (...) because
there was the end of every Verse. For the Hebrews conceive, that all the
Scripture-text before was but as it were one Verse, without any notes of
distinction; even as it is this day, all their Books, except very seldom, and
almost only in the greater Sections and Parts, do not use distinctive Points,
but signify a new Part, Section or matter of discourse, by larger Writing of
the first Word. And that till the time of this Council or great Synagogue the
Text of Scripture was without Notes of distinction of the Verses, the Jews
prove out of the Sacred Book of the Law, written after the ancient manner, into
a great form rouled up, kept in their Synagogues in a Sacred Chest for public
solemn Readings on Sabbath days and other Festivals; which is still to be seen
without those Notes of Verses, and without the Points of Vowels and Accents,
according to the form of the first exemplar written by Moses, and given to the
people of Israel, as themselves affirm. But that the whole Law was written
without any distinction of words, without any space interposed, that the whole
Text was as it were one Verse or one Word; is a vain fiction of the Kabbalists.
Now, if the Hebrew Text was distinguished into Verses by the Men of the great
Synagogue, why have not the lxx. Greek Interpreters, prudent Elders, born Jews,
the chiefest learned Men, most observant of their Law, retained that
distinction in their Traslation? The Answer is, that the difference of Verses,
as also of innumerous other places in that version, is not from those first
Interpreters, but from the Transcribers* who sometimes conjoined, sometimes
divided the sentences, as their Pen ran, and their mind was either more or
less intent; which in great and long works usually happens. Besides, who can
certainly affirm, or believe, that the present Greek version is altogether the
same, which those first interpreters with so great labor ftamed? What made
some of the most pious and most learned Fathers in the Primitive Christian
Church so often to complain of that Translation? What moved them to set forth
so many new ones in the Greek? Why did some so religiously embrace, and so much
commend the verity of the Hebrew Text? Cap. 11.

XXXVI.
After the distinction of the Verses by the men of the Great Synagogue, they
took into consideration the single Words, and therein they had a double care;
one respected the writing of them by naked Consonants, the other the reading of
them and pronunciation by the Letters and Vowels jointly. In the writing of the
Words by the Letters, they consulted with the Authentic Copies of the first
Authors, as many as were then extant in their hands, or else followed the
fidelity of other Copies most approved, and most in number; whether the Words
were Written according to the Native propriety of their Origination; what words
with what quiescent Letters were written fully, and what defectively; what
Letters and Words were written abundantly, and not read; or on the contrary,
what were read; and not written in the Text; or what were written in this
manner, and read in another; as the Church had observed it continually from the
time of Moses. Of all which particulars, the learned and skillful then were
able to give account, and there were mystical reasons, known to them; but among
the posterity, through the most grievous calamities of aftertimes, forgotten.
Now, if this part of Critical learning belongs to the Masora, and thence by all
they are styled Masoreths who were the Authors of it, then none can deny but
the first Masoreths were the Men of the great Synagogue? Cap. 11.

XXXVII.
A Second care of these Masoreths, was about the reading and pronouncing of the
Words, together with the Vowels and Accents: of them also particularly were
written Masoretic Notes. But whether the men of the great Synagogue here first
invented the Points of Vowels and Accents, or perfected them being invented by
other, or being neglected or disused, restored them, and took care that a
Masora should be also written of them, this cannot easily be said nor proved.
Lastly, these men not content with all this, numbered the Letters, Words and
Verses in every Book, that it might be known, what Letter, what Word, what
Verse was in the midst of every one; what Word did but once occur, and
therefore did easily admi^ some error or corruption; what words more often, and
how many times they were read under this or that form; and infinite other
things of like nature, touching the explication of the Holy Text, did they
deliver; that so they might fence it about, as it were, and preserve it from
corruption. And from this part of their Office, whith was employed in numbering
of the Words, they were also called Sopherim, i. e. Numerators, from (...) to
number; and to celebrate their Antiquity and their Excellency the Talmudists
call them the Ancients and the First, using this of those admirable men: The
Elogy heart of the Ancients was like the Gate of the Porch to the Temple; but
the heart of the Latter, like the eye of a Needle, Lib. 119. Eribbim. Cap. 5.
Cap. 11.

XXXVIII.
As before Number. 6. two Authorities of Aben, Ezra, and Elias Levita, were
alleged touching the Authors of the Masora; so likewise here shall we bring in
the Testimony of some famous Hebrews, to confirm this which is the more current
opinion: R. Gedalia in his Catena Kabalae, fol. 21. writes, Behold the men of
the great Synagogue have set forth many new Constitutions for the good of the
whole Captivity, as the distinction of Verses, the diversity of reading and
writing, the full words and the defective; the Sections close and open, the
Letters greater and less, the Accents and Vowel points; My mind gives me that
all were given to Moses from Mount Sinai, but posterity was forgetful of them;
or that they were given indeed to Moses, not that they should be committed to
writing; but these Princes (the men of the Great Synagogue) wrote them all down
and communicated them to all Israel. Don Isaac Abarbinel, in the Preface to his
Nachale Abhoth, writes, Ezra likewise taught Israel the Points, Accents, and
ends of the Verses, whereby he directed them and freed them from all confusion
and error. Ephodi cap. 7. of his Grammar writes in this manner; That most Holy
man, who was the Head of the Scribes, Ezra the Priest and Scribe, shook his
Lap, and strained all his Nerves, that he might bring into order what was
perverted; so did all the Scribes who followed him, and corrected these Books
with all possible care, until they left them most perfect, by numbering the
Sections, Verses, Words, and Letters; the full and defective Words, the
irregular and regular, and so forth (whence they are also styled Sophorim,
Numberers) and made of these the Books of Masora, Cap. 11.

XXXIX.
This is the common Sentence of the Hebrews, that the Masora proceeded from the
men of the Great Synagogue, and was not unknown to Elias, as in his foresaid
third Preface he acknowledges; Lo, it is the opinion of many, that Ezra the
Scribe and his Council, namely the men of the great Synagogue, made the Masora,
the Punctation and Accents upon the whole Bibles. So it is: and one shall
scarce find any Hebrew or Jew giving his voice for Elias, but on the contrary
his reasons are refuted by the most Learned Rabbis. Thence I say, from Ezra
had the Masora its beginning and rise, and the Vowel-points either their Birth
or Renovation; but I confess, the Masora, as a matter of infinite Study, was
continued by their Successors many Ages, until it grew up into a great Book,
exceeding for its quantity the Bibles themselves, as Elias writes, who saw
many Books of the Masora. Well might so great a Work and Study, so infinite and
vast a Labor, require both a long time and many hands, and those not vulgarly
learned. Now the circumstance of time, and the holy care and most ardent Zeal
of Ezra, and the rest of his Colleagues, toward the Reformation of the Church,
favor this work very much: He knew by his Prophetic Spirit, that the last of
the Prophets in the Jewish Church then lived, and therefore nothing was more
necessary, then that the Sacred Scripture should be conserved in it
uncorrupted. Their prudence and care it was to prevent the corruption by this
Critical Labor, whereby the true and constant writing and reading of all the
words, might remain for ever; and indeed they have effected it, as none can
deny who is thoroughly acquainted with the Secrets of this Study. Thus much of
the Original and Authors of the Masora. Cap. 11.

XL.
The Matter of the Masora, of which it consists, are the Critical or
Censorious Annotations touching the Hebrew Text of Holy Scripture; The Texts
are reckoned according to the Verses, Words, and Letters; the Verses are
numbered first entire through the several Books of the Bible, and in the
Pentateuch of Moses according to the greater Sections too, which are showed by
three greater (...) or (...). And withal through the whole Scripture, the
middle Verse of every Book is named; all which are set down after the Text, at
the end of every Book; as for Example: Genesis has 1534 Verses, and the middle
Verse is, And by thy Sword shall thou live, Chap. 27. 40. Exodus 1209. the
middle Verse; Speak not evil of the Magistrate, Chap. 22. 28. Leviticus 859.
the middle Verse, He that touches the flesh of him that has an Issue, Chap.
15. 7. Numbers 1288. the middle Verse, And it shall come to pass that the man's
rod whom I shall choose shall blossom, Chap. 17. 5. Deuteronomy 955. the
middle, And thou shall do aecording to the Sentence, Chap. 17. 10. The Sum of
the Verses (but mistaken in all the Books) of the whole Pentateuch, 5845. the
middle Verse of the whole Law or Pentateuch, And he put the Breast Plate upon
him, Levit. 8. 8. The Verses of the greater Sections, etc. This Hedge the first
Masorets set about the Holy Scripture, that the Sacred Body thereof might not
be maimed by the loss even of one Verse. Cap. 12.

XLI.
Again, the Verses were considered according to their various affections in the
Words and Letters. One Verse is noted consisting of two and forty words, which
have in them Letters one hundred and sixty. It is read Jer. 21. 7. Two Verses
there are in which there is four times (...), Genesis 22. 7. 1 Reg. 20. 14. Three
Verses there are, which have each Eighty Letters; one is Number. 36. 8. Three
Verses, in every one is (...) once, and (...) four times, as Number. 11. 19. Three
have each (...) thrice, and (...) also thrice, as Exodus 29. 5. Three begin and
end with the Divine name (...), which they call (...) the Memorial of Gods
eternal essence, as Deuteronomy. 31. 3. where the Masora cites the other two. There
are four Verses, in every one whereof (...) is five times, as Exodus 40. 18.
Five Verses, and in every one are five continued words of two Letters, as (...)
1 Reg. 3. 26. where the rest are cited. Ten Verses, wherein are (...) as 1 Reg.
7. 20. Ten in the Law, whose first and last word is the same, as Levit. 7. 9.
Fourteen, which consist only of three words, as Genesis 5. 6. Exodus 28. 13. where
the rest are alleged. There are twenty six Verses, in every of which are
extant all the letters of the Alphabet, as Ezekiel. 38. 13. where the rest are
quoted: among those there is one Verse, which has not only all the Alphabet
simple, but is enriched also with the five final Letters, and that is Soph. 3.
8. But let them beware, who have the Venice Editions lest-they weary themselves
too much in seeking for the Verses; for there are in them some false Verses
cited, which fault we have amended in our Edition. Innumerous more of this kind
have the Masoreths noted in the examination of the Verses in the Bible. Cap. 12.

XLII.
In the Words the Masoreths noted, First the genuine writing and reading of
them, where any diversity did occur. 2ly, Where they were written fully with
the quiescent Letters, or defectively without them. Thirdly, Their seat and
place in the beginning, middle or end of the Verse; and what form they had
either by themselves or by reason of some accent. Fourthly, Their structure and
conjunction with other words, or composition with servile Letters. Fifthly,
Their signification, where was any ambiguity. Sixthly, They often noted words
different in vowels and accents, where any peculiar observation or difference
seemed to require it. And to all these they added both the number, how often,
and the place where every one was exstant. Cap. 13.

XLIII.
The Writing and Reading is called by the Masoreths (...) or (...) when a Word
was otherwise Written in the Text by Letters, and noted in the Margin to be
otherwise read by Vowels; or when a Word was Written abundantly in the Text,
and omitted in Reading; or on the contrary was not written at all in the Text,
and yet was to be read: whence arose many and various kinds of this head. As,
sometimes a Letter was wanting in a Word, sometimes it abounded; sometimes one
Letter was changed into another, sometimes it was transposed. Likewise, in words
now some one was wanting in the Text, now it redounded; in this place a word
was divided in two, which was to be read as one, and on the other side, in that
place two written as one, which ought to be read divided, and in some places
also a Word was written in the Text, for which another Word was to be read.
Hence Elias Levita says, he observed all the Words which are of diverse
writing and reading, to be in number 848. and of them, says he further, 65.
are in the Law, 454. in the Prophets, 329. in the Hagiographa. But we have
observed, that they are many more. Here we shall propose a few; (...) in
thirteen places is deficient at the beginning, in three in the midst, in twenty
nine at the end: So, many other Letters. (...) is twelve times written at the
end of words abundantly, etc. Cap. 13.

XLIV.
Secondly, Words are said to be written fully or defectively, which are written
with the Letters (...) or (...), or without them; and more rarely the same is
said of (...) and (...); as (...) Genesis 1. 12. is read in Scripture thrice,
twice fully, with (...) in the midst, as in this place, and once defectively
(...) without (...) in the midst, which the Masora cites out of Ruth. 2. 8.
which yet at this day in the Printed Books is full, against the Masora. Also,
(...) Genesis 2. 7. is written fully with a double (...), which they noted
expressly, for in other places it is always (...). It is a Rule in Elias
Levita, in his Masoreth, Sermon. 1. cap. 1. Whenever the full words were more
then the deficient, then they numbered the deficient: but when the deficient
exceeded the number of the full, then the full were numbered. Cap. 13.

XLV.
Thirdly, The place of words in the Verses was noted; and first in the
beginning of the Verse, as at (...) Genesis 1. 2. it was noted to be eight times
the beginning of a Verse, and the places are quoted. (...) Genesis 1. 30. is noted
to begin the Verse four times, and the places alleged at the end of
Deuteronomy. So they noted innumerable other, and especially those which do
more seldom begin the Verse. And very often have they noted certain Particles
undeclin'd, as (...) and the like; which also sometimes they numbered in the
single Books of the Bible, that the beginnings of Verses might not be changed;
so (...) is ten times the beginning of the Verse in Deuteronomy, etc. Cap. 13.

XLVI.
Fourthly, The structure is noted in Verbs, when a Verb is joined with a
peculiar Noun, or with a certain Preposition with which it is not wont to be
joined; as the Verb (...) to say, with (...) for to say unto God, is found nine
times joined, and the places are cited in the great Masora in the word (...).
So the Verb (...) with (...) for to fear God, is found seven times, and the
places are reckoned up in the Masora Genesis 42. 18. The Verb, etc. Cap. 13.

XLVII.
Fifthly, The signification is noted in ambiguous words; as Genesis 6. 11. at the
Word (...) it is noted, six are to signify tears, for otherwise (...) is, Ascend
thou. Genesis 19. 8. at (...) they note, eight are in a profane or common
signification, when otherwise this word signifies God. Genesis 30. 24. at (...)
the Masora says, eleven are in the signification of adding defective, beside
three full, which are for the distinction of the proper name (...) Joseph, etc.
So, infinite more, which are of singular use. Cap. 13.

XLVIII.
Sixthly, The Vowels and Accents are observed by the Masoreths. In the great
Masora they name only the Vowels Kametz and Tzere; where under Kametz, Pathach
also, and under Tzere Saegol is comprehended; which the latter Rabbis, who
collected the little Masora out of the great, for distinction sake have called
little Kametz and little Tzere. The little Masora sometime expresses the name
of these and certain other Vowels, sometime only sets down the figure. For
example, Genesis 16. 13. at (...) It is not extant any more with Catephkamets;
because they saw it was irregular, that such a Vowel should be put under a
Letter not guttural, to which Sheva compounded properly agrees, etc. Cap. 13.

XLIX.
A Letter, though the least part of a Word, yet the Masoreths thought it not
unworthy of their diligent care, that not so much as one Letter or Tittle of a
Letter might be lost or changed. They noted first the quality of Letters in
their Figure, and then the quantity in their number. The Figure of Letters was
found in some without the common use either greater or less, either inverted
or pointed extraordinarily. No doubt, the ancient wise men had just and fit
causes of this diversity, but such as the various dispersions and most heavy
calamities of their posterity brought into oblivion, or for the most part
turned into several fictions and groundless mysteries. It is well, those
diverse figures, however, are preserved as Eternal Monuments and Testimonies of
the ancient wisdom. We will content our selves with a taste, being assured
that the use of this writing also is most ancient, noted in the Masora long
before the time of the Talmud, and not first invented by the Tiberians who
lived after it: for it is mentioned in the Talmud-tract, De Scribis c. 9. Cap.
14.

L.
A great (...) is extant in the word (...) Adam, 1 Chronicles. 1. 1. that it might
be a memorial of the first and only man, from whom the writer there intended to
deduce the original and the History of Mankind. That it was done to begin the
Book, as some will have it, is the less probable, because that is observed very
seldom in the beginning of other Books. A great (...) in the word (...) in the
beginning Genesis 1. 1. to mind us to consider the greatness and sublimity of the
work of creation: which is twofold, of the Heaven and of the Earth, signified
also by the numeral value of the Letter (...). A great (...) in the word (...)
He shall be shaven, Levit. 13. 33. some think it to be a memorial of three that
were bound to be shaven; a Youth of thirteen year old, a Nazarite polluted by
the presence of a dead body, a Levite. A great (...) in (...) one, Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
in that illustrious sentence (...) Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.
In this sentence the Letter (...) is also a great one: (...) to signify that
the Eternal Lord is the only God in the four parts of the world, that is, in
the whole world, both in heaven and earth, and no other God in any part of the
world besides him. For the Letter (...) stands for four. The two great Letters
in this sentence conjoined make the word (...) a witness, as if they would
thereby say unto us, Hear Israel and be a witness to me, that I have seriously
admonished thee concerning the one true and Eternal God: according to that, Ye
shall be my witnesses says the Lord, Isa. 43. 10. A great (...) in the word
(...), where it is said, Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. to raise the greater admiration, that they should make
such an ill requital to that Lord, Father, Redeemer, Maker, and Governor, by
showing themselves to their fivefold benefactor five ways (which the letter
(...) does withal denote) wicked and ungrateful, being corrupt, perverse,
crooked, foolish and unwise; as all these are expressed in the Text, etc. Cap.
14.

LI.
The little Letters signify diminution and contempt; as a little (...) in the
Word (...), Prove. 30. 15. The Horseleach has two daughters, called Give, Give.
The Horseleach is a Symbol or sign of a covetous man: their estate, to whom his
Daughters are married, is sucked out and diminished. If at any time he does
good to a poor man, he never does it gratis, but requires double by his
Daughters Give, Give, till the poor man be brought to extremity; and this
diminution is intimated by the smalness of the Letter. A little (...) in the
Word (...) Prove. 28. 17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person;
to show his misery who is guilty of shedding of blood, that he is even unworthy
of the name of man. A little (...) in the word (...) Genesis 2. 4. when they were
created, to wit, the Heaven and the Earth; to declare that all created things
shall decay and perish; and as the letter consists of broken parts, so shall
they be dissolved. The Hebrews affecting mysteries, say, a transposition of
this letter is intimated, that of (...) may be made (...) for Abraham, i. e.
for the faithful was the world created; for they alone praise God for his
wonderful works of creation, etc. But some, who have more thoroughly searched
the letters and numbers, have given another cause of greater and lesser
letters; namely, that every such Letter is the term or bound of a certain
number of letters, either from the preceding great letter, or the beginning of
the book, or some other place, heretofore known by a peculiar index: as, the
little (...) in (...) Genesis 2. is the term of the number from the beginning of
the Book, to wit, that the letters hitherto are 1112. etc. Cap. 15.

LII.
Of the letter (...) inverted, says the Masora, Numb. 10. 35. at the word
(...) in going forward, there are nine Verses wherein is such a sign of Nun
inverted. And the first is this, And it came to pass when the Ark set forward,
that Moses said, Rise up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate thee flee before thee. Here (...) is conceived to be inverted, to
intimate that all the enemies of Israel should so be turned back and
overthrown. The second Numb. 11. 1. And the people complained: where the
inverted Nun is a token of the preversnesse of the people, in the midst of so
many signal deliverances and great blessings of God, bitterly complaining and
showing their contumacy and ingratitude, etc. Cap. 16.

LIII.
That the Masoreths might have nothing untoucht, that was pertinent to the
conservation of the sacred Text, and the notation of its genuine form, being
thus intent upon the work, they espied in the whole Text of sacred Scripture
fifteen words, wherein some one letter or other was noted extraordinarily with
certain pricks above, not with Vowels, or the notes of Vowels, but Symbolical
notes, the signs of some Arcane and secret sense; the explication whereof
being delivered and propagated Orally, was known to those first and next
following times, but among the posterity, by reason of Wars and Persecutions,
went out of knowledge into Oblivion. Now the Masoreths easily judging, they
were not set down in vain by the Ancients, but as remembrances of some point of
secret wisdom, would by no m^anes wipe them out of the Text, but rather mark
them, thereby to hold posterity to the duty of meditation. The pricked words,
as I said, are in the whole fifteen; ten in the Law, four in the Prophets, one
in the Hagiographa. First is in (...) Genesis 16. 5. The Lord shall judge between
me and thee: the words of Sarah to her husband Abraham. The Masora notes there
is a Prick above the latter (...). The word (...) is not written fully with
both Jods in all the Law, but in this place: whence the latter was pricked, to
mind us, it was not put here in vain, etc. Cap. 17.

LIVE.
Next, for the quantity of the Letters, or their number, that the Masoreths
comprehended in a certain number the Letters of all the Books of Holy
Scripture, is evident enough out of some Remains to this day extant of the
Masora; for the Masora notes upon the Letter (...) in the word (...) Levit.
11. 42. that it is the middle Letter of the whole Pentateuch, or Law; and the
Letter (...) in the word (...) Psalm 80. 14. is the middle Letter of the Book of
Psalms. At the end of Genesis, after the number of the Verses of that Book, it
is added; and the Letters thereof are 4395. which is to be understood of the
last Section of that Book, not of the Letters of the whole Book. Elias Levita
Pref. 3. l. Mas. writes, that the Letters of the whole Law are Sixty thousand
thousands forty five; and there he says, the Letters of the first Section
Bereshit, are 1915. which is false; we believe they are more then 5000. We
doubt not but an account was given of the number of Letters, in all the Books
of the Bible, though this Masora is not brought to light. But that this part of
the Masoretic Study was referred into certain places of their Books, and so
delivered to the notice of Posterity, appears by a certain Poem, which in a
curious manner exhibites the number, how often every Letter in the Alphabet is
contained in the whole Scripture. Cap. 18.

LV.
The Author of those Verses is affirmed by Elias to be Raf Saadia Gaon, who was
Head of the Sorian Academy in Babylon, about the year of Christ 927. The Verses
are very difficult; but this Sum of them here follows:

42377 38218 29537 32530 47754 76922 22867 23447 11052 66420 48253 41517 77778
32977 13580 20175 22725 21822 22972 22147 32148 59343.

And hence it is clearly seen, how exceeding great was the Industry of these
men, how laborious their Study, and how much their Zeal, that they might
conserve the Integrity of Scripture inviolate, even in the least tittle to all
posterity. Cap. 18.

LVI.
We have seen the Matter, now for the Form of the Masora; it was at first
consigned in separate and distinct Books, but afterward the Scribes adjoined it
to the Text by parts, but confusedly and defectively. In which Form it stood
till the public impression made about the beginning of the last age by the
singular Study and cost of Daniel Bombergus, and by the Assistance of R. Jacob
Ben Chajim at Venice. But notwithstanding all the diligence of the man, the
difficulty of the work caused him to leave innumerous Faults, a good part
whereof we have corrected in our Edition. Cap. 19.

LVII.
The Form and Order of the Masora in the Bibles printed at Venice, is in this
sort. Masora is twofold, the Great and the Little; the Great Masora which
comprehends all the Critical Learning, with a full enumeration of the places of
Scripture, called (...) is proposed either separately, without the Text of
Scripture, in the end of the Bibles; or jointly with the Text in the higher and
lower Margin thereof: the one is named Final, the other Textual. The little
Masora is that which is briefly and succinctly written down at the side of the
Text, in Numeral Letters, in short and Symbolical words. Here is no citation of
the places, but when a word occurs twice, which is signified by the Letter
(...); then the other place is noted by a word or two annexed to that Letter. A
greater number sometimes is expressed in a Symbolical Sentence, and in the
Chaldee, where the single words denote the several places of the Bible,
alleged in the Great Masora. This is the Form. Cap. 19.

LVIII.
We conclude with the end of the Masora. This the more Sound and Learned
Hebrews have excellently observed, that the Masora is a sure Safeguard and
Defense of the Sacred Text, to this end set round about it, to secure and keep
it safe against all Errors. Here is pertinent what the wise Cosri said to his
Antagonist, objecting that the Study of the Masoreths was placed (...) in an
unlawful and unprofitable work: But says he, Their Study was in such an
unprofitable Work, with which is joined the conservation of the Law, that there
might never b^ occasion of changing any thing therein. To the same purpose is
that of the wise Aben Ezra; Certainly a great Reward is due to the Authors of
the Masoreth* who are as it were the Keepers of the City-Walls; for by their
endeavor persisteth the Law of the Lord, and the Holy Books in their Form,
without any addition or detraction: And that of Elias Levita, After the Labor
performed by the Masoreths, it is impossible that any change at all in any
Books of Scripture has happened heretofore, or can hereafter happen. That of
R. Jacob Ben Chajim is not to be omitted, who in his Preface to those great
Bibles, after he had declared largely the use of Masora, says, Had not the men
of the Great Synagogue bin, who restored the Crown (of the Law) to its ancient
splendour (as it is written, So they read in the Book of the Law of God
distinctly, and gave the Sense, and caused them to understand the reading,
Nehem. 8. 8.) We had walked in the dark, and bin as blind men, and had not had
one Book corrected, nor a Copy of the Law, whereon we might rely. Thus the
Jews. Cap. 20.

LIX.
The same has been acknowledged by Christians; as many as have attained to any
better knowledge of this Art. Benedictus Arias Montanus, in his Preface
discoursing of the various Reading in the Hebrew Books, and the way and use of
the Masoreths; Great, says he, was the Religion, and great the care of the
ancient Israelites in the conservation of the Reading of the Holy Books: and
that treasury entrusted by God and commended to them (wherein were contained
the mysteries of eternal life) was esteemed worthy of all their diligence, to
keep it so, that by no means any one word of it, or so much as the least
tittle might be impaired. Hugh Broughton an English man upon the 9. of Dan.
says, There is one sort of great renown, the Masorites, whose diligence
preserves the Hebrew Text safe and sound for ever; and Nicholas Fuller in his
Miscell. Theol. l. 3. c. 13. To this end that the Hebrew truth might be kept
inviolate, was excogitated by the most expert Jewish Masters a certain subtle
and curious Art, which they called (...), that is, a tradition, or the most
accurate way of delivering through the hands of those who do succeed, the Canon
of Holy Scripture, always pure and perfect. By the benefit whereof they
exactly know, and have the number of, not the words only, but the very Letters
too. So that, not the least change can be made by any either unlearned, or rash
or negligent hand, but it is deprehended presently. Whence it is fitly styled
by them (...), as the hedge or mound of the Old Testament, to keep off thence
all corruption and depravation. Cap. 20.

LX.
And this may suffice for the present concerning the Author, Matter, Form, End
of the Masora. I will close up these Collections with a saying of Pliny used by
my Author, Optima quaeque malunt contemnere plerique quam discere. Very many
there are who had rather despise the most excellent things, then take the pains
to learn them.

FINIS.

