The Character of A Torey.
A TORY is a Monster with an English Face, a French Heart, and an Irish
Conscience. A Creature of a Large Forehead, Prodigious Mouth, Supple Hams, and
no Brains.

The Country-mans Description of him, was both Rhyme and Reason; Roary, Whorey,
Sworey, Scorey,
That Is a TOREY:


For Noise and Debauchery, Oaths and Beggary, are the Four Elements that
Compose him: His Arms are those of Issacher, An Ass Couchant; and his Mark is a
Red-Ribbon in his Capp, to show, That he belongs to the Scarlet Whore, by her
Bloody Livery; or else, you may take it for a Wedding favor, That whenever
Popery and Tyranny shall make a Match, he would fain be a Bride-man.

He seems Descended from Esau, since he is so ready to Truck away an Invaluable
Birthright for a French Kickshaw, and a Nauseous Mess of Italian Pottage. Or if
you will run his Pedigree higher, you may call him a Noddite, one of the Race
of Cain the Murderer, that would fain be Persecuting his Brother, merely
because he is more Righteous than Himself.

Take our TORIES in the State, and they are Caterpillars that Devour every
Green thing in a Flourishing Kingdom, and would Stab Liberty and Property to
the Heart, That they themselves, like Beasts of Prey, might live wholly upon
Spoil and Rapine; fit only to be Subjects to Nebuchadnezzar, when bereaved of
Human Sense, he Hearded with the Wild Asses of the Desert. Though they boast
themselves Englishmen, yet they Act in all things as Antipodes to their Native
Country; and seem rather Bog-trotters Transplanted, the Spawn of some
Red-shanks, or the By-blows of the Old Lazy Lord-Danes, that once Domineered
over our Ancestors: They are a sort of Wild Boars, that would root out the
Constitution, and break the Balance of our happy Government; and render that
Despotick, which hitherto has been both Established and bounded by Law. Fauxes
in Masquerade, that with Dark-lanthorn Polices, would at once blow up the Two
Bulwarks of our Freedom, PARLIAMENTS and JVRIES; making the First, only a
Parliament of Paris: and the Latter, but mere Tools, to Echo back the pleasure
of a Judge. They are so certain, That Monarchy is Jure Divino; That they look
upon all People living under Aristocracys, or Democracys, to be in a State of
Dammation. And fancy, That the Grand Seignior, the Czar of Muscovy, and the
French King dropped down from Heaven with Crowns on their Heads, and that all
their Subjects were Born with Saddles on their Backs. Your True TORY is as fond
of Slavery, as others are of Liberty, and will be at as much Pains and Charge
to obtain it; for he Envies the Happiness of Canvas Breeches and Wooden Shoes;
and extremely Admires the Mercy of the Inquisition. He Rails at Magna Charta as
the Seed-plot of Sedition; Swears, That it was first obtained by Rebellion, and
that all our Forefathers were Rogues and Fools, and did not understand
Prerogative. He wonders, why People should squander away their time at the Inns
of Court, or what need there is either of the Common Law, or the Statute-Book,
the King might at any time, with quicker dispatch declare his Pleasure in any
Point or Controversy, and each Loyal Subject were bound to Acquiesce, on pain
of Damnation. Yet after all, his boasted Loyalty extends no further than a
Drunken Health; He Roars and Swaggers, but does not Serve the King: He promises
Mountains, and by Lies and Misrepresentations, gives False Measures, but
performs nothing: Nor is it the Cause, but the Crust, that he Barks for.

Then in Relation to the Church, -- TORY is either a Crab-Protestant, that
crawls backwards as fast as he can to Rome; or at best, but the Catts-foot
wherewith the Romish Monkeys Claw the Protestant Religion till the Blood comes:
one that does their Drugery though he has not always the Wit to see it, and all
the Wages he must expect, is Polypheme's Courtesy, To be Devoured Last. He is a
Flambeau kindled by the Jesuits, and flung in, to make a Combustion amongst us.
Whilst we were Hunting down their Plot with a full Cry, they slipped in this
Deep-mouthed Hound, who spending on a false Scent diverted the Chase, and so
the Popish Puss squats safe in her Form: and now quitting the Pursuit of the
Foxes, he begins to Worry the Sheep. He pretends high for the Church of
England; but as he understands not her Doctrine, so he Dishonours her by his
Lewd Conversation: What a pretty Pious Confession of Faith is it, to hear a
Bully Cry, -- God-Dam-Mce, I am of the Church of England, and all the
Presbyterians are Sons of Whores. Indeed, the only proof both of his Religion
and Courage, is, That he Swears most frequently by that Tremendous Name, at
which, lesser Devils Tremble: and his Christianity consists in Cursing all
those that he is pleased to call Phanaticks, and Phanaticks he calls all those,
that are not content to be either Papists or Atheists. His Tongue is always
Tipped with Dam -- me, and Forty one; and so hot, (being set on Fire of Hell)
that he is fain to drink Healths, (sometimes to the Pope, and sometimes to the
Devil,) Sixty times an Hour to quench it; and then Belches out Huzza's as fast,
as Mount Strombulo does Fire and Brimstone.

Whilst he Clamours at Dissenters for not coming to Church, he thinks it is
Canonical enough to Sleep over the Lordsday to Digest the Fumes of Saturdays
Debauch, or take a walk in Guild-Hall-yard, peep in at the Preacher, and
presently Retire to the Tavern for a whet to Dinner, or else to meet the Club
of Witty Good-mockers by Fleet-Ditch side, and Droll away the day in Blasphemy,
Ridiculing Religious Duties, or Inventing Jack-Pudding Lies of some pretended
Nonconformists Preaching. If he be somewhat of a more Serious Temper, he is as
very a superstitious Bigot, as any in the Papacy, he would rather have no
Preaching than that the Surplic^ should be left off, and thinks his Child not
(...) it be not done with the sign of the Cro^s, he counts Opus operatum
^^cient, and if he have but been at Common Prayer, and made his Responses loud
enough to drown the Clark, and had the Parsons Blessing, his Task is done and
all is safe. Flesh on a Friday is more Abomination to Him, than his Neighbors
Bed, and he Abhors more not to Bow at the Syllables of the word Jesus, than to
Swear by the name of God.

He has got a New English Dictionary Framed by the Indefatigable Skill of
Heraclitus and the Observator, whereby he Traversties the most Loyal honest
Sense into Blasphemy and Treason. Talk soberly of Religion, and he Elaps you
over the Face with Heresy, Schism, Fanaticism and Faction, or roundly calls you
Confounded Whigg, and so you are Confuted. Urge never so modestly Legal
Fundamental Rights, and mention Irregularities, though in a place appointed to
Remedy them, he cries out, Rebellion! Treason! You Depose the King! You Arraign
the Government etc. Mention the Commons of England and the General Sense of the
Nation, and he exclaims, Dam the Mobile and your Appeals to the Rabble; And yet
at the same time Courts and Applauds Tagg Ragg and Long-tail, the Cooks and
Chandlers of New Sarum, and such other Worshipful Patriots, for declaring their
three halfpenny Judgments of the highest Affairs of State, in their Addresses.
And as for the two last Parliaments, every petty Chap-man, or Apprentice-Boy,
takes upon him to Censure the grave Proceedings of those Venerable Senates, as
malepartly as if they had been but a Company of Fiddlers.

Yet still he fears not God, so much as a Parliament: But the reason why he
Blasphemes the one, and Rails at the other, is because as he really beleives
not a Future Judgment in the other World, So he puts far off the other (to him)
evil day in this, and hopes to Escape the Justice of both, by the Mediation of
Saint Noli Prosequi.

LONDON: Printed for William Inghal the Elder, Bookbinder. 1681.


