The CHARGE of the GOVERNOR OF St. Thomas's Hospital.
MAY it please you to understand, That you are Elected and Chosen one of the
Governors of this Hospital; and during the time you shall so continue, you are
to endeavor, according to such laudable Decrees, Orders and Ordinances, as
have been or shall be made by Authority of the Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of the City of London, Governors of the Possessions, Revenu^^ and
Goods of the Hospitals (of Edward late King of England the Sixth) of Christ,
Bridewell and St. Thomas the Apostle, to attend upon and perform the Necessary
Affairs and Business of this House; And to the best of your Power to Order and
Govern the Poor of this House, and the Lands, Possessions, Revenues and Goods,
belonging to the same, that you may Acquit your self as a True and Faithful
Steward and Disposer of all such Things as shall be committed to your Care and
Charge, and that with such a Loving, Cheerful and Respective Diligence, as
becomes a Faithful Steward of God, whom (in this your Place) you chiefly Serve,
and unto whom you shall render an Account. For be you well assured, you cannot
be blameless before him, if after you have set your Hand to this Good Work and
promised your Care and Attendance in and upon the Business of this House, you
shall contrariwise neglect the same, and not yield that Aid and Succor to the
Poor which the Duty of your Place requires. In Expectation of your Faithful
Discharge of this Trust, you are Chosen and Admitted a Governor of this
Hospital.


