THE CASE of my Lord ROOS.
THe Lord Roos did in the Court of Arches Cant. London, sue his Lady in a Cause
of Separation and Divorce propter Adulterium.

The Lady his wife appeared to that suit in the Arches.

The Lord Roos libelled against her in that Court.

Witnesses were in that Court examined.

There was Publication.

The Cause was afterward in that Court concluded and assigned for sentence.

Information upon the whole matter was had.

And the Dean of the Arches after such Information had upon the merits of the
Cause, gave Sentence of Divorce against the Lady propter Adulterium.

Anno v. Edw. vj. An Act touching the Marriage of the Lord Marquess of
Northampton, and the Lady Elizabeth his Wife.
WHere the Right Honorable William Marquess of Northampton, by lawful Sentence
before Competent Judges, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws used in this
Realm, was and is most justly divorced from the Lady Anne Bowrgsher, one of
the Daughters of Henry, late Earl of Essex, sometime his Wife, for her
dissolute living and manifest Adultery, And so being Separate, Divorced, and at
Liberty, by the Laws of God to marry, about Four years past, Solemnly and
Lawfully did Marry the good and Virtuous Lady Elizabeth, Daughter to Sir George
Brook, Lord Cobham. The KINGS most Excellent Majesty tendering as well the
honorable Estate and Fame of the said Marquess and Elizabeth his Wife, as the
Continuance of the Family and Posterity of the said Marquess and Elizabeth in
honorable and lawful Succession: And that such Issue as should come betwixt the
said Marquess and Elizabeth should be counted, reputed and taken of all His
Subjects for Lawful, as by the Law of God they be in very deed, is pleased and
contented, That it be enacted by the Assent of His Highness, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, That the said Marriage solemnized and had
betwixt the Marquess and Elizabeth, shall be adjudged, deemed, reputed and
taken in all places of this Realm and else where, and in all his Highnesses
Courts Ecclesiastical and Temporal for Lawful, to all Intents, Constructions
and purposes; and that the said Elizabeth shall, as well in the Life of the
said Marquess, as after his death, if she happen to overlive him, be enabled by
the Authority of this Act, to demand, have and enjoy as well her Ioynture or
Dower of, in, and to all the Mannours, Lands and Tenements which the said
Marquess shall have of any State of Inheritance, whereof any his Lawful wife
is, may, or ought to be Dowable, As also all such Honor, Place, Dignity,
Pre-eminence, Profit and Commodity, as she might in any wise ask, Challenge or
Demand, as if the said Lady Anne had been naturally dead before the
Intermarriage of the said Marquess and Elizabeth, and in as large and ample
manner as any other lawful Wife to any of the KINGS Subjects ought, should or
might, either in the Life of her Husband, or after his Death claim, challenge,
demand or have: And that such Issue as shall happen to be betwixt the said
Marquess and Elizabeth, shall by th Authority of this Act be adjudged, deemed,
reputed, and taken for Legitimate and Lawfully begotten of the Bodies of the
said Marquess and Elizabeth, to all Intents, Constructions, and purposes in the
Law, and otherwise. And for all manner Degrees, Dignities, Styles or
Preheminences belonging to any Child or Children lawfully begotten by such men
and personages of Degree, as the said Marquess is or hereafter may be, And
shall by the Authority of this Act, as well be enabled to claim, challenge and
demand after the death of the said Marquess and Elizabeth, or either of them,
as heir and heirs to the said Marquess and Elizabeth and either of them, all
such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Rights, as they or either of
them shall Dye Seized of, of any estate of Inheritance, as also be enabled as
heir and heirs, and to be Inheritable to any of the Anceffors, Coliateral or
Lineall of the said Marquess and Elizabeth, or either of them, in as large and
ample manner to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, as the Children born
in lawful Matrimony betwixt any other of the Kings Subjects be, and ought to
be: And that it shall be lawful for such Issue as is aforesaid to use for the
Recovery of any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Rights, all and every such
Action either of his and their own Possession and Seisin, or of the Possession
and Seisin of the said Marquess and Elizabeth, or either of them, or of the
Possession and Seisin of any Ancestor Coliateral or lineal to the said Marquess
and Elizabeth, or to either and every of them, and to make their title as heir
or heirs to them or any of them, in as large and ample manner as any other of
the Kings Subjects, born in lawful Matrimony, might or ought after the death of
any their Ancestors; The said former Marriage betwixt the said Marquess and
Anne, or any Decretal Canon, Constitution. Ecclesiastical Law, Common Law,
Statute, Usage, Preseription or Custom of this Realm to the Contrary in any
wise Notwithstanding.

Copia vera. Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.


