Middx ss.
A Certificate for ye Discharge of one Greived or Overrated to ye Poll tax
1692* gratis.
By Their Majesty's Commissioners for putting in Execution in the County
aforesaid, an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Raising Money by a Poll,
Payable Quarterly for One Year, for the Carrying on a Vigorous War against
France. 25. March. 1692.
WHereas by Virtue and in Pursuance of the aforesaid Act of Parliament (...)
residing within the (...) of (...) in the (...) aforesaid, is in and by the
Estreat or Assessment charged upon the Persons there Residing, Rated and
Assessed the Sum of (...) which being demanded by the Collector thereof, and
the said (...) being aggrieved with the said Assessment, has within the time
limited by the said Act, made Complaint unto Us, Commissioners amongst others
for putting the said Act in Execution within the said County, (One of Us who
Signed or Allowed the said Rate being One) whereupon We have particularly
examined the said Complaint upon Oath, and upon due Examination thereof have
abated and defaulked the said Assessment to (...) and do hereby Order that the
same be Estreated into the Exchequer accordingly, as by the said Act of
Parliament is directed, and all Persons therein concerned are to take Notice
hereof.

Dated this (...) Day of (...) in the Fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord and Lady William and Mary, by the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc. Annoque Dom.
169^ 1692

