The CASE of John James, The Lessee of GEORGE DURDANT, Plaintiff, against
William Richardson, Defendant; in a Writ of Error in PARLIAMENT.
JOHN James brought an Ejectione Firm in the Court of King's Bench, for certain
Lands in Stains in the County of Middlesex, upon the Demise of George Durdant,
against the Defendant Richardson, upon Not Guilty pleaded, The Jury finds a
Special Verdict, viz.

That Henry Wicks, Esquire; being seized in Fee of the Lands in question, the sixth
of June 1657. made his Will in writing, and thereby devised the said Lands in
these words, viz. I give unto John Higden and his Heirs, during the Life only
of Robert Durdant, Eldest Son of my Nephew Andrew Durdant, Deceased, my Lands
in Stains, upon Trust to suffer the said Robert Durdant, during his Life, to
receive the Rents and Profits (he the said Robert committing no waste) and
after the Decease of the said Robert Durdant, I do give the said Lands unto the
Heirs Male of the Body of him the said Robert Durdant now living, and to such
other Heirs Male and Female, as he shall hereafter happen to have of his Body.

That George Durdant, the Plantiffs Lessee, at the time of the Will made, and
at the Death of the Devisor, was the only Son and Heir-Male apparent of the
said Robert Durdant.

That the said John Higden and Robert Durdant, after the Death of the Devisor,
by Fine and Feoffment, sells away the said Land to the Defendant Richardson,
and his Heirs, of the Yearly value of Forty Pounds, for Three Hundred and Fifty
Pounds, the said George Durdant being then a Minor.

That after the Death of Robert Durdant the said George Durdant enters upon the
Defendant Richardson, and makes a Lease of the said Land to the Plaintiff John
James.

After many solemn Arguments, the Court of King's Bench was of Opinion, That
George Durdant has a good Title to the Lands in question, by the meaning of
the Will, notwithstanding the Sale made by John Higden, and his Father Robert
Durdant, and gives Judgment accordingly for the Plaintiff.

For, First, The Devisor intended no greater Estate, either to John Higden, or
Robert Durdant, than during the life of the said Robert Durdant.

Secondly, By the words Heirs-Males of the Body of him the said Robert Durdant
now living, George Durdant, as his Eldest Son and Heir Apparent, takes an
Estate in remainder, immediately vested in him, and cannot be said to depend in
contingency upon the death of his Father Robert Durdant; for the words now
living, relating to the words Heirs-Males, no other sense can be made of them,
but by applying them to George Durdant; who, though he be not an Heir in a
strict sense, during his Father's life, yet in an improper sense, and according
to common Parlance, he may be said to be Heir, to take an Estate in remainder;
and unless such a construction be made of the first words Heirs-Males, the
words now living, and likewise the subsequent words, viz. and to such other
Heirs-Male as he shall hereafter happen to have of his Body, must be construed
vain, idle and superfluous, which is absurd, and contrary to the constant
practice in the exposition of Wills; then consequently, if there be an Estate
in remainder vested in George Durdant, the Fine and Feoffment cannot destroy it.

The Defendant Richardson brought a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber,
where the Judgment for the Plaintiff in the King's Bench was reversed.

To reverse the Reversal in Exchequer Chamber, and that the first Judgment may
stand, the Plantiff has brought the now Writ of Error in Parliament.


