The Case Of Mr. Wyndham, on his Appeal to the Right Honorable the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal in this present Parliament Assembled, from a Dismission
and Decree made by the late Lord Chancellor Jefferys in the Court of Chancery.
Edmund Wyndham, Esquire; Pl. Dame Anne Wyndham, Widow, Def.
IN 1647. Sir Edmund Wyndham and Sir Hugh Wyndham both deceased, the Appellants
Grandfather and Father morgaged diverse Lands to one Edward Hyde, Esquire; in trust
for Sir Francis Wyndham, Brother of Sir Edmund, under a Proviso that if Sir
Edmund, or Sir Hugh Wyndham, or either of their Heirs, should within Ten Years
after the Date of the Deed pay Sir Francis Wyndham 1800 l. with Interest, and
indemnify him and his Heirs for all Engagements he then stood Bound, or should
become Bound for the said Sir Edmund and Sir Hugh Wyndham, the Deed was to be
void.

That soon after the making of the Mortgage Sir Edmund went with his late
Majesty King Charles the Second beyond Sea, and Sir Hugh was imprisoned for
Loyalty, being obnoxious to the late Usurped Powers; and Sir Francis Wyndham
was immediately empowered to sell any part of the Mortgaged Estate to discharge
his Debt, and entrusted by Sir Edmund to receive the Rents and Profits of all
other his Lands and Estate to hasten the Payment thereof: And Sir Francis, by
such Sales and receipt of Profits, raised his whole Debt in a short Time after
the Mortgage; and Sir Edmund Wyndham returned not into England till the
Restoration of his late Majesty, and then Sir Francis Wyndham was a Member of
Parliament and Privileged; but their were several References and Treaties
between Sir Edmund and Sir Francis, in relation to the Mortgage, but no end was
made before their Deaths; and Sir Edmund and Sir Hugh Wyndham being dead, the
Appellant as their Heir claims the benefit of the Equity of Redemption; and the
Defendant as Executrix of Sir Francis Wyndham claims what remains unfold of the
Mortgaged Estate, and the Appellant's Suit in Chancery was to redeem the
Estate, and have an account of the Moneys raised toward the satisfaction
thereof, and to avoid the same the Defendant pleaded the Statute of Limitation
of Actions, and a pretended stated Account to be made up by and between Sir
Edmund and Sir Francis Wyndham, and a Release of the Equity of Redemption; and
though Sir Hugh Wyndham were then living, yet was made no party or any wise
privy thereto, and by that pretended account there was due in 1664. or 1665.
2912 l. 16 s. and the Defendant brought her Bill against the Appellant, to
redeem according to that Account, or be Foreclosed of the Equity of Redemption.

22 Nov. 3 Jac. 2. Both Causes were heard before the Lord Chancellor Jefferys,
who dismissed the Appellants Bill with Costs; and upon the Defendants cross
Bill decreed the Appellant to redeem the Mortgaged Premises upon the Foot of
the pretended Account, by payment of 2912 l. 16 s. with Interest and Costs, or
be Foreclosed of the Equity of Redemption; from which Di^mission and Decree the
Appellant appeals, as being both Unjust and Unreasonable.

First, For that the pretended stated Account was not ever fully Stated or
Allowed, as such, either by the Appellants Grandfather or Father; but, on the
contrary, was objected against as Erroneous, as appears by a Subscription
thereto and Underwritten, which the Defendant concealed, and did not set forth
by her Plea or Answer in Chancery.

Secondly, There is omitted out of the Receipts of Sir Francis Wyndham, and in
the Account, 952 l. principle Money, and for which no Credit is given by the
Account.

Thirdly, The Plantiffs Grandfather is by the Account charged with an Estate of
Sir Francis Wyndham, pretended to be sold by him to pay the Debt secured by the
Mortgage 1245 l. principle Money, which is fully proved to be sold but for 860
l. and so is by the pretended Account overcharged with 340 l. principle Money;
and Interest upon Interest for the same, from 1655. to 1665.

Fourthly, The said Sir Francis Wyndham charge himself by the said Account
but with 500 l. received of one Mr. Lacy upon Sale of the Mortgaged Premises,
whenas it is fully proved he received 570 l. So that the 70 l. and Interest
thereof ever since 1649. is omitted out of the Account.

The whole Account throughout is made up and charged with Interest upon
Interest, and for part of the purchase Money made by Sale of part of the
Mortgaged Premises, and which were sold in 1649. the Mortgagors by the Account
had no Credit or Allowance for the same till 1660, and yet in the mean time are
charged with Interest upon Interest by the Account, in which there are many
Omissions, Errors, and Over-charges, to the value of above 2000 l. and the
principle Debt mentioned in the Mortgage was but 1800 l. and within Two Years
after the Mortgage Sir Francis Wyndham made by Sales of the Mortgaged Estate
above 2000 l. besides the 952 l. received by Profits, omitted to be charged in
his Receipts; and he, and the Defendant, have besides kept near a 100 l. per
Annum of the morgaged Estate ever since; and yet it is pretended there is still
due near 3000 l. on the Mortgage besides Interest, whenas on a just Account the
Mortgage will appear over-paid: And on the whole Matter the Appellant humbly
prays only to proceed to a Fair Account; and if any Thing shall appear thereon
Due is ready to pay the same to the Defendant, upon reconveying of the
Mortgaged Estate.


