THE TROUBLES OF ISRAEL OR THE ENGLISH ACHAN Pursued, And his Footsteps partly
discovered.

By one that hopes to be kept from admiring any man's person for advantage sake;
yet freely desires to give Honor to whom Honor, and Fear to whom Fear is due.

PROVE. 18.9. He that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great
waster.

He that being often reproved hardneth his neck shall suddenly be destroyed
without remedy.

LONDON, Printed for T. Brewster at the three Bibles at the West end of Paul's.
1660.

The troubles of Israel or the English Achan persued and his footsteps partly
discovered, by one that hopes to be kept from admiring any man's person for
advantage sake, yet freely desires to give honor to whom honor, and fear to
whom fear is due.
SO wonderful are the searching and unmasking Providence of the Lord, which of
late appeared amongst us, together with the manifold and woeful miscarriages of
those who once seemed to be well qualified, and were by what was discernible
judged to be meet instruments for the carrying on the Lords work in these
Nations; That unto all who would be kept pure, blameless, and steady in their
most holy faith, till this oppearing, whose coming is as a refiners fire, etc.
Renewed and fresh occasions are given at this day, to be diligently observing
the operations of God in the Earth, and seriously and impartially to be
reflecting upon their own hearts and spirits to try and prove whether the
principles they are at present in, they practice or retain a sufficient
Character or symptom of that anointing which abides and qualifies the soul to
make good proof of its integrity and faithfulness to the Lord, when brought to
the Test in the face of greater temptations then herberto has been met with,
or probably is expected by many.

And it being none of the least concernments of these for whom the Lord has
(not withstanding their unworthiness) once more stretched forth his mighty Arm
to be found exercising themselves therein; unto them therefore of what rank,
quality, or sort soever they be (as well Governors as Governed) by way of more
special a dvertisement, its judged what follows may not be unseasonably
presented.

Sirs, Though doubtless the design of the Creator at first in making man of
nothing and raising him unto that Estate wherein he was before the fall, had in
it a tendency of further light and glory to have been communicated and brought
forth unto Adam, yet we have (though woefully) experience that the none
improvement of that ability light and life, to the end for which it was given,
occasioned no less then the loss of all the Excellency and Dominion
propounded to that Estate, changed the liberty of the whole Creation into
bondage from which it still groans to be delivered, and were it not that the
Lord in exceeding wisdom and grace set the regoining to himself the works of
his hands by a new and living way, the present hope and earnest expectation of
the Creature had been eternally void; but ever blessed be his name, that as sin
abounded his grace abounded much more.

And should we thus gradually descend to take notice of the manifold examples
of like nature extant in Scriptures or otherwise from the days of Abell until
now, how might the burden of their calamities, which befell such as answered
not the design of God in their day according to the opportunities given them so
to do, serve to awaken all in whom there remains any kind of desire to be
meeting the Lord in his comings forth to reduce the Nations to himself, to a
serious watchfulness, lest at any time through the temptations of the flesh
they should be found opposers of him who will not fail one day to reckon with
all the Sons of Antichrist, for all their evil deeds, hard speeches, and secret
consultations against the Lord and his Anointed.

The too too manifest appearance of such things in our day calls for more then
an ordinary lamentation at the hands of English men, that after so many eminent
and signal demonstrations of the Lords intentions to work a mighty work such as
has not been usually heard of amongst us, there should yet be found so much
resolute implacable enmity in the heart of this Nation, which stouts it self
out to the perfecting its rebellion (and consequently their destruction who are
acted by it) against the Council and solemn determination of the most high to
set his mountain a top of all the mountains, etc.

But it is observable that the peremptory enraged attempts and breakings forth
of those Children of disobedience, in whom the old Enemy or Prince of the Air
thus works, to do all the dispight they can to the simple and pure interest
of God, ever precedes its own downfall and ruin; as being thereby fitted,
ripned, and prepared for destruction and shame; and yet unto this degree of
ungodliness and impiety it seldom works until by some seeming pretense of
zeal for truth, it has very much interessed and twisted it self into the
Hearts and Loins of such as are entrusted with Dominion and power to rule and
govern for God in the Earth.

So that its humbly conceived of all men, persons placed in Authority are most
liable (though but for a miserable reward) to become the servants of sin, (viz)
the great sin of setting up the great abomination that makes desolate; and
therefore it can hardly be expressed how deeply it concerns all such,
especially those in this Nation where the Lord has so often and so highly
signified his displeasure against the disobedient, stubborn, and perverse
contrivances of their predecessors, to be exceeding careful, least through an
evil heart of unbelief they are led away to the same (if not a greater) excess
of Riot, with those who for want of ability to follow the Lamb wheresoever
hewent have perished in the midway.

Now for that the Lord has once more put opportunity into the hands of such as
have the oversight of rule and Governance in England to be pressing forward,
by all that they are or may be, to answer the design of God in their day, by
exalting justice, judgment, and equity, and to cause Righteousness and truth,
(in truth) to run down like a mighty stream amongst us; and in all their
undertakings for liberty, to have faithful respect to the pure liberty of the
Sons of God.

The remnant of the Woman-seed the faithful servants of the most high, are
therefore not only engaged in an expectation of it, and earnestly, and
affectedly to be imploring from them a daily manifestation of such fruits as
are conduceble to the advancing this interest (viz.) the liberty of the Sons of
God, above and beyond all other private interests that would be upper most and
have the pre-eminence in the world; but also if for these things (under what
pretense soever or that the time of building the Lords house is not yet come)
shall seem to be least of all concerned, or so strive to order the matter if
any thing (must be squezed, from them toward the building the Lords house) so
do it as it may conduce to the advancing their own houses also and not
otherwise; then it becomes all that are in expectation of their Lot in their
inheritance of the Sons of God, to be found in the discharge of their duty
toward their rulers by dealing plainly and heartily with them, laying before
them not only, the sad and woeful effects that has in times past been produced
by a careless and corrupted appearance in the work of the Lord, but also as
opportunity and ability is given to be spreading forth the evil and dangerous
consequents that are like to attend their putting far from them the day of God,
and the retardings of his work, especially when no less then a continued
series of providence from time to time ^ear after year, holds forth so high a
testimony for the Lord, and a discovery of his design as in this Nation it has
done.

As therefore, good reason it is, we should as well in respect of the glory of
God, the honor and safety of our superiors, as for our own peace and
advantage in our more special, and spiritual concernments, to be found in a
timely and faithful discharge of what is so much incumbent upon us.

Let it not then be ill taken by any who are restored to their former stations
and places of trust in power (and thereby to greater opportunities of following
the Lord more fully) that in such a manner for that end they are so often
solemnly and faithfully addressed unto by the poor despised and bruised people
of the Lord in this Nation, begging, entreating, and persuading, by all the
arguments of love and terror, that either the Scriptures of truth, the
dispensations past, or such as we are at present under can furnish them with,
that a hardened heart of ingratitude and impiety might not be found amongst
them, with which instead of bearing rule for God, men too often appear in the
exercise of their own wills, and that they may gain unto themselves or
Families, a portion in the beggarly perishing vain Glory of this world that ere
long must pass away like a scroul, too far proceed in a denial of the Lord
that bought them, but rather a meekned, softened frame of spirit apt and ready
to take what further impression the Lord has to imprint upon it, lest the
contrary bring upon us an overflowing scourge, and inundation of such calamity
as has not been experienced or lately heard of: for our mercies has exceeded,
and the spirit of God will not always strive with man, and who knows how soon
such as will not that Christ should Reign over them, may for their unworthy
refusal of that honor be either exposed to shame, bondage, and contempt, or
else called for to be brought forth and slain before his face.

Were the thoughts of these things, and for what end the Lord suffered the
Parliament to be interrupted at first and now recalled to their former
authority, together with the many special circumstancies that has attended
those transactions, more seriously and generally with them, then as it may be
feared it is, surely the effects thereof would be otherwise then yet we have
(or by the good wills of many) are like to experience. But the just Lord who
yet exercises his patience and long-suffering toward the sons of Men, if
hapily they will feel after him and repent, etc. will not be mocked at last. Be
wise therefore O ye Kings and be instructed O ye Judges of the earth, stand
in awe sin not, serve the Lord with fear lest he speak to you in his wrath and
vex you in his sore displeasure.

Should the time of the foresaid interruption, or that which too justly
occasioned the shaking of the rod in that manner, be but a little reminded or
enquired after, would it not appear too manifestly, that with many of them, who
suffed that contradiction, it was a season of security and slothfulness to any
thing the voice of that day called for on the behalf of the Lords work so
eminently begun and set a foot amongst us, for whose sake many worthy and
renowned victories were given, and much honor done to many that adheared
thereunto; yet I say, do but a little reflect upon the passages of that time,
and what selfishness, covetousness, pride, and wantonness, will appear to be
the charge and guilt of that day; and what advantage and opportunity was
thereby given unto others to become what they ought not to be, greatning and
magnifying themselves above their fellows, and under the pretense of removing
the aforesaid evils, Acted too much the evil servants part that said in his
heart, my Lord delays his coming, and to do such things as brought a very sore
and grievous reproach upon the very name of Religion professed by English men.

But this as a deceitful usurpation for that it was not improved to the end for
which it was pretendedly acted, escaped not the lash of the Lords just and
righteous hand; and so as that it may even serve to convince us if we be not
altogether stupid.

That now the Lopping of a few superfluous over reaching Branches is not all
such attempts exposes the transgressour in that kind unto, but the Axe is laid
to the root of the Tree, and that the ambitious endeavors of man to leave
himself a name in the Earth, is the only way to be written Childlesse in the
honor and trust of Government.

What of this kind of blasting or disappointment has apparently passed upon
the like projections of such as once were serviceable to their Country in the
day of Battle, wants not its evidence to prove it, and that the eyes of the
Lord are toward the footsteps of men, strictly weighing and observing all
their motions whether they are such as duly answer the end of providence or
keep any pace with his design or not, and accordingly will bring to light the
secret intentions of their hearts and wherein they are a contriving to do
injury to the cause and interest of Christ, that evil he will certainly cause
to descend upon their own pates: it begins to be more commonly received for
truth, that he who digs a pit for another shall fall into it himself.

And it may be as rightly conjectured that the hurt of many (whose persons and
reputations are too justly under a cloud at this day) took being with the
change of their names and titles, for Colonels to Lords, from less to more,
from O C. to O P, etc. Let it therefore be the wisdom of the people and their
heads this day, by other men's harms to beware of doing or contriving any thing
that may revive or give length of days, to the tottering interest of the beast
and false Prophet: for to run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward,
hazards a perishing in the gainsayings of Core. It Was the safety of Laban and
Esau that Jacob became a Prince, prevailing with God and with men, it would
have been Pharaoh's advantage, had he been so conquered, it was his destruction
to follow Israel to the Read Sea, it will be the still peace and prosperity of
Rulers to give the Lords people liberty, to follow him wheresoever he goes.

A show or flourish of this seemed not long since to present it self amongst us
as if our Magistrates intended to be first in bringing the greatness of their
treasures to Christ, and were now resolved upon all terms to join issue with
him and become nursing Fathers to his people, etc.

It Is well it proves more substantial and that the occasion the Lord has once
more taken (by the rebellion of others) to roll away that reproach from the
remnant of his poor people in England, be observed according to the manifest
decision it has made between the true friends of Israel and the troubles or
Achans of our day, and their Abettors.

The fruits of whose vexatious Spirits, so plentifully gratifying the Ballad
singers employment, which are insufficient to vindicate their innocence or any
ways conceal their agreement with death, however they think its taken for
granted that the late abominable design of War was only grounded upon a
Cavaleer bottom, ( viz. the interest of the old Royalist) but the parallel
proceedings and pretenses of Dunbar, Worcester, and Westchester, give
(especially to such as have escaped their snares) too much cause to judge
otherwise, and that they send not their old Loyalty a mourning for nothing,
besides the manifold distgustings, shaking the head and gnashing the teeth in
this City and else where at the Churches and others for their conformity to the
Parliament together with their tauntings at the independent, that now they had
discovered themselves, by joining with the Anabaptists and others, further
demonstrates the spirits and principles of that Generation of men. And it may
also serve to induce our rulers otherwise then at present they do, to encourage
such as in the face of difficulty and reproach, have proved themselves faithful
to the Lord and their Country, for it will be taken but for a slender argument
of respect or true kindness unto any to be called upon for assistance in the
day of trouble, and as soon as the storm is but a little past again to be
slighted and rejected, but better things are hoped, or at least wished for to
be the reward of friends, etc. And seeing the Lords hand appeared sar toward
the demolishing some stately boothes amongst us of late let it move us to
press forward in the seeking after a City whose builder and maker is God,
and to cease tabernacling in the concernments of a lower nature, least through
much striving for mastership and dominion in Israel, it be discovered we are
yet ignorant of the first principles of the Kingdom of God. And therefore be
it known unto all that judge themselves concernd, that as the greater is not
comprehended of the less but the less of the greater, so the spiritual is not
comprehended of the civil interest but the civil of the spiritual, and ere
long, (however our being emptied from vessel to vessel has no more prevailed
with men) it will appear that, that which formerly hadan excellency in it, has
now none because of that which does excel, and then so much the more dangerous
will it be for a Nation to be lifting the heel against the Lord when his design
is to make them a people more excellent then their neighbors. It could be
wished therefore, that it were not with many now, as with Saul in times past
who when he knew that the Kingdom must be rent from him, coveted to have the
name of walking in end out before the people, so that with men only ambitious
of honor, when none other can be (obtained) a show of dignity and dominion
will serve till by having recourse to some false guides, or old maxims of
state policy given by Aristotle, Matchavil, and the like, they judge themselves
in a capacity to sttruggle for something more, whilst the seed of the true
Mordecay only addressing it self to the father of spirits receives
encouragement to despise the vanity and haughtiness of Haman in the gate, and
are strengthened to believe that if, (after much entreating and patience) by
persons in authority opportunities are neglected, the substance of true honor
and deliverance shall come to them another way, and then such as have not been
faithful in a little, will not be judged worthy to be made rulers over much.

Therefore all ye in this Nation (whether in Parliament, Council, or Army)
whom God has exalted that ye might magnify him, and exalt his name before
the people be then every one of you, yet prevailed with, ere it be too late (if
there be any hope, any beauty, any excellency, any consolation or salvation in
the interest and Kingdom of the Son of God, to mind these things: let not your
hearts (in opposition to the approachings and drawings near of his glory) be
set upon things that perish, it was the miscarriage of others, let it not be
yours, to put too a great price upon what you are or have, rather let a due
improvement thereof be made to the honor of his most holy name, in whose hands
all the hearts and lives are to dispose of at his pleasure, who has once more
taken occasion to try and prove yours, by putting such opportunities into your
hands to redeem the times past, that if ye should grow careless, negligent, or
remiss therein, 'Twill surely be accounted for, and what damage and detriment
is thereby occasioned to the interest of the Lord and his deople, will
certainly be required at your hands who are found guilty of such neglect, be
you ever so highly exalted in the interest and pomp of this vain glorious
world, for the Lord raigns he has clothed himself with Majesty, and with
strength wherewith he girds himself, to reckon with all the wicked and proud
doers of the Earth, this discourse or faithful advertisement proceeds not from
any evil will disrespect or prejudice the Author retains against any man's
person now in Power, but a sense of the evil of our doings in times past, and
the face of things too much reflecting upon what was not then acceptable, much
less in a day of further light Creates a jealousy for truth, and the welfare
of such as are and ought to be concerned for it, fearing least by agravating
our former offenses we bring upon our selves and others the greater damnation
or judgment, etc. And though it may be truly asserted that it is the
concernment of English men in general, this day, to follow hard after a thorogh
or more excellent reformation, yet its not intended here by any means, that a
slighting or undervaluing what is received in order thereunto, (be it ever so
small) should be begotten in the hearts of any, no, far be it from every one
that fears the Lord so to do, rather let all study thankfully to improve what
we are made partakers of, to its right use and end that God may be glorified
and our selves redeemed from the corruption and bondage of this sinful world,
into the precious liberty of the Sons of God, which ought to be the only aim
of all our leaders, and is the excellent deliverance both longed and hoped for

By their well wisher, T C.
22. 7 month. 59.
Here should have been annexed to this a brief enquiry after a symptom or
manifestation of that principle that is able to preserve the soul in the hour
and power of darkness, and keep it unspotted in the midst of the great
temptations that are a coming upon all the earth to try them that dwell
therein, together with a glymps of the St. or spiritual man's concernment in a
day of rebuke but for want of convenient opportunity, and for some other
reasons (...) with the Author it is at present omitted, only for the
encouragment of such as desire to follow the Lord full and to lean upon him in
an evil time, let me commend unto ye the assertion and experience of a well
tried servant of the Lord, Psalm. 33.18. that the eye of the Lord is upon them
that fear him, and have a hope in his mercy to deliver their souls from death,
and to keep them alive in a day of Famine.

FINIS.

