A DECLARATION FROM His Majesty the KING OF SCOTS, Wherein is declared how
the Army shall be fully satisfied all their Arrears, with a large Overplus.

TOGETHER With an Assurance of Indemnity to all that have been engaged, and
active in any the late Wars. That all Armies shall be disbanded, and His
Government always regulated by a Free and Full Parliament, triennially called:
And the People secured of their Liberties, and eased of their Illegal Burdens
and Taxes.

ALSO A Letter to the Right Honorable The Lord LAMBERT From a Lover of Peace
and Truth.

Being a most faithful Advice how to choose the safest way to the happy ending
of all our Distractions.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1659.

CHARLES R.
WE having lately received an Overture from some persons In England, with a
seeming pretense of a Peace and Reconcilement betwizt Us and out Subjects of
England, and although they acknowledge themselves few in number, and not so
well resolved as to trust us with their Names, yet undertake on the behalf of
many thousands, to make good their propositions to us, conditionally, that we
grant and assure unto them, their (as they call them, reasonable and modest)
requests; whether these men's Intentions are just and upright, as they pretend,
or whether with Joab's salutation to Abner, they would entrap us to our
destruction; or with Shimei, come the first of all the House of Joseph to meet
us, not being able to support themselves in their decaying condition, we shall
not be much desirous to enquire after: Only from hence we take occasion to let
those persons, and all the world know, that we are ready to grant to all our
Subjects (some very few excepted) more than they can have the confidence to
expect from us: Yet let not any rash judgment condemn us for our large Offers,
as being in so low, and forlorn a Condition, as never any Christian Prince for
many Ages has been; That we are forward in promises, though intend little or
no performance: We say, were our calamity more heavy upon us (which can hardly
be) we shall not be drawn by the greatest allurements and advantages to pass
our engagement for any thing we are nor fully resolved co perform, which being
chiefly for the general good and peace of all our Subsects, we cannot but hope
for a happy success to ensue, and therefore to declare that (if peaceably
received) we shall forthwith grant,

1. A general and free pardon to all (seven of those only excepted, which were
the bloody Judges and Murderers of the King our Father.)

2. That all the Armies shall be within six months disbanded, if moneys for
their satisfaction can in a Parliamentary way be so soon raised, and that they
shall have all Arrears fully paid them, and three months pay over and above to
every common Soldier, for their better removal and settlement, in their former
or better way and place of living.

3. That the Armies being so satisfied and disbanded, no Soldier shall be
continued, but in the ancient Garrisonr, accustomed on the Sea Coasta, and that
no new Army shall be raised, or any Fleet by us set forth to Sea, upon any
occasion whatsoever, but by consent of Parliament.

4. That not any of Our Subjects shall be burdened with Taxes, Excise,
Free-quartering, or other illegal payments or pressures, or any Oaths imposed,
nor any debarred of their Liberties, questioned for their Lives or Estates, for
any cause or pretense whatsoever, but by the ancient and known Laws of the
Land, according to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right.

5. That the Purchasers of Crown Lands and Rents being satisfied their
purchase-mony and interests by the profits thereof, and further payment to
their full Reimbursement, The said Lands and Rents may return to the Crown
again, we being resolved in the mean time to cast our Self on the love of our
Subjects for our future support: And if the Parliament (that shall next be
called) shall not think fit to give us a reparation, and such a competent
revenue as we might expect, we have learned, and shall submit (if there be
occasion) to the condition of the meanest of our Predecessors.

6. That the Purchasers of Bishops and Deans and Chapters Lands and Rents,
being in like sort satisfied, their purchase-mony and interest by the profits
and further payment, till they be reimbursed, that then the said Lands and
Rents shall be conferred on the Clergy and Ministry, as the next Parliament
shall ordain.

7. That as soon as Writs can be issued, a free and legal Parliament shall be
summoned, and the privileges thereof maintained, without any exemption to any
person whatsoever, being legally chosen and returned, according to the ancient
Laws and Customs of Englund in that case provided.

8. That the Parliament shall be desired by us (and with whom we shall concur)
to take care for the settling of the Protestant Religion, and the public
worship of God (with liberty for tender Consciences) and for the providing for
the Ministry in the first place, as being the most weighty affair, and ought to
be preferred before any other Concernment whatsoever, without which no blessing
from above can be expected upon our Government.

9. That if the Parliement shall pass an Act of general Pardon, (and if they
shall desire those seven persons by us intended to be executed, shall be
included, and giving us satisfactory reasons for the same) we shall concur with
them therein.

10. That the affairs of the Land and our Government shall be Constantly
regulated and managed by Parliaments, and that the Act for Triennial
Parliaments shall be by us duly observed.

We acknowledge it is very difficult, if not impossible, to please all,
especialy where there are so many divisions, and every man almost of a several
mind and opinion: But as we have proposed too ur Self, so shall we endeavor to
give all reasonable Satisfaction to all our Subjects. And if the Actings of the
Representatives in a Free Parliament of their own choice can satisfy them, we
shall not be wanting in summoning and concurring with them: But if that will
not please them, nothing will.

Now, if these condescentions of ours shall have so much freedom of passage in
England, as many a scurrilous and lying Pamphlet fly abroad without our
control, we are confident that all of understanding, that are not wilfully
blinded, or not over-swayed with present self-interest, thereby knowing our
large Offers, must needs be fully convinced of the amplitude thereof, extending
to all their grievances.

However, if it shall be instanced wherein we are too short, (for we are ready,
for the Good, and Peace of the Nation, to give large satisfaction, and ample
assurance to our most inveterate Enemies;) We having yielded to all matters of
most importance, shall not stick at lesser things.

And if any that have been adherers and assisting to our late royal Father and
us, shall think we are herein too free and indulgent to such, and so many open
and professed Enemies; and that we have made no provision for our Servants, and
Friends; we desire them all to consider our own, and also their Conditions, and
how things now stand in England; that neither we, nor themselves, can otherwise
(in any probability) better our selves, unless by a bloody and hazzardous War;
which though we cannot doubt of the lawfullnesse on our part, and consequently
a prossperous success, if we shall be necessitated thereto for the recovery of
our just right, yet we are assured, that the God of peace will rather prosper a
peaceable than violent and forceable entrance: And therefore we hope all those
our friends, and loving Subjects, will rest fully satisfied with that we shall
do pursuant to these propositions, we being desirous hereafter to consider
their sufferings (though not comparable to ours) as God shall enable, and in
all just and lawful ways.

And now we wish, that all the people of England would remember how they have
performed their Protestations, Oaths, Vows, Solemn League and Covenant: But to
instance in no more than the Honor and Privileges of Parliament, the
foundation of all their laws, which they have so often sworn and vowed to
maintain with their lives and fortunes: what face of a Parliament they have now
left, which should consist of three Estates, King, House of Peers, and House of
Commons: The two first wholly destroyed: And what of the last is in being (not
to mention at least 150 that at the beginning of the Wars left them and went to
Oxford) when a considerable number of their own party protested against their
proceedings, and deserted the House; How many imprisoned, and what great
numbers by force expulsed by that late bloody and hypocritical Usurper, which
actions of his (though they were a main step to his intended Throne and
Tyrannical Government) yet are to well relished, By that Tail of a Parliament
remaining, that they are resolved neither to readmit the persons so illegally
and injurioussly expelled, nor to fill up the void places of any removed or
dead: so that in a few year^, what by death and new expulsion., they may reduce
themselves to the number of those infamous Tyrants of Athens, and if they can
establish themselves by their designed Militia, and that they may thereby be
able to command their now masters, the Swordmen, and Cashire them, they will
modd^ such a new Army as shall be in subjection to them, and then Vote
themselves, their Sons, and Nephews, a Parliament for ever,

Let those that have generous English Spirits seriously consider into what a
Labyrinth of woe and: misery they have run themselves and now lyc under; what a
confusion there is in Church and State; that what has been gotten by blood and
rapine, must be so upheld; The Government these Usurpers would settle, not
being to be maintained, but by continual Armies and Navies, and he support of
these must be Taxes, Excise, Free-quarterings, and chargeable Militia's and
other unsupportable burdens to perpetuity*

Now let the whole Nation beg and implore a blessing from the Father of
Mercies, and let them all be of one heart and one mind, to free themselves of
these Iron yokes and heavy pressures, and join and concur^ with us, in
esablishing a peaceable Government, to the great joy and happiness of the
honest and true-hearted, and to the sdvancement of the true Protestant Religion
and God glory. And let them all unanimously with one Voice say, Amen.

A true Copy taken from the Original.

A Letter to the Right Honorable The Lord LAMBERT.
SIR,
LEt it not be a Trouble to you to read a few Lines from one unknown, but a
much honourer of your Noble Spirit, and therefore desirous to cast in this dram
of Advice among those many and weighty Debates now before you.

If I should tell you of diverse that had a power or capacity to contribute to,
or restore Peace to these Nations, and have neglected the oportunities which
they have since repented of, I am confident you would, even your self, point
put the men; namely, Essex, Fairfax, Waller, Massey, Brown, Rich, Cromwell, and
others.

Sir, We look upon you at this instant as having the whole strength of the
Nation in your hands; but if you expect to hold it long, you will be miserably
deceived: Therefore I beseech you make good use of this happy opportunity, and
consider how great you may make your self, and how glorious you will be to
posterity, if you be a means of laying the Government on the shoulders of Him
that ought to bear it, which will in an instant restore a happy Peace and
Settlement to this distracted Nation: Certainly the greatest est honor, and a
better estate than any English Subject enjoyes shall be your reward. But if you
doubt how the Soldier, and Persons deeply concerned, that shall concur with
you shall be secured and satisfied; See this Deelaration, that to my knowledge
has been near three months in this Town, and perhaps not yet come to your
view. Consider of it, and see, if all your own seekings, both from Our Hand,
and another in particulars be not here answered. Lay your Hand on your Heart,
for are you not thereby convinced? or would you know under what. Government the
people would rest most satisfied, either a Single Person, Council of State,
Parliament or Army? Appoint such a way as every man may without fear or danger
give in his vote undiscovered. To begin only with this Town; Let the Clerk of
every Company, or Constable of every Ward take a Ticket in Paper from every
man, and put it into a Box locked and sealed, and you will find Nine parts of
Ten incline to that Constitution we have lived under above these five hundred
years: But if not, you will however by this course give great satisfaction to
the People, in letting them have each an opportunity of declaring their minds,
and thereby you will be rightly informed of their affections; which being
weighed in the balance of your judgment, you may with confidence and
assurance steer on a straight course to the Haven of Happiness and Safety.

My Lord, I conceive I have done my duty in declaring my mind, and have no more
to say, but that you do as God shall put in your Heart, and then go on and
prosper.

October. 14. 1659. Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant, S. L.

A LETTER To the Right Honorable The Lord LAMBERT, From a Lover of Peace and
Truth. Being a most faithful Advice how to choose the safest way to the happy
Ending of all our Distractions.

Also, A DECLARATION FROM The KING of SCOTS, How the Army shall be fully
satisfied all their Arrears, with a large Overplus.

TOGETHER WITH An Assurance and Indemnity to all that have been engaged and
active in any the late Wars. That all Armies shall be disbanded, and his
Government always regulated by a free and full Parliament, triennially to be
called: And, The People secured of their Liberties, and eased of all Illegal
Burdens and Taxes.

Printed in the Year, 1659.

A LETTER to the right honorable The Lord LAMBERT.
SIR,
LEt it not be a trouble to you to read a few Lines from one unknown, but a
much honorer of your Noble Spirit, and therefore desirous to cast in his dram
of Advice among those many and weighty Debates now before you.

If I should tell you of diverse that had a power or capacity to contribute to,
or restore Peace to these Nations, and have neglected the Opportunities, which
they have since repented of, I am confident you would, even your self, point
out the men; namely, Essex, Fairfax, Waller, Massey, Brown, Rich, Cromwell,
and others.

Sir, We look upon you at this instant as having the whole strength of the
Nation in your hands, but if you expect to hold it long, you will be miserably
deceived: Therefore I beseech you make good use of this happy opportunity, and
consider how great you may make your self, and how glorious you will be to
posterity, if you be a means of laying the Government on the shoulders of Him
that ought to bear it, which will in an instant restore a happy Peace and
Settlement to this distracted Nation: Certainly, the greatest honor, and a
better estate than any English Subject enjoys shall be your reward. But if you
doubt how the Soldier and Persons deeply concerned, that shall concur with you
shall be secured and satisfied; See this Declaration, that to my knowledge has
been near Three Months in this Town, and perhaps not yet come to your view.
Are you not thereby convinced, or would you know under what Government the
People would rest most satisfied, either a Single Person, Council of State,
Parliament, or Army? Appoint such a way as every man may without fear or danger
give in his vote undiscovered: To begin only with this Town; Let the Clerk of
every Company, or Constable of every Ward, take a Ticket in Paper from every
man, and put it into a Box locked and sealed, and you will find Nine parts of
Ten incline to that Constitution we have lived under above these five hundred
years: But if not, you will however by this course give great satisfaction to
the People, in letting them have each an opportunity of declaring their minds,
and thereby you will be rightly informed of their affections; which being
weighed in the balance of your judgment, you may with confidence and
assurance steer on a straight course to the Haven of Happiness and Safety.

My Lord, I conceive I have done my duty in declaring my mind, and have no more
to say, but that you do as God shall put in your heart, and then go and prosper.

October. 14. 1659. Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant S. L.

CHARLES R.
WE having lately received an Overture from some persons in England, with a
seeming pretense of a Peace and Reconcilement betwixt Us and our Subjects of
England, and although they acknowledge themselves few in number, and not so
well resolved as to trust us with their Names, yet undertake on the behalf of
many thousands, to make good their propositions to us conditionally, that we
grant and assure unto them, their (as they call them, reasonable and modest)
requests; whether these men's Intentions are just and upright, as they pretend,
or whether with Jo^b's Salutation to Abner, they would entrap us to our
destruction; or with Shimei, come the first of all the House of Joseph to meet
us, not being able to support themselves in their decaying Condition, we shall
not be much desirous to enquire after: Only from hence we take occasion to let
those persons, and all the world know, that we are ready to grant to all our
Subjects (some very few excepted) more then they can have the confidence to
expect from us: Yet let not any rash Judgment condemn us for our large Offers,
as being in so low, and forlorn a Condition, as never any Christian Prince for
many Ages, has been; That we are forward in promises, though intend little or
no performance: We say, were our calamity more heavy upon us, (which can hardly
be) we shall not be drawn by the greatest allurements and advantages to pass
our engagement for any thing we are not fully resolved to perform, which being
chiefly for the general good and peace of all our Subjects, we cannot but hope
for a happy Success to ensue, and therefore do declare that (if peaceably
received) we shall forthwith grant,

1. A general and free pardon to all (seven of those only excepted, which were
the bloody Judges and Murderers of the King our Father.

2. That all the Armies shall be within six months disbanded, if Moneys for
their satisfaction can in a Parliamentary way be so soon raised, and that they
shall have all Arrears fully paid them, and three months pay over and above to
every common Soldier, for their better removal and settlement, in their former
or better way and place of living.

3. That the Armies being so satisfied and disbanded, no Soldier shall be
continued, but in the ancient Garrisons, accustomed on the Sea Coasts, and that
no new Army shall be raised, or any Fleet by us set forth to Sea, upon any
occasion whatsoever, but by consent of Parliament.

4. That not any of our Subjects shall be burdened with Taxes, Excise,
Free-quarterings, or other illegal payments or pressures, or any Oaths imposed,
nor any debarred of their Liberties, questioned for their Lives or Estates, for
any cause or pretense whatsoever, but by the ancient and known Laws of the
Land, according to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right.

5. That the Purchasers of Crown Lands and Rents being satisfied their purchase
money and Interests by the Profits thereof, and further payment to their full
Reimbursement: The said Lands and Rents may return to the Crown again; we being
resolved in the mean time to cast our Self on the Love of our Subjects for our
future support: And if the Parliament (that shall next be called) shall not think
fit to give us a reparation, and such a competent revenue as we might expect,
we have learned, and shall submit (if there be occasion) to the Condition of the
meanest of our Predecessors.

6. That the purchasers of Bishops, and Deans and Chapters Lands, and Rents,
being in like sort satisfied their purchase money and Interest by the profits
and further payment, till they be reimbursed, that then the said Lands and
Rents shall be conferred on the Clergy and Ministry, as the next Parliament
shall ordain.

7. That as soon as Writs can be issued, a free and legal Parliament shall be
summoned, and the Privileges thereof maintained, without any exemption to any
person whatsoever, being legally chosen and returned, according to the ancient
Laws and Customs of EngLand in that case provided.

8. That the Parliament shall be desired by us (and with whom we shall concur,
to take care for the settling of the Protestant Religion, and the public
worship of God (with liberty for tender Consciences,) and for the providing for
the Ministry in the first place, as being the most weighty affair, and ought to
be preferred before any other Concernment whatsoever, without which no blessing
from above can be expected upon our Government.

9. That if the Parliament shall pass an Act of general pardon, (and if they
shall desire those seven persons by us intended to be executed, shall be
included, and giving us satisfactory reasons for the same) we shall concur with
them therein.

10. That the Affairs of the Land and our Government, shall be constantly
regulated and managed by Parliaments, and that the Act for Triennial
Parliaments shall be by us duly observed.

We acknowledge it is very difficult, if not impossible to please all,
especially where there are so many divisions, and every man almost of a several
mind and opinion: But as we have proposed to our Self, so shall we endeavor to
give all reasonable Satisfaction to all our Subjects. And if the Actings of the
Representatives in a Free Parliament of their own choice can satisfy them, we
shall not be wanting in summoning and concurring with them: But if that will
not please them, nothing will.

Now, if these condescentions of ours shall have so much freedom of passage in
England, as many a scurrilous and lying Pamphlet fly abroad without our
control, we are confident that all of understanding, that are not wilfully
blinded, or not over-swayed with present self-interest, thereby knowing our
large Offers, must needs be fully convinced of the amplitude thereof, extending
to all their grievances.

However, if it shall be instanced wherein we are two short, (for we are ready
for the Good, and Peace of the Nation, to give large satisfaction, and ample
assurance to our most inveterate Enemies;) We having yielded to all matters of
most importance, shall not stick at lesser things.

And if any that have been adherers and assisting to our late royal Father and
us, shall think we are herein to free and indulgent to such, and so many open
and professed Enemies; and that we have made no provision for our Servants, and
Friends; we desire them all to consider our own, and also their Conditions, and
how things now stand in England; That neither we, nor themselves, can otherwise
(in any probability) better our selves, unless by a bloody and hazzardous War;
which though we cannot doubt of the lawfulness on our part, and consequently a
prosperous success, if we shall be necessitated thereto for the recovery of our
just right, yet we are assured that the God of peace will rather prosper a
peaceable then violent and forceable entrance: And therefore we hope all those
our friends, and loving Sujects, will rest fully satisfied with what we shall
do pursuant to these propositions, we being desirous hereafter to consider
their sufferings (though not comparable to ours) as God shall enable, and in
all just and lawful ways.

And now we wish that all the people of England would remember how they have
performed their Protestations, Oaths, Vows, Solemn League and Covenant: But to
instance in no more then the Honor and Privileges of Parliament, the
foundation of all their laws, which they have so often sworn and vowed to
maintain with their lives and fortunes: What face of a Parliament they have now
left, which should consist of three Estates, King, House of Peers, and House of
Commons: The two first wholly destroyed: And what of the last is in being (not
to mention at least 150 that at the beginning of the Wars left them and went to
Oxford) when a considerable number of their own party protested against their
proceedings and deserted the House: How many imprisoned, and what great numbers
by force expulsed by that late bloody and hypocritical Usurper, which actions
of his (though they were a main step to his intended Throne and Tyrannical
Government) yet are so well relished, by that Tail of a Parliament remaining,
that they are resolved neither to readmit the persons so illegally and
injuriously expelled, nor to fill the up the void places of any removed or
dead; so that in a few years, what by death, and new expulsions, they may
reduce themselves to the number of those infamous Tyrants of Athens, and if
they can establish themselves by their designed Militia, and that they may
thereby be able to command their now Masters the Swordmen, and Cashire them,
they will moddle such a new Army as shall be in subjection to them, and then
Vote Themselves their Sons, and Nephews, a Parliament for ever.

Let those that have generous English Spirits seriously consider into what a
Labyrinth of woe and misery they have run themselves and now lie under; what a
confusion there is in Church and State; that what has been gotten by blood and
rapine, must be so upheld. The Government these Usurpers would settle, not
being to be maintained, but by continual Armies and Navies, and the support of
those must be Taxes, Excise, Free-quarterings, and chargeable Militia's, and
other unsupportable burdens to perpetuity.

Now let the whole Nation beg and implore a blessing from the Father of
Mercies, and let them all be of one heart and one mind, to free themselves of
these Iron yokes and heavy pressures, and join and concur with us, in
establishing a peaceable Government, to the great joy and happiness of the
honest and true-hearted, and to the advancement of the true Protestant Religion
and Gods glory. And let them all unanimously with one Voice say, Amen.

A true Copy taken from the Original.

FINIS.

