ANIMADVERSIONS UPON A FATAL PERIOD.

Or, a Brief DISCOURSE Concerning The Present State of the Body, And The Future
State of the Soul.

By Tho. Collard, M. A.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even
as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Matt. 23.
37. LONDON, Printed by T. D. for Thomas Basset at the George near St. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street. 1678.

To the judicious, knowing, and skilful Physicians, Apothecaries, and
Chirurgians: These Animadversions upon a fatal Period, are most humbly
dedicated by the Author.
Honored Sirs,
I Hope I may beg, and easily obtain your pardon, for prefixing your names to
these few Sheets; seeing your whole Profession, by the clearest Consequence,
is, by some men's endeavors, likely to be defamed and cashiered, as one great
Imposture.

To the READER.
THe Notion of a Destiny, of the Fatal Event of all things, of peremptory and
absolute Decrees, being once imbibed by the Vulgar, or even by their great
Abettors; they soon commence such excellent Sophisters as to argue and cajole
themselves out of all morality and honesty: Abold and Hectoring confidence, an
idle and fruitless faith, Yeas and Nays, grave nods, sadtones and accents, wrie
Mouths, sullen and lugubrious looks, Hypocrisy and mere Formalities with the
more precious Sort of them; and oaths, curses, imprecations, and notorious
frolicks and debaucheries with the Prophaner: have the like influence (they
think) on God, concerning their present and future State; as truth, sincerity,
temperance, ardent zeal, emient piety, real charity and devotion. For the
Almighty, in their judgments, before they had a Being designed their Fate
either of bliss or misery, which neither Vice nor Virtue can alter.

Death it is confessed, is very formidous, of a tragical and austere Aspect, and
Life, especially eternal, is sweet and eligible, desired and courted by all;
but should they endeavor to use all the Means and Methods imaginable to eschew
the One, and to enjoy the Other; yet a previous and dormant Decree might
frustrate their designs, and press them to the infernal Pit, whiles, Idiots
like, they were aspiring for Heaven. This supersedes their care and industry,
makes them respect an extravagant Romance, a Dithyrambick, or a hymn of their
own making, as good for the Health of their Souls, as the whole Duty of Man, Te
Deum, or one of David's Penitentials; and Chalk Ashes, and Sawdust as
efficacious for the Health of their Bodies, as the richest Julips and Cordials;
and so Both oftentimes perish either by Presumption or Despair: these being the
direful Effects and sad results, which naturally issue, like insipid rivulets
from putrid springs, from such brainsick and vertiginous Phancies.

There are many (I know) elaborate and judicious Discourses, both from the
Press and the Pulpit, which since the blessed and miraculous Restoration of
our exiled KING and CHURCH, have like so many holy Engines battered down those
prodigious Opinions concerning Gods most just and sacred Decrees: Yet the
Contagion still remaining in these Parts, as was evident from W. C's
Pulpit-Prate in Vindication of a Fatal Period, and the Turks Aphorism, Quod
terminus vitae est immutabilis; and even as it now appears from the Press in
its new form, after two years licking: (for there are some things added, as
that of Bp. H. and more omitted;) yet the zealous Harangue is still a Bear,
able to startle all that have any good thoughts of a Deity, or any real
estimate for Truth, Reason, Piety, Religion, and the Sincerity of the Sacred
Writ* tho it is received by his infatuated Proselytes with as great veneration,
as one of St. Paul's Epistles. And this is no Novelty nor wonder neither: for
it is storied of a Geneva Innocent (I might say a blasphemous Zealot) that said,
Si veniret Sanctus Paulus qui eadem hora concionaretur qua and Calvinus, ego
relicto Paulo audirem Calvinum, If St. Paul should come from Heaven, and Preach
at the same time that Calvin did; I would desert Paul, and attend and hear
precious Mr. John Calvin. Comparisons (I know) are odious; and I must needs
confess, that there is as vast a difference between J. C. the Master, and W. C.
the Disciple, as there is between a subtle Politician that can Argue and
Rhetoricate, and one of his talkative Bigots.

Our Plebeans and Artizans, and most that formerly frequented the illegal
Meetings, being infected with the sour Leaven of absolute and irrespective
Decrees of Election and Reprobation, which are used by them as Catholicons to
free them from all the diseases both of body and mind, from all faults and
Errors: for after the most detestable acts and heinous offenses, they usually
solace themselves (as I have often known,) That all was decreed, allotted, and
appointed for them: that Gods will must be done: and that if God had given them
better Grace, (as they usually word it) they had been better men, and less
peccant. So that the poor ignorant Creatures (tho highly conceited of their
own, as well as of their Teachers knowledge) dream, that the Almighty is obliged
in honor to pardon their most deliberate and blackest crimes; they being
(according to their own Principles,) necessitated thereto by his own eternal
and immutable Act and Deed. This Contagion, I say, being yet amongst us: This
mean Antidote may not, I presume, prove altogether ineffectual, tho not totally
to Allay and expel, yet in some measure to put a stop to the Increase and
spreading of it; which has been one of the grand Causes of that vast Empire Sin
has got in England since the public Preaching of it, in (and a little before)
our late intestine Commotions. I shall not apologize, but shall leave the
ensuing Lines to thy serious and impartial Consideration.

A brief Discourse.
Ezekiel. 18. 31, Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die,
O house of Israel?
THE many Misapprehensions of God, especially concerning the secret purposes of
his Will, which he neither commands us to search after, nor will permit us to
know; (and surely then were we but half ashamed of notorious Contradictions, we
should never pretend to know Gods Decrees, which we call hidden and secret;)
and the diverse Misperswasions of the Divine Attributes, especially concerning
his Justice and Mercy; are none of the smallest Causes of those gross Errors
and scandalous practices that are found amongst the Propugners of them. The
Pulpit, Chair, and Press, (when we found by woeful experience that Maxim
verified, No Bishop, no King) insinuated unto us such Opinions and Doctrines,
(one of the most blasphemous that ever I heard, was vented, when the Good Old
Cause was rampant, by Mr. W. at a Soul-edifying Lecture; viz. That we are not
saved by Jesus Christ.) as infer falsehood in God, and set an opposition between
his revealed and his secret Will, his holy Commands and just Decrees, making
the one a blind for the better execution of the other; as if all the love and
mercy he expresses, all the passionate invitations he makes were only to mock
and delude us. And as several ills (says the most judicious, and ever to be
admired Author of the Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety) are hereby
countenanced and authorized, so is all Virtue in general discouraged and
disheartened; these benumb us in our Christian course, substract that spirit and
vigor, which should carry us through the weary stages of duty: indeed they cut
the very sinews of Industry, baffle and make ridiculous all purposes of Labor,
the Ministers Preaching, and the Peoples Hearing and Doing: for what should
invite a man to strive for that, from which he knows he is either irreversibly
precluded, or else so infallibly ascertained of, that his negligence cannot
defeat him.

GOD has given us Rules of Life, which upon the severest Penalties he requires
us to study and practice; and we divert from these, and make it our business to
trace his Counsels. We are gazing at the Stars to read our Destiny, and look
not to our feet; and by that negligence experiment the worst fate they could
have portended: for I think we may say our wild Phancies about Gods Decrees,
have in event reprobated more than those Decrees, upon which they are so
willing to charge their ruin, and have bid fair to the damning of many, whom
those left salvable. We often forget our Calling by contemplating our
Predestination; and let the Opinion of our Fate be at once the Encouragement
and Excuse of our sloth, than which nothing can more evacuate the purpose and
design of our Christianity, which Divines have truly defined to be not a
contemplative but active Science.

THE Almighty interrogates the house of Israel, Why will ye die? and tells them
in the subsequent Verse, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies;
wherefore turn your selves, and live ye? Yet some bold Inquisitors into Gods
Decrees and hidden Counsels dream, That his secret Will is of a very distant
nature to his revealed; Et Deus ita terminum seu horam mortis homini
praefinierit decreto absoluto; ut hac ipsa hora, and non alia, hoc ipso mortis
genere, quo homo moritur, and non alio, mori illum simpliciter absoluteque sit
necessarium: and that the Soul likewise is liable to the same fatality. That
Myriads do what they can, are from Gods eternal and immutable purpose ordained
for death and endless misery; and a very few Favorites only, in comparison of
the rest, do what they will, are predestined to life and immortal Glory. This
wounds the Credit both of the Divines and the Physicians, of their Proselytes
and Patients; and by the clearest consequence makes the former Cheats, and the
later Fools. But whether true or no, we come now to consider.

THE Question here, Why will ye die? and the Protestation, I have no pleasure
in the death of him that dies; may clear Gods ways of being either cruel or
unequal; and evidently demonstrate the Almighty's Philanthropy, and his high
resentment of the ruin and Perdition either of Body or Soul. And first
concerning the present State of the Body. The present state of the Body.


THE Protoplast, had he continued in his integrity, (as he might, for God gave
him sufficient power to stand, and did not withdraw the least degree of his
Grace, or infuse into him any secret impulse or motion, whereby he might
deviate from that sacred station in which he was placed;) he had been free from
death; but having once eaten the prohibited fruit, 'twas necessary by Gods
Decree (but not before) that Death should arrest him for it; for the immutable
Creator had said, That in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die,
Genesis 2. 17. So that we may not before the Fall (although it be true since) term
death, with Socinus, to be naturae sequela per se. For as by Adam Sin entered
into the world, so death by sin, Romans 5. 12. And as it follows; so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned: that is, All mere men that were after
born, were sinners, born after the image and likeness of Adam that was now a
sinner, and had begotten no Child in his innocence. Sinful men then we are all,
and die once we must by reason of our Fore-father's Apostasy. It Is true, we
read that Lazarus and others being raised from the dead, without controversy
died twice; but the Author (St. Paul doubtless) of the Heb^. Chap. 9. 27.
speaks of the natural Law, whereby it is appointed unto all ordinarily once to
die; so that it is not opposite to this truth, because others have died twice,
which by an extraordinary manner happened only to a few. And as for those that
shall be found alive at the second and sudden coming of Christ, they shall be
changed in a moment, and in the twinkling of an eye; which mutation or change
shall be to them instead of death. It Is then most apparent, that it is
ordinarily appointed unto men once to die; and then certainly to come to
judgment, to be punished or rewarded according to their actions. Romans 14. 10. 2
Cor. 5. 10.

OUR brittle and terrestrial Bodies, we all grant, must be dissolved; for our
Bounds are set, and our lives limited within such a number of years, beyond
which, by the ordinary course of nature we cannot pass; but our Days are not so
strictly and fatally limited and determined, as if neither God nor man could
extend or shorten them. The fifteen years added to Hezekiah's days, assure us
of Gods power to prolong the life of man; and Reason, Experience, and all
History both sacred and profane, proclaim his power to shorten it. And
thousands of Examples too sadly evince, how expert and indefatigable many are
in putting a Period to their own and other men's days, in the midst and prime of
their strength and splendour. A man may destroy him^e^^, his Friend, Neighbor,
or Enemy, before he has seen thirty years, that otherwise might have seen
threescore. And therefore a fatal Period, in the judgment of all considering
men, is no less than a Stoical, Astrological, and Mohammedan Dream; or at best
but a popular Error, as our immortal Dr. Hammond terms it in his Postscript of
new Light.

AND we likewise confess, That God does know, and may foretell the very time,
manner, and place of any man's death; but it is a simple Logician, and a giddy
and hot-braind Christian, that from Gods Predictions and Revelations of the
period of some men's lives, as of Aaron, Pashur, Hophni and Phineas, and of the
holy Jesus; will hence infer, (as W. C. most irrationally does) that therefore
the very moment, the very kind, (tho it be self-murder) and place of every
man's death, are fatally, and absolutely decreed and appointed.

I shall transcribe our famous Preacher's very expressions and words, which
indeed would have sounded better from the mouth of a bold Gladiator, with a
Sword in his hand ready for Combat, or from a Magisterial Adventurer, than from
a Lover of Humility; as our great lover of popular applause is uncharacterized,
and in all humility publicly proclaimed by his friend and neighbor, his
profound Champion; who doubtless has an equal inspection both into the Law and
the Gospel.

W. C. page 7. Death (as to all the particular circumstances of it) is
foreappointed and determined by Gods Eternal purpose. 1. As to the time when a
man shall dye: It must be such a time, such a day, and such a moment. Thus for
the time when. 2, The next circumstance (page 10, 11.) I shall speak of is, the
place Where we must (or if you will, rather where we shall) dye; (must or
shall, a great choice and kindness truly) this is also appointed by God,
whether at home or abroad, whether in the field or in the house, whether in the
lower or upper rooms, whether at table (the round or long) or by the fire side,
(or in the midst of the fire) whether in the bed (the flock, feather, or
doun-bed) or in a Chair, (the blew or the red.) 3. As to the manner of dying,
or kind of death, mill modi Lethi, as the Poet says; whether it shall be a
sudden or a lingering death, (an Apoplexy or Consumption,) whether it shall be a
natural or a violent death, (by old age or by poison) whether in Peace or in
War, Foraign or Domestic, (whether by sickness, and by what sickness (whether
great or small, by the biting of a Flea or a Viper, by a stab with a Stelletto
or a straw, by the shot of a Blunderbus or a Pop-gun; for supposing the very
time, manner, and place of every man's death are fatally determined, there is no
more danger in the one, than in the other,) or by the hand of Justice; whether
by burning at the stake, hanging on the Gallow, or losing ones head on the
Scaffold. Isa. 22. 18. Jer. 11. 12. Jer. 34. 5. Joh. 12. 31. 32. Joh. 21. 19.
Mat. 23. 34. 1 Pet. 4. 19. (And so from the first Chapter of Genesis to the
last of the Revelations.) All these circumstances, I say, (but shall never be
able to prove) are appointed, determined, and limited by Gods unchangeable
purpose. (These comfortable Doctrines are calculated for Newgate.

THE first six Quotations out of the Prophets and Apostles, are Predictions
only of some certain men's death; as of Shebna, King Zedekiah, the men of Judah
and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the blessed Jesus, whose death upon all
accounts is to be respected as a Case extraordinary; and therefore they argue
nothing for a fatal Period, as I intimated before. And the last (viz. 1 Pet. 4.
19.) is as impertinent and ridiculous, as if I should cite the first Chap. of
St. John, or any other, to prove that there be as many Worlds, (as some with
their Telescopes would persuade us) as there are Stars in the Firmament. The
words run thus, Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator. No man in his Wits would ever think, that this place could in the
least prove, or seem to favor a fatal Period; or, to use his own words, That
God in his unchangeable purpose has appointed, and determined the time, the
manner, (tho it be hanging on the Gallows for Murder, for Patricide; or losing
ones head on the Scaffold for Treason;) and place (Tyburn, Tower Hill;) of men's
death; unless it be because there is one word in it, viz. Suffer. This was ever
a fanatical Trick to amuse and delude the Vulgar; for let them hear a Legion of
Allegations from the Pulpit, (tho not one of them to the purpose, as here.)
they instantly admire, and adore the man as an Angel or Messenger from Heaven;
style him a Gifted, Scripture-learned, and powerful Preacher, that he has all
the Bible at his Fingers end, and had a Text for every word he thundered out of
his wide Throat. Whereas others are for Reason, ancient Records, Councils,
Fathers, and the like humane Learning. Thus having the credulous Multitude fast
by the Nose, it is no difficult Province to instill into them the most erroneous,
schismatical, and factious Tenants, as the most perspicuous Truths; well
knowing that they want either Wit or Time to try and examine them. Read the
seven preceding Verses, and you will find, that the Apostle there only
predicts, what great pressures and afflictions the primitive Converts would be
loaded with, for the sake of their new (and therefore as their Enemies, both
Jews and Gentiles thought false) Religion. That so by knowing this beforehand,
Persecution might not unexpectedly surprise them, and cause them either to
fluctuate or apostatize,

Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial (terrible fire of
Persecution) which is to try you: But rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of
Christ's sufferings; that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also
with exceeding joy, If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye;
for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. But let none of you (pray observe
it, for this Caution is directly against a fatal Period, and intimates that the
kind or manner of their death, was not absolutely appointed; for they might
suffer death for their wickedness, as well as for their Religion; or else the
Precept or Advice (call it which you will) must needs be very ridiculous)
suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in
other men's matters. But if any suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed;
but let him glorify God on this behalf. For the time is come that judgment
must begin at the house of God; (for the trial of the righteous) and if it
first begin at us, (the true Proselytes of Christ) what shall be the end of
them (the Crucifiers of the holy Jesus, and the obdurate Persecuters of
Christianity) that obey not the Gospel of God? (but utter excision.) And if the
righteous scarcely be saved, (have afflictions in this life,) where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear? (how dreadful then is the expectation of the
profane?) Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, (that
suffer in the cause of their Savior,) commit the keeping of their Souls to him
in well-doing as unto a faithful Creator. (bear their pressures patiently, and
commit their lives to God, who will, if he sees good, preserve them; or else
make their sufferings a way and passage to Eternity.) This is enough to
demonstrate (tho we shall have other occasions hereafter) to his knowing
Editor, with the rest of his Sticklers; or to any other that has but common
reason; how grossly Gods Word is abused and wrested from its genuine and proper
sense, to prop and Patronize his Heterodoxies and Mohammedan phrenzies.

TO affirm dogmatically, that decollation, suspension, felo de se, or any other
miserable death that happen to men; yea, and all the cursed means thereto, as
fraud, rapine, treason, sacrilege, murder, etc. are all absolutely appointed
by Gods immutable counsel and purpose; these conceptions (I say) of the
Almighty, derogate much from his goodness, mercy, and truth; and are not only
diametrically opposite to his very nature, who is Love in the abstract, 1
Epist. St Joh. 4. 8. (...), and cannot be the Author of sin; but to all the
sacred Monuments and Records which evince, That the Period of every man's Life
is mutable, and may be extended or shortened by Providence or Art, by God or
Man. For,

THE great God may (as all must yield, that will not deny his Attribute of
Omnipotency, or make him a necessary Agent.) prolong or shorten the days of any
man; and our Prayers, Repentance, the salubrity and purity of the Air and
Water, our temperance and choice in eating and drinking, and the knowing and
prudent Physician, may by Gods blessing extend our days: Whereas profaneness,
our immoderate passions and desires, the corrupted and impure Elements, our
excess in any respect, exposing our selves to any great and eminent perils, as
the Sword or Pestilence; or an ignorant and confident Quack with his strong and
improper Medicaments, may shorten our days. And he that denies this, (as W. C.
out of abundance of humility, or rather ignorance does) may as well contradict
and deny not only his own reason, (reason did I say? that is a most scandalous
and impious thing for a meek and mortified man, that is full of Raptures and
Illuminations, to own;) but also his own experience, and the sacred History it
self. First,

IT IS evident from the Scriptures, That there is no fatal Period, but that our
lives may be extended or shortened.

OUR gracious Maker has promised long life to those that fear him, and observe
his Mandates. Deus his qui ipsum timent, (...) fore promittit. Exodus 20. 12.
Deuteronomy. 4. 40. 5. 16, 33. 8. 1. Psalm. 9. 16. Prove. 4. 10. Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.
8.

AND God threatens the wicked, that for their impieties he will cut them off in
the midst of their Age, that they shall not live so long as otherwise they
might. Lev. 26. 25. Deuteronomy. 5. 25, 26. 6. 15. 7. 10. 8. 19. Psalm. 55. 23. 104.
35. 109. 8. Prove. 10. 27.

FROM the Examples of Er and Onan Genesis 38 7, 10. of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
Numb. 16. 32, 33. of the Jews, Exo. 31. 14, 15; of the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 28.
of Absolon 2 Samuel 18. 9; of Ananias and Saphira Acts 5. 5, 10. But were there a
fatal Period, all these Promises and Menaces must needs be vain, false, and
ridiculous; which to affirm or imagine would be no small blasphemy: And the sad
Catastrophes of the forementioned, of Er and Onan, of Ananias and Saphira, etc.
were the results of his eternal and absolute Decrees, and not of his wrath and
just Judgments. And that tho Corah and his Confederates did not die the common
death of men, but the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up; yet in (W.
C's Opinion, page 9.) they lived out all the days of their special and personal
limit; or all the days appointed as their portion in the land of the living.
This methinks looks Legerdemain, than honest and sound Theology.

THERE are two places of holy Writ, (amongst several others, some whereof anon
I shall have occasion to nominate,) which may cause W. C. to strike sail, and
yield to right and truth, if the simple Encomiums of the Vulgar, and of the
factious Party, have not metamorphoz'd, and puffed him up into a carnal state
(which he tells us is very dangerous, and in this we believe him;) of arrogance
and self-adoration.

THE first is, Jer. 21. 8, 9. Thus says the Lord, Behold I set before you the
way of life, and the way of death. He that abides in this City shall die by
the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; but he that goes out, and
falls to the Caldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be
to him for a prey. Which clearly demonstrates, that the time, manner, and place
of their death, were not limited and determined by any absolute and
unchangeable purpose or Decree of God; for 'twas in their own choice and power
either to extend or shorten their days. If they would remain in the City, they
should die; if forsake it, they should live.

THE second is the fifth Commandment, Exodus 20. 12. which only has a Promise
annexed to it: Honor thy father and mother, that is, thy civil Parents, (the
King, Magistrates;) thy Ecclesiastical Parents, (Bishops, Pastors;) as well as
thy natural Parents, that brought thee into the world; that thy days may be
long in the land. [That] here intimates not the final cause, but the event;
((...) not (...), as the Grammarians speak) for this is not the end of our
obedience, but an event and a consequent to follow upon it: and the Promise is
used as a motive to give honor to whom honor is due. To clear the truth of
this, we must observe first, That all the Promises of God for temporal things,
as for life, health, wealth, are conditional, not absolute; Psalm. 34. 12, 13,
14. 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11. Mat. 6. 33. and shall so far be performed as may make for
our good; and therefore in Deuteronomy. 5. 16. the Promise is thus limited and
declared: Honor thy Father and thy Mother that thy days may be prolonged, and
that it may go well with thee. So that the meaning is, (says the most Reverend
and Learned Bp. of Gloucester in his Exp.) that so long as it may go well with
any man, his life shall be prolonged as no farther; but if his life prove to
him a displeasure and no benefit, it shall be taken away, and an eternal, which
is far better, bestowed on him. Thus it happened to Josiah, 2 Kings 22. 20.
Thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see
all the evil which I will bring on this place. Or secondly, That it may go well
with thee, may carry this sense, which St. Paul intimates, 1 Timothy 1. 2. Honor
and pray for Kings, that you may lead a quiet and peaceable life; for where
this holy Order is broken and abrogated, all peace and quietness (as our civil
Dissentions proved) is disturbed, and nothing but blood, wounds, and confusion
follow. Or thirdly, This might show Gods Ordinance: For the Almighty commonly
gives a healthy and long life to crown our obedience even before the Sons of
men, Psalm. 37. 22. Jer. 17. 11. In this particular the disobedient Son was to
be cut off by the hand of the Magistrate, and was to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 21. 18.
And Solomon tells us, Prove. 30. 17. The eye that mocketh at his Father, and
despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and
the young Eagles shall eat it. By this we see that Gods Law was, that the
undutiful Son should not be long-lived, should not live so long as the dutiful
and obedient. Yea sometimes God executes this vengeance with his own hands, as
upon Corah and his rebellious Associates. The Story of the Kings, of all
ancient and modern Records will assure us, That the Disobedient, Thieves,
Murderers, Rebels, Traitors, were not long-lived; but perished often by the
sword and immature death.

BUT our Lover of Humility, at the end of his Paraphrase on this Commandment,
flatly denied all this from the Pulpit, (and I must tell you in a Parenthesis,
that I first animadverted on what W. C. preached;) tho it is wisely omitted by
the Press; and affirmed with no small confidence, (as G. S. W. G. and several
others besides my self, will be deposed;) viz. That we do see by Experience,
That the rebellious and undutiful to Parents do live so long as those that are
dutiful and obedient. A pure Catechist; For this, I presume, is no infinitely
Soul-concerning point (if I may speak in his own Dialect) or precious Doctrine
to inspirit either men or children to duty and obedience; but a grand Incentive
for Villains to continue in their infernal plots and designs; or, when being
detected, a Salvo for them; and is, if we may believe our own Experience, and
the Word of truth it self, a notorious falsity and delusion, and clearly
evacuates Gods promises. For Myriads, we know, of Rebels and Murderers, in the
most flourishing part of their lives, have been cut off by the sword of
Justice: But Mat. 5. 5. Blessed are the meek; for they shall inherit the earth.
(...) (Dr. Ham.) very often has a peculiar Critical signification in the
Gospels, and refers to the Land of Judaea, and here by being promised to the
meek and obedient, looks distinctly on the fifth Commandment, and in it on the
Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, i. e. a fruitful prosperous being
here on earth, viz. long life and tranquillity; which is here said to belong by
promise of God peculiarly to the meek. But when the exercises of this virtue of
meekness and obedience in some singular conjunctures of time brings losses, or
death upon them; they shall richly be rewarded in another world, and be made
amends abundantly there for all that the practice of this virtue has brought
on them.

BUT it may be said, (and that truly too, for ought I know;) that W. C. had not
this (viz. That we do see by Experience, etc.) in his Notes. But this will not
excuse him; for should I extol and preach up the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England, (as in Duty and Conscience I ought,) and my Notes should be
very sound and orthodox; yet if I should tell my Auditors ex tempore, or
without my Notes, That the Doctrines of Transubstantiation, of Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, etc. are agreeable to Gods word; I know I ought and
should be questioned for it, and my Notes would not keep me in my Parsonage
without an open Recantation, seeing there are honest Witnesses enough to prove
it.

BUT to do W. C. all the right imaginable, I shall transcribe verbatim his
newmodel'd Answers to two Texts of Scripture, which he thought might contradict
(as indeed they do) his former Assertions.

FIRST Solomon says, Eccles. 7. 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou
foolish, why should thou die before thy time?

ANSW. (page 8.) He that dies before his time, dies not before the time which
God has determined; an unseasonable death to man, does not prevent Gods
season: To clear which, we must distinguish about death, which is Twofold.
First, Natural; Secondly, Violent. A man that dies a violent death, is said to
dye before his time which he might have reached unto by the course of nature;
Sin cuts him off, before God cuts him off: But then God cuts him off for sin.
Thus many dye before their time; and except in this sense, no man dies before
his time.

TRULY Sir, in this sense (without aping you, and straining for Rimes and
Quibles,) it is perfect nonsense; for how can a man that dies a Violent death,
be properly said in any sense to dye before his time? when, according to your
own words, (page 11.) God in his unchangeable purpose has appointed, and
determined the very moment, manner, and place of every man's death; whether
Natural or Violent, whether by burning at the Stake, or hanging on the Gallows.
And besides, we cannot truly affirm of many sincere, pious, and virtuous men,
that were removed hence by a Violent death; Jeremy was stoned, Ezekiel
beheaded, Isaiah cut asunder, Eleazar, at the age of fourscore years, cudgel'd
to death, none of the easiest doubtless; most of the Prophets and Apostles
persecuted and slain, St. Peter endured crucifixion with his head downward,
according to his own request, and St. Paul decollation, in one day at Rome, as
Eusebius tells us; some burnt, others devoured by wild Beasts, or the like
deaths, as St. Polycarpus, Ignatius, St. Laurence, Cyprian, and Myriads which
suffered under Nero, Trajan, Antonius, Severus, Maximinus, and Dioclesian who
everted Churches, and made the sacred Bibles become fuel to devouring flames;
We dare not, I say, judge, That Sin did cut those glorious Saints off, (because
they suffered Violent deaths,) before God did cut them off; and that then God
did cut them off for sin: for this were a sign of Gods justice, wrath, and
fury. But rather that God did cut them off, before Sin did cut them off; either
for the advancement of his honor and glory, the good of the Church, (for
sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae;) or to free them from future miseries and
calamities, which otherwise might befall them. So Isaiah 57. 1. The righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. All which are infallible Tokens of Gods
infinite mercy and immense love.

SECONDLY, David says, Psalm. 55. 2. That bloody and deceitful men, shall not
live out half their days.

ANSW. (page 9.) For answer to this you must know (Beloved) that there is a
general and special, or personal limit of man's Life. 1. The general Limit is
Seventy or Eighty years. Psalm. 90. The few exceptions which some have made by
exceeding this limit, weakens not this general Rule. 2. There is a particular
limit upon every person; the limit of one may be Forty years, when another is
tied to Thirty, a third to Twenty, a fourth to Five, and a fifth perhaps may be
tied to Four years; these are special Limits upon special men. Now when the
Psalmist says, That a bloody and deceitful man shall not live out half his
days; the meaning (the subverting) of it is, that he shall not live out half
the days of man's general limit: As suppose a bloody man be cut off at Thirty,
he has not lived out half Seventy or Eighty years, which are the common terms
of Life prescribed unto Mankind, beyond which they cannot pass; but this man
lives out all the days of his special and personal limit, or all his days which
are appointed as his portion in the Land of the living. Thus the bloodiest man
that is, let him dye when he will, dies in the particular season appointed unto
him.

A prolix, frivolous, and childish Answer, tho perhaps he may think it very
Scholastic; the substance whereof in short is this: David (Beloved) dreams,
That bloody men shall not live out half their days; but I (your Oracle) assure
you, That the bloodiest man that is, lives out all the days of his special and
personal limit; or all his days which are appointed as his portion in the Land
of the living. If this is sound and Authentic, (profound Sir) What difference
then (in respect of a long Life or a short,) is there between the blood-thirsty
and merciful, the fraudulent and just? For a precious Saint can but live out
all the days of his special and personal limit, or all the days which are
appointed as his portion in the Land of the Living; and so (in your judgment)
does every notorious and precious Rogue. But suppose a Felon or Murderer is
executed at three or fourscore years (as has often happened,) then, according
to your own account, his days cannot be said to be shortened in any respect; for
he has lived out all the days both of his general and special limit. If our
popular Holderforth is not past shame and all goodness, he may do well (if the
Parcae will permit,) to recall his Pamphlets, which with a great deal of
ostentation he has scattered amongst the Vulgar, and resign them to Vulcan, or
my Lords-house for necessary uses; for he that has but half an eye, may
without an Optick-glass see, how notoriously the sacred Writ is contradicted,
tortured, and scandalized by his petty Distinctions.

THE Almighty, we concede, may permit (but not absolutely and peremptorily
determine and appoint,) the fall either of this man or that; yea he may permit
(for ends best known to himself,) the meek, obedient, and virtuous to suffer by
or with the profane: As we have known Royal Innocence to be arraigned as the
vilest Criminal, and he that was inferior to God only, to be murdered, like
the holy Jesus, by the fury and outcry of the unstable Multitude, the very
Scum and Rabble. Yet this Heroic and ever blessed Martyr never repined, and
exclaimed against Gods methods and dealings as unjust or unequal; but gave us
the reason of all our sad disasters and heavy pressures. Our Sins (says he in
his (...)) being ripe, there was no preventing of Gods justice from reaping
that glory in our calamities, which we robbed him of in our prosperity. For
punishments are but the results of sins; and therefore whatsoever Malignity
lies in the effect becomes entirely chargeable upon the Cause, and we are to
look upon our Vice not only as our greatest but our only unhappiness. Our
numerous and gygantick Provocations did call for judgments, and that the
expiring of the Breath of our Nostrils, was a great one, the whole Nation soon
felt, lay gasping, ready to bid adieu to all sublunary comforts. For God in his
justice to Us shortened his days, and suffered for a time Tyrants on his
Throne, to become Sirens and Crocodiles to fascinate and trapan, and Lictors to
scurge us; but in his mercy to Him, removed him hence, from the evil and
miseries approaching; and crowned him first with Martyrdom, and then with
glory. Una eademque manus vulnus opemque. The rod of our Maker when it falls
upon the virtuous, being, like that of an indulgent Parent upon his only Child,
the strongest argument of love and affection. He intends the greatest pity,
when to the Spectators that are ignorant of his designs, he seems most cruel
and inexorable; and when he seems to patronize and favor the Stratagems of the
vicious, it is only that Their fall and His glory might be the greater; and that
they might in the height of their arrogancy and presumption, like lofty
Pharaoh and his army, eternally sink and perish. But many inconsiderate men, we
know, are much startled, and secretly murmur;

Qui cumres hominum tantac aligine volvi Aspicerent, laetosque diu florere
nocentes Vexarique pios. So holy David had a zealous indignation against the
successes of the wicked, and repined to see them thrive in wealth and grandeur;
but when he had recourse to Gods Sanctuary, and entered into a serious
consideration of his counsels and providence, he soon perceived the Scene to be
altered, and that their Prosperity was no more but like that of a dream whilst
it lasts it is imaginary not real. Fret not thy self then because of evil doers,
neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be
cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. But those that wait upon
the Lord, those shall inherit the earth. Psalm. 37. 1, 2, 9. The general common
end of the wicked is untimely excision, signal punishments even in this Life;
mind the sad Exits of the Sodomites, of Herod, Judas, Simon Magus, Arius,
Julian the Apostate; of the Conspirators and Murderers of our late dread
Sovereign, Dorislaus and Ascham stabbed, Hoyle hanged himself, Norton, being
disquieted in mind, dyed raving mad; Harrison, Scot, Carew, Jones* Scroop,
Axtel, precious Hugh Peter's hanged and quartered: But we shall not ascribe
their deplorable and immature deaths as happening unto them from the eternal
Decrees, or from Gods unchangeable purpose; but from their own demerits, and
Gods just judgments. Whereas the Lot of the pious and obedient is length of
days, and prosperity in this World; but if that fail, as God in his infinite
wisdom sometimes sees good tha^ it should, an abundant compensation of bliss in
the Life to come shall be most certain. He that loses his life for my sake
(says our Savior) shall find it. Mat. 10. 39. The loss of a short temporary
Life shall be rewarded with an eternal.

THERE is one place (upon which W. C. wholly depends that at the first aspect
may seem to favor a fatal Period; Job. 14. 5. His days are determined, the
number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds which he
cannot pass. Upon which words two learned Critics comments thus: Significat
hic apud Deum esse certissimam praescientiam dierum and mensium quibus homo
victurus sit, ex qua tamen non sequitur necessitas rei (nam res est contingens)
sed tantum necessitas consequentiae. The days and years of man's life, in
respect of Gods prescience are determined and most certain; but from hence it
does not follow that the thing it self, man's time is necessarily determined,
(for it is contingent and vareable,) but only the necessity of the consequence;
because God, whose eyes cannot be deceived, sees all things uno intuitu, that
our days and months will be thus long, or thus short.

SO the Metaph. tell us: Quae Deus praescit non possunt non evenire, and sic
habent necessitatem fiendi. Idque propter infallibilitatem praescientiae
divinae. Res enim sic dicuntur necessariae non nisi per connexionem ad aliud,
hoc est, praescientiam divinam. Loquendo autem de rebus in se spectatis, quae
praesciuntur, remota connexione ad praescientiam divinam, non omnes res sunt
necessariae, quae necessit as est consequentis. Sunt enim multa in mundo
casualia, fortuita, libera, quae omnia in se spectata non necessaria sed
contingentia sunt. Fiunt proculdubio cuncta, ait Boet. quae futur a Deus
praenoscit; sed eorum quaedam proficiscuntur de libero; quae quamvis eveniant,
tamen propriam naturam non amittunt, sed priusquam fierent etiam non evenire
potuissent.

AND says the other; Causae naturales and morales suos habent effectus in vita
hominis conservanda. Deus igitur illas in constituendo termino vitae, ut
omniscius respexit, ita tamen ut eas, uhi velit inhibere possit. Natural and
moral Causes, as wholesome food, air, water, continency, temperance etc. have
their effects and operations in preserving man's Life; and God in terminating
and setting Boundaries to man's Life, as he is Omniscient and foresees all
things, has an eye and respect to these; yet so that he can put a Stop to
those natural and moral Causes, can inhibit them, as in his infinite wisdom he
sees fit. As for Example, God sees that such a man living and doing thus and
thus, will, according to the ordinary course of nature, certainly live thus
long, suppose fifty, sixty, seventy years; yet God may cause that this man that
might live thus long, shall dye much sooner, as at twenty or thirty. So God in
his mercy may shorten the days of many righteous men, take them away from the
evil to come; or in his justice cut off the wicked, that according to the
strength of nature, and the set bounds thereof, might have lived much longer.
Yea Job himself is against a fatal Period, and therefore we cannot imagine if
he intended it in the 14 Chap. he would have contradicted both himself and it
in the 21 Chap. 19, 20, 21. ver. God lays up his iniquity for his children,
he rewards him, and he shall know it. His eyes shall see his destruction, and
he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty. For what pleasure has he in his
house after him, when the number of his months are cut off in the midst. W. C.
being now forced from his strong Hold, which he thought invincible;; 'twill be
his wisest way to address himself to the Alchoran, where he may find more
kindness, and need not fear a second repulse.

NEITHER may men's lives be shortened only, but also extended; whereof we have a
pregnant example in the 2 Kings 20. beg. For God plainly signified to Hezekiah,
that he should dye of that very distemper he then labored under; for he was
come to the set Bounds, beyond which he could not pass, except Omnipotency be
pleased to remove them farther. So ver. 1. Hezekiah was sick unto death, and
the Prophet Isaiah came, and said to him. Thus says the Lord, Set thy house in
order, for thou shall dye, and not live. Yet the immutable Creator that decrees
mutability, (as the learned Dr. Jackson words it,) and whose promises and
menaces are not absolute but conditional; hearing his Prayers, and seeing his
tears, removed the Boundary, recovered him with a lump of figs, (to demonstrate
the use and necessity of means,) and added to his Life fifteen years. And
therefore W. C's Gloss is very prodigious and Enthusiastic, (page 8.) The
fifteen years added to Hezekiah 's Life, were added to Hezekiah 's date, not to
Gods. Hezekiah looked upon himself as a dead man, that he should dye of that
very sickness, (and good reason, seeing God told him so;) and so in all
likelihood did his best Physicia^s, for he was sick of the Plague; but both he
and they were deceived: for God in his unchangeable purpose, had appointed
fifteen years more to Hezekiah 's Life.

STRANGE indeed: For we find in the Chapter no such learned Cheats and
Pick-pockets, (as all Physicians are, supposing a fatal Period;) nor the least
shadow of such an interpretation: for God himself said by the mouth of his
Prophet, I have heard thy Prayer, and I will add unto thy days fifteen years,
and I will deliver thee and this City etc. And as a sign that God himself would
effect this, and did not prevaricate; a Miracle is wrought, he brought the
shadow (the Sun) ten degrees backward by which it had gone down in the dial of
Ahaz. But were the former Paraphrase true, God himself made --, and the Prophet
told a Lie, and was deceived, as well as Hezekiah and his Physicians; and the
words should not run, The Lord will, or did really add to Hezekiah's days
fifteen years; but Hezekiah, the Prophet, the Physicians, with all the Nobles
and Courtiers, not well understanding this infinitely Soul-concerning Point,
viz. a Fatal Period; were so simple and credulous as to believe that God had
miraculously extended Hezekiah's Life: (and who can think otherwise, that reads
and believes this sacred History?) Whereas God had absolutely decreed from
eternity, or in his unchangeable purpose appointed, (there is not the least
difference in the Phrases,) that Hezekiah should live fifteen years longer;
which being not expired, 'twas impossible for the Plague, or for God himself to
put an end to his days. A feeble and impotent God that can neither extend nor
shorten the Lives of his Creatures. It Is wonderful to see, that one petty
Distinction (in Man's date, but not in Gods,) should be of such mighty force as
to enervate so many plain Texts of Scripture, as have been, and may be produced
for the prolonging and shortning of man's Life; and to make them speak quite
contrary, even to become like a Nose of Wax, to turn either to this side or
that, to prove truth to be falsehood, and falsehood truth. Should I be troubled
with such an airy and Atheistical Whimsie, as to affirm with some of the
ancient Peripateticks and Ethnicks, That the World is eternal; (tho Aristotle
himself doubted (...).) And against it is objected Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth, Ergo Mundus non fuit ab aeterno. I shall
most humbly crave W. C's leave, borrow his almighty distinction, and answer
very magisterially, as he did to the Lords adding to Hezekiah's days fifteen
years. It Is true, in man's date, viz. in the date and account of Moses, Aaron,
and their Bigots, the World had a beginning; but in Gods date 'twas eternal:
for God in his unchangeable purpose had appointed it from Eternity, Such stuff
as this will pass for superfine Doctrine; for powerful Preaching and sublime
Raptures, with those that have their Instructers of the Geneva stamp in as
great admiration because of advantage, Jude 16. as the simple Papists have
their Monks and Confessors, or even as his Holiness the Pope himself.

THE learned and judicious Beverovicius, before he could think that his
Profession could find any considerable entertainment among men, thought it fit
to be stated by the knowing men of his Age; viz. Whether there were a fatal end
of every man's life, beyond which it were not in the power and compass of art,
sobriety, or good managery to extend it; and as little in the power of any
Disease or Intemperance, or even the Famine, Plague, or Sword to shorten it?
Should the same Question be again started, no considering men, I presume, would
hold the affirmative. For we daily see the sad effects and results of
intemperance and inordinate living; we have often seen, felt, or heard of the
impartial and mighty power of the Sword and Pestilence; how Myriads have been
cut off, that according to the strength and ordinary course of nature, and Gods
common Providence, might have lived much longer. And therefore we are not so
stupid and zealously Lunatic, as not to fear the frequent Afterclaps (Fevers,
Dropsies, Surfeits,) of high and constant debaucheries, or the Fury of
insulting Enemies, and infectious Diseases. Our most mortifyed and stoutest
Combatants for fatal and necessary events, will suffer their actions to
contradict their Faith, (tho Protestatio contra factum non valet;) and be
thought timorous and ignorant Creatures, even quake and fly, to save their
Lives, from any imminent danger; which, supposing their firm belief and
confidence of a fatal Period, is a piece of notorious Folly. For if neither
intemperance, the Sword, or Plague, can shorten our days one minute; I would
fain know, in respect of our Health and Safety, why we should dread them, or
avert from either; why Bacchus and Venus, daily carouzing and obscene Embraces
are respected, yea are known and professed Foes to Longaevity; why we may not
rest as securely in a Pesthouse, as on a bed of Roses, as safe before a
Cannons mouth, as in our Closets? And so our Saviors Advice (who minds the
welfare of our Bodies as well as of our Souls,) must needs be vain and
ridiculous, Mat. 10. 23. When they persecute you in this City, flee into
another. For no Asylum, or City of Refuge (granting a fatal Period) can save
us, or extend our days the least point of time. And so this precept or prudent
Counsel of Christ to his Disciples, (viz. To flee from Persecution,) is as
thwarting to W. C.'s. Doctrine, as he tells us (page 18.) that of Martha's to
him was; If thou had been here my Brother had not dyed. Sir it is my hearty
request that you would not be passionate, and question the Holy Jesus, as you
seem to do poor silly St. Martha, for her confiding in our Saviors power, and
love to her Brother; That if he had been there, Lazarus had not dyed; saying,
Is not this advice a thwarting of my Doctrine? Can fleeing from Persecution
free us from Death, or extend our days one minute? seeing all the particular
circumstance, relating to it (viz. the time, manner, and place) are
unchangeably appointed by Gods insuperable Power. This Counsel, it is confessed,
of the Theanthropos, is a thwarting to your fatal and dogmatical Assertions;
and so is David's address to the Lord, Psalm. 102. 24. O my God, take me not away
in the midst of my days. Here is thwart upon thwart to try your Job-like
Patience, and pregnant Wit, in forging some new Distinctions, and riming
Evasions, seeing the Old ones are detected, and already cashiered.

BUT farther, Were this Stoical Opinion (fit indeed for sanguinary Designs, to
animate Turks and ambitious Rebels;) most clear and demonstrative; the
Physicians then may burn their Books, Galen and Hypocrates; and the
Apothecaries and Surgeons may pull down their Shops, and hang themselves (if
they are ashamed to beg,) for want of bread, or else the Magistrates may do it
for them, as being the vilest cheats in Nature; but howeever let me advise them
that for pity sake, that they would no longer vex and torment their simple
Patients with Causticks and Scarifyings, nor saw off Legs and Arms tho
gangreen'd: the very moment, manner, and place of their Death are fixed and
unalterable; no Art imaginable, no fervent Prayers, no gracious Providence can
do them the least good. If the Eternal Decree is, that this Patient shall dye
of this gangrene, it is frustraneous, yea cruelty to cut off the mortifyed
member; but if the Decree is, that he shall live longer, and dye of some other
Distemper; let the Part be never so much putrifyed, he shall certainly (tho you
apply not the least remedy,) live out all the days determined, or (as W. C.
most profoundly words it,) all the days of his special and personal limit. What
a ridicuculous and silly thing it is, (supposing a fatal Period) for pregnant
Females so highly to concern themselves for fear of abortion, to be so
sollicitous and inquisitive after a knowing Midwife, when old gooddy
Tittle-tattle can perform the Office as well; and, when being delivered, to
undergo such cruel thirsts, and to take such care and pains about the New born
Infant? If the Decree is, that both the Mother and the Child shall live, a good
Midwife or a bad, or none at all, quarts and pottles of strong liquor, or clear
Possets, Fish or Flesh, they cannot dye; but if the Decree is, that one or both
shall Dye, all the charges and care imaginable will be ineffectual. And
therefore it is no small madness to cast away our Money, and to be concerned (as
some soft-natur'd Gossips are,) about this Nicety or that; for Praedest. ad
finem, praedest. quoque ad media, if God has ordained Life, he has likewise
unavoidably, or in his unchangeable purpose ordained and appointed the means,
or else he will preserve it without them; but if Death is in the Pot, there is
no avoiding of the Broth. This W. C. (if he understands his own Principles,
which is much to be doubted;) and all the Irrespective Reprobatarians hold, and
endeavor to justify; which takes away the liberty of man's will, and makes him
inferior to Brutes, that by natural instinct choose what may conduce to the
preservation both of themselves and their species, and avoid whatsoever is
noxious and injurious to them; whereas poor man is as senseless, and
incapacitated to do himself either good or hurt, as a Stock or a Stone. For if
the Decree is Life, it shall be life, do what we will; if Death, do what we
can, Death. How absurd and contrary to reason, experience, and to Gods frequent
and serious Protestations and Invitations this is, the meanest capacity may
easily judge?

SHOULD a man in a sudden and violent Distemper, a Surfeit, Pleurisy, Apoplexy,
etc. despise and deride the known and usual Remedies, (as many of this
Persuasion have done; tho the most knowing of them will not trust and depend
upon this fatal Faith, but in their Sickness are as willing to send for a
judicious Physician as any;) and tell his mourning Friends and Relations, that
he will not so much suspect God as to try the skill of man, or be so imprudent
as to fee a Fool or a Cheat: for the time, manner, and place of his Death are
unchangeably appointed by Gods insuperable Power. And therefore why do you talk
of the use of Means? when the strongest Poison cannot shorten my days; nor the
richest Cordials, or God himself extend them one moment beyond my special and
personal limit, beyond the time appointed as my Portion in the land of the
living. And this I know to be true, for the Seraphical Preacher that taught and
confirmed me in this secret and hidden point; (for Gods revealed word is
against it,) is as infallible in the Pulpit, as the Pope is in Cathedra, and
when there can explicate all obscure doubts and hard Queries, as easily as
crack a nut with a hammer. I shall for brevity sake dilate only upon one, (tho
I have been credibly informed of many others, viz. How many Millions that were
at Church one Lords day, yet were in Hell the next; And that Hell is Spatium
infinitum in loco finito; infernally wise truly.) The next Sabbath day after he
had informed us of the certainty of a fatal Period; from the same infallible
Chair in O. C. Church, for the satisfaction of a zealous and scrupulous
Brother, he informed us likewise of what substance our immortal Souls were
made, viz. That the Souls of men are made of the very same Substance that the
Angels are. Had our Angelical Praedicator asserted, That the Souls of men are
made of the same Substance that the Man in the Moon is; his credulous and
all-ear'd Creatures might have believed him; tho others might have thought him
either Lunatic, or troubled with a Vertigo, or else a little cracked in the
Pericranion. And indeed the truth of the one, is no more apparent than that of
the other; for the best Metaphysicians affirm, That the Angels and Souls of men
are of a diverse species, and so doubtless of a diverse substance. Nam essentia
animae ex natura sua est incompleta and partialis, and implicat naturalem
propensionem ad materiam. At vero tale quid essentiae Angelicae non convenit,
quae est totalis and completa: Id ergo indicium manifestum est diversitatis
specificae. And therefore I shall not make this an Article of my Creed, viz.
That the Souls of men are made of the very same Substance that the Angels are;
before I am ascertained by this grand Philosopher, who forgetting his Humility
talks as if he had commenced Doctor with the Angels in Heaven; viz. That there
is not the least difference between Spiritual and immaterial Substances, tho
there is between gross and corporeal. But to digress no farther; Should there,
I say, be such a mad Zealot for a fixed and inevitable Period, that would try
the truth of it by a plain hazard of his Life, felo de se, or the violation of
the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill, especially thy self, by refusing
lawful and necessary means ordained by God himself, will be none of his
smallest Crimes at the great and general Audit.

SHOULD we see one in an ecstasy, in a furious rage or discontent, drink
Poison, Stab, Hang, or cast himself from a Precipice; would we peremptorily
conclude, (like W. C.) that this was the very moment, this the very kind and
place of Death, where this desperate and wretched Miscreant should be hurried
off the Stage of this World by a fatal and absolute Decree? The Lord forbid
that we should harbor such cruel thoughts of him that made and formed us; that
has proclaimed himself, and we dare believe him, to be merciful; that he is no
(...), and wills not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn
and live. And can we then be so profane and sottish, as to aver, even in
Print, that this mad Creature, and Legions besides that came to fearful and
deplorable ends, by Melancholy, Despair, the Temptations of Satan, by Venery,
Debauchery, etc. were inevitably decreed by God, or in his immutable purpose
determined and appointed to become their own Executioners?

BUT W. C. to make his sordid matter as clear as the Sun in its Meridian,
ininforms us; (page 16.) That there are Two (he might say as truly, ten hundred
thousand) sorts of Divine appointments, What should be. What shall be. What
should be: He has showed thee, O man, what is right; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy
God. God has appointed that men should be sober, temperate, true, honest, just
and square in their dealings; God has appointed that men should read, hear,
pray, repent, believe, be convicted, and live holily. These appointments of the
Divine Majesty, are daily disappointed and violated by wicked and ungodly men.

HERE (and in several other places, which would be too tedious to transcribe,)
our Oracle contradicts himself; for he would have all Gods Decrees and
Appointments to be peremptory and absolute, impossible to be disappointed. So
but three lines before the Misterious Distinction, he tells us; Human
appointments come to nothing, when God is against them, but Divine appointments
shall stand, that is cannot be disappointed, And tho he styles What should be a
Divine appointment, as well as What shall be; yet presently forgetting himself,
he rightly informs us, (tho directly contrary to his former Positions,) That
those Divine appointments of What should be, are daily disappointed and
violated by wicked and ungodly men. And by this most ridiculous Distinction, he
makes God to decree contradictions; that although God in his unchangeable purpose
has appointed that All men should be Holy, do Justly, and by consequence be
saved; yet the generality (as the event proves,) should, or shall (utrum horum
mavis) be unholy, yea necessarily damned. Which directs me to speak something
concerning the Future State of the Soul.

THE great Potentate of the Universe, it is true, may permit, The Future State
of the Soul.
but not decree to permit, (as we were once told by W. C's. learned Champion:)
or in his immutable purpose absolutely determine and appoint either this Sin,
or that Evil: for then the Punisher of Sin must needs be the Author of it, and
poor man must suffer for that which 'twas impossible for him to avoid: and the
Almighty, we know, is not obliged by a Miracle always to hinder men from misery
and perdition. For he has made us rational Creatutes, and gives us strength and
grace, if we will but use and improve it, to follow that which is good and
laudable, and to eschew the contrary; to live well and contented, tho under the
heaviest pressures, in this World, and after death, by the merrits of the holy
Jesus, who has triumph't over both Hell and the Grave, to ascend the Heavens,
and to be crowned with glory and immortality.

AND God, we willingly grant, is immutable, James 1. 17. Heb. 6. 17. but then
we must know and remember, that this Immutability does not limit or confine
God, or determine, constrain, or force men's wills and actions; or certainly and
necessarily appoint or infer either this man's bliss, or that man's misery.

IMMUTABILITAS divinae voluntatis non est intelligenda possitive, hoc est quasi
Deus non possit velle mutationem vel varietatem rerum: Nec in sensu diviso, hoc
est, antequam quasi uni oppositorum conjuncta est. Antequam enim Deus decernit
punire aliquem hominem, poterat utique non decernere. Et haec est ipsa radix
libertatis. Unde si aliquod Agens diceretur immutabile in sensu diviso, revera
non esset liberum, quia libertas consistit in hoc, ut possit quis divisive
velle and non velle idem. Sed immutabilitas voluntatis divinae intelligenda est
in sensu composito, hoc est, Si Deus actuali volitione se ad aliquam rem
determinaverit, est constans and tenax propositi. Et haec est immutabilitas
voluntatis, quae nihil pugnat cum ejusdem liberate. AND the supreme Monarch of
the whole World, it is confessed on all sides, sees all things, all accidental and
casual events; but Praescientia nil ponit, this Foreknowledg does not
necessitate or compel men either to this or that, to this Virtue or that Vice,
to Life or Death.

QUAE causas habent necessarias, praevidet Deus eventura necessario, quae vero
a causis contingentibus pendent, contingentur eventura praevidet: Et sic rerum
contingentia seu mutabilitas abunde consistere possit, cum divinae
praescientiae infallibilitate; siquidem causas rerum non mutat, sed quasque suo
loco relinquit. Porr^, nihil Deo praeteritum vel futurum, sed omnia praesentia.
Res igitur ratione Divinae praescientiae consideratae, non ut praeteritae, non
ut futurae, sed ut praesentes considerandae sunt. Veluti igitur res, quando
sunt, necessario sunt, nec tamen per hoc tollitur contingentia seu mutabilitas
rerum; poterint enim aliter fieri antequam ita fierent: Ita Deo omnes res
infallibiliter notae sunt, ut pote ipsi praesentes, quae tamen immota scientiae
divinae certitudo non tollit aut libertatem arbitrij aut rerum contingentiam.
THERE is a far greater disparity between Gods permission, his prescience, and
his absolute decreeing and appointing of Sin and final Misery; than there is
between one man's only permitting and seeing another man to ruin himself
wilfully, tho he has often told him the Danger, and given him such Rules and
Advice whereby he might have secured himself from the least peril;) and his
forcing him to Destruction against his Will, against all Reason and Humanity.

YET Calvin, and his rigid polemick Proselytes contend, That all things, be
they the most Criminal and Prodigious Acts, happen ex Dei nutu, consilio,
ordinatione, and impulsu. They endeavor indeed to palliate this by telling us,
That Sin is merely privative, and that the Act is only from God, but not the
Pravity of it; whereas Sin is positive, (as the Learned Dr. Pierce has
sufficiently evinced;) and the Action and the Obliquity of it cannot be
disjoined: and God doubtless upon no other account commands us to avoid every
evil Action, but because the ratio formalis of Sin resides in the action it
self.

I shall transcribe some of their Melancholy Dreams, concerning Gods most
Sacred Decrees and Actions; which may well make any sober Christian blush and
tremble to read them.

HOMICIDIUM aut adulterium, quantum Dei authoris, motoris ac impulsoris opus
est, crimen non est; quantum autem hominis est, crimen ac scelus est.

DEUS movet latronem ad occidendum innocentem: Esau quoque in infantia mori non
potuit, quem divina providentia in hoc creavit, ut viveret atque impie viveret.

DEUS poterit, si minus propri loqui velimus, dici aliquo modo aut initium aut
causa peccati.

DEUS ita agit per mala instrumenta, ut non tantum sinat illa agere, nec tantum
moderetur eventum; sed etiam excitet, moveat, regat, atque hoc ipso fine creet.

MALA, quae agunt impij, ideo agunt, quia ad haec fuere destinati.

DEUS homines ad adulteriam, maledicta, mendacia, sancte impellit, (sancte here
is well placed;) and ad peccata quae palam prohibet, occulta ratione incitat.

HOMINEM non plus boni posse facere, quam facit, nec plus mali omittere, quam
omittit; imo Deum decrevisse apud se, quantum boni and mali ab unoquoque
praestari velit.

HOMO ad peccandum a Deo coarctatur.

FATEMUR ac docemus impios omnes ita a divina providentia regi, ut nihil aliud
efficere queant, quam quod Deus aeterno suo and immutabili consilio decrevit.

QUOD ais, iniquam and hypocritam esse, si Deus per decretum suum nos ea facere
nolit, quae ut faciamus praecipit; contraque facere non velit, quae nobis
prohibet, falsum est.

FRUSTRA de praescientia lis movetur, ubi constat ordinatione potius and nutu
omnia evenire. Call. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. s. 6.

THEIR ancient and first Masters, the Gnostics and Manichees, could not
express themselves in harsher Notions, which make God not only to will and
patronize Sin, but to impel and necessitate men to it; which is directly
opposite to the Scriptures, which assert, That our Merciful Creator is so far
from promoting or designing the least Sin or Evil, that he prohibits and
utterly abhors it, Zach. 8. 17. Psalm. 5. 5. God, we concede, may deliver up
without the least injustice, an impenitent Sinner to the obduration of his
Heart, especially when all that is done, is not by infusing any ill quality
into him, but by leaving him now to himself, who had so often held out against
Gods gracious calls and invitations. So Pharaoh having hardened his own heart
after the sixth Judgment, and over and above frustrated Moses's special last
warning: God then (but not before) is said to harden his Heart, and would have
destroyed him, but that he raised him up, or preserved him alive, even for this
purpose, to make the Divine Power more illustriously visible in punishing such
a notorious Offender, that would not be moved with so many Judgments of the
Almighty. This indeed, viz. Pharaohs obduration, was foretold by God from the
first of his sending Mose^ to him, Exodus 4. 21. But this foretelling it so
early is no argument that it was immediately done, but on the contrary his own
hardening his own heart is also foretold, Exodus 3. 19. God shows Miracles and
Signs before Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 10. and because the Magicians did the like with
their Enchantments, it follows Pharaoh's heart was hardened (not he) as if it
were God) hardened Pharaoh's heart, but) Pharaoh's heart waxed hard, was strong;
or by an ordinary acception of Kal for Hithpahel, Pharaoh's heart hardened it
self. And so it follows, v. 14. the Lord said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is
waxen hard, he refuses to let the People go. But after the judgment, that of
Boyls and Blains, Exodus 9. 10. then it is said in a new Style, the Lord hardened
Pharaoh's heart v. 12. Which was the very time at first referred to by the
prediction of God to Moses.

IN like manner it happened to the perverse Jews, who having resisted Christ
after all the rest of the Prophets, killed the Son after the Servants, and
rejected the Apostles Preaching after Christ's Resurrection: God then (but not
before) gave them up to obduration, to become Vessels of Wrath fitted for
Destruction. And after this the great Jehovah, that is a most free and gracious
Agent, and is not bound to this People or that, to primogeniture or the like,
(as appears by the tipical Stories of Ismael and Isaac, of Jacob and Esau, Romans
9.) out of his gratuitous Mercy by the Preaching of the Gospel, called and
invited the Gentiles to Christianity, to save them upon Christian, without
legal performances, upon internal and Evangelical, without external and
Mosaical obedience. (Peruse the most elaborate and Orthodox Writings of the
most Learned, Reverend, and Pious Dr. H. Hammond, concerning these and the like
difficulties; and thou may receive the clearest satisfaction.)

BUT it could never enter into my Breast to imagine, that God from Eternity did
absolutely decree the Fall, and the inevitable Perdition of the major part of
mankind; or (as W. C. words it, page 13.) that God drew out Death's Commission
before the Fall, but did not set his Hand and Seal to confirm it till after the
Fall; and that in the counsel and purpose of God, Death was appointed unto men
from Eternity: Which Calvin himself terms a dreadful and horrible Decree. Unde
factum est, ut tot gentes una cum liberis eorum infantibus aeternae morti
involverat lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum est? Decretum
quidem horribile fateor, Call. Inst. l. 3. c. 23 s. 7. It Is strange I say, that
some men should be of such sour and morose (I had almost said Diabolical)
natures, as peremptorily to maintain, That God Created Souls purposely to damn
them; or to use the Doctrine and the very words of J. M, That God takes as
great glory and delight in damning of men, as he does in saving of them.
Monstrous Divinity, and such as is not to be found amongst the sottish Turks,
or the rude Indians and Americans; and therefore I should much wonder, did I
not know what Charitable, and good-natured, and how free from Pride and
Selfishness our Olivarian Speakers were; that Saints (as most shamefully they
styled one another) that lived in the Sunshine of the Gospel, should yet
contradict the most perspicuous Truths in it. For

THE Sacred Bible, from Genesis to the Revelations asserts, That the Divine
Goodness, Clemency, Mercy, and Love, are exhibited to all Mankind really, upon
Condition of Faith, Repentance, and amendment of Life, John 3, 16, 17. God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. For God sent not his Son
to condemn the World, but that the World (all mankind) through him might be
saved. Herein (Dr. Hammond.) has Gods unspeakable Love been expressed to
mankind, that he has sent his Eternal Son to assume our nature, and to teach
and give Examples of Holy Life, and at last to dye for them, and rise again,
and ascend the Heaven, all on this one Design, that every Person in the World,
that shall receive and obey him, shall be rescued from Eternal Death, and then
made partaker of Eternal Life. For this my mission from God my Father was
designed all in Mercy and Charity, not to punish or condemn any man, but on
purpose that all men might be rescued from Punishment.

MAT. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. Mar. 1. 15. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel. Mat. 18. 11. The
Son of man is come to save that which was lost. Romans 5. 8. God commends his
love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners Christ dyed for us. 1 Ep.
St. Joh. 2. 1, 2. Jesus Christ is the propitiation for our Sins; and not for
ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World. Non solum (Bro.) pro peccatis
Electorum, sed singulorum hominum. Nam vox Mundi nuspiam usurpatur in literis
sacris pro sclis electis. By the word World is never meant in the Sacred Writ
only the Elect, but either signifies the whole Compages consisting of the
Heaven and Earth, or the whole race of mankind, both pious and wicked; or else
the whole number of the wicked. And therefore it is very evident, That Christ
came not only to save the Elect, that is, those that have believed in him, and
have thereby obtained Mercy; but also the Profane, that have rejected his
Counsels, and would not submit to his easy Yoke and Golden Scepter.

1 TIMOTHY 1. 15. This is a Faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance; (a
Truth of an huge price, and fit to be the only Tradition or true Cabala among
us Christians, instead of all the Jewish Secrets and Mysteries;) that Jesus
Christ came into the World to save Sinners: (to rescue men out of their evil
courses, and upon reformation to obtain Pardon and Salvation for the greatest
Sinners, none excepted.) Psalm. 145. 8, 9. The Lord is gracious and full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great Mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his Works. It Is the Title by which God was pleased
to make known and proclaim himself to his People, Exodus 34. 6. The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, etc. God is very forward and willing to pardon
repentant Sinners, and not denying them that Grace, or proceeding in Judgment
against them, till he be provoked to it by great ingratitude and obdurations:
and this Mercy of his is not enclosed to a few special Favorites of his, but
enlarged and vouchsafed to all and every man in the World, upon the Title of
his Fatherly Mercy to his Creatures, till by their impenitence persisted in,
against his means of Grace, they render themselves incapable of it. H. H.
Paraph.

GOD does seriously invite us to discard our Sins, and tells us, That all our
calamities issue from our own putrid Fountains, and not from the Divine will,
or any Eternal and Inconditional Decree. For God cannot do or will Evil, viz.
malum culpae the Evil of Sin, tho he may malum paenae the evil of Punishment.
Amos 3. 6. Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? that
is, the Judgments and Afflictions, which befall men for their impieties are from
God. So. v. 1. I will punish you for your iniquities. God is the Author of no
Evil, but that of punishment. Nam idem est (says St. Basil) Deum asserere
peccati authorem, and negare esse Deum. It Is as impious to make God the Author
of Sin, as it is to deny his very Being and Essence.

PROVE. 1. 23. Turn ye at my reproof. Ezekiel. 18. 32. I have no pleasure in the
Death (violent or eternal) of him that dies, wherefore turn your selves, for
there is no fatal Remora, Sentence or Decree, or the least defect on Gods part;
and live ye. Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, how often would I (as I am God, as well
as man) have gathered thy Children together, and ye would not? Ye have opposed
all the methods of Divine Wisdom, refused all my invitations (says the Holy
Jesus to the obstinate Jews) tho never so frequent and passionate.

SED resp. Calvinistae, Christum voluntate humana voluisse salutem Judaeorum,
quia juxta hanc voluntatem ei non erat notum, qui ex ijs convertendi essent: At
voluntate divina eorum salutem noluisse, alias conversi fuissent and
congregatt. Sed admisso hoc effngie, omnes Christi promissiones, earumque
veritas vocabitur in dubium. Quoties enim Christus quidquam promisisse legitur,
toties animi pendebit homo, an promiserit voluntate divina an humana. Et
fruslra opponitur, Mat. 26. 39. Iste enim locus hoc tantum evincit, voluntatem
Christi humanam, distinctam fuisse a voluntate divini sed ita ut illa voluntati
divinae se semper submiserit, nec ab diversum quidquam voluerit: Non enim
absolute petit ut transeat calix, sed hac condition, si possibile esset; and
additur statim haec correctio, non quod ego volo, sed quod tu vis, fiat.
Cert^ssimum est (ait Casp. Er. Br.) Christum secundum voluntatam tam divinam
quam humanam voluisse rebellium Judaeorum salutem: Nam verbum Dei diserte
docet, Christum nihil in officio suo voluisse, dixisse, docuisse, quod non
dixit, docuit, voluit, ad nutum, praescriptum, and mandatum Patris. Joh. 5. 30.
8, 26, 28, 40. 14, 24.

CAN any sober and rational man then suppose, That God by any secret, fatal,
and absolute Decree willed and ordained, that the major part of this People,
whom he had covenanted with, chosen, and owned by many mercies and
deliverances, should now necessarily continue blind, and oppose the means of
grace offered to them by his Son, their promised and long expected Messiah? The
holy Historian (Saint Luke the Physician) tells us the contrary, Acts 3. 26.
Unto you (the Jews) first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities. This doubtless then,
viz. Gods eternal and immutable Decree, was not the cause of their rejection;
but their own contumacy and contempt of the Gospel, Acts 13. 46. It was
necessary that the word of God should first have been Preached to you, (the
Jews,) but seeing ye put it from you, (behave your selves so obstinately and
perversely,) and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, (incapable of
receiving Benefit by the Gospel) lo, we turn to the Gentiles.

GOD, we know, tells us, That it is his Will that all men singula generum)
should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. 1 Timothy 2. 4. That none
should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9. and Romans
11. 32. God has concluded them all under unbelief, that he might have mercy
upon all, (Jews and Gentiles which comprehend all mankind.)

SALUTEM omnium voluit Deus noster clementissimus, non solum secundum
voluntatem ejus revelatam, externam seu signi; sed etiam secundum voluntatem
ejus occultam, internam, and beneplaciti. Nam volitio in Deo una est, sicut
essentia. Et voluntas signi dicitur, quia est signum beneplaciti divini, seu
quia significat and manifestat beneplacitum divinum: At si latet beneplacitum
divinum, tum etiam signum illius beneplaciti latet, servata eadem proportione.
Deinde, Quid est hipocritam and simulatorem agere, si hoc non est? Verbo
sonoque exteriore ad vitam and salutem homines vocare atque invitare; sed
interno decreto eoque absoluto atque immutabili eosdem a vita and salute
arcere. Dei mandatum est, ut sermo noster sit ita and ita; quo ergo jure dicere
licebit, Deum aliud verbo exterius testari, aliud autem in cord suo clausum
servare; in voluntate signi prae se far animum benevolum, in beneplacito
autem suo habere animum inimicum. Notum est illud Homeri, (...) -- It Is an
odious thing to let the tongue contradict the heart, to speak fair and intend
the contrary.

THE five Virgins, mentioned Mat. 25. had they not been foolish, that is,
careless and improvident, might have had as free admission into the Bridegrooms
Chamber, as the five wise or provident. Hence the Prodigal Son, that made his
Felicity expire with his Estate, and by his Travels had gained nothing but the
knowledge of iniquity and penury; yet no sooner returns and leaves his
misdemeanors, but he receives a paternal embrace. For Gods arms were, are, and
ever will be open to enclose the meanest Converts, and will give them such a
sufficiency of Grace, both internal and external, which brings Salvation, and
has appeared unto all men, Titus 2. 11. which, if they resist not, will at
last be found to be saving and effectual: For sufficient and efficacious grace
are not two different species of Grace, but one and the same; and the Divine
Grace is termed either this or that, only ab eventu, as it is improved by us.

PRAY consider, Should we lash a Cripple for halting, or having clogged and
fettered a Slave, require him to run a race; should we exhort the Dumb to
speak, and the Deaf to her, or condemn and deride one born Blind, because he
cannot distinguish colors; this would argue the highest Frenzy and Fury. And
can we then be so stupid and irreligious to imagine, that the great God of
Heaven, that is full of Wisdom, Equity, and Love, would invite (and upon
refusal torment to Eternity) those men to walk in his Paths, and to behold the
Light of the Gospel, whom he himself had shackled and blinded by a fatal and
inevitable Decree? Far be it from us Christians to judge thus of a Deity, that
has proclaimed, and proved himself to be more merciful to the Sons of men,
than the most indulgent Parent can be to his only Child. And surely 'twould be
no small Wonder, if a Father that has ten Sons of equal merit, should take two
of them into his Favor and Protection; and expose the rest to the merciless
and impetuous rage of Lions and Tigers. And if you should ask him the reason of
this his inhumanity, he could answer nothing but Sic volo sic jubeo --

I have no more reason to object and delate against my eight Children, that I
have rejected, than against the two that I have cherish't and embraced; I
might, if I would have preserved all from perdition, but 'twas my will and
pleasure only, and nothing else, that the far greater number, maugre their sad
cries and expostulations, should fall and perish to eternity. This doubtless is
no Criterion, or sure sign of a Paternal affection; but an evident
Demonstration of one of the most prodigious Monsters in nature. I need not
apply it. In short,

THESE crude and fatal Assertions before mentioned, concerning the Divine
decrees and appointments; cannot be palliated, sweetened, or well digested, by
their pleading that God is under no Law, which (says a judicious Author) is a
very Lawless and unreasonable pretext; for the everlasting rectitude of his
spotless nature, is more than any external Law: and pray what can Truth and
Justice do, but what is holy and just? Or by their subtle distinguishing inter
jus Dei absolutum and ordinatum, inter reprobationem and damnationem, inter
reprobationem privativam and positivam, inter praeteritionem and damnationem.
For he that avers Gods absolute will and pleasure to be the Sole Cause of
preterition and reprobation, may with the same confidence affirm it to be the
prime (if not sole) cause of damnation. Tantum discriminis est inter
praeteritionem and damnationem, quantum differentiae intercedit inter haec duo;
infer mortem and nolle vitam alicui continuare, absque qua vitae
continuatione mors necessario sequitur. Whereas the Scriptures (the only Rule
of our Faith, unless we will admit of Enthusiasm,) assure us, That it is men's
crying Sins, their contumacy, impenitency, and incredulity, (and non absolutum
Dei in homines and creaturas jus, non Dei beneplacitum, seu absoluta ejus
voluntas, that are the real Causes both of preterition, reprobation, and
damnation. Joh. 3. 18, 19. Joh. 6. 40. Mark 16. 16.

THE Consequences and results of these Calvinistical Dreams, and fatal
Doctrines, are very sad, dismal, and numerous; some whereof I shall nominate,
and then conclude.

1. THEY confine and limit Gods power, and make him a necessary Agent; for he
cannot punish or destroy the most blasphemous and bloodiest men, before their
appointed time; nor shorten or extend the days of the virtuous.

2. THEY derogate from Gods goodness, mercy, and justice; for what greater
tyrany and injustice, than to judge men to endless flames, without any
intuition of faith or incredulity, of obedience or disobedience? For surely
it is not justice, (as some Hypochondriacks fancy,) but the highest cruelty to
make men miserable, that thereby he might take an occasion of showing justice.

3. THEY contradict Gods Veracity; for what more false and perfidious than to
say and swear, That he wills not the Death, but the safety and conversion of
those, whom, notwithstanding by an immutable and irresistible Decree, he has
designed to eternal Death and Misery.

4. THEY make God with Marcion, Simon Magus, the Manechees, the prime and
principal Author of all the Crimes, and horrid Villainies acted under the Sun.
Cum enim Causa superior and omnipotens, ita moveat and determinet causam
inferiorem and impotentiorem, ut ea sic mota ac determinata non possit non
peccare; stupidus sit oportet, qui non animadvertat constitui hac ratione Deum
peccati causam, and quidem propriam and principalem.

5. THEY render Christ's Nativity, his Holy Life, his bitter Death, his glorious
Resurrection and Ascension, and his continual Intercession for us at the Throne
of Grace; yea all Preaching and Praying, the Sacraments, and all just and
virtuous Actions, to be vain, useless, and ineffectual: For to what purpose all
this? if it is absolutely decreed from Eternity, who shall be saved, and who
shall be damned, sine fide praevisa, sine praevisis operibus. Praedestinationem
vocamus aeternum Dei decretum, quo apud se constitutum habuit quid de unoquoque
homine fieri vellet. Non enim pari condition creantur omnes, sed aliis vita
aeterna, aliis damnatio aeterna praeordinatur. Calv. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 31. s.
5.

6. THEY lead men, especially the Vulgar, and those of the weaker Sex, (as we
have often known,) either into Presumption or Despair; some poor deluded Souls
think the Gate of Mercy shut, when it is wide open, and become melancholy and
distracted; and others, tho rebels, traitors, heretics, and schismatics, grow
proud and censorious, and dream that it will fall open to them (tho precious
and witnessing People, Gods Cupboard of Plate, as in modesty they style
themselves) without the least knock or striving.

AND Lastly, They are inlets and broad roads to security and all
licentiousness, if I shall live, I shall live; if I shall be saved, I shall be
saved; do what I will: if I shall dye, I shall dye; if I shall be damned, I
shall be damned; do what I can: for the Decree and Sentence either of Life or
Death is eternal, is immutable, past and irrevocable. Therefore Ede, bibe, lude
--

THESE prodigious Effects and sad consequences being clear and demonstrative,
it is prudence to stop our ears, and (if I may use W. C's. martial phrase,) to
buckle our selves against all such fatal Opinions and wild Whimsies, that are
contrary to reason, and the very nature of a Deity, to the purport and Economy
both of the Law and the Gospel: What is asserted in this small Tract, is, I
presume, consonant to both, to Gods word, and to that Light (viz. Reason) he
has seated in us to judge and balance things by. Here is no Popery, no
Pelagianisme or Semi-Pelagianisme, which some cry for want of arguments, as a
sufficient confutation. For we firmly believe, that it is by Gods grace and
providence that we live, move, and have our Being in this World; and by which,
by the merits of the Holy Jesus we expect Salvation in the Other. We steadfastly
believe the Apostles Symbol; that God is true and just in all his ways, and
righteous in all his dealings; that his secret Will is not opposite in the
least punctilio to his revealed; and that he that believes and is baptized,
that sincerely repents of his former sins, and forsakes them shall be saved,
shall receive plenary pardon, and upon perseverance to the end, eternal bliss;
but he, and he only that stands out obstinately and impenitently shall be
damned. Our extravagant thoughts, and foolish confiding and depending on our
absolute Election, may be a snare and stratagem to deceive and ruin us; but
our serious and hearty Persuasions, That the Divine Decrees and appointments
are conditional; so that we are hereby moved and allured to come to God with a
filial love and fear, and incited to duty and action, to real piety and
honesty, to do as we would be done by, which comprehends both what the Law and
the Prophets has taught us; This belief, I am sure, can never delude us, no
Decree can baffle this: For Godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 8. has the Promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come.

THIS may suffice to demonstrate to all considering men, that are not biassed
by interest, prejudice, or prepossessions, That the present State of the Body,
and the future State of the Soul, are not limited and determined by any fatal,
absolute, inconditional, immutable, and peremptory Decree; but that both Body
and Soul by the Divine grace and providence may (if we be not defective in our
own Duty) be infinitely blessed and happy.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for Tho. Basset at the George in
Fleet Street.
DR. Littletons Dictionary, English-Latine and Latine-English, in 4to. Bp.
Wilkins of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion, 8vo. Dr. Sparks
Devotions on the Feasts and Fasts of the Church, 8vo. Mr. Wanley of Coventry
his History of Man, wherein by many thousands of Examples is showed what Man
has been from the first Ages of the World to these times, in respect of his
Body, Senses, Passions, Affections, etc. in Folio. Mr. Allingtons Reformed
Samaritan: a Visitation Sermon, Preached in Coventry, to which is annexed a
Discourse about the Necessity and Expediency of Set forms in 4to. Mr. Meritons
History of England in 120. The 12. and 13th parts of Sr. Edw. Cooks Reports, in
Folio. Dr. Browns Religio Medici, in 8vo. Sr. Thomas Herberts Travels, in
Folio. Pools English Parnassus, or a Help to English Poesy, in 8vo, Sr. Roger
Manleys Russian Impostor, or History of Muscovy, in 8vo. Pharmacopoeia
Londinensis, newly altered and Enlarged throughout the whole work, according to
the present Practice: by the College of Physicians, London. In Folio and 24to
Pharamond, or the History of France, a famed Romance in 12 parts, in Folio. Sr.
John Vaughan, late Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, his Reports and
Arguments, in Folio. Mr. Mieges New Dictionary, French and English, and
English-French, in 4to. The History of France, Containing all the Memorable
Actions in France, and other Neighboring Nations, in Folio. Daltons Justice of
Peace, newly enlarged, Folio. Hudibras, the first and second part, in 8vo.
Swinburns Treatise of Wills and Testaments, in 4to. Doctrina Placitandi, or the
Art of Pleading, in 4to. The History of Don Quixot, Folio. Judge Hales of the
Primitive origination of Mankind, Folio.
FINIS.
Advertisement*
Now in the Press.
THE ten Volumes of Year Books, with Tables to the whole, and references* never
before Printed. And also Guillims Heraldry, with many Additions

