THE CIVIL and MILITARY ARTICLES OF LIMERICK. Agreed upon the 3d Day of
October, 1691.
Between Sir Charles Porter Knight, and Thomas Coningsby, Esquire; Lords Justices
of Ireland, And His Excellency the Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General and
Commander in Chief of the English Army, on the one part. AND The Right
Honorable Patrick, Earl of Lucan, Piercy Viscount Galmoy, Col. Nicholas
Purcel, Col. Nicholas Cusack, Sir Toby Butler, Col. Garret Dillon, Col. John
Brown. And Their Excellencies the Lieutenants Generals D'Ussoon and de Tesse,
Commanders in chief of the Irish Army, on the other part. With the Ratification
thereof under the Great Seal of England, by their Majesty's King William and
Queen Mary.
GULIELMUS and Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulament. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren.
Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die Februarii, ultimi Praeteriti in
Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba.

WILLIAM and Mary, by the Grace of God, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas certain Articles, bearing Date the third Day of October last past,
Made and Agreed on between Our Justices of Our Kingdom of Ireland, and Our
General of Our Forces there on the one Part; and several Officers there,
Commanding within the City of Limerick in Our said Kingdom, on the other Part.
Whereby Our said Justices and General did undertake that We should ratify those
Articles, within the Space of eight Months, or sooner; and use their utmost
Endeavors that the same should be Ratified and Confirmed in Parliament. The
Tenor of which said Articles, is as follows, viz.

In Consideration of the Surrender of the City of Limerick, and other
Agreements made between the said Lieutenant General Ginckle the Governor of the
City of Limerick, and the Generals of the Irish Army, bearing Date with these
Presents, for the Surrender of the said City, and Submission of the said Army:
It is agreed, That ART. I. THE Roman Catholics of this Kingdom shall enjoy
such Privileges in the Exercise of their Religion, as are consistent with the
Laws of Ireland, or as they did enjoy in the Reign of King Charles the IId: And
their Majesty's, as soon as their Affairs will permit them to summon a
Parliament in this Kingdom, will endeavor to procure the said Roman Catholics
such farther Security in that Particular, as may preserve them from any
Disturbance upon the Account of their said Religion. ART. II. All the
Inhabitants or Residents of Limerick, or any other Garrison now in the
Possession of the Irish, and all Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms, under any
Commission of King James, or those authorized by him to grant the same in the
several Counties of Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork and Mayo, or any of them; and
all the Commissioned Officers in their Majesty's Quarters, that belong to the
Irish Regiments, now in Being, that are treated with, and who are not Prisoners
of War, or have taken Protection, and who shall return and submit to their
Majesty's Obedience; THEIR AND EVERY OF THEIR HEIRS, shall hold, possess and
enjoy all, and every their Estates of Freehold, and Inheritance; and all the
Rights, Titles and Interests, Privileges and Immunities, which they, and every,
or any of them held, enjoyed, or were rightfully and lawfully entitled to, in
the Reign of King Charles the IId. or at any Time since, by the Laws and
Statutes that were in Force in the said Reign of King Charles the IId. and
shall be put in Possession, by Order of the Government, of such of them as are
in the King's Hands, or the Hands of his Tenants, without being put to any Suit
or Trouble therein; and all such Estates shall be freed and discharged from all
Arrears of Crownrents, Quit-rents, and other public Charges, incurred and
become due since Michaelmas 1688, to the Day of the Date hereof: And all
Persons comprehended in this Article, shall have, hold, and enjoy all their
Goods and Chattels, real and personal, to them or any of them belonging, and
remaining either in their own Hands, or the Hands of any Persons whatsoever in
Trust for, or for the Use of them, or any of them: AND ALL AND EVERY THE SAID
PERSONS, OF WHAT PROFESSION, TRADE OR CALLING SOEVER THEY BE, shall and may
use, exercise and practice their several and respective Professions, Trades and
Callings, as freely as they did use, exercise and enjoy the same in the Reign
of King Charles Ild. Provided, that nothing in this Article contained, be
construed to extend to, or restore any forfeiting Person now out of the
kingdom, except what are hereafter comprised: Provided also, That no person
whatsoever shall have or enjoy the benefit of this Article, that shall neglect
or refuse to take the The Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance required by the second
Article of this Treaty. I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, that I will be
faithful, and bear true Allegiance to their Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary. So help me God.
oath of Allegiance, made by Act of Parliament in England, in the First Year of
the Reign of their present Majesty's, when thereunto required. ART. III. All
merchants, or reputed merchants of the city of Limerick, or of any other
garrison now possessed by the Irish, or of any town or place in the counties of
Clare or Kerry, who are absent beyond the seas, that have not bore arms since
their majesty's declaration in February 1688, shall have the benefit of the
second Article, in the same manner, as if they were present; provided, such
merchants, and reputed merchants, do repair into this kingdom within the space
of eight months after the date hereof. ART. IV The following Officers, viz.
Colonel Simon Lutterel, Captain Rowland White, Maurice Eustace of Yermanstown,
Chievers of Maystown, commonly called Mount-Leinster, now belonging to the
regiments in the aforesaid garrisons and quarters of the Irish army, who were
beyond the seas, and sent thither upon affairs of their respective regiments,
or the Army in general, shall have the benefit and Advantage of the second
article; provided they return hither within the space of eight months from the
date of these presents, and submit to their Majesty's government, and take the
abovementioned oath. ART. V. That all and singular, the said persons comprised
in the second and third Articles, shall have a general pardon of all
Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons, Misprisons of Treason, Premunires, Felonies,
Trespasses, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever, by them, or any of
them committed since the beginning of the Reign of King James the lid. and if
any of them are attainted by Parliament, the Lords Justices, and General, will
use their best endeavors to get the same repealed by Parliament, and the
Outlawries to be reversed Gratis, all but Writing Clerks Fees. ART. VI. And
whereas these present Wars have drawn on great violences on both parts, and
that if leave were given to the bringing all sorts of private actions, the
animosities would probably continue, that have been too long on foot, and the
public disturbances last: For the quieting and settling therefore of this
Kingdom, and avoiding those inconveniences which would be the necessary
consequence of the contrary, no person or persons whatsoever, comprised in the
foregoing Articles, shall be sued, molested, or impleaded at the suit of any
party or parties whatsoever, for any Treaspasses by them committed, or for any
Arms, Horses, Money, Goods, Chattels, Merchandises, or Provisions whatsoever,
by them seized or taken, during the time of the War. And no person or persons
whatsoever, in the second or third Articles comprised, shall be made
accountable for the Rents or mean rates of any Lands, Tenements, or Houses, by
him or them received, or enjoyed in this Kingdom, since the beginning of the
present War, to the day of the date hereof, nor for any waste or trespass, by
him or them committed in any such Lands, Tenements, or Houses: And it is also
agreed, that this Article shall be mutual, and reciprocal, on both sides. ART.
VII. Every Nobleman and Gentleman comprised in the said second and third
Articles, shall have liberty to ride with a Sword, and a Case of Pistols, if
they think fit; and keep a Gun in their Houses, for the defense of the same, or
for Fowling. ART. VIII. The Inhabitants and Residents in the city of Limerick,
and other garrisons, shall be permitted to remove their goods, chattels, and
provisions, out of the same, without being viewed and searched, or paying any
manner of duties, and shall not be compelled to leave the houses or lodgings
they now have, for the space of six Weeks next ensuing after the date hereof.
ART. IX. The Oath to be administered to such Roman Catholics as submit to their
Majesty's government, shall be the Oath abovesaid, and no other. ART. X. No
person or persons, who shall at any time hereafter break these Articles, or any
of them, shall thereby make, or cause any other person or persons, to forfeit
or lose the benefit of the same. ART. XI. The Lords Justices and General do
promise to use their utmost endeavors, that all the persons comprehended in
the above mentioned Articles, shall be protected and defended from all arrests
and executions for debt or damage, for the space of eight Months, next ensuing
the date hereof. ART. XII. The Lords Justices and General do undertake, that
their Majesty's will ratify these Articles, within the space of eight Months,
or sooner, and use their utmost endeavors, that the same shall be ratified and
confirmed in Parliament. ART. XIII. Lastly, And whereas Colonel John Brown
stood indebted to several Protestants, by Judgments of Record, which appearing
to the late Government, the Lord Tyrconnel, and Lord Lucan, took away the
effects the said John Brown had to answer the said debts, and promised to clear
the said John Brown of the said debts; which effects were taken for the public
use of the Irish, and their army: For frceing the said Lord Lucan of his said
engagement, passed on their public account, for payment of the said
Protestants, and for preventing the ruin of the said John Brown, and for
satisfaction of his Creditors, at the instance of the Lord Lucan, and the rest
of the persons aforesaid, it is agreed. That the said Lords Justices, and the
said Baron de Ginckle, shall intercede with the King and Parliament, to have
the estates secured to Roman Catholics, By Articles and Capitulation in this
Kingdom, charged with, and equally liable to the payment of so much of the said
debts, as the said Lord Lucan, upon stating accounts with the said John Brown,
shall certify under his hand, that the effects taken from the said Brown amount
unto; which account is to be stated, and the balance certified by the Lord
Lucan in one and twenty days after the date hereof:


For the true performance hereof, We have hereunto set our hands, Present,
Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle.


AND Whereas the said City of Limerick has been since, in pursuance of the
said Articles, surrendered unto Us Now know ye, that We having considered of
the said Articles, are graciously pleased hereby to declare, that We do for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, as far as in Us lies, Ratify and Confirm the same,
and every Clause, Matter and Thing therein contained. And as to such parts
thereof, for which an Act of Parliament shall be found to be necessary, We
shall recommend the same to be made good by Parliament, and shall give Our
Royal Assent to any Bill or Bills, that shall be passed by Our two Houses of
Parliament to that purpose. And whereas it appears unto Us, that it was agreed
between the parties to the said Articles, that after the Words, Limerick,
Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, or any of them, in the second of the said Articles,
the Words following, viz. [And all such as are under their Protection in the
said Counties,] should be inserted, and be part of the said Articles: Which
Words having been casually omitted by the Writer, the Omission was not
discovered till after the said Articles were signed, but was taken notice of
before the second Town was surrendered: And as Our said Justices, and General,
or one of them, did promise that the said Clause should be made good, it being
within the Intention of the Capitulation, and inserted in the foul Draught
thereof: Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Ratify and Confirm
the said omitted Words, viz. [and all such as are under their Protection in the
said Counties] hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, ordaining and
declaring, that all and every Person and Persons therein concerned, shall and
may have, receive, and enjoy the Benefit thereof, in such and the same Manner,
as if the said Words had been inserted in their proper Place, in the said
second Article; any Omission, Defect, or Mistake in the said second Article, in
any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, that
these Our Letters Patents shall be enrolled in Our Court of Chancery in Our
said Kingdom of Ireland, within the Space of one Year next ensuing. In Witness,
etc. Witness Our Self at Westminster, the twenty fourth Day of February, Anno
Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae Quarto per Breve de Privato
Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. Praedict. Ad Requisitionem Attornat.
General. Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae, duximus
exemplificand. per Praesentes. In cujus Rei Testimonium Has Literas Nostras
Fieri Fecimus Patentes. Testibus Nobis Ipsis apud West. Quinto die Aprilis,
Annoque Regni Eorum Quarto.

BRIDGES.
Examinat. per nos

S. Keck Lacon Wm. Child
In Cancel. Magistros.



MILITARY ARTICLES AGREED UPON
Between the Baron de Ginckle, Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief of the
English Army, on the one part. AND The Lieutenants Generals D'Ussoon and de
Tesse, Commanders in chief of the Irish Army, on the other; and the General
Officers hereunto Subscribing.
ART. I. THAT all persons, without any exception, of what quality or condition
soever, that are willing to leave the Kingdom of Ireland, shall have free
liberty to go to any country beyond the seas ( England and Scotland excepted)
where they think fit, with their Families, Household Stuff, Plate and Jewels.
ART. II. That all General Officers, Colonels, and generally all other Officers
of Horse, Dragoons and Foot Guards, Troopers, Dragoons, Soldiers of all kinds,
that are in any Garrison, Place or Post, now in the hands of the Irish, or
encamped in the Counties of Cork, Clare and Kerry, as also those called
Rapparees, or Volunteers, that are willing to go beyond Seas as aforesaid,
shall have free leave to imbark themselves wherever the Ships are, that are
appointed to transport them; and to come in whole bodies, as they are now
composed, or in parties, companies, or otherwise without having any impediment,
directly or indirectly. ART. III. That all persons abovementioned, that are
willing to leave Ireland, and go into France, shall have leave to declare it at
the time and places hereafter mentioned, viz. The Troops in Limerick on Tuesday
next in Limerick; the Horse, at their Camp on Wednesday; and the other Forces
that are dispersed in the Counties of Clare, Kerry, and Cork on the 8th
Instant, and on none other, before Monsieur Tameron, the French Intendant, and
Colonel Withers; and after such Declaration is made, the Troops that will go
into France must remain under the Command and Discipline of their Officers,
that are to conduct them thither: And Deserters of each side shall be given up
and punished accordingly. ART. IV. That all English and Scotch Officers, that
serve now in Ireland, shall be included in this Capitulation, as well for the
security of their Estates and Goods, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, (if
they are willing to remain here) as for passing freely into France, or any
other Country to serve. ART. V. That all the General French Officers, the
Intendant, the Engineers, the Commissaries at War, and of the Artillery, the
Treasurer, and other French Officers, Strangers, and all others whatsoever,
that are in Sligo, Ross, Clare, or in the Army, or that do trade or commerce,
or are otherwise employed in any kind of station or condition, shall have free
leave to pass into France, or any other Country; and shall have leave to ship
themselves, with all their Horses, Equipage, Plate, Papers, and all their
Effects whatever; and that General Ginckle will order Pass-ports for them,
Convoys, and Carriages by Land and Water, to carry them safe from Limerick, to
the Ships where they shall be embarked, without paying any thing for the said
Carriages, or to those that are employed therein, with their Horses, Carrs,
Boats and Shallops. ART. VI. That if any of the aforesaid Equipages,
Merchandise, Horses, Money, Plate, or other Movables, or Household stuff,
belonging to the said Irish Troops, or to the French Officers, or other
particular persons whatsoever, be robbed, destroyed, or taken away by the
Troops of the said General; the said General will order it to be restored, or
payment to be made, according to the value that is given in upon Oath by the
person so robbed or plundered: And the said Irish Troops to be transported as
aforesaid, And all other persons belonging to them, are to observe good order,
in their march and quarters: and shall restore whatever they shall take from
the Country, or make restitution for the same. ART. VII. That, to facilitate
the transporting the said Troops, the General will furnish 50 Ships, each Ship
Burden 200 Tons; for which, the persons to be transported, shall not be
obliged to pay; and 20 more if there shall be occasion, without their paying
for them; and if any of the said Ships shall be of lesser burden, He will
furnish more in number to countervail; and also give two Men of War to imbark
the Principal Officers, and serve for a convoy to the vessels of burden. ART.
VIII. That a Commissary shall be immediately sent to Cork, to visit the
transport Ships, and what condition they are in for sailing; and that as soon
as they are ready, the troops to be transported, shall march with all
convenient speed, the nearest way, in order to embark there. And if there shall
be any more men to be transported, than can be carried off in the said 50
Ships, the rest shall quit the English town of Limerick, and march to such
quarters as shall be appointed for them, convenient for their transportation;
where they shall remain till the other 20 Ships be ready, which are to be in a
Month; and may embark on any French Ship, that may come in the mean time. ART.
IX. That the said Ships shall be furnished with forage for Horse, and all
necessary provisions to subsist the Officers, Troops, Dragoons, and Soldiers,
and all other persons that are shipped to be transported into France; which
provisions shall be paid for, as soon as all are disimbarked at Breast or Nants,
upon the coast of Britany, or any other port of France they can make. ART. X.
And to secure the return of the said Ships, (the danger of the Seas excepted)
and payment for the said provisions, sufficient hostages shall be given. ART.
XI. That the garrisons of Clare-Castle, Ross, and all other foot that are in
Garrisons, in the Counties of Clare, Cork, and Kerry, shall have the advantage
of this present Capitulation; and such part of those Garrisons as design to go
beyond Seas, shall march out with their Arms, Baggage, Drums beating, Ball in
Mouth, Match lighted at both ends, and Colors flying, with all the provisions,
and half the Ammunition that is in the said Garrisons, and join the Horse that
march to be transported; or if then there is not shipping enough for the body of
Foot that is to be next transported after the Horse, General Ginckle will
order, that they be furnished with carriages for that purpose; and what
provisions they shall want in their march; they paying for the said provisions;
or else, that they may take it out of their own Magazines. ART. XII. That all
the troops of Horse and Dragoons, that are in the Counties of Cork, Kerry, and
Clare, shall also have the benefit of this Capitulation; and that such, as will
pass into France, shall have Quarters given them in the Counties of Clare and
Kerry, apart from the Troops that are commanded by General Ginckle, until they
can be shipped; and within their quarters, they shall pay for every thing,
except Forage, and Pasture for their Horses, which shall be furnished gratis.
ART. XIII. Those of the garrison of Sligo, that are joined to the Irish army,
shall have the benefit of this Capitulation; and orders shall be sent to them
that are to convey them up, to bring them hither to Limerick the shortest way.
ART. XIV. The Irish may have liberty to transport 900 Horse, including Horses
for the Officers, which shall be transported Gratis, and as for the Troopers
that stay behind, they shall dispose of themselves as they shall think fit;
giving up their Horses, and Arms to such persons as the General shall appoint.
ART. XV. It shall be permitted to those that are appointed to take care for the
subsistence of the Horse, that are willing to go into France, to buy Hay and
Corn at the King's rates, wherever they can find it, in the quarters that are
assigned for them, without any left or molestation; and to carry all necessary
Provisions out of the City of Limerick: And for this purpose the General will
furnish convement carriages for them to the places, where they shall be
embarked. ART. XVI. It shall be lawful to make use of the Hay preserved in the
Stores of the County of Kerry, for the Horses that shall be embarked; and if
there be not enough, it shall be lawful to buy Hay and Oats, wherever it shall
be found, at the King's rates. ART. XVII. That all Prisoners of War, that were
in Ireland the 28th of September, shall be set at liberty on both sides; and
the General promises to use his endeavors, that those that are in England and
Flanders shall be set at liberty also. ART. XVIII. The General will cause
provisions and medicines to be furnished to the sick and wounded Officers,
Troopers, Dragoons, and Soldiers of the Irish army, that cannot pass into
France at the first imbarkment; and after they are cured, will order them Ships
to pass into France, if they are willing to go. ART. XIX. That at the signing
hereof, the General will send a Ship express to France; and that besides, he
will furnish two small Ships of those that are now in the river of Limerick, to
transport two Persons into France, that are to be sent to give notice of this
Treaty; and that the commanders of the said Ships shall have orders to put
ashore at the next part of France, where they shall make. ART. XX. That all
those of the said Troops, Officers, and others, of what character foever, that
would pass into France, shall not be stopped upon the account of debt or any
other pretext. ART. XXI. If after signing this present Treaty, and before the
arrival of the fleet, a French packet-boat, or other transport ship, shall
arrive from France, in any other part of Ireland, the General will order a
passport, not only for such as must go on board the said Ships, but to the
Ships, to come to the nearest port to the place where the troops to be
transported shall be quartered. ART. XXII. That after the arrival of the said
fleet, there shall be free communication and passage between it and the
quarters of the abovesaid troops; and especially, for all those that have
passes from the chief commanders of the said fleet, or from Monfreur Tameron
the Intendant. ART. XXIII. In consideration of the present Capirulation, the
two towns of Limerick shall be delivered, and put into the hands of the
General, or any other person he shall appoint at the time and days hereafter
specified, viz. the Irish town, except the magazines and hospital, on the day
of the signing of these present articles; and as for the English town, it shall
remain, together with the island, and the free passage of Thomond-bridge, in
the hands of those of the Irish army that are now in the garrison, or that
shall hereafter come from the counties of Cork, Clare, Kerry, Sligoe, and
other places abovementioned, until there shall be convenience found for their
transportation. ART. XXIV. And to prevent all disorders that may happen between
the garrison that the General shall place in the Irish town, which shall be
delivered to him, and the Irish troopers that shall remain in the English town,
and the island, which they may do, until the troops to be embarked on the first
50 ships shall be gone for France, and no longer; they shall entrench
themselves on both sides, to hinder the communication of the said garrisons:
And it shall be prohibited on both sides, to offer any thing that is offensive;
and the parties offending shall be punished on either side. ART. XXV. That it
shall be lawful for the said garrison to march out all at once, or at different
times, as they can be embarked, with Arms, Baggage, Drums beating, Match
lighted at both ends, Bullet in Mouth, Colors flying, six Brass Guns, such as
the besieged will choose, two Mortarpieces, and half the Ammunition that is now
in the Magazines of the said place: And for this purpose, an inventory of all
the Ammunition in the garrison shall be made, in the presence of any person
that the General shall appoint, the next day after these present articles shall
be signed. ART. XXVI. All the magazines of provisions shall remain in the hands
of those that are now employed to take care of the same, for the subsistence of
those of the Irish army that will pass into France: And if there shall not be
sufficient in the stores, for the support of the said troops, whilst they stay
in this kingdom, and are croffing the seas, that, upon giving up an account of
their numbers, the General will furnish them with sufficient provisions, at the
King's rates, and that there shall be a free market at Limerick, and other
quarters, where the said troops shall be: And in case any provision shall
remain in the magazines of Limerick, when the town shall be given up, it shall
be valued, and the price deducted out of what is to be paid for the provisions
to be furnished to the troops on shipboard. ART. XXVII. That there shall be a
cessation of arms, at Land, as also at Sea, with respect to the ships, whether
English, Dutch, or French, designed for the transportation of the said troops,
until they shall be returned to their respective harbors; and that on both
sides, they shall be furnished with sufficient pass ^orts, both for ships and
men: And if any sea Commander, or Captain of a ship, or any Officer, Trooper,
Dragoon, Soldier, or any other person, shall act contrary to this cessation,
the persons so acting, shall be punished on either side, and satisfaction shall
be made for the wrong that is done; and Officers shall be sent to the mouth of
the river of Limerick, to give notice to the Commanders of the English and
French fleets, of the present conjuncture, that they may observe the Cessation
of arms accordingly. ART. XXVIII. That for the security of the execution of
this present capitulation, and of each article therein contained, the besieged
shall give the following hostages -- And the General shall give -- ART. XXIX.
If before this capitulation is fully executed, there happens any change in the
government, or command in (...)


ARTICLES Civiles et Militaires DE LIMERICK, Conclus le troisieme d'Octobre
1691.
Enter le Chevalier Charles Porter, le Sieur Thomas Coningsby Ecuyer Seigneurs
Justiciers d' Irlande. Et son Excellence le Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General,
and Commandant en chef de l'armee Angloise d'un cote. ET Le Seigneur Patrice
Comte de Lucan, le sieur Piercy Vicomte de Galmoy, les Sieurs Nicolas Purcel
Colonel, Nicolas Cusack Colonel, le Chevalier Theobald Butler, les Sieurs
Garret Dillon Colonel, and Jean Brown Colonel. Et leurs Excellences les
Lieutenants Generaux D'Ussoon et de Tesse Commandants en chef de l'armee
Irlandoise, de l'autre cote. Avec la ratification de ces Articles par leurs
Majestez Le Roy Guillaume et la Reine Marie Sous le grand Seau d' Angleterre.
GULIELMUS and Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulament. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren.
Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die Februarii ultimi praeteriti in
Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba.

GUILLAUME and Marie par la grace de Dieu, etc.
a tous ceux qui ces presents verront, salut.
Comme certains Articles en date du troisieme d' Octobre dernier, faits and
conclus par nos justiciers de notre Royaume d' Irlande, and le General de nos
armees dans le dit pais d'une part; and plusieurs officiers commandans dans la
ville de Limerick dans notre dit Royaume de l'autre part: par lesquels Articles
nos dits Justiciers and General se sont engagez, que nous ratifierions les dits
Articles dans huit mois ou meme plutot, and qu'ils feroient tout leur possible
pour les fair aussi ratifier and confirmer en Parliament. La teneur des dits
Articles est comme il s'ensuit.

En consideration de la reddition de la ville de Limerick, and autres
stipulations passees enter le dit Lieutenant General Ginckle, le Gouverneur de
la ville de Limerick, and les Generaux de l'armee Irlandoise, de la meme date,
que les presents, a cause de la reddition de la dite ville and soumission de
la dite armee, on est convenu que,

ART. I. LES Catholics Romans de ce Royaume jouiront dans l'exercice de leur
religion de tous les privileges non contraires aux Loix d' Irlande, ou comme
ils en ont joui sous le regne du Roy Charles Second. Et leurs Majestez,
aussitot que la situation de leurs affairs leur permettra de convoquer un
Parliament en ce Royaume, tacheront de procurer aux dits Catholics Romans
toutes les autres seuretez necessaires pour empecher qu'ils ne soient
aucunement inquietez ou molestez pour cause de Religion. ART. II. Tous les
habitans and autres qui resident a Limerick ou dans aucune autre des garnisons
actuellement dans la possession des Irlandois and tous les officiers and
soldats portants arms par commission du Roy Jacques, ou de ceux par luy
authorisez pour cet effet dans les Comtez de Limerick, de Clare, Kerry, Cork,
and Mayo, ou dans aucune Comte d'icelles, and tous les officiers en Commission
qui se trouvent dans les quartiers de leurs Majestez, and servent dans les
regimens Irlandois qui sont actuellement en pied and avec lesquels se fait le
present traite, and ne sont pas prisonniers de guerre, ou ont accept
sauvegarde ou protection, and qui voudront revenir and se soumettre a
l'obeissance de leurs majestez, TOUS ET CHACUN DE LEURS HERITIERS tiendront,
possederont and jouiront de toutes and chacune de leurs terres biens en fond
and autres biens and heritages, and de tous les aroits, titres, interests,
privileges, immunitez ou franchises, don't ils ou aucun d'eux ont joui ou avoit
droit de jouir sous le regne de Charles Second, ou dans aucun autre tems depuis
selon les loix and ordonnances qui etoient en force pendant le dit Regne de
Charles second and seront mis en possession par order du government,
paisiblement and sans process de tells parties de leurs biens qui se trouvent
enter les mains du Roy ou des ses fermiers. Et tous les biens de cette nature
seront libres and dechargez de tout arrerage de rentes royales and autres
rentes ou impots publics establis and echus depuis la saint Michel de l'annee
1688 jusqu'au jour de la datte du present traite: Et toutes les persons
comprises dans cet article, auront, tiendront and jouiront de tous leurs biens
meubles and immeubles a eux ou a aucun d'eux appartenans and restans, soit
enter leurs propres mains ou es mains de ceux par eux employez par fidei commis
and confiance, pour menager leurs interests. ET TOUTES ET CHACUNE DES DITES
PERSONS DE QUELQUE PROFESSION, MEIIER VOCATION QU'ELLES SOIENT pourront
suivre and exercer leurs dites professions ou metiers avec la meme franchise
and liberte qu'etles ont eve sous le Regne de Charles Second, pourveu que rien
contenu dans cet article s'explique a s'etendre au retablissement des persons
actuellement horse du Royaume, don't les biens sont sujets a Confiscation, a
l'exception neanmoins de ceux cy apres compris. Pourveu aussi que person ne
puisse participer des avantages portez par cet article, qui negligera ou
refusera de preter lorsqu'il en sera requis, Le serment de Fidelite ou
Allegiance requis par le second Article de ce Traite. JE A. B. promets avec
sincerite and jure, que je fidelite and vraye Ligeance porteray a leurs
Majestez le Roy Guillaume and la Reine Marie. Qu'ainsi Dieu me soit en aid.
le serment de fidelite port par arret du parliament d' Angleterre la premiere
annee du Regne du Roy and de la Reine d'aujourd'huy. ART. III. Tous marchands,
ou reputez marchands de la ville de Limerick, ou d'aucune autre garnison a
cette heure dans la possession des Irlandois, ou d'aucune autre ville ou place
dans les comtez de Clare and Kerry, qui sont absens au-de-la des mers, and qui
n'ont point port les arms contre leurs Majestez depuis la declaration de
leurs Majestez publiee au mois de Fevrier 1688, auront and participeront des
avantages du second Article tout comme s'ils eussent ete presens; pourveu que
tells marchands, ou reputez marchands reviennent au Royaume dans l'espace de
huit mois a conter de la date des presens. ART. IV. Les efficiers, don't les
noms s'ensuivent, scavoir, le Colonel Simon Luttrel, le Captain Roland White,
les sieurs Maurice Eustace de Yermanstown, Chievers de Maystowne communement
appelle Montleinster servans actuellement dans les Regimens qui sont dans les
susdites garnisons and quartiers de l'armee Irlandoise, qui ont ete envoyez
horse du pays pour les affairs de leurs Regimens respectives ou de l'armee
Irlandoise en general, recevront and profiteront des avantages de l'article
second, pourveu qu'ils reviennent au Royaume dans l'espace de huit mois, a
conter de la date des presens, and qu'ils se soumettent au gouvernementde leur
Majestez and qu'ils pretent le serment cy dessus specify. ART. V. Que toutes
and chacune des dites persons comprises dans le 2 d and 3 me Articles, auront
une amnestie ou pardon generale de toutes sorts de convictions, proscriptions,
condamnations par contumace, pour crimes de leze Majeste, de tous crimes
punissables de mort de toutes autres transgressions des loix par eux ou aucun
d'eux commises depuis le commencement du Regne du Roy Jacques second. Et que si
aucun d'eux soit condamne par Arret du Parliament, les seignenrs de la Regence
and le General tacheront de fair annuller cet Arret de condamnation en
Parliament and de revoquer les proscriptions gratis, except ce qu'on doit payer
aux clercs ecrivains. ART. VI. Et d'autant que les presents Guerres ont attire
sur les deux parties opposees beaucoup de torts and de violences, and que s'il
etoit permis aux particuliers d'intenter des procez sur les dites violences;
les animosites publiques, qui ont deja dure, trop long tems, pourroient encore
continuer: Pour donc retablir le repos and la paix de ce Royaume and pour
obvier aux inconveniens qui seroient la consequence immanquable de tells
procedures, il est stipule qu'aucum de ceux qui sont compris dans les susdits
articles ne sera poursuivi en justice, ou aucunement moleste a la requisition
de qui que ce soit pour aucunes transgressions des loxi pour aucun enlevement
ou saisies d'armes, de chevaux, d'argent, de hardes, meubles ou marchandises,
provisions par eux faites durant la guerre; ny sera aucun de ceux qui sont
compris dans le second ou troisieme Article, assign cite en droit, ou rendu
responsable des rentes usufruits, and possessions d'aucunes terres, biens en
fonds ou maisons par eux on aucun d'eux receues ou saisies depuis le
commencement de la present Guerre jusques au jour de la datte des presens, ni
d'aucun degat, deperissement ou desordre par eux ou aucun d'eux commis: Il est
aussi stipule que cet Article sera mutuel and reciproque aux deux parties. ART.
VII. Tout Seigneur et gentilhomme compris dans le second and troisieme Articles
cy dessus auront la liberte d'aller par tout avec l'epee and une pair de
Pistolets, and d'avoir un fusil chez eux, soit pour la deffense de leurs
maisons, ou pour la chasse. ART. VIII. Il sera permis a tous les habitans and
autres qui resident a Limerick ou dans les autres Garnisons d'emporter leurs
biens, meubles, hardes and provisions sans etre visitez ou fouillez, and sans
payer aucuns droits, and ne seront tenus a quitter les maisons ou logis qu'ils
occupent actuellement de six semaines, a compter de la datte du present Traite.
ART. IX. Le serment que l'on fera preter aux Catholique-Romains, qui se
soumettront au government de leurs Majestez Regnantes, sera celuy cy dessus
specify and point d'autre. ART. X. Si quelqu'un contrevient aux presens
Articles, ou a quelqu'un d'iceux, il n'excluera pas par la, aucune autre
person des avantages y portez. ART. XI. Les Lords Justiciers and le General
promettent de fair tout leur possible pour que toutes les persons comprises
dans les Articles cy dessus, soient protegees and mises a couvert contre tout
arret ponrsuites, ou executions pour dettes ou dommages, durant huit mois apres
la datte des presens. ART. XII. Les Lords Justiciers and le General s'engagent
que leurs Majestez ratifieront ces presens Articles dans huit mois d'icy, ou
meme plutot, and feront de leur mieux pour qu'ils soient aussi ratifiez and
confirmez en Parliament. ART. XIII. Finalement, Comme le Colonel Jean Brown se
trouva endette a plusieurs protestans par jugements enregistrez; and que le
dernier gouvernement en etant inform, les Lords Tyrconnel and Lucan enleverent
les effets que le dit Jean Brown avoit pour payer ses dites dettes, don't ils
promirent de le fair decharger, and ces effets furent employez a l'usage and
au service commun des Irlandois and de leur armee: Pour exempter donc le dit
Lord Lucan de son dit engagement contracte pour leur cause commune, comme aussi
pour satisfaire les dits protestans and empecher la ruin du dit Jean Brown,
and contenter ses creanciers, nous sommes convenus a l'instance du dit Lord
Lucan, and des autres persons cy dessus mentionnees que les dits Lords
Justiciers, and le dit Baron Ginckle intercederont aupres du Roy and du
Parliament pour conserver par Articles and capitulation aux Catholiques-Romains
dans ce Royaume lenr biens meubles and immeubles, chargez and egalement
affectez au payement des dites dettes jusqu'a la concurrence de ce que valoient
les dits effets enlevez au dit Jean Brown, suivant le certificat qu'en donnera
par ecrit sign de lny le dit Lord Lucan apres avoir compte avec le dit Jean
Brown; le dit Compte sera dress and la balance d'iceluy certify par le dit
Lord Lucan dans vingt and un jours de la date des presens.


Pour l'accomplissement de tout ce qui dessus est nous avons sign, Presens,
Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle.


ET comme la dit Ville de Limerick Nous a ete livree depuis, suivant les dits
Articles, Scavoir Faisons que Nous ayant considere les dits Articles avons bien
voulu declarer par ces presents, que Nous Ratifions et Confirmons, tant pour
Nous que pour Nos Heretiers et Successeurs, autant que de Nous depend, les dits
Articles and chaque clause and condition y portees. Et quant a ce qui requiert
un Act confirmatif du Parliament, Nous en recommanderons l'accomplissement au
dit Parliament and donnerons Notre Agreement and Approbation a tout Act ou
Acts qui passeront a ce sujet dans les deux chambres de Notre Parliament: and
Comme il nous paroit que les parties stipulantes sont convenues qu'apres les
mots Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, ou aucun d'iceux specifiez au deuxieme
Article, les mots suivans, scavoir, [and tous ceux qui sont sous leurs
protections dans les dites Comtes] dussent etre inserez and fair party des
dits Articles. Lesquels mots ayant ete omis casuellement par l'ecrivain,
l'omission n'en a pas ete appercue qu'apres que les dits Articles furent
signez, mais on s'en apperceut avaunt qu'on eut livre la second Ville; and
comme Nos dits Justiciers and General ou l'un d'eux, ont promis que la dite
clause auroit lieu ainsi qu'etoit l'intention des parties stipulantes, and
qu'elle etoit de meme inseree dans le brouillon de la capitulation, Notre
plaisir, de plus, est, and par ces presents Nous Ratifions and Confirmons les
dits mots omis, scavoir, [et tous ceux qui sont sous leurs protections dans les
dites Comtes,] declarant and ordonnant par ces presents tant pour Nous que
pour Nos Heritiers and Successeurs que toutes les persons comprises dans les
dites clauses and conventions auront, recevront and jouiront des avantages
d'icelles, ainsi and de la meme maniere qu'elles l'auroient fait, si les dits
mots eussent ete inseres dans leur propre place, au dit second Article; and ce
nonobstant toute omission defaut ou inadvertence a trouver dans le dit deuxieme
Article a la charge toujours, et Notre volonte and plaisir est, que Nos
presents Lettres Patentes soient enregistrees dans Notre Cour de Chancellerie
de Notre dit Royaume d' Irlande dans un an, du jour de la date des presents.
En foy de quoy, etc. Temoins Nous memes a Westminster le vingt quatrieme jour
de Fevrier, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae Quarto per Breve
de Privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. predict. Ad requisitionem
Attornat. General. Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae pro Regn. Hiberniae duximus
exemplificand. per Praesentes. In cujus Rei Testimonium Has Literas Nostras
Fieri Fecimus Patentes. Testibus Nobis Ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis,
Annoque Regni Eorum Quarto.

BRIDGES.
Examinat. per nos

S. Keck. Lacon Wm. Child
In Cancel. Magistros.



LES ARTICLES MILITAIRES De Capitulation signs
Enter le Baron de Ginckle, Lieutenant General, and Commandant en chef de
l'armee Angloise d'un cote. ET Les Lieutenants Generaux D'Ussoon et de Tesse
Commandants en chef de l'armee Irlandoise, de l'autre cote, Avec les Officiers
Generaux qui sous-Signerent.
ART. I. QUE toute person sans aucune exception, de quelque qualite ou
condition, quelles soient, qui voudront quitter le Royaume d' Irlande, auront
la liberte, de passer la mer, dans quels pais ils jugeront a propos, (l'
Angleterre et l' Ecosse exceptees) avec leurs familles meubles, vaisselle
d'argent, et joyaux. ART. II. Que tous les Officiers Generaux, Colonels, et
generalement tout autre Officier de Cavalerie, Dragons, Gardes a pie,
Cavaliers, Dragons, Soldats, tells qu'ils puissent etre; dans quelque Garnison,
place, ou lieu, don't les Irlandois sont actuellement en possession, ou campez
dans les Comtez de Cork, Clare et Kerry, aussi bien que ceux qu'on appelle
Raparees ou Voluntaires, qui voudront passer la mer (comme cy dessus) auront la
liberte de s'embarquer sur les vaisseaux designez, a les porter, d'aller tous
en corpse, comme ils sont presentement composez ou en parties, ou par
compagnies, ou autrement, sans aucun empechement directement ou indirectement.
ART. III. Que toutes les persons susdites, qui voudront sortir du Royaume d'
Irlande, pour passer en France, auront permission de le declarer aux tems et
lieux cy dessous marquez c'est a dire: Les troops dans Limerick le mardy
prochain, a Limerick. La Cavalerie dans le camp le Mercredy. Et les autres
troops qui sont dispersees, dans les Comtes de Clare, Kerry et Cork, le
huitieme jour du present mois (et point d'autre) devant Monsieur Tameron,
l'Intendant Francois, et Colonel Withers, et apres que cette declaration sera
faite, les troops qui doivent passer en France, seront sous le commandment, et
la discipline des Officiers qui doivent les conduire la. Et les deserteurs de
chaque cote seront rendus, et punis conformement. ART. IV. Que tous les
officiers tant Anglois qu' Ecossois, qui servent presentement en Irlande,
seront compris dans cette Capitulation, tant par rapport a la seurte de leurs
terres et biens, en Angleterre, Ecosse, et Irlande, (s'ils veulent rester icy)
que pour passer librement en France, ou dans aucun autre pais pour servir. ART.
V. Que tous les officiers Generaux Francois, l'Intendant, les Ingenieurs, les
Commissaires de Guerre, et d'Artillerie, le Tresorier, et autres Officiers
Francois, Etrangers, et tous les autres tells qu'ils puissent etre qui sont dans
Sligo, Ross, Clare, ou dans l'armee, ou qui negocient ou trafiquent ou sont
autrement employez dans aucune condition, auront la permission d'aller en
France ou ailleurs, et de s'embarquer avec leurs chevaux, equipages, vaisselle
d'argent, papiers, et effets de tell nature qu'ils puissent etre: et que le
General Ginckle leur fournira des passeports, des escortes, et des voitures
tant par eau, que par terre, pour les mener saufs de Limerick, jusqu'aux
Vaisseaux, ou ils seront embarques, sans payer aucune chose, pour les dites
voitures, ni a ceux qui y seront employes, avec leurs Chevaux, Charettes,
Batteaux, et Chaloupes. ART. VI. Que s'il y a aucun desdits Equipages,
Marchandises, Chevaux, Argent, Vaisselle d'argent, ou autres Hardes, ou
ustensils, appartenants tant audites Troops Irlandoises, qu'aux Officiers
Francois, ou autres particuliers, tells qu'il, puissent etre, pille, detruit ou
pris par les Troops du susdit General: Ledit General ordonnera de le
restituer, ou de le fair payer, selon l'estimation, qui en sera faite par
Serment de ceux qui auront ete pillez ou volez. Et les dites Troops
Irlandoises, qui doivent passer la mer, et toutes autres persons qui leur
appartiennent, seront obligees d'observer le bon order sur la route, et dans
leurs quartiers, et de render tout ce qu'ils prendront injustement des habitans
ou d'en fair restitution. ART. VII. Que pour faciliter l'embarquement des
dites Troops, le General fournira 50 Vaisseaux du port de 200 tonneaux chacun,
sans que les persons qui doivent etre transportees, soient obligees de payer
aucune chose: et 20 Vaisseaux de plus, en cas de besoin, sans aucun payement;
et en cas qu'il y en ait quelques'uns de ces Vaisseaux de moindre charge, Il en
fournira un plus grand nombre, pour suppleer au defaut, et aussi deux Vaisseaux
de Guerre pour embarquer les Officiers Principaux, et servir de convoye aux
autres Vaisseaux de port. ART. VIII. Qu'un Commissaire sera immediatement
envoye a Cork, pour visiter les Vaisseaux de transport, et en quel etat ils
sont, pour mettre a la voile; et aussitot qu'ils seront prets, les troops qui
doivent partir, marcheront avec toute la diligence necessaire, par les chemins
les plus courts, pour s'y embarquer. Et en eas qu'il se trouve plus d'hommes a
transporter, qui ne peuvent trouver place dans les dits 50 Vaisseaux, le rest
quittera la ville Angloise de Limerick, et marchera aux quartiers designez
propres pour leur embarquement, ou ils resteront jusqu'a ce que les autres
vingt Vaisseaux soient prets, qui sera dans l'espace d'un mois, et peuvent
s'embarquer, sur quelque vaisseau Francois qui peut venir en attendant. ART.
IX. Que les dits Vaisseaux seront pourvus, de fourage pour les chevaux et de
tous les vivres necessaires, pour la subsistence des Officiers, Cavaliers,
Dragons, Soldats, et toutes autres persons qui seront embarquees, pour aller
en France pour lesquels vivres on payera, apres que le tout aura ete debarque
soit a Breast, Nantes, sur les cotes de Bretagne ou en aucun autre Port de
France qu'ils toucheront. ART. X. Et pour la seurete du retour de ces vaisseaux
(les dangers de la mer exceptez) et le payment des vivres, on laissera des
otages suffisans. ART. XI. Que les garnisons de Clare-Castle, Ross, et toutes
les autres troops d'Infanterie, qui sont en garnison, dans les Comtez de
Clare, Cork, et Kerry, seront comprises dans la present Capitulation, et
celles qui voudront passer la mer en sortiront, avec leurs Arms, Baggage, Bale
en bouche, Meche allumee par les deux bouts, Tambours battans, Enseignes
deployees, avec toutes les provisions, et la moitie des munitions de guerre,
qui peuvent etre dans ladite garnison, et joindront la Cavalerie en march,
pour s'embarquer: ou s'il n'y a pas des vaisseaux suffisament, pour le corpse
d'Infanterie, qui doit partir le premier, apres la Cavalerie, le General
Ginckle, leur fera fournir des voitures necessaires pour cela, comme aussi les
vivres don't its auront besoin pour leur subsistence, pendant le tems, qu'ils
seront en chemin, en payant ces vivres; ou autrement, ils pourront les prendre
de leurs propres Magasins. ART. XII. Que toute la Cavalerie, et les Dragons qui
sont dans les comtez de Cork, Clare, et Kerry, seront aussi compris dans cette
Capitulation, et qu'a ceux qui passeront en France, on donnera des quartiers
(dans les Comtez de Clare, et Kerry) separez des troops du General Ginckle
jusqu'a leur embarquement, a condition, qu'ils payeront ce qu'on leur fournira,
a la reserve du fourrage, et la pature de leurs chevaux qu'ils auront gratis.
ART. XIII. Ceux de la Garnison de Sligo, qui sont joints a l'Armee Irlandoise
jouiront pareillement de cette Capitulation, et l'on enverra order a ceux qui
doivent les escorter, de les amener a Limerick par le plus court chemin. ART.
XIV. Les Irlandois auront permission, d'embarquer 900 chevaux, ceux des
Officiers y compris, qui seront transportez gratis, et a l'egard des Cavaliers
qui resteront en arriere, il leur sera permis, de disposer d'eux memes, comme
ils voudront; a condition qu'ils rendent leurs chevaux, et leurs arms a ceux
que le General nommera. ART. XV. Il sera permis a ceux, qui seront etablis pour
prendre soin de la subsistence des Cavaliers, qui veulent passer en France,
d'acheter du Foin et de l'Avoine aux prix du Roy, ou ils en pourront trouver,
dans les quartiers qui leur sont assignez, sans etre Empechez ou molesez; et de
tirer de la Ville de Limerick toutes les Provisions necessaires: et pour cet
effet le General leur fournira les voitures propres aux lieux, ou ils seront
embarquez. ART. XVI. Il sera aussi permis, qu'on se serve du Foin, qui est dans
les Magazins du Comte de Kerry, pour les chevaux, qui seront embarquez; et s'il
n'y en a pas suffisamment, il sera permis d'acheter du Foin, et de l'Avoine ou
on en trouvera, aux prix du Roy. ART. XVII. Que tous les Prisonniers de Guerre,
qui etoient en Irlande le 28 de Septembre, seront mis en liberte, de part et
d'autre; et le General promet d'user de ses efforts pour fair pareillement
mettre en liberte ceux, qui sont en Angleterre et en Flandres. ART. XVIII. Que
le General fera fournir des provisions et des medicamens aux Officiers,
Cavaliers, Dragons et Soldats de l'armee Irlandoise malades et blessez; qui ne
pourront pas passer en France au premier embarquement; et apres qu'ils seront
gueris; il leur ordonnera des Vaisseaux pour passer en France s'ils y veulent
aller. ART. XIX. Qu'en signant la present Capitulation le General enverra un
vaisseau expres en France; et qu'outre cela, il fournira deux Vaisseaux de
ceux, qui sont a present dans la riviere de Limerick, pour transporter en
France deux persons, que l'on doit y envoyer, pour y donner, avis du present
traite; et que ceux qui commandent les dits vaisseaux, auront order de
debarquer au premier port de la France ou ils seront portez. ART. XX. Que tous
ceux des dites Troops Officiers, et autres de quelque caractere qu'ils soient,
qui voudront passer en France, n'en seront pas empechez, ni pour dettes ni
aucun autre pretexte. ART. XXI. Si apres la signature du present Traite, et
avaunt l'arrivee de la flote, il arrive une corvete Francoile, ou autre Vaisseau
de transport de France en aucun autre endroit d' Irlande, le General ordonnera
des passe-ports, non seulement pour ceux, qui doivent etre embarques sur les
dits vaisseaux, mais aussi pour les vaisseaux, pour venir au port le plus
proche du lieu, ou les troops, que l'on doit transporter seront en quartiers.
ART. XXII. Qu'apres l'arrivee de la dite flote il y aura une communication
libre, et passage enter elle et les quartiers des susdites troops; et sur tout
pour tous ceux, qui ont des passe-ports des commandans en chef de la dite
flote, ou de Monsieur Tameron l'intendant. ART. XXIII. En consideration du
present Traite, les deux villes de Limerick, seront cedees, et mises enter les
mains du General, ou d'aucune autre person, qu'il etablira, au tems et aux
jours cy apres specifiez, a savoir la ville Irlandoise, les magasins et
l'hopital exceptez, le jour de la signature des presens Articles, et quant a la
ville Angloise, avec l'isle, et le passage libre du pont de Thomond, elle
demeurera dans la possession de ceux de l'armee Irlandoise, qui sout a present
dans la garnison, ou qui viendront des Comtes de Cork, Clare, Kerry, Sligoe, et
des autres lieux don't on a fait mention, jusqu'a ce qu'on ait trouve les chooses
propres pour leur transportation. ART. XXIV. Et pour prevenir tout desordre,
qui puisse arriver enter la garnison, que le General mettra dans la ville
Irlandoise, qui lni sera cedee, et les cavaliers Irlandois qui resteront dans
la ville Anglosse, et dans l'isle, ce qu'ils pourront fair, jusqu'a ce que les
troops, qui doivent etre embarquees sur les premiers 50 vaisseaux, soient
parties pour la France et pas plus long tems, ils se retrancherons de part et
d'autre, pour empecher la communication des dites garnisons: et il sera defendu
de part et d'autre d'offrir aucune chose qui soit offensante et les parties
coupables d'aucune offense seront punies de part et d'autre. ART. XXV. Qu'il
sera permis a la dite garnison de sortir tout d'un coup, ou a plusieurs fois,
selon qu'elle pourra etre embarquee, avec arms et baggage, tambours battant,
meche allumee par les deux bouts, bale en bouche, enseignes deployees, six
pieces de Canon de font au choix des assiegez, deux mortiers, et la moitie de
toutes les munitions de guerre, qui sont a present dans les magasins de la dite
place: et pour cet effet on fera un inventaire de toutes les munitions de
guerre de la garnison en presence d'aucune person que le General nommera le
lendemain de la signature du present accord. ART. XXVI. Tous les magasins des
vivres resteront enter les mains des persons, qui en sont a present chargees,
pour fair subsister ceux de l'armee Irlandoise, qui voudront passer en France;
et s'il n'y en a pas suffisamment dans les magasins pour la subsistence des
dites troops, pendant leur sejour dans ce Royaume, et qu'ils passent la mer,
qu'en donnant une memoire de leur nombre, le General leur en fournira
suffisamment au prix Royal et qu'il y anra un march libre a Limerick, et dans
les autres quartiers, ou les dites troops seront: et en cas qu'aucuns vivres
se trouvent dans les magasins de Limerick, quand la ville sera rendue, on en
fera l'estimation, et le prix sera deduit de ce, que l'on doit payer pour les
vivres, qu'on doit fournir aux troops a board des vaisseaux. ART. XXVII. Qu'il
y aura une cessation d'armes tant par terre, que par mer, par raport qux
vaisseaux Anglois, Hollandois ou Francois destines a transporter les dites
troops, jusqu a ce qu'ils retourneront a leurs ports respectifs: et qu'on leur
fourn ra de part et d'autre des pasleports, sufficiens tant pour les vaisseaux,
que pour les hommes: et s'il arrive, qu'il soit contrevenu par quelque
Commandant ou Captain de vaisseau, Officier, Cavalier, Dragon, Soldat ou
autre person a cette cessation d'armes; la person coupable sera punie de
part et d'autre et les dommages ou torts reparez; et des Officiers seront
envoies a l'embouchure de la Riviere de Limerick pour donner avis aux
Commandans des flotes Angloise et Francoise de la present situation, afin
qu'ils observent aussi la Cessation d'armes. ART. XXVIII. Que pour la seurete
de l'execution du present traite, et de chaque Article y contenu, les assiegez
donneront les otages suivans -- et le General donnera --. ART. XIX. Si avaunt
l'execution entiere du dit traite, il arrive quelque changement dans le
Gouvernement, ou dans le commandment (...)


ARTICULI CIVILES et MILITARES Civitatis LIMERICI, Conclusi Die tertia
Octobris, Anno Domini, 1691.
Inter Carolum Porter Equitem, and Thomam Coningsby Armigerum Dominos
Justitiarios Hiberniae, Et Excellentiam suam Baronem de Ginckle Exercitus
Anglicani Imperatorem ex una part. ET Vere Honorabiles Patricium Comitem de
Lucan, Pierceium Vice Comitem de Galmoy, Colonellum Nicolaum Purcel, Colonellum
Nicolaum Cusack, Tobiam Butler Equitem, Colonellum Gerardum Dillon, and
Colonellum Joannem Brown, Et Suas Excellentias Vice-Imperatores D'Ussoon et De
Tesse, Exercitus Hibernici Imperatores ex altera part. Una cum eorundem
Articulorum ratificatione a suis Majestatibus Gulielmo Rege, and Maria Regina
sub magno Angliae Sigillo.
GULIELMUS and Maria Det Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex
and Regina, Fidei Defensores, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem:
Inspeximus Irrotulament quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren.
Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die Februarii, ultimi Praeteriti in
Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba.

GULIELMUS and Maria Dei Gratia, etc.
Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem:
Quandoquidem Quidam Articuli, dati die tertio Octobris ultimi Praeteriti,
facti and conclusi inter nostros Justitiarios Regni nostri Hiberniae, and
nostrum Imperatorem nostri ibidem Exercitus ex una part, et Plures Officiales
ibi intra civitatem Limericum in dicto nostro regno Gubernantes, ex altera
part, Quibus nostri dicti Justitiarii and Imperator se obligaverunt, quod nos
eosdem Articulos infra spatium octo Mensium, vel citius Ratificaremus, et etiam
quod totis suis viribus conarentur ut iidem Articuli in Parliamento
Ratificarentur and Confirmarentur. Tenor autem eorum Articulorum est, ut
sequitur,

In Consideratione Deditionis Civitatis Limerici, and aliorum Pactorum inter
dictum Vice-Imperatorem Ginckle Civitatis Limerici Gubernatorem; et Exercitus
Hibernici Imperatores initorum et datorum eodem die quo praesentes Pro
Deditione dictae Civitatis, and Submissione dicti Exercitus, concluditur, Quod,

ART. I. ROMANO-Catholici hujus Regni in Exercitio suae Religionis fruentur
talibus Privilegiis, quae legibus Hiberniae non repugnant, vel qualibus
fruebantur Rege Carolo secundo regnante: Et suae Majestates, cum primum sua
Negotia eis permiserint Parliamentum convocare, dictis Romano Catholicis talem
ulteriorem Securitatem in eo particulari procurare conabuntur, quae eosdem ab
ulla molestia ob dictam Religionem servare poterit. ART. II. Omnes Incolae, vel
Commorantes Limerici, vel ullius alterius Praesidii nunc in possessione
Hibernorum, and omnes Officiales and Milites nunc militantes sub ulla
Commissione Regis Jacobi, aut illorum, qui ad eam concedendam ab illo
Authoritatem habent in Comitatibus Limerici, Clare, Kerry, Cork et Mayo, vel in
ullo ex ipsis, et Omnes Officiales Commissionem habentes in suarum Majestatum
Stationibus, qui pertinent ad Hibernorum legiones nunc existentes, quibuscum
tractatur, et qui non sunt Captivi bellici, vel qui Protectionem acceptaverunt,
et qui redibunt, et suarum Majestatum Obedientiae se submittent; ET OMNES ET
SINGULI EORUM HAEREDES tenebunt, possidebunt et potientur Omnibus and Singulis
eorum Terris, Feudis, Haereditatibus, Juribus, Titulis, Possessionibus,
Privilegiis and Immunitatibus, quae ipsi et eorum omnes, vel singuli tenebant
potiebantur, vel quibus just and de jure erant intitulati Rege Carolo secundo
regnante, vel ullo tempore ex eo, juxta leges and Statuta quae eodem Carolo
secundo regnante fuerunt in vigore, et de Mandato gubernantium mittentur in
possessionem eorum quae sunt in manibus Regis, vel in manibus Feudatariorum
ejus, absque ulla lite aut Molestia; Et omnes tales terrae erunt liberae et
exoneratae omni vectigali regio et aliis oneribus publicis contractis et
debitis a festo S. Michaelis 1688 usque ad diem quo hi dati sunt. Et omnes
Personae in hoc Articulo comprehensae habebunt, tenebunt, et potientur omnibus
suis bonis et Catallis realibus et personalibus ad ipsas vel ad ullam earum
pertinentibus, et remanentibus vel in propriis earum manibus vel in manibus
cujuscunque alterius personae per modum Fideicommissi, vel pro usu earum, vel
ullius ex ipsis: ET OMNES ET SINGULAE PRAEDICTAE PERSONAE CUJUSCUNQUE
PROFESSIONIS, ARTIS AUT VOCATIONIS SINT, poterunt uti, exercere et versari in
suis variis respective Professionibus, Artibus, et Vocationibus aeque libere ac
in iis versabantur, eas exercebant et iis fruebantur sub regno Caroli secundi
Regis. Salvo tamen, quod nihil in hoc articulo contentum intelligatur extendi
ad restaurandam ullam personam exlegem nunc extra hoc Regnum, exceptis hisee
posthac comprehendendis. Salvo etiam, quod nulla persona quaecunque habeat, aut
gaudeat hujus Articuli beneficio, quae negliget aut recusabit praestare
Juramentum autem Fidelitatis per hunc Articulum exigendum tale est. EGO A. B.
sincere promitto et Juro quod Fidelis ero, and veram Allegianciam praestabo
Regi Gulielmo, et Reginae Mariae. Sic me Deus adjuvet.
Juramentum Fidelitatis a Parliamento in Anglia conditum anno primo regni Regis
and Reginae jam regnantium cum ab ipsis exigi contigerit. ART. III. Omnes
mercatores, vel reputati mercatores civitatis Limerici, vel ullius alterius
praesidii nunc ab Hibernis possessi, vel ullius oppidi aut loci in comitatibus
de Clare vel Kerry, qui in partibus transmarinis absunt, and non militarunt a
publicatione declaration is suarum majestatum mense Februarii 1688, hujus
secundi articuli beneficio gaudebunt, eodem modo ac si praesentes adfuissent,
modo tamen quod tales mercatores, et reputati mercatores, intra spatium octo
mensium a die quo praesentes dati sunt ad hoc regnum revertantur. ART. IV.
Sequentes officiales, viz. Simon Lutterell, tribunus militum, Roulandus White
praefectus, Mauritius Eustace ex Yermanstown, Chievers ex Maystown, vulgo
Mount-Leinster nunc praepositi legionibus in supradictis praesidiis, et
stationibus exercitus Hibernici, qui in partibus transmarinis sunt, et eo missi
de negotiis ad suas legiones, vel ad totum exercitum spectantibus, secundi
articuli beneficio fruentur, modo huc intra spatium novem mensium a die. quo
praesentes dati sunt redeant, seseque suarum majestatum legibus subjiciant,
dictumq juramentum praestent. ART. V. Quod omnes et singulae praedictae
personae secundo et tertio articulis comprehensae, accipient condonationem
generalem omnium condemnationum, proscriptionum, proditionum, proditionis
deferendae neglectuum, confiscationum, furtorum, transgressionum, et aliorum
criminum et malefactorum quorumcumque ab illis vel a quavis illarum ab initio
Regni Regis Jacobi secundi admissorum, et siqua illarum a parliamento sit
proscripta, Domini Justitiarii exercitusque imperator totis viribus conabuntur,
ut ejusmodi proscriptio abrogetur rescindaturque a proximo parliamento gratis,
scribarum salario excepto. ART. VI. Et cum praesens bellum magnas utrique parti
concitarit violentias, et si privatas lites qualescunque intentare liceret,
simultates producerentur, quae diutius duraverunt, publicaeque discordiae
protraherentur: ad pacandas igitur resque Regni componendas, calamitatesque
contrarium necessario consecuturas, declinandas; nulla persona, aut personae
quaecumque praecedentibus articulis comprehensae in jus trahentur,
moiestabuntur, aut in jus ullius partis aut partium postulatione vocabuntur, ob
ullam transgressionem ab illis commissam, vel ob ulla arma, equos, pecuniam,
bona, catallas, merces, aut provisiones quascumque ab illis durante bello capta
aut occupata: et nulla persona aut personae quaecumque secundo et tertio
articulis comprehensae in jus rapientur, aut reae agentur aut rationem reddere
tenebuntur ullius reditus, aut proventus cujusvis terrae, fundi, aut domorum ab
ipsa aut ipsis receptorum, aut possessorum in hoc regno ab initio praesentis
belli ad diem quo hi articuli dati sunt, neque ullius devastationis, aut
transgressionis ab illa aut illis commissarum: et concluditur quod hic
articulus sit utrique parti mutuus et reciprocus. ART. VII. Omnes nobiles et
generosi, praedictis secundo et tertio Articulis comprehensi habebunt
libertatem equitandi cum gladio et pari Scloppetulorum si ipsis visum fuerit,
et habendi Scloppet um in aedibus suis pro defensione earundem, vel pro
venatione. ART. VIII. Omnibus incolis commorantibusque Limerici, aut in aliis
praesidiis, licebit amovere inde sua bona, catallas et provisiones sine
inspectione, scrutatione aut vectigalium solutione: nec ex aedibus suis aut
hospitiis quae nunc occupant discedere cogentur, quoad sex hebdomades a die,
quo praesentes dati sunt, effluxerint. ART. IX. Juramentum a Romano-Catholicis,
qui sese suarum majestatum legibus subjecerint, exigendum, erit juramentum
praememoratum, et non aliud. ART. X. Nulla persona aut personae ullo tempore
postmodum hos Articulos, vel illorum quemvis violantes, causa erunt, cur ulli
personae aut personis illorum beneficium adimatur. ART. XI. Domini Justitiarii
et exercitus imperator pollicentur sese pro virili laboraturos, ut omnes,
supradictis Articulis comprehensi protegantur tutique praestentur ab omni
manuum injectione, executione pro debitis aut injuria per spatium octo mensium
diem, quo hi dati sunt, sequentium. ART. XII. Denique Domini Justitiarii sese
obligant suas majestates praesentes articulos intra spatium octo abhinc mensium
ratificaturas esse, immo vel citius; et quantum in illis situm est, operam
daturas esse ut iidem a parliamento ratificentur et confirmentur. ART. XIII.
Demum quandoquidem tribunus militum Joannes Brown fuerit in aere multorum
Protestantium judiciis in tabulas relatis quod cum dominis Regno nuper
praepositis constaret, Dynastae Tyrconnel et Lucan abstulerunt illi praefato
Joanni Brown bona, quae solvendis debitis asservabat, quibus sese illum
exoneraturos esse polliciti sunt, quae bona ad usum communem Hibernorum
illorumque exercitus adhibita sunt; ad igitur eximendum Dynastam Lucan tum a
dicta fidejussione illorum causa communi contracta, tum etiam ad satisfaciendum
dictis Protestantibus, obviamque exitio praefati Joannis Brown eundum satisque
creditoribus ejus faciendum; inter nos convenit postulatione praefati Domini
Lucan, aliorumque supradictorum, ut praememorati Domini Justitiarii, et Baron
de Ginckle sua utantur apud Regem et Parliamentum gratia, ut bona immobilia
Articulis et tractatu Romano-Catholicis conservata onerentur pariterque
dictorum debitorum solutione afficiantur tantum, quantum dicta bona praefato
Joanni Brown ab lata, valebant, secundum literas certificatorias, quas manu sua
subscriptas dabit idem Dominus Lucan facta ratione cum dicto Joanne Brown: quae
ratio componetur, cujusque differentiam dictus Dominus Lucan intra viginti dies
et unum a die quo praesentes dati sunt testabitur.


Ad veram horum articulorum peractionem propriis manibus subscripsimus Present,
Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Car. Porter. Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle.


ET cum dicta Urbs Limericensis Nobis consequenter ad praefatos Articulos
dedita fuerit, Sit vobis notum, Nos, perpensis dictis Articulis, benign his
declarare, quod Nos, pro Nobismetipsis Haeredibus et Successoribus Nostris
quantum in Nobis situm est, Ratificamus et Confirmamus eosdem, et illorum
unamquamque clausulam omniaque illis comprehensa. Quod autem ad tales parts
illorum attinet, quarum Ratificatio Parliamenti Decretum exiget, earum
confirmationem peractionemque Parliamento Commendabimus, Regioque Nostro
Assensu omne Decretum aut Decreta in eum finem utriusque Parliamenti conventus
Comprobabimus; Cumque Nobis appareat, assensum esse ab utraque part dictis
Articulis, quod post verba Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, vel illorum
quodvis in secundo Articulo, verba sequentia viz. [omnesque illi qui sunt sub
illorum in dictis Comitatibus tutela:] inserenda essent, parsque dictorum
Articulorum esse deberent, quorum verborum casu a Scriba omissorum, non est
observata omissio, nisi post horum Articulorum subscriptionem; verum
animadversa est, ante secundae urbis deditionem: Et quemadmodum dicti Nostri
Justitiarij, Imperatorque vel illorum alteruter, promiserunt dictam clausulam
perfectum iri juxta sensum mentemque tractatus, et inserta fuit rudi ejusdem
exemplari: ulterior Nostra voluntas et beneplacitum est, et his Ratificamus et
Confirmamus dicta omissa verba viz. [omnesque illi qui sub illorum in dictis
Comitatibus tutela sunt] pro nobis, nostris haeredibus et successoribus,
jubentes, declarantesque unamquamque personam, et personas illis comprehensas
habituras esse, posse habere, recipere et illorum frui beneficio tali, et eodem
modo, ac si verba praefata proprio loco inserta fuissent in dicto secundo
articulo, nulla omissione, defectu aut errore, in dicto secundo articulo
obstantibus, modo semper, nostraque voluntas et beneplacitum est, ut hae
literae nostrae patentes in Cancellariae nostrae acta referantur in dicto
nostro Hiberniae Regno intra spatium unius anni proxime sequentis. In
testimonium, etc. test sigillo nostro vigesimo quarto die Februarii apud
Westmonasterium, Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi, et Reginae Mariae quarto per breve
de privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. Praedict. Ad Requisitionem
Attornat. General. Domini Regis and Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae.
duximus exemplificand. per Praesentes. In cujus Rei Testimonium has literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die
Aprilis, Annoque Regni eorum Quarto.

BRIDGES.
Examinat. per nos

S. Keck Lacon Wm. Child
In Cancel. Magistros.



ARTICULI MILITARES De quibus Conventum est
Inter Baronem de Ginckle Vice-Imperatorem, Anglorum Exercitus Imperatorem ex
una part. ET Vice-Imperatores D'Ussoon et De Tesse, Hibernorum Exercitus
Imperatores ex altera part, officialesque Generales his Articulis
Subscribentes.
ART. I. QUOD omnes personae, sine ulla exceptione cujuscumque ordinis aut
conditionis quae volent ex Hiberniae Regno discedere, habebunt libertatem eundi
ad quasvis parts transmarinas (Anglia, Scotiaque exceptis) cum suis familiis,
suppellectile, argento facto, gemmisque ART. II. Quod omnes Officiales
Generales, Colonelli, omnesque generaliter alij Officiales equitatus, equitum
sclopetariorum, et peditatus, militumque denique cujuscumque generis, qui sunt
in ullo praesidio, loco, aut statione, nunc in possessione Hibernorum, vel qui
in Castris sunt in Comitatibus Cork, Clare et Kerry, sicut etiam illi vocati
Raptores, vel Voluntarii, qui volunt ire ad parts transmarinas, ut supra,
habebunt libertatem conscendendi naves, ubicumque illae sunt, quae illis
transvectandis destinantur, veniendique collective, ut nunc sunt, vel divisim,
cohortatim vel alio quovis modo, sine ullo impedimento, direct vel indirecte.
ART. III. Quod omnes praefatae personae, quae volunt ex Hibernia in Galliam
discedere, habebunt licentiam id declarandi temporibus et locis infra dicendis,
viz. Copiae Limerici, die Martis proximo Limerici; Equitatus, in castris suis
die Mercurii; caeteraeque Copiae dispersae in Comitatibus Clare, Kerry, et
Cork, die octavo praesentis mensis, et nullo alio tempore, coram Domino Tameron
Intendente Gallico, et Colonello Withers; postque factam ejusmodi
declarationem, Copiis in Galliam transituris remanendum erit sub imperio
disciplinaque suorum Officialium, qui illas eo ducturi sunt: et utriusque
exercitus transfugae mutuo reddentur atque conformiter punientur. ART. IV. Quod
omnes Angli et Scoti Officiales militantes jam in Hibernia hoc Tractatu
comprehendentur, tum quoad securitatem suarum terrarum bonorumque in Anglia,
Scotia et Hibernia (si hic remanere voluerint) tum quoad licentiam libere
transeundi in Galliam, aut aliam quamvis Regionem ad militandum. ART. V. Quod
omnes Officiales Gallici Generales, Intendens, Machinatores, et Commissarii
Belli et Tormentorum Bellicorum, Quaestor, et caeteri Gallici Officiales,
Exteri, et omnes alii quicunque, qui sunt Sligo, Ross aut Clare, vel in
exercitu vel qui mercaturam faciunt aut negotiantur, vel versantur in alio
quocumque statu aut condition, poterunt liberrime transire in Galliam aut
aliam quamvis Regionem; et poterunt naves conscendere cum omnibus suis Equis,
Cultu, Argento facto, Chartis et omnibus Bonis quibuscumque. Et Imperator
Ginckle jubebit iis dari itineris symbola, praesidia, vecturas terra et aqua;
quibus vehantur tuti Limerico ad Naves, in quas imponentur, nec quidquam
solvent pro dictis vecturis, aut illis quorum opera utentur, cum equis,
vehiculis, naviculis, et scaphis. ART. VI. Quod si quidquam praefati Cultus,
Mercium, Equorum, Pecuniae, Argenti facti, aut aliorum Mobilium aut
suppellectilis dictarum Hibernicarum Copiarum, vel aliorum Officialium
Gallicorum, vel privatarum personarum quarumcumque direptum fuerit, perditum,
aut ablatum a Copiis dicti Imperatoris; id dictus Imperator aut jubebit
restitui, aut pro eo solutionem fieri, pro aestimatione illius juramento facta
a persona sic direpta aut spoliata: et dictis Copiis Hibernicis transportandis,
ut supra, et omnibus aliis personis ad ipsas spect^ntibus bonus ordo
observandus est in itinere et stationibus; omniaque reddent, quae incolis
abstulerint, aut restitutionem facient pro eisdem. ART. VII. Quod, ut facilius
transvectentur dictae Copiae, Imperator suppeditabit quinquaginta Naves,
singulas capaces ducentorum doliorum: pro quibus personae transvectandae nihil
tenebuntur solvere; imo viginti alias si opus fuerit, neque pro iis quidquam
solvent; quod si quaepiam dictarum Navium suerit tanti oneris incapax, plures
numero Ille suppeditabit in compensationem: et etiam dabit duas Naves Bellicas,
quas conscendent praecipui Officiales, quaeque erunt Navibus onerariis
praesidio. ART. VIII. Quod Commissarius quamprimum mittetur Corcagiam ad
examinandas Naves transvectorias, videndumque qua sint ad navigandum
condition; et quod, ubi primum paratae fuerint, Copiae transvectandae ibunt
quam commodissima celeritate, brevissima via, ad illas conscendendas. Quod si
major fuerit transvehendorum numerus, quam ut praefatis quinquaginta Navibus
vehatur, reliqui discedent ex urbe Anglica Limericensi in eas stationes, quae
illis assignabuntur commodae illorum transvectationi; ubi remanebunt quoad
caeterae viginti Naves paratae sint, quae erunt intra mensem; et poterunt Navim
quamcunque Gallicam conscendere quae interea adventare poterit. ART. IX. Quod
dictis navibus suppeditabitur pabulum pro equis, et omnes necessariae
provisiones ad sustendandos Officiales, Copias, Draconarios, Milites, et
caeteras personas quascumque quae in naves imponentur transvehendae in Galliam:
pro quibus provisionibus pecunia numerabitur, ubi primum omnes ex navibus
descenderint Bresti aut Nantibus, in littore minoris Britanniae, vel in alio
quocunque portu Galliae quem attingere poterunt. ART. X. Et ad praestandum
securum reditum dictarum navium (maris periculo excepto) et pecuniam pro dictis
provisionibus, obsides dabuntur. ART. XI. Quod Praesidia Clare-Castelli, Ross,
caeterique Pedites qui sunt in Praesidiis, in Comitatibus Clare, Cork et Kerry,
fruentur beneficio hujus Tractatus; Quique ex his Praesidiis statuunt maria
transire, egredientur cum Armis, Sarcinis, pulsu Tympanorum, Glande plumbea in
ore, cum Fomite ex utraque extremitate accenso, Vexillis explicatis, cum
omnibus Provisionibus, dimidiaque part Apparatus bellici qui jam in dicto
Praesidio est, seseque adjungent Equitatui qui erit in itinere transvectandus;
quod si tunc numerus navium non suffecerit Peditatui proxime transvehendo post
Equitatum, Imperator Ginckle jubebit illis ad eam rem vecturas suppeditari; et
quascumque opus habuerint provisiones in itinere, modo pro iis solvant, vel ut
ex suis eas Promptuariis sumant. ART. XII. Quod omnes Equitum et Draconariorum
Turmae quae sunt in Comitatibus Cork, Kerry et Clare, fruentur beneficio hujus
Tractatus; et quod iis, qui volunt transire in Galliam, stationes dabuntur in
comitatibus Clare et Kerry, seorsim a Copiis quibus imperator Ginckle praeest,
quoad in naves imponantur: et intra stationes solvent pro re qualibet, excepto
pabulo, equorumque pastu quae gratis suppeditabuntur. ART. XIII. Illi de
Praesidio Sligo qui junguntur Hibernorum exercitui, fruentur beneficio hujus
Tractatus; et mandata mittentur ad eos, qui illis praesidio futuri sunt huc, ut
eos Limericum brevissima via ducant. ART. XIV. Hibernis licebit transvehere
nongentos equos, inclusis Officialium equis, qui transvehentur gratis, et qui
Equites remanent, disponent de se, ut voluerint, concessis equis armisque iis
personis quas Imperator assignabit. ART. XV. Licebit iis ad quos deferetur cura
sustentandorum Equitum qui in Galliam transire volunt, emere Faenum Avenamque
pretiis Regis, ubicumque invenerint, in stationibus illis assignatis sine ulla
mora vel molestia; et capere quasvis provisiones necessarias ex Urbe Limerico:
et ad hanc rem Imperator suppeditabit iis commodas vecturas ad ea loca, ubi in
naves imponentur. ART. XVI. Licebit uti faeno, asservato in horreis in Comitatu
Kerry pro equis qui in naves imponentur; et si non suffecerit, licebit emere
faenum et avenam, ubicumque invenientur, pretiis Regis. ART. XVII. Quod omnes
captivi bellici, qui fuerunt in Hibernia, vigesimo octavo Septembris, in
libertatem restituentur utrimque et imperator pollicetur se usurum omni opera,
ut qui sunt in Anglia et Flandria, in libertatem quoque restituantur. ART.
XVIII. Imperator provisiones, and medicamenta aegrotis vulneratisque
Officialibus equitibus, draconariis militibusque exercitus Hibernici curabit
suppeditanda, qui in prima navium conscensione in Galliam transire non
poterunt, sanatis autem naves comparari jubebit, ad transeundum in Galliam, si
transire voluerint. ART. XIX. Quod in horum subscriptione, imperator navim
nunciam mittet in Galliam; suppeditabitque ex iis quae nunc in portu
Limericensi sunt duas naves quae transvehant duos in Galliam homines mittendos
cum nuncio hujus tractatus, quique his navibus praesunt, iis imperabitur, ut
exponant in littus, quos vehunt, in proxima Galliae part, ad quam fuerint
delatis. ART. XX. Quod quicumque ex dictis Copiis, Officialibus aliisque
cujuscumque nominis, volent in Galliam transmittere, non impedientur causa
aeris alieni, aut alia de causa quacumque ART. XXI. Si post subscriptionem
praesentis Tractatus, et ante classis adventum, navicula Gallica literarum
bajula aut alia navis transvectoria, ex Gallia in aliam quamvis Hiberniae
partem appulerit: Imperator jubebit dari itineris symbola, non solum dictas
naves conscensuris, sed etiam navibus, ut appellant ad portum proximum loco ubi
copiae transvehendae in statione fuerunt. ART. XXII. Quod post adventum
praefatae classis, liberum erit commercium liberque transitus, inter illam,
stationesque dictarum copiarum; et potissimum, omnibus, qui a supremis
Officialibus dictae classis acceperunt salvi conductus diplomata vel a domino
Tameron, Intendente. ART. XXIII. In considerationem praesentis tractatus, duae
urbes Limericenses dedentur, tradenturque imperatori, vel alteri cuivis, quem
statuerit, tempore, et diebus infra dicendis viz. urbs Hibernica, exceptis
cellis et nosocomio, die quo praesentes articuli subscribentur: Urbs vero
Anglica remanebit una cum insula, liberoque pontis Thomondii transitu in
manibus eorum exercitus Hibernici, qui nunc sunt in Praesidio vel qui posthac
venerint ex comitatibus Cork, Clare, Kerry, Sligoe et aliis locis praedictis,
quoad apta omnia illis transvehendis comparentur. ART. XXIV. Et ad avertendos
quosvis tumultus inter praesidium ab Imperatore collocandum in urbe Hibernica
quae illi tradetur, et Equites Hibernos in urbe Anglica remansuros, quod illis
licebit, quoad copiae, in primas quinquaginta naves imponendae, In Galliam
profectae fuerint et non diutius; utrimque sese fossa cingent, ad rescindendum
omne dictorum Presidiorum commercium: prohibebiturque utrimque nequa
committatur offensa; qui autem commiserint ex alterutra part, punientur. ART.
XXV. Quod licebit dicto praesidio vel eodem tempore collective, vel diversis
temporibus exire, ut in naves imponi possit, cum armis, sarcinis, sono
tympanorum, fomite ad utramque extremitatem accenso, globulo plumbeo in ore,
passis vexillis, sex tormentis aeneis, quae obsessi eligent, duobus pyrobolis
et dimidia part apparatus bellici, qui nunc in cellis est dictae urbis;
quapropter fiet catalogus omnis apparatus bellici Praesidii coram quovis ab
imperatore statuenendo, postridie quam hi articuli subscribentur. ART. XXVI.
Omnes provisionum cellae remanebunt in manibus illorum, qui curam gerunt
illarum, in sustentationem illorum exercitus Hibernici, qui in Galliam transire
volent: Et si non suerit satis in cellis ad sustentandas dictas copias, quamdiu
manent in hoc regno, et Maria transeunt, quod reddita numerorum ratione,
Imperator abunde provifionum suppeditabit pretiis Regis; et quod liber Mercatus
erit Limerici, et in aliis Praesidijs ubi dictae copiae erunt: quod si quid
provisionum remanferit in cellis Limericensibus, urbe reddita aestimabitur, et
pretium detrahetur de eo, quod solvendum est pro provisionibus sunpeditandis
copiis in navibus. (...)



