ARTICLES OF Peace, Commerce and Alliance, Between the CROWNS OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND SPAIN.

CONCLUDED In a Treaty at Madrid the 13./23. day of May, in the year of our
LORD GOD, 1667.

Translated out of Latin.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, M.DC.LXVII.

Articles of Peace, Commerce, and Alliance, between the Crowns of Great Britain
and Spain.
I. FIrst, It is agreed and Concluded, That from this day forward there shall
be between the two Crowns of Great Britain and Spain, a General, Good, Sincere,
True, Firm and Perfect Amity, Confederation and Peace, which shall endure for
ever, and be observed inviolably, as well by Land, as by Sea and Fresh-waters;
and also between the Lands, Countries, Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories,
belonging unto, or under the obedience of either of them; And that their
Subjects, People and Inhabitants respectively, of what condition, degree or
quality soever, from henceforth reciprocally, shall help, assist, and show to
one another all manner of Love, good Offices, and Friendship.

II. That neither of the said Kings, nor their respective People, Subjects or
Inhabitants within their Dominions, upon any pretense, may in public or
secret, do, or procure to be done, any thing against the other, in any place,
by Sea or by Land, nor in the Ports or Rivers of the one or the other, but
shall treat one another with all Love and Friendship,; and may by Water and by
Land, freely and securely pass into the Confines, Countries, Lands, Kingdoms,
Islands, Dominions, Cities, Towns, Villages, walled or without wall, fortified
or unfortified, their Havens and Ports (where hitherto Trade and Commerce has
been accustomed) and there trade, buy and sell, as well of and to the
Inhabitants of the respective Places, as those of their own Nation, or any
other Nation that shall be or come there.

III. That the said Kings of Great Britain and Spain, shall take care that
their respective People and Subjects from henceforward do abstain from all
Force, Violence or Wrong; and if any injury shall be done by either of the said
Kings, or by the People or Subjects of either of them, to the People or
Subjects of the other, against the Articles of this Alliance, or against common
Right, there shall not therefore be given Letters of Reprisal, Marque, or
Counter-marque by any of the Confederates, until such time as Justice is sought
and followed in the ordinary course of Law: But if Justice be denied or
delayed, then the King, whose People or Inhabitants have received harm, shall
ask it of the other, by whom (as is said) the Justice shall have been denied or
delayed, or of the Commissioners that shall be by the one King or the other
appointed to receive and hear such Demands, to the end that all such
differences may be compounded in friendship, or according to Law. But if there
should yet be a delay, or Justice should not be done, nor satisfaction given
within six months after having the same so demanded, then may be given Letters
of Reprisal, Marque or Counter-marque.

IV. That between the King of Great Britain and the King of Spain, and their
respective People, Subjects and Inhabitants, as well upon Sea as upon Land and
Fresh Water, in all and every their Kingdoms, Lands, Countries, Dominions,
Confines, Territories, Provinces, Islands, Plantations, Cities, Villages,
Towns, Ports, Rivers, Creeks, Bays, Streights and Currents, where hitherto
Trade and Commerce has been accustomed, there shall be free Trade and
Commerce, in such way and manner, that without safe Conduct, and without
general or particular License, the People and Subjects of each other may
freely, as well by Land as by Sea and Fresh Water, Navigate and go into their
said Countries, Kingdoms, Dominions, and all the Cities, Ports, Currents,
Bays, Districts, and other places thereof, and may enter into any Port with
their Ships laden or empty, Carriage or Carriages wherein to bring their
Merchandise, and there buy and sell what and how much they please, and also at
just and reasonable rates, provide themselves with provisions and other
necessary things for their subsistence and voyage; and also may repair their
Ships and Carriages, and from thence again freely depart with their Ships,
Carriages, Goods, Merchandise and Estate, and return to their own Countries, or
to such other Place as they shall think fit, without any Molestation or
Impediment, so that they pay the Duties and Customs which shall be due, and
saving to either side the Laws and Ordinances of their Country.

V. Item, It is likewise agreed, That for the Merchandises, which the Subjects
of the King of Great Britain shall buy in Spain, or other the Kingdoms or
Dominions of the King of Spain, and shall carry in their own Ships, or in Ships
hired or lent unto them, no new Customs, Toll, Tenths, Subsidies, or other
Rights or Duties whatsoever shall be taken or increased, other then those which
in the like case the Natives themselves, and all other strangers are obliged to
pay; and the Subjects aforesaid buying, selling and contracting for their
Merchandises, as well in respect of the Prices, as of all Duties to be paid,
shall enjoy the same privileges which are allowed to the natural Subjects of
Spain; and may buy, and lade their Ships with such Goods and Merchandises;
which said Ships being laden, and Customs paid for the Goods, shall not be
detained in Port upon any pretense whatsoever; nor shall the Laders, Merchants,
or Factors who bought and loaded the Goods aforesaid be questioned after the
departure of the said Ships, for any matter or thing whatsoever concerning the
same.

VI. And to the end that the Officers and Ministers of all Cities, Towns and
Villages belonging to either, may neither demand nor take from the respective
Merchants and People, greater Taxes, Duties, Stipends, Recompenses, Gifts, or
any other charges, then what ought to be taken by virtue of this Treaty; and
that the said Merchants and People may know and understand with certainty what
is ordained in all things touching this; It is agreed and concluded, That
Tables and Lists shall be put up at the Doors of the Custom-houses and
Registries of all the Cities, Villages and Towns of, or appertaining to one or
the other King where such Rights and Excises or Customs are usually paid; in
which, how much, and of what quality such Rights, Customs, Subsidies and
Payments, either to the Kings or any the aforesaid Officers are allowed, shall
be put down in writing, declaring as well the species of what is imported, as
what is carried out. And if any Officer, or any other in his name, upon any
pretense whatsoever; in public or secret, directly or indirectly, shall ask or
receive of any Merchant or other person respectively, any sum of money or other
thing, by the name of Right, Due, Stipend, Allowance, or Recompense (though it
be by the way of voluntary Donative) more otherwise then aforesaid, the said
Officer or his Deputy being in such manner guilty and convict before a
competent Judge in the Country where the Crime is committed, shall be put in
Prison for three months, and shall pay thrice the value of the thing so
received; of which the half shall be for the King of the Country where the
Crime is committed, and the other half for the Denunciator, for the which he
may sue his Right before any competent Judge of the Country where it shall
happen.

VII. That it shall be lawful for the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, to
bring out, and carry into Spain, and all or any Lands and Dominions of the King
of Spain (where heretofore they have used Trade and Commerce) and trade there
with all kind of Merchandise, Clothes, Manufactures, and things of the Kingdom
of Great Britain, and the Manufactures, Goods, Fruits, and kinds of the
Islands, Towns and Plantations to him appertaining, and what shall have been
bought by English Factors on this side, or farther on the other side of the
Cape of Buena Esperanca, without being enforced to declare to whom, or for what
price they sell their said Merchandise and Provisions, or being molested for
the errors of the Masters of the Ships, or others, in the entry of the Goods;
and at their pleasure to return again out of the Dominions of the King of
Spain, with all, or any Goods, Estates and Merchandise, to any of the
Territories, Islands, Dominions and Countries of the King of England, or to any
other Place, paying the Rights and Tributes mentioned in the antecedent
Chapters; and the rest of all their lading which is not brought to Land, they
may detain, keep and carry away in their said Ship or Ships, Vessel or Vessels
again, without paying any Right or Imposition whatsoever, for it, as if
therewith they had never been within any Bay or Port of the Catholic King.
And all the Goods, Estates, Merchandise, Ships or other Vessels, with any
things introduced into the Dominions or Places of the Crown of Great Britain as
Prizes, and judged for such in the said Dominions and Places, shall be taken
for Goods and Merchandise of Great Britain, comprehended so by the intention of
this Article.

VIII. That the Subjects and Vassals of the Most Serene King of Great Britain
may bring and carry to all and singular the Dominions of the King of Spain, any
Fruits and Commodities of the East Indies, it appearing by testimony of the
Deputies of the East-Indy Company in London, that they are of, or have come
from the English Conquests, Plantations or Factories, with like privilege, and
according to what is allowed to the Subjects of the United Provinces, by the
Royal Cedulas of Contravando bearing date the 27. of June, and the 3. of July
1663. and published on the 30. of June, and 4. of July the same year. And for
what may concern both the Indies, and any other Parts whatsoever, the Crown of
Spain does grant to the King of Great Britain and his Subjects, all that is
granted to the United States of the Low Countries and their Subjects, in their
Treaty of Munster 1648. Point for Point, in as full and ample manner as if the
same were herein particularly inserted, the same Rules being to be observed
whereunto the Subjects of the said United States are obliged, and mutual
Offices of Friendship to be performed from one side to the other.

IX. That the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, trading buying and selling
in any of the Kingdoms, Governments, Islands, Ports or Territories of the said
King of Spain shall have, use, and enjoy all the Privileges and Immunities,
which the said King has granted and confirmed to the English Merchants that
reside in Andaluzia, by his Royal Cedulas or Orders, dated the 19. day of
March, the 26. day of June, and the 9. day of November 1645. His Catholic
Majesty by these presents reconfirming the same as a part of this Treaty
between the two Crowns. And to the end that it be manifest to all, It is
consented, that the said Schedules (as to the whole substance thereof) be
passed and transferred to the body of the present Articles, in the name and
favor of all and singular the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, residing
and trading in any places whatsoever within his Catholic Majesty's Dominions.

X. That the Ships, or any other Vessels that shall belong to the King of Great
Britain or his Subjects, Navigating into the King of Spain's Dominions, or any
of his Ports, shall not be visited by the Judges of Counterband, or by any
other Officer or Person, by his own, or by any other Authority; nor shall any
Soldiers, armed men or other Officers or Persons, be put on board any of the
said Ships or Vessels; nor shall the Officers of the Custom-house of the one or
the other Party, search in any Vessels or Ships belonging to the People of the
one or the other, which shall enter into their Regions, Dominions, or
respective Ports, until their said Ships or Vessels are unladen, or until they
have carried on shore all the Lading and Merchandise which they declare they
resolve to disembarque in the said Port; nor shall the Captain, Master or any
other of the Company of the said Ships be imprisoned, or they or their Boats
detained on shore; but in the interim, Officers of the Custom-house may be put
on board the said Vessels or Ships, so they exceed not the number of three for
each Ship, to see that no Goods or Merchandise be landed out of the said Ships
or Vessels, without paying such Duties as by these Articles either Party is
obliged to pay, which said Officers are to be without any charge to the Ship
or Ships, Vessel or Vessels, their Commanders, Mariners, Company, Merchants,
Factors or Proprietors. And when it happens that the Master or Owner of any
Ship shall declare that the whole Lading of his said Ship is to be discharged
in any Port, the Entry of the said Lading shall be made in the Custom-house,
after the usual manner; and if after the Entry made, any other Goods be found
in the said Ship or Ships, more then what are contained in the said Entry,
eight working days shall be allowed them on which they may work (which shall
be reckoned from the day they began to unlade) to the end, that the concealed
Goods may be entered, and the Confiscation of them prevented. And in case that
in the time limited, the Entry or Manifestation of them shall not have been
made, then such particular Goods only, which shall be found as aforesaid,
though the unlading be not finished, shall be confiscated, and not any other;
nor shall other trouble be given, or punishment inflicted on the Merchant or
Owner of the Ship; and when the Ships or Vessels are reladen, they may have
freedom to go out again.

XI. That the Ship or Ships appertaining to the one or the other King, or to
their respective People and Subjects, that shall enter into any Ports, Lands or
Dominions of the one or the other, and shall discharge any part of their Goods
and Merchandises in any Port or Haven, being consigned with the rest to other
Places, within or without the said Dominions, shall not be obliged to register
or pay the Rights of any other Goods or Merchandise, then of that which they
shall unlade in the said Port or Haven, nor be constrained to give Bond for the
Goods they shall carry to other Places, nor any other security, if it be not in
case of Felony, Debt, Treason, or other capital Crime.

XII. Whereas the one moity of the Custom of all Foreign Goods and Merchandise
imported into England is allowed and returned back to the Importer, if the said
Goods be exported out of the said Kingdom within twelve months, after their
first Landing, upon Oath made that they are the same Goods which paid Custom
inwards, and that if they be not re-shipt within the said twelve months, yet
they may at all times be exported without paying any Custom or Duty outward:
It is therefore agreed, That if any the Subjects of the King of Great Britain
shall hereafter Land any Goods or Merchandise, of what growth or nature soever
they be, in any of the Ports of his Catholic Majesty, and having entered them,
and paid the Custom which by this Treaty ought to be paid, and shall afterward
desire to transport them, or any part of them, to any other Place whatsoever,
for a better Market, it shall and may be lawful for him or them so to do
freely, without paying or being demanded any other Custom or Duty at all for
the same, he or they making Oath, if required thereunto, that they are the same
Goods for which Custom was paid at their Landing; And in case that the
Subjects, People and Inhabitants of the Dominions of either part shall unlade,
or have in any City, Town or Village respectively, any Goods, Merchandises,
Fruits or Estates, and have paid the Customs due, according to what has been
declared, and after that, not being able to put them off, shall resolve to
remit them to some other City, Town or Village of the said Dominions, they may
not only do it without difficulty or impediment, and without paying other
Rights then what were due at their Entry, but likewise the Custom or Rights
shall not be paid again in any other part of the said Dominions, bringing
Certificates from the Officers of the Custom-house, that they were paid before
in the due form. And the chief Farmers and Commissioners of the King of Spains
Rents in all places, or some other Officer or Officers to be appointed for that
purpose, shall at all times permit and suffer the Transportation of all such
Goods and Merchandises from place to place, and give sufficient certificate to
the Owners thereof, or their Assigns, of their having paid their Custom at
their first Landing, whereby they may be carried to, and Landed at any other
Port or Place of the said Jurisdiction, free from all Duties or Impediments
whatsoever, as aforesaid, saving always the right of any third Person.

XIII. That it shall be lawful for the Ships belonging to the Subjects of the
one or other King, to anchor in the Roads or Bays of either, without being
constrained to enter into Port; and in case they be necessitated to enter
thereinto, either by distress of weather, fear of enemies, Pirates, or any
other accident, in case the said Ships be not bound to an enemies Port, and
carrying thither Countraband Goods (whereof without some clear proof, they
shall not be questioned) shall be lawful for the said Subjects to return to Sea
freely when they please, with their Ships and Goods, so as they do not break
bulk, or expose any thing to sale; and that when they cast anchor, or enter the
Ports aforesaid, they be not molested or visited; and it shall suffice that in
this case they show their Pass-ports or Sea-papers, which being seen by the
respective Officers of either King, the said Ships shall return freely to Sea
without any molestation.

XIV. And if any Ship or Ships belonging to the Subjects and Merchants of the
one or the other, entering into Bays, or in the open Sea, shall be encountered
by the Ships of the said Kings, or of Privateers their Subjects; the said
Ships, to prevent all disorders, shall not come within Canon-shot, but shall
send their Longboat or Pinnace to the Merchant-ship, and only two or three men
on board, to whom the Master or owner shall show his Pass-ports and
Sea-Letters, according to the form which shall be inserted at the end of this
Treaty, whereby not only the Ships lading, but the place to which she belongs,
and as well the Master and Owners name, as the name of the Ship may appear; by
which means the quality of the Ship, and her Master or Owner will be
sufficiently known, as also the Commodities she carries, whether they be
Countraband or not; to the which Pass-ports and Sea-Letters, entire faith and
credit shall be given, so much the rather, for that as well on the part of the
King of England, as of the King of Spain, some Counter-signes shall be given
(if it shall be found necessary) whereby their authenticalness may the better
appear, and that they may not be in any wise falsified.

XV. If any prohibited Merchandise or Goods shall be exported from the
Kingdoms, Dominions and Territories of either of the said Kings, by the
respective People or Subjects of the one or the other, in such case the
prohibited Goods shall be only confiscated, and not the other Goods; neither
shall the Delinquent incur any other punishment, except the said Delinquent
shall carry out from the respective Kingdoms or Dominions of the King of Great
Britain, the proper Coin, Wool, or Fullers-earth of the said Kingdoms, or
shall carry out of the respective Kingdoms or Dominions of the said King of
Spain, any Gold or Silver, wrought or unwrought; in either of which cases, the
Laws of the respective Countries are to take place.

XVI. That it shall be lawful for the People and Subjects of both Kings, to
have access to the respective Ports of the one and the other, and there remain,
and depart again with the same freedom, not only with their Ships, and other
Vessels for Trade and Commerce, but also with their other Ships fitted for War,
armed, and disposed to resist and engage the enemy, and arriving by stress of
weather to repair their Ships, or furnish themselves with Provisions; so that
entering willingly, they be not so numerous, that they give just occasion of
suspicion, to which end they are not to exceed the number of eight, nor
continue in their Havens, nor about their Ports, longer time then they shall
have just cause for the repair of their Ships, to take in Provisions or other
necessary things, much less be the occasion of interrupting the free Commerce,
and coming in of other Ships, of Nations in Amity with either King; and when an
unusual number of Men of War by accident shall come unto any Port, it shall not
be lawful for them to come into the said Ports or Havens, not having first
obtained permission of the King unto whom the said Ports do belong, or the
Governors of the said Ports, if they be not forced thereinto by stress of
weather or other necessity, to avoid the danger of the Sea, and in such case
they shall presently acquaint the Governor or chief Magistrate of the place
with the cause of their coming; nor shall they remain there any longer time
then the said Governor or Magistrate shall think convenient, or do any act of
Hostility in such Ports, that may prove of prejudice to the one or the other of
the said Kings.

XVII. That neither the said King of Great Britain, nor the King of Spain, by
any Mandate general nor particular, nor for any cause whatsoever, shall
embarque or detain, hinder or take for his respective service, any Merchant,
Master of a Ship, Pilot or Mariner, their Ships, Merchandise, Clothes or other
Goods belonging unto the one or the other, in their Ports or Waters, if it be
not that either of the said Kings, or the persons to whom the Ships belong, be
first advertised thereof, and do agree thereunto; Provided that this shall not
be construed to hinder or interrupt the ordinary course of Justice and Law in
either Country.

XVIII. That the Merchants and Subjects of the one and the other King, their
Factors and Servants, as also their Ships, Masters and Mariners, may as well
going as coming, upon Sea and other Waters, as in the Havens and Ports of the
one and the other respectively, carry and use all kind of Arms, Defensive and
Offensive, without being obliged to register them, as also upon Land to carry
and use them for their defense, according to the custom of the Place.

XIX. That the Captains, Officers and Mariners of the Ships belonging to the
People and Subjects of either Party, may not commence an Action, nor hinder or
bring trouble upon their own Ships, their Captains, Officers or Mariners in the
respective Kingdoms, Dominions, Lands, Countries or Places of the other for
their Wages or Saleries, or under any other pretense. Nor may they put
themselves, or be received, by what pretext or color soever, into the service
or protection of the King of England, or King of Spain, or their Arms; but if
any controversy happen between Merchants and Masters of Ships, or between
Masters and Mariners, the composing thereof shall be left to the Consul of the
Nation, but after such manner, as he who shall not submit to the Arbitrament,
may appeal to the ordinary Justice of the place where he is subject.

XX. And to the end that all Impediments be taken away, and that the Merchants
and Adventurers of the Kingdoms of Great Britain be permitted to return to
Brabant, Flanders, and other the Provinces of the Low Countries, under the
Jurisdiction of the King of Spain; Forasmuch as it has been thought
convenient, that all, and any the Laws, Edicts, and Acts by which the
importation of Cloth, or any other Woollen Manufacture, of what kind soever,
dyed, or undyed, milled or unmill'd, into Flanders, or the other Provinces,
has been prohibited, be revoked and disannulled; and that if any Right,
Tribute, Imposition, Charge or Money, has been with permission, or otherwise
put upon Clothes, or any of the aforesaid Woollen Manufactures so imported
(except the ancient Tribute upon every piece of Cloth, and proportionably upon
every other Woollen Manufacture, agreeable to the ancient Treaties and
Agreements between the then Kings of England, and the Dukes of Burgundy, and
Governors of the Low Countries) the same should be altogether void, and no
such Tribute or Imposition from henceforth imposed, or put upon the said
Clothes or Manufactures for no cause or pretext whatsoever; And that all the
English Merchants, trading in any of the said Provinces, their Factors,
Servants, or Commissioners, should enjoy from henceforward, all the
Privileges, Exemptions, Immunities and Benefits, which formerly have been
agreed and given by the aforesaid ancient Treaties and Agreements, between the
then Kings of England and the Dukes of Burgundy, and Governors of the
Low Countries: It is therefore agreed, That Deputies shall be named by the King
of Great Britain, who meeting with the Marquess of Castelrodrigo, or the
Governor of those Provinces for the time being, or any other Ministers of the
King of Spain, sufficiently authorized in this behalf, shall friendly Treat and
Conclude hereupon; and also such further Privileges, Immunities, and necessary
Exemptions, suitable to the present state of Affairs, shall be granted for the
encouragement of the said Merchants and Adventurers, and for the security of
their Trade and Commerce, as shall be agreed upon in a special Treaty, that
shall be made between both the Kings, touching this Particular.

XXI. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms and Dominions of the Most
Serene Kings of Great Britain and Spain respectively, shall with all security
and liberty, sail to, and Traffic, in all the Kingdoms, Estates, or Countries,
which are or shall be in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality with the one or the other.

XXII. And they shall not be disturbed or disquieted in that liberty, by the
Ships or Subjects of the said Kings respectively, by reason of the hostilities
which are or may be hereafter between either of the said Kings, and the
aforesaid Kingdoms, Countries, and States, or any of them, which shall be in
Friendship or Neutrality with the other.

XXIII. And in case that within the said Ships respectively, be found by the
abovesaid means, any Merchandise here under mentioned, being of Countraband,
and prohibited, they shall be taken out and confiscated, before the Admiralty,
or other competent Judges; but for this reason, the Ship, and the other free
and allowed Commodities which shall be found therein, shall in no wise be
either seized or confiscated.

XXIV. Moreover, for better prevention of the differences which might arise
touching the meaning of forbidden Merchandise, and of Countraband; It is
declared and agreed, That under this name shall be comprehended all Firearms,
as Ordnance, Muskets, Mortar-pieces, Petards, Bumbs, Grenades, Fire-crancels,
Fireballs, Musket-rests, Bandeliers, Gunpowder, Match, Saltpeter, and
Bullets; likewise under the name of forbidden Merchandise, are understood all
other Arms, as Pikes, Swords, Pots, Helmets, Backs, and Breasts, Halberds,
Javelins, and such like Armor; Under this name is likewise forbidden the
transportation of Soldiers, Horses, their Harnasses, Cases of Pistols,
Holsters, Belts, and other Furniture, formed and composed for the use of War.

XXV. Likewise to prevent all manner of dispute and contention, It is agreed,
That under that name of forbidden Merchandise, and of Countraband, shall not be
comprehended Wheat, Rye, Barley, or other Grains, or Pulse, Salt, Wine, Oil,
and generally whatsoever belongs to the sustaining and nourishing of life, but
they shall remain free, as likewise all other Merchandises not comprehended in
the preceding Article; and the transportation of them shall be free and
permitted, although it be to the Towns and Places of Enemies, unless such Towns
and Places be besieged, blocked up, or surrounded.

XXVI. It is also agreed, That whatsoever shall be found laden by the Subjects
or Inhabitants of the Kingdoms and Dominions of either of the said Kings of
England and Spain aboard the Ships of the enemies of the other, though it be
not forbidden Merchandise, shall be confiscated, with all things else which
shall be found within the said Ships, without exception or reserve.

XXVII. That the Consul which hereafter shall reside in any of the Dominions of
the King of Spain, for the help and protection of the Subjects of the King of
Great Britain, shall be named by the King of Great Britain, and he so named,
shall have and exercise the same power and authority in the execution of his
charge, as any other Consul has formerly had in the Dominions of the said King
of Spain; and in like manner the Spanish Consul residing in England, shall
enjoy as much authority as the Consuls of any other Nation have hitherto
enjoyed in that Kingdom.

XXVIII. And that the Laws of Commerce that are obtained by Peace, may not
remain unfruitful, as would fall out if the Subjects of the King of Great
Britain, when they go to, come from, or remain in the Dominions or Lordships of
the King of Spain, by reason of their Commerce or other business, should be
molested for case of Conscience; therefore that the Commerce be secure, and
without danger, as well upon Land as at Sea, the said King of Spain shall
provide, that the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain shall not be
agrieved contrary to the Laws of Commerce, and that none of them shall be
molested or disturbed for their Conscience, so long as they give no public
scandal or offense; and the said King of Great Britain shall likewise provide,
for the same reasons, that the Subjects of the King of Spain shall not be
molested or disturbed for their Conscience against the Laws of Commerce, so
long as they give no public scandal or offense.

XXIX. That the People and Subjects respectively of one Kingdom, in the
Dominions, Territories, Regions or Colonies of the other, shall not be
compelled to sell their Merchandise for Brass-mettal-coin, or exchange them for
other Coin or things, against their will; or having sold them, to receive the
payment in other species, then what they bargained for, notwithstanding any Law
or other Custom contrary to this Article.

XXX. That the Merchants of both Nations, and their Factors, Servants and
Families, Commissioners, or others by them employed; as also Masters of Ships,
Pilots and Mariners, may remain freely and securely in the said Dominions,
Kingdoms and Territories of either of the said Kings, and also in their Ports
and Rivers; and the People and Subjects of the one King, may have, and with all
freedom and security enjoy, in all the Lands and Dominions whatsoever of the
other, their proper houses to live in, their Warehouses and Magazines for
their Goods and Merchandise, which they shall possess during the time for which
they shall have taken, hired, and agreed for them, without any impediment.

XXXI. The Inhabitants and Subjects of the said confederate Kings, in all the
Lands and Places under the obedience of the one or the other, shall use and
employ those Advocates, Proctors, Scriveners, Agents and Solicitors, whom they
think fit, the which shall be left to their choice, and consented to by the
Ordinary Judges, as often as there shall be occasion; and they shall not be
constrained to show their Books and Papers of Account to any person, if it be
not to give evidence for the avoiding Lawsuits and Controversies; neither
shall they be embarked, detained, or taken out of their hands, upon any
pretense whatsoever. And it shall be permitted to the People and Subjects of
either King, in the respective Places where they shall reside, to keep their
Books of Account, Traffic and Correspondence in what Language they please, in
English, Spanish, Dutch, or any other, the which shall not be molested, or
subject to any Inquisition. And whatsoever else has been granted by either
Party, concerning this particular, to any other Nation, shall be understood
likewise to be granted here.

XXXII. That in case the estate of any person or persons shall be sequestered or
seized on by any Court of Justice or Tribunal whatsoever, within the Kingdoms
and Dominions of either Party, and any Estate or Debt happen to lie in the
hands of the Delinquents belonging Bona fide to the People and Subjects of the
other, the said Estate or Debts shall not be confiscated by any of the said
Tribunals, but shall be restored to the true Owners in specie, if they yet
remain, and if not, the value of them (according to the Contract and Agreement
which was made between the Parties) shall be restored within three months
after the said sequestration.

XXXIII. That the Goods and Estates of the People and Subjects of the one King,
that shall die in the Countries, Lands and Dominions of the other, shall be
preserved for the lawful Heirs and Successors of the deceased; the right of any
third Person always reserved.

XXXIV. That the Goods and Estates of the Subjects of the King of Great
Britain, that shall die without making a Will in the Dominions of the King of
Spain, shall be put into Inventory with their Papers, Writings, and Books of
Account, by the Consul or other public Minister of the King of Great Britain,
and deposited in the hands of two or three Merchants that shall be named by the
said Consul, or public Minister, to be kept for the Proprietors and Creditors;
and neither the Cruzada, nor any other Judicatory whatsoever, shall intermeddle
therein; which also in the like case shall be observed in England toward the
Subjects of the King of Spain.

XXXV. That a decent and convenient Burial-place shall be granted and appointed
to bury the bodies of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, who shall die
within the Dominions of the King of Spain.

XXXVI. If it shall happen hereafter that any difference fall out (which God
forbid) between the King of Great Britain, and the King of Spain, whereby the
mutual Commerce and good Correspondence may be endangered, the respective
Subjects and People of each Party shall have notice thereof given them in time,
that is to say, the space of six months, to transport their Merchandise and
effects, without giving them in that time any Molestation or trouble, or
retaining or embarquing their Goods or Persons.

XXXVII. All Goods and Rights concealed or embarked, Movables, Immoveables,
Rents, Deeds, Debts, Credits, and the like, which have not with a formal notice
of the cause, and by a legal condemnation, according to the Ordinary Justice
been brought into the Royal Exchequer at the time of concluding this Treaty,
shall remain at the full and free disposal of the Proprietors, their Heirs, or
of those who shall have their Right with all the Fruits, Rents and Emoluments
thereof, and neither those who have concealed the said Goods, nor their Heirs
shall be molested for this cause by the Exchequers respectively; but the
Proprietors, their Heirs, or those who shall have their Right, shall have for
the said Goods and Rights their Action at Law, as for their own proper Goods
and Estate.

XXXVIII. It is agreed and concluded, That the People and Subjects of the King
of Great Britain, and of the King of Spain shall have and enjoy in the
respective Lands, Seas, Ports, Havens, Roads and Territories of the one or the
other, and in all places whatsoever, the same Privileges, Securities,
Liberties and immunities, whether they concern their Persons or Trade, with all
the beneficial clauses and circumstances which have been granted, or shall be
hereafter granted by either of the said Kings, to the Most Christian King, the
States General of the United Provinces, the Hans-Towns, or any other Kingdom or
State whatsoever, in as full, ample, and beneficial manner, as if the same were
particularly mentioned and inserted in this Treaty.

XXXIX. In case any difference or dispute shall happen on either side
concerning these Articles of Trade and Commerce, by either the Officers of the
Admiralty or other person whatsoever, in the one or the other Kingdom; The
complaint being presented by the party concerned, to their Majesty's, or to any
of their Council, their said Majesty's shall cause the damages forthwith to be
repaired, and all things, as they are above agreed, to be duly executed; and in
case, that in progress of time any frauds or inconveniences be discovered in
the Navigation and Commerce between both Kingdoms, against which sufficient
prevention has nor been made in these Articles, other provisions may be
hereafter mutually agreed on, as shall be judged convenient, the present Treaty
remaining still in full force and vigor.

XL. It is likewise accorded and concluded, That the Most Serene and Renowned
Kings of Great Britain and Spain shall sincerely and faithfully observe and
keep, and procure to be observed and kept, by their Subjects and Inhabitants
respectively, all and singular the Capitulations in this present Treaty agreed
and concluded: Neither shall they directly or indirectly infringe the same, or
consent that the same shall be infringed by any of their Subjects or
Inhabitants. And they shall ratify and confirm all and singular the
Conventions before accorded by Letters Patents reciprocally, in sufficient,
full and effectual form, and the same so formed and made, shall
intercheangeably deliver, or cause to be delivered faithfully and really,
within four months after the date of these presents; and they shall then,
as soon as conveniently may be, cause this present Treaty of Peace and Amity to
be published in all Places, and in the manner accustomed.

Dated at Madrid, the 23./23. day of May, in the Year of our Lord, 1667.
The Form of Letters which ought to be given by the Towns and Seaports, to the
Ships and Vessels setting sail from thence.
TO all unto whom these Presents shall come, We the Governors, Consuls, or
chief Magistrate or Commissioners of the Customs, of the City, Town or Province
of N. do testify and make known, That N. N. Master of the Ship N. has before
Us, under solemn Oath declared, that the Ship N. of (...) Tun (more or less) of
which he is at present Master, does belong to the Inhabitants of N. in the
Dominions of the most Serene King of Great Britain. And We, desiring that the
said Master may he assisted in his Voyage and Business, do entreat all persons
in general and particular, who shall meet him, and those of all Places where
the said Master shall come with the said Ship and her Merchandise, that they
would admit him favorably, treat him kindly, and receive the said Ship into
their Ports, Bays, Havens, Rivers and Dominions, permitting her quietly to
sail, pass, frequent and negotiate there, or in any other places, as shall seem
good to the said Master, paying still the Toll and Customs which of right
shall be due. Which we will acknowledge gratefully upon the like occasions. In
witness whereof, we have signed these Presents, and sealed them with the Seal
of our Town*

WILL. GODOLPHIN. Don PEDRO FERNANDEZ del Campo y Angulo.

THE COPY OF A PATENT, Containing Several Gracious Privileges lately Granted
by the High and Mighty PHILIP THE FOURTH, KING of SPAIN, etc.

Which are confirmed by the foregoing Treaty, and whereof mention is made in
the ninth Article of the said Treaty.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, M.DC.LXVII.

The Copy of a Patent, containing several Gracious Privileges lately granted
by the High and Mighty Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, etc.
DON PHILIP, By the Grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, the two
Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarre, Granado, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia,
Majorca, Sivilla, Sardinia, Cordona, Corsega, Muriea, Jaen, the Algarves,
Algesira, Gibraltar, the Islands of the Canaries, the East and West Indies,
Islands, and firm Land of the Ocean Sea, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy,
Brabant and Milan, Earl of Haspurg, Flanders, Tirol, and Barcelona, Lord of
Biscay and Molina, etc.

WHereas on the behalf of you Richard Anthony, Consul of the English Nation,
for your self, and in the Name of the Subjects of the King of Great Britain, it
has been showed unto me, That by virtue of the Peace which is concluded in
this and that Realm, you do reside and trade in Andaluzia, and specially in the
Cities of Sivill, St. Lucar, Cadiz, and Malaga, desiring me to be pleased to
confirm unto you the Privileges, Exemptions and Faculties which do belong unto
you as well by the Articles of the said Peace, as by the Confirmations thereof,
and other Favors and Graces which my Lord and Father of glorious memory did
grant unto you, and all such others which have been given you by the Crowns of
my Realms of Castile and Portugal, and to command that they may be in, and for
all things observed and accomplished unto you without any limitation, and for
further assurance to grant them anew unto you, with the qualities, amplitudes
and declarations which shall be most convenient for you; and to set Penalties
upon such as shall contradict, and not observe them unto you; and to the end it
may be known what they are, to grant them Copies thereof, or of that which my
favor shall be; And I taking the Premises into consideration; and because for
the occasions which I have for my Wars, you have offered to serve me with 2500,
Ducats of Silver, to be paid one Thousand ready money, and the remaining one
Thousand five Hundred in the Month of April of this Year; whereof the
Licentiate Francis Moreno, which in reversion of Don Anthony de Campo, Redondo
y Rio, Knight of the Order of Santiago, one of my Council and Chamber, and of
the Treasury in your name, and by virtue of your power did acknowledge a
Writing of Obligation in form before John Cortez de la Cruz, my Notary, I do
hold it for good; And by these Presents of my own motion, and certain
knowledge, and Royal and absolute Power, which I in this behalf will make use
of, and do use as an absolute King and Lord, not acknowledging any Superior in
matters Temporal, do confirm and approve the Privileges, Exemptions, and
Faculties which do belong unto you as well by the Articles of the said Peace,
as by the Confirmation thereof; and also the other favors and graces which my
Lord and Father did grant unto you, and others whatsoever, which have been
given by my Crowns of Castile and Portugal unto the said Subjects, in and for
all things as therein, and every thing and part thereof is specified,
contained, and declared, to the end they may be firm, stable, and of value, and
be observed, kept and accomplished unto you: For my deliberate intent and Will
is, that all those of the said Nation shall enjoy thereof without any
limitation, in such manner, that, during the time the said Englishmen shall
reside in Andaluzia, neither you nor they may be charged with any Office or
public Charge, nor Council, Tutorship, Curatorship, Receivers or Treasurers,
although they be of Customers and Millions, or other Services which concern my
Royal Treasury; and much less they may demand of you any Loans or donations, or
take from you any Rights, or your Rents, Horses, or Slaves: And to do you the
more favor or grace according to that which is agreed by the said Peace, I do
will and promise that you shall and may deal and trade freely, and sell your
Merchandise and Fruits, and buy those of my Realms, and carry them forth,
observing that which is ordained and commanded by the Laws and Statutes which
make mention thereof, and paying to my Royal Treasury the Duties or Customs
which ought to be paid, prohibiting, as I do prohibit and command, not to take
from you by force any Merchandises, Wheat, or Barley, although it be for the
making ready or furnishing my Armies, Fleets, or Gallions, nor for Purveyors or
Stewards; and the Privileges are to be concerning the Wheat and Barley
according to the Tun; and concerning the other things and Merchandises, as you
shall conclude and agree: but they may not take them out of your possession
until they have paid for them, unless for the same there be leave given, that
they do not molest and trouble you. And forasmuch as many of you do treat to
bring into the Ports of Andalusia, the City of Sivil, and other places, great
quantity of Newfoundland fish, and other sorts of dry and salted Fish, because
they are Victuals which are very necessary; and that you have been and are put
to great Charges, and are much troubled, I do will and command to be kept the
Ordinance of the City of Sivil, whereby it is ordained, that those which come
in with dry or salted Fish, there shall not be any Price or Rate set upon them,
but they shall be permitted to sell at such a Price as they shall think good;
and it shall not be necessary to manifest them any more then unto my Officers
which receive my Royal Rents: and if the Ships wherein the said Fish is brought
be great Ships, that they cannot go up the River, and that the same be put into
Barques or Lighters, the Judge of the Admiralty nor any other person may not
put any Waiters or Keepers into the Barques or Lighters at the charge of the
Owners of them.

And I do also command, That if the said Fish shall appear to be rotten, and
that it cannot be spent, that it be burnt, or thrown into the Sea; and that for
this cause there shall not be any Cause or Action commenced against the Owners
thererof, or persons which shall sell it, nor they shall not be imprisoned, nor
informed against: And forasmuch as the Administers of the Customs, and others
of diverse duties which are received for the Fruits and Merchandises, do use
when any body does inform, to have the person imprisoned which shows himself
to be party, whereby happens to men of Trade great discredit, charges, and
vexations; My Will is, and I do command, that in the said Information there
shall be only proceeded against the Merchandises, and not against the persons;
but they shall be permitted (as I do permit them) to make, and they shall make
their defenses in the said Vexation. And forasmuch also, as according to an
Article of the said Peace, which makes mention of Matters in Religion,
notwithstanding that in some Suits they should declare whether they be Roman
Catholics or not, excusing themselves to give faith to others which they take
as parties or as witnesses;

I do also command, That concerning this matter there be not done, nor there
shall not be done, any thing with those which are born in the said Realm, but
only that the said Condition be kept and accomplished, and that no such
questions be put unto them giving unto the Oaths which they shall take in
Judgment Court, and without, the same faith and credit which should be given
in case they were Spaniards; and herein you shall not receive any trouble or
molestation, nor there shall not be any grievance done unto you: And whereas
for the Justification of some causes, the Judges and Justices do pretend that
the Merchants of the said Nation should exhibit Books of their contractions or
dealings; I do will and command, that the Books of the Merchants of the said
Nation shall not be taken out of their hands for any cause whatsoever, but they
shall keep and show them in their houses, to take out the parcel which shall be
appointed, and others shall not be demanded of them, nor there shall not be any
other Papers taken from them, upon penalty that he which shall do here against,
shall be punished according to Law.

And forasmuch as the Merchants do dispatch the Merchandise from the
Custom-house of the said City of Sivil of all Duties, and because there are
many which do make up a sheet, which is Subscribed and Signed by all the
Officers, and remains in the hand of the Alcayde of the Custom-house; for
that by virtue thereof, the Merchandises are permitted to go forth, which are
in Fardels, Packs, Trunks and Cases; and afterward when they have taken them
forth, and put them into their Houses and Warehouses, the chief Keeper of the
Custom-house, and the Officers of the half per Cent. do visit the House and
Goods, troubling and molesting them, demanding of them the dispatches, it
seeming unto them, that they may detain them because they left the dispatch in
the hands of the said Alcayde of the Custom-house; I do prohibit and command,
that the houses of the said Merchants shall not be visited, nor the dispatches
shall not nor may not be demanded of them, in regard, they have them not in
their hands; and this is to be understood, and is understood of houses which
are within the Walls of the said City; and to the end it may be known to you,
which are of the English Nation, there is to be delivered unto you Copies of
the said Privileges and Exemptions which do concern you and which were granted
unto you, as well by the Articles of Peace, as by any other manner. And for
execution and accomplishment of all the Premises, I do command those of my
Council, and those of my Councils, Assemblies and Tribunals of my Court, and
the Presidents and Judges of my Audiences, Alcaydes, and Officers of my House
and Court, and Chanceries, and the Regent and Judge of the Court of Degrees of
the City of Sivil, and chief Alcaldes of the Precincts thereof, and all the
Corrigidors, Assistants, and Governors, chief Justices, and Ordinaries, as
well in the said Cities of Sivil, Cadiz, Malaga, and St. Lucar de Barameda, as
of all other Cities, Towns and Places of these my Realms and Dominions, and all
other Judges and Justices whatsoever, of what quality or condition soever they
may be, whom principally or incidentally may concern in any manner the
accomplishment or performance of that which is contained in this Patent, that
presently so soon as they shall be by virtue thereof required, or the Copy
thereof Signed by a Notary public, that there be thereunto given as much
faith, as unto the Original; and that every one in the place where it shall
concern him do observe, and accomplish, and cause the same to be observed,
accomplished, and executed, in and for all things as therein is contained, and
they shall not in all nor in part put upon you any impediments, nor any other
difficulties or doubts, nor do any thing against the tenor and form thereof,
nor consent or give way that it be interpreted, limited or suspended in all or
in part, or that to the contrary be given any Sedidas, provisions, or other
dispatches: but for observation thereof, in the place which shall concern every
one, they shall give order, and ordain to deliver unto you those which shall be
necessary: And for more firmness and validity of the favor and grace which by
this my Patent I do grant you, and that at all times this favor may be certain
and sure unto you, you are to keep or have a Judge Conservator in Andalusia,
especially in the said Cities of Sivil, Malaga, Cadiz, and St. Lucar de
Barameda, unto whom I am to give sufficient Commission for keeping and
accomplishing the said Privileges, Liberties and Exemptions, who shall
constrain and compel all and whatsoever persons, of what sort or quality they
may be that shall concern the said Nation, as well those which shall be
Defendants accused, as those which shall be Plaintiffs, although the persons
which shall accuse them, and which shall be accused by them, have private
Judges, as well by consent as agreement which they may have made by
pre-eminence or privilege which they hold, to the end the said Judge
Conservator may only take knowledge privately of the said Courts, and not any
other Judge or Tribunal, although it be by way of excess or notorious Justice,
or in any other matter or form, which Judge Conservator is now Doctor Don
Francisco de Vergara, Judge of my Court de les Grados, of the City of Sevill,
the time that he shall assist therein, and in his absence the Licentiate Don
Francisco de Modrano, Judge of the same Court, who for the suits which shall be
commenced in the said Cities of Cadiz, Malaga, and St. Lucar, is to Subdelegate
his Conservatorship, in the person which by the said Nation shall be propounded
or named, that he may effect the same to the conclusion, and they shall be
referred unto him to be determined: and of that which he shall determine, the
Appeal is to be made to my Council, and not to any other Court.

And forasmuch as my will is, that every one in his time shall have primative
Commission, and Jurisdiction to protect and defend you concerning all the
contents of this my Patent, that all the same may be kept and accomplished in
the form which I do offer the same unto you, I have found good to charge, as by
these presents I do charge them with the protection and defense hereof: and I
do command them to see or peruse this my Patent, and the qualities, conditions,
preheminencies, and amplifications therein contained, and to cause all the same
to be kept, accomplished and executed, in such form and manner, and according
as therein is contained and declared, without consenting or giving way, that in
all, or in part there be made unto you any doubt or difficulty, and before the
said Don Francisco de Vergara, or in his absence before the said Francis de
Medrano, (and not before any other Judge) privately in the first instance, are
to pass, and be followed all the causes and suits, which concerning the
premises, or any thing or part thereof shall be moved and caused, and the
execution and punishment of those which shall not be obedient; For my will is,
that the knowledge and determination of all the contents in this my Patent, is
in all things privately to concern, and shall concern them; proceeding in all
things against those which shall be culpable, and executing for the same the
penalties which are mentioned by Law, reserving as I do reserve, the
appellations which shall be put in upon their acts and sentences, to my
Council, and not any other Court, without that any other of my Councils,
Tribunals, Courts, Chanceries, or any other Judges or Justices of my Realms or
Dominions, of whatsoever quality they be, may meddle, or shall meddle
therewith, or in the use or exercise of the Jurisdiction private in the said
first instance, which by this my Patent I do grant unto them, by way of excess,
appellation, or any other recourse or manner; the which and every of them, I do
inhibit and hold for inhibited the knowledge thereof, and do declare them for
incompetent Judges thereof: for which and every thing, and part thereof, I do
give them the most sufficient Power, and most ample Commission, which according
to Law is required and necessary, with the incidences and dependencies,
annexities; and after them the said English Nation of the said City of Sivil,
may name in the said Commission one of the Judges of the said Audience, which
the said Nation shall choose: And I do command the President, and those of my
Council of the Chamber, that presenting before them their nomination (the case
happening) to make void the said Commission, by promotion or vacation of the
said Don Francisco de Vergara, and Don Francis de Medrano, or to dispatch it in
any other manner, by Ordinary to him that shall be therein nominated, in the
form according, and as by this my Patent is declared. And that it maybe the
better accomplished, I do from this time give them power, and authority, that
they may Subdelegate, and they shall Subdelegate this Commission, for the
business and suits which shall be offered in the said Cities of Cadiz, Malaga,
St. Lucar de Barameda, in the person which by you shall be propounded unto
them, that they may substantiate them for a conclusion, and remit the Suits and
Causes unto them to be determined, in such manner as they shall find good and
convenient, for the security of that which is contained in this my Patent. And
I do charge the most excellent Prince, Don Balthazar Charles, my most dear and
most beloved Son, and do command the Infants, Prelates, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Richmen, Commanders, and Under-Commanders, Governors of Castles, strong
Houses, and Plains, and those of my Council, Presidents and Judges of my
Courts, Alcaydes, and Officers of my House, Court and Chanceries, and all the
Corigidors, Assistants, Governors, Alcaldes, Mayors, and Ordinaries, and
whatsoever Judges and Justices of these my Realms and Dominions, to observe and
accomplish, and to cause to be observed and accomplished, this my Patent, and
the favor or grace which thereby I do grant you, and against the tenor and
form thereof, not to do or pass, now, nor at any time, in any manner
perpetually for evermore. Nor to consent or give way to be limited or suspended
unto you, all or part thereof, not withstanding of whatsoever Laws or Statutes
of these my Realms and Dominions, Ordinances, Style, Use, or Custom of the said
Cities of Sivill, Cadiz, Malaga, or St. Lucar, or any other thing which is or
may be to the contrary; the which for this time, for so much as concerns this
matter, holding the same here for inserted and incorporated, as it were word
for word written, I do dispense, abrogate, derogate, cancel, annihilate, and
make void and of none effect, remaining in full force and effect for all other
things henceforward. And for this my Patent Jeronimo de Canencia, Auditor of
Accounts, in my chief Office of Accounts, and my Secretary of the Mediaenate
shall take a Copy, at whose Charge is the account and reason of this right. And
I do declare, that for this favor you have paid the duty of the Mediaenate,
which amounts to thirty and five thousand one hundred fifty and five
Maravediz in Silver: which sum you are to pay from fifteen to fifteen years
perpetually, and in case they do accomplish or end, you may not make use of
this favor, until such time as it shall first appear that you have satisfied
this duty. And you are also to pay the Judge Conservator, which shall be named,
his Salary, or to help to bear his charges, which he shall enjoy for his labor
or pains in the said business, before you shall enjoy thereof, which is to
appear by Certificate of the Office of this Duty. Given in Saragosa, the
nineteenth day of March, Anno 1645.

I The King, I Anthony Carnero, Secretary of the King our Lord, did cause it to
be written, by his Commandment. Registered, Michael de Lariaga, Lieutenant of
the Lord High Chancellor. Michael de Lariaga. The Copy was taken, Jeronimo de
Canencia; Don John Chumazero y Carillo, Doctor. Don Anthony de Campo Redondo y
Rio, Licenciate.

JOSEPH GONSALES.


THis Copy does agree with that out of which it was taken, which for this
effect was exhibited unto me by William Bland, dwelling in the City of Sivill,
who took it away again with him the 11. of April, Anno 1645.

Joseph de Pineda, Notary Public of the City of Sivill for the King.



FINIS.

