THE CASE OF Challoner Chute Esquire, Upon his Appeal from two Decrees of the
Court of Chancery, obtained against his Father and himself, at the Suit of the
Right Honorable Dorothy Lady Dacre and others.
Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament Assembled.
CHalloner Chute, the Appealants late Grandfather, upon his Marriage with the
said Lady Dacre, did by Articles in October 1650. Covenant with Sir Dudley
North her Brother, and Mr. Richard Barret her Son, as her Trustees, to
purchase, and settle, on the said Lady Dacre, within three Years then next, a
Jointure of 500 l. per Annum Value: Or else, that in default of Settling such
Jointure, 5000 l. part of a Debt of 7800 l. owing by the Late Earl of Arundel,
should be received by the said Lady Dacre or her Trustees, for the Benefit of
her, her Executors and Administrators.

After the Marriage, the Appealants said Grandfather purchased a House and
Lands of 500 l. per Annum at Rohampton, with an intention to settle the same on
the said Lady, pursuant to the said Agreement, and so he declared; but at her
Importunity, he was prevailed upon to sell the same to the Countess Dowager of
Devonshire, the said Lady Dacre having a good Present from the said Countess
for her Consent: And thereupon she the Lady Dacre, chose to have Sutton-Court,
and Lands at Chiswick in the County of Middlesex (which were of 600 l. per
Annum Value, to be Settled on her and her Trustees for her Jointure, (part
whereof was of an undoubted Title, and other thereof was a Term for Years, held
of the Dean of St. Paul's London, and the Inheritance thereof purchased under
the Title of the then Usurping State,) whereupon the 7800 l. was received and
disposed of by the Appellant's Grandfather in his Life time, without any
Contradiction of the said Lady and her Trustees, and the said Purchase and
Settlement of the said Chiswick-Joynture, was made at the Request of the said
Lady, and accepted by her, and her said Trustees, both before and after the
Death of the Appellants said Grandfather, (which happened in 1659) as a full
Satisfaction and Performance of the said Marriage-Articles: And the said Lady
entered and enjoyed her said Jointure for about two years after her said
Husband's Death.

That the said Lady, having a Legacy in Plate and Goods, of about 900 l. Value,
given her by her said Husband, and being evicted of Sutton Court by the Deans
Restitution, she preferred her Bill in Chancery in her own, and her Trustees
Names, against the Appellants Late Father, as Heir and Executor of her said
Husband, to have the said 5000 l. as if no Settlement had been made in
pursuance of the said Marriage-Agreement, and likewise for the said Legacy of
Goods. And in 1664. obtained a Decree against the Appellants Father, for the
Sum of 5000 l. and Interest, out of the Assetts Real and Personal of his
Father, and also a Decree for her said Legacy of Plate and Goods; although it
appeared, that there wanted Assetts to pay Debts and Legacies: And by that
Decree, the Reversion of an Estate called the Vine in Hampshire, expectant upon
the Appealants Father and Mothers Lives, is subjected as Assetts in Law by
Descent, when it should fall, to pay the said Ladies pretented Demand of 5000
l. and Interest.

Soon after the said Decree, the Appealants Father and Mother Dying, and the
Reversion thereby falling into Possession, the said Lady obtained a further
Decree by Consent against the Appealant. during his Minority, for the
Possession of the said Estate, called the Vine, and for cutting down Wood and
Timber, and allowing 40 l. per Annum a piece out of the Appealants Estate, to
three of her younger Grandchildren, which by Law she was obliged to maintain;
whereby, and by causing her Servant Mr. Owen, to take Administration of the
Appealants Fathers Estate; she seized all the Appealants Estate both Real and
Personal.

Which Proceedings and Decrees are Erroneous and Unjust.

1. For that the Decree orders 5000 l. and Interest to be paid in respect of
Marriage-Articles, that were fully performed, even in the very Letter of them,
and to the good liking, and full Satisfaction of the Parties; and when there
was no Breach of Covenant, or any Action maintainable upon the said Articles.

2. If there had been a Breach of Covenant, the Plaintiffs had no Equity, but
might have pursued their Action at Law; and it is Error for Equity to make a
Decree, where there is proper Remedy at Law, especially where Damages are to be
Assessed by a Jury.

3. For that no Interest or Damages ought to have been given, in regard the
5000 l. was in Nature of a Penalty, and only is ten Years Purchase for an old
Life, Or if any Interest or Damages ought to be given. Yet,

4. For that Interest or Damages are generally given: whereas they should (if
any) have been given only to the time of the Decree, as they are always given
to the time of the Recovery at Law; and they ought not to be given generally,
or to the time of Payment; and Equity ought not to have given Damages, or
further Relief than the Law would have done.

5. For that the Decree has not only given Interest in a Case where none could
be given by law, but has given Interest on a great part of that Interest
directly: If it stand, the Lady will have as good as Interest upon Interest
throughout.

6. For that the Decree allows the Legacy of Plate and Goods valued by the
Decree, at 900 l. when it appears there were no Assetts to pay Debts.

7. For that the Reversion that is made Assetts did not come by Descent, but by
Devise to the then Defendant, and therefore ought not to have been made liabie
to the pretended Demand of the Lady.

8. For that the Decree against the Petitioner, during his Minority, gives the
Lady Dacre, and her Servant Mr. Owen, Liberty to Fell and Cut the Appealants
Wood and Timber, which was beyond the Power of the Court to do.

9. For that 120. l. per Annum, is Decreed out of the Appealants Estate, for
the maintenance of the Ladies Grandchildren, and whom She is obliged by Law to
maintain.

For which Reasons, the Appealant humbly prays the Decrees may be Reversed and
set Aside.


