THE CHARTER OF THE BAHAMA Islands.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To All to whom these presents shall
come greeting.

KNOW YE That We for diverse good Causes and Considerations, us, hereunto
especially moving, of our especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion:
HAVE Given and Granted, and by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and
Successors, DO Give and Grant unto our Right trusty and Right entirely Beloved
Cosen Christopher Duke of Albemarle; our Right trusty and Right Well-beloved
Cosen and Counselor William Earl of Craven; our Right trust and Well-beloved
Councillors, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Chancellor and
Under-Treasurer of our Exchequer; Sir George Carterett Knight, and Baronet,
Vice-Chamberlain of our Household; and our Trusty and Well-beloved Sir Peter
Colleton Baronet, their Heirs and Assigns. All those Islands called Bahama, The
Bounds
Clentheria, Vianis, Providence, Inagua, and all other those Islands lying in
the Degrees of Twenty and two, to Twenty and seven North Latitude, commonly
known by the Name of the Bahama Islands, or the Islands of the Lucayes.

Together, with all and singular Ports, Harbors, Bays, Rivers, and Islets
belonging unto the Islands aforesaid; with the Fishing of all Sorts of Fish;
Whales, Sturgeons, and all other Royal Fishes in the Sea, Bays, Islets, and
Rivers within the Premises; and the Fish therein taken: Together with the
Royalty of the Sea upon the Coast within the Limits aforesaid.

And moreover, All Vains, Mines, and Quarries, as well discovered as not
discovered, of Gold, Silver, Gems, precious Stones, and all other whatsoever,
be it of Stones, Metals, or any other thing whatsoever found, or to be found
within the Islands and Limits aforesaid.

And furthermore, The Patronage and Avowsons of all the Churches and Chapels
(which as Christian Religion shall increase) within the Islands, Isles, Islets,
and Limits aforesaid shall happen hereafter to be Erected; together with
License and Power to Build and Found Churches, Chapels, and Oratories in
convenient and fit Places within the said Bounds and Limits, and to cause them
to be Dedicated and Consecrated according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of our
Kingdom of England: Together with all and singular the like, and as ample
Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Prerogatives, Royalties Liberties,
Immunities, and Franchises of what kind soever with in the Islands, Isles,
Islets, and Limits aforesaid.

To Have, Jurisdict. of a Count Palatine.
Use, Exercise and Enjoy; the same as amply fully, and in as ample manner as
any Bishop of Durham in our Kingdom of England, ever heretofore Held, Used, or
Enjoyed; or of Right ought or could Have, Use, or Enjoy.

And them, The said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John
Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter
Colleton their Heirs and Assigns.

We do by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, Make, Create, and
Constitute the true and absolute Lords and Proprietors of the said Islands; and
of all other, the Premises, saving always the Faith, Allegiance, and Sovereign
Dominion due to us, our Heirs and Successors, for the same.

To Have, and to Hold, Possess, and Enjoy the said Islands, Isles, Islets, and
all and singular other the Premises, unto them the said Christopher Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns for ever.

To be Holden of us, our Heirs, and Successors, Tenure.
as of our Manor of East-Greenwick in our County of Kent, in free and common
Soccage, and not in Capite, or by Knights-service: Yielding and paying yearly
to us, our Heirs and Successors for the same, the Fourth part of all Gold and
Silver Oar, which within the Limits hereby granted, shall from time to time
happen to be found. And also Yiedling and paying to us, our Heirs and
Successors as often as we or they shall happen to come or enter in to the said
Islands, one Pound of fine Silver.

And forasmuch as we have Made and Ordained the aforesaid Christopher Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, the True
Lords and Proprietors of the Islands aforesaid: Know ye therefore moreover that
we reposing especial Trust and Confidence in their Fidelity, Wisdom, Justice,
and Provident Circumspection for us, our Heirs and Successors. Do Grant full
and absolute Power by Virtue of these Presents, to them the said Christopher
Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord
Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton, and their Heirs and
Assigns, for the good and happy Government of the said Islands, full Power and
Authority to Erect, Constitute, and make several Counties, Baronies, and
Colonies, of, and within the aforesaid Islands, Lands, and Hereditaments, in,
and by these Presents granted, or mentioned to be granted as aforesaid, with
several and distinct Jurisdictions, Power, Liberties and Privileges: And also
to Make, Ordain, and Enact, and under their Seals to publish any Laws and
Constitutions whatsoever, either appertaining to the Public Estate of the said
Islands, or of any distinct or particular County, Barony, or Colony, of or
within the same, or to the private Utility of particular Persons, according to
their best Discretion, by and with the Advice, Assent and Approbation of the
Freemen of the said Islands, or of the Freemen of the County, Barony, or
Colony for which such Laws or Constitution shall be made, or of the greater
part of them, or of their Delegates or Deputies, whom for Enacting of the said
Laws, When, and as often as need shall require. We Will, that the said
Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton, and their
Heirs and Assigns, shall from time, to time, Assembled in such Manner and Form
as to them shall seem best; and the same Law duly to Execute upon the People
within the said Islands, County, Barony, or Colony, and the Limits thereof for
the time being, or which shall be Constituted under the Power or Government of
them, or any of them; either sailing toward the said Islands, or returning
from thence toward England, or any other of ours or Foreign Dominions, by
Imposition of Penalty, Imprisonment, or any other Punishment. Yea, if it shall
be needful, and the quality of the Offense require it, by taking away Member
and Life, either by them the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl
of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir Georege Carterett, and
Sir Peter Colleton, and their Heirs, or by them or their Deputies, Lieutenants,
Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Officers and Ministers to be Ordained or
Appointed according to the Tenor and true intention of these Presents. And
likewise to Erect and make any Court or Courts whatsoever of Judicature or
otherwise, as shall be requisite; and to Appoint and Establish any Judges, or
Justices, Magistrates, or Officers whatsoever, as well within the said Islands
as at Sea, in such Manner and Form as unto the said Christopher Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton, or their Heirs shall seem most
convenient: Also to Remit, Release, Pardon and Abolish, either before Judgment
or after, all Crimes and Offenses whatsoever against the said Laws, and to do
all and every other thing and things which unto the complete Establishment of
Justice unto Courts, Sessions, and Forms of Judicature and Manners of
proceedings therein do belong, although in these Presents express Mention is
not made thereof, and by Judges by him or them delegated to Award, Process,
hold Pleas, and determine in all the said Courts and Places of Judicature, all
Actions, Suits, and Causes whatsoever, as well Criminal as Civil, Real, Mixed,
Personal, or of any other kind or nature whatsoever; which Laws so as aforesaid
to be Published. Our will and pleasure is, and we do enjoin, require and
command, shall be absolute, Firm, and Available in Law; and that all the Liege
People of us, our Heirs and Successors within the said Islands; do observe and
keep the same inviolably in those Parts so far as they concern them, under the
Pains and Penalties therein expressed, or to be expressed: Provided
nevertheless that the said Laws be consonant to Reason, and as near as may be
conveniently agreeable to the Laws and Customs of this our Kingdom of England.

And because such Assemblies of Freeholders cannot be so suddenly called as
there may be occasion to require the same: We do therefore by these Presents,
Give and Grant unto the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir
Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns by themselves or their Magistrates in
that behalf lawfully Authorized, full Power and Authority from time to time, to
make and ordain fit and wholesome Orders and Ordinances within the aforesaid
Islands, or any County, Barony or Province, of, or within the same, to be kept
and observed as well for the keeping of the Peace, as for the better Government
of the People there abiding, and to publish the same to All to whom it may
concern, which Ordinance we do by these Presents strictly Charge and Command to
be inviolably observed within the said Islands under the Penalties therein
expressed, so as such Ordinances be reasonable and not repugnant or contrary,
but as near as may be agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of this our Kingdom of
England, and so as the same Ordinances do not extend to the binding, charging
or taking away of the Rights or Interest of any Person or Persons, in their
Freehold, Goods, or Chattels, whatsoever.

And to the end, the said Islands may be the more happily increased by the
multitude of People resorting thither, and may likewise be the more strongly
defended from the Incursions of Salvages and other Enemies, Pirates and
Robbers: Therefore, we for us, our Heirs, and Successors, do Give and Grant by
these Presents, Power, License, and Liberty unto all the liege People of us,
our Heirs, and Succenors, in our Kingdom of England or elsewhere within any
other our Dominions, Islands, Colonies, or Plantations, (excepting those who
shall be especially forbidden) to transport themselves and Families into the
said Island with convenient Shipping and, fitting Provisions, and there to
settle themselves, Dwell, and Inhabit any Law, Act, Statute, Ordinance, or
other Thing to the contrary in any wife notwithstanding.

And we will also, and of our more especial Grace, for us, our Heirs, and
Successors, do strictly Enjoin, Ordain, Constitute and Command, that the said
Islands, shall be of our Allegiance, and that all and singular the Subjects and
Liege People of us, our Heirs and Successors, transported, or to be transported
into the said Islands, and the Children of them, and such as shall descend from
them, there born, or hereafter to be born, be, and shall be Denizons and Leiges
of us, our Heirs, and Successors, of this our Kingdom of England, and be in all
things Held, Treated, and Reputed as the liege faithful People of us, our Heirs
and Successors, born within this our said Kingdom, or any other of our
Dominions, and may inherit, or otherwise purchase and receive take, have, hold,
buy and possess any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments within the said Places,
and them may Occupy, and Enjoy, Give, Sell Alien, and Bequeath: As likewise,
all Liberties, Franchises, and Privileges, of this our Kingdom of England and
of other our Dominions aforesaid; may freely and quietly have, Possess, and
Enjoy, as our liege People, born within the same, without the molestation,
let, vexation, trouble or grievance, of us, our Heirs and Successors, any
Statute, Act, Ordinance, or Provisions to the contrary notwithstanding.

And farthermore, that our Subjects of this our said Kingdom of England, and
other our Dominions, may be the rather encouraged to undertake this Expedition,
with ready and cheerful mind; Know Ye, That we of our especial Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, do Give and Grant, by virtue of these Presents, as
well as to the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John
Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter
Colleton, and their Heirs, as unto all others as shall from time to time repair
unto the said Islands, with a purpose to inhabit there, or to trade with the
Natives thereof, free Liberty and License to Lade and Freight in any Ports
whatsoever, of us, our Heirs and Successors, License to transport Goods and
Merchandise.
and into the said Islands, by them then Servantsand Assigns, to transport, all
and singular their Goods, Wares, and Merchandises; as likewise all sorts of
Grain whatsoever, and any other Thing whatsoever, necessary for their Food and
Clothing (not prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of our Kingdoms and
Dominions to be carried out of the same without any let, or molestation of us,
our Heirs and Successors, or of any other our Officers and Ministers
whatsoever) saving also, to us, our Heirs and Successors, the Customs, and
other Duties and Payments due for the said Wares and Merchandises, according to
the several Rates of the Places from whence the same shall be Transported.

We will also, and by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, do
give, and grant License by this our Charter, unto the said Christopher Duke of
Albermarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, and to
all the Inhabitants and Dwellers in the Islands aforesaid, both present and to
come, full Power, and absolute Authority to import or unlade by themselves, or
their Servants, Factors, or Assigns, all Merchandises and Goods whatsoever that
shall arise of the Fruits and Commodities of the said Islands, either by Land,
or Sea, into any the Ports of us, our Heirs and Successors, in our Kingdom of
England, Scotland and Ireland, or otherwise to dispose of the said Goods in the
said Ports; and if need be, within one Year next after the unlading to lade the
said Merchandises and Goods again into the same, or other Ships, and to Export
the same into any other Countries, either of our Dominions or Foreign, (being
in Amity with us, our Heirs and Successors) so as they pay such Customs,
Subsidies, and other Duties for the same, to us, our Heirs and Successors, as
the rest of the Subjects of this our Kingdom for the time being shall be bound
to pay, beyond which, we will not that the Inhabitants of the said Islands
shall be any way Charged: Provided nevertheless, and our Will and Pleasure is,
and we have further for the considerations aforesaid, of our especial Grace,
Certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, given and Granted, and by these Presents,
for us, our Heirs and Successors. Do Give and Grant unto the said Christopher
Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord
Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns,
full and free License, Liberty, Power and Authority at any time or times, from
and after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, next ensuing, the date hereof
to Export and carry out of any of our Dominions into the said Islands Custom
free, all Sorts of Tools which shall be useful and necessary for the Planters
there in the Accommodation and Improvement of the Premises, any thing before in
these Presents contained, or any Law, Act, Statute, Prohibition, or other
Matter or Thing heretofore Had, Made, Enacted, or Provided; or hereafter to be
Had, Made, Enacted, or Provided, or the contrary in any wise Notwithstanding.

And Furthermore, of our more ample and especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and
mere Motion, we do for us, our Heirs and Successors, Grant unto the said
Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs
and Assigns, full and absolute Power and Authority to Make, Erect, and
Constitute within the said Islands, and the Isles and Islets aforesaid, such
and so many Sea Ports, Harbors, Creeks, and other Places for discharge and
unlading of Goods and Merchandises out of Ships, Boats, and other Vessels; and
for lading them in such and so many Places, and with such Jurisdictions,
Privileges, and Franchises unto the said Ports belonging as to them shall seem
most expedient: And that all and singular the Ships, Boats, and other Vessels,
which shall come for Merchandises and Trade into the said Islands, or shall
depart out of the same, shall be laden and unladen at such Ports only as shall
be Erected and Constituted by the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William
Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
and Sir Peter Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, and not elsewhere any Use,
Custom, or any thing to the contrary in any wise Notwithstanding.

And we do furthermore Will, Appoint and Ordain, and by these Presents for us,
our Heirs and Successors, do Grant unto the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle,
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Authony Lord Ashley, Sir George
Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns. That they the said
Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs
and Assigns, may from time to time for ever, Power to Assess Customs.
have and enjoy the Customs and Subsidies in the Ports. Harbors, Creeks, and
other places within the aforesaid Islands, payable for Goods, Merchandises, and
Wares there laded, or to be laded, or unladed, the said Customs to be
reasonably Assessed upon any occasion by themselves, and by and with the
consent of the Free People there, or the greater part of them as aforesaid. To
whom we give Power by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, upon
just Cause and in a due proportion to Assess and Impose the same.

And further, of our especial Grace, certain Knowledge, Power to Create Tenures.
and mere Motion, we have Given, and Granted, and by these Presents for us, our
Heirs and Successors, do Give, Grant, unto the said Christopher Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns, full and
absolute License, Power and Authority. That they the said Christopher Duke of
Albemarle, William Lord Craven, John Lord Berkely, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns, from time to
time hereafter for ever, at his, and their Will and Pleasure, may Assign,
Alien, Grant, Demise, or Enfeoff the Premises or any part or parcel thereof, to
him or them, that shall be willing to purchase the same, and to such Person,
and Persons as they shall think fit, To have and to hold to them the said
Person, or Persons, their Heirs and Assigns in Fee Simple, or Fee Tail or for
Term of Life, or Lives, or Years, to be held of them the said Christopher Duke
of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton, their Heirs and Assigns, by such
Rents, Services, and Customs, as shall seem fit to the said Christopher Duke of
Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir
George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns; and not
immediately of us, our Heirs and Successors: And to the same Person, or
Persons, and to all and every of them, we do Give and Grant by these Presents
for us, our Heirs and Successors, License, Authority, and Power, that such
Person, or Persons may have and take the Premises, or any Parcel thereof, of
the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord
Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton;
their Heirs and Assigns, and the same to hold to themselves, their Heirs or
Assigns, in what Estate of Inheritance soever, in Fee Simple, or in Fee Tail,
or otherwise, as to them, the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl
of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and
Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns shall seem expedient: The Statute
in the Parliament of Edward Son of King Henry, heretofore King of England, our
Predecessor, commonly called the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, or any
other Statute, Act, Ordinance, Use, Law, Custom, or any other Matter, Cause, or
thing heretofore Published or Provided to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding: And because many Persons born or inhabiting in the said
Islands for their Desert and Services, may expect and be capable of Marks of
Honor and Favor, which in respect of the great Distance cannot conveniently
be conferred by us. Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and we do by these
Presents, Give, and Grant, unto the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William
Earl of Craven, Power to Confer Honor.
John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter
Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns, full Power and Authority to Give, and Confer
unto, and upon such of the Inhabitants of the said Islands, as they shall
think, do, or shall Merit the same, such Marks of Favor and Titles of Honor
as they shall think fit, so as those Titles or Honor be not the same as are
enjoined by, or conferred upon any the Subjects of this our Kingdom of England.

And further, also we do by the Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors,
Give, and Grant License to them the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William
Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns, full Power, Liberty, and
License to Erect, Raise, and Build within the said Islands and Places
aforesaid, or any Part, or Parts thereof, such and so many Forts, Fortresses,
Castles, Cities, Boroughs, Towns, Villages, and other Fortifications
whatsoever; and the same or any of them to fortify and furnish with Ordinance,
Powder, Shot, Armor, and all other Weapons, Ammunition, and Habiliments of War,
both Offensive, and Defensive, as shall be thought fit and convenient for the
safety and welfare of the said Islands, or any part thereof, and the same or
any of them from time to time, as occasion shall require to Dismantle,
Disfurnish, Demolish and pull down. And also to Place, Constitute, and Appoint,
in, or over all or any of the said Castles, Forts, Fortifications, Cities,
Towns, and Places aforesaid; Governors, Deputy-Governours, Magistrates,
Sheriffs, and other Officers, Civil, and Millitary, as to them shall seem meet.
And to the said Cities, Boroughs, Towns, Villages, or any other Place, or
Places within the said Islands, to Grant Letters or Charters of Incorporation;
with all Liberties, Franchises and Privileges requisite and usual, or to, or
within any Corporations within this our Kingdom of England, granted or
belonging, and in the same Cities, Boroughs, Towns, and other Places, to
Constitute, Erect, and Appoint such, and so many Markets, Marts and Fairs, as
shall in that behalf be thought fit and necessary.

And further, also to Erect and Make in the Islands aforesaid, or any part
thereof, so many Manors with such Seigniories as to them shall seem meet and
convenient, and in every of the said Manors To Have and hold a Court Baron,
with all things whatsoever, which to a Court Baron do belong. And To Have and
to hold Viewes of Franck-Pledge and Court Leet for the Conservation of the
Peace, and better Government of those Parts with such Limits, Jurisdictions,
and Precincts as by the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of
Craven John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir
Peter Colleton; or their Heirs shall be Appointed for that purpose, with all
things whatsoever, which to a Court Leet, or View of Franck-Pledge do belong,
the same Courts to be Holden by Stewards to be deputed and Authorized by the
said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; or their
Heirs, or by the Lords of the Manors and Leets for the time being, when the
same shall be Erected; and because that, in so remote a Country, and situate
among so many barbarous Nations, the Invasions as well of Salvages or other
Enemies, Pirates, and Robbers, may probably be feared: Therefore we have given,
and for us, our Heirs and Successors, do give Power by these Prsents, unto the
said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, Power to make War.
William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George
Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns by themselves, or
their Captains, or other Officers, to Leavy, Muster, and Train all sorts of
Men, of what Condition soever, or wheresoever born, whether in the said Islands
or elsewhere for the time being; and to make War, and to pursue the Enemies
aforesaid, as well by Sea as by Land; Yea, even without Limits of the said
Islands, (and by Gods assistance) to vanquish and take them, and being taken,
to put them to Death by the Law of War, and to save them at their pleasure, and
to do all and every other thing which to the Charge and Office of a Captain
General of any Army belongs, or has accustomed to belong, as fully and
freely, as any Captain General of an Army has ever had the same.

Also, our Will and Pleasure is, and by this our Charter, we do give unto the
said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs
and Assigns, full Power, Liberty, and Authority, in case of Rebellion, Tumult,
or Sedition, (if any should happen, which God forbid) either upon the Land
within the Islands aforesaid, or upon the Main Sea, in making a Voyage thither,
or returning from thence, by him and themselves, their Captains, Deputies, or
Officers, to be authority under his, or their Seals for that purpose. To whom
also, for us, our Heirs and Successors, we do Give and Grant by these Presents,
full Power and Authority to Exercise Martial Law against mutinous and seditious
Persons of those parts, such as shall refuse to submit themselves to their
Government, or shall refuse to serve in the Wars, or shall fly to the Enemy,
forsake their Colors, or Ensigns, or be Loyterers, or Straglers, or otherwise
howsoever offending against Law, Custom, or Discipline Military, as freely, and
in as ample manner and form, as any Captain General of an Army by virtue of his
Office, might, or has accustomed to use the same.

And our further pleasure is, and by these Presents, for us, our Heirs and
Successors: We do Grant unto the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William
Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord; Ashley, Sir George Carterett,
and Sir Peter Colleton their Heirs and Assigns, and to the Tenants and
Inhabitants of the said Islands, both present and to come, and to every of
them, that the said Islands, and the Tenants and Inhabitants thereof shall not
from henceforth be held or reputed any Member or Part of any Colony whatsoever,
in America, or elsewhere, now Transported or made, or hereafter to be
Transported or made; nor shall be depending on, or subject to their Government
in any thing, but be absolutely separated and divided from the same: And our
Will and Pleasure is, by these Presents that they be separated, and that they
be subject immediately to our Crown of England, as depending thereof for ever.

And that the Inhabitants of the said Islands nor any of them shall at any time
hereafter be compelled or compellable, or by any ways subject or liable to
appear or answer to any Matter, Suit, Cause, or Plaint whatsoever out of the
Islands aforesaid, in any other of our Islands, Colonies, or Dominions in
America or elsewhere, other than in our Realm of England, and Dominion of
Wales. And because it may happen that some of the People and Inhabitants of the
said Islands, cannot in their private Opinions Conform to the Public Exercise
of Religion according to the Liturgy, Forms, and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, or take or subscribe the Oaths and Articles made and established in
that behalf; and for that the same by reason of the remote Distances of these
Places, will as we hope, be no Breach of the Unity and Uniformity Established
in this Nation. Our Will and Pleasure therefore is, and we do by these
Presents, for us, our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant unto the said
Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs
or Assigns, full and free License, Liberty, and Authority by such ways and
means as they shall think fit to Give and Grant to such Person and Persons
inhabiting and being within the said Islands hereby, mentioned to be Granted as
aforesaid, or any part thereof, such Indulgencies and Dispensations in that
behalf, for, and during such time and times, and with such Limitations and
Restrictions as they the said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of
Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir
Peter Colleton; their Heirs and Assigns, shall in their discretion think fit
and reasonable: And that no Person or Persons unto whom such Liberty shall be
given, shall be any way molested, punished, disquieted, or called in question
for any differences in Opinion, or Practice in matters of Religious
Concernment, who do not actually disturb the Civil Peace of the Island, County,
or Colony, that he or they shall make their Abode in. But all and every such
Person or Persons may from time to time and at all times, freely and quietly
have and enjoy his and their Judgments and Consciences in Matters of Religion
throughout all the said Islands, they behaving themselves peaceably, and not
using the Liberty to Licentiousness, nor to the Civil Injury nor outward
disturbance of others; any Law, Statute, or Clause contained, or to be
contained, Usuage or Custom of our Realm of England to the contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding. And in case it shall happen that any Doubt or
Question should arise concerning the true Sense and Understanding of any Word,
Clause, or Sentence contained in our present Charter.

We will Ordain and Command, That at all times, and in all things, such
Interpretations be made thereof, and allowed in all and every of our Courts
whatsoever as lawfully may be adjudged most advantageous and favorable to the
said Christopher Duke of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley,
Anthony Lord Ashley, Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; their Heirs
and Assigns.

Although express mention of the true yearly Value, or certainty of the
Premises, or of any of them, or of any other Gifts or Grants, by us, or by any
of our Progenitors or Predecessors heretofore made by the said Christopher Duke
of Albemarle, William Earl of Craven, John Lord Berkeley, Anthony Lord Ashley,
Sir George Carterett, and Sir Peter Colleton; in these Presents is not made, or
any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Proviso, Proclamation, or Restriction heretofore
Had, Made, Enacted, Ordained or Provided, or any other Matter, Cause, or Thing
whatsoever, to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In Witness, whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.
Witness Our Self at Westminster, the first Day of November, In the two and
twentieth Year of our Reign. By Writ of Privy Seal. PIGOTT.

FINIS.

