To all the Churches of Jesus Christ, called to be Saints through the immortal
seed which dwells in you, and shall be with you for ever. Grace be with you,
and peace from God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Dearly beloved Brethren,
WE hope it is on our hearts to live and die with you, as those that are joined
to the Lord, and each to other by the will of God, members of that one body,
built up through that one everlasting spirit, a holy Tabernacle for the living
God. Neither is it the least part of our joy to be serviceable unto you, who
are our joy, and the delight of our dear Jesus. Surely we have been made in
much sense to say to the Lord, our goodness extends not unto thee; but if as a
few poor worms we may be useful to thy excellent ones, to help them on to the
end of their faith, the salvation of their souls, it shall be enough unto us:
And for this we would labor night and day, warning every one of you, striving
with you, and together with you with God for you, that every one of you may be
presented perfect in Christ Jesus. This design and honest desire of our souls,
has brought us together from far to ^it before the Lord in this place, where
we have been taking upon us to speak to God, though dust and ashes. Yea, we
have been encouraged to spread before your Father and our Father, the several
weights that lie upon you and us. Wherein we have not been without hope, the
Father has not taken advantage through our confessions to condemn us in his
presence, or to upbraid us, but has smiled upon us notwithstanding. And though
we have been ready to cry out, we are cut off from before thine eyes, yet has
he heard the voice of our supplication. And it is no small addition to our
comfort, while we think of it, that while we carried the yokes and burdens of
whole Sion, and have been as the souls under the Altar, crying, How long Lord,
holy and true, why does this Chari^t wheel make so ^^ng tarrying? the Lord has
lightened us while we have thus looked unto him. Neither shall we be ashamed to
say to you, Rejoice oh Daughter of Sion, behold your King, he comes in
righteousness and in peace, to give an expected end. We have told our Father
and your Father, that we could not be satisfied with life for our selves, peace
for our selves, white robes for our selves, unless Sion also might be made
partaker of the salvation of God. And in this we have had some faith, and some
revivings have attended our souls in the hope of his mercy; and now as we have
been faithful for you to God, so we would now be faithful for God to you. We
have been arraigning the abominations of Sion before the bar of the most High;
we have been crying for Justice from the throne, upon every sin, for strength
and light to purge out every persisting impenitent sinner, as enemies and
traitors to the crown and dignity of our Lord Jesus. More particularly, we have
been spreading out our hands before the most High, and have made confession of
those reigning abominations in our own souls, and in the Churches that light
spirit, living short of the true light and sense of Gods Majesty in his
Churches, and among his Saints; from whence proceeds that vanity and
carelessness which does so much attend them. We have bewaild that wretched
worldly spirit, that plucks down the Saints from their excellency, and leaves
such blackness upon them, which renders them so uncomely in the eyes of men.
We have bewaild that coldness and deadness that is upon our selves, and upon
the Churches. That formality in holy duties, that indifferency, that Laodicean
spirit that is fallen in upon us, while we have be^n ^ry^ng, Let him make speed
and hasten his work that we may see it, let the counsel of the Lo^d come, that
we may know it; and all this wh^le h^ve been drawing iniquity with the cords of
vanity, having been in a great measure as without the sense of the work, so
without the true travail of soul, which this work should put us into. For these
things our souls have been bowed down: And some have been made to cry out, O^
that our heads were a (...), and our yes were us rivers of tears, that we might
weep f^r the in^quity of the daughters of Sion. Behold for this our souls have
been in distress, our bowels have been ^^oubled, our hearts have been turned
within us; we have taken off our ornaments, we have been breaking and bleeding,
and have been crying out for more ^ighs, because the crown is fallen from Sions
head by reason of her iniqui^y. We have been bewailing personal iniquity,
congregationall iniqu^ty* national ^niqui^y, family iniquity, cl^s^t ^niquity;
we have by search found poor Sion as it were witho^t soundness, from the crow^
of the head to the sole of the f^^o^full of bruises and putrified sores. And
now we call upon you that tremble at the word of God to come unto us; take
heed, oh take ^^ed of being unsensible of poor Ja^ob^ trouble; take heed of
stretc^ing your s^lv^s on your b^ds of Ivory, of drinking you wine in bowls, in
cha^ting at the sound of the viol, ano^^^ing you^ s^lves with the chief Spices,
and forget that J^s^ph is in affliction, your poor nat^on, your poor familys,
your poor Churches, your own poor ^culs are in distress, heaven and earth
seems to frown* ^rouble within, and terror without; these things are come upon
thee, and who shall comfort thee? Oh come down, sit in the dust, call your
solemn assemblies, pr^cla^m fasts, and w^ep bitterly before the Lord f^r all
your abomin^tion: You have but as it were played with God you have not tr^mbled
in his pres^nce, you have been wa^ton before him, having been without the
terror of his Majesty, therefore you have confessed, and have delighted to word
it out with the Lord, but alas, you have no sooner gone away, but you have
forgot what manner of men and women you were, and thought no more on your
prayers. Oh how often have you mocked God; but oh be not deceived, God will not
be mocked. It appears already how God takes it at your hands, and now once
more you have sent us hither, and once more our father has smiled upon us, for
we have begged him to save us yet this once more, and truly we tr^mble. If it
should be as at other times, what will the Lord do in the end thereof, the
hope that is in Israel concerning this th^ne li^^ in your putting from you that
accursed thing. Oh now if you would pursue this pride, this worldliness, this
coldness and slothfulness, your personal neglects, your family neglects, the
Lord might yet be entreated to return and have mercy upon us, that we might be
healed. Oh that now these things might ^e laid to heart. How does the world as
a canker eat out your affections to the Lord Jesus, eat out your time, your
strength, your zeal, while you have been asleep in the lap of this Dali^^h,
your locks have been cut off, and you are but as other men; that whoever
beholds you may say what singular thing do ye? now then lay to heart these
crying abominations of Sion: the general complaint in almost all the Epistles,
the world is too beautiful; Satan has sheed them the Kingdoms of the earth,
and this has Bewitched them, and their minds are much, oh too much alienated
from the Lord. Oh brethren the lot is fall^n upon this as a troubler of Israel,
and that for which you have fallen before your enemies, bring it out now, and
stone it before the Lord; yea raise up such a heap upon it, as it may never
appear more; that God may make this Valley of Ach^r a door of h^pe. This
iniquity has been apparently written upon your for^heads, witness your
^emisness i^ meetings, your neglect of the poor Sain^s, and of the Ministers of
Christ, whose daily complaints and addresses are living monuments of this
reigning abomination; your cruelty to servants, children, exacting all their
labors, but take no time to counsel them, instruct them, to show them that
are without Christ that miserable estate wherein they are, that their souls may
be the better for you, and they bound to bless God on your behalf. And to
commune in the Lord with them that are in Christ, that their souls might be
comforted, edified, and encouraged to walk with God in their places. This has
made professors families so dry, useless, and unprofitable, Saints communion so
little tending to edification. This ^in eats out all that divine sweetness of
regenerating and sanctifying grace. We have mou^ned in that we have had so
great a hand in this trespass, in not bearing so faithful a testimony against
it in our miyistry, but slavish fear of being accounted selfish or the like,
has stopped our mouth until the mouth of this iniquity has almost devouring
the poor Churches of Christ. Oh we would not consult with this flesh any
longer, but in our places (and desire by these to provoke all the ministering
brethren every where also to be faithful to the Lord and their poor Churches,
to bear a faithful testimony against every evil way that is hated and abhorred
of God, what censure soever they may meet with all from men. That of
slothfulness, carelessness, another reigning evil; from these two as the root
springs many other dangerous hurtful practices the great hindrances of our
works in our Families the Churches and our own Souls. And because they are
evils rooted deeply in the heart, it is hard to get them out. And we have by
experience found, how well they are able to bear with testimony against them,
with Reproo^s and Counsels, and yet lie close, they are Sermon-proof and
Epistle-proof; so strong that they have wrested all weapons out of the hands of
Saints and Ministers that have been formed against them: Now we desire we may
no longer rest in a testimony of words, but proceed to take some effectual
course that sin or sinners may be purged out of the house of God. In order to
this, we desire the Churches that they would set some day or days apart wherein
they may bewail these iniquities and pollutions of Sion before the Lord, and to
bring their souls into a through sense of them also, that the ministering
brethren would without respect of persons bear their constant testimony in
their ministry, and from house to house night and day, warning every one to
flee from those abominations; that at least they may deliver themselves from
the blood of souls, having declared to them the whole counsel of God. And if
still it be persisted in, and plain proofs of it in the ways and works of the
professors of Christ, we leave it as the Churches special duty to pursue it, by
dealing with it until sin or sinner be purged away. We shall leave it to the
Lord, and those with whom the Lord has entrusted with his Oracles to be
further opening and alleging those things whose words we desire may be heeded.
Another ^vil we had thought to have spread before you; for want of opporunity
we shall now omit, yet desire you may lay it to heart, look over again our
former Epistles, and that from Chard we have labored in vain, that which has
been brought forth has been to so little purpose. And now brethren, our hope
is in your obedience; in those things we hope we shall rejoice in you; nay we
do rejoice in our hope of you; in this hope we commit you to the Lord, and to
the word of his grace, who is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance amongst them that are sanctified. We remain

Yours dearly to love in, and ready to serve you for Christ Jesus, Thomas
Collier, Nathaniel Strange, Thomas Glass.

We have appointed our next meeting at Dorchester, and desire the Churches to
send their Messengers to be there the 2d day (at night) of the 2d week of the
3d month (vul.) May 1658.


From the meeting of the Messengers of the Churches in Tiverton, this 18 day of
the 7th month 1657. signed by us, in their names, and by their appointment.
London, Printed for Thomas Brewster, at the three Bibles in Paul's
Churchyard, 1657.


