THE Man of Sin Discovered OR George Whitehead UNMASK'T.
And his Sheep's Clothing pulled off, that his Wolvish Nature and Spirit may be
seen.
By several Instances of G. VV's Lies, False Accusations, and base Perversions
in his Book, Entitled, Judgment Fixed, etc. wherein, although he Subscribes
himself a constant Servant of Christ, yet by his Fruits he is discovered to obey
Antichrist.
His Servants you are whom you obey.
Christian Reader,
For Preface, I desire thee, without Partiality, and in Patience to read and
consider these Seriptures following, which are not here produced as a Warrant
for my Proceedings in this Discovery, but as a Caution to some, that they be
not hasty in Judging it.

In those days I saw Jews that Married Wives of Ashdod, etc. And their Children
spoke half in the Speech of Ashdod -- then I reproved and cursed them, and
smote certain of them, and pulled off their Hair. -- And one of the Sons of
Jojada, the Son of Eliaship, the High Priest, was the Son in Law of Samballat
the Horonite, but I chased him from me. Neh. chap. 13. verse. 23, 24, 25, 28. He
that troubles you, shall bear his own Burden, whoever he be, Gal. 7.11. GEORGE
WHITEHEAD, the Spirit which guides thee in this wicked work is already manifest
not to be the Long-Suffering Spirit of Christ, but the Spirit of Antichrist, as
in all Six Babels, etc. and Innoc. Vindic. may be seen; which the Reader is
referred to, not for want of better Proof (...) says, but to prevent
Repitition, and he does the same, he refe^^ (...) and the Accuser, etc.
Therefore in thus doing, that he condemns others for, he is inexcusable. I
shall not trace him in all his Serpentine perverse Windings, but instance some
of his wicked Doings.

Besides many other ill Names, as Devil, and Devil Incarnate, etc. he often
terms W. R. F. B. and T. C. Informers, and flourishes it out with all the
aggravations he can, as Apostate, persecuting, malicious, outrageous Informer;
considering the time he takes to render us such abhorrid Informers, when scarce
any Person in the Nation so obnoxious as Informers, it may be thought he
intended us no good; but he has in this discovered himself to be of the
Generarion of Persecutors by their own Principle; for they say of one, He Is
guilty of persecuting with the Tongue, which is one in nature, etc. This is thy
own Judgment Fixed on thy self; and G. W. has hereby made so great a Rent in the
Sheep's Clothing, he, etc. appears in, that their Wolvish Spirit and Nature is
seen; and thou G. W. have hereby spared me some Labor in Unmasking you; for
this is proof of your Apostasy; therefore for shame call no more for Proofs
thereof, nor think to excuse your selves by accusing others, for that will not
clear you, but prove you, Accusers of the Brethren. Several other Instances I
could give of your Doings, which by your own Rule prove you Persecutors; as,
your rendering those Friends who cannot conform to your Forms (who be many in
several Counties) Perverse and Unpeaceable in their Conversations: now G. W.
Persecution is Sin, and he that commits Sin, is of the Devil. Therefore thou
art not a Constant Servant of Christ (as thou falsely subscribes thy self) but a
persecuting One, of Antichrist; and therefore not to be heard, but to be turned
from and chased away.

G. W. in the Contents of his third Section, says of W. R. He is proved guilty
of reproaching the Quakers in general. I have examined that third Section, and
find no such Proofs; but thou cites from Chapter Qu. Preface, page 6. W. R. saying,
These kind of Declarations frequently published among the aforesaid People. Now
of those words of W. R's, the aforesaid people: (says G. W.) What mean they but
the Quakers in general? But its evident that by those words W. R. meant not the
Quakers in general, but some that he had aforenamed in page 5. Such as thy self
Geo. Apostate Innovators; and thy querying, what means, etc. is but basely
begging the Question, and that is no Proof: therefore the notorious Untruth thou
would turn on W. R. is thy own; but in case he had meant, that such
unprofitable Doctrines were preached amongst the Quakers in general in their
public Meetings, what Reproach is it to them? if such as thee preach among
them that which edifies not, how can the Hearers help it? Its no Reflection on
them, to discover your wickedness; and thy not proving in that Section what
thou affirmest in the Contents, proves thee a False Accuser. But if to detect
the Errors of some among any People, be a Reproach to the people in general,
then are you the most guilty of Reproaching the Christian Religion in general,
of any I know.

In the Contents of the sixth Section, G. W. says of W. R. His writing to clear
himself from giving Judgment on Report, proved untrue by diverse Instances. But
in that sixth Sect. I find no such Proof, but G. W's confident say-so, and
several times basely begging the question; which is no proof: Be ashamed! of
such wicked works, as to put such Untruths in thy Front, and being so bold as
to say, proved by diverse Instances, when as I find none, but several queries,
with thy own bare Affirmative and Negative; which are several Instances of thy
being of a Reprobate Mind, rather than a Constant Servant of Christ.

Upon W. R's Query to G. Fox about his having been (as some thought) looked on
as that Prophet, God said, by Moses, he would raise up, etc To this says G. W.
he does deny it, in reference to himself as a particular Man -- only the Truth
of the Immortal Seed, Christ in him, as in every true Believer. What Jesuits
reserve, G.W. has in the words; [particular Man] is hard to know, but by what
is printed, and what I have in Manuscript by me, G. F. has rendered himself
more than a Christian Man, for he blasphemously styles himself, to O. C. THE
Son of God, not a Son, that is too common for him, other Christians be such,
therefore he says, THE Son of God: THE, by way of Eminency. George, thou
could plainly show thy Dislike for one saying, the Scripture was the Rule,
says thou, He Idolatrously sets the Scriptures in the place of Christ; but for
that wicked Barbados Judgment, and G. F's Idolatrous setting himself in the
place of Christ, I do not find that thou have plainly showed thy dislike, but
rather plainly showed thy self to justify the Wicked; but I believe, that
unless ye repent, although both you two Georges join hand in hand, yet you shall
not go unpunished. I have an account of some Passages that past betwixt O. C.
and G. F. (in Manuscript signed J. Stubs) where G. F. says, From him whom the
World calls G. Fox; who is THE Son of God. Now it is the particular Man, the
World calls G. Fox, and not the Imortal Seed: therefore thy Jesuits Cloak
cannot cover his blasphemous Deifying himself: and it is evident, he did think
himself, and was thought of by others, above what he ought to be; for the
Immortal Seed Christ, is in every true Believer as well as in him; and although
others of you do account your selves as Rulers and Overseers, and have said
that God has crowned you, etc. yet I do not find any such Titles and
Expressions to, and of any of you, as he has given him, as in 5th. Babels,
page 7. the blasphemous Expressions in a Letter to him. All these considered,
plainly shows its little worth, what G. F. or G. W. affirms or denis.

In page 39. G. W. represents W. R. saying, The Penman, and his Brethren
accounts themselves Christ's Representatives: and then G. W. says, That Is an
Untruth. So it is of G. W's, but not of W. R's, for he says not so, but W. R.
says I have cause to suppose, that the Penman, etc. count themselves Christ's
Representatives. This is no positive affirmation, but an abuse in G. W. to turn
W. R's Supposition into an Affirmation; therefore the Untruth is G. W's besides
the false Accusation.

Says G.W. in page 51. to W. R. Thou have told a gross Untruth, for the Penman
never said, I desire my Name should be hid, etc. Now by his saying, he never so
said; that implys, he ^harg'd W. R. as saying, he had so said, which is false;
for W. R's words be, It appears to me the Penman was ashamed his Name should be
published, etc. Now herein G. W. is chargeable with two gross Untruths. 1st. In
charging W. R. with one, when there is none there proved. 2dly. In charging him
falsely, as saying that which he did not say: but yet that may appear which is
not so said; for thou have not said thou art a Liar and Persecutor, etc. G. W.
yet thou appear'st such; therefore the gross Untruth is thine, George, and not
W. R's.

In page 91. G. W. charges W. R. That he renders G. F. etc. as showing no
Dislike to the Barbados Paper; and then says, G.W. Oh shameless Perverter! So
thou art, G. W. else thou durst not say so; when as W. R. does say, and thou
confessesth the same, that G. F. does dislike some part thereof: and thou (to
make W. R. seem to contradict himself) do cite three Sentences of his,
wherein he grants some Dislike is shown: and herein G. W. does pervert W. R's
words; which be after he had cited some Passages of G. F's daubing with the
Subscribers; then of those words, says W. R. THIS shows no Dislike, etc. Its of
those Hypocritical Expressions that he so says, which he had before mentioned,
and not of G. F's whole Letter, although G. W. to color his Perversion, does
change W. R's first word THIS for AS, because the word THIS was not for his
Purpose. But G. W's Forgery and Perversion shows that their Church Authority is
not defended by Truth and Honesty; but Forgery and Lies, etc. be the chief
Towers of their Babel. O that you of the Second-days Meeting, who pretend you
are Overseers of Christ's Church, should be so blind or partial as to suffer
such things to be Printed and Fathered on the Spirit of Christ. But however
that Point is gained of you, that a high grown Church of G. F's have erred, and
therefore your Pretensions to the Orderings and Power of God's Spirit for your
Impositions, will little avail without some better Evidence than your own
Say-so; and Experience teaches us it is true, that a particular may not be in
Unity with your Universal Spirit, and yet not be erred from their own Measures,
as G. F. falsely says. And G. W. thy covering of your Hypocrisy, and daubing
with the Subscribers, under the pretense of Charity, manifests for what and to
whom your Charity is, even to such as can give up all, etc. a pair of
charitable Georges indeed; as can pass by such small Faults, as giving up all
Spirituals and Temporals to your Spirit: but if another (or rather the Printer)
mis-spel a word, that you can publish in Print for four Errors, as in J.F's
Book entitled, A Few Words, etc. p. 20.

Some Observations on G. W's Letter to F. B. in Judgment Fixed.
NOtwithstanding G. W's Pretensions of Concern of Conscience in the beginning
of his Letter, yet Money seems to be his great Concern, as is evident by his
being in so great a rage, as appears by his vomiting out such envious and
defaming terms to F.B. Viz. Defrauder, Over-reacher, unreasonable Imposer,
Arbitrary, conceited Fool, etc. And I find te^ pages mostly spent about 15 l.
paid to F.B. for so much he was Fined for S. Cater's Preaching, and not
telling his Name; which Money F. B. proffered to return to S. C. again, upon
his Subscribing to a Paper, as in Painted Harlot, page 36. may be seen at
large. The Substance was, that S. C. should give it as his Judgment (not Gods
Command) that all Friends of the Ministry ought to tell their Names to
Informers, when they come to Convict the Meetings where they be, or Re-imburse
those that suffer for their not so doing, or be reputed blame worthy. This G.
W. renders an unconscionable Cannon, illegal Imposition, (and terms F. B. Fool)
but I do not find he has proved it so, but himself a false Accuser, although
he says, p. 212. It exceeds the Conventicle-Act. But G. W. says false, or else
that Act is very favorable; for were the Extremity of that Act of no worse
Consequence, than to be by S. C. reputed blameworthy; and noted as such, surely
there would not be so many distressed and imprisoned: but for Proof that F. B's
Proposition is severer than the Conventicle Act, G. W. says, that Act no where
compels Friends to tell their Names to Informers: Nor does F. B's Proposition;
for they may reimburse who suffer for them, or be reputed blame worthy, and
noted as such (BUT) by S. C 's Judgment. Is not S. C. some more than ordinary
Prelate in G. F's new Church Government? he being such a Leading Man formerly,
when he was for another Interest (and lead -- Horse) which it may be he then
thought, would have prevailed, and been as G. F. now is, the Ruling Party, but
that failing, he soon found another, likely to answer his Ends, and so, it may
be, if G. F's Party should not hold to be the ruling Interest, he may turn
about to another, as Ben. Furly has, and say, he knew not what Spirit did then
influence him: for such empty Clouds are easily driven with any Winds; but
although G.W. calls F.B's Proposition, Cannon, Edict, etc. yet I know not how
he can prove it such, if signed by S. C. unless it be so, that any one of G.
F's Preacher's Judgment be a Law or Edict, or else S. C. is some extraordinary
Prelate of G. F's.

Notwithstanding G. W's Outcry against the Proposition, I shall offer something
for the Reasonableness thereof. 1st. It seems Christian-like, for the Minister
to be willing to bear his own Burden, for fear he make his Preaching
chargeable to others, for surely if the true Apostle would work with his hands,
to administer to his Necessities, rather than be chargeable to others, then
surely he will, (if able, for its not to be thought he meant others) reimburse
them that suffer for him; although the false Apostles G. W. and S. C. will not.

2. If its our Duty to bear one another Burdens, then much more our own.

3. But turn G. W's own Argument, page 215. That which will not pay 10 l. for
his Brother (says he) will not lay down his Life for the Brethren. But he is
more unlikely to lay down his Life for his Brother, who would not lay down his
Money to his Brother that suffered for him.

4. It manifests Distrust in the Preacher, that he preaches not for Christ's
Sake, because its promised, That whatever any one suffers for Christ's Sake, it
shall be restored: and your being so unwilling to bear your own Burdens, show
that you have little (if any) of the Apostle's Faith, though you (but falsely)
assume so much of their POWER.

5. By ^^ncealing your Names, and so securing your Money, you are not good but
ill Examples to the Flock, contrary to the true Ministers.

6. By that golden Rule, Do as you would be done by; Its equal, that if the
Preacher will not suffer for another, then he should not let another suffer for
him; that G. W. and S. C. would not suffer for F. B. is evident by their
Judgment and Practice; therefore S. C. should not let F. B. suffer for him.

7. Your not telling your Names, nor reimbursing those that suffer for you,
savours too much of Self-saving, which is repugnant to Christ's Command and
Example of Self-denial.

8. The Ministers not reimbursing those who suffer for them, is so much below
the Christian Nobility of those (whom that proud Pharisee G. W. terms) a dark
sort of Christians, as is evident by the Example of J. Jolly, mentioned in the
Painted Harlot, etc. page 16. That it is a shame for you S. C. and G. W. to come
short of them, seeing you pretend to so much more Light than they.

Therefore for these, and more Reasons that may be given, it seems not
unreasonable nor unconscionable, (as G. W. falsely implies) but it is good
reason and Conscience that the Preacher should reimburse who suffer for him (if
able) or be reputed Blameworthy, notwithstanding G. W. continues his Rage;
(what a Passion! a little Money puts this miserable Wretch G. W. in;) against
F. B. whom he falsely charges in p. 212. Says G. W. to F. B. Thou would
enforce on Friends of the Ministry, who sometimes may be silent in Meetings, to
tell their Names -- But that this is an Untruth, is evident by the words of F.
B's Proposition; for they may choose whether they will tell their Names or no,
if they will reimburse those that suffer for them; and if none be Fined for
them, then they have nothing to pay. Therefore G. W's Affirmation that F. B.
would enforce them to tell their Names, is false, and G. W. forces an Untruth
on the Reader, as well as a false Charge against F. B.

In page 212. G.W. says, that F. B. would enforce Ministers, whilst
ministering, (or Declaring) to stop and tell their Names, etc. But they may
reimburse those that suffer for them, and then need not stop to tell their
Names: but G. W. had need stop, and not run on in this his pernicious Current
of Untruths and Pervertions, thus to wrest things to his own Destruction, if he
repent not. But besides all this which has been said, the very Beginning and
Conclusion of F. B's Proposition clears it from all these Calumnies G. W. loads
it and F. B. with; for its only thus, Viz. I, S. C. do hereby testify it is my
Judgment, etc. -- And in the Conclusion it runs thus, that such as tell not
their Names, nor reimburse who suffer for them, shall be (by S. C's Judgment)
reputed Blameworthy. Behold this is the u^most Severity of that Proposition of
F. B's which G. W. complains of as such an Unconscionable, Illegal,
Unreasonable Cannon; but I think, to the Impartial Reader, G. W. himself
appears far more Unreasonable, Perverse, and Partial in so terming F. B's
Proposition: for F. B. did not desire S. C. to stamp it with the Titles of The
Judgment or Testimony in the word of God's Wisdom: or that, The Rise, Practice
and Establishing thereof was according to the Counsel of God. I say, had F. B.
desired S. C. to stamp it with such unfitting Titles as you have your IDOL G.
F's Image, Women's Meetings; or as you have your wicked Bull against J. S. and
J. W. Then G. W. might justly object against it: but on the contrary, F. B.
only desired S. C. to give it as his Judgment. Now with what Face can G. W.
render F. B's Proposition as such an unconscionable Cannon, Edict, etc. and yet
say, that their Laws, by them so Deify'd, and imposed as indispensible New
Covenant Ordinances: (of these G. W. says) They are tender and Christian
Counsel and Advice: and G. W. says, that F. B. abuses them for their tender
Counsel and Advice: whereas it is evident, F. B. etc. only oppose their
indispensible imposing their new invented needless Imaginations upon People
against their Consciences. And notwithstanding F. B. has shown and complained
against that new and illegal Practice of theirs, in making that unlimited Law,
not to Suffer, nor Permit Marriages without the consent of two Men's and
Women's (that is, four) Meetings, etc. Yet G. W. has the confidence to affirm,
that F. B. has not shown nor given them any instance of those new Practices
among them. Also G. W. terms that unlawful and unlimited Cannon of theirs, not
to Suffer nor Permit Marriages without License from G. F's Female Prelates,
etc. as at large may be seen in De Christiana Liberate page 139. This G. W.
terms an Agreement; which in common acceptance, implies the consent of all
Parties concerned, which they cannot pretend to have had in the making that
formentioned Cannon; and unless G. W. can prove that J. A. agreed to that
Cannon, it is an Imposition on him and all concerned. This partiality in G. W.
etc. prove them to be those who use false Balances and Measures, (I mean not
for his Trade) which is an abomination to the Just. I say, let the Impartial
Reader but weigh these things in the equal and true Balance, and then judge
whether or no G. W. is not very unconscionable and unchristian, to thus grossly
pervert, abuse, and falsely charge F. B. and yet have the confidence to
subscribe himself a Constant Servant of Christ, when as these wicked works
manifests him more likely a Constant Servant of Antichrist.

SOME OBSERVATIONS ON G.W's ABUSE OF T. CRISP IN HIS BOOK, JVDGMENT FIXED. etc.
IN Page 277. G. W. charges me with a Downright Untruth, because in Testimo. p.
24. I say of those aforecited Testimonies, The substance of the whole is
included: but says G. W. the substance of that Paper of J. W's is not included:
but to clear my self from his downright Untruth, I answer, that in page 23. in
the Title, on top of that Testimony of J. W*, I do not term it their sense
about Tithes, but their sense about Women's Meetings, etc. and G. W. cannot
prove that in that Paper they gave any other or contrary sense about Women's
Meetings than what I there insert; but that G. W. charges me with, is, for
leaving out some words about Tithes; but unless he could prove that I had in
that Paper given any thing, as their sense, concerning Tithes, and contrary to
that he mentioned, its wrong in him to charge me with a downright Untruth: but
G. W. says to me, why did leave out those words, was there nothing of their
sense? etc. I say, yea, there was of their sense about Tithes, but not about
VVomen's Meetings, therefore not needful for me to insert there, because it is
entitled, Their Sense about Women's Meetings, and not about Tithes: and G. W.
has not proved me in a downright Untruth, but himself a downright false
Accuser. Again, page 299. G. W. cites me in 4th. Babels, page 2. and 3. saying,
There is no denial or disowning the Principle of giving up all Spiritual and
Temporal to G. F 's Men's and Women's Meetings; then says G. W. to me, this is a
gross Untruth: but he has not proved it so, but proved himself a gross
Perverter: for those words of mine which he cites were in answer to some
Charges of S. C's against me, and related to some particular passages out of G.
F's Letter, which S. C. had brought against me, and 'twas of those particular
Citations of S. C's out of G. F's Letter, which I there said, Here is no denial
or reproof for giving up all, etc. Also in page 3. I say, In all S. C 's
Citations, he has not proved any Denial of the Principle, of Giving up all,
etc. and G. W's applying those words of mine to G. F's Letter in general, when
as they only relate it to those particular passages, is a Pervertion; and
instead of giving manifest Proofs of their disowning that wicked Principle he
gives his own confident Say-so; that their Consciences bear them witness they
do deny it: which proves his own gross Boldness and Partiality; for they say
that others Say-so is no Proof: and if G. W. were not more than ordinary
confident, he durst not so affirm, Viz. That they did plainly show their
dislike to that Paper: but it is observable, how this Perverter G. W. has
varyed the term, for my words are, The Principle of Giving up all, etc. Now
these words he changes into the word Paper, which makes great difference in the
signification: and I never did deny, but always allowed they did dislike some
part of that paper, but a Part is not the Whole, therefore their dislike is not
properly applicable to the Paper in general; see it more at large in 1st. 4th.
and 5th. Babels, etc. And because G. W. does so confidently affirm they did
plainly show their dislike, let the Reader consider their dealing with J. P.
for causing some of their Books to be thrown down publicly on the Exchange,
near where he burnt a little piece of waste Paper; because they thought that
contempt was thereby shown to their books: now this they dislike, and plainly
show it, for they published in Print, that he was instigated by the Devil: (this
plainly shows dislike) but no such dislike to the Judgment of Giving up all,
etc. but on the contrary, highly magnifyed them; although that Judgment or
Principle be of so wicked a tendency; but to cover their devilish Malice, they
f^^sly pretend he would have burnt the Bible; but their former Writings
manifest their respect to that good Book was not so great, but their rage was
great; because they thought Contempt was shown to their Books. I say, these
considered, and their cruel envy in showing their plain dislike to F. B's
Proposition, and their Hypocritical flattering them at Barbados, do more
plainly show their Partiality and Respecting of Persons, than their plain
denial of that Paper, and G. W. observe what St. John says, If we say we have
Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we lie. What then is thy confident
saying so worth, when you act so contray? And notwithstanding G. W. has the
confidence to say, Their Conscience bears them witness, and they have plainly
showed their Dislike: yet S. C. in page 1. calls it, Our Judgment, or the
Judgment we take part with. For shame, G. W. be not thus plainly confused and
false; for herein thou art guilty of false Accusing, Pervertion, and a GROSS
Untruth, besides the Partiality and Hypocrisy which is herein plainly shown.

In Page 300. G. W. seems much offended with me for saying in 4th. Babels, etc.
page 8. G. F. etc. sharply reprove others, who cannot against their Consciences
give up All, etc. -- as the Barbados Church has done, and for not bowing to
G. F's Image. Of this says G. W. What an abominable Lie is this! and that is
his Proof: but to clear me of G. W's Abominable Lie, let but their, dealing
with J. P. aforementioned, and their disowning J. A. also their accusing me
with Evil, and acting contrary to my Conscience, and excluding me not only from
Them, but from the Faithful; also their wi^ked Luciferian Bull of 66 against J.
S. and J. W. etc. and what Names they give them, Viz. Despisers of Heavenly
Dignities, bring Confusion to the Churches, lay waste the blessed Unity of the
Brethren: and many more black Characters, yet not for Breach of the Command of
God, or Law of the Nation, but because they cannot against Conscience conform
to G. F's Laws (which I term, bowing to his Image) also let but their
unconscionable Presumptions, and unlimited Law, mentioned in De Christiana
Liberate, page 60. Not to Permit nor Suffer Marriages, without the Consent of
two Men's and Women's Meetings, etc. Although they knew before they made this
Law, that there were some that would not own their new Female Government; also,
let their severe Sentence against those that discountenance or discourage their
New Female Government by Women, see De Christiana Liberate, page 44. That if
any Man do but hinder or persuade his Wife from spending what Time or Money she
or they will, and if they Judge their so doing, a discountenancing them in the
Work of the Lord, tho but gathering Money for such as S. Cater, to give him 10
l. at a time; and if after their Admonition any persist in the same, they have
by that their Judgment excluded such out of the Unity of the Church of Christ:
Nay, in this their Luciferian, Uncharitable Edict for Confirmation of their New
Female Government, they say of their Women's Meetings, That the Rise, Prastice,
and setting up, and Establishment of them -- is in the Ordering and Leading of
the Eternal Spirit. Sad were the Condition of many Quakers, and others, had
these Men, G. W. etc. any Power in Chr^st's Church: but blessed be God, we are
satisfied to the contrary, they ha^^ ^^^^ainly shown by their Pride and Envy,
that they have little to do there, wh^ (...) Power they have in G. F's Church,
it is little matter, as long as they (...) ^ot outward Power: also they say they
have Power to determine in Man (...) Meum and Tuum, that is, Temporal; and say,
That all that are led by the (...) ^t (G. W's, and not Christ's) must be of one
Mind, cannot be otherwise. (...) these considered, I think it is evident to the
Impartial Reader, that they do more than sharply reprove such as cannot against
their Consciences, Give up all, Spiritual and Temporal, etc. for many of these
concerned in the aforemen^ioned cannot against their Consciences Give up to be
of their M^nd in Spirituals and Temporals; so that if we must be all of one
Mind whatever they require, Spirituals and Temporals must be given up; See 1st.
Babels. Therefore I think it plainly proved they sharply reprove and that by
this their procedure, they do what in them lie to compel People to give up all.
All these considered, and that G. W. gives no Proofs of his Charge against me
but his Say-so, I hope that the Impartial Reader is satisfied that my saying,
They sharply reprove those which cannot give up all Spirituals and Temporals,
etc. against their Consciences, etc. is not an Abominable Lie: but its
observable how Jesuilitically G. W. insinuates this high Charge, for although
he would have the unwary Reader think it so, yet he dare not be so abominable
bold as to positively affirm it, but basely begs the Question, saying, What an
abominable Lie is this!

Again, in p. 300. G. W. seems much offended at my saying in 4th. Babels, page
7. That they endeavor to compel all to worship their Image. And in page 10. I
say, that they will drive those that will not follow them, contrary, or before
the Spirit lead them, into their Ceremonies. These G. W. says, be scornful,
notorious, foul, and false slanders. But I find no notorious Proof thereof,
only G. W. says it: but in 1st. 2d. 3d. 4th. and 5th. Babels I have
sufficiently proved your Compelling, and to them I refer the Reader: also these
aforenamed Instances of your excluding from the Church of Christ, etc. all who
cannot Conform to you, and your cruel envious Persecuting by all the Power you
yet have: these manifest your Compelling Spirit, as in Gal. 2.14. it is said,
Why compellest thou the Gentiles? etc. Now he had no power to compel, but by
persuading them, That unless they were Circumcised, and kept Moses's Law, they
could not be saved, Acts 15. And that, in Scripture sense is Compelling, and
You have done as much, and therefore my Charge is not notorious false, but thou
G. W. art notorious Confident and wicked to deny that which is so plainly true;
and therefore herein the notorious, foul, false Slanderer is thy self.

G. W. in his page 301. charges me with Confident Credulity for representing
that Paper or Vision in Testimonys, page 12. as Ed. Buroughs, and he
represents it as John Perrots; but herein he is guilty of that he condemns me
for, Viz. Confident Credulity, for he only produces some Persons from Bristol,
that say they have seen it with J. P's Name to it, but others have seen it with
Ed. Buroughs Name to it, so that I stand on equal terms with him in that; but
also one of G. W's Brother Preachers has granted to me that it was some other
^ B. although not E. Borough, which if so, then it cannot be J. P's, as (...)
represents it, but he too confidently Credulous; neither have I in my (...)
^^^dition assigned it to E. Borough, but E. B. for it is not the Name of (...)
^^^hor that induced me to pulish it, but the Service of the Matter, which (...)
been spoke by Balaam's Ass, ought not to be disesteemed: and if I was t^ (...)
in assigning it to E. Borough, then thou G. W. art not excusable in
representing it J. P's, but as guilty as I am; yet I believe thou would think
thy self hardly dealt by, if I should call thee such Names as some of thy
Brethren have done me about that, (falsely affirming it to be J. P's) saying
that I am Joined with the Devil, past shame, sold my self to work wickedness,
impudent Face, and many more such terms have I had by Post (to put me to
Charge) without any Name, or Place from whence: but this action and the
Language shows its from G. F. or some of his Adherents.

As for those words of mine in Test. page 26. Viz. If any observe not to do
just as others, in Tithes and other Civil Rights, etc. These words G. W. is
offended at, saying in his page 272. That I do account Tyths amongst Civil
Rights; but he misapplies my words; although I confess, I might more fully and
properly expressed my self, considering what a Perverse Generation I had to do
wi^h: but had G. W. been in the Spirit of Charity (which he falsely pretends to)
with the Salvo of not strictly or most proper, and the allowance of Faleor in
Syntax: as such Excuses he can find for more unsound and blasphemous
Expressions of G. F.) he might have allowed, that in some sense, my words are
not so intolerable as he renders them, considering, that in some Places, Tithe
so called, is particular Persons, ( Laymen's, not Clergymen's) proper Estates
by Inheritance; and in such Cases, I know not but Tyths so called, may be
termed a Civil Right; not that I take on me to determine them so (as due by
Equity originally, but as Outward or Temporal Concerns, as Cole Tax, etc. But
your great Advantage against them, lies in that term, or word [TYTHE] but if
the Authority of the Nation should tax the same Persons the same value as their
Tithe under the denomination of Tribute, or other Name, as to them seem meet,
and empower some Civil Officer to collect it, as they do other Taxes, although
they employ them to the same Uses, I see not but great part of the Strength of
many of your Arguments would be abated, it not being for you, as private
Subjects to question or assign how, or to whom the Authority disposes of any
Taxes.

In page 273. G. W. does falsely render me as pleading for them to be led by the
Spirit, to pay Tithes, who have really been convinced of the Evil thereof. That
G. W. does intend thus to render me, is evident from these his words, Viz. Thou
could never suppose that any measure of Grace would allow any, who have been
convinced of the evil thereof [Tythes] in the Payment of them. But G. W. has
not, nor can produce me any where so saying, but its an absolute Forgery of his
own, and plainly shows him a Slanderer and false Accuser. But this I do say,
that some may refuse to do some things, thinking that they are by the Spirit
convinced of the Evil thereof, but be mistaken, and be influenced by the wrong
Spirit, that guides thee; but in time may be restored to better Judgment; and
not take your Commands for New Covenant Ordinances, but find that they are but
Men's Traditions, and that for fear, and to please you, they did do, and refuse
to do some things, and yet not render the Spirit of God to ^^ntradict it self,
but contradictory to your Spirit; and thy thus forging a Sentence, proves thee,
not a Constant Servant of Christ, but of Antichrist.

As it is evident by thy perverting R. R's words, in Test. page 22. where he
says, In all Forms the Lord has of his People -- fitted to act in all Forms,
as the Lord their Light shall lead them. This G. W. says in page 281. Tends to
Rantisme: but proves it not, but says, His (i. e. Gods) Light does not lead the
Children of the Free Woman to act in all Forms, etc. Neither does R. R. any
where so say, only, that they are fitted to act in all Forms, as the Lord shall
lead them. So that by R. R's words, they are not fitted to act in any Form the
Lord does not lead them into, but as he leads them into any Form, they are
fitted to act therein; and G. W. I think herein thou have spoke more Truth than
thou were aware of, for I believe the Lord has many Children whom he does not,
nor ever will lead into your Form (of Female-Prelates in the Church, although
you impose them as indispensible New Covenant Ordinances) to act therein,
therefore, not All Forms, as thou say: but that which R. R. intended by those
words, was to show his Christian Charity to some honest minded amongst you and
other distinct Forms of Professors of Christianity, that THEY were accepted of
God, not in respect to your Form before others, but as they loved and feared the
Lord, doing that which is just, says R. R. And this Spirit of Charity to other
Persuasions, is to you proud Pharisees, a Rock of Offense and Stumbling Stone
(but precious to the Meek and Upright hearted) and is that you hate, and
endeavor to destroy; (read your Figure in Esau) in whom, or wherever it is
brought forth, and after which the Dragon, through you, casts such Floods of
Wickedness and false Accusations: and although the Rage of Esau may for a time
cause Jacob to flee, yet he is blessed, and shall be blessed, and the Mount of
Lordly Esau shall be laid waste. Read who can.

In p. 285. G. W. says that R. R. gives no particular Instance of their
Impositions, but bids them witness the hat: but he does mention their assuming
Power to judge in Cases of Controversy, and their Imposing their Judgment on
their Brethren, on pain of being rejected, as joined to Heathens, and other
particulars R. R. mentions, which are more than witness the Hat; and do witness
thee G. W. a false Accuser, who in page 280. says of J. P. that He is offended
at the Form of Sound Words, THEE and THOU: and this because he says to G. F.
Away with your Set Form of Words Thee and Thou: but its YOU wicked Ones, to
whom he showed your Abominations in many particulars, as may be seen in his
Letter in Print to G. F. I say, it is you Wicked Ones G. W. etc. to whom he
says, Away with your Set Forms, etc. It Is not the words Thee and Thou, for he
allows them to be proper Speech enough, neither does he condemn any that use
them out of Conscience, or in Simplicity; and G. W. had the Man of Sin been at
that Stature and height of wickedness in any, in the days of Isaiah, as he is
come to in thee, when Isaiah said, My Soul hates your New Moons, etc. He might
have accused the Prophet, for speaking against the Commands of God, by the same
Rule as thou charges J. P. Therefore away with thy perverse and false accusing
Spirit, G. W. Its not the Spirit of true Judgment.

And G. W. thou seems very impudent to charge me in Print, to abuse my Wife;
but George, it is not I, but thou, that have abused her ^^d me in representing
us in Print to the World, as at variance, for from thy scandalous and so often
charging me, as abusing her, it was thought by some that knew us not, that we
lived in discontent; but G. W. and his Brother in Iniquity, J. F. could not
effect that, and I hope, never shall; and for all thou term'st us Devil, and
Devils Incarnate, and pratest of the Devil and W. R. but thou have herein
manifested more familiar Converse with that Evil Spirit than any of those thou
so terms; as also, witness thy charging me to act or Sin against Knowledge. And
my Wife does not think it any Abuse to let the World know she was deceived in
and by you, and that you are not what you pretended to be, and once she and my
self thought you were (your Fruits have made you manifest; but for the word
[CHEAT] thou art offended at, it was your own term given me in Print, and
returned to you again, as more properly belonging to those among you that
Preach, and have wronged several People. And George, thou have not, nor can
thou prove thy false charging me, to abuse my Wife; but I shall say the less,
because where I am known, I thank God, thy Impudence therein cannot hurt me;
but thine, and J. F's Provocation is so great, it is hard to be born; for such
is the height of thy Envy against me, that you are not satisfied with doing
what you can to raise Difference between my Wife and me, and render me abusing
her, but also thou represents me as one that will sign, own, or set my hand to
that which is not my own; and so not only a Cheat, but what worse you please.
For says G. W. to me, page 291. IF it be thy own -- however it is Patronised by
thee. But hereby G. VV. thou have rendered thy self more like a CHEAT than me,
to subscribe thy self a Constant Servant of Christ, and yet do such Works of
Darkness; for hear what one of thy Brethren R. S. says to F. B. about the word
IF: says he, Thou would fain come out with a Positive Assertion, IF it were not
a Downright Lie; of which it may be, then art Conscious to thy self. Now G. W.
see if this be not thy own Case, and plainly proves thee, etc. guilty of doing
that you condemn others for; which G. W. thou have said is Unchristian, besides
the Slander that is insinuated by thy word IF.

In page 293, and 294. G. W. charges me with acting contrary to my Conscience,
and to be irreligious, at my will and pleasure to lay Religion aside. And this
he proves only by perverting my words, in 4th. Babels, p. 19. where I say, I
condescended to take my Wife in the presence of a Priest, and acquainted him,
that I did it not on account of Religion, but to answer the Law. Now those
words, Viz. I did it not on account of Religion, G. W. perversely applies to the
weighty Concern of Marriage; as if I said I did not Marry on account of
Religion; but that is only his Pervertion; those words are only relating to the
Form; I did not think that Form, of declaring it in his Presence any more
Religious than other ways. And its in the Form that I placed the Indifferency,
as my next words show, Viz. But to answer the Law. And I placed not the
Indifferency in the weighty Concern of Marriage, as G. W. falsely insinuates:
for formerly, when Friends published their Marriages, some to the Justices or
in the Market Place, there might be as much Religion in the one as the other;
for G. F. in his Orders says, They may declare it to the next Justice, or in
the Market Place, or they may not, says he; (although he has made another Law
since) for one Form is no more Religious than another, and that is the true
meaning of my words, and not as G. W. perverts them, to render me as one that
has laid Religion aside; which I believe, he does not out of any mistake, but
wilfully and on purpose to make me Odious to honest People.

In Page 296. G. W. draws a wicked Conclusion, saying, Therefore T. C. etc. may
be good Christians, whilst thus inconsistent with their Consciences. But I
deny his Principles and Practices, and this his perverse Conclusion is not
deducible from my words, but is a Slander of his own inventing, for what I
plead for, is, that People may be free to act according to their Consciences,
and not against them; therefore unless G. W. can prove that I have pleaded for
any such Unconscionable Liberty, he is a False Perverter, as further appears in
page 162. in the Contents of the 6th. Sect. says G. W. of me, He proved
Irreligious. So that his own base begging the Question, he terms Proof; for in
his 6th. Section, in p. 294. as the Master of G. F's Inquisition Office, says
G. W. to me, How Irreligious wast thou in it! As if I had been like his
Brethren, John Tysoe and Christopher Tailor: and if such Men as G. W. etc.
their Questions may be admitted as Proved Charges of so weighty a Concern, as
to prove a Man Irreligious, who knows what may be the Consequence thereof! But
hereby he has DISCOVERED himself to be an IRRELIGIOUS Slanderer, and therein,
Antiscriptural.

In p. (...) After G. W. has drawn his false Conclusion as the Consequence of
my Judgment, he says to me, Thus inconsistently thou might as well argue for
the Christian-Quakers paying Tithes, etc. And then further says, But I must
deny the Consequence. I answer, So do I, G. W. deny Thee and thy Consequence
too, and tell thee, that its an Untruth for thee to infer from my pleading that
one may pay Tithes, who is not convinced of any Evil therein (for it cannot
with Honesty be supposed I intended any other) That the Consequence of this is,
that others may pay Tithes whilst inconsistent with their Consciences: I say,
it is so far from being the Consequence of my Judgment, that it is quite
contrary to it: therefore thou G. W. in this art a very false Accuser and
Perverter; for that is the main thing I oppose and testify against you for.
Because that by your so strict enjoining your Ceremonies on People, and
Excommunicating those that cannot conform to you, not only from Your Society,
but out of the Church of Christ: and by this your Severity you compel some to
be Hypocrites; who to please you, sometimes act things inconsistent with their
Consciences: which is inconsistent with your first Principles.

I intended some further Discovery of this Man of Sin in G. W's Book: but
finding the same Spirit in a Book, Entitled, Righteous Judgment, etc. by R.
Sandiland; who being of another Nation, I shall not take notice of, but the
Licensers and Approvers of his Work, G. W. and the rest of G. F's chief
Prelates of the Second days Meeting concerned, who in that Book of R. S's speak
so much in the speech of Ashdod, that those who have Ears to hear may know they
are of the Kindred of Sanballat (the Enemy of Jerusalem) that good Nehemiah
chased away: for Proof whereof, consider their Wrath and Mockery, in Page 97.

Team, Rogers, Crisp, Penniman, Bullock and Bugg,
Dark, Divel-driven, Dungy Gods desperately lugg.
Observe Reader, first by their Term, Team, they render us five as a Team of
Horses, besides the other black Characters, as Dark, Devil-driven, Dungy-Gods.
These seem to be the Mockers and Scoffers that the Apostle said should arise;
and notwithstanding G. W. and his Brethren have thus Printed Us, as such to be
Abhorred Creatures, yet they have the Impudence to say, That Christ never
taught to call Friends such Names as FOXONIANS (which is only used for
distinction of their Party from the Quakers in general) then surely it may be
concluded, Christ was not their Teacher in these envious Terms, but that
Antichrist was G. Whitehead's and his Brethren's Teacher herein, or else they
would not have the Impudence to say, The Almighty God knows we never
Endeavored to Compel any to a Conformity -- who were not fully satisfied in
their Minds thereto. If they will allow that to be Compelling, what is in the
Scriptures so accounted, then they are already proved guilty thereof, in 3d.
Babels, page 2. but if they will admit of nothing to be termed Imposition or
Compelling but Outward Force, then I confess thy have not as yet Power so to
do; but if none but such be properly Compelling, then Peter and others
concerned with him, to whom Paul said in the Galathians, Why compellest thou
the Gentiles? -- were not guilty; for they had no Power to use Outward Force
any more than you have; but in Scripture Sense, the strict enjoining of Outward
things, as an Absolute Necessity, and as the indispensible Ordinances of the
New Covenant, and without an exact Conformity thereto, will not admit them to
be of the Church of Christ, is COMPELLING; which you have more than Endeavored
to do, for you HAVE so done to the utmost of your Power, to those who are so
far from being FULLY satisfied in their Consciences, that they are not AT ALL
SATISFIED therein, as is already proved, page 9, 10. by your Excommunicating
those from the Church of Christ, who encourage not their Women's Meetings, as
also their Law, Not to SUFFER Marriages without the License of two Women's
Meetings, as in page 7. more at large may be seen. Surely, if they were not
given up to that Lying Spirit that prevailed on Ahab's Prophets, they durst not
have the Face to call the Almighty God to witness to so Gross an Untruth, Viz.
That they have not Endeavored to Compel any to a Conformity -- who were not
FULLY satisfied in their Minds thereto. These Untruths are the Speech of
Ashdod, and discovers you to be Children of Strange Wives.

Now by these several Instances of G. W. etc. their LIES, PERSECUTION, FORGERY,
SLANDERS, PERVERSIONS, also G. W's scornful and disdainful Terms in many
places, Viz. Resemble the Devil, the Devil and W. R. giddy headed Fool, and his
likening W. R. to a Snarling Dog, and terming us DEVILS, DEVILS INCARNATE, and
many more such black Names, it appears.

If it be true, as G. W. says, page 212. Christ never taught to call Friends
FOXONIANS; then surely Christ was not his Teacher in these scurrilous Names
aforenamed; but these do manifest G. W. etc. to be those grievous Wolves which
the Apostle foretold should enter after his Departure, and also which Christ
bid beware of. For this G. W. has not only belyed and abused us, but he has
belyed the Lord, in fathering these his wicked Actions on the Spirit of
Righteous Judgment: but his unrighteous Fruits do prove him, not a Constant
Servant of Christ, as he falsely subscribes himself, but a Servant of the
Covetous and false Accusing Spirit of Ahab and Jezabel; which because Naboth
could not yield to part with his Inheritance, therefore they falsely accuse him
of Blasphemy; which thing is not to be read bare as a History, but as in
Scripture it is said, These Things are an Allegory. For in the Revelations,
2.20. The Church of Thyatira is charged to suffer the Woman Jezabel, (who as
she does now, called her self a Prophetess, to teach and deceive the Servants
of God.

The same Spirit does now work in G. W. etc. against some who, like Naboth,
cannot part with the Inheritance of their Fathers (i. e. the Liberty of their
Consciences) notwithstanding G. F's, etc. Pretensions of Comely Order, etc. as
Ahabs was for a Garden of Herbs, who promised as fair as G. F. etc. can do,
That he would give a better Vineyard: but as Naboth could not then, so cannot
many now part with their Inheritance, that is to say, forsake the Teachings of
the Spirit of Christ in their own Hearts, to obey the Commands of G. W. etc.
who are acted by such a wicked Spirit; for if they should, they might thereby,
not only enslave themselves, but their Posterity to the Will and Lust of G. F.
G. W. etc. or any such hereafter, that may be suffered to put on the Sheep's
Clothing of good words stole from Scripture, to deceive the Simple Hearted, as
they have done: if they have the same presumptious Confidence to write on the
Head of their own Imaginations the same, or such Names of Blasphemy as G. F.
etc. have done to their needless Imaginations. I oppose not the People called
Quakers in general, or their Principle, the Light of Christ Jesus in the Heart
or Conscience of every one, to be thereby taught and led, for of the Truth and
Sufficiency thereof I am well satisfied. But it is this Jezabel's Spirit that I
oppose, which does guide and act this G. W. etc. as is fully discovered by the
aforementioned Lies, Forgeries and Slanders, which are the Grapes of Sodom,
brought forth by this G. W. etc. in whom the wicked One is grown to the height
and Strength of the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition; for none else dare be so
wicked as to father so great wickedness upon the Spirit of Righteous Judgment:
but now the Sheep's-Cloathing is pulled off, from the Woovish Spirit, which
guides G. W. etc. It will not be safe for Friends to follow the Footsteps of
this Flock; for they are not the Paths of the Just. And if it be true, They
which do Evil hate the Light, then this G. W. cannot love it, but is an
Adversary thereto. Although the Wicked shall do wickedly, and shall not
understand, yet the Humble God will Teach; for whose Information this Discovery
is published.

By T. Crisp.


