A CONFUTATION OF Some pretended Reasons for His MAJESTY's Issuing a General
Pardon to the Rebels of Ireland, that will submit: without Exemption of the
Considerable and Influencing Men among them. In Answer (as alleged) to the
late Declaration, framed by the English Nobility, and Gentry of Ireland.
LICENSED, Sept. 5. 1689.

J. FRASER.

I Shall not make Reflections upon the Author, more than to affirm, That the
apparent insufficiency of his pretended Reasons seem to make him one of the
late King James's Counselors, who are famed for nothing but Impudence, and
(...)

He begins with the Mischief that would attend His Majesty's Forces in Ireland,
by lying in the Fields, burning the Country, murdering the Protestants now in
the hands of the Natives, increasing, and continuing a constant Charge to
England; all which, he says, would be the consequence of excepting the most
considerable Men: and the Reasons that he gives, are, That these great Men will
stifle the King's Declaration of Pardon; or, the Clergy will baffle the Credit
of it.

Now, to use the late Duke of Ormond's Character of an Irishman, Let him
alone, said that great and good Man, and he will spoil his own business, is
what we shall find true, if we examine the several parts of this Argument.

For, First he tells us, That the considerable Men would stifle, and keep the
Pardon from the rest. If this were true, he needed not to have proceeded any
further; but he can hardly trust himself so much as to express this Argument,
before he flies to another, as improbable as the former; and that is, The
Clergy will blast and baffle the Credit of the Declaration. Had any but an
Irish understanding undertook this assertion, he would not have insisted upon
two Points, so apparently irrational, and inconclusive, that every Man of
Ireland can prove to be notoriously false, and at the same time have omitted
that which seems to be considerable, (viz.) That the Grandees of the Irish have
such an Influence over the Commonalty, and they such a Love for their Lords,
that nothing could disengage them from their Interests; but that they would
either have a General Pardon, or else Universally Suffer. But this it seems he
thought not of, but grants that if they knew of the Pardon, unless the Clergy
baffled the Credit of it, there was a probability of their submission. Now to
show the palpable weakness of this Argument: Can any imagine that when almost
half of Ireland is in the Possession of His present Majesty, the Vulgar Irish
established there in the same Peace and Security they enjoyed before the
Rebellion, that they will not Communicate this to their Friends, and Relations
in other Parts of the Kingdom, and give them assurance of the same Pardon,
which has been so happily vouchsafed to themselves? They that best understand
the disposition of the Irish, know them to be the most inquisitive People in
the World. A Fellow under a Ditch, looking to his Cows, will ask every one he
meets, What News? And it is impossible to keep public Transactions from being
divulged to the Populace, when the Irish will pass undiscovered through the
Kingdom. This (I think) puts their being acquainted with the Pardon out of
doubt; and for that of their Clergies baffling the Credit of it, that is as
easily answered; for persuasions against matter of Fact will take no place.
When a considerable part of the Kingdom do actually enjoy the full benefit of
the Pardon, who will believe a Man, that only confidently affirms, they will
not? So far is this from a Question, that the Irish have not the least occasion
of suspicion, because they never failed of an Inviolable performance of
Articles from the English.

I think there needs no Reply to all the Direful effects he mentions, as
consequential to their standing out; because by his own Concession, it seems
they will submit, if they hear of, and believe the Pardon: And, I presume, it is
plainly proved that they will do both.

His second Head is allowed. No doubt but the Irish will lay down Arms, and
consequently the Country will be preserved, and immediately put into His
Majesty's hands.

His Third Paragraph, as to what of it relates to the Protestants of Ireland
living upon the Charity of England, the ordinary sort it is true have done so,
but not a Gentleman of an Estate has received any thing. The rest of it needs
no answer as to what is to come, but something may be said of what is past; the
Protestants of Ireland have in a great measure undergone what he presages of
the future, and therefore think they have reason to hope His Majesty will
Graciously vouchsafe them some reparation out of the Estates of the most
notorious Rebels, which can be interpreted no otherwise than as an Act of
Justice to the present Sufferers, and as well as a determent to the Natives,
not to commit the like Barbarity for the future, which if connived with in this
Juncture, will animate them to play the same Game at the next Opportunity.

The Fourth is allowed, and no fear of the Rebels doing any thing in their
power to oblige the English. They are already cloyed with King James's Brass
Sixpences, and have made a sufficient experiment of the Success of the
Protestant Arms, who having so destroyed the flower of their Forces, when but
an handful of Men, what can they expect now from so Great a Captain as Duke
Schomberg at the Head of a Royal Army?

In his Fifth Reason the Irish man appears barefaced, for none but such would
presume to meddle with the Secrets of Kings; he tells us of the Kings
justifying himself to his Foreign Roman Catholic Allies, that it is not for
Religion he prosecutes the War, etc.

This Politician wants good Manners, and should be taught that our King is the
greatest Monarch of Europe, and not (thought it might be more modestly
expressed) accountable to Allies, especially in Matters of Religion, which
however this Spark undertakes to acquaint the World that it is none of His
Majesty's Business; yet we must crave leave to diffent from his ipse dixit, and
both to hope, and believe the contrary, and that in respect of Religion, as
well as Property, he hazarded his Sacred Person for the purchasing the
unspeakable Privileges we now enjoy, as well in Religions as Civil Rights.

He Closes his Politics with two Observations; one is upon the Reasons given
for excluding some from Pardon, though he is so wise as to mention more of
them. But he is Positive in his Opinion, that if God put us in Possession of
Ireland, we have greater security than ever, being safe from a Popish King; I
hope we are, though I suppose he does neither wish nor believe it. But whatever
Prospect of security we have of not being re-inslaved by a Popish King, yet are
we not free from Popish Pretenders: Where is this Proselites beloved Sham
Prince of Wales, and his Bloody Protector the French King? Is it not possible
for them upon any Revolution either Foreign or Domestic, to send (when we are
least aware of it) Arms, and Assistance to cut off the Protestants, when not a
Man of these great Rebels are disabled from Re-acting the former Tragedies? Nay
they are by so much in the better capacity than ever, by how much they are
Possessors of the Treasure and Riches of the Protestants.

He closes this Paragraph like his Brothe Teague, that swears if he had Noting
he would give you Someting; so this Blade has been emptying his Budget, to
prove that nothing will shorten the War, but by pardoning all the Grandees; and
yet at last he tells you, that you shall be satisfied with enough that will
forfeit their Estates, and never accept of the Indemnity; he might then have
saved his labor in his Learned Argument, for the number, excepted is but
Seventy odd, and they such Monsters, that if any in Ireland should stand out,
we may suppose it to be them: but I cannot grant him so much Carriage in any of
his Countrymen as to refuse Pardon; we know them to be so far from that, that
an Irishman will twist a Gad to hang his Father, so that he may have the
favor of being hanged last.

And now comes the Blade to that which we may justly call Libellous, in
offering that to the English Nobility, and Gentry of Ireland, which I fear he
never had himself, a Consideration; and that is, whether they can propose any
thing that will increase the charge and danger of England, since the work is to
be effected by English Lives and Purses, and that they that prescribe these
hazardous and chargeable methods, do not lay their Fingers to the Work.

This, I say, is a mischievous and false Insinuation, and gives the Lie to the
Grand Council of the Nation.

The Gentlemen of Ireland have always, and still do propose that which may
soonest and most scecurely establish that Kingdom in the Hands and Government
of the English, which they believe can never be effected without making
Examples of some few, tho not one of ten thousand.

They own their Preservation (under God) from the King and English of England;
but he asserts a falsehood, which we appeal to the Honorable House of Commons
to justify us against, in affirming, that we will not so much as lay our
Finger to that Burden we pull upon the Lives of the English in the reduction
of Ireland.

The House of Commons received the Address of the Gentlemen of Ireland, praying
to be recommended to his Majesty for that Service, and that not done in a
general manner, but the name of every individual person returned; his Majesty
was pleased to employ all he could find room for: since that twice before the
King and Counsel they have offered their Service to go in the Head of the Army
against the Irish Rebels, many are gone Volunteers, and those that are left,
would according to their several Circumstances do the same, had they
conveniences to carry them. It is strange confidence, that in the Face of the
King and Parliament, he should assume to print such a notorious untruth, as
that the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland will not lay their Finger to the War
they engage England in.

I have thus briefly shown the Folly and rashness of this Irish Minister of
States pretended Reasons for a General Pardon to the Irish, not excluding
Seventy Persons, as Victims for more Thousands of Protestants they have ruined.
I might say much more, but that is done to my hand, in a Letter called the
Mantle thrown off, or the Irishman dissected, which bears date before these
Reasons set forth by Teague, who, I presume, was angry for taking off his
Mantle, and would cover himself with the Fig Leaves of an unwarrantable and
irrational Discourse.

London, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.


