A B^^e^ Relation, and Exact Map of the Harbor o^ New-Ca^t^e, near
Tinmouth-Barre, since December, 1672.
When Eight Ships were overwhelmed by the Freshes, of which Six were (as not
lying difficult) removed and cleared the first month; the other Two being great
and deep laden, sunk in the best of the Harbor, were blown up with Gunpowder
a few months after, with some particulars of what Change happened that Harbor
thereupon to this present August following.

THE two Wrecks called Mr. Vicars, and Mr. Grayes Ships, sunk where before was
not above 10, 12, to 14 foot at low water; the one L lying on her broad side,
the other K back-broken, sat right up, fast dockt, the Freshes running with
such violence from Westward above, betwixt both Ships; and almost round about
them such a whirle Neddee of water, as may be compared to an Oriocano of wind,
had the first Month scoured a Channel on the West side of, and near both these
Wrecks, deep as they are marked 28, 30, to 33 foot also at low water, which
Channel would have run lower, and so settled the Ships out of harms way, had
they not at that depth met with a hard Cole-Mine; whereas at the East Side
toward the Bar the old depth of 10, 12, to 14 foot at low water continued
notwithstanding the greatest Storms, Surfs and Spring-Tides that happened out
the Sea over the Bar, so near the Wrecks for two months together after the
Wrecks were so settled.

For it was the Freshes that overwhelmed these eight Ships in December, 1672.
which no Storms ever did, whereof these two L, K sunk in the best of the
Harbor, as appears by the two Light-houses C, D and the Bar M, for no Ships
could steer into the Harbor by the lights, but must run hazard of being
spoild, if not quite split upon the Wrecks, they being beset in such a manner
as the Wreck L, defended K, from the Sea, East, and K the like for L, from the
Freshes West, that they were absolutely fixed for Ages to continue, and that
Harbor like to be lost for ever.

But since the Powder-blasts upon these two Wrecks L, K, a few alterations has
appeared near the Bar to the better, viz. the Wrecks lying so near the Hurd
Sands N, caused such a strong Sluice betwixt that and the Wrecks, that it has
thrown the Hurd up further Southward, and consequently the River and the Bar
broader than it was before at that place, which is the cause of this in
public. Some small alterations also it has caused on sundry Sands up the
River, of which every Wherry-man can inform, although by what course it has
taken since the blasts: All those places are like in a year or two's time, to
return to its old station; for after the Ship L that had Lead in, was blown
away, where at first it sunk was but 10, 12, to 14 foot, after thirty days
were 28, 30, to 33 foot, and after the blast one third part of four hundred
pieces Lead being taken up at about 28 foot deep, within twenty days after it
shallowed to 17 and 20 foot, and daily more, till all the rest of the Lead
became buried.

These two Wrecks, one very near, and the other above 400 Ton full, laden with
Coals, etc. weighed about eight hundred thousand pound weight apiece, besides
the empty Ships, which by the Ship-Carpenters Rule of proportion ought with all
her Masts, Anchors, Tackle, Rigging, etc. to weigh near as much as her Lading
in weighty Commodities, if she be designed long lived; to these add so many
hundred Ton of Water or Sea atop of them. The difficulty of conveying a
Powder-chest to execute under Water at them on the outside of the Ships, many,
viz. their lying so near the Bar, that what by one constant course or other
happening every year, in three quarters thereof it could not be performed; for
three days before, and three days after every Spring-tyde, reckoning the day
of the Moons change, there is half of the year gone, how often the Wind is East,
North, or N, E in a year, either of those, with a reasonable gale, makes too
great a swell thereabouts to spend Powder-chests below; how many stormy days
are there usually in a year? when, and two days after every storm, no dealing
thereabouts in that business; and worse than all this, rainy-weather sometimes
three or four days, after one days showers, the Freshes will bring down so
swift a Current, that over against Cliffords Fort, and the Figure 30, makes for
a matter of a hundred and fifty fathom length, a gulf, swifter than that of
Florida. To all these, one difficulty more as bad as the worst, the Neddee, or
Whirle of Water, would without great pains and care overturn the Engine from
its designed place, which sundry particular difficulties I mention, because
some unskilful pretenders to this part of the Mathematics, expected that so
great a weight and bulk beforementioned, besides Lead and Stones, in one of
them, should with one Chest containing seven barrels of Powder, be blown up
from that depth, so easy and so high above Water, as the Boys send up Kites,
which could not have been hoped from seven thousand barrels, the Ships not
being to be undermined, and the Powder-chests being fired at the sides of the
Ships; but, were such a business to be done in the Waters of Thames, as many
Chests might be spent, and Ships blown up in twenty days, as could be done at
this Bar in a year at such weather as was there six months together; and
every day one could be done to an empty Ship in such streams as the Thames, and
where the Chest could be conveyed in the hold.

At any of which Weathers, or at the nearest of a Slack (if any ever be there)
all former known ways would have failed, as diverse (to any other purpose but
vain expenses) were endeavored before my coming there; for no flying Fusee
would burn to the bottom, but either bend or break, which must needs choke or
drown the Wildfire by the way; so that possibility it self became to be
questioned, whether ever the Harbor were like to be cleared, or at the best to
the cost of many thousands; thereupon the Magistrates sent up a Relation of the
dangerous condition His Majesty's Port of New Castle was in; His Majesty was
pleased to send unto them a new way to convey a Fire-Ball through a hollow Mast
fastened to the Chest at the bottom of the Sea, the Chest shaped and ordered
within and without in such a figure, as the designed place could be executed
upon, as true under Water, as Guns can send out Bullets above, which hitherto
was never known, or at least not known to be practiced in any Country by any
Nation whatsoever before; by virtue whereof the Author can destroy and remove
all such Sinckers, as was this and the last year, or at any time hereafter may
be designed by the enemy, as certain (without undermining) as Rocks (which
cannot be done but with undermining) can be blown up above ground, whether the
Sinckers are filled with Sand, Coals, Stones, Bricks, Mortar, in a mass, or
loose, the like of any other matter of weight whatsoever.

And in regard the appearance of Smoke above Water after the blast so far
under, has startled the inquisitive Chimist in point of nature, that the
Seawater being salt, and Gunpowder likewise salt, its Smoke also salt, must
therefore certainly incorporate together, and none of that Smoke ever be seen
above-water.

I have purposely placed this figure V to show how the Water and Smoke, with
pieces of the Ship did appear for a moment or two above water, a matter of a
quarter of a minute after the Powder took fire below, without any contradiction
to that rule of nature; for these six or seven barrels of Powder spent together
under Water, produced no more Smoke or report above, than is usual from one
Ordnance (although those that stood a mile off upon the Hills, felt the ground
shake under them at the blow) and doubtless therefore by that natural rule, the
Smoke must all have dissolved into the Salt Water, had the blast been deeper,
or the quantity of Powder less, which being so much, and the motion so swift
through such a shallow as twenty eight foot, some Smoke appeared above, by the
same rule, as a Gnatt passing through a small flame, must dissolve in the
flame; but by reason of its swift passage, part of him appears scorcht on
the other side. And for another Gentleman's opinion, to confirm the foregoing,
that this lower Smoke W having not so swift a way as the uppermost X before it:
where the report began was therefore the sadder color, as if it had been dyed
in the passage, is not so probable, but palpable to the contrary in my opinion;
rather that the sadness of the Smoke about the Water W passing through the
Ship, and up with the Coals, became blackish by the Coals; and nothing more
certain, but that almost all the Smoke was mingled with the Sea; else had but
half of it broke out above at X, it must consequently have shaken both South
and North Sheilds.

LONDON, Printed for the Author EDMOND CVSTIS, 1673.


