The Cruel Mother; BEING A true Relation of the Bloody MURDER Committed by M.
Cook, upon her Dearly beloved Child; with the causes wherefore she did it: Her
occasional speeches to several Friends and others that came to visit her in
Prison, With the manner of her Execution and demeanor there.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by W. R. 1670.

An Exact and True Narrative of the Horrid, Inhumane, and Unnatural MURDER
Committed by M. Cook upon the Child of her own Bowels.
OF all sins there is no sin cries louder in the ears of God and Man than that
of shedding of Blood; innocent Blood, What a Heinous, Inhumane, Barbarous and
wicked sin it is? and such was the sin here, as hereafter will more largely
appear in the ensuing Discourse.

The sad occasion of this Relation is one Mary Cook, the Wife of Thomas Cook,
living in Cloath-Fair near Smithfield, a Mother of three Children, two Sons and
one Daughter, which Daughter was the Child of her chief affection, and the
subject of her chief affliction, upon whom she pitched to act this horrid
Murder, she is aged about thirty seven years, of a very silent melancholy
temper, troubling her thoughts too much with care for the things of this world
(as with bitter sighs she has often since acknowledged: She was very subject
to conceive discontents to her self, and to construe most passages from her
Relations to the worst sense, (whether really or seemingly intended, we will
leave to her Relations (who are more nearly concerned) to consider how little,
or how far they might contribute to the increase of her melancholy Spirit, and
so hasten her to this Ruin.) We will not charge them with any thing, only
relate what she has after in private and public confessed to several that are
ready to give a very just account (if occasion require) Viz. That her conceived
discontents at the unkindness of her Relations (as she supposed) did make her
grow so big with melancholy, (a good bait for the Devil to work upon) Her
natural life grew a burden to her, and her spiritual life she grew more and
more mindless of. So prevalent are the Devils temptations when he meets with
such melancholy subjects; and when he had found this way would work about his
purposes to her destruction, he was not wanting to stir up instruments to
hasten and heighten the same; So at last she comes to enter into secret counsel
with the Devil and her own wicked Heart, how to bring her life to an end: At
last she resolves upon drowning her self, and had attempted it many months
agon, but being providentially met by some that knew her, was disappointed of
this sinful and sad purpose: Some months after she resolves upon hanging her
self, and to that end got several Sceans of Silk, and in her own Seller was
going to act that dreadful Tragedy, but her Husband providentially approaching
prevented her.

And it is worthy of note, for all that read this sad story that still the
Devil prevailed with her to keep his Counsel from the knowledge of such friends
as might any way discourage her, in the prosecution of this wicked design, by
which means he had her linked the faster to his chain, in order to her
destruction: For it is more than probable, had she made her temptations know to
some sober Christian, means with God and her Heart might have been used, to
have plucked her out of this snare of the Devil, but she still persists and now
at l^st resolves to cut her own throat, and but a day or two before she acted
this last Tragedy, it is observable, she a little gave vent to her inside; had
wisdom and Gods blessing been observed, to have made some narrow search into
the nature of what she uttered. For upon some occasion of her Husbands being to
accompany some persons upon such occasions as she seemed not liking to, did
thus reply: if he went, she would then throw her Child in the fire, namely,
that little Babe she soon after murdered, but by his compliance at this time,
she was prevented: But the devil does not leave her, he has her too fast to
lose his labor; for on the sixth of February, being the Lords day 1670/69
between eight and nine in the morning, she having overnight lodged a knife
about her with an intent, (as she has often since confessed) to cut her own
throat the next opportunity, rising in the morning she goes down Stairs to make
her Fire, and then whets her knife to make it more ready, then puts it to her
throat making some impression upon her skin, and then withdrew her hand again:
Now the Devil that is never wanting to help forward wicked purposes, puts her
upon a fresh cosultation, what should become of that Child she so much loved
above the other two Children when she was dead, upon this she conceived better
to rid that out of this world first, so should she by that means come to her
own end, upon which she goes up stairs, and finding her Husband absent, she
with great violence took the Babe out of the Cradle, a Daughter of about two
years and a quarter old and cut its throat, in a ghastful manner, the poor Babe
(as she has related) gave three or four lamentable sigh^ and so departed;
immediately she threw it from her upon the fire-Hearth, and then passionately
stamped with her feet; her Husband hastily running up stairs, and at the door
asking, Wife, what is the matter? She dolefully replies, she had given the
Child its breakfast, no sooner had she spoke, but he beheld with an afflicted
spirit his Babe lie bleeding upon the ground, in which amaze, breaking out into
great lamentation, a Lodger and Neighbors approach, and a Chyrurgeon sent for,
but all in vain.

A Constable is sent for to secure the Murderer, by whom she is carried before
Sir W. Turner, who hearing the Fact with great amazement, committed her to
Newgate, where she remained till the Sessions came, in which time she
miscarried, and was in all likelihood in such a condition as might put a period
to her life before Sessions came. But Divine Providence had otherwise decreed,
she must live to satisfy the justice of the Law, and be a Terror to deter all
others from being guilty of the like Crime: nay, if they have any Grace, from
having any thoughts of so horrid a Blood-guiltiness.

During the time of her being in Newgate, she continued a woman much dejected
in spirit and deeply afflicted with melancholy, notwithstanding the utmost of
means was used both for body and soul, as if so be God had marked her for an
abject of terror to all surviving Mothers, both that were spectators, and also
for the future that shall hear of, or read this bloody Narrative, her
obdurating and impenetrable heart, not being capable to receive that daily
supply of comfort or consolation which she had, did much discourage the
faithful Ministers and People of God, who was very earnest with her and God in
her behalf; always very slow and backward in speech to every thing of good
unless to the confession of the unnatural, inhumane, notorious, material
bowelless cutthroat murder: Upon which at the first, rather inclined to
desperation, at last did believe there was mercy enough, and pardoning grace in
the Lord Jesus Christ, but she could find in her self no comfort of it, though
desires after it; all this while so far forth as her wicked companions and
fellow Prisoners did not by their graceless discourses, and unseemly actions
prevent; she employed in duty: but she told us she could only word it and not
heart it: Another time told us that if she could be but once more sensible of
the light of Gods countenance being revealed to her, she did not care if she
died the next moment (which was the most honest expression that ever we heard
from her,) For says she, the reproachful, ignominious bodily death I do not
fear, it is my due debt I ought to pay; but the death of my Soul I dread. She
told us a day or two after she had received some comfort, but soon eclipsed,
and lost again by reason of melancholy vapors, her intellects being much
impaired, and the Devil improving the present advantage; but her usual request
of Ministers and the People of God was not voluntarily, but as the discourse of
others made way and exhausted it; Thus you have an account of her quotidial and
daily temper. The Sessions now beginning at Justice Hall in the Old Baily, on
the 21. Feb. She was there Arraigned and Cast for her life.

By the favor of the Bench, she had a weeks time granted her to prepare for
her death; and to die on Wednesday the second of March in Smithfield, over
against Cloth-fair Gate, where formerly she lived, and committed that
out-crying unparalled Murder.

Dr. St. a very Able and Reverend Divine; was had to her on Monday before she
suffered, both to see how she was prepared for Death, and to understand the
truth as to what might be the occasion of her committing that horrid sin; and
that Religion might not be aspersed. He demanded solemnly and seriously,
whether that was the occasion of it, and that she would give the truth of it as
a dying woman; She answered no, there was no such thing: but being pressed
farther with the same motives said, she did not believe her Relations to love
her so well as they ought, and she being under some distempers of body a week
or a fortnight before, and they would not seek out for help; She did it out of
revenge to them which she did intend to have done to her self, but going up
stairs with the Knife, found the innocent Babe (the Devil turning the
temptation) ^^leep in the Cradle, took it out and most barbarously Cut the
Throat of it, it giving one shrike, and lifting up the eyes to see from whom
the the fatal bloody stroke came, and so became the Mothers sinful Sacrifice.

March 1. Being the day before her Execution, her Husband being gone from her
most part of the Afternoon, being jealous he was gone to seek her Pardon; she
declared to a friend that was with her, That she did not desire a Pardon, but
if she could obtain a Pardon in Christ, it was all she desired; continuing very
cheerful all night, with breathing after Christ, and begging Pardon for her
sins. After half an hours rest, which was all she took in the night, her
Husband asked her how it was with her, she answered, not so well to boast, she
found greater discoveries of Christ to her poor Soul, then she heretofore had
and was more cheerful and freer to discourse of her condition this day, then
any day before, since she came nto Prison.

On the day of her Execution, reading Isaiah 43. ver. 1. But now thus says the
Lord that created the^ O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not:
For I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine. She
said to her Husband, what has the Lord Redeemed me, such a sinner as (...) am,
redeemed?

Being asked by her Husband when she was going into the Cart, If she would not
take her Bible with her, she answered she could not boast to the world, she
desired a Pardon from Christ in her heart, and said she freely forgave every
one, and desired forgiveness of all, and that they would pray to God for her,
that he would forgive her. Being brought to the place of, Execution in
Smithfield, a Gibbet being Erected at Cloth fair Gate after her Prayers, and
Prayers made for her, and many good expressions uttered by her, the Executioner
did his Office. She being observed to lift up her hands after she was turned
off, so long as she was judged to have any sense left in her.

FINIS.

