A Meet help. OR, A Wedding SERMON, Preached at New Castle in New England, June
19th. 1694.

At the Marriage of Mr. John Clark, AND Mrs. Elizabeth Woodbridge.

By Mr. John Cotton, Pastor of the Church at Hampton.

Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge. Hos. 3.3. Thou shall not play the
Harlot, and thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be for thee.
Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. Boston, Printed by B. Green, and
J. Allen. Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop over against the Town house, 1699.

To the Candid READER.
THis small Tract had come to light before now, had it not been for the
averseness of the Author thereunto. The Auditory to whom it was Preached, were
so satisfied and pleased with the Discourse that they did generally in the
season of it, desire it might be made public; the unwillingness of the
Preacher (whose design was wholly to have stifled it) has hitherto hindered and
delayed it; but being overcome at last, others that got the perusal of it, do
judge that whether in season, or out of season, it may be useful. Marriage is
one of the most considerable Changes that befall the Children of men in this
World; and though it be so, that some spend a considerable age, and live and
dye without tasting the sweets of it; whether frighted by an apprehension of
imagined and insuperable sorrows attending it, or from a natural frigidity, or
a morose unsociable temper, or on religious grounds or pretenses, or perhaps on
other reasons not mentioned, must be left to themselves; but the generality of
the Children of men do so far answer the Law of their Creation, and the end of
this Institution that they do incline and desire, and in time actually enter on
this Change, without which the World would cease; and we cannot easily see, how
the great things that God has yet to do on the Stage of the World, would be
accomplished. Marriage then being of such general concernment to the Sons and
Daughters of Adam, and to the Church of God; it is good for every one to be
advised about it, and when they engage in it, so to do it as may best answer
all its ends; and wisdom in this as in all other weighty Concerns, must be
sought of him who gives liberally, and upbraideth not: it being God alone that
can guide into ways that are plain and easy, or sweeten any Change or Condition
to us, and render that State that would be otherwise thorny and perplexing to
us, to be comfortable and pleasant. Hence its requisite, that not only his
presence be sought, but his Oracles consulted; which some neglecting, and
driving on furiously, having their heat kindled by some secular Interest, have
run themselves into such intanglements and intricacies, that they could
afterward find it easier to bewail themselves in; then extricate themselves out
of. The Sac^^^^ (...) its Counsels in reference to this Affair; the Apostle
spends a large Chapter upon it. 1 Cor. 7. and though he gives liberty to the
Unmarried to pitch on whom they will, yet he limits it with that restriction,
only in the Lord, which some not observing, it may be said of their Matches, as
God sometimes speaks of Isreal's Kings. Hos. 4 8. They have set up Kings, but
not by me, they have made Princes, and I knew it not; on which account it was
sometimes spoken in reference to one of them: That he gave him in his anger,
and took him away in his wrath This is enough to show us, that Truths of this
nature, are sometimes to be managed, opened, unfolded and applied by the
Ministers of the Gospel; and the Ensuing Sermon being at such a time, was
pertinent to the purpose in hand, and a word in season; and is thereupon
commended to thy perusal, with sincere wishes, it may prove to thy benefit.

Per Auditorem.
A Meet Help. Or, A Wedding SERMON.
WE are invited this day (to a Wedding Supper, I cannot say) but to a Wedding
Sermon. Marriage as well as meat is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. 1 Timothy 4.5. It is the worst Clandestine Marriage says one Fuller
when God is not invited to it; when he is by Prayer and the Sanctification of
his Word sought with it, as it is nobly Public, so may we expect it will be
lastingly prosperous. That Word of the Lord which may he bless to the
Sanctification of this, and so rendering it, you may and Written,

Genesis II. 18. And the Lord God said, it is not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him an help meet for him. WHEN the Maker of the World had
finished his glorious workmanship, the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Host
of them, and had assigned man, who was as an Epitome or Compendium of the
Creation (a Microcosm in this Macrocosm a lesser World in thi^ greater) a
convenient domicil or habitation, together with a Calling, in a Garden of his
own planting; He takes notice yet of something wanting, at least for man's
convenience and comfort and resolves upon the providing of it. Indee^ Junius,
Piscator and Diadoti apprehend this done before man had his place assigned him
in the Garden; and I do grant it was on the Sixth Day, and before God took a
Survey of his whole work, and pronounced thereon, That it was ver^ Good: Though
I do at present concur with Pareus, that it was after he was brought into the
Garden. Then is the want of a Meet Help most seen, when a man is fixed to any
certai^ place, or in any particular Calling, and it is goo^ at such a time to
look out for that which Go^ did not see good that man should be without God
Himself looked out for the first man, as good Parents sometimes do for their
Children, and so he does indeed for all ever since, Matches are made in Heaven,
and God brings to every Man his Wife that has one, verse 22. He consults the
good of man more than man does his own; ungrateful he, if he does not consult
Gods Glory. God consults his pleasure, as well as his profit; ungrateful he, if
he content not himself in the bounds that God has set him; and if he content
not himself to drink waters out of his own Cistern. Prove. 5.15. There cannot an
inconveniency attend man's condition but God spies it sooner then man himself:
it was not Adam said, It is not good that man should be alone, but it was the
LORD GOD said it: nor is man more ready to remedy his own inconveniency then
God is, I will make him an help meet for him, says God. It is great folly,
unbelief, and ingratitude for man not to rest contented with God's care of and
provision for him, and disposal of all his concerns: all a man's own care is
inopportune and insignificant without it, and misplaced where that is
distrusted. The Apostle teaches better, when he says, Casting all your care
upon him for he cares for you. 1 Pet. 5.7. Though I find man immediately upon
his Creation, and in innocence in the Garden of Eden; I may not now stand to
pick and present you with the many and various roses and flowers I find him
surrounded with, for the time I am confined to, will permit me to gather no
more than I can hastily catch at, growing upon these two Stalks, scil. The
Observation that the Lord God, man's Maker, makes of the man he had placed in
the Garden, and his resolution thereupon; (for of these two parts do the words
we have read consist) the Observation he makes is, That it is not good that man
should be alone, his resolution thereupon is, I will make him an help meet for
him. I say first, the Observation he makes, is, that it is not good the man
should be alone, and therein he does recommend it as an Observation unto us,
Scil.

Obs. That it is not good that the man should be alone: This is what the Lord
God has said, and we may safely say it after him; and the Lord God said, said,
whether in so many words and syllables, or in the mind of man, or revealing it,
by an Angel, or any other way says Austin, there is no need to seek, but
rather that we understand what he did say; (be sure it serves to represent the
Counsel of God in this matter (the same which he took in the Creating of man)
or as acting by Counsel, and manifesting i^ in the execution thereof.)

These are then the questions proper here to be enquired into: Scil.

1. In what sense we are to understand the phrase alone? 2. In what respect it
is not good that the man should so be?
Quest. 1. In what sense we are to understand the phrase alone?

Sol. Not of any solitude or solitariness; for in some sense it is good for a
man to be alone, and at some times, as when he goes to meditate, etc. and at
such a time as the Philosopher said, he is never less alone, then when he is
alone; but by alone here we are to understand, without a Compeer, Consort,
Companion as other Creatures had, without a woman, without a Wife, without a
Meet Help, which it is therefore added, shall be prepared: It is not good that
the man should be alone in this respect; which is to be understood again of the
species (of mankind) not of Individuals, for it is granted of some Individuals,
it is good of them to be alone, even in this respect, as of such as them
mentioned. Mat. 19.12. and so such as are of an unsociable nature, are like
brambles and briars, will tare and afflict all that come near them; and so
likewise at some times, as in times of persecution it is good for a man not to
touch a woman, says the Apostle Paul. 1 Cor. 7.1. but then he speaks only of
that particular time, as he explains himself, v. 26. I suppose therefore that
this is good for the present distress; and there may be yet other things that
may render it convenient to this or the other individual to be alone, or for
the present time, but in general, and for mankind it is not good. That is then
the Second Enquiry, Scil.

Quest. 2. In what respect it is not good that the man should be alone?

Sol. 1. In that it does not answer the end in man's Creation. As,

1. The propagation of mankind; had man been or continued alone, how should
mankind in a natural way, and regularly have been propagated? and should every
man now do so, what would become of the whole world in one Age? God could
indeed have Created at first such a number of men as he did of Angels, but it
was Gods pleasure to make of one blood, all Nations of men to dwell on all the
face of the Earth. Acts 17.26. and in order to the obtaining of that end, it
was not good that man should be alone. 2. His gathering a Church out of
mankind, that was Gods end we see, in that it is done, but that could not have
been, had mankind not extended beyond one individual. 3. The Glory of his Mercy
and Justice in Sending his Son in the Flesh, born of a woman which would never
have been, had the man been alone, or had there been no woman; In these
respects it don't answer Gods end in man's Creation, and therefore is not good
that the man should be alone.
2. It don't answer man's immediate end, nor indeed any end of man; it is not
good, i. e. neither bonum, jucundum, or utile, it is neither pleasant nor
profitable, nor indeed honorable. The ^^od that man enjoyes in this world (not
to ^^eak of that which he does, which is bonum ^^^estum, the good of honesty)
is either ^^easure, profit or honor, but for man to be a^^^e does not make for
either of these.

1. It does not make for his pleasure; solitariness (...) very uncomfortable
the Wife man tells us, ^cles. 4.9, 10, 11, 12. Man is a sociable Creature, ^^d
to such an one a solitary life, though aboun^^ng with all other good things,
would be tedi^^s and unpleasant; it must needs be so to him ^^o is alone in a
wide world, and has none of (...) kind with him, though the Creatures should
(...) subjected to his dominion. 2. Nor does it make for his profit; profit is
^^mmonly aimed at in marching as well as plea^^re, and there are more ways then
one where^^ it is obtained, it does not then make there^^re to lead a single
life; you know the proverb, ^^at he that would thrive, must first ask his ^ifes
leave, and if so, he must have one to ask; (...) does not besure make for the
profit of the and, if by accident it should to the profit of this ^^dividual;
as that the man should be alone ^oth not make for his profit, so neither 3.
Does it make for his honor; Marriage is ^onourable in all, it is said, Heb. 13
4. that does ^ot then make for his honor which is contrary ^o it; Thus we see
in short then, that for man to be alone in the sense said, does neither answer
Gods end, nor man's, and therefore it is not good. I might have been larger in
showing it, but considering the Occasion, I shall content my self with what has
been said, and proceed to the Use we should make of it.
USE 1. Is it not good that the man should be a lone, or without the woman?
this condemns Misogynists, such as cry out against all women, hate woman kind
(if there be such among mankind) are bitter, and full of spiteful invectives
against them; they hate and inveigh against them, whom it is not good that man
should be without, and indeed that they are without them is commonly the reason
why any do; their quarrel with them is, that which the Fox in the fable had
with the Grapes, they are out of their reach: Women are Creatures without which
there is no comfortable Living for man: it is true of them what is wont to be
said of Governments, That bad ones are better than none: They are a sort of
Blasphemers then who despise and decry them, and call them a necessary Evil,
for they are a necessary Good; such as it was not good that man should be
without. Prove. 18.22. Whos^ finds a Wif^ finds a good thing, and obtains
favor of the Lord* And they are spoken of as the desire of the eye Ezekiel.
24.16, 21. It is with a more than Fem^nine impotency, that any declaim against
the whole Sex for the infirmity of some, and it may be without that cause
either: they should all remember, that they are Sons of Women, that their
Mothers were Women, and that otherwise they had never been Men; Yea, that the
Lord JESUS CHRIST our Blessed Savior, was born of a Woman, and that Blessed
was the Womb that bare him and the Paps which gave him suck. Luke 11.27. And
that the Apostle Paul who was not for the cumbrances that attended a Married
Estate in times of Persecution, yet calls Marriage honorable in all. Heb.
13.4. And another Apostle, would have honor given unto Women as the weaker
vessels, and as being heirs together of the Grace of Life. 1 Pet. 3.7. Nay the
Hebrews err on this extreme, while they say, There is nothing good but a Woman,
and that he who lives without a Wife, remains without good etc. They think
hither looks that of Solomon, in Prove. 18.22.

2. This Condemns them who condemn or contemn Marriage; it condemns them who
live a Monkish life, so much in request among the Papists; and it condemns that
Popish conceit of the Excellency of Virginity, as if it were more perfect and
complete than a Married State: whence many among them are devoted to it, as in
their Nunneries etc. God was of another mind, It is not good, said God; they
are differently minded then it seems from their Maker, the All wise God; they
don't say after him, who thus practically say, It is good for man to be alone.
How Monks who professedly live alone (and thence have their name Monks) will
acquit themselves of being of a different Judgment, in this matter from their
Maker, I do not presently see. I remember in Church History, I have read of one
who immediately upon Marriage, without ever approaching the Nuptial Bed,
indented with the Bride, that by mutual consent they might both live such a
life, and according did sequestring themselves according to the custom of those
times, from the rest of mankind, and afterward from one another too, in their
retired Cells, giving themselves up to a Contemplative life; and this is
recorded as an Instance of no little or ordinary Virtue; but I must be pardoned
in it, if I can account it no other than an affort of blind zeal, for they are
the dictates of a blind mind they follow therein, and not of that Holy Spirit,
which says, It is not good that man should be alone: Nor can I from the same
principle be an advocate for such who lead a single Life merely through
Moroseness or Aversation to humane Society, or where there is no sufficient
let to a double one, and the Maturity of years call for it. Indeed where there
is a sufficient cause, there is nothing to be said against it, though what is
so, to be duly considered: And though Batchelours as Mr. Fuller says of them
in his holy and profane State, may be the strongest Stake in the Hedge of the
Common wealth, and the best work, and the greatest merit, for the Public have
sometimes proceeded from such, while both in affection and means they have
Married and Endowed the public; yet were there no other Stakes in the Hedge,
it would soon fall to the ground, for when these are plucked up what would
uphold the Hedge? They do nothing honestly toward the worlds continuance,
increasing God's Subjects or the Kings; and they come under the Condemnation of
that Vulgar Sentence, Nascitur indignus, per quem non nascitur alter, that they
are unworthy to Live themselves who are not instrumental of giving life to
others.

3. They do well who in the season of it seek a suitable Companion, and so do
they who accept being suitably sought to; both do well: they enter into an
Estate, wherein there are more hands to labor, more wits to advise, more means
to comfort one another; and otherwise to do good. They both do well, and
therefore should not be discouraged in it: Parents should not be too hard in
giving their consent, though the Match is not always to their minds, they
should remember that they are made in Heaven, and that there is a Secret
Providence inclining the Hearts of Persons in this matter, which they should be
wary how they withstand, least they should do as Sampsons Parents did, who for
a while opposed his motion of that nature, Not knowing that it was of the Lord.
Judge. 14.3, 4* Having faithfully and discreetly advised their Children, they
should not too Tyranically impose upon them. We know by long Experience that
forced Matches any way seldom do well: the Persons sought too should not be
too hasty in their rejections, even there where they don't see reason presently
to accept; nor indeed is it prudence to be too hasty any ways in that to which
deliberation is called for. It is often seen in the World, that they who are
forward to reject the Marchantable are at last glad of he refuse. They should
not be too hasty, I say, in rejecting. He that gives his Virgin in Marriage,
says the Apostle, does well. 1 Cor. 7.38. And so does She who gives her self
with her Parents leave; and though he adds, but he that gives her not in
Marriage does better, he only means in some respects, and at the present
juncture, as he said before for the present distress, and to avoid trouble, as
he says, verse 28. If a Virgin marry she has not sinned, nevertheless such
shall have trouble in the flesh, and that so she might have liberty for things
of a Spiritual nature, verse 34. But in other respects and according to the
common order appointed by God, she does well. They have done well both in
seeking and accepting, who are the Occasion of our Assembling here at this
time; and it is with great Approbation, I suppose, on all hands that we meet to
Celebrate it publicly: That they may go on to do well, let it be our united
Prayers.

4. Let not them who are not alone, but united in Wedlock, be as if they were
alone; though in some respects I grant they should be so, and that according to
Apostolical precept; they that have Wives, should be as if they had none. 1
Cor. 7.27. i. e. in respect of their minding Spiritual and Heavenly things: but
let them not be as if they were alone in respect of their duty to each other;
let not the Husband be so in neglecting the duty of the Husband, nor the Wife
in neglecting the duty of the Wife: let not the Wife be so by the Husbands
neglect, nor the Husband by the Wives: let them not be unsociable after they
have Covenanted and Vowed a consortship, and solemnly plighted their Troth to
each other: better be alone in reality than live so, or as if they were so,
after they are wedded. I here add, let their Company with each other, be better
than their being alone: Solitariness is better than some Company: Yoke-fellows
should endeavor to endear one another by their mutual sweet Society. A
Minister by virtue of his Calling indeed is to be much alone, if he is so in
his Study, he should not be so when he comes out of it too; and he should
always find that of his Companion to be instar Omnium, in the room of and
beyond all other. To these who are now to be put together, I pray they may
never be alone more but when occasionally asunder, they may yet be present with
each other in Spirit and Effigy, that God may be always graciously present
with them both, and that they may draw out the thread of their lives with an
equal extent here, and inherit life eternal together in the other world. It is
not good that the man should be alone. We come now in the Second place to the
resolution hereupon. I will make him an help meet for him: which does resolve
us in what God did, that he did make such an help; and in that as an
Observation.

Obser. That God did make the Woman to be an help for the man. So did Adam call
the person God brought to him, to be a meet help: context verse 23. I shall
speak to this in a very few words, as few as it can be shown in: in what
respect the Woman is an help meet for the man, and hint the use that is to be
made of it.

The Woman is or should be an help meet for the man in these following
respects. Scil.

As She answers natural, oeconomical and Theological ends; and how she does
each, I shall show presently: but I must first take notice, that the word here
rendered Meet, is in the Original, As before him. Jerome reads it, Lake to him:
the Seventy, According to him: as before him. i. e. In his Image of his own
kind, like to him, which should be as it were, a Second self, Graceful in his
eyes; grateful to him, always as it were in his sight, and assistant in the
work of his life; lifting as it were over against him, as the word is rendered,
over against him. Josh. 5.13. So that it issues in what it is here rendered,
Meet for him. Brutes are an help to man for many ends, whence they are called
Jumenta, but they are not a meet help in this sense; they don't agree with him
specie, they be not associated with him. etc. The woman is made to be and is a
meet help to man.

1. As She answers natural ends, and so is,

1. A most sweet and intimate companion, and an entire friend; there is no
stricter or sweeter friendship than conjugal; as it was the first in the world,
so it is most natural.

2. Is helpful in the propagating of mankind. Ruth 4.11. She helps build up the
House.

2. As She answers oeconomical ends, and so is assistant in Family affairs, in
the Government of the House, ordering things within doors, especially (for the
house is her Center) and she should be an help as before him, should be a
keeper at home. Tit. 2.5. Not a rash wrambler abroad: the Shellfish is an
Hierogliphick hereof, which carries her house on her head: like which therefore
the painter drew Venus. The woman should keep at home, Educating of her
Children. Prove. 1.8, 9. 1 Timothy 5.14. Keeping and improving what is got by the
industry of the man. The wise man finds a glass wherein good Wives may see
themselves. Prove. 31.

3. As She answers Theological or Divine ends.

1. And so is an assistant to him in his Piety, and Honesty, a promoter of
that; the Apostle supposes them Praying, yea and Fasting together. 1 Cor. 7.5.
1 Pet. 3.7. So the man and woman, as one says, are a Domestic Church. Indeed
Julian the Apostate, Scoft at the Woman's being a meet help in this respect, in
that she was the person that drew man into Sin, that seduced him: It is true,
She being seduced her self, seduced him; but it does not follow, but that She
was given for another end, and often attains it, and the missing it then should
make Women the more wary for the future: And though the Apostle does suppose
them in a Married Estate, more involved in the cares of this life. 1 Cor. 7.32,
33, 34. Yet he supposes them likewise helpers forward of each other in Faith
and Love. verse 16. and 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.

2. So an helper of his Infirmity, a remedy of unlawful Love; to avoid
Fornication, says the Apostle, Let every man have his own wife, etc. 1 Cor.
7.2. So that Satan tempt not for incontinency, verse 5. The woman is a meet
help as she answers these ends.

USE. Did God make her for this end? Hence first man needed her, and therefore
now should not despise her.

2. She was made for man, and therefore should not despise but honor him, and
yield Subjection to him as her Head; the Apostle infers this from her being
made for man out of man, after man, and yet falling before him. 1 Cor. 11.8, 9.
1 Timothy 2.12, 13, 14

3. Hence of the more public Service the man is, the greater helper is the
woman called* to be, that becomes his Wife; And the more Service she does to
God and her Generation, while she does the duty of her place, and is the more
happy therein; a good encouragement to Marry good Ministers, though they should
live but poorly, and not have their reward in this Life.

4. Hence they who be not meet helps, do not answer their end; they who are an
affliction and scourge to man, pervert the Order of God, and nature, and of
such an one (says Chrysostom) adjutorium Diaboli non viri

5. Hence man is to use her as a meet help, as a companion, not as a Servant,
and should again be an help, and an head to her. Ephesians. 5.28.

6. Hence men may see what Yoke fellows they are to choose, and what help to
expect from them, and they who want may be encouraged for to seek: Si qua voles
apt nubere nub^ pari, every good man will not suit every good woman, et e contra.

7. Let the woman be what she was made for, a meet help, not an unmeet
hindrance; that is the description given of the woman in the Text, God might
have said, I will make a woman, or a wife, but he rather chose this Periphrasis
expressive of her Character, showing what she should be to her Husband. And
this is the blessing that I wish to the Bride, who now appears here, that she
may every way answer this Character: And to you Sir, who are now seeking a
Title, or rather the Confirmation of your Title in such an one, that you may
experience according to your desires and expectation, and may acknowledge God
in his Love has brought her to you. I shall Commend you further to his
Blessing, when that Office is done you, for which you are now come hither.

Tibi Domine.

