THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Six Prisoners that suffered at TYBURN On
Wednesday the 22th of May, 1678.

At which time were Executed

John Cross, George Blake, William Stone, Humphry Hulin, Thomas Constable, Rose
Goodman.
As also of Charles Pamplin, who was Executed the same day in Covent Garden,
for Murdering Lieutenant Dalison.

With a true Account of their Behavior in Newgate from the time of their
Condemnation, and last Speeches at the place of Execution.

With Allowance.

London: Printed for D. M. 1678.

The Confession and Execution of the Prisoners suffering at Tyburn.
OF these unhappy wretches who now became necessary Sacrifices to Justice, he
that occasioned most discourse, as well by reason of his being generally known,
as by the heinousness of his Crime, being the death of a very worthy Gentleman,
was a person that being heretofore in a very good place, might have lived as
comfortably and genteely as any man of his Rank could have wished; but
extravagance still wanting Supplies, put him upon wicked designs, lost his
Employ, and since which, having followed loose irregular courses, he at last
came to commit this bloody Crime for which he was now executed: the Particulars
whereof having been already published, need not here be repeated. When he came
to receive Sentence of Death, he desired time to prepare himself; to which the
Court answered, that he should have what was usual and convenient, but
cautioned him not to mock God, or flatter himself with vain hopes of a
Reprieve, as many do under that pretense; but rather with all his might to
humble himself and make his peace with God. Several Ministers visited him after
his Condemnation, and earnestly pressed him to a hearty Repentance, and that if
any others were Confederates with, or Abetters of him in this barbarous Murder,
he would disburthen his Soul by discovering them: But he was at first so far
from answering their expectations therein, that he would give no full account
of the Reasons or Provocations that moved him to do it; nor would he for some
time declare himself guilty of the Murder, but at last he did confess it,
saying, It was upon an Affront that he could not bear; but expressed himself
heartily sorry for his cruel Rage, and desired all that were present, to pray
for him to Almighty God, that he might obtain Pardon for that and all other his
manifold sins.

After his Condemnation the generous Charity of the Keeper of Newgate favored
him so far as to permit him to lie in the Pressyard, though he had not Money to
defray the usual Fees of that Lodging; where he was at last so far wrought
upon, that never any man appeared more sensibly penitent: an Instance or two
whereof (amongst many others) we think fit here to recite. The day before his
Execution he asked what it was a Clock, and being told past eleven, Ah, Lord,
says he, where shall I be to morrow at this time? The same day a Barber coming
to trim him, after he had washed his hands very clean, looking upon them, he
said, Cleanse, O God, my hands from Blood guiltiness, and all my sins as clean
as they now appear from filth. Then taking a turn or two in the Chamber, God
grant, says he, I may fear Death to morrow no more than I do to day: for I
bless God I have now no dread upon my Spirits concerning the Death I am to
suffer. I know it is just, and therefore will willingly undergo it; not doubting
but the precious Blood of my Savior has attoned for that Innocent Blood which
I have rashly and wickedly shed. And so continued in an undaunted temper and
frame of Spirit to the very last.

The whole night before he suffered, he spent in Devotion, continuing in Prayer
with such ardency of zeal, and such apt Expressions of a broken heart, and yet
humble Faith and Assurance in the Mercies of God, as the like was scarce ever
heard in that place before, And so about ten a clock, was carried to the place
of Execution, in Covent Garden, where he made a large Confession of his sins,
and recommending his Soul to God in a most zealous Prayer, submitted to the
Sentence.

John Cross, George Blake, and William Stone, were all of a Gang of that worst
sort of Highway thieves, commonly called Foot padders, making it their business
to lurk in the Roads near London, and knock down and rob the Market people, (or
others) in their return homewards in the evening; Two Robberies of this kind
they were now Executed for, one upon a Person passing on foot through King
Harries Walk, who had but five shillings about him the other a Butcher on Horse
back in the Highway, not far from thence, from whom they took about three
pound; nor were they content to rifle and bind them, but also barbarously
without any provocation, beat them severely, swearing they would make them know
the danger of traveling with so little Money. They committed ('it is believed)
several other Robberies the same night, and some it seems resisted them, for
one of them was wounded in the Belly; the day they chose for these Exploits,
was the Execution day after the last Sessions. And 'twas proved that they were
all three Spectators at Tyburn, in a Coach, and yet so hardened were they in
wickedness, that nothing dismayed with the untimely and shameful ends of their
Associates, they immediately the same Evening return to act these Villainies,
which now justly brought them to be the next that should succeed in that fatal
place, and be made Examples themselves, since they would take no warning by the
sad Examples of others, having long followed these ungodly Courses: for George
Blake was burnt in the hand about a year and a half ago, for stealing of Plate,
and indicted last Summer Assizes in Surrey, for a Robbery: And William Stone
had formerly broke Hartford Goal, whither he was committed for the like offense.

One of them especially appeared now very penitent, and made a large Confession
of his Crimes, spending his time wholly in Reading, Prayer, and bewailing his
sins.

Humphry Hulin and Thomas Constable, two old Thieves, though but young men,
suffered for stealing of several Horses: A Trade they had long been acquainted
with, and thereby almost ruined diverse honest people.

And here we cannot but give notice of a grand Abuse put upon the world in a
Pamphlet printed for B. H. pretended to be a Narrative of the Proceedings at
the last Sessions: wherein is set forth, that a Constable was tried for
Horse-stealing, but says he, upon Circumstances of his Innocence, was cleared:
whereas there was no Constable brought upon his Trial.

Rose Wheeler, alias Goodman, a Woman grown old in wickedness, was Executed for
two several Robberies Committed in Houses where she pretended to take Lodgings,
thereby undoing several poor people, for she had long made it her practice, and
it seems brought up her Daughter to the same profession; for she this Sessions
was likewise Arraigned for the like fact, but refused to plead, having
heretofore been Condemned for Stripping and Robbing of young Children, and
often in Newgate for several other Thefts. Another young Woman was Condemned
with her, but being supposed to be drawn in by her, obtained a Gracious Pardon:
As likewise did another Woman and a young Man, who severally had robbed their
Masters.

These last mentioned Persons having spent most part of their Lives in a
continual series of Wickedness, and Rebellion against God and all righteous
Laws, it is no wonder if now, when they were overtaken by Justice, and had he
amazing terrors of Death to grapple with, they were smitten with dreadful
Horrors and Astonishment; from which both Mr. Ordinary and other Godly
Ministers endeavored to awake and relieve them, first by representing to them
the miserable Condition they were in; that the Temporal Death, which most they
fixed their thoughts upon, was nothing in comparison of what was to succeed: And
afterward acquainted them, that there was yet a Way, and but only one, to
prevent their everlasting Misery; which was a speedy and serious Repentance,
and laying hold on the Merits of their crucified Savior, by a firm and lively
Faith: By whose gracious Promises, and consideration of his Infinite Mercies,
they sought to take them off both from Atheistical Insensibility on the one
hand, and Despair on the other, and so set them in the path of Life, before
they tasted of the bitter Cup of Death; and it is hoped, by the Grace and
Blessing of God on their Labors, their pious Intentions toward these poor
Souls were not in vain. For in their passage, and at the place of Execution,
they behaved themselves with all the marks of a sincere Penitency, bewailing
their former misspent time, and horrid Impieties, imploring Mercy at the Throne
of Grace, and desiring all Spectators, by amendment of Life, to make a better
use of their sad Examples, than they themselves had done of others suffering in
the like ignominious manner.

FINIS.

