AN ORDINANCE DECLARING That the OFFENSES herein mentioned, and no other, shall
be adjudged HIGH TREASON Within the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and
IRELAND, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.

Thursday, January 19. 1653.
ORdered by His Highness the Lord Protector and His Council, that this
Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published.

HENRY SCOBEL, Clerk of the Council.

Printed at London, and reprinted at Leith, 1653.

An ORDINANCE declaring that the Offenses herein mentioned, and no other, shall
be adjudged HIGH TREASON within the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
THE Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, and the Supreme Legislative Authority of the
same being settled and established to be, and reside in One Person, and the
People assembled in Parliament (the style of which Person is already declared to
be LORD PROTECTOR of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland) and
the Exercise of the chief Magistracy and Administration of the Government over
the said Countries and Dominions, and the People thereof, to be in the Lord
Protector, assisted with a Council, who have power, until the meeting of the
next Parliament, (which is to be the third of Sept. next) to make Laws and
Ordinances for the Peace and Welfare of these Nations, where it shall be
necessary, which shall be binding and in force, until Order shall be taken in
Parliament concerning the same; And it being a matter of greatest Importance to
the just Government of a People, That Crimes and Offenses of highest nature,
punishment and forfeiture, should be most clearly and fully expressed, and
reduced into such certainty as the People might readily know them, and knowing
them, might the better shun and avoid the same; And by reason that the Nation
of Scotland is reduced unto, and brought under this Government, which must
necessarily occasion an alteration of some Laws formerly in force; His Highness
revising and perusing the several Laws heretofore made in Cases of High
Treason, and to the end the same might be brought into one Body, Does Declare,
Establish and Ordain, And be it Established and Ordained by His Highness the
Lord Protector, by, and with the consent of His Council, That if any person or
persons shall compass or imagine the death of the Lord Protector for the time
being; Or if any person or persons shall maliciously or advisedly either by
writing, printing, openly declaring, preaching, teaching, or otherwise,
publish, That the Lord Protector, and the people in Parliament assembled, are
not the Supreme Authority of this Commonwealth; Or that the Exercise of the
chief Magistracy and Administration of the Government over the said Countries
and Dominions, and the People thereof, is not in the Lord Protector, assisted
with a Council; Or that the said Authority or Government is tyrannical,
usurped, or unlawful; Or that there is any Parliament now in being, or that has
any Continuance, or any Law in force for continuing the Parliament, which is
hereby declared to have been absolutely dissolved and determined upon the
twentieth day of April, one thousand six hundred fifty and three, and shall be
adjudged and taken so to be; Or shall plot, contrive or endeavor to stir up or
raise force against the Protector or the present Government, or for the
subversion or alteration of the same, And shall declare such endeavor or
endeavors by an open Deed, Then every such Offense shall be taken and adjudged
to be high Treason.

And whereas the Lord Protector and the Council, for the just and lawful
defense of this Commonwealth, are at present necessitated, by reason of the
manifold distractions within the same, and Invasions threatened from abroad, to
continue Armies and Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, which (under God)
must be the Instrumental means of preserving the good People of these Nations
in peace and safety; Be it further Ordained and Established by the Authority
aforesaid, That if any person (not being an Officer, Soldier, or Member of the
Armies or Forces) shall plot, contrive or endeavor to stir up any mutiny in
the said Armies, or among the said Forces, or any of them; Or to withdraw any
Soldiers or Officers from their obedience to their Superior Officers, or from
the present Government, as aforesaid; Or if any person or persons whatsoever
shall procure, invite, aid or assist any Forreiners or Strangers to invade
England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any the Dominions thereunto belonging; Or
shall adhere unto any Forces raised by the Enemies of this Commonwealth; Or if
any person or persons shall plot, contrive or endeavor the betraying,
surrendering or yielding up any City, Town, Fort, Mag^zine, Ship, Vessel, or
Forces by Sea or Land belonging to this Commonwealth; Or if any person or
persons shall counterfeit the Great Seal of England, or of Scotland, or
Ireland, for the time being, used and appointed by Authority of Parliament, or
by the Lord Protector, with the Consent of the Council; Or the Sign Manual,
Privy S^gnet, or Privy Seal of the Lord Protector for the time being; Or if
any person or persons whatsoever shall proclaim, declare, publish, or any way
promote Charles Stuart, Eldest Son to the late King, or James Stuart, ^ne other
of his Sons, or any other the Issue or Posterity of the said late King, or any
other person or persons claiming by, from, or under him or them, or either, or
any of them, to be King or Chief Magistrate of England, Scotland, or Ireland,
or of either or any of them, or of any the Dominions to them, or either, or any
of them belonging; Or if any person or persons shall give, keep, or hold any
Intelligence whatsoever, by Lette^s, M^ss^g^s, or otherwise, to or with the
sa^d Charles Stuart, James Stuart, the late Queen their Mother, or any of them;
Or i^ any person or persons shall counterfeit the Money of this Commonwealth;
or shall bring any false Money into this Land, either Counterfeit or other,
like to the Money of this Commonwealth (knowing such Money to be false) to the
intent to Merchandise, or otherwise; Or if any person or persons shall
hereafter falsely forge or Counterfeit any such kind of Coin, either of Gold or
Silver, which is not the proper Coin of this Common wealth, and yet is or shall
be current within the same; Or shall bring from the parts beyond the Seas into
this Commonwealth or into any the Dominions of the same, any such false or
Counterfeit Coin of Money, being current within this Common wealth, as is
abovesaid (knowing the said Money to be false and Counterfeit) to the intent to
utter or make payment with the same, within this Commonwealth, by Merchandise
or otherwise; Or if any person or persons shall Impair, Diminish, Falsify,
Clip, Wash, Round, File, Scale, or lighten, for wicked lucre, or gains sake,
any the proper Moneys of this Commonwealth or of the Dominions thereof, or of
the Moneys or Coyns of any other place allowed or suffered to be current within
this Commonwealth or the Dominions thereof; Then all and every the offenses
abovementioned shall be, and are hereby deemed, ordained and adjudged to be
high Treason; And the Offenders therein, and their Counselors, Procurers,
Aiders, and Abetters, being Convicted according to the Laws of this Nation of
any of the said Offenses, shall be and are hereby deemed and adjudged to be
Traitors against this Commonwealth, and shall suffer and have such pains of
death, and incur such forfeitures, as in case of high Treason is used and
Ordained.

Provided always, That neither this Ordinance, nor any thing therein contained
as touching the Moneys and Coins aforesaid, nor any attainder of any person or
persons for the same, shall in any wise be adjudged to make any corruption of
blood to any the heir or heirs of any such Offender or Offenders, nor to make
the wise of any such Offenders to lose or forfeit her Dower of or in any Lands
Tenements, or Hereditaments, or her Title, Action, or Interest in or to the
same.

Provided always, That no person or persons shall be Indicted or arraigned for
any of the Offenses before mentioned in this Ordinance, unless such Offender
or Offenders shall be indicted or prosecuted for the same within one year after
the offense committed.

And it is lastly Ordained and Established, That no other Matter, Fact, Crime,
or Offense whatsoever, then only such as are herein mentioned and expressed,
shall be deemed, taken, or adjudged to be high Treason, any Law, Statute, Act,
or Ordinance to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, and it is hereby declared to be the full purpose and
true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, That the Laws and Statutes made in
the times of the late Queen Elizabeth and of King James against the pretended
Authority of the Bishop of Rome, and his See, Jesuits; Seminary Priests, and
Professors of the Romish Religion, should not be repealed, but stand, be, and
continue in full force and effect in every Clause and part thereof; And
therefore, If any person or persons shall attribute unto, maintain, or defend
the Bishop of Rome, or his See, to have any Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction
within this Common-weath, Or if any Person has procured, or shall obtain from
the Bishop of Rome or his See, any Bulls, writings or Instruments to absolve
the People of this Common wealth from their obedience to this Government, and
to reconcile them to the Authority of the said See; And has used, or put in
ure, or shall use or put in ure, any such Instrument, either upon or beyond the
Seas, or in any place within this Commonwealth, Or if any person or Persons by
color of any such Instrument, has or have heretofore taken, or shall
hereafter take upon him or them to absolve or reconcile, or to grant, or
promise any such Absolution or Reconciliation; Or if any person or persons
shall obtain or get any manner of Bull, writing, or other Instrument, either
written or Printed, which shall contain any thing, matter or Cause whatsoever;
Or shall publish, or by any ways or means put in ure any such Bull, writting
or Instrument; Or if any person on persons shall pretend to have Power, or
shall by any ways or means put in practice to absolve, persuade or withdraw
any of the people of this Common wealth from their obedience to the Government
established in the same; Or to move any of them to promise any obedience to any
pretended Authority of the Sea of Rome, or of any other Prince, State, or
Potentate to be had or used within this Commonwealth; And shall do any overt
Act to that intent or purpose; Or if any person shall by any means be willingly
reconciled or absolved, or withdrawn as aforesaid; Or shall promise any
obedience to any such pretended Authority, Prince, State, or Potentate, as
aforesaid; Or if any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or such other Priest, Deacon, or
Religious or Ecclesiastical person whatsoever being born in any pa ts within
this Commonwealth, or the Dominions thereof, that has been or shall be made,
ordained, or professed by any Authority or Jurisdiction dirived, or challenged,
or pretended from the Sea of Rome, by, or of what Name, Title, or Degree soever
the same be called, or known, and shall come into, be, or remain in any parts
of this Commonwealth, or the Dominions thereof, That then all and every the
offenses abovementioned shall be and are hereby deemed and adjudged to be high
Treason.

FINIS.

