Considerations Proposed to the Electors of the Ensuing Convention.
GENTLEMEN,
GOd Almighty has now put it into your hands either utterly to Ruin, or
perpetually to Settle three Kingdoms, and with them the Protestant Religion in
general, by the Choice you shall make of Men to Represent you in the ensuing
Convention.

You never yet enjoyed (and probably never may again) such an opportunity of
making your selves and Posterity happy; your Choice being now absolutely Free,
without any force or hazard, as formerly.

Consider therefore they ought not to be chosen that Ridiculed the Popish Plot,
and Promoted several Protestant Sham-Ones; That did what in them lay to
Surrender your CHARTER, or which is all one, submit to the Kings Regulation of
it: And discountenanced and threatened all that would not give up the Rights of
the City as well as themselves; upbraiding them with the odious Name of Enemies
to the Government: That baffled you in your Choice and Suffrage, and made many
worthy Citizens Rioters, for Asserting your Rights therein: That swore Illegal
Sheriffs by force of Arms: That contrary to the known Rules of Common-Councils,
pretended to Repeal all the Proceedings of Twenty years, without so much as
once reading any Act thereof (except the Titles) or Referring them to any
Committee, and absolutely refusing the Negative Question, tho desired. And that
in a word, did to the utmost in their Sphere, endeavor to promote the
Aubitrary desigas of a Popish Court, to rob all freeborn Englishmen of their
Inherent Rights and Privileges. [Sir W. P. then Lord Mayor.]

But rather such now are to be chosen, who in the Parliaments of King Charles
the Second opposed Popery and Arbitrary Power in the face of Danger, and will
now in all probability expose themselves to the greatest hazards, to Establish
your Religion, Laws, and Liberties.


