THE CONFESSIONS AND EXECUTION OF THE Two Jesuits, Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered
at TYBURN, On Friday the 24th of January, 1678/9. For HIGH TREASON. VIZ.
WILLIAM IRELAND, AND JOHN GROVE. With their Carriage and Behavior.

Tanium Religio potuit suadere Malorum? LICENSED, 1678/9.



LONDON: Printed for R. G. 1679.

THE CONFESSIONS and EXECUTION OF The two Jesuits FOR HIGH TREASON.
COuld it be imagined, that it could ever enter into the heart of Man to commit
Murder under a Conceit of Religion; or for God's sake Traitorously to kill not
only God's Image, but his Vicegerent too? Could it be thought, that under the
most obliging, best-natur'd, and gracious Prince in the World, any persons
could be found so profligately wicked, as to Conspire against his Life? And
this too amongst a sort of men that have made such mighty boasts of their
Loyalty! What Sentiments must we have of such People? Or how can we express
their Tempers better, than in that Expostulation of the Reverend Author of The
Practice of Piety? P. 783. If they are Saints, who be Scythians? Who are
Cannibals, if they Catholics?

On Tuesday the 14th. of December. 1678, there were Three of these Romish
Emissaries, on a most fair and equal Trial, Condemned to die, not in the least
for their Religion, unless Treason and Murder be an essential constitutive part
of it; not for being Roman Catholics (as they absurdly love to call
themselves) nor for being Popish Priests, or seducing good Subjects to their
Idolatrous and Traitorous Principles: though both these latter Facts they know
are made Capital by our most necessary Laws, for preservation of the
Government. 'Twas not, I say, for any of these Causes; and therefore let not
any of their Party at home or abroad, who make Lies their Refuge, and devote
all their Endeavors to misrepresent things, cry out, as they were wont to do,
and too lately, with an impudence to be equaled by nothing but their malice,
have done. That the poor innocent Catholics are prosecuted, persecuted,
martyred, etc. for their Religion.

But to satisfy all the World, Be it known, they were Apprehended, Tried,
Convicted and Condemned for the highest of Crimes; for it was a crime of the
same species that at first made Angels Devils, I mean Treason, High Treason,
aggravated to the highest pitch; being not only to destroy our established
Religion, but likewise subvert the Government, and in order thereunto to
Murder His Most Gracious Majesty, our Sovereign Lord the King (whom, may the
Hand of Heaven, as hitherto through a Thousand dangers from different Factions,
so ever protect, and long preserve.)

As for the qualities of these persons, we have little to say; If any of them
were well descended, or related, we are sorry they should not retain that
loyalty and virtue which had added luster to their Ancestors. One of them was
without dispute of the Jesuits Order, and a man of parts; the other two (as far
as I can learn) but Lay brothers of the Society: The first instigated the last
to the horrid attempt: But as to particulars of the proof, I refer the Reader
to a peculiar Narrative, which is expected from Authority, of the whole
procedure.

The Holy Days intervening, and upon some other important considerations, they
had a large time allowed them for Repentance, and fitting themselves for Death;
but on Friday the 24th of this instant January, two of them, viz. William
Ireland and John Grove were brought to Execution (the other, for good reasons,
being for the present respited): They were drawn both together in one Sledge,
with White Hats, and Grey-Clothes; one of them had a Book in his hand, and was
often observed to whisper to the other.

By the vast multitudes that crowded to see them pass, and the general sense of
the people, it was apparent how zealous the English Nation in general, and this
famous City in particular, are in their respects to his Majesty, and how
concerned to bring all those to just punishment that shall any way make
attempts against His Sacred person, or endeavor to destroy the Protestant
Religion, and introduce abominabie Popery, which can never be effected without
subversion of the Government.

At the place of Execution, they said something, as Prayers; but otherwise
talked little that could be heard, by reason of the vast throng of Spectators;
and so suffered most deservedly according to the dreadful sentence.

But since there is so much talk of Jesuits, and indeed not only we, but all
Europe, has reason enough to beware of them; It may not be amiss to give the
Reader some account of the Original of those troublesome Companions, how long
they have been in the World, and who was their Founder.

The person that Instituted them, was Ignatius Loyola, a Spanish Soldier, in
the year 1540. He had been a fellow debauched in his youth, and having spent
all his Patrimony, grew so devout, as to set up for a New Order, whom
blasphemously he called, The Fellows, Companions, or the society of Jesus; and
amongst other Provisions, besides the three Vows of Chastity, Poverty, and
Obedience, established, That all Members thereof should take another special Vow
-- That whatever the Roman Bishop for the time being shall Command, they shall
execute the same without Tergiversation or excuse. This was just after Luther
began the Reformation; and the Pope having need of such trusty sticklers, you
may be sure encouraged them: but that which made them first famous, was,
Teaching of Schools, which they discharged with great diligence and dexterity;
thereby, not only engaging Parties, but also imprinting a lasting veneration in
Youth for that Society under which they had been bred. To tell you all the
Lying Miracles they attribute to this Catholic Lance-presade, requires a
Volume. I shall only venture to show one piece of their impudence, in the
detestable words of Valderama, one of that Order, de Canoniz. Loyolae, p. 51.

It Is not to be wondered, that Moses did very great Miracles, for he wrought
them by the power of the Name of God, engraven in his staff: Nor is it any more
that the Apostles did so many wonders, when all was done in the Name of God.
But that our blessed Ignatius should, with his own Name written in a piece of
paper, do more Miracles than Moses and all the Apostles put together, this
indeed raises in us an excess of Admiration for him.

For my part, I judge the greatest Miracle we are beholden to him for, is, That
he has set up such a mischievous Gang, so destructive wherever they come to
Government, and yet Christendom should suffer them so mightily to increase. --
The said Loyola's Motto was -- Cavete, vobis Principes; wherever you see us,
look to your selves. -- This is the honestest trick that ever I Read of from a
Jesuit; it is fair warning, and they may well be laughed at that will not take it.

FINIS.

