THE CONFESSION and EXECUTION OF THE Five PRISONERS That Suffered at TYBVRN, On
Friday the 4th of June, 1680.
VIZ.
Thomas Newell, John Biggs,
Both guilty of Burglary, and also of breaking Prison lately out of Newgate.
John Eakins, One of the same Crew for Burglary. George D. A Marshals man, for
Murdering a Child. AND Richard Spykeman, for Burglary.

With an Account of their Behavior after Condemnation, and at the place of
Execution.
THe Sessions for London and Middlesex began May the 26th, and continued to the
28th, where were in all Condemned fourteen persons, four Women and ten Men; all
which women were by a Jury of Matrons found severally to be quick with Child,
and so Reprieved till they were Delivered; and of the men five also, who had
not so notoriously offended, as to be totally excluded from Mercy, were put by
and exempted from the Severity of Justice.

John Newel and John Biggs had formerly been notoriously Guilty of diverse
Burglaries, and particularly of breaking out of the Goal of Newgate, and being
on new Facts Imprisoned at St. Albans, they were thence removed; and had not
the confidence to plead otherwise than Guilty, as well knowing there were so
many Indictments against them, as would certainly do their business.

John Eakins was one of the same Crew, an old Malefactor, who so often had
received Mercy, that now he could expect or hope for it no more.

Richard Spykeman was also Condemned for Burglary, having run through the whole
course or stage of Villainy. He began first with Dear-stealing, and as the least
Rogueries transacted with Impunity, prompt on to the greatest, and single,
small, vicious Attempts grow up in time to be perfect Habits; so he after
various over-past Crimes, having been a Water-pad, etc. became so far hardened,
as not to stick at any nefarious Acts whatsoever; and therefore as an
Incorrigible Offender, was now thought fit to be mowed down by the Scythe of
Justice.

George D. was an Officer belonging to the Marshals-Court: his crime, for
killing the Child of a poor Man; (whom he Arrested) because it cried out to see
its Father mis-used. At the time of his Condemnation, he seemed very remorseful
for his Offense, but afterward appeared (as some supposed) more expectant and
sollicitous for a Temporal, than any other Pardon.

The substance of the several Crimes as were found at the Sessions were as
follows.

A remarkable Trial was about the Murder of a Constable at the Armitage-stairs,
for which a poor Waterman stood Indicted; there were abundance of Witnesses
examined, and the Trial was very tedious. But the sum of the matter was to this
effect: Some Scotchmen, half a dozen or more in all, belonging to a Ship that
lay in the River, having been on shore, and it is probable taking plentiful
Cups, as Sailors use, about nine of the Clock at night were returning to their
Vessel; and in order to get to their own Boat, some of them stepped through a
Boat of the Prisoners, in which there was a Boy, whom a Scotch boy of this
company either trod upon or affronted, which made him strike him; and the
Scotchmen as fast fell on the English-boy, who ran and called his Master the
Prisoner, and so the Fray increased: to quell which, the now Prisoner called
the Constable living just by, and who was his intimate Friend; for at his house
he used commonly to leave several Tackling belonging to his Boat, and other
offices of Kindness frequently passed between them. But so it happened in the
Scuffle, it being pretty dark, the Constable's Brains were beat out, supposed
to be done with one of their Poies, or Hooks, which they use with their Boats.
The Scotchmen shifted for themselves and got away, and a person that was there
alleged, that the now Prisoner struck the fatal Blow; but besides that there
was no former Malice, so 'twas a most unlikely thing, that he should go to hurt
one that was his Friend, and came thither at his request to assist him. So that
upon the whole matter, it was believed such witness might possibly be mistaken,
in so great an Hurry and Confusion; so that the Waterman, who had the repute of
an honest, civil, quiet man amongst his Neighbors, was Acquitted.

A Person was Convicted for a Robbery in Middlesex, committed in a
Victualling-house that stood alone, remote from Neighbors, whither the
Prisoner, for some time before the Exploit was committed, used for some days
frequently to resort, and seemed a very civil Guest: but having laid the
Design, he and two or three more of his Companions came one Evening, about 9 or
10 of the Clock, before the Doors were shut, there being no body there but the
Woman of the house and her Maid; where presently swearing in a furious manner,
they begun to demand her Keys, and this Fellow held the Woman below, whilst the
rest went up stairs and ransackt her Trunks, etc. taking away in Money and
Goods to the value of near Twenty Pounds; and then binding the Woman and her
Servant, went away with the Booty. The Woman, whilst the rest were making
havoc above, seeing her self like to be quite undone, wept bitterly, and said
to the now Prisoner who held her below, Alas, Sir, I did not imagine that you
would have dealt thus by me! To which all the Answer the hard-hearted Villain
returned, was with a scornful Smile, No indeed Landlady, I believe you did not.
He had then a Perriwig on, and other Clothes, but the Woman knew him by his
Voice; and the Maid swore directy that he was the man: And so he was found
Guilty.

An old fellow, one of those that broke out of the Goal, and upon their
retaking at St. Albons being brought up, were publicly exposed with Collars
about their Necks, to the view of the people without Newgate, having now
several Indictments against him; when he was required to plead to the first,
said, He was Guilty of that and whatsoever else should be brought against him;
and being thereupon asked, Why he would plead so unadvisedly, and whether he
had a mind to cast away his Life, answered, That he were as good cast it away
himself, for he was sure he should be Hanged. And indeed he had no reason to
promise himself a better Destiny, for he had been a notorious Housebreaker, and
the occasion of many other men's ruin, by his bad Example, and pernicious
Counsel and Enticement.

A kind of Distracted Woman was Arraigned for stealing a great sum of Money;
but she seemed to take no notice of, nor understand any thing that was said
against her; and the Officers of the Jail affirmed, that ever since her
Commitment, she appeared to them as a person Lunatic, or not compos mentis;
and therefore in respect of her condition she was set aside.

A young man was found guilty of a Felony and Burghlary in London, breaking
into an House that he was well acquainted at in the night, and stealing thence
a Gold Watch and other things, to the value of one hundred pounds and upwards.

A Bailey belonging to the Marshals-Court, going to Arrest a poor man for a
Debt of seven shillings, and according to the usual Cruelty and barbarousness
of those savage Cattle, beating and dragging him along; a Child of the man's,
seeing her Father so used, cried out: whereupon this brutish fellow turned
about and struck the poor Child a blow on the head with a great Cudgel, so
furiously, that a Gentleman that saw it, testified it was enough to have knocked
down the stoutest man. However, the Child was for the present recovered to
life, and by the help of a Surgeon, the Wound in some time seemed to be healed,
but still she complained of her Head, and seemed to languish ever after, and
not long after dyed; so that it was concluded he was the occasion of her death,
and accordingly the Jury found him guilty.

An Ale-house-keeper was likewise Indicted for killing a poor weak man, whom
'twas said he kicked; but the proof not being positive, and the party deceased
having long been known to be very infirm, he was acquitted.

Two Shop-lifts were Convicted of Felony for stealing of three pieces of Damask
Silk out of a shop in London, where they came pretending to buy Diaper, and
whilst the man went to reach it, they got the silk; but he soon missed it, and
pursuing them, they according to the usual tricks of Practitioners in that
Mystery were seen to drop it.

A Woman that came to be a Servant in a Gentleman's house, before she had been
there five days, took an opportunity to Rob them of a considerable parcel of
Plate and some Money, and carried it down into the Country by a Carrier; being
discovered, was now Indicted together with the said Carrier, and she was found
Guilty: but the Carrier being a very honest man, and nothing Criminal proved
against him, was deservedly Acquitted.

Two persons were charged with High Treason for Coining, and some suspicious
Circumstances were made out; but if they designed any such thing, they were but
Bunglers at the Trade; and there being no punctual Proof, they were found Not
Guilty.

Let these poor wretches Woe be our warning, and their Execution every Readers
Admonition. Consider I pray! with what terror did these miserable Criminals
stand at the Old-Bailey-Bar; their hands even trembling whilst lift up for
Trial, and their very lips quaking, whilst against the Dictates of their
Consciences they pleaded Not Guilty. Their Countenance Condemning them before
the Judge, and their Fears, (pusht on by Consciousness of their guilt)
Executing them both before, and more severely than the Hangman. Yet this Judge
is but a man, that must quickly dye himself; that Sentence of Death which he
can pronounce, is already passed by Nature upon the most innocent. That act of
death which the Law inflicteth on these men, is but momentary, and who does not
know whether himself shall not dye more painful than any of these?

With what horror, O God! shall each guilty Soul stand before his dreadful
Tribunal, in the day of the great Assizes of the world, that has not an
interest (on Gospel-terms) in thy Christ and our Jesus? whilst there is the
unapproachable presence of an infinite Majesty to daunt him, a fierce and
clamarous Conscience to give Evidence against him, Legions of terrible Devils
waiting upon him, a gulf of unquenchable fire ready to receive him; whilst the
glory of the Judge is no less confounding, than the cruelty of the Tormenters,
where the Sentance is unavoidable, and the Execution everlasting. Why then, (to
every Reader be it spoken) do not these Terrors of thee our God, make us wise
to hold a private Sessions upon our own Souls and Actions? that being acquitted
by our own Hearts, we may not be Condemned by thee, and being judged by our
selves, we may not be Condemned, though by, yet at least not with, the world:

As for Walter Gilman who was found guilty on two Indictments by the Middlesex
Jury, and about whom one of the London Jury was Confined, for not finding him
guilty of stealing a Watch, he was Reprieved.

The Five beforementioned were carried in two Carts, Three in the first, and
Two in the last, of whom the Marshals man seemed to be very penitent.

FINIS.

