THE Day-Dawning, And the DAY STAR Arising to the Dispersed of JUDAH and ISRAEL.

Wherein is briefly handled Their CALL, AND CHRIST'S Second coming, whose day is
near at hand.

By THO. COLLIER.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills for T. Brewster, at the three Bibles, near the
West end of Paul's, 1655.

(...) It may seem strange, that I, at such a distance from you, and not of
your nation, should trouble my self so much about your estate, being a people
now despicable in the worlds eyes, scattered and dispersed among the nations;
and upon a rational account unlikely to be a people beloved for the Fathers
sake, and that shall be honored of God when the nations shall fall before you,
and confess you a people sought out and saved, and not forsaken: but I have had
several prevailing arguments in mine own heart, which have occasioned me to
present you with this Epistle, and I entreat and beseech you for the Lords
sake, and for the love of the truth, that you do read this Epistle, and ponder
it well in your hearts, desiring the God of Grace to give you an understanding
in the truth herein presented to you, for with much bowels of tenderness and
love, have I written to you: the reasons moving me thereunto are these.

1. That clear discovery God has given me by his Spirit from the Word of truth
of his intention to do you good; and that although you have been a long time
rejected and scattered for your own sake, yet you are beloved, and shall be
gathered for the Fathers sake.

Secondly, being thus instructed in the truth of your calling, it lay much as a
duty upon my heart (and I am confident from the Lord) to write unto you; that I
might perform my duty to you in my generation, leaving the blessing to the Lord.

Thirdly, Likewise being assured that the time of your gathering is at hand.

Fourthly, knowing likewise that your fullness will be the time of the
deliverance of all believing Gentiles, now dispersed and trampled under foot
for their Lords sake; for he was given to be a light to the Gentiles, and the
glory of his people Israel.

Fifthly and last, I find it to be the desire of Manasseh Ben Israel, in his
book titled, The hope of Israel, in his Epistle to the Reader, That if any to
whom his book came, had any thing worthy of posterity, that they would give him
notice of it. I have not here presented you with any thing of History or
outward learning, but have indeavored, according to the grace received, in the
plain evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and power of truth, to present
you with such things, as may, through the blessing of God, tend to your eternal
good.

The first principle of truth I have to present you with, is, that the true and
promised Messiah was, according to the counsel of God, to suffer death for the
redemption of sinners; and this I shall clear unto you, by convincing grounds
from the Scriptures, Moses, and the Prophets, whom you know and own; and my
earnest desire for you at the throne of grace, is, that the God of grace may
give you an understanding in the knowledge of this truth. This I shall confirm
unto you from three grounds. 1. Promises, 2. Types, 3. Prophesies.

First, Is that Promise of grace, Genesis 3. 15. I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and hers; it shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel. This promise has a special relation to the
Messiah, and clearly presents us with his suffering, that by his death he
should break the Serpents head (viz.) the head of Satan; though he himself were
bruised, though he suffered in the flesh, yet he should overcome in suffering.
I do not deny, but that this has been and is accomplished in all that truly
know the Lord: Satan, sin, and evil men oppose, but the seed of the woman has
and will bruise the head of all, in and for his people, though he himself was
appointed to be bruised by the Serpents seed, to this agrees Isa. 53. 5. He
was bruised for our iniquities, etc.

Secondly, see it clearly and fully presented in types and shaddows; first the
Paschal Lamb or Passover, mentioned Exodus 12. was a lively representation of
the crucifying of the Lamb of God, the Messiah who was to come, and by his
blood to make atonement and peace for sinners, that as the children of Israel
were then made partakers of a deliverance out of Egypt, by that means the
killing of a Lamb, eating the flesh, and sprinkling the door-post with the
blood, etc. so must the Messiah give his life and blood for the redemption of
his people (out of spiritual Egypt, darkness and oppression) both of Jews and
Gentiles.

2. All the sacrifices and offerings by the Priests commanded in the law of
Moses were clear types and representations of the sufferings of the Messiah;
the offering of Lambs, and Rams, and Bullocks; etc. to be sin offerings,
burnt-offerings and peace offerings, etc. all presentations of Christ the
Messiah, in English the anointed, who was to be the alone peace and sinoffering
for his people; the Priest was to offer sacrifice for sin, as is expressed at
large, Levit. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 Chapters, and Chap. 16. 34. they were
to make an atonement once a year, both for themselves and the people. All
these offerings could not do away sin, but as it had a relation to the true
offering, he that was to offer himself once for all, that he might by one
offering for ever perfect them that were by him sanctified: this truth you
shall see when the Lord takes away the veil that is spread over your faces,
that clearly under all these offerings is represented the offering up of the
true Messiah once for all, etc.

3. This truth is likewise clearly prophesied, that he that runs may read.
There is scarce any prophet of God, but did foresee and foretell of this truth,
the sufferings of the Messiah. Moses the servant of the Lord, and great prophet
and type of the anointed, as you may see Dcut. 18. 15. he by the inspiration of
the Lord, presents him much as has been minded In his suffering estate; the
prophet David likewise in Psalm. 22. presents him a sufferer, particularly in
verse. 16. They peirced my hands and my feet: a clear prophecy of the Messiah.
I beseech you weigh it in your hearts, David was never peirced in his hands and
feet. See likewise the prophet Isaiah chap. 53. throughout, describing the
Messiah, that he was wounded and bruised, rejected of men, a man of sorrows,
and acquainted with griefs, and that God laid upon him the iniquity of us all.
And Zach. 12. 10. They shall look upon him whom they have peirced: all which
confirms the truth, that the Messiah, which you look for, was to come forth,
first in his humiliation, in contempt, in suffering, etc.

SECT. II.
THe second principle of truth that I have to present unto you, is, That that
Jesus which was crucified by your forefathers at Jerusalem, without the gate,
was and is the true Messiah, and this is that principle of truth, you have to
this day rejected; and my earnest desire is, that you would read these lines
with patience, and weigh well the truth herein presented with much tenderness
and love unto you; and in this I shall present you with many new
Testament-Scriptures, useful being compared with the old, be willing to read
and compare them together before you judge. And, Oh that you would be mo^e in
searching after the knowledge of the truth of Gods grace, held forth in the new
Testament, and if the Lord work upon your hearts, I should commend principally
unto you the Epistle to the Hebrews, which especially concerns you, and may
through the blessing of the Lord be of much use unto you.

I desire to mind you of one thing by the way, before I come to the
confirmation of the truth asserted, viz. that the true and promised Messiah,
was, according to the Scripture, to have his day and time of humiliation, as
has been already proved, and then his glory, Isa. 9. 6. first a child, a son,
and then a King, and the government must be upon his shoulders, etc. Chap. 53.
throughout till the last ver. he is presented in his suffering estate; and in
the last verse. in his reign: Therefore I will divide him a portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong. To this agrees that of
Christ, Luke 24. 25, 26. Oh fools and slow of heart to believe that which the
prophets have written, ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to
enter into his glory? 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. the suffering part, as in relation
to himself in his own person, he has passed through, and is entered into
glory, Act. 1. 9, 1^. Though while the Church is under suffering, yet as he is
considered one with his Church, the time of his humiliation is not over till
all the members are glorified with him.

Now that this is the true Messiah that suffered at Jerusalem, will appear, if
you consider, 1. That in him was fulfilled all the legal types that did
represent him in his sufferings* he it was that is the true Pascal Lamb, or
rather the Lamb represented in the Passover, Exodus 12. The Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1. 29. 36. the true passover that was
sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. that whosoever believes in him, all their
iniquities shall be passed over, John 3 16.

And he was the substance of all those sacrifices and offerings in the law of
Moses, those sin offerings, burnt offerings, heave-offerings, and
wave-offerings, they all lead to him, were fulfilled in him; those sacrifices
served to the purifying of the flesh, suitable to the covenant that then you
were under, but they never purified the conscience from dead works, to serve the
living God in spirit and in truth, no otherwise then as it had relation to
Christ the true sacrifice, Christ being become an high Priest of good things to
come, Heb. 9. 13, 14. For if the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an
heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, Purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God? As the high Priest then entered once a year into the most holy
place, offering sacrifice for himself and the people, Exodus 30. 10. Levit. 16
2. with Heb. 9* 7. So is Jesus Christ become a high Priest of good things to
come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to
say, not of this building, neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his
own blood he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption, Heb. 9. 11, 12. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made
with hands, which are figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to
appear in the presence of God for us, etc. Heb. 9. 24, 25, 26. so that what was
figured out in the sacrifices, priesthood, temple and tabernacle, Christ is the
substance of all, fully and completely answers them, and fulfills them, and
ends them all; so that he is the end of the law for righteousness to every one
that believes, Romans 10. 4. By all which it appears that he is the true and
promised Messiah, because that in him is fully answered all the figures and
shadows of the old Testament.

It will farther appear that this is the true Messiah, if you consider how
fully in him is answered all the prophesies and promises of him in the old
Testament in relation to his humiliation; and in him shall be fulfilled all the
promises of his glory, but every thing in its order that God has set it. 1.
For his humiliation, see what the Prophet David personating Christ, as it might
be very well (for sometimes Christ is called David, Ezekiel. 39. 24, 25. and the
promise made with David and his seed, has a special relation to Christ, Psalm.
89. from the 19. to the 39. verse.) see Psalm. 22. the prophet personating Christ
in his sufferings, you may clearly see Christ answering those things, or all
those things fully answered in him: in way of complaint, ver. 6. I a worm and
no man, this was the condition of Christ, verse. 7. All they that see me, laugh
me to scorn; so it was fulfilled in Jesus, Mat, 27. 29, 30 31. and when they
had plated a crown of thorns (in reproach) they put it on his head and a reed
in his right hand, and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him and said,
Hail King of the Jews, etc. Again, Psalm. 22. 8. he trusted in the Lord, that
he would deliver him, let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him. See this
made good Mat. 27. 43. when he was upon the Cross in the height of his
sufferings for the sins of others, then his enemies tauntingly fulfilled the
Scripture, and said, He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have
him, etc. So again Psalm. 22. 16. For dogs have compassed me, the assembly of
the wicked have enclosed me; they have peirced my hands and my feet: and this
was fulfilled in him, as is clearly employed in John 20. 24, 25. and Thomas one
of the Twelve said, etc. Except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, etc. I will not believe. Again, Psalm. 22. 17. they part my garments
among them, and cast lots upon (or for) my vesture, and this was fulfilled in
Christ. See Mat. 27. 35. Joh. 19. 23, 24. Again in Isaiah Chap: 7. 14. the Lord
by the prophet (Ahaz refusing to ask a sign) gives him a sign: Behold a
virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Emmanuel: this
cannot be rightly intended or understood but of Christ the true Messiah. For
first, never a virgin conceived a child in the ordinary course of nature. And
secondly, his name Immanuel, viz. God with us; could not properly be given to
any but the Son of God, nor ever was there a virgin that bear a Son, but Mary
the mother of Jesus, or any one, besides him truly called Immanuel, that is,
God with us, and with his, believing in him, by his spirit and grace, and shall
be with his in glory, Mat. 23. Luke 1. 26, etc. here in is the mystery of Gods
wisdom and grace to men; that as by a woman sin and condemnation came first
into the world; so by a Son born of a woman, a virgin, salvation is come into
the world.

As his conception and birth was according to the Scripture of a virgin, so the
place of his birth was according to prophesies exactly fulfilled, viz. in
Bethlehem, Mic. 5. 2. with Mat. 2. 1, 5. and for this reason it was that Herod
commanded all the males in Bethlehem, and the coasts thereof from two years old
and under to be slain, that so he might make sure to slay Jesus, Mat. 2. 16.
and this makes way for the fulfilling of another prophecy, Jer. 31. 15. with
Mat. 2. 17, 18. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the
prophet, saying, In Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation and weeping, and
great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children and would not be comforted,
because they were not: though I do not question but that there may be much in
this prophecy relating to the distressed estate of Israel, and afterward a
prophecy of their return. But it was likewise fulfilled in this also, for
Benjamin came of Rachel, Genesis 35. 18. and Ramah was one part of Benjamins
possession, Nehe. 11. 33. and the fulfilling of this Scripture made way for the
fulfilling of another prophecy, Joseph at the command of God flying with Jesus
into Egypt to save his life from Herod, made way for the fulfilling of that
prophecy, Hos. 11. 1. Out of Egypt have I called my Son, Mat. 2. 15. he was
there, viz. in Egypt, until the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, out of Egypt have I called
my Son. Its true, there might be something in it relating to your coming out of
Egypt by the hand of Moses, but prophesies are of a large extent, and the most
precious mystery is hid from our eyes, if the Lord open not our understanding.

His life was a life of suffering as soon as he came into the world, his life
was sought after, and afterward he was the reproach of men, accounted a friend
to Publicans and sinners, a blasphemer, one that cast out devils through
Beelzebub the Prince of devils, Mat. 12. 24. John 10. 33. and so in him was
fulfilled that prophecy, Isa. 8. 18. with Heb. 2. 13. Behold I and the
children which the Lord has given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel. He
came to his own, and his own received him not, and so that prophecy was
fulfilled, Isa. 53. 1. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed? and that prophecy Isa. 6. 9. Go tell this people, hear ye
in hearing, but understand not, and see in deed, but perceive not. Make the
heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes lest
they hear with their ears, and see with their eyes, and understand with their
hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them. And has not this been your
condition many years? and has not there been a forsaking in the land upon this
account, and the Lord has removed you far away? but there is a tenth which
shall return, etc. See verse. 11, 12, 13.

And in him was fulfilled that prophecy Zach. 9. 9. Rejoice greatly, O
daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem: Behold thy King comes to
thee, he is just, having salvation, lowly, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a
Colt, the fool of an Ass. This was fulfilled in him, Mat. 21. 5. to the 10.
this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet saying
Behold thy King comes unto thee meekly, sitting upon an Ass, etc. Note, this
was an act of Christ to be performed in his humiliation he must come lowly,
meekly riding upon an Ass; this is not to be expected in his glory, then he
shall come in power and great glory. Who will abide the day of his coming? and
who will stand when he appears? Mal. 3. 2. But first he must come meekly and
humbly; and yet riding in this meek estate; wherein was a resemblance of his
glory; the great multitudes that went before and followed after him cried,
saying Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed be he that comes in the name of
the Lord, Hosanna in the highest, Mat. 21. 9. if there was so much glory
appeared in his meekness in his humiliation, how will he appear glorious when
he shall appear in his power, when the song of Saints shall be, the Lord God
omnipotent reigns.

With what clearness was that prophecy fulfilled in all the circumstances of
it? Isa. 52. 14 and cha. 53. throughout, Cha. 52. 14. as many were astonished
at thee, his visage was so marred more than any man's, and his form more than
the sons of men. Was not this fulfilled when your fathers cried out crucify
him, crucify him, give us not this man but Barabbas? Mat. 27. 20, 21. Jesus
was so marred in their eyes, that they preferred Barabbas a thief and a
murderer before him, Act. 3. 14, 15. thus was he a man of sorrows and
acquainted with griefs, despised and rejected of men, and not esteemed* Chap.
53. 3. Oh was not this prophecy fulfilled to the life in Jesus? verse 4, 5.
Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God and afflicted; but he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, etc. the reason was in verse. 6. Because that all we like
sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord
has laid on him the iniquity of us all, and he bare our sins on his own body
on the cross, 1 Pet. 2. 24. In him was fulfilled that saying of the Prophet
Micah 5. 1. They shall smite the Judge of Israel with the rod upon the cheek,
Mat. 27. 30. They spit upon him, and took the reed and smote him on the head,
and so fulfilled that Scripture, Isa. 50. 6. I gave my back to the smiters, and
my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid not my face from shame and
spiting.

Thus was he numbered among transgressors, Isa. 53. 12. accounted worse than
Barabbas crucified between two thieves, Mark 15. 27, 28. and the Scripture was
fulfilled. In all which he fulfilled that saying Isa. 53. 7. he was oppressed,
and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a Lamb to
the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so opened he not his
mouth, with Mat. 26. 62, 63. And thus in silence for the sins of men he
suffered death, even the shameful death of the Cross: and that Scripture was
fulfilled, Isa. 53. 8. He was cut off out of the land of the living for the
transgression of my people was he cut off, and verse 9. he made his grave with
the wicked, etc. and verse. 12. he poured out his soul to the death, and he was
numbered with the transgressors for he bear the sins of many. Thus have I given
you a brief taste of this truth so necessary to be known in this day of grace,
that Jesus Christ is the true promised Messiah. The Lord give you an
understanding in this precious truth, which in it self is so full of clearness,
that whosoever runs may read if the vail remain not still untaken away.

I shall add in the last place, that he according to the Scripture came of the
tribe of Judah, and so was the Son of David according to the flesh; and in him
were the prophesies fulfilled, Genesis 49. 10. The scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor the lawgiver from between his feet till Shilo come, and to him
shall the gathering of the people be. And that prophecy Isa. 11. 1. And there
shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Iesse; and a branch shall grow out of
his roots, with Act. 13. 22, 23. I have found David the son of Iesse a man
after mine own heart which shall fulfill all my will, of this man's seed has God
according to his promise raised a Savior Jesus, and this is proved both by
Matthew, Chap. 1. and Luke chap. 3. in their account of the genealogy of Christ
both agree in their account that he was the Son of David, though probably there
may seem some scruple, because they reckon upon a contrary line, yet I do
believe there is much of the wisdom of God in it: Matthew reckoning after the
genealogy of Joseph, who was the supposed father of Christ, and Luke after the
line of Mary the mother of Christ; so that take it on which side you will, both
came of David, and so Christ was the son of David, and the son of Abraham, Mat.
1. 1. and so he was acknowledged in his incarnation by all that had any
convictions of heart upon them, Mat. 9. 27. The two blind men cried, Thou son
of David have mercy on us, and the woman of Canaan, Chap. 15. 22. Cried,
saying, have mercy on me, O Lord thou son of David, and Chap. 21. 9. the
multitude cried out Hosanna to the son of David, etc. Let this suffice, he was
the son of David, he was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and
declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness,
by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 3. 4. For he did not only die for our
sins, but he was also raised again for our justification, according to the
Scriptures, Romans 4. 25. and so that Scripture was fulfilled, Psalm. 16. 11. Thou will not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. David saw corruption, but
this man saw no corruption, being quickened and raised by the Spirit, Mark. 16.
6. 1 Cor. 15 and being risen, he is ascended to the Father, Ioh. 20. 17. Act.
1. 9, 10. And the heavens must receive him till the time of the restitution of
all things, Act. 3. 21. Thus much shall suffice at present in confirmation of
this truth, that that man Jesus who was crucified at Jerusalem is the true and
promised Messiah, though I might give many grounds more, as the wise men coming
by a star from the East to Jerusalem, saying, where is he that is born King of
the Jews? together with the many and great miracles which he did? as to turn
water into wine? Ioh. 2. heal the sick? open the eyes of the blind? raise the
dead? preach ed with authority, Mat. 7. 29. Never man spoke like this, by the
confession of those that were sent to apprehend him, Ioh. 7. 46. Thus his works
do witness that he was the son of God, John 36. and John was a witness to him,
Ioh. 1. 15. and 5. 33. the father by his Spirit bare witness to him, Mat. 3.
17. with Ioh. 5. 37. all his disciples and servants were witnesses to him in
their cleaving to him, and bearing up of his name, though in a way of
suffering; the Sun being darkened in the day of his sufferings, was an evident
witness that he was the Son of God, Mat. 27. 45. the rending of the veil of the
temple, and raising of the dead, and quaking of the earth, convincing
witnesses, Mat. 27. 51, etc. that he was the Messiah.

And finally, your being cast out of your own country amongst the nations, your
City and temple destroyed, according to his word, Mat. 24. 2. for your
rejecting of him according to that parable, Mat. 21. 33. 38. 41. This is the
Son, come let us kill him, etc. Read that parable, and consider all these, with
many others that I could produce do confirm that Jesus is the Christ.

SECT. III.
THe third general truth I desire to present you with, is, that the rejecting
of this Jesus has been and is your sin, and that its your duty to own him, and
to believe in him. I say unto you as once the Messiah said unto your fathers,
John 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your sins. There
are several reasons why your fathers did, and you to this day do reject him.

1. The meaness of his condition in outward appearance. Oh you looked for him
to come in glory, a King to deliver you from all your enemies. Oh you did not,
you do not know the mystery of his humiliation; it was hid from your eyes; it
was hid from his own disciples, till after it was accomplished. Hence it is
Christ says, Luke 24. 25, 26. O fools and slow of heart to believe all that
the prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these things* and
to enter into his glory? the meaness of Christ was and is to this day a veil
cast over your faces, by reason of which you did not, you do not know him.

2. The meaness of his followers, Oh they were too mean for such a presence as
was supposed would attend the true Messiah, hence it was (I will not say and
yet is, your selves best know) that the chief Priests and Pharisees said, have
any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him? Ioh. 7. 48. Oh consider
that prophecy, Isa. 8. 14, 15 He shall be for a sanctuary, but for a stone of
stubmling, and for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a gin
and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and many of them shall fall
and be snared, and be taken; and has not this been your condition, merely upon
this account of rejecting Christ for his meaness, and for the meaness of his
followers? upon this account it was that he was set at naught of the builders,
and yet is become the head stone of the corner, not understanding the
Scriptures which spoke of him, Isa. 14. 32. That the Lord has founded Zion,
and the poor of his people shall betake themselves unto it, Chap, 29. 19. the
poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel.

Other reasons might be presented, but not so useful in this place. Oh
therefore let it be your wisdom to embrace him, and not to stand it out with
him any longer. I say the night is far spent, and the day is at hand, Oh kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and his wrath be kindled, but a little, blessed are
they that trust in him, Psalm. 2. I say unto you as once Paul, Act. 13. 38, 39.
be it known unto you, that through this man is preached unto you, the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses. Oh do not
contradict and blaspheme any longer; for he is still good and gracious, the
arms of his mercy are yet open to receive you; he is not yet risen up out of
his holy habitation to take vengeance on his enemies; but he is yet
complaining, as in Isa. 49. 4. Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have
spent my strength for naught and in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the
Lord, and my work is with my God: Behold Christ complaining for the rebellion
of his nation, as if he had spent his labor in vain, suffered in vain, because
of their long rejecting of him; but see the answer of God unto him to comfort
him in his sad complaint, v. 6, 7. And he said, art thou ligher then that thou
should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
restored of Israel (and till Israel does receive thee, and is gathered by thee,
for thy comfort) I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may
be my salvation to the ends of the earth: thus says the Lord the redeemer of
Israel, Israel shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with
righteousness. Oh therefore stand it not out with the Lord any longer, for if
ye will not believe, ye shall not be established; the way by which God will
work your deliverance, will be your owning of the holy child Jesus, he it is
that must be your peace, and that by faith in his blood, for he has given his
life a ransom for many to be testified in due time, and that prophecy Zach.
12. 10. shall be fulfilled; they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and
shall mourn for him, etc. and he it is that was peirced by your fathers, and by
your selves too, in so much as you have justified your fathers in their sin, by
your rejecting of him, and that opinion will prove but a fancy mentioned in
Menasseh Ben Israel, his book page 33. Sect. 26. that some of your wise men
say, that there is Messiah the son of Ephraim, and that he shall dye in the
last war of Gog and Magog, and do apply this Scripture to that, they shall look
upon me whom they have peirced, etc. This cannot be for these reasons.

1. There is never but one Messiah spoken of in the Scriptures, Dan. 9. 25, 26.
and that Messiah is the Son of David, and he was to be cut off, but not for
himself but for men.

Second Reason, Because the cuting off of the Messiah was to be after the
building of the City Jerusalem, in their coming out of Babylon; and before the
second destruction by Titus, expressed in these words, that from the going
forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem (viz. in coming forth
of Babylon) unto Messiah the prince, seven weeks, that is seven times seventy
weeks, and the seventy weeks is seventy times seven weeks, which is all one in
computation of time, then the Messiah was to be cut off, and after Jerusalem
destroyed again by the people of the Prince that shall come, for the Roman
Monarchy was not then in being, but was to come so that it cannot be so
understood that Messiah should be cut off in the last war of Gog, because he
was to be cut off before the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman power.

3. It cannot be understood so, because that word in Zachariah, clears it self;
he does not say Gog and Magog shall look on him whom they have peirced; so it
must be if he were to be slain by Gog, but I will pour upon the house of David,
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of Grace, etc. and they shall
look upon him whom they have peirced, etc. he was peirced by you, and you it is
that shall look upon him and mourn, when the Lord does pour out the spirit of
Grace upon you.

4. It cannot be in the last war of Magog, for then shall be no destruction to
any but Gog himself, for there are two destructions to Gog, as in its place I
shall make it appear. Oh therefore be entreated to sit down a little, and sadly
consider your estate. If this be truth, which is undeniable, that the true
Messiah was according to prophesies to suffer, and all things spoken of by the
prophets was fulfilled in him, and so it appears that he was, and is indeed the
Son of God, King of Israel, Is it not high time for you to awake out of sleep?
Does not the Lord say by the Prophet, that there is a veil and covering cast
over all people* Isa. 25. 7. And Paul 1 Cor. 3. that the covering in the
reading of Moses law remains untaken away. When that is taken away, you shall
see him to be the substance, as has been minded, of Moses law, Priest
sacrifice, atonement, prophet, and king, and to him you will submit in all
things; Do you believe the Prophets? I know you believe them: Oh then desire
the Lord that you may understand them, that you may not remain in that estate,
that Christ being come, you do not know him; it was want of knowledge that was
the cause why your fathers crucified him, so Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 8. had they
known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Oh continue not in that
sin of ignorance and unbelief; I know you shall not long. I do rejoice in the
hearing of your zeal against idolatry, Images and Pictures; in your keeping
close to your own people in your marriages, by which you are preserved in your
great expectation of the Messiah: but Oh my soul longs that you might know him
in his humiliation, that so you might suffer with him, and for him, and reign
with him, that you might know who it is you look for, one that has suffered
and been tempted, that so he might be your king in his humiliation, a little,
before he come in his glory. Oh it will be your joy and crown of rejoicing one
day, if you have hearts to own him truly in his humiliation. Well, your duty
is, and its that which the Lord calls you to, to repent and believe the Gospel,
to be baptized after believing, in the name of the Lord Jesus, wherein is
represented the washing away of sin both in conscience and conversation,
through faith in his blood; its only the duty of believers to be baptized; we
own no national Church under the Gospel (before the day of Christ's glorious
appearing) but whosoever lives and believes in him shall be saved; the
nations delude themselves with the form of godliness without the power; Oh its
the life and power of godliness that will stand us instead at the last: its
your duty to own him in every part of his word and will, for God has raised
him up a Prophet to you; and its your duty to hear him in all, Dcut. 18. 15.
with Act. 3. 22, 23. Moses gives up all to him, if Moses were upon the earth he
would willingly submit himself to this prophet; therefore stand it not out with
him, remember that word of Christ, Luke 19. 27. but those mine enemies that
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them before me.
The Lord Jesus in his glorious appearing will render vengeance to them that
know him not, to them that obey him not, but will be admired in all those that
have believed in him: in that day, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. 9, 10. Oh therefore fear and
tremble to stand it out with him any longer, he is that stone, that whosoever
falls on him will be broken, but on whomsoever he shall fall, he will break
them to pieces: you have been stumbling at him a long time.

Oh take heed lest he fall on you, he is not only a Lamb full of meekness,
patience and forbearance, slain for the sin of sinners, but he is the Lion of
the Tribe of Judah, and when the Lion roareth all the beasts of the Forest will
then tremble, Oh then blessed are all those that put their trust in him.

To conclude this word, remember I bessech you these three things.

1. That without him there is no life, there is no other name given among men,
whereby you may be saved, but by the name of Jesus, viz. through faith in his
blood.

2. Consider the grievousness of your sin, in rejecting him so long as you
have, consider of that word of the Prophet, if it had been an enemy I could
have born it, but it is thou O man my acquaintance, Psalm. 45. 13. it is his
own, and they have not received him. Oh that's it will cause you to weep
bitterly every family apart, Zach. 12. when you shall come to look upon him
whom you have peirced, and shall mourn for him. Oh its that will break your
hearts, when you shall see and say, he that is our king has been our reproach;
we it is that have wounded and peirced him, we it is that have rejected him,
and trampled him under our feet, and accounted the blood of the covenant an
holy thing; yet know, that if the Lord make you sensible of your sin, he is
gracious, he is yet a Lamb full of meekness, and his blood shall cleanse you
from all your sins; for the promise is to you as many as the Lord our God shall
call. For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of
death for the redemption of the transgressions under the first Testament, they
which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15.

3. Consider, that notwithstanding your rejecting of him, yet he shall be your
King at last, and he it is that shall be manifest to be the Lord of lords, and
King of kings, that one Lord Jesus Christ who has been so much set light by
you, see Hos. 13. 10. I will be thy King, Where is any that may save thee in
all thy Cities? and this leads me to the fourth particular.

SECT. IV.
THe fourth particular that I shall present you with, is that this Jesus shall
reign on earth and the twelve Tribes of Israel shall be gathered by him to
their own land in peace.

1. That this Jesus shall have his kingdom and dominion here on earth manifest
among the sons of men. Having had his day of humiliation among the sons of men,
He shall have his day of glory on earth among the sons of men, that as he has
been abased in person on earth, so shall he in person reign on earth. In the
confirmation of this glorious truth, I shall present you with many Scriptures
both in the old and new Testament, Psalm. 2. throughout. Where the Lord has
said it, that notwithstanding the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain
thing, for they imagine that Christ shall not reign, which is a vain thing,
vain imaginations, etc. yet verse 6. Have I set my King upon the holy hill of
Sion. And verse 8. He shall have the heathen given him for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession; and what shall he do with
them? he shall break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel. This is a clear prophecy of the reign of Christ the anointed.
I have set mine anointed upon Zion the hill of my holiness; and all the rage of
men on earth shall not hinder it, or prevent God in his great design of the
exaltation of the man Jesus; to this fully agrees that glorious prophecy,
Psalm 72. throughout though it may be supposed, that the Prophet in this Psalm
intends Solomon, which I do not altogether deny, yet he intends Solomon no
otherwise than as he was a type of Christ, but in the Messiah, the man Jesus,
shall this prophecy be truly and fully made good in the day of his glory,
verse. 2. He shall judge thy people with righteousness and thy poor with
judgment, verse. 4. He shall judge the poor of the people, and shall save the
children of the needy and shall break in pieces the oppressor, verse. 5. they
shall fear thee so long as the Sun and Moon endures throughout all
generations. This was never made good in Solomon, nor in any man else, but it
shall be in Christ, Dan. 7. 27. all dominions shall serve and obey him; but to
return, verse. 7. in his days the righteous shall flourish, and abundance of
peace, till there be no Moon, verse. 8. he shall have dominion also from sea to
sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth, and so to the 17. verse are
many glorious prophesies of his kingdom, and his name shall be for ever; he
shall be a son to continue his fathers name for ever; and men shall be blessed
in him, all nations shall call him blessed, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
who only does wondrous things* and blessed be his glorious name for ever; and
let the whole earth be filled with his glory, Amen, Amen. So likewise in Psalm.
82. 8. after the description of Magistrates, what they should be, and what they
should do, defend the poor and fatherless, do justice to the afflicted and
needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked, etc. and then what they did
judge, unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked, etc. the Prophet seeing
no justice to be done by men, what ever they should be, or whatever they
pretend to be, even as Gods upon earth, pretending to do justly, yet nothing
less: he looks further, even to the righteous branch. Arise O God, judge the
earth, for thou shall inherit all nations; this is that should be the faith,
prayers, and consolation of the Saints amidst all the troubles of the world and
injustice and unfaithfulness of men, that the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, and his countenance does behold the upright, Psalm. 11. 7. and
that he will take to himself his great power, and will reign, Rev. 11. 17. Isa.
11. 1. there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch
shall grow out of his roots, that is Jesus Christ the Son of David, Act. 13.
23. and he shall be filled by the father, through the Spirit of the Father,
withal accomplishments for so great a work, verse. 1, 2, 3. and then with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth, and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked* verse. 4. Isa. 32. 1, 2. Behold a
King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment, and man
shall be a hiding place, even the man Christ Jesus, whom the Lord has made
strong for himself, Psalm. 80. 17. and by whom he will rule the nations; its
true, this prophecy has been, is, and shall be made good in a mesure, even in
the day of his humiliation, he has been and is a King, and a hiding place to
all that truly believe in him, but it shall be much more fulfilled in the day
of his exaltation, when every knee shall bow to him, and every tongue shall
confess him to the glory of God the Father, Psalm. 45. 23. Phil. 2. 11. Isa. 42.
1, 2, 3, 4. Where you have, 1. A description of Christ in his humiliation.

1. What he is to his Father, verse. 1. His servant, his elect, one in whom his
soul delights, etc.

2. His humility and patience in his suffering. He shall not cry nor cause his
voice to be heard in the street.

3. His meekness and harmlesness. A bruised reed shall he not break, the
smoking flax shall he not quench.

Yet 4. He shall bring forth judgment into truth. He shall bring forth
judgment in the earth, the Isles shall wait for his law; all the
discouragements shall not hinder him, the greatness of his sufferings and the
long time of his being rejected by his own nation, etc. shall not hinder him,
but he shall bring forth judgment into victory, and establish Jerusalem a
praise in the earth, Isa. 62. 7. Jer. 22. 5, 6. Chap. 33. 15. Behold the days
come says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a
King shall reign and prosper, and execute judgment and justice in the earth
etc. this is the King promised in Ezekiel. 37. 25. and my servant David shall be
their Prince for ever; this is the fifth Monarchy mentioned Dan 2. or the
little stone cut out of the mountain without hands, that shall break in pieces
all that have gone before it, and shall be the last government in the world,
for he shall not leave the government to another people as all the rest have
done and shall do, v. 44, 45. this is the kingdom and glory of the ancient of
days, spoken of Dan. 7. 9, 10. and 26, 27. this is that Michael Dan. 12. 1.
that shall stand up, a great prince which stands for the children of thy
people, and the Lord shall be King over all the earth; in that day there shall
be one Lord, and his name shall be one, Zach. 14. 9. See this glorious truth
preciously held forth likewise in the New Testament, Phil. 2. from verse. 6. to
the 12. where the Apostle, first describes him in his humiliation, and then in
his exaltation, that God has highly exalted him, and given him a name above
every name, that at the name of Jesus (viz. his kingly authority) every knee
should bow, etc. and this is it the Apostle minds in the Epistle to the
Hebrews Chap. 2. applying that which is written concerning Christ in Psa. 8.
Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, verse. 8. but now we see
not yet all things put under him; but althings in this world shall be put under
him, and he shall reign till all his enemies are made his footstool, Psalm.
110. 1. Mat. 22. 44. 1 Cor. 15. 25. Heb. 1. 13. this is likewise preciously
minded, Rev. 11. 15. the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever; and this is the thousand
years reign spoken of Rev. 20. 4. Thus much shall suffice as in clearing the
truth of the reign of Christ.

2. The place where he shall manifest his glory, in his kingdom, and that is at
Jerusalem in the land of Canaan, that land which the Lord chose for himself, a
habitation for his name and people, the place and City of his holiness, even
the mount Zion; that place where our Lord suffered his shame and reproach,
shall he manifest his glory: the Lord shall reign in (Isa. 24. 23.) mount Zion,
in Jerusalem, and there shall be glory before his ancients, Joel 3. 12. Let the
heathen be awakened and come up to the valley of Jehosaphat, for there will I
sit to judge all the heathen round about, there will the Lord sit and judge of
the heathen, and there will the Lord govern his people, Zach. 2. 12. and the
Lord shall inherit Judah, his portion in the holy Land, and shall choose
Jerusalem again; let all flesh therefore be silent before the Lord when he
arises up out of the habitation of his holiness.

3. In this day of the reign of Christ, will he gather together the dispersed
of Judah and Israel into their own Land; that although for their sins they have
been put far away for along time; yet they shall be gathered, for the Lord has
redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from him that was too strong for him, therefore
they shall come and sing in the hight of Zion, and shall flow together to the
goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, etc. and their soul
shall be as a watered garden, and they shall not see sorrow any more, Ier. 31.
11, 12, the Lord will gather them out of all places whither they have been
driven and they shall come with weeping and supplication, verse. 8. 9. that is,
they shall come in with the sense of the sin that has been the cause of their
being put far away, they shall look upon him whom they have peirced, and shall
mourn for him, Zach. 12. First he will gather Judah and Benjamin, and let them
have some sight of his grace, Zach. 12. 7. the Lord also will save the tents of
Judah first, and pour first upon them the Spirit of Grace and of supplication,
that the glory of the house of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not
magnify themselves against Judah; that which I understand in it, is, that
because Judah and Benjamin had their hands especially in the crucifying of
their King.

The Lord will first, to show that he is gracious, save Judah first, called the
tents of Judah, because the two tribes known by that name, live as it were in
tents, not so possessed of any Nation as to call it their own.

And secondly, he will save the tents of Judah first, thar the glory of the
house of David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnify
against Judah, not but that Judah is the house of David, but the glory of it
will be the coming in of the ten tribes so long lost, that will be the glory of
the house of David, that is of Christ, but the tents of Judah must be first,
that the ten tribes may not magnify against them, because they had a hand in
the crucifying of their king, they it were that said, this is the heir, come
let us kill him, but Israel was ignorant of this.

Therefore to prevent Isreal's magnifying against Judah, the Lord will save the
Tents of Judah first: behold the riches of his grace, and kindness to men: this
is one prevailing thing that has at this time drawn forth my heart and pen in
writing to you.

And secondly, He will save the ten tribes and bring them to their own land,
who have been for a long time driven far away, yet not so properly said to dwell
in tents as Judah, because I do believe that they are not only in being, but
that there are great and strong nations of them; as for the many places
mentioned by Menasseh Ben Israel, of their habitation, I am not so curious
about it, it is enough to me to know that they are, and that they shall return
when their day is come. I do give much credit to that mentioned by you in 2
Esdra 13. their being passed through the River Euphrates into a strange land,
where never mankind dwelt, etc. and that there they shall remain till the
latter day, and then the Lord will work signs for them, and return them the
same way, and will dry up the river again for them to pass through; and to
this agrees that prophecy in Isa. 11. 11. when the Lord shall set his hand
the second time to recover the remnant that are left from Assyria, etc. then
verse. 15. the Lord shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea, and
with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river, and shall smite it
in the seven streams, and make men go over in shoos, and v. 16. there shall be
a high way for them that are left from Assyria, etc. that is the ten Tribes
that was carried away captive by Salmanazer king of Assyria, where Euphrates is
called the Egyptian sea, in way of allusion, because it shall be like, as it
was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt, verse. 16. to
this agrees that in Zach. 10. 11. and he shall pass through the sea with
affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the deeps of the
river shall dry up, and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down (because
Assyria carried them away) and the Scepter of Egypt shall depart: now the
reason why Egypt is so much spoken of and the return from Egypt. I do judge is,
because there was a remnant that was not carried captive into Baylon, but went
into Egypt, Jer. 43. 5, 6, 7. and I have not read of their return, but its
probable, that they might be driven away into some obscure place, and shall
undoubtedly return at the time appointed. But to return, to this agrees that
in Rev. 16. 12. And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the
East might be prepared. Doubtless the ten Tribes are in all this time of their
being in the unknown parts of the world grown into many kingdoms and great
people, and their coming in through the river Euphrates will be a great
amazement to the world; thus shall both Judah and Israel be gathered to their
own country under Christ the head of his Church* and that prophecy shall be
fulfilled, Ezekiel. 37. 16. Judah and Joseph shall be both written on one stick,
and shall become one, and shall have one king, even David (that is Christ)
shall be their prince for ever, and he shall make a covenant of peace for them,
and they shall be no more two; the envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the
adversaries of Judah shall be cut off, Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah
shall not vex Ephraim, Isa. 11. 13. this is that which the Lord has said, that
though thy bruise be incurable, and thy wound grievous, yet the Lord will
restore health, and will heal thee of thy wounds, etc. Jer. 30. thus shall
Jerusalem be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem, Zach. 12. 6.
I shall say no more to this at present, beeause I find Manasseh Ben Israel so
full of clearness in this part of the truth, and I do perceive by his lines
your earnest expectation of the accomplishment of this great salvation by the
Messiah, which is indeed my joy; but Oh that your souls did know him and
believe in him, who will appear for your joy; and as for the time, I dare not
pitch upon it, because I believe, as is mentioned in the hope of Israel, the
Lord has reserved it to himself. So Christ answered his disciples, Of that day
and hour knows no man, no not the angels of heaven, but my father, Mat. 24.
36. and when his disciples asked him after his resurrection, if he would at
this time restore the kingdom to Israel: He answered them, it is not for you to
know the times and seasons which the father has kept in his own power, Act. 1.
6, 7. yet I do believe, and have very much confidence, that the time is at
hand; and it is yet but a little while, and he that shall come will come, and
will not tarry, even so amen. But who will abide the day of his coming, and who
will stand when he appears? Mal. 3. and this I desire to mind you by the
way, that as at or in the beginning work of your deliverance, You must come in
by weeping cross, not only in the sight and sense of your sin, Jer. 5. 4.
Looking on him whom you have peirced, and mourning for him, Zach. 12. but
likewise in relation to the great trouble you are like to meet with also from
the world, that as you have been scattered among the nations, and Israel has
been kept in obscurity, so the nations will rage in your gathering together,
and then will be the first war of Gog and Magog, mentioned in Ezekiel. 38. and 39.
and it will go hard with you for a time, see Zach. 14. 1, 2. to this that
agrees, Rev. 16. 12. when the River Euphrates is dried up, that the way of the
kings of the earth may be prepared, verse. 13, 14. on their appearance, three
unclean spirits like frogs went out of the mouth of the dragon, the beast and
the false prophets, which are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go
forth to the kings of the earth, and to the whole world to gather them together
to the battle of the great day of God almighty; that is the great battle of Gog
and Magog mentioned before, called the great battle of God almighty, because it
is that great battle appointed of God, where he will destroy both his and your
enemies.

And in this great distress, by reason of the nations fury, called Gog and
Magog, then shall Michael the great prince of his people, stand up for your
deliverance, Dan. 12. 1. Then will the Lord send a fire upon Magog, and he
shall know that there is a God in Israel, and the Lord will make his holy name
known in the midst of his people Israel, and he will not let them pollute his
holy name any more, etc. Ezekiel. 39. 6, 7.

And then shall that prophecy be fulfilled, Isa. 2. and Micah 4. Nation shall
not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more, only
after the glorious reign of Christ and his Saints, Satan shall be loosed for a
little season, Rev. 20. and shall gather together Gog and Magog (that is those
that were left of the nations in the first destruction, Ezekiel. 39. 2) and they
shall compass the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City; and fire
shall come down from God and destroy them, this shall be the last encamping
together of Gog, and the last destruction and final judgment; in this day of
glory shall all believing Gentiles be gathered in with you, for he is given as
well to be a light to the Gentiles, as to be the glory of the people Israel,
Isa. 49. 6.

Thus have I in tenderness and faithfulness both to the Lord and you,
discharged this as my duty in commending these few lines unto you; the Lord
grant that it may find acceptance with you. Here are many prayers presented
for you at the throne of grace, by those who clearly see and believe Gods
intention of good to you; for my self I trust my heart is so much set at
liberty toward you, that I could not only prostrate my pen and prayers for
your good, but my person likewise, if I saw a clear call from the Lord to serve
you.

In a word to conclude, I do believe that you have some of those remembrancers,
in this nation, spoken of Isa. 62. 6, 7. That will give the Lord no rest till
he have made Jerusalem a praise in the earth; which is the earnest and daily
prayer of him who is both yours and the truths servant, as far as he may,
though unworthy.

T. C.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
MY Friends, to whose hands this Epistle may come; The estate of the Jews
having been a long time sad, and indeed as once the Gentiles were, and all
unbelieving Gentiles are, without Christ in the world, and so without hope in
themselves, as in relation to the true Messiah, the Lord having given me some
apprehension concerning his purpose both of grace and glory toward them, I
could not with good conscience altogether hold my peace at this time, without
writing these preceding lines unto them; it being translated into French (that
being a language that they are exercised in) and so sent unto them, the work
being done, the issue I leave to the Lord, who I know does usually honor
himself in working by weak means; and being desired by some friends, I have
likewise got it printed in English, thereby not only to provoke others, who
perhaps may be more enlarged in this work toward those poor dark despised
people, but likewise that all whose hearts are (truly) Zion-ward, may be
instant with the Lord in prayer for them, and so much the more, because their
coming in will be to us life from the dead; and their fullness will be our
glory. Oh therefore let all be warned, not to be wise in their own conceit, and
know that blindness is happened to Israel but in part, but that till the
fullness of the Gentiles is come in, and then Israel shall be saved.

I have a few words, my brethren and friends, to present you farther with,
concerning the reign of Christ; and that is, that he shall have a kingdom upon
the earth, and shall reign with his people upon the earth, manifesting his
power and glory amongst them, and over the world.

But before I proceed any further, I shall answer one objection, that is, some
may say, It was not long since that your self was against this principle, etc.

Answ. Its true, in part I was, being much informed in the truth of the reign
of Christ, but judging it to be a glorious reign in the spirits of his people
over the world, and this is the apprehension of many precious sons of Zion at
this day; but the Lord opening the seals by degrees unto his people, he gives
them to see farther into the mystery of his will concerning his kingdom, and as
light shines in, their darkness does fly away: I could not but judge it my
duty to give some hints concerning my farther apprehension of the kingdom of
Christ, in which I shall be very brief.

That his kingdom shall be manifest on earth, will appear from these ensuing
grounds.

1. It was and is the great design of the Father to exalt the Son here on earth
before the sons of men; this was his design before he made the world, and ever
since all things, has, does, and will concur to the bringing about of this
great design; therefore he at first made the world by him and for him, Ephesians. 4.
9. Col. 2. 16. Joh. 1. 1. afterward man being fallen, and the curse come in upon
the whole creation, Genesis 3. God did by him and for him recover the world again,
Col. 1. 20. that so he might have a selected people to himself, that might
enjoy his grace and glory, Col. 1. 21. chap. 3. 4. His suffering in the flesh
was a preparative to this great glory, both for himself and people, it being
the appointment of the Father, and there being no other way left or appointed
by the Father for the redemption of the sons of men, Luke 24. 26. Phil. 2. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. Heb. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 20. he being ascended to the father, Joh.
20. 17. to receive for himself a kingdom, and return, Luke 19. 12. 15. and in
the mean time by his Spirit in the Ministry of the Gospel, he is gathering
together of his people to himself (among the Gentiles) that when he do appear,
they may appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. for to them that look for him, he
will appear a second time without sin to salvation, Heb. 9. 28. that God having
made the world, and again redeemed it to a state of continuation by his Son and
for him, and purchased a people to himself out of the world. We may conclude
that the Sons dominion shall be over the world: see Psalm. 72. throughout; and
that all dominions shall serve and obey him.

Obj. So they do serve him now, and he rules over them.
Answ. True, they serve the design of God now, but the kingdom of Christ is not
of this world; but there is a time appointed when the kingdom of Christ shall
be visibly manifest, and the world shall knowingly he subject to the Son, Rev.
5. 13.

Second ground is, that this truth is clearly held forth in the Scriptures; of
truth, when our understandings are opened, we shall see it. The first Scripture
I shall present you with, as a foundation, is Act. 3. 27. Whom the heavens must
receive until the time of the restitution of all things, which God has spoken
by the mouth of all his prophets since the world began, where we may note two
things.

1. That at the coming of Christ from heaven will be the restitution, not the
dissolution.

And secondly, it is that restitution spoken of by the mouth of all the holy
prophets.

Now it will be good to search into the prophets, and see what they have
prophesied of, and we shall find all agree in one, that Christ must reign,
Psalm. 2. 6. 7. that his dominion shall be from sea to sea, even to the ends of
the earth, Psalm. 72. that he shall possess all nations, Psalm. 82. 8. that he
shall reign in mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously,
Isa. 24. 23. that a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule
in judgment, Isa. 32. 1. that God will raise unto David a righteous branch,
and a King shall reign and prosper, and execute judgment and justice in the
earth, Jer. 23. 5. and David my servant shall be king over them, etc. and they
shall dwell in the land which I gave to Jacob my servant, etc. Ezekiel. 37. 24,
25. and all dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7. 27. that the Lord shall
be King over all the earth, Zach. 14. 9.

These and many others I might produce to this purpose, and likewise then will
be the restitution or restoration of the whole creation; that Scripture will be
fulfilled both in the letter as well as in spirit, Isa. 11. 6, 7* 8, 9. chap.
65. 25. considered with Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. and then shall those blessed
promises be made good to the Saints here on earth, Psalm. 37. 11. Mat. 5. 5.
Isa. 25. 8. and chap. 65. 13. etc. and all this must be done when Jesus Christ
is sent from heaven to manifest his power to take to himself his great kingdom,
and to reign; and this is likewise confirmed in the New Testament, the Nations
and kingdoms of this world are become the Nations and kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11. 15. This is the
thousand years spoken of in chap. 20, etc.

A third ground I take from his suffering, he fulfilled all that was prophesied
of him concerning his suffering, according to the very letter of the
Scriptures, he has so fulfilled it, Act. 3. 18. and why should we think it
incredible that he shall even so fulfill the Scripturs in his reign on earth?
And why shall we think it a high and glorious discovery of grace for the Son to
abase himself on earth in his humiliation, and think it too low a piece of
service for him to come and reign, to receive the due desert (if I may so say)
of all his labor to manifest his glory before his Saints, and to set his feet
on the necks of his enemies? Why should we not think it to be a great degree of
honor for the Lord who have suffered on earth to receive his glory on the
earth. And why shall we make an Alegory or mystery of those Scriptures that do
foretell of his reign on earth, any more than of those Scriptures that did
foretell of his sufferings, I do believe that it has been the policy of Satan,
and the weakness and pride of men, in turning Scripture into Alegories and
myste-so much, that we had almost lost the truth; therefore let it suffice,
that as Christ and his people has had their day of humiliation on the earth,
so they shall have their exaltation on the earth, Psalm. 2. 8. Rev. 2. 26, 27.
Psalm. 149. 5, 6, 7, 8.

Obj. We do not question but that the Saints shall rule the earth, and that the
power of Christ in them shall subdue the Nations.
Answ. And if the Saints, why not Christ their head with them? Can you afford
the kingdoms of this world to the Saints, and not to Christ? I say that the
Saints shall never reign on earth till the Kingdom of Christ is come, till he
is descended from heaven in power and great glory; as he has suffered before
us, and for us, so we, if we suffer with him, shall reign with him, Romans 8. 17.
When Christ comes to rule the nations then shall the Saints reign with him.

Obj. Is it not said 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. that when the Lord shall descend from
heaven, etc. and that the dead in Christ shall be raised, and then we who
remain and are alive shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, and
so shall ever be with the Lord?
Answ. 1. That is to make good the Scripture which says, Zach. 14. 5. The Lord
our God shall come, and all the Saints with thee, and if they be not caught up
to meet the Lord, he cannot bring them with him.

And secondly, the Scripture do not say that they shall abide above, but with
the Lord, that is, they shall come down with him, as Joel 3. 11.

Quest. Do you suppose that the Jews be called before that day?
Answ. I do believe that there will be something done amongst them upon that
account; and that there will be a great gathering together of them at
Jerusalem, before that day, but their fullness will not be till the day of his
appearing in glory, that will be their uniting, Jer. 23. 5, 6. Ezekiel. 37. 22.

Qu. Will the raising of the dead, and the calling of the Jews to their fullness
be at one time.
Answ. To me it so appears, those Scriptures considered, 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45.
with Hos. 13. 14. the prophet Hosea clearly prophesying the coming in of
Israel, and particularly the ten tribes; the Apostle applies it there to the
resurrection of the dead, etc. Romans 11. 15. what shall their coming in be but
life from the dead, that is, if their rejecting was an occasion of so much
mercy to the world. What miracle of mercy at their receiving or coming in, even
the resurrection of the dead. To this prophecy fully agrees Isa. 26. 19.
speaking throughout that Chap. of the the glory of Jews, thy dead men shall
live together with my dead body shall they arise, Awake, and sing ye that dwell
in the dust* etc.

Quest. If so, how will those Scripture be reconciled, that of Christ, Mat. 22.
30. in the resurrection, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are
as the angels of heaven, and that of the propbets which seems to hold forth
building of houses and plainting of vinyards and procreation of children, etc.
Isa. 65. 2.
Answ. Why may not both these stand together as a truth? what if we should
suppose, that after the the coming of Christ* and the raising the dead in him
(for they must be first raised, 1 Cor. 15.) and changing the believing Gentiles
that raised and changed, may be ever with the Lord, that the Jews then brought
in in their fullness, may remain in a glorious estate (Satan being shut up) yet
not changed; and so the prophesies may be fulfilled concerning them, and those
that are raised and changed likewise; and so much the the more because its
evident that the resurrection and their coming in in fullness will be at one and
the self same time.

And what if we should suppose according to the Scripture, that the new
Jerusalem spoken of Rev. 21. that must come down from God out of heaven, be a
material City now above according to Gal. 4. 26. Jerusalem which is above is
the mother of us all, it is above, but it shall come down, etc. and what if we
should suppose this new Jerusalem which is so full of excellency (and probably
may be the place now where the Father does most manifest his glory, though the
heaven of heavens cannot contain him; and where Christ and the spirits of just
men, are Heb. 12.) when it comes down from God out of heaven, and the
tabernacle of God is with men, and that does dwell among them. I say that this
City may be the head place of residence for Christ and the changed Saints; and
the twelve tribes to inhabit without the City, according to Ezekiel. 48. which is
the prophecy and description of the same City; and if so God may have a seed
among them to be brought forth in the world in the time of the reign of Christ,
and if so, they shall be all righteous, Isa. 60. 21. with chap. 59. 20, 21.
which is applied by the Apostle to the calling of the Jews, and coming in of
the ten tribes, Romans 11. 26.

Quest. Shall this new heaven and new earth be before or after the destruction
of the world by fire, spoken of by Peter, 2 Pet. 3.
Answ. I do believe that it will be before the dissolution; my reasons are
(though Peter mentions the dissolution first, yet never theless we according to
his promise look for new heavens and a new earth, etc.)

1. Because that promise is clearly to the Jews, and shall be made good to them
when their redeemer does come to take away their sin.

2. Because that holds forth a destruction of the world by fire, as once it was
destroyed by water.

3. Because after the dissolution and judgment, the kingdom shall be given up
to the Father, and God shall be all, 1 Cor. 15.

Quest. Will not Christ's coming be the day of Judgment?
Answ. It will be the beginning of Judgment. 1. The glorifying of his people.
2. A great judgment and destruction to the world, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. 3. He
shall all that time with his Siants judge the world. 4. At the end will be the
final judgment, Rev. 20. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Quest. What shall be the condition of the world at that time?
Answ. The men of the world shall on condition enjoy peace and plenty, the
condition will be they shall own and honor Christ and the Saints, and come up
to Jerusalem, doing homage there, and bring presents thither as an
acknowledgment; not for any need of it there, but as Christ and the Saints have
been at the feet of the world: now shall the world be at their feet according
to those Scriptures, Ps. 72. 9, 10, 11. Isa. 60. 24. chapter 66. 23. Zach. 14. 16.
Rev. 3. 9. Chap. 27. 26.

Quest. If this be truth, that Christ and the Saints shall reign on earth, what
advantage will it be to the Saints in the knowledge of it more than to believe
his coming and kingdom at the end of time.
Ans. It must needs minister consolation in the knowledge of the truth of
things; there is no truth of God but the knowledge of it ministers joy, much
more; this about the kingdom and glory of Christ, that the place of suffering
shall be for a time the place of glory and liberty.

2. It will keep us more to a constant expectation of his coming and not to put
it far away, as of necessity we must, if we suppose a state of glory and
liberty for the Church here on earth before his coming, as almost all do
expect; when Paul only minds the Appostles to be first, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. and
that has been, and I believe is almost over, and the day of his glory is at
the doors.

3. It will tend to the establishing of the Saints in the truth in opposition
to all false ways and false Christ's, knowing it to be their duty to wait upon
him in his appointment until the day of his appearing, thereby manifesting not
only their owning of him, by virtue of their being owned by him, but also that
they do indeed look for him, for none durst to look for him indeed, but those
who upon a right account do serve him. What advantage has Satan had in our
days for want of souls being principled in this truth, one says here, another
there is Christ, and all because we turn his reign all into a mystery, viz. in
the Saints: but hold right here, and you shall be able to discover all false
and Antichrists, be they never so deceivable: own Christ thy justification, thy
king to serve him according to the Scriptures, the resurrection his personal
coming and reign, and look for it, and thou shall live above all those false
notions that are in the world, able to judge them all, in the light of this
truth.

4. It will keep the Saints in peace and quiet in their minds, though under
persecution, till the time come, the contrary, an imaginary that the Saints
shall reign, makes them vex when things go not to their minds, fills them with
trouble and unquietness, if not turbulency of spirit, thinking now is the
kingdom of Christ going up, but if the Saints knew that their day must be a day
of suffering till Christ come, they would not trouble themselves about the
kingdoms of the world till that time come, for all powers set up in the world
before Christ come, are but members of the fourth Monarch, even the most
righteous, etc. must be broken when he comes, therefore let the Saints wait
with patience, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. Amen.

FINIS.

