By the Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND HENRY CROMWELL.
WHereas we take notice that there are sundry apprehensions touching the
present posture of affairs, whereby the minds of the good People of this land
may be disquieted, and from thence the Common Enemy and other disaffected
persons among us encouraged to disturb the quiet and peace of this Nation, for
prevention thereof, We strictly charge and require all Officers and Soldiers
of the Army immediately to repair to their Garrisons and Charges; and that all
Sheriffs and other Officers, as well civil as Military, take diligent care to
preserve the public peace, and by all due ways and means to hinder all
unlawful Assemblies, the dispersing or divulging of any seditious papers, the
signing or procurement to sign any test, engagement, or declaration of what
kind soever, which may tend to divide the good People of this land, or alienate
them from obedience to his Highness and the present Government, and to give an
account of their proceedings to us from time to time as there shall be
occasion. And we do further order and require all Sheriffs, Majors and other
Officers of all Counties, Cities and towns Corporate within this Dominion
respectively, forthwith to publish and proclaim this Declaration within their
several Jurisdictions, and also the chief Officers present with the respective
troops or Companies are hereby required at their Garrisons and Quarters, or at
the head of their respective troops or Companies to publish the same
accordingly.

Given under our hand at his Highness Castle at Dublin, the ninth of May 1659.
Ordered that the above Declaration be forth with printed and published.

Robert Gorges Secretary.


