A Country DIALOGUE BETWEEN William and James, ON THE MONTHLY FAST DAY WITH
REFLECTIONS ON THE EARTHQUAKE Which lately happened at Iamaica, and Here Sept.
8. 1692.
Will. WEll met, Jemmy: Why was you not at Church to day?


Jam. I chose the better part, Charity; I carried in a dozen Loads of Wheat
[the Weather is very uncertain, and we must expect Corn will be dear] with
which I shall be able to relieve my poor Abdicated Neighbors.


Will. I am sorry you was not there; for we had a most heavenly Sermon preached
by a Strange Divine.


Jam. Ay, We have very many Strange Divines nowadays.


Will. You take me up before I Am down, Jemmy; I meant a Stranger.


Jam. So do I too; Strangers to the Orthodox Doctrine of the Church of England.


Will. You will have your way still, I find: Before the Sermon our Vicar
tickled it off with a godly Prayer made by Bishop B -- net and the new
Archbishop T -- n; and that must be Orthoknocks as you call it, I hope.


Jam New-no Bishop, if you will believe St. Cyprian, as you may find it in Dr.
Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 246. His Words are so
considerable to our purpose, that I will set them down: Et cum post primum
secundus esse non possit, quisque post unum qui (...) esse debeat, factus est,
non jam secundus ille sed nullus est; Since there cannot be a second after the
first, whosoever is made Bishop when one is made already, who ought to be
alone, he is not another Bishop, but none at all. Thou know as well as I,
Billy, that Dr. Stilling fleet and Dr. Tillotson were inseparable Waiters at
Whitehall, and club'd in their Writings: Let them reconcile these Words of St.
Cyprian, even the holy and meek St. Cyprian, to their Practices, if they can:
And it is most earnestly desired, that they would club again, and solve this
Dilemma. St. Cyprian's Argument is good against Mr. Baxter; ergo, it is so
against the new Archbishop of Canterbury; for, the most Reverend Father in God,
Dr. Sancroft, is still living.


Will. You are too Book-learn'd for me: but I Will warrant you the Archbishop Til
-- n will satisfy you; for he is a very good Christian.


Jam. Your Warrant I fear will fail in both your Hypothesis's; the latter is
very much questioned. But that we may not be longer Strangers to this strange
godly Prayer, I pra'ye what was it?


Will. That God would Bless, Preserve and Keep, our most Gracious K. William,
and our most Religious Q. Mary; And that he would Defend them against, and give
them Victory over, all their Enemies.


Jam. What Enemies? Did the Parson name them, Billy?


Will. No, No: But every body knows he meant the Most Christian Turk, Lewis the
French King; and the late King James, who would bring into England, Popery,
Slavery, and Arbitrary Power: But I Will warrant him for ever returning; for the
Prayers of the Godly will prevail certainly.


Ja. The Godly! Where do thou read that God commanded or enjoined Subjects to
pray for the Destruction of their lawful King?


Will. King William and Queen Mary has commanded it, and I am bound in
Conscience to obey our King and Queen; and they are our lawful Sovereigns, I Am
sure; I saw them Anointed and Crowned with mine own Eyes.


Ja. Ay, they are the People's Anointed: But did not You and I see King James
Anointed and Crowned too? What became of Your Conscience when you Rebelled
against him? Ha!


Will. I believe by your Talk you did not Fast nor Pray neither to day.


Ja. Yes, I did both; but 'twas for our Sins, particularly those of the deepest
Dye, Rebellion and King-killing: You make an Ahab's Fast for Naboth's Vineyard:
You have Slandered the King our Father, and his Son; nay more, Deposed him, and
thrust him into a strange Country to starve; but God has raised him a Friend
in his Extremity: and now you Fast and Pray that God would prosper you in your
Rebellion; and that he would be pleased to null the Fifth, Eighth, Ninth and
Tenth Commandments, that you may wash your hands, and say we are Innocent.


Will. No, We pray to God to confound the French King and his Devices.


Jam. Because he preserves our lawful King James: If he would banish him as
Oliver Cromwell, our Prototype, formerly gained that point; then instead of
Cursing you would Bless him: But God has given this Monarch a more sublime
Soul. When we do re-establish K. James on his Throne, the glorious K. Lewis
will make an advantageous Peace for all Christendom. Nothing obstructs a Peace
so much as the boundless Ambition of K. W. and poor England is the Ass to bear
the Burden whilst we mount him, and raise the Dutch to trample us in the dirt.


Will. Odsooks, say you so? The Parson did not say one word of that.


Jam. No, it is too nice a point to be touched: but if you will have a little
patience, and set aside your unreasonable Prejudices, I will demonstrate the
whole matter to you as concisely and with as much Veracity as I can. Know then,
that this damnable Conspiracy has been hatching in K. Charles II. time; for
when they found that good King firm to his Resolution of keeping the Succession
in the Right Line; and notwithstanding all their Artifices, would not pass the
Bill of Exclusion; but withal advised them to make the strictest Bill they
could to menacle their Kings in case of a Popish Successor, and he would Sign
it: which was so far from giving them Satisfaction at that time, although so
indulgent, reasonable, and condescending, that Shaftsbury was sent into
Holland, and there founded this horrible Conspiracy and unnatural Rebellion. It
was not so much to keep out Popery, suppress Arbitrary Power, and preserve
Property [Neither of which was in danger in that King's Reign] as it is
insinuated in all the P. of Orange's Declarations; but to alter the Succession,
and to make the K. of England Elective, which they have effected in the P. of
Orange, designing thereby a Commonwealth when they are able.


Will. But K. James intended to bring in Popery, and govern Arbitrarily by
dispensing with our Laws; it is better a Commonwealth than under such a King.


Jam. To enervate that, I was an ocular and an auricular Evidence; for K.
James, the Night before he went to Windsor, and then for Salisbury, was pleased
to express himself at Supper with great Concern for his Kingdoms, in these
Words, with Hands and Eyes lift toward Heaven; What would my People have? I
will call a Parliament that all Grievances may be taken away, that Laws may be
made to secure their Religion and Property, that they may examine strictly into
the Birth of the Prince of Wales; God forbid that any such Cheat should be put
upon the Nation; for, said our good King [darting his Eyes on the Pope's
Nuntio] clapping his Hand on his Breast, I will do as I would be done by, for
that is the Law and the Prophets. Then directing his Discourse to the Earl of
Oxford [who waited then as Gentleman of the Bedchamber] with the same
Asseveration, striking his Breast, he said, I will do as I would be done by,
for that is the Law and the Prophets. Then speaking to Sir Henry Firebrace,
Clerk-Comptroller in waiting, he continued his religious Protestation, smiting
his Breast, etc. as before. I saw and heard all this, Billy, as I hope for
Salvation: And his Majesty expressed himself so pathetically, that we did see,
as it were, his Royal Soul in his Pious Face; Vultus index animi: if ever it
was true, 'twas at that time. And to confirm he spoke his Sentiments a Great
Person, who is now alive, told me then the King had declared in Coucil, There
was nothing his People could ask of him that he would not do to satisfy them:
yet I am afraid, said he, it is (...) too late. His Lordship is now in
Commission, and therefore you need not doubt of his Majesty's Integrity, since
a Williamite avowed it. A Peer of the Realm does not swear when he gives his
Verdict against his Fellow-Peer; only puts his Hand to his Heart, saying Upon
my Honor, and 'ts sufficient: His Majesty King James did it three times,
calling God to witness: I hope you will allow him his Peerage, Billy. Yet
infatuated Englishmen would not believe him! How many Millions of Money? How
many Thousands of Lives? How many Hundreds of Ships had we saved? What
Reproaches? What Calamities? nay, What Sin^ had we avoided, by adhering to our
pious Sovereign's Promises and Declarations. But we blasphemed the Lord's
Anointed and our Sovereign Lord the King saying He is a Deceiver, we will not
believe him, [We will not have this man to reign ever us] and yet at the same
time embraced the P. of Orange as a Savior sent from Heaven inspired for our
mi^^culous Preservation; and are still going on in our Lethargick Chimera's,
although he has not made out any thing in his Declarations, particularly his
bringing over the P. of Wales's Mother, a poor Baker's Wife as was pretended;
tho K. James sent Letters to both Houses to examine narrowly into the Birth of
that Prince, saying, It is not to be supposed at this time of day that the P.
of Wales back awny Friends in either House: yet it was not insisted on, because
they know the Proofs irrefragable. And tho some say that was not in the P. of
Orange's Declaration, yet it is well known that such a Woman was every Night
exposed on Horselack in Holland, where their Circie of Coaches met as ours do
in Hide-Park, and publicly declared the P. of W^les Mother who was to go into
England with the P. of Orange to confront the Juggle, as t^^y called it, of the
Birth of the P. of Wales. To confirm the truth of this, several Persons of
Substance who were then in Holland have deserted the P. of Orange's Interest
upon that politic Dutch-Trick. You may judge of all other Cheats by this. If
the P. of Orange's Design had been purely to settle Religion and Property by
Law, and for preventing Popery and Arbitrary Power, and to settle the
Succession, as 'twas pretended Why did he not, as King James proposed, remain
in some part of his Majesty's Dominion with his Troops, that a Free Parliament
might be called to adjust all Jealousies and Grievances? This had been a most
glorious Atchievment, worthy to be engraven in the Roll of Fame ad perpetuam
rei memoriam: But inftead of giving an Answer to the King, his Uncle and
Father-in-law, by the Lords whom he had sent to him on that Errand, he marches
directly for Windsor Castle, and thence to St. James's And to show he came
positively for the Crown, all his Declarations were in the Royal Style, We,
etc. To pursue which Design, after the Guards were set by the King he changed
them to Dutch Guards, and sent three Lords when His Majesty was in a sound
sleep at Midnight who rudely waked him [tho dissuaded from it by the Page and
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, who told them the K. was not well, and had slept
very little in two Nights before] to tell him the P. of Orange could not think
himself safe His Majesty being so near him; and therefore he would have him
remove [that Night too, else they might have staid until the Morning] either to
ham-House or to Hampton Court. O barbarous Insolence! You or I could not have
endured it from Servants; no, not from our Parents!


Will. Odsooks, I would have broke their Heads had any served me so.


Jam. Well then, by this time I hope you do not think the King did abdicate us,
-- we do not truly understand the word; it signifies a free and voluntary
resignation of our Right; Now pray consider, did K. James freely and
voluntarily resign his Crowns? or was he not forced to make his escape out of
the hands of his Enemies to save his Life? For they had put a Dutch Guard upon
him, by which he was made a Prisoner, and Death usually is the next step to
Monarchs.


Will. They must go whom the Devil drives; I never heard a word of this before.


Jam. No, nor thousands more, but the quite contrary; for they are true
Children of their Father, they delight in, and carry on their designs by Lies:
But what have we gained by this Revolution and Rebellion? Let us cast up our
Accounts. Imprimis -- We have Dethroned, Deposed, Banished, and for ever as
much as in us lies, extirpated our Lawful King, and his true Heir, under whom
we enjoyed Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity: We paid nothing for these Blessings
Billy; no! not so much as our Prayers and Praises to Heaven for them as we
ought! if we had, God would not have permitted these judgments to fall upon us:
Our Sins are the cause, let us therefore repent and make restitution to our so
much injured Sovereign: Repentance cannot be true without Restitution; to
repent and yet continue in the same Sin is nonsense; It Is like the Swearing
Clergymen, who in the Letany, pray From all Sedition, privy Conspiracy and
Rebellion, good Lord deliver us; and yet they continue in Actual Rebellion,
Preaching against their Lawful King, and praying for an Usurper: Call ye these
Prayers and Praises to God? No, no, be not deceived; It Is the sacrifice of
Fools and Knaves; and God will esteem it no other. I fear, and tremble at it.
There were few or no Taxes in K. James's Reign; but since this Revolution,
Rebellion and Usurpation, in four years time only, more Money has been drained
from poor mistaken-abused- England than in the two former Reigns; from the
miraculous Restoration of K. Charles II. [ more than 28 Years which great
Blessing We have quite forgotten too] until the Diabolical Abdication of K.
James: Nay, I may safely take in the Reigns of Qu. Elizabeth, K. James I. and
K. Charles I. [ In all 129 years] in whose Reign what noise did a little
Ship Money make, which built the Royal Sovereign? [a Ship which has done so
much Honor and Service to the English Nation, and remains capable to do a
great deal more:] The heat was, because the King raised it without a
Parliament. But now a Convention and a Foreign Prince can Dethrone the Lawful
King, and make a Parliament, which gives away almost all the Wealth of the
Nation to enrich the Dutch; and it goes down glib with us! Neither do they so
much as enquire how K. William has performed the Prince of Orange's
Declarations.


Will. It Is true indeed; we cannot boast of his Integrity in that: But we are
freed from Popery, that is totally crushed.


Jam. And the Church of England too, in a great measure, which is the only
Bulwark against Popery; when that Rampart is demolished, Popery will flow upon
us impetuously: But we do not see so much Religion to brag of in K. W. Before
he came over 'twas confidently averred, that he used to go to Mass; and
promised the Confederate Popish Princes, that he would be kind to the Papists;
of whom he brought over, and continues, many thousands in his Army, (and pays
them tho he goes on tick with the English.) In Scotland he is a Kirksman, the
Church of England is almost destroyed there: In Ireland he would allow of
Popery, or any thing what the People please, to gain that Government: In
England he is a lukewarm Christian, favoring all, and truly of no Religion;
unless Predestination can be called Religion. Empire is his sole aim and
design, which he will compass directly or indirectly; by Policy, Stratagems,
Dissimulation, breach of Promises, Protestations and Declarations; or by the
death of thousands of Soldiers. He was earnestly entreated and advised [since
we Created him King, for he was made so out of nothing] to decline his
precipitate intention of attacking the Enemy; because in all probability, he
would loose 10000 Men before his Army could have equal fighting, they being so
advantageously Posted: What then, replied he, so we gain our Point: For if we
are predestined to conquer, we shall overcome; if not we must be beaten; O
pius Pater Patriae! who values not his Subjects Lives and Treasure, so he
climbs to the top of the Pinnacle. And to strengthen this Assersion, What
Popular Acts has he passed since we dubbed him King, to recompense, all our
Blood and Treasure? King James had other Bowels; For when his Subjects, those
whom he had most endeared, had deserted him; O English Ingratitude to their
Kings! he would not venture the remaining Loyalists; because they were but an
handful to a multitude: Oh! call not his Piety cowardice I beseech you Friends
and Fellow Subjects, 'twas true Religion; he was truly Religious (in his way)
and only designed that the Roman Catholics might have a limited Liberty for
their Religion, of which His Majesty is a member, to be adjusted by Act of
Parliament, as likewise our Grievances: Certainly it had been our Interest to
have kept our Old Religion, and our Lawful King: in his time our Coffers were
full and ran over, but now they must squeeze to get any thing out of them.


Will. Odsooks and squeeze very hard let me tell you that; they Poll, and Poll,
and Poll every quarter, so that I cannot pay my Rent I Am sure.


Jam. We are well enough served, we brought it on our selves by Abdicating our
good Old King, and caressing a Petty Prince; for whom, and our depraved fancy,
we paid the first penny, a-lumping-all-to-make-a-penny-worth, the sum of 600000
l. Sterling.


Item. In Taxes, most part of which is carried out of the Land, never to return
again, except some Half Crowns which are so Clipped they hardly weigh 22 d. and
yet they do it in Holland openly in their Shops: a Crime with all Capital, but
there a Trade: the Taxes are computed at about 20000000 l. Sterling; but I do
not pretend to be exact, because a true account thereof will be published by
way of Debtor and Creditor, to present to the Houses of Commons next Sessions:
I shall only advise my Country men to consider, that when the Blood ceases to
circulate, the Body cannot live: Money is the Blood of the Body-politick; that
being exhausted no Gold or Silver Mines are in England to repair or replenish
it; and our Trade is so much impaired, that but little Bullion is imported to
answer he vast exportation of our Coin.

3. When Ships arrive richly laden, which is but seldom, we have not Money to
buy those Commodities; if we can cover our Nakedness decently and cheap, and
put food into our Bellies to sustain nature, it is all we can reach to now: And
when our Merchants have cast up their Accounts of double or treble wages to the
Seamen, double time in waiting for Convoys, etc. Treble Insurance Money, etc.
and their Goods laying dead upon their hands, with the mighty Losses they have
sustained at Sea; I hope, at last, they will be of my opinion, that Honesty is
the best Policy, and Godliness the truest gain, and show it too by petitioning
the Council now, and the Parliament the next Session, to bring home our Lawful
King.

4. The number of Ships taken and lost is computed at 2500 Sail; the value of
which at 500 l. each Ship (a modest computation the cargo included) amounts to
4000000 l. not reckoning the Men of War lost.

Lastly, The number of brave Men killed, by this dismal change is not easily
computed; it is guessed at 100000, but if they could be exactly numbered, it is
impossible they should be valued; especially their precious Souls.


Will. Well; in the main I am of your mind, that we have done a
hair-brain-hasty-unadvised-action: But now we are in, we are obliged to go
through; for if K. James returns by the Force of France, then we shall
inevitably be overwhelmed with French-Arbitrary-Power and Slavery; be servile
to Strangers, and Dragoon'd into Popery; and we were better continue as we are,
then we part with a great deal of our Riches, then totally to loose our
Religion, which is dearer to us than our Lives.


Jam. The ills which I have done cannot be safe, but by committing greater said
wicked Cataline; but Christians have another method, Repentance; turn ye, turn
ye from your wicked ways; for why will ye dye, O house of Israel, says the
Lord: You say we have done a hair-brain-hasty-action; but you mince the matter,
for we have perpetrated a very wicked and sinful deed: Rebellion is as the Sin
of Witchcraft says God.

2. You say we must go through, etc. as above: To which I answer, King James
cannot in prudence endeavor to be re-established in his Kingdoms by a Foreign
Force [unless we compel him] for that way his People would be destroyed; his
Country laid waste, and his Subjects beggared; and it is next to a King of
Clouts to be King of a debilitated and ruined Nation; at the best he could
expect to be but a Viceroy during pleasure by your bugbear supposition. No,
King James says otherwise in his Declaration; The Most Christian King has,
according to our desire, declined to send over Troops so numerous, as may raise
jealousies in the minds of our good Subjects, See K. James's Declaration.
of his intending to take the Work wholly out of their hands, or depriving any
true ^nglishman of the part he may hope to have in so Glorious an Action, as is
that of restoring his Lawful King; that but so many Troops should come, as are
sufficient to untye the hands of our Subjects; and make it safe for them to
repair to Our Standard; which Troops shall be sent back, as soon as we shall be
fully settled in Possession of our Kingdoms, without the least injury to the
Persons or Possessions of Our Subjects, etc. But we may prevent these surmises
and fears by addressing to the Parliament, to recall Him, that His Restoration
may be as Glorious as his Royal Brothers. Let all unbyassed Englishmen revolve
how flourishingly we enjoyed our Religion, Laws, Property, and Trade after that
miraculous Restoration; and God would restore the same Blessings had we the
same repenting Hearts.

3. As to our Servility to Strangers, etc. -- Your K. W. has forty Papists in
this Army to one that K. James had in his; and a much greater number of
Strangers than our lawful King designed to bring with him for his and our
necessary Assistance. Remember the Danes in the days of yore, now they Lorded
it over us, [and were from thence called Lordanes] and if we go on [or go
through as you call it] to have our best Men killed in the Dutch Quarrel, and
to support the Ambition of K. William, we shall be so weakened, that Dutch
Strangers will be our Masters, and English Freeholders their Slaves. I beg,
religiously, that all Freeborn Englishmen would weigh this point truly, like
brave old Englishmen.

4. Our Religion will be guarded by Acts of Parliament, as I told you I heard
our gracious K. James promise, and you have seen in his Declaration which he
will keep inviolably, tho the P. of Orange broke his in every Particular.


Will. If this be true, as I know a great part of it is, sure we are not wise
to be thus led by the nose. I have read in a Book entitled A Discourse written
by Sir George Downing the King of Great Britain 's Envoy Extraordinary to the
States of the United Provinces, showing how cruelly, barbarously, and
inhumanely, the Dutch treated us at Amboyna.


Jam. Ay; and when it is in their power they will use Us just so in England. The
Lord open our eyes, that we may foresee and prevent our ruin, for we are on
the brinck of a Precipice: Yet notwithstanding our loss the other day (about
14000) by Namur, we have sent more Recruits (12000 Men) the Soldiers who were
to form a Descent into France this Summer to Crown K. William there, as the
Prophecy tells you the Son of Man, meaning Him, must be this notable fourth
Year of his Reign. O infatuated Englishmen! to believe such Stuff! Yet, as the
Doctrine now in vogue speaks, -- If the P. of Orange is predestined to be
King of France, it must be so; and if the People of England are predestined
to Rebel, and continue in it, they must do so, and be damned. So that by this
Dutch Doctrine we make God the Author of all our Villainies. O horrible
Blasphemy!


Will. Pray what may that pretended Descent cost the Nation?


Jam. About 3 or 400000 l. A Trisle.


Will. Trifle me no Trifles; I see we must be undone at this rate.


Jam. If we do not repent it is very visible we shall perish: And truly I see
but little hopes of true Repentance and through Reformation; for about three
Weeks since I discoursed with one, who is a zealous Williamite, concerning the
Premises, hoping to convince him, as God be thanked thou art; but his Heart was
unmalleable: His chief Argument for their being in the right, was Success. He
began with the Prince of Orange's Arrival in the Winter; how the Winds and Seas
favored him; how he missed our Fleet; how the Hearts of the People were open
to receive him; his Conquest in Ireland; the beating the French Fleet, etc. I
urged David's Complaint, how the Wicked flourished in his time, Then, said he,
I have cleansed my self in vain, and washed my hands in innocence. The Success
of the Wicked amused holy David; it was too hard for him to understand until he
went into the House of the Lord, then he knew the end of these Men; namely,
That they stand in slippery places, and shall be cast down and come to a
fearful end. That Success is not the Christian's Rule, the Word of God, the
Scriptures, are our guide: If an Angel from Heaven should preach any other
Doctrine to you than what you have received from us let him be anathema, says
the Apostle. Now the Scriptures say, Honor thy Father and Mother; Thou shall
not Steal; Thou shall not Covet; Fear God and honor the King; Touch not mine
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; Mine Anointed, not the Peoples, and much
more. Then to weaken his Argument founded on Success and Prosperity, I conjured
him to confider religiously the terrible Earthquake at Jamaica in July last in
which so many Thousands were swallowed quick; they went down into the Pit, not
having time to say Lord be merciful to us Sinners; about four Milli^^s of
Trcasure was buried and destroyed. And this Island is the best Plantation the
English have in the West-Iudies, and is now as much subject to K. William as
his other Dominions: Surely then this Earthquake must be esteemed a great
Judgment, and must put a Remora to the celebrated Success and Prosperity so
much boasted of, etc. He returned, That Earthquakes proceed from natural
Causes; that they were a wicked People, Sodom and Gomorrha were not more
sinful, and their Destruction was but the effects of God's Justice; That We in
England were true Protestants, and lived up to the Religion We profess, and
therefore he feared no Earthquakes here: it is Terra firma in Old England. I
told him, That God could shake the Foundations of the whole Earth, and would
his Terra firma if We continued in our Sins: That the Pharisee thanked God he
was not so wicked as the penitent Publican, but that Publican was justified
rather than he: That our Savior said they were not greater Sinners on whom the
Tower fell than those who escaped; but if they did not repent they should all
likewise perish: That this Judgment was sent on Them to warn Us: That Jamaica
could not be guilty of greater Sins than we have perpetrated: We did Behead our
lawful pious King, and do yet continue in a Wicked Rebellion: at which Word he
pish'd, and so we parted. O Billy, what hope is there of Repentance in them who
are so far from owning their Sins, that they applaud their own Righteousness,
and bring God himself to justify them by his forbearance.


Will. Truly we are a very wicked and obdurate People; yet God is pleased still
to Warn us: What a terrible Trepidation had we this 8th day of Seprember, at
Two of the Clock in the Afternoon? Which shows God can shake this Terra firma
so much relied on by insensible Wretches.


Jam. Yea, and shake it to pieces; worse than at Jamaica, if we do not Repent,
and make Restitution. There is a memorable Passage in the sixteen Chapter of
the Acts almost synonymous, but very pertinent, to our Transactions here in
England, and the Earthquake this day: I will insert it, and enlarge upon it.
Paul and Silas the Apostle and Disciple of our Lord Jesus Christ, were, for
Preaching the Gospel and working a Miracle, Acts xvi.
beaten with many Stripes, and cast into Prison: And that they might be kept
more secure, they were thrust into the Stocks. [ Our Archbishop, and several
Bishops and Ministers, Ver. 23, 24.
are violently thrust from their lawful Habitations and just Rights and
Possessions, and confined with the Fetters of Poverty and Penury; and, were it
not for the Charity of well-disposed Christians, they and their innocent
Families would starve; because they refuse to act against their Consciences.]
But Paul and Silas Prayed and sung Praises unto God, and suddenly there was an
Earthquake, and the Foundation of the Prison was shaken, and the Doors were
opened, and their Bonds loosed; and the Keeper fearing the Prisoners were fled,
would have killed himself: But Paul cried with a loud Voice, Do thy self no
harm, for we are all here. Then when he had called for a Light, and saw the
wonderful effects of the Earthquake, he trembled, [As many of us, God be
thanked, did at this days Earthquake] and brought Paul and Silas out, and said,
Sirs, What must I do to be saved? And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved and thy house: Ver. 25. to 34.
And he took them the same hour and washed their Stripes and and was baptized
he and all his. And when he had brought them into his house he set meat before
them and rejoiced, believing in God, and all his house. Three things are very
remarkable in this Man's Conversion, Faith, Repentance, and Restitution.

1. Faith. -- Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, verse. 29. And that he did
believe is plain, for he was baptized, verse. 33.

2. Repentance. He trembled and fell down before them, verse. 29. He was sorry
and grieved for his past Sins, and resolved to turn from them and lead a new
life, walking in God's holy Commandments for the future, if he could find the
true way; and therefore he cries out with great earnestness, in a mighty Agony
of Spirit, Sirs, What must I do to be saved?

3. Restitution. He did as much as lay in his power: He could not take off the
Indignity, Affront, Smart and Pain, that the Stripes and Stocks gave them, and
with which he had so cruelly and with great inveteracy but a little before
loaded them; but he washed their Sores, bathed their Bruises, bound up their
Wounds, and brought them into his House, set Meat before them, and rejoiced,
and believed in, and praised God. O happy change! From a Jailer he became
freeborn in Christ Jesus! O blessed Earthquake! thus to shake and change the
hearts of Sinners from a hardened Adamantine Persecution of Christ's Apostles
and Disciples to the tenderness of a divine Repentanee and an invincible
Charity! God grant the Earthquake this day may have the same E^ects with us;
that we may wash the Stripes of those we have scourged, and with this Keeper of
the Prison, repent and make Restitution, without which no Repentance can be
true. God has shaken his Rod over us, and if we do not amend our Lives he will
let it fall heavy upon us. He warned Jamaica with such Tremblings as we have
seen this day several times before his Judgments poured down upon them. O let
us heartily reslect on our past wicked Lives, and with unfeigned Sorrow and
effectual Repentance turn from our ways with loathing and detestation; choosing
rather to dye than commit, or continue in, any known Sin: And tho Earthquakes
are caused by the Air being compressed, or pent, in the Bowels, or Caverns, of
the Earth, and proceed from natural Causes as Thunder and Lightning do, are
bounded by God's omnipotent Providence, and cannot hurt without his Permission;
yet if the Punishment of our Neighbors and his threatening Rod, which he has
this day held over us in great mercy, will not move us to forsake the crying
Sins treated of at large in the Premises of which we are so notoriously guilty;
he will suffer his Anger to break forth into Fury, and consume Us, our Wives,
our Houses and our Children, in the twinkling of an eye; and not only punish us
temporally, but hurry us into Perdition with the eternally tormented Souls in
Hellfire.


Will. God forbid we should provoke his Mercies by continuing in our Sins:
Verily your Discourse, and this merciful warning from Heaven, has so touched
my Soul, that I do now, and will always, pray that God would grant us true
Repentance, and loyal Hearts to restore our Deposed King. Amen.


Jam. Fellow Subjects, dear Brethren and Christians, for Jesus Christ's sake
consider: If we persist, an intestine War will inevitably follow, [ Pray
reflect on the Miseries of Ireland;] and it is but just that we who would not
know our own Happiness should be made so miserable. If we continue obstinate,
and not restore King James in his lifetime; yet an indisputable Right to the
Crown lives as long as the Prince of Wales survives, or other Sons which the
Queen may still have: There will be an entailed War upon the Nation so long as
any Interest can be made to soment and support it. Pray reflect on the bloody
Contentions of the Houses of York and Lancaster, and tell me if it is morally
possible that we can be happy whilst a just Dispute continues amongst us
between a Dispossessed Right and an Unjust Possession. God of his infinite Mercy
give us true Repentance, loyal Hearts, and discerning Souls, that we may see
and pursue the things which make for our Peace here, and our eternal Welfare
hereafter. Amen.


Sept. 8. 1692.
FINIS.

