REFLECTIONS on Mr. DVNTON's Leaving his WIFE.
In a Letter to Himself.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, with your Printed Case enclosed: I am heartily sorry
you should have so sad a Case to impart, were it only to your Friends; but to
be necessitated to make the World your Judges, and thereby furnish matter for
the Insults of your Enemies, is the Excess of Unhappiness: Though I dare avouch,
upon a fair Examination of your Case, for your gaining to your side the
greatest Party, as rashly as the World is apt to Judge. They must needs condemn
such a Senseless Obstinacy as your Wife shows. All her deep Policy in adhering
to her Mother against her Husband, is but the height of Extravagance. She
values Riches, and fears Poverty so much, that she Embraces the readiest way to
procure what she Fears, and never to enjoy what she Prizes; she builds her
Fortune upon her Husbands Ruin, and sees not how heavy it falls upon her self.
This she may be sensible of, when it is past Remedy; which will be the more
Deplorable, as it might have been so easily prevented. But no Woman that had
Loved her Husband at half the rate she pretends, would have ever slipped such an
opportunity of kindly obliging a Man of so Grateful a Temper, that he Studies
to requite the least Courtesy from mere Strangers, but would make it the
business of his whole Life to requite a Kindness that came kindly from his Wife.

Your Proposals were so open, fair, and candid, after the Charitable Arts you
used to change her Carriage, hoping to have caught her with Guile, [2 Cor. 12.
16.] that it is the greatest Wonder to see a Design so well laid, so perversely
lost; nor had it been possible, had you been to deal with People of Common
Sense: But what Treatment must an Honest Sober Man expect at the hands of a
mere Woman, that has not Wit enough to distinguish a Husband's Necessities from
his Extravagance; and thinks it Wisdom to tie the hands of a Husband, though it is
to the Ruin of his Credit, and her own? The Methods used by you, were so Wise
and Cautious, there is nothing left for Excuse on their parts. Mr. Larkin Acted
like a Friend-between you both; and gave 'em a fair Occasion to see and
consider the Mischiefs they were like to be involved in, and must inevitably
fall upon themselves; for the sinking of a Husband's Credit, seldom brings much
Honor to a Wife. But be she as indifferent as she Pleases to that Point, a
little thinking might awaken her Fears, least these ways of proceeding may
prove the means of forcing you to such Measures for Paying your Debts, which in
the end may prove of no great Advantage to her, with respect to mere Interest,
seting aside those of preserving Peace and Charity; nay, the Shame of the
World, and Speech of People, which perhaps she better understands, unless with
the help of her Mother, she thinks to bring the World to her side by those
Objections with which they satisfy themselves; but it is plain there is nothing
in 'em; it is only a pretense to save their Bags: For if there is no possibility
of proving you a Vicious Man, what cause is there of saying there will be no
end of paying your Debts? But if they will not Trust Providence, but will have
you give over your Trade, for for fear of losing by it, you offer 'em fair; let
'em put you in a way of Living without it, and use you like a Friend, and
you will soon take off all Objections they shall bring against you.

And as you have not spared your self, but made the World acquainted with what
they pretended to object against you, so you do very well to justify your fair
dealing, as in your Reflections you make it appear, that you gave 'em full
satisfaction of the whole Circumstance of your Fortune; which obliges them to a
Performance of what ever was Promised on the other part, both in Honor and
Conscience, if they have either: But some Passages in their Conduct, make 'em
both a little doubtful. As to your Wife, what Honor is in prefering her
Mothers Bags before the Credit, and Quiet of her Husband? And as little
Conscience, in Swearing before her Marriage, she would never suffer her Husband
to take up a Penny upon her Jointure in case of the greatest Necessity, quiet
opposite to a Vow she was going so Solemnly to make, in the presence of God;
and this by her Mothers Command; which shows they are both of a Stamp. She
might as well have made her Swear to hate her Husband, and do him all the
Mischief she could; it would have been as Lawful, and as consistent with her
Matrimonial Vow. But that which gives the Sanction to this Oath, (and inspires
her with a Zeal to Burn, rather than Violate her Vow) is, that her Mother will
not give her a Farthing if she does. Thus you see Money is the God they love
and honor, and deny themselves Credit and Reputation, Peace and Quietness, and
all Earthly Comforts, for the sake of this Idol. It had been but just and fair
to have told you what Religion she was of, that you might have chose whether
you would have Married an Idolater; with which, I am certain, (had you known
it) you would never have ventured to contaminate your self and Posterity;
there is little Honor in deceiving a Husband. Therefore both in Conscience and
Honor she was bound to have acquainted you with what her Mother made her
Swear, that so you might have secured your self of some means to be Just, and
pay your Debts: But that is the least of her Care; for if she owns that you and
she are all one, and yet denies her assistance to pay your Debts, it plainly
shows she would not pay 'em, if they were soley hers, and none of yours.

I cannot blame you for not desiring Increase from such a Stock, unless you can
mend it; there is small Comfort in having Children Nursed up in Rebelion and
Wickedness; were that all. But you have another Reason, more prevalent with
you, very much becoming a Just and Honest Man, which makes you content to leave
neither Heir nor Estate behind you, and suffer any thing, rather then do the
least Injustice; or that any one should suffer upon your account: This is a
Virtue so out of their way, they cannot in the least comprehend it, nor truly
Act any thing else that is at all allied to Virtue; and this is sufficiently
seen in their unanimously rejecting such Condescending Proposals as those you
made 'em; and shows the strength of all Combinations of Wickedness that can
prevail to the making a sacrifice of their True Interest and Happyness, to
their Senseless and Obstinate Passions; otherwise the Letter you sent her by
Mr. Larkin, would have made some impression upon a Wife that had the least
Spark of Love to her Husband, or Sense of her Duty. But she had so far imbibed
her Mother's Principles, of holding the Conclusion, as spared the trouble of a
further Answer, than that her Mother had made her take a Wicked Oath, and she
held her self bound to keep it. You might well Divine what a Reception you was
like to meet with, yet 'twas Generously done to go your self, and own to their
Faces your real sense of their Behavior, and what it had forced you to resolve
upon, since they had neither by Words nor Actions given you the least
Temptation to Trespass upon your Friends for their sakes; and as you were
treated with Passion on their side, what need of Apology? Sure, if ever there is
occasion for it, it is when all the Laws of Conjugal Affection are broke, and by
the Instigation of a Mother that had hier'd her Daughter with deceitful
Promises to ahandon her Husband's Interest: And who it is that governs the
Mother, may be guest at by her Actions. To have made a plausible Excuse for
denying a Kindness of that Necessity, to one so nearly related, had been
inhumane enough; but such a Violent Asseveration, of being Torn Limb from Limb,
rather then to assist you, that had Married her Danghter, and to whom she was
indebted, by Promise at her Death, a far greater sum; this Uncharitable Mind,
to say the least of it, plainly shows whose she is, and whom she serves, and
who has blinded her to all that was capable of moving her to any thing that
would be thought humane. And however they may represent your Passion, the
Christian and Charitable Leave you took of 'em, speaks you free from all
Rancour and Malice; and whatever Passion you showed, it must proceed from a
Violent Transport to reform their Errors, which they were so tenacious of,
notwithstanding they looked so Monstrous in your Eyes: Especially your Wife's
Crime was much greater than her Mothers; whose Influence and Authority can no
way excuse her; for had her Design in Marrying you, been only for a Ioynture,
(which is plain enough) yet who would reject the Opportunity of Living happy
till her Ioynture falls, which you offer her upon such easy terms? And how
ridiculous she makes her self in the Condition she chooses, and prefers before a
Cohabitation with her Husband, and all for the sake of a Ioynture that would
not be much hurt by what you Propose. and perhaps may never fall to her? But
you have done the part of a good and true Christian, by studying all you could
to live Peaceably, even with those that were Enemies to Peace; and courageously
resoved to run through all Difficulties with a steady Mind. And could you have
dispensed with the Paying of your Debts, your Proposals had never come to raise
such a Storm: But it is a most Stupendous Wickedness (as your Wife and Mother
thinks) honestly to seek the means of Paying ones Debts: Their carriage in this
occasion might incline one to think, could you have brought 'em such a Sum by
never so Unjust or Unlawful Means, it would not have disturbed their Quiet: For
it is the same thing to keep ones Money Unjustly, as to get it so. And truly,
Sir, as I desire to maintain an inviolable Friendship with you to the end of my
Life, I am in no danger of losing it upon the account of blaming you for
Publishing your Case. You say well you have tried all other ways: This may do
some good, when well applied to 'em by that Reverend Divine to whom you have
sent it, he being a Person they respect; and if it succeed, you promise to
suppress the further Publishing of it: If not, the World must know a great deal
more of their Life and Actions; for why should you be felo-de-se upon your own
Reputation, to save a Phantom? For I believe they have None to lose; nor have
not had a great while.

And now I cannot for bear remembering you what a high Esteem you ever had of
Wedlock; that I could never sway you to my Opinion of it, which you looked upon
as a kind of Cowardice in me, but I assure you the World is now aware of Widows
that love Money, though perhaps it is not come to the knowledge of such honest
well meaning Men as your self; that suspects no more deceit in others, than you
find in your own Breast: But now you see what work they make with such a one,
when in their Power. But there are but few of those, and they may set their
Snares long enough, ere they get any other; and it will not be long before the
World will be overstock'd with Rich Widows.

Sir, I heartily wish a speedy end of your Trouble; and as of all Men you
deserve a good Wife, because you know how to Value her, so since it is your
Fortune, I hope you will find the way of making the best use of a Bad One.

But, as you well observe, had you the best cause in the World, you must expect
that Men of a narrow Soul will be raising of Lies, and saying that, which, when
you appear, they will be ashamed to own: All Men adore the Rising Sun, but few
have any great respect for his Setting, except in your Case, which is so Just
and Honorable, that there is good Reason to doubt the Honesty of that Man that
does not become your Friend (whatever he might be before) upon reading your
Case. If any are your Enemies, 'twill be only those whom you have obliged
beyond any possibility of Requital As to those you have been so often bound
for, (or for their Relations, which is the same thing) the very stones in the
Streets would cry Shame on 'em, should they speak against you. But it is well
known they are Persons of a more Noble Temper then to act such a mean part;
neither is there any possibility they should. For that part of your Case
relating to Mr. John White, (though but briefly hinted in your Letter to Mr.
Larkin) is largely proved in the Letter you afterward sent to his Widow; which
Letter I have seen, and were it Printed, it would convince the World (as it did
me) that you have said too little, and been very kind upon that Head.

Thus have I sent you my Thoughts on your Printed Case. But this Solemn time of
Devotion, took up so much of it, I had very little to spare for these
Reflections: But because I looked upon it as a Work of Charity, I did make bold
to borrow more then I would have done on any ordinary occasion; and I think I
have said something to every Point, at least the most Considerable. How
Serviceable it may prove, I know not; nor what to wish for you, I pity you
which way soever it happens: I see no pleasant Prospect on either side, unless
they can muster up some good Qualities for which you can find in your heart to
dote upon 'em; for I am sure they have Bad Ones enough to vex your Patience.
And were it Lawful to part from a Wife for any cause except Adultery, or fear
of ones Life, (and in such a Covetous Woman that loves only her Ioynture, there
is some cause for that suspicion) otherwise I know not how lawful it is; but
could I satsifie my Conscience of that Obligation, I should far prefer any
shift I could make of paying my Debts, before living with her. -- Pray God
Grant you Patience, if that must be your Lot, and direct you for the best.

Be so kind to let me know your success, for I Impatiently wait the Issue. I
cannot be Unconcerned in what so nearly relates to your Repose, who am,

Your Faithful Friend, And Humble Servant.


