A Description of the Turks Prayers and Fasts, before they go to War with the
CHRISTIANS
THE Grand Signiour having Grounds to fear the GOD may have a Design to make
use of the Rod of His Indignation, for the Chastisement of the Ottoman Empire,
and the Sultan to prevents his falling together with his Subjects into the
Hands of the Christians his Enemies, Ardently wishes that the Anger of GOD may
be appaced by the means of the Procession of the great Machomet for which
Reason, he strictly Commands, that all and every one of his Subjects Fast twice
a week, Viz. On Monday and Friday in the most Rigorous manner, abstaining from
all kind of Food and Drink till the Eevening; And on the said Days, the High
Priest, with his Ecclesiastical Assistants are Commanded, immediately to appear
Covered with Ashes, and to go in Procession through the Streets with Digected
countenances, and cry alloud in the Ears of the Inhabitants of Mecca the
following words, O GOD assist thy People.

THE Sultan furthermore Commands, that Machomets Coffin be carried into a
public place, and laid upon Four Golden Columns, Sarrounded with Twelve other
Coffins full of their Saints Bones, that by their means the great Machomet may
not faill on his part to pacify the Anger of GOD. The great Sultan Commands
likewise, that all the Strangers that shall be in Mecca, together with the
Inhabitants of that Town shall Seven times walk in Procession round that Tomb
in the open Country, ^rying, Houling and Groaning, and the Turkish Priests are
on this Occasion, to Speak to the People, and Represent to them the great
misfortunes the Ottoman Port has suffered for some Years past, and that, if
they do not Repent, they will Experience, by their Ruin, the Wrath of GOD.

UPON these Days of Penitence and Procession all Sorts of Music, etc. Are
forbidden amongst the Turks.

The Order of Procession.
1st. 600 Men barefooted covered with Sackcloath and Ashes, carrying in their
Hands Weapons, made use of in the last War, some broken and some wh^le, etc.

2dly. Next to them 300 Mustimans, who are a sort of Monks, having sharp
cutting Knives, with which they are to make Incisions in their Bodies, crying
out, Sighing and cutting their Breasts.

3ly, Then 6000 Men with Whips or Scourges, lashing themselves over their
shoulders.

4thly. The Tomb or C^ffin of Mahomet, carried by 30 Ispohia, or Turkish
Priests, ^aving their Beards shaved and bare-headed. That Tomb is to be
surrounded and guarded by 300 Bashaws their Shimiters drawn who have orders to
kill on the spot, such who shall presume out of curi^si^y to look upon that
Tomb, and the Bodies of such who shall be killed on that account are to be
thrown to the Dogs.

5thly, Fifty Turkish Princes without any Ornament of Purple, bare headed, and
besmeared, with Christian Blood, their left Hand tied, and dragging with their
right a Horses Tail.

6thly, 3000 Janissaries, who instead of their Arms, are to drag after them
their Bucklers, crying ou^ in a lamentable Tone, Halla; Halla, Hu.

7thly, One of the chief Viziers is to close the Pr^cession, riding upon an Ass
bare headed in token of Humiliarios, holding in his left Hand a Turkish Cap
dipped in Christian Blood, and in the right a Cane, wherewith he is to Strike
his Nead, and is to deprecate the future Calamity in these Words. O great
Prophet, assist us for obtaining the Grace of our God, that the Christians may
remain confounded.

8thly, After this they are to carry a Chest full of Aspers or Silver Piecess
of Money, to be thrown among the People by a Turk appointed for that purpose,
but none is to be so audacious as to rise from the Grownd, till the Procession
is gone by, on pain of loseing his Head.

9thly, Last of all c^mes ^^e an incredible Multitude of Turks, amongst whom
are the Pomites, who are to Scratch and tear their Faces, and at every hunder
Paces they are to lift up their Eyes to Heaven, and ^^y out, Ha^^ay Baccha, O
God, assist us that we may not (...)


