Truth brought to Light, OR, The Last WORDS of a DYING-MAN: Being The SPEECH of
William Dillon Esquire, Executed the twenty fifth of February, 1662. for the
Death of J. Web, lately killed in a Fray in Long-Acre.
GOod People, I stand here a Spectacle to God, Angels and Men, sad and
deplorable (I believe) to you, but in my inward Reflections on my Regenerate
Estate, in my dear and blessed Savior Jesus, full of Spiritual Hopes and
Comfort.

I declare my self to you all a true and constant Christian, an Apostolical
Roman Catholic, and on that account, I am particularly obliged to protest
that my hopes are totally and solely placed in the All-sufficient Merits of my
glorious Redeemer, from whose Merits, the Merits of Man receive their total
supernatural condignity and worth. To help the completing of the Sufferings of
his own Body, in his mystical, I am come here to participate of his beloved
Cross, sanctified and dignified by his own most precious blood.

I give thanks to those deserving and charitable Persons, who desired and
endeavored my longer Life, for my better Repentance and amendment. But
although they have failed in their Merciful Intercessions for me, there is an
Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the Just, whose Power is infinite,
to save to the uttermost.

As I infold my self in the Arms of his rich and embracing Mercy, so I would be
joined with you all in his Divine, as I am in my own derived charity.

I wish you all good, as I should have done that very person, if known to me,
for whose Death I am condemned. God Omniscient knows my Innocence in that
particular, being in my Conscience so clear and free from that guilt, that to
my knowledge I never touched the Man. May they have the benefit of the blood of
Christ, who have occasioned the loss of mine; and God forgive me in His, as I
do them for my own.


