A True and Strange RELATION OF THE Travels, Adventures, and great Persecution
of FOUR Eminent Quakers Who in the Year 1680, Traveled through France, Italy,
and Turkey, to promote their RELIGION.

Wherein is fully Declared the Designs, Endeavors and Attempts of these
Zealous Quakers, for the Conversion of the Great TVRK and the POPE.

With a perfect Account Of the Event and Success of the Business, and of all
the most remarkable Passages. As also a faithful Relation of their private
Discourses and Disputes which passed between these Quakers and the Pope, the
Cardinal his Cousin, and Cardinal Pool.

Also of their VOYAGE to Constantinople, And of their most Barbarous, cruel and
bloody Death, by the Special Command of the Chief Governor the Great Turk.

Who caused their Hands to be chopped off, their Tongues to be cut out, and
their Eyes bored out, and each Man to have a sharp Wooden Stake run in at his
Fundament quite through his Body.

Faithfully and compendiously related by John Elias Esquire; who was an Eyewitness
to a great part of these Transactions in Constantinople.

With Allowance.

Printed for I. Clarke, at the Bible and Harp in West-smithfield, 1681.

The True and strange Relation of the Travels, Adventures, and great
Persecution, of four Eminent QUAKERS, etc.
IT was toward the end of March, in the year 1670, that John Watson, William
Stubbs, Nathaniel Golden, and Rowland Jenkins, all eminently known to be
Leading-men among the Quakers: It was I say, about that time that these men
said they had the Spir it of Burning, and the Holy Anointing in them, and were
called and sent by God to preach the Everlasting Gospel to the Nations and
Heathens. And they said that the Child Jesus within them, had assured them of
great success, and that the Lord would be wonderfully with them in this
Dispensation, that they should break the Bread of Life to the Nations, and
that the Springs of Life should break forth out of their Bellies It is a wonder
to see what strange effects and boldness these Enthusiastical persuasions and
Phanatical Dreams caused in these poor men. They were now swelled with hopes
and expectation of Wonders. They now resolved to leave England, and embark for
France, and begin this great work of converting Nations and Heathens.

Reader, I do intend to give you a true and impartial account of these men's
actions in Foreign parts, as I have received it from their own mouths, and
also been fully and faithfully informed by several other persons of known worth
and Integrity, who were eyewitnesses to the same.

John Watson was a Gentleman of a pretty considerable estate and been well
Educated, he had spent some years at the University, and had also formerly been
a Traveller into France, Spain, and Italy, all which Languages he thoroughly
understood, and spoke very fluently. The other three were plain Countrymen,
and knew no other Language but their own, but persuaded themselves they should
have the Gift of Tongues, and be endued with power from above.

In Easter Week they took Shipping at Dover, and were soon wasted over to
Calis. I find not that they had any Impulse of Spir^t to say or attempt any
thing, but that they traveled on very peaceably and quietly, paying for what
they had, and so came to the great City Paris, where they spent two days only,
and then advanced toward Lions, where they continued about a Fort night. Here
it was that the tumultuous Spirit began first to show it self to the French
Nation. On April 27. William Stubbs said he had received a command from God to
speak; and he signified as much to John Watson and the rest. On the next day
which was Sunday, about 10 of the Clock in the Forenoon, they went all four to
the great Cathedral, or St. John's Church; where they were celebrating high Mass
(as they call it) about the middle of the Mass, William Stubbs on a sudden
climbs over the Rails and goes up to the High Alter, where as he was beginning
his Discourse in English (for as yet he had not received his gift of tongues)
the Church Officers presently lay hands on him and carry him out, and commit
him to Prison until the next day. On Monday the Officers have him before the
Magistrate, who refuses to meddle in this case, but causes him forthwith to be
sent to the Archbishop. The Archbishop is highly offended with him for his
bold attempt and resolves to punish him with all severity imaginable, he remits
him to Prison, and orders that the next day at 10 of the Clock in the monrning,
he be brought before him again. On Tuesday he is strictly examined what his
intentions were, and how he durst be so bold to commit so great a Crime in so
public and confident manner; His answers were altogether impertinent, and
withal so saucy, that the Bishop sent him to the House of Correction where he
was soundly lashed. On Friday morning the Bishop ordered him to be brought
before him again; and seemed to be much incensed against this poor Quaker: Now
the reason why his Grace was so fierce against this poor man, was, because of
his Servants had maliciously suggested to him that he was set on and encouraged
to offer this public affront to their Divine Service, by some of the Hagonot
Ministers; which was a most malicious untruth, for as yet these Quakers had not
had any of the least correspondence or converse with any Protestant in France,
as they did all very soberly attest to me in Italy. The Bishop was resolved to
give him a full hearing, and to sift the business to the bottom. He asked him
if he was not set on to this irreverent action by the Hugonot Ministers? He
replied no, he was moved by the Spirit of God within him, and that it was the
Spirit of Burning and the Holy Anointing that had caused him to do as he had
done. And here he entered into a long discourse, telling the Archbishop, and
the Canons who were there present, that the Law of God was written upon men's
hearts, and that now the time was come that they should be taught of God. Now
the Lords people were all to be Prophets, they were all to have fresh Springs
arise in their hearts. And that the Lord had sent him and three Friends more
into these parts, to break the bread of Life to the Nations, to open the hidden
Mysteries of Christ's Kingdom, to overthrow the Babylonish Practices of Rome, to
break the Serpents Head, and wound the great Leviathan.

The Archbishop, the Canons, and the whole Company were much astonished at
this man's confidence, and his wild and Frantic discourse and answers, and
began now to relent, and to pity this poor man, and look upon him as a
Madman, and one out of his senses, and so accordingly gave order to have him
to the Hospital of Mad People, and there carefully to be looked after until he
gave further order.

About a week after this, 3 English Gentlemen hearing what had passed, and how
that an English man who was mad, was committed to the Hospital of Madmen: The
Gentlemen went immediately to the Hospital to enquire the truth of the matter,
when they came, the Keeper very courteously informed them of the whole
business, brought them to the sight of Stubbs; who was locked up in a small
Cell by himself, and an Iron Chain about his Leg, and his head shaved (for it
is the custom there to shave all mad people.) When the Gentleman came in, they
found him sitting in a melancholy sullen posture: he would not so much as look
up or speak one word to them, for the space of above an hour, notwithstanding
they spoke very kindly to him, and asked him concerning his condition, and the
causes of his Distemper, and promised him all the assistance and kindness that
lay in their power: at last this sullen Spirit was overcome, and he began to
enter into a long discourse of the Spirit within him, and that God had sent him
and his three friends to break in pieces the great Leviathan of Rome. Now the
Gentlemen quickly perceived his Spirit, and plainly discovered him to be no
Madman, but a Quaker. They asked him concerning his other friends where they
were? And withal promised to do their utmost for his Releasement, and so giving
the Keeper some Money to be kind to their Countryman, they bid him farewell. At
evening they went to the Inn to visit the other three Quakers, and had much
discourse with them, endeavoring to persuade them to desist from this so
hazardous and fruitless an enterprise, and speedily to return to their own
Country, demonstrating the great dangers and inconveniences they would thrust
themselves upon, if they did still persist, or any farther prosecute this fond
and rediculous undertaking; and so they parted. The next day they addressed to
the Archbishop, who was pleased to entertain them with much civility and
respect. They returned humble thanks to his Grace for his greatcare of their
Countryman, in sending him to such a place where he was so well accomodated in
all things in order to his Cure, and withal, represented to his Grace his
condition, quality and Religion; and how that he was not a Madman, but one of
those Sectarians which in England are called Quaker. And withal, informed the
Archbishop and Canons, how that party do desire to appear different from all
others in their manner of speech, their apparel, and manners. And also humbly
Petitioned his Grace for a Releasement, promising within a day or two to
dispatch them out of the Town; The Archbishop readily condescended to all
their demands, and presently gave order that Stubbs should be set at Liberty,
which was accordingly performed. And the day following they all four left the
Town, and hasted their Journey to Italy.

When they came to Milano in Italy, they had another Enthusiastical impulse of
Spirit. And now John Watson, Nathaniel Golden and Rowland Jenkins, who had
hitherto been silent, or (as they expressed it themselves) humbly waiting at
the feet of Jesus, who had now given them command to begin to Preach the
Everlasting Gospel to the Italians. Here Stubbs accompanied with his three
friends, did now (as formerly at Lions in France) upon Sunday enter the Domo or
Cathedral of the City, and made a great and public disturbance when they were
in the height of their Solemnities. Watson began to make a discourse in
Italian, but was presently seized and carried forth, and had before a
Magistrate, who forthwith committed them all four to Prison, but withal, gave
order they should be civily used, and lack for nothing until further order;
about four or five days after, they were commanded to appear before the
Governor of Milan himself, who was resolved to have a full account of the
matter. The Governor when he saw their uncivil behavior, their sullen looks,
and heard their wild discourses, he presently concluded them Madmen, and gave
order to have them confined and carefully looked after, and also appointed two
Physicians to visit them, and to do their utmost for their recovery. The
Physicians presently made a visit to the Hospital, and had a long discourse
with Watson, (who spoke Italian well) and then returned to the Governor to
give him their judgments of the business, they told his Excellence that they
were mad, as did evidently appear to them by their very countenance and manner
of Discourse: and that one of them (meaning Stubbs) had a manifest and signal
token of his distemper, viz. his head was shaven according to the usual
Practice of all Physicians in the world. They added also that they did verily
believe they were Dutchmen, who made an escape from their Keepers. The
Governor was well satisfied with this account the Physicians gave of the
Quakers, and accordingly ordered them to take care of them, and let no means be
wanting that might be used for their recovery, and that they should be used
with all tenderness imaginable. The Doctors all the time of their Imprisonment
causing their heads to be shaven, letting them blood, and Purging them so
excessively, that Jordan after a fortnights confinement, being in a melancholy
humor, he gave up the Ghost. The other three by Purging and bleeding, were
brought very low, the Physicians were very much disheartened and did altogether
despair of their recovery, and did signify as much to the Governor, withal
telling his Excellence that they supposed it was some Religious Melancholy
that these men were afflicted with, and that it was insufferable and not to be
overcome by any Art, and so desired the Governor to release them, which was
accordingly performed; And toward the beginning of June they left Milano and
set forward for Rome; for to convert the great Leviathan the Pope.

June the 18 they came to Rome, the place they so much desired to see, upon the
Sunday following, they according to their old Custom, entered a little Church
called San Jacome Scozza Cavalli, where Watson made a fierce and zealous
discourse against the Babylonish Idolatry of that City, and said that the Pope,
who was the Man of Sin and the great Leviathan, was now to be crushed in
pieces, and God had sent them from the utmost parts of the earth to convert
that City, and to confound the Pope and all his Adherents, and that now God
would pour out the full Vials of his wrath and fierce indignation upon them,
and bring them all to utter Ruin, shame and confusion.

The Conference of Cardinal Pool with the English Quakers, and how he brought
them before the Pope.
These poor Quakers had not been a Month in Rome, but the whole City took great
notice of them, and generally condoled their condition, as being distracted and
far from their own country, July 6 Cardinal Pool hearing much of these men's
frantic actions, was very desirous out of curiosity to see them, and to
discourse with them; hereupon he caused them to be brought before him, and was
pleased with much patience to discourse an hour with them, and then civilly
dismissed them, and sent them to their Lodgings. About two days after he made
report to the Cardinal his Cousin, and to the Pope himself of what had
happened, and of the strange enthusiasms of these 3 English Pazzi (for so he
always termed them) and how they had a great desire to have some conference
with his Holiness, and that they affirmed that God had sent them to deliver
some secret Revelations to him. The Pope at first was a little surprised at the
news, and gave order to have them privately brought before him and the two
Cardinals. When they were admitted into the presence, Watson saluted the Pope
with this address. Art thou that Man of Sin, that Artichrist and great
Leviathan, Verily God has raised us up from the utmost parts of the Earth to
preach the everlasting Gospel to thee, and to convert thee from thy Idolatrous
errors and sinful ways, unto the true way and to the Light, etc. The Pope was
amazed at this strange confidence, and did really believe that the common
report had not at all belyed them, but that they were very much distempered in
their minds, and distr^cted, and gave a strict command that none should oder
any violence to them, but withal privately appointed some of the Engli^^
College to persuade them to return home, or else to take charge of them in
their College, and not let them thus run about the City disturbing the people.
This was effected according to the Popes desire, for about the end of July,
seeing how unsuccessful their endeavors had been, they resolved to leave that
Babilonian City, and go preach the Gospel to the Turks and Mahometans. In order
thereunto, they took Shipping for Constantinople, where within two Months they
safely arrived.

They had not been above a fortnight in that great City, but they went into the
Mahometans Mosco's and Temples, and caused great tumult among the people. For
this offense they were condemned to be bastinado'd, i. e. to receive three
hundred blows upon the soals of their Feet, which was accordingly executed with
that extremity of rigor and cruelty, so that in few days the putrified flesh
came off from the bones, which was a miserable spectable to behold. But this
spirit of Quakerism had so Transported and infatuated them, that they got
wooden Crutches, and once more went to their profane M^sco's, and caused a
much greater disturbance then before. Hereupon the Turks were sore vexed, and
presently had them before the Mufti himself, who forth with in a great fury and
rage passed this cruel sentence upon them, viz. That they were to have their
hands chopped off, their Tongues cut out, their Eyes cut out, and each Man to
have a sharp Wooden Stake run in at his Fundament, and so quite through his
body, all which was accordingly put in execution: And so these poor wretches
after all their sufferings, ended their miserable Lives.

FINIS.

