An EPISTLE By Way of Encouragement to Friends, To be frequent at Weekday
Meetings.
Dear and tender Friends,
WE having been often refresht, in the living presence of the Lord, in
Meetings; and those that have truly Hungered after Righteousness, have there
felt the Bread that comes from Heaven, plentifully Distributed; and many being
thereby Nourished up in the Eternal Life, it has encouraged them to be
frequent in Meetings; not only on first Days, but also on Week days, to wait
upon the Lord in his Divine Gift, to be refresh't again: For as the Sense of
Gods Goodness is abode in, the Hunger will remain after the Childrens Bread,
and an earnestness of mind will be to get to the Table of the Lord, where our
Souls have been Refresht before; that we may enjoy the renewings of the
Heavenly Life, and increase in it; wherein, as we are preserved, we shall abide
in the favor of God, and have a share of his Blessings which he is bestowing
among the Sons of Men, whose Hearts are prepared and stand open, and expecting
to receive from him.

Therefore, Friends, let a Watchfulness be in the mind of every one, that this
Worlds Cares and Concerns do not become as Briars and Thorns unto any, hindering
their Growth in the Truth: For, Friends, these outward Goods the Lord has
bestowed, ought rather to cause in our minds Thankfulness unto the Giver, and
to walk in true fear, and lowliness of mind before him, and unto those that so
do, outward Riches, or any outward Blessing or Mercy that he bestows, will not
be an Occasion, to neglect our Christian Duty of Assembling our selves
together, but so much the more as we have received from him, so much the more
to be engaged to serve him, and draw near unto him, and wait upon him.

And thus your good Example in frequenting Meetings, may be an Inducement to
others to frequent Friends Meetings also; whereas, if any looking into our
Meetings, should (...) a thinness and slackness in Friar (...) may they not
think? that our (...)ings are no more profitable than their own, and so not be
drawn by our Example to be fervent in seeking after the Lord; let therefore the
zeal and diligence of Friends in frequenting Meetings, show forth the Benefit
of our Meetings, and the refreshment that may there be had; and it may prove a
means to stir up them to consider, that surely we do enjoy more in our
Meetings, then they do in theirs, because of our frequenting them so diligently.

And Friends, if any are in streights and difficulties inwardly, whom have we
to go unto? in comparison of our God therefore not only in private, but also in
the assembly of the Lords People, spread your spiritual necessities before him,
and wait upon him for a supply; and let the minds of none Wander, out (when you
are so met) be staid upon the Lord in his Heavenly Gift, to receive from him,
and if any are not yet come to a stay to their minds, let such be turned to the
meas;ure of the Spirit they have received, and (in faith) therein diligently
resist the enemy that would keep you unsettled, and as you abide faithfully
Warring against him, in due time you will know a Victory; and this will be of more
advantage to your immortal Souls, then increase of outward Wealth, or indeed,
then a bare formal sitting in Meetings, only to hear the Experiences of others.
For hereby you will come to know Bread in your own Houses, and Water in your
Cisterns, that you will not need to say to others, give us of your Store. For
through the Heavenly Gift that you have received will you be abundantly
supplied, and your Souls in the receiving, will have a Sacrifice of
thanksgiving and Praise to Offer to our God, who is worthy thereof, for ever
and evermore.

And you that are Masters and Mistresses of Families, and Parents of Children,
had need be Exemplary in your Practice and care over those of your Families,
That they seeing your zeal and earnestness, in Assembling your selves together,
to wait upon the Lord, may be drawn by your Example also to be diligent in
waiting upon him, and so come to receive for themselves of his Blessings and
Mercies, and then, that they together with you, may live Worthy of his Mercies,
is the fervent Travail and Prayer of

Your Friend, Theodor Eccleston.
London, 13. 10. Month. 1693. Remember the time Appointed for Meetings to begin.
(...)nted by T. Soul at the Crooked Billet in Holy-well-Lane, Shoreditch. 1693


