THE EARL of PEMBROKES SPEECH IN THE HOUSE of PEERS, When the Seven Lords were
accused of High Treason.
Copia vera, MIC. OLDSWORTH.

My Lords,
YOu know I seldom make Speeches, yet (my Lords) every thing would live; and
now I must either find a Tongue, or lose my Head. I am accused for sitting
here, when your Lordships fled to the Army; Alas, my Lords, I am an old man, I
must sit; you may ride or run any whither, but I am an old man. You voted them
Traitors who left the House, and went to York; they told us then they were
forced away by Tumults: Do not You say so too? were they Traitors for going,
and am I a Traitor for staying? 's Death (my Lords) what would you have me do?
hereafter I Will neither go nor stay. I have served you 7 years, what have you
given me, unless part of a Thanksgiving Dinner, for which you made me fast once
a Month? I was fed like a Prince at the KING'S cost, twice every day, (long
before some of you were born) and this KING continued, nay, out-did his Father
in heaping favors upon me: Yet (for your sakes) I renounced my Master when he
had most need of me; voted against him, swore against him, hired men to fight
against him: I confess, I my self never struck at him, nor shot at him; but I
prayed for those that did: I gave my Tenants their Leases Fine-free, if they
would rise and resist the KING. And yet (my Lords) after all this, must I be a
Traitor? Have I not sworn for you over and over again? You sent me on your
Errands to Oxford, to Vxbridge, to Newcastle, to Holdenby; you hurried me up
and down as if I had been a King: You made me carry a world of Propositions, I
brought them all safe and sound; what you bad me say, I spoke to a syllable;
and had the KING asked me how old I was, without your Commission I should not
have told him, and yet (my Lords) I am an old man. Remember how I stuck to you
against Strafford and Canterbury; some of you shrunk at Strafford's Trial, that
your Names were like to be posted with Malignants; and for Canterbury, many of
you would have had him live, my Lord of Northumberland and others would have no
hand in his Blood, but I gave you the casting voice, which sent him packing
into another World; and yet now would you send me after him? Have I not sat
with you early and late? When the Parliament tumbled, and tossed, and rolled it
self, on this side, and on that side, still I was for the Parliament; though I
staid here with Presbyterian Lords, yet when you returned I was firm for you.
All the other Lords left you in the House when Sir Thomas's Chaplain gave
thanks for your return; but I staid and prayed with you, and am (for ought I
know) as great an Independent as any of you all. I rejoiced with you, fasted,
sung Psalms, prayed with you, and (hereafter) will run away with ye. Nay, I had
done it now, but who knew your minds? If ye meant I should follow ye, why did
ye not wink upon me? Think ye I could run away by instinct? My Lords, you know
I love Dogs, and (though I say it) I thank God I have as good Dogs as any man
in England; now (my Lords) if a Dog follow me when I do not call him I bid him
be gone; if I call him and he comes not, then I beat him; but if I beat him for
not coming when I never called him, you will think me mad; 's Death (my Lords)
It Is a poor Dog is not worth the whistling.

But perhaps my fault is not mere staying here, but being active in your
absence, because in my Robes and Collar of SS. I brought up Mr. Pelham the
Commons new Speaker; why, what if I did; Is not Mr. Pelham my own Cousin? would
your Lordships have me uncivil to my kindred? why might not I entertain the new
Speaker as well as Sir Robert Harley entreat us to admit him? Mr. Pelham is
none of Sir Robert's Cousin, and yet Sir Robert is an old man.

I hear some say, that I was forward to begin a new War, that my Hand is to all
the Warrants for listing Men and Horse; and in order thereunto I voted His
Majesty should come to London. It Is true (my Lords) I did give my Vote for the
KING's coming hither; but wherefore was it? 'twas only to come to choose a new
Speaker: what would ye have us dumb, and sit here like Ferrets? My Lords, I
love to hear men speak; and all the Lawyers told me, No King, no Speaker; that
either the Commons must name their Speaker, and the KING approve him; or the
KING name him, and the Commons approve him; no King, no Speaker And so I was
for the King, that is, for the Speaker.

Then (my Lords) observe the manner of his coming: the KING was to come
according to the Covenant; mark ye that; I was still for my Oaths: let him come
when he will, if the Covenant fetch him, he had as good stay away. And yet men
cry shame on the Covenant; those that took it do cast it up again; and those
that refuse it have given a world of Arguments that it is unreasonable; which
reasons our Assembly (like a Company of Rascals) never yet answered. I know (my
Lords) many of our Friends never took this Oath, but they refused it out of
mere Conscience; shall Malignants Consciences be as tender as ours? why, what
do they think our Consciences are made of? But (my Lords) suppose this Oath be
unreasonable; can we do nothing but we must give reason for it; this is as bad
as the House of Commons, who when we deny to pass any Ordinance, presently send
to know our reasons, though themselves give no reasons for demanding ours. And
so Malignants would have reasonable Oaths; only here is the difference, the
House of Commons do use to demand Reasons, and Malignants desire to be suffered
to give Reasons. My Lords, I love not this giving of reasons, though I hold the
Covenant is extreme reasonable; for as some Malignants take it to save their
estates, so we give it to make them lose their estates; both love the estate,
and both hate the Covenant. Thus ( my Lords) we have Reason for this Oath, and
Your Lordships have No Reason to make me a Traitor while I give my Vote
according to the Covenant.

As for signing Warrants to raise a New War, I wonder you will speak of it; have
not you all done it a hundred times? how many Reams of Paper have we subscribed
to raise Forces for King and Parliament? It Is known I can scarce write a word
besides my Name: Cannot a Man write his own Name without losing his Head? If I
must give account for what I set my hand to, Lord have mercy upon me! I see now
my Grandfather was a wise Man, he could neither write nor read, and happy for
me if I were so too. Come, come my Lords, be plain and tell me, do I look like
one that would raise a New War? I must confess I love a good Army, but if there
be none till I raise it, Soldiers of Fortune may change their Names. No, (my
Lords) 'twas not I, 'twas the Eleven Members would have raised a War; you see
they were guilty by their running away, I neither ran with them, nor with you,
I do not like this running away, I love to stay by it; and whether was for War,
I that stayed in Town, or You that went to an Army? The Devil of Horse did I
list but in my New Coach, nor used any Harness but my Collar of S-S. And will
you for this clap me in the Tower? You sent me thither six years since for but
handling a Standish, and now you will commit me for writing my Name; what (my
Lords) do you hate Learning? Can you not end or begin a Parliament without
sending me to the Tower? Do your Lordships mean to make me a Lord Mayor? If I
needs must go, I pray you, send me home, to Baynard's Castle or Durham House,
(a damnable Fire burnt my House at Wilton, just that hour I moved Your
Lordships to drive Malignants out of London.) But why to the Tower? am I
company for Lions? do you think me a Cattamountain, fit to be shown through a
Grate for two pence? No, my Lords, keep the Tower for Malignants, they can
endure it, some of them have been Prisoners 7 years; they can feed upon bare
Allegiance, please themselves with Discourses of Conscience, of Honor, of a
Righteous Cause, and I know not what: But what is this to me? How will those
Malignants look upon me? nay, how shall I look upon them? I confess some of
them love my Son's company, they say he is more a Gentleman, and has wit:
'sDeath (my Lords) must I now turn Gentleman? I thought I had been a Peer of
the Realm, and am I now a Gentleman? Let my Son keep his Wit, his poor Father
never got two pence by his Wit. Alas, (my Lords) what hurt can I do you? Or
what good will it do you to have my Head? I am but a Ward, my Lord Say has
disposed of me these seven years; I am no Lawyer, though the Littletons call me
Cousin; I am no Scholar, though I have been their Chancellor; I am no
Statesman, though I was a Privy-Counsellour; I know not what you mean by the
Three Estates. Last June the Army demanded a Release for Lilburne, Musgrove,
and Overton, I thought They were the Three Estates. I thank God I have a good
Estate of my own, and I have the Estates of my Lord Bayning's Children, and I
have my Lord of Carnarvan's Estate; these are my Three Estates. And yet (my
Lords) must I to the Tower? Consider we are but a few Lords left, come, let us
love, and be kind to one another: The Cavaliers quarreled among themselves,
beat one another, and lost all. Let Us be wiser, my Lords; for had we fallen
into their condition, my Conscience tells me we had looked most woefully.

I perceive Your Lordships begin to think better of me, and I hear you would
quit me if I were not charged by the Agitators and General Council of the Army.
How? Agitator? 'sDeath, what is that? Who ever heard that word before? I
understand Classical, Provincial, Congregational, National, but for Agitator,
it may (for ought I know) be a Knave not worth three pence: If Agitators cut
Noble-men's throats, you will find the Devil has been an Agitator. As for the
General Council, I hate the Name of it, it is old and naught, and used to be
full of Bishops; those fellows have troubled us ever since the Apostles; I
thought we had made 'em poor enough, and is their Name come again to torment
me? My Lords, I understand not these General Councils, those of old (they say)
were Christians, and these are Independents: What a damnable deal of
Generalling is here! General Assembly, General of the Army, General Council of
the Army; we never had quiet hour since we had so many Generals. Well, my
Lords, these are hard times, and we make them worse with hard words, which
neither we, nor our Fathers understood. Heretofore Bishops went Jure Divino,
then Elders would be Jure Divino, and now Agitators will be Jure Divino (Dam
me, I think nothing is Jure Divino but God.) Call you this a through
Reformation? what betwixt the Assemblers and the Agitators I am reformed to
mere skin and bone. My Lords, if these 'tators must rule the Kingdom, why are
not we our selves Agitators? why may not I make Oldsworth an Agitator? His
abilities and honesty are equal to most of 'em. But (for ought I see) Agitators
will sooner be Earls of Pembroke and Montgomery, than we Agitators: for the
Parliament leads the People, the Army leads the Parliament, Sir Thomas leads
the Army, Cromwell leads Sir Thomas, Ireton leads Cromwell, Agitators will lead
Ireton; whither the Devil shall we all be led at last?

My Lords, ye see I have spoke my mind; I hope every week some of your
Lordships will do the like; and the Commons in this (though in nothing else)
will follow the House of Peers.

But I have done, I have done, my Lords: Remember I beseech you I am an old
man, I have been a Grandfather time out of mind, (for I was so when this
Parliament began) and now must I be food for Agitators? O my Lords, I have used
the KING so ill, and He loved me so well; and I have served you so well, and
you use me so ill, that no man is sorry for me: Therefore my Request is, that
you would not think of sending me to the Tower, 'till some body pities me.

FINIS.

