Divine EXAMPLES of GOD'S SEVERE JUDGMENTS UPON SABBATH BREAKERS, In their
unlawful Sports, Collected out of several Divine Subjects, VIZ. Mr. H. B. Mr.
Beard, and the Practice of Piety: A fit Monument for our present Times, etc.
depiction of a person being stoned (in accordance with the punishment meted
out in Numbers 15: 36) for violating the Sabbath Remember that thou keep holy
ye Sabbath Day etc
The profane Isralite, that durst assay,
In gathering sticks, to break the Sabbath day,
Is stand to death, for like Contumacy
The Lord has sworn, that every Soul shall dye.
depiction of young men drowned while playing football on the Sabbath Several
Young men playing at foote-ball on the Jce upon the LORD'S DAY are all Drowned

depiction of a woman and her daughters who are burnt up for working on the
Sabbath A Woman and her two Daughters pill and dry flax on the Lords day, are
all burnt

depiction of a miller's house and mill which burn down because he violated the
Sabbath A Millers House and Mill Bur^^ etc.



Differences of the Jewish from the Chr^stian state.
The Jewish Sabbath was kept in remembrance of the Worlds Creation. The
Christian's Sabbath is kept in remembrance of the Worlds Redemption. The Jews
as a Figure of Grace that they should rest from servitude of sin. The
Christians as a Figure of Glory when they shall rest from occasions of sinning.
The Jews had bodily Sacrifices of Beasts; We Christians of Prayer. They the
Levitical Priesthood of the Law; We Christian Ministry of the Gospel. They
Temples and Synagogues; We Christian Churches. They S^craments of Circumcision,
Passover; We of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

N^w to keep holy a Sabbath to the Lord is to celebrate an Holy rest unto God,
not only to abstain from all labor of the body, but also practicing all Godly
Exercises, as Prayer, hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments, etc.

And to profane this day is to labor in servile Works of our ordinary
calling, to travel about ordinary business, to keep Fairs and Markets on this
day, or to use sports and recreations, or any thing else more than things of
necessity.

Scriptural Examples of sudden Judgments for several sins.
When Belshazar was Feasting with his Nobles, the Fearful hand writing was upon
the wall. While Herod vanted himself, and the people honored him like God, the
Angel smote him, and he dyed of Worms. W^ile the Philistines were banqueting,
Sampson pull d the Temple upon their Heads. When the men of Ziglah were
Feasting and Dancing, David came upon them and slew them. When the Israelites
were at their Manna and Quails, even while the meat was in their mouths, God
took away their Lives. When Job's Children were making merry one with an other,
the Wind came and blew down the House. While the whole World was marrying and
giving in marriage, the Flood came and drowned them. While the Steward was
recounting what policy to use, the Mas^er called him to account. While the
Churl was musing of his full Barns, and saying to his soul be merry, that night
his soul was taken from him.

Abel s blood suddenly cries for vengeance.

Jeroboam was stricken while he struck.

Baalam was stopped in the way. Judas presently hanged himself. Herod, Saul,
Athaliah, and Jezabel, had their offices taken from them for sin. Remember
Lot's Wife. Haman hanging upon his own Gallows, and Achan's sepulcher.

Sins against mercy bring the severest Judgments, Read Leviticus 26, from ver.
14, to 40.

Israel the miracle of mercy, that grew from 70. souls in a few years to six
hundred thousand, the more oppressed the more they prospered, like Camomile or
the Palm Tree, but when they abused Mercy and slighted Sabbaths, they became
the greatest Objects of Wrath. There died partly by the Sword, and partly of
Famine, Eleven hundred thousand of the poorer sort. Two thousand in one night
were Imbowelled, six thousand were burned in a Porch of the Temple, the whole
City was sacked and burnt, and ninety seven thousand taken Captives. And to this
day are they not the offscouring of the World?

If he were slain which on the Sabbath day.
For need did gather sticks: Oh! how shall they
Escape God's wrath, which for ba^e pelf or pleasure,
Profane God's Sabbaths in most frequent measure.

Examples.
1. A Woman near Northampton, the same day the Book for sports was read, upon
that Sabbath day having but three pence in her purse, hired a Fellow to fetch a
Minstril, who coming, she with others fell to Dance, and so continued within
night, and the same night was got with Child, which at the Birth she murdered,
and being detected and apprehended, she before the Justice confessed it, and
withal told the occasion, saying it was her falling to sports on the Sabbath
upon reading the Book for sports had brought her to this end, for which
unnatural fact she was put to death.

2. At Northampton a young man that was at first of a loose kind of life, but
after by the example of other good people had begun to reform his loose life in
the Observation of the Sabbath, but hearing the Book of sports he fell again to
profane the Sabbath: at an Assizes there when the Judges were in the Church
being taken as he was picking a Pocket, he confessed that upon the publishing the
said Book of sports he was encouraged to wickedness, and for this suffered
death.

3. A Maid at Enfield near London hearing of the Liberty given by this Book,
said, she would dance, and on the Sabbath day danced so long that within two or
three days she dyed.

4. Upon May day, being the Lords day, a Maid of the Minister of Cripple Gate
Parish London, was Married to a Widdower having three Children, and upon this
day they kept their Marriage Feast in the Church-house joining to the Church,
and spent all the Afternoon in Dancing; but in one Week after, the Plague began
in that Parish in the new Married man's House, and within one Month the Man, his
Wife, and two Children dyed; thus the Plague began in that Parish.

5. In the same Month a Minister Rector of a Church in London, upon the
Saturday would go with two Neighbors, boon Companions, to be Jovial the next
day; they conditioned he should bestow a Sermon upon them; they on the Lords
day spent the Forenoon idly, and in the Afternoon this Minister with his
Neighbors visited a London Minister that had a Benefice there, for whom he
Preached. Sermon being ended they are invited to the Ministers House to a Bottle
of Sack; they drank so long that the two Neighbors tongues began to fail them.
That night their Minister could not sleep and was struck with a sudden
coldness, and with much ado being returned to London, he dyed before the next
Lords day.

6. On Jan. 25. 1^34. being the Lords day in the time of the great Frost,
fourteen young men presuming to play at Football upon the Ice on the River
Trent near to Gainsborough were all drowned.

7. At Dover the same Lord's day the Book was read, one in St. Jame s Parish
that played on a Kit, with it called together diverse, and that very day was
struck by Divine hand, and within two days dyed.

8. At T^urlow in Suffolk, one made a Feast on the Sabbath day to his Friends
for joy of the publishing this Book of sports on the Lord's day, and the next
day was pressed to death by the sudden fall of a stack of Faggots.

9. At Hellingsby in Sussex this Book being read on the Lord's day, the next
day an honest man, one Tomkins being on his way, his Neighbor scoffingly a^kt
him if he would dance with him the next Sunday, to whom Tomkins answered, take
heed thou be not dancing in Hell before that day, or before it be long and by
the next Week this scoffer and two of his Family dyed.

10. Febru. 9. 1634. being upon the Lord's day, an Apothecaries man in
Lime-street London, with another Companion rid to Barnet to make merry, and
returning home drunk, near High-Gate met a Tinker, to whom offering abu^e the
Tinker strikes his Hor^e, the other bids run him through, which he did with his
Rapier, the Tinker fell down dead, and both were apprehended and sent to
Newgate.

11. At Thornton near W^stchester at the publishing this Book, ^hey prepared
for a Summer-ale upon the Sabbath day, and a lusty young Wench was chosen
Purveyor for Cakes, and going on the Saturday to the Mill passing by a Hedge in
the way she was immediately struck and fell into the Ditch, where she was found
dead; there lay all the Lord's day, the Coroner being sent for on the Monday
she was carried to her Grave. And the effect wrought so upon the people, that
no Summer-Ale was kept; but the May Pole which before they had set up they took
down.

12. In Yorkshire at a Wake on the Lord's day, in Otley Parish at Baildon, two
men sitting at drink in the Night fell out, and being parted, the one a little
after finding his fellow sitting by the fire with his back toward him, comes
behind him with a Hatchet, Chines him down the back, so as his Bowels fell out:
the Murderer being pursued leapt into a River and drowned h^mself.

13. One Wright at Kingston that re^oyced much at the suspending of his
Minister, for not reading the Book of sports, saying he hoped shortly to see
them all so served: was in a day or two after struck with a dead Palsy all
over the one side, and with Blindness and Dumbness, that he could neither go,
nor see, nor speak and so lay a Fortnight and then dyed.

14. In Moor-fields near London, diverse Youths playing at Cat on the Sabbath
day, two of them fell out, and the one hitting the other under the Ear with his
Cat he fell down for dead in the place, the other was sent to Prison; but the
dead after a time recovering, the Prisoner was releast, which may be a warning
to Youths profaneness.

15. April the 18. 1635. one traveling with three other from London to Maiden
Head on the Saturday, the three spent the Sabbath there, but he would travel on
his way contrary to the La^ies direction whom he served; he rode to Henley in
the Morning and there heard the Sermon and fell to Travel in the Afternoon; but
in the way leading his Horse gently down a plain descent and even way, his
Horse suddenly fell and broke both his fore legs; the man was amazed at the
immediate hand of God as he after confessed to his three fellow Travelers that
overtook him, and said all the good Sermons that ever he had heard did never so
work upon his Conscience as this thing did, and that example should for ever be
a warning to him.

16. In 1634 one Edward A^^rideth, a Gentleman, having been pained in his feet,
and being upon his recovery, whereupon one said to him he was glad to see him
so nimble; Amerideth replied, that he doubted not but to dance about the
Maypole the next Sabbath day: but before he moved ou^ of that place he was
suddenly struck with a feebleness and dizyness in his head, that being carried
to an House he dyed before the Lord's day came.

17. In Gloc^st^^shire one being very forward to advance a summer meeting
wherein his Son was to be stickler, went himself to see it and there beholding
it he fell down dead and never saw an^t^er Sabbath.

18. A Miller at Churchdown, near Gloucester, would needs (contrary to the
admonitions both of his Minister in private, and generally in public, yea and
that very day, and of other Christian friends) keep a solemn Whitson ale, for
which he had made large preparation and provision even of threescore dozen of
Cheese-cakes with other things proportionable; in the Church house half a mile
from his Mill, his Musical Instruments were set forth on the side of the Church
house, where the Mini^^er and people were to pass to the Church to Evening
Prayer, when that and Sermon were ended, the Drum is struck up, the Pieces
discharged, the Musicians play, and the rout fall a dancing, till the Evening;
where they all with the Miller resort to his Mill; where that Evening before
they had supt, about nine of the Clock on Whitsunday, a fire took suddenly in
his House over their heads, and was so brief and quick, that it burnt down his
House and Mill, and devoured withal the greatest of all his other Provision
and Housholdstuff. This is confirmed by sundry good Testimonies.

19. At Baunton in Dorcetshire some being at Bowls on the Lord's day, one
flinging his Bowl at his Fellow Bowler, hit him on the Fare, so as the blood
issued forth at the other Ear, whereof he shortly died. The Murderer fled.

20. One good man Paul near Stoke in Dorcetshire, rejoicing much at the
erecting of a Summer-pole, at a Parish called Simsbury in ^orcetshire, and
saying before one of his Neighbors, he would go see it, though he went naked
through a Qu^ckset Hedge: which is a common Proverb they use: Going with Wood in
his Arms to cast into the Bonfire, where he lived, and using these words:
Heaven and Earth are full of thy glory, O Lord: he was presently smitten by the
stroke of God, and within two or three days died, and his Wife with him. These
two last examples are testified by a Minister in his Letter to a Brother
Minister.

21. In the edge of Essex near Brinkley, two Fellows working in a Chalk pit,
the one was boasting to his fellow, how he had angered his Mistress with staying
so late at their Sports the last Sunday night, but he said he would anger her
wor^e the next Sunday. He had no sooner said this, but suddenly the Earth fell
down upon him, and slew him out right, with the fall whereof his fellows limb
was broken, who had been also Partner with him in his jollity on the Lord's
day, escaping with his life, that he might tell the truth, that God might be
glorified, and that by this warning he might repent of his sin, and reform such
his profaneness, and remain a Filler of Salt, to season others with fear by
his Example.

22. The last Spring a Miller hard by W^otten in Warwickshire, went on the
Lord's day to a Wake, whence returning home again, the same day at night found
his Mill and House and all on a fire; this was testified by a Minister (in a
reply to another Minister) who was an Eye witness.

23. At Woolston in the same Country, where the said Ministers Father had been
Minister forty years, and by God's blessing upon his Labors, had reformed
things very well; yet upon the publication of this Book in print, many of the
Inhabitants the Spring following, were imboldned to set up May poles, Morris
Dance, and a Whitson ale, continuing their rude revelling a Week together, with
many affronts to their ancient and reverend Pastor: but it pleased God, that
not long after, a spark from a Smith's shop, caught in that room where the Ale
was brewed, and though means were ready at hand, yet it could not be quenched,
but set the House on fire, and presently flew to the Barn, in which their
disorder was, and burnt the same with thirteen Dwelling Houses more, most of
whose Inhabitants were Actors or Abettors in the same: This is testified by
many.

24. In the year of our Lord 1633. October. 26. after the Book of sports was
known to be published in print, David Price, a Welshman, servant to one Thomas
Hill, a known Grasier of that Country, coming to Banbury with his Drove on
Saturday night, declared his purpose of driving them the next day early in the
Morning, being the Sabbath or Lord's day: his Host where he lodged, dissuaded
him, because it was the Sabbath day, and told him that he would certainly be
stopped, and made to pay for it according to the Statute. He answered that he
would drive them, and let me see (says he) who will hinder me. So in the
Morning, two other accompanying him, he went to fetch the Cattle out of the
Ground, one that knew him, met him at the Towns end (not yet out of the Town)
and adm^ni^ed ^im, saying, What, David, to day; he made no answer, but went
onward, and though for any thing that appeared to any other, or that himself
complained of, he was then ^n good health, as ever he was, yet within l^ttle
more than a stones cast off the Town, he fell down dead suddenly, and was
buried in Banbury Churchyard the next day after; None could discern any
sensible or evident cause of so sudden a surprizal, and himself gave no sign
of any pains, weakness, or illness, till the instant time he gave up the ghost.

25. At Wicks, a Town betwixt Colchester and Harwich in Essex, upon Whitsunday
last in the Afternoon, two Fellows meeting at the football, the one killed the
other.

26. At Oxford on the Sabbath day, one Bally Hawks a Butcher, would needs go
into his field with an hatchet and shovel to mend his ditch: his Wife dissuaded
him what she could, being the Sabbath day, but he said he would go make an end
of his work, which he did, for suddenly he was struck dead in his ditch, and
so made an end of his work, and his life together.

27. Also at Oxford a Carpenter undertaking to mend a Stage in St. John's
College on the Saturday night, for the finishing whereof he must of necessity
spend some part of the Lord's day morning, that the Stage might be ready
against the Monday following, he that night fell backward from the Stage, being
not far from the ground, and brake his neck, and so ended his life in a fearful
Tragedy.

28. A young man near Bow, going to swim in the River on Essex side, on the
Lord's day in the Afternoon, was drowned.

29. Two boys of St. Albans, going to Verulam's Pounds, a mile off to swim on
the Lord's day, July 12. one of them was drowned, and the other hardly escaped.

30. At Ramsey in Suffolk, a tall man on the Lord's day going with others to
swim, and being advertised and warned of a hole in the water, he swear that
there was no place there could drown him, but by and by on a sudden he was
missing, being now under water and so drowned.

3^. On September. 13. 1635. being the Lord's day, two young men of the Parish of
St. Dunstans in the West, London, going to swim, were both drowned.

32. At Lemster, one Master Powle, January 1634. on the Lord's day serving a
Writ of sub poena (and that of purpose on that day as is credibly reported)
upon one Mr. Shuit, a Gentleman, this he did in the Church yard, so soon as
they were come out of the Church: Mr. Shuit thereupon told him, I thought you
had been an holier man than so, to do this upon this day; he replied, I hope I
am never a whit the more dishonest, or less holy for that; having spoken this,
he suddenly fell down dead, and spoke not a word more, his Wife seeing this
was suddenly struck with sickness.

33. A Fellow in Summersetshire being to make a Tent upon the Lord's day, for a
Fair that was to be kept upon the Monday following, said to one on the
Saturday, that they would rear it to morrow, so the next day which was the
Lord's day, being drunk, he d^ed the same day roaring.

34. In June 1635. on the Lord s day, the Tapster and Chamberlain of the Queens
head in Southwark, rid into Kent to be merry: and having drunk liberally,
riding homewards, the one of them fell from his Horse and broke his neck.

35. Also in June 1635. and as some report the very same Lords day, in
Southwark, at the Red Lion, near St. George's Church in the Afternoon, a man
with another sat drinking so long, that the other about six of the Clock
departing, fell a sleep so, that he never awaked again.

These Examples were Collected from Beard's Theater of God's Judgments, and the
Practice of Piety.
36. A Noble man in France, that used to go a hunting on the Sabbath day; his
Wife brought forth a Child with a Dogs head.

37. At Kinstat in France, a covetous Woman used on the Sabbath day to dry and
pill Flax, and would not be warned although her Flax took fire two several
Lord's days, but on the third Sabbath, she and her two Children were burnt to
death.

38. Some in France at their Husbandry upon the Sabbath, have been struck with
Thunder, some had their Bodies and Bones burnt with visible fire, and consumed
to ashes; Scaffold at Plays on the Sabbath day have fallen, and many have been
wounded; some killed out right

39. In 1583. at Paris Garden, upon the Sabbath day, a great Company were
gathered to behold a sort of Bear baiting, the Scaffold suddenly brake, and
Eight were slain outright; and many more wounded.

40. A Husbandman grinding Corn upon the Lord's day, had his Meal burnt to
Ashes.

41. Another carrying Corn on this day, had his Barn and all his Corn therein
burnt with fire from Heaven.

42. Stratford upon Avon, was twice on the same day twelve month (being the
Lord's day) almost consumed with fire chiefly for profaning that day.

43. The Inhabitants of Tiverton in Devonshire, were great prophaners of this
day, of which their godly Minister did often admonish them; and not long after
his death, on the ^hird of April 1598. By a sudden fire, the whole Town was
almost consumed, to the number of 400. Houses, and 50. Persons in the Flames.

44. And once since in 1612. the same Town was almost consumed again; a sure
token of God's anger.

Royal King Solomon has a true saying, that Judgments are prepared for
scorners, Prove. 19.29. And in this short view you may behold Judgments executed.

The Lord has made his day known by his Judgments, Numb. 15. 32. etc. To teach
the Inhabitants of the World righteousness, Isa. 26.9.

These Tragical spectacles of divine Justice proclaim the profanation of the
Lord's most sacred day, a crying sin. Which has been confirmed by the whole
State in Parliament in two famous Statutes in the First of Carol. and in the
Third of Carol. and two Ancient Acts in Hen. and Edw 6.

The Homilies, Common Prayer Book, Canons, Articles, and Injunctions conclude
the same.

Our late Sovereigns of blessed memory King James and King Charles in the first
year of both their Reigns in the several books of Common Prayer, and order for
the publ ck Feasts set out by their Royal Authorities for the aversion and
ceasing of those dreadful Plagues which then swallowed up many thousands,
Confess that among other sins, the profanation of the Sabbath, and not keeping
holy the Lord's day, was one chief cause why these two great Plagues brake in
upon us.

God grant that these punishments of some may be a warning to us all, and as
Cyprian that Ancient Father well says, he is over audacious, who strives to
pass over there where he has seen another to have fallen; he is outragiously
headstrong who is not struck with fear, when he beho^ds another perish in that
course which he is running; he loves his own safety, who takes warning by the
death of others; and he alone is a prudent man who is made wise by the Ruins of
other men.

May these Judgments on some, become Remed^es to cure all, who are sick of the
self same sin. Which is the end of the Publisher.

London, Printed for T. C. and sold by William Miller, at the Sign of the
Gilded Acorn in S. Paul's Churchyard, near the Little North Door, 1671.


