A DIALOGUE BETWEEN LOD. MUGGLETON AND THE QVAKERS: Showing forth the Damnable
Blasphemies of that Impudent Impostor, collected out of their own Printed
Letters.

To Vndeceive the People.

Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for J. C. 1677.

A Dialogue, etc.
IT is very observable, that when Men have once shaken hands with the Ancient
Orthodox, and undoubted Principles of the Church of England, they soon after
bid Adieu to Morality, Manners, and Discretion; and suffering themselves to be
hurried on by the impetuous Blasts of giddy headed Frenzy, stop not till they
are plunged in those ominous Quagmires of Atheism, Irreligion, or Heresy;
whose fatal Effects the yet yawning Wounds of many hundreds of Families in this
Nation do but too recently declare. It is no small Grief to the Conscientious
and Learned, to see the Profane and Ignorant make a Trade of their Professed
Christianity, and reckon to themselves some Hundreds per annum upon the
Invention of some innovated or unheard of Doctrine. But above all, whoever
attempted any thing in this kind, I think this Muggleton to be most notorious.
However these Seducing Impostors (like Jealous Harlots) are by reason of their
Secular Interests rendered incapable of living near one another without Railing;
insomuch that if the Devil were of so morose a Constitution as that
Philosopher, who never laughed but when he saw a Mare mumbling of Thistles, he
would surely have stretched his Spleen in deriding at those Illiterate
Disputations have passed between Muggleton and the Quakers.

Which because I have here undertaken to sum up, and to show the unacquainted
Reader the Ridiculousness of the one, as well as the Profaneness of the other,
I think fit to let him understand, that the Quakers having been several times
baffled out of their principal Tenets, were at length no longer able to
maintain their invented Fopperies, but by running to Enthusiastic Sanctuaries,
amusing their most Rational Opponents with an Harangue of those extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit, and that unusual Light within, which they pretended was
committed to their charge. Now this Lodowick Muggleton being destitute of many
of those natural Endowments, as well as artificial Acquirements, which have
given some color to the Errors of more Learned Men, builds upon the Quakers
Foundation, and talks as far beyond them of Visions, Revelations, Commissions,
and Enthusiasms, etc. as they did to others before in the same kind; as you
shall hear by this ensuing Dialogue, collected out of both their Letters sent
to each other, and now printed and bound up together in a Book of Muggletons
called, The Interpretation (...) ^he Eleventh Chapter of the Revelations.

Rich. Farnsworth Quaker, page 4. Lodowick Muggleton, thou pretendest to have
received a Commission by a Voice from God, whereby thou becomest Judge,
Accuser, and Witness, to curse and bless according as thou please; and
whosoever thou do bless or curse, it is not in the power of Men nor Angels,
no nor in the Almighty himself, to revoke from Eternal Damnation.


Muggleton page 40. My Commission of the Spirit is as true as ever Moses or the
Prophets were, and of as great, nay greater Authority then theirs, and given by
the same Spirit.


Quaker page 41. But thou art singular in thy Doctrine, Knowledge, Judgment,
etc. and under pretense of a Commission from God, have presumed to exalt thy
self above God and Christ, in affirming thy Sentence (if once past) unrevokable
even by the Almighty himself.


Muggleton page 43. You would have said as much of Peter if you had lived in
those days; and yet you see God gave that power to Man to keep tbe Keys of
Heaven and Hell, page 44. and as he had power to bind and loose, to remit or
retain; so likewise has the same God given me to bless and curse Men and Women
to eternity, page 45. I do neither bless any out of Affections, neither do I
curse any through Envy or Malice; but it is either because they have sinned
against the Holy Ghost, or else I do know them to be of the Reprobate Seed.


Quaker. How dare you exclude all other Ministers and Messengers by this
pretended Power, and only assume that Commission to your self?


Muggleton page 46. As true as God is Truth, there is no true Messenger,
Minister, or Ambassador of God in the World but my self, neither shall there be
any sent of God after me to the Worlds end, page 47. For it is Gods practice to
give Authority to Men that are mortal, to condemn according to the tenor of
their Commission, whether it be for a Temporal or a Spiritual Death; and that
you and such as you shall find to your eternal sorrow, make as light of it as
you will.


Quaker. If thou art so great a Prophet as thou pretendest to be, why is not
thy Name inserted in the Holy Scriptures, as other Prophets were?


Muggleton page 149. If you had lived in Christ's days when he was upon Earth,
you ^ould hardly have found his Name recorded in the Law and the ^rophets; nay
it is more probable that I am ordained the Chief judge, because my Name is not
recorded in Scripture. If there had been such a Name written in Scriptures,
that he should be the ^^st Prophet in the World, many would have named their
Sons Lodo^ick Muggleton, and that is the cause there is so many John's,
Tho^asses, and Jeremiahs, etc.

Furthermore, in Sam. Hooton's and W. Shepherd's Letter to Mug^eton, page 7.
wherein they begin thus.

Friend, for so we can call thee, as Christ did Judas, here is some Queries for
thee to answer in writing, or else for ever stop thy mouth: ^r what reason did
Christ come into the world?


Muggleton's Answer. Christ came into the world to destroy the Devil, which is
the Spi^^ of Reason, of which Spirit most of the Quakers are of


Quakers. Is the Spirit of man mortal or not?


Muggleton. It is Mortal, and does and shall dye with the body.


Quakers. How came thou by this pretended Commission, or how can thou give
(...) any reason to believe it?


Muggleton page 67. That I have this Commission I prove thus: Because I do know
by (...) revelation of Faith, that God did speak to John Reeve three morn^^^s
together distinct words and sentences to the hearing of the ear, (...) 51. Feb.
3, 4, 5. and gave him a Commission as he did Moses. And as ^^ron was given to
be Moses's mouth, so was Lodowick Muggleton ^^^en to be John Reeve's mouth; so
that John Reeve being the chief ^^^ilst he was living, but since the Burden or
Commission of the Lord ^^^h been laid upon me: as Elisha had a double portion
of Elijah's ^^rit, so have I had a double portion of Revelation of the spirit
since ^^^n Reeve departed this life.


Quakers. By what rule or method do thou judge and pass condemnation on thy
^^^w creatures?


Muggleton page 70. (...) go by as certain a rule as the Judges of the Lord do
when they give judgment according to the Law, only I have no Juries, nor
accusers, nor witnesses. What Jury had Elisha when he called for fire from
Heaven, to fall upon two Captains and their fiftys? What Jury had Peter when he
smote Ananias with his sword? But to give the Reader better satisfaction, I
shall show how I condemn men and women at a distance. 1. There must be some of
my faith who has heard them speak wicked speeches against me and my
Commission, and so thereupon I have sent the sentence unto them. 2. I do never
pass sentence upon them, unless I have some writings under their own hands, as
I have from you Quakers.

Thus (Reader) I have entertained thee awhile with the Errors, Blasphemies, and
Irregularities of Lodowick Muggleton; on which fearing thou should be by this
time cloyd, I shall divert thy melancholy, and please thy curiosity, with some
of those strange Heresies and ungrounded principles which Muggleton not without
some reason in many places lays to the Quakers charge; so that when they are
both deliberately considered in thy serious judgment, thou may strike thy
hand on thy breast, and wonder how many silly soul^ could ever be deluded by
such Idle Blasphemous and Irrational Impostors.

Muggleton, before he lets fall his shower of ponderous Arguments on the
Quakers, salutes them with this Prologue, to give them time to set themselves
in a defensive posture against the intended rage. You are much mistaken if you
think to deal with (...) Prophet, who has a Commission from God, as you deal
with th^^ Priests of the Nation; because you are fallen to a more precise kin^ of
life then they, and have amazed them with your feinged Ligh^ within, you must
not think to do so by a commissioned Prophet.


Quaker page 21. Thou say that we deny both the Father and the Son, and that
we d^ny the same flesh and bones which Jesus suffered death withal upon t^^
Cross.

Ibid. 2. You say that we deny he was laid in the grave, rose agai^^ and was
seen by the Apostles; I challenge thee to tell me, where and (...) whom these
things were denied by any of us, or else be thy mou^^ stopped for ever after.


Muggleton page 21. According to your charge I shall acquaint you with both the
pla^^^ and persons. The place East Cheap, at a Butchers house, and (...)
persons which denied them were first the Butcher himself, I think his name was
Whitpan; another of them was Fox the younger, who is now both dead and damned
to eternity; another of them was J. Harwood; as for the other two, I have
forgot them, but one of them was a great Lubbardly Fellow, perhaps you may know
him better then I.

Page 22. Secondly, as for my Cursing: If it were a sin in me, it must
certainly be a greater in you, who have nothing but that fictitious light
within you, to warrant you from that just imputation which may be justly thrown
on your most damnable Doctrine: and that light within, which you so much brag
of, is nothing but the Whimsies and Chymera's of your frantic brains; insomuch
that it differs in you, every one sharing more or less, according to their
natural bilities.

3. This light within you is nothing but the Capricio's and Levalto's of your
mad brains, in as much as it leads you to actions of Sorcery and Witchcraft
before you begin that pretended devotion; so that you often sit as if you were
suddenly struck dumb or bewitched for two hours space before you utter one word
again, page 7. Do you blind Quakers think, that the repeating of Scripture
texts does prove my Commission a pretended thing? Then I say, those Jews which
were under the Law of Moses might as well have said, that the Apostles
commission was but a feigned thing; and so they did, therefore they persecuted
them for it, as you would me if it lay in your power, as it did in theirs. I
shall therefore speak a few words to you Sam. Hooton and Will. Shepherd,
because you two have committed that unpardonable sin which will never be
forgiven either in this world, or in that to come, in speaking evil of the
Doctrine and Declaration of the Spirit and Commission we received from the True
Personal God without us, even the man Christ Jesus in Glory.


His form of Cursing.
Therefore in Obedience to my Commission, I do pronounce Sam. Hooton and W.S.
for their Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit that sent me, Cursed and Damned
Souls and Bodies, from the presence of God, Elect, Men and Angels to Eternity.

FINIS.

