PROPOSALS For Printing by Subscription, the Second, Third and Fourth Volumes
OF THE French Book of Martyrs, Or HISTORY of the Famous Edict of Nantes.
Which Three Volumes with the First already Published, CONTAIN An Account of
all the Persecutions that have been in France, from the beginning of the
Reformation (there) down to this present Time, comprehending the Reigns of
Henry III. Henry IV. Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. The whole Work Faithfully
Extracted from all the Public and Secret Memoirs that could possibly be
procured, by that Learned and Judicious Divine Mounsieur Bennoit. Printed first
in French by the Authority of the States of Holland and West-Friezland, and now
Translated into English.
With Her Majesty's Royal Privilege.

THE First Volume of this French Martyrology already Published, having fully
answered the Expectations of the Curious, it has occasioned several Gentlemen
to desire a speedy Publication of the whole Work; but seeing that cannot be
done with the Expedition expected without Great Expense, I shall therefore to
gratify those who are impatient for the remaining Volumes, make Proposals for
Printing the Second, Third and Fourth by way of Subscription, not doubting but
that such a Seasonable Work as this is, (which has been Patronized by the
States of Holland, and born a Second Impression there in a few Weeks) will meet
with answerable Encouragement here, seeing her Majesty's Royal License for the
Printing of it, and the Expectations of so many Great Persons as have desired
it in our own Language, will not a little recommend it to the English Nation.
As for the Author, his Preface to the First Volume does yet promise fairer
things, as his Correspondence for the carrying on so Great a Work extending to
such distant places, his access to so many Public and Private Libraries, as
well as to the Cabinets and Studies of the Exacter sort, where Eugitive Pieces
secure themselves. His Assistances by Manuscripts and Collections, especially
those of the Learned and Ingenious Monsieur Tesserean, and the Memoirs he left
at his Death, with other helps, which will best appear in the Work it self.

If History be properly Consecrated to preserve to Posterity the Remembrance of
things the most remarkable that fall out in the World, it cannot be denied, but
that the deplorable End of the Liberty which the Protestants enjoyed so long a
Time in France, is one of the most Memorable Accidents that merits to be taken
in hand for the Information of succeeding Ages. There is not any thing in that
Revolution which does not deserve particular Refl^ctions; upon whatever
Circumstance a Man fixes his Mind, he shall find enough to exercise his
Thoughts either at wondering at the Malice and Fury of those that were the
Authors of it, or in admiring at the Patience of those that were envelop'd in
it. It is not to be imagined what has passed in that Kingdom upon this
Occasion, especially within these last Thirty Years. It was very necessary
therefore to establish things in their true Light, and to Collect in a History
all the sorrowful Accidents of this Revolution, ( we having as yet no Faithful
Collection of them any where extant) to the intent that thereby a durable and
perpetual Monument might be erected, of a Catastrophe worthy to be Eternized in
all its Circumstances, and therein an Account given of all the Martyrdoms and
Persecutions which in France have befallen those who for these Fourscore and
ten Years have lived in that Kingdom under the Faith of the most Solemn Edict
that ever was Published.

The PROPOSALS are,
I. THAT these Second, Third, and Fourth Volumes will contain about Three
Hundred Sheets, which shall be Printed on the same Paper, Character and Size
with the First Volume already Published, that Paper and Character being the
very same with these Proposals. II. That the Price of these Three Volumes to
Subscribers shall be Twenty four Shillings in Sheets, to be paid at four equal
payments, viz. Six Shillings in hand (for the speedy carrying on the Work) Six
Shillings upon the Delivery of the Second Volume, Six Shillings more at the
Delivery of the Third, and 6 s. at Delivery of the Fourth. III. And for the
further Encouragement of those who promote it, any Gentleman who will subscribe
for six Books, shall have a seventh Gratis, which will reduce the Price of the
Three Volumes to about One pound six pence three Farthings. IV. The Price of
these Three Volumes to those that do not Subscribe, shall not be less than
Twenty seven Shillings in Sheets. V. All who intend to Assist in the
Advancement of this Useful Work, are desired to send in their Subscriptions
with all speed unto the Undertaker here undernamed, where Printed Receipts
shall be given them; and if they arise to a competent Number, the Second Volume
shall be published by Christm^ss next, and the Third and Fourth by Lady Day
following. VI. That to render the Work Complete, there shall be a large
Alphabetical Table to each Volume. VII. Those who expect the Benefit of these
Proposals, are to send in their First Payment before the 24th. of December
next, for after that Day no Subscription shall be taken in.
PPOPOSALS are to be had of the UNDERTAKER John Dunton at the Raven in the
Poultrey, London and the Country.

There is Newly Published,
THe Genuine Remains of that Learned Prelate Dr. Thomas Barlow, late Lord
Bishop of Lincoln, containing diverse Discourses Theological, Philosophical,
Historical, etc. in Letters to several Persons of Honor and Quality. To which
is added, the Resolution of many abstruse Points; as also Directions to a Young
Divine for his Study of Divinity, and Choice of his Library, with great Variety
of other Subjects. Published from his Lordships Original Papers. Price Bound 6
s.

Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.


