A Descent from France: OR, THE French INVASION of England, CONSIDERED and
DISCOURSED. LICENSED, May 10. 1692.
THat there is, or at least has been, an intended Invasion from France, Headed
by King James, is too apparent; and that the greatest Encouragement to such an
Undertaking, must be the expected, if not promised Succors ready to join him
upon the Descent, is as plainly evident. Now that there can be such a Party of
Englishmen, and those professing themselves Protestants too, (for the Romanists
are no part of our wonder) whose Reasons and Sense can be so lost and depraved,
as to conspire with such a Design, is not a little stupendous.

The business of this Paper therefore, is to examine, What Consequences they
can expect from the Success of such an Invasion; and what Patriots they shall
make themselves, in Assisting the Return of King James?

In the first place, Do they flatter themselves, because, forsooth, the
greatest part of our Invaders, for the more plausible pretext, are composed of
English, Scotch, and Irish, Natives and Subjects to the Crowns of England, that
therefore King James's Service (so poor a mask) is all the business of this
Expedition? Have we forgot since so lately in Ireland, the French King could
hardly hold the Vizor on till the Conquest of that Kingdom, where the very
Irish themselves began to be jealous (and with too much cause) of their
pretended Friends, but intended Lords, the French? And that no Anguis in Herba,
no French Reserve lies at the bottom of this Invasion.

Secondly, Do they think this Succor to King James, tho in so important a
Service as Resettling him upon his Throne, can deserve any grateful Return? and
upon that Encouragement they found the Safety of their Religion and Liberties,
in any Promises of Security from that Obligation. Alas! is it so late since
woeful Experience convinced them, that Acknowledgment or Gratitude, are no part
of a Popish King's Principle; witness, the unkind return he made to that very
Church of England, that more than once, were so exemplarily zealous for
securing the Crown upon his Head, in their strenuous opposition against both
the Bill of Exclusion, and Monmouth's Insurrection. And if both those deserving
Services, those accumulated Obligations were such feeble Cobweb-Lawn; shall any
thing done in his Service now, make a stronger Tie upon him? No, quite to the
contrary. For example, The Church of England had then twice obliged him, and
never once offended him; besides, there was not only a Coronation Oath, but his
first voluntary Declaration at his assumption of the Government; one would
reasonably think enough to bind him to Performance. But how little all those
Bonds signify, when the Cancelling Hand of Rome came into Play; we have but
too much reason to remember. And if all those Ties, I say, could not hold then;
what can we hope for, when there neither is, nor can be any Tie at all to hold
him now? For example; suppose the blind and mistaken Frenzy of some of our
Protestant Zealots, (if that name can be proper for them), could remo^^ him to
his Throne; what shall they deserve for it, any more than the Title of
^^p^^f^^^ble Servants? Their turning him out from the Throne, together with the
remembrance of the dear Irish Blood shed by them, and the rest of our Faults,
are such Capital Transgressions, that the restoring him into it again, will not
be half our Expiation. And supposing he Publishes the most mollyfying
Declaration upon his Landing, that all the Eloquence of Rome can put together;
shall that oblige him? No, so far from it, that it neither is, nor can be any
more than a scroll of wast Paper. For supposing the Contents of it should run
in these flattering Insinuations, viz. What wondrous Clemency he would show us
upon our return to our Allegiance, and with what Moderation he would Reign over
us, upon our re-admitting of him to his Throne, with all the most solemn
Protestations, and what not. Now as it is unlikely that King James should ever
return without Opposition, and undoubtedly a very strenuous one; it being
impossible we should be all drawn in with the specious Bait of sweet words, and
fair Promises; and consequently, he must have a Blow for it. Supposing,
nevertheless, I say, his Party so strong, and his Success so great, as to
recover his Kingdoms: Upon such a recovery, whatever he promises in his
Declaration, is from that Moment, null and void. For the Consideration is not
performed, and consequently, the Obligation cancelled. For instance, he comes
not in by our Submission, and return to our Allegiance, but by Force and
Conquest. And as such, not only his Declarations, but his very Coronation Oath,
without the stretch of a mental Reservation, are all actually absolved. And if
Law, nor Oaths, Service, nor Fidelity, as beforementioned, were able to keep
his Romish Zeal in any Bounds or Limits before; what shall the loosening of 'em
all expect now? And consequently what driving Jehu must we look for, when that
black Day comes, (which Heaven of its mercy keep far from us.) And whatever
private Gratuities or Favors some particular Eminent Protestant Hands may
possibly receive for their signal Services in this Revolution, nothing of sense
but must conclude us the miserablest Nation and People in the World.

Besides, could we look for Miracles, and expect a Reign of Clemency from him,
our Religion and Civil Rights secured; what a Crew of Irish Dear-Joys that come
over with him, are here to be rewarded, all Preferment and Honors, nay, the
fat of the Land to be cantoned out amongst them: And consequently the Power in
these confiding Hands, the whole Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty of England
must live under the check and awe of Tories and Rapparees, and submit to all
the Insults of Miscreants and Vagrants; and well we compound so cheap.

Nay, though some People fancy we shall at least enjoy this Blessing of being
eased from Taxes by his Return; it is so much a mistake, that in the other
Extreme, that very shadow vanishes too. For what must this Expedition cost the
French King, and what must all his Irish Arrears, and other infinite
unacountable Sums amount to, which must all lie upon this ruined Nation to
satisfy, with a very courteous Complement into the Bargain, if the French King
will graciously and mercifully please to demand no more. Nay, perhaps the whole
Charge of his several Years Naval Preparation; (for had King James continued on
his Throne, most of all that Expense had been saved) must lie at our Door, a
Score too terrible even to think of; and take it altogether, a very grateful
Payment out of the Protestant Pockets to so prodigious a Champion of the
Protestant Religion, as King L^^^s.

But for once (though contrary to common sense) granting we should allow all in
his Favor, that the most zealous Jacobite can pretend, viz. That King James
upon his return to the Throne, shall to a tittle perform every particular
Article in his very Declaration, as plausible soever as it may be penned, viz.
We'll suppose, that the French King shall disclaim, directly or indirectly, all
Pretensions whatever to England, that the Restoration of his Friend King James
is his only part and design in this Expedition; and King James on the other
side, shall abjure all manner o^ violation to the Laws, shall support the
Protestant Religion, and (making a Seamark of his former Wreck,) shall
peaceably keep up to the full observance of so generous a Profession: granting
all this, I say, and whatever other imaginary Security his dreaming Party can
form to themselves; nevertheless, in the fairest Face, let us observe the
dismal and tremendous Effects of his Restoration. It Is known to the whole World
to what the French Ambition tends, viz. Universal Monarchy. And it is as
notoriously famous what Desolations and Ravages the Arms of France have made,
and how formidable that Successful Destroyer is, even to the whole united
Powers of Europe. And as his present Majesty King William, is, possibly,
(without a vanity) the Leading Champion of the whole Confederacy, and all
little enough to make head against France; upon King James's return to the
Throne, here is not only so potent an Arm as the Alliance of Britain lopt off
from the Confederacy, but added to the Strength of France. For tho in his Reign
before, he only stood Neuter, with little or no other Assistance to his
Idolized Grand Lewis, than his heartiest Vows and Prayers for the success and
prosperity of that encroaching Enslaver of Mankind: Yet now he will lie under a
more pressing obligation; and the least return even of common Gratitude for his
remounting him on his Throne, will be to list under that Tyrant's Standard, and
joining the Arms of England, to the finishing and crowning the whole Designs of
that universal Aspirer. And as the whole Confederacy already, is little enough
to match him; upon this Revolution in England, it is impossible to ex^ect less
than that the whole Cause of Christendom must sink, and all Eur^pe truckle
beneath him. And whilst the English hands must be^^ so great a part in th^s
fatal Turn (to give it no harder Name) what is it but a making our selves the
Monsters of Mank^nd, the inevitable instruments and Tools to that grand
Cutthroat of Christend^m. And what has some little palliation on his side, as
having the pretense of Renown and Honor, in the Quest of Laurels and
Enl^rgement of Empire, etc. will on our part amount only to Butchery and
Desolation, for mere Butchery and Desolations sake. The Gl^ry, if any, will be
Lewis's, and the Infamy England's. Infamy indeed, (if we meet with no worse
Reward) when we consider what barbarous part we must act in the yoking and
shackling of Europe. But suppose it end^ there, and that will be the only Brand
in the English Scutcheon: And that Lewis in his grasp of Universal Empire,
shall exclude England from any part of his Feudatories, and Tr butaries, viz.
he shall make Golden Promises to King James, and once in his life (his first
virtue of that kind) keep Faith, and no worse follow, (a very unlikely
Flattery:) yet what an Eternal Shame to the Old English Honor, the sleeping
Dust of our Third Edward, and Fifth Henry, and indeed the whole British
Chronicles, is our portion, in aggrand^zing of France to that prodigious Bulk
and Growth, and dwindling our selves to that diminutive and despicable state
and condition, as are and must be the unavoidable consequences of King James's
Restoration.

Granting the Jacobites therefore, all their own Delusions can shape, that King
James shall forget and forgive; shall rule by Law, and turn a Saint upon a
Throne: And that the disinterested Lewis shall have no other Designs upon
England, but purely King James's Assistance; yet still the most they can look
for, is perhaps, to enjoy a little English Liberty (upon their own supposition)
during the short Remnant of King James's Days, whilst his Gray Hairs, perhaps,
shall fill the Seat: But I wonder any reasonable man, that pretends but to
common Sense, can think it possible that France should engross the Dominion of
Europe, and England ever hope to continue the only Exempt from the Universal
Yoke; Is there that Frenzy so mad as to fancy it? No, all our best Hopes will
be to be swallowed last, and the annexing of Britain, a Province to France;
and consequently to groan under all the Slavery and Vassallage of a French
Government, is the undoubted Fate of England; and hereby the Restoration of
King James, in its favourablest Aspect, brings no less Fatality along with it,
than entailing of Misery upon us to the end of the World; and all the Honor
our Protestant Restorers will reap, is to be the Ruin and Curse of their whole
Posterity, their very Names and Memories loathed and abhorred to all succeeding
Generations.

London: Printed for Richard Humphryes, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
1692.


