A Description of the City of AETH and Situation of the Castle, with an exact
Journal of the Siege, begun the 17 th of May New Style, till the Capitulation
on the 5 th of June, and Surrender on the 7 th Together with the New
Fortifications made by the French, 1667.
map of city of Aeth The Explanation
A. The Mons Gate. B. The Brussels Gate. C. The Tournay Gate. D. A Horn-Work.
E. The Half Moon of Vallon. F. The Half Moon of Coffres. G. The Half Moon of
Recollets. H. The Half Moon of Brabanoon. I. The Half Moon of Cambren. K. The
Half Moon of Tournay. L. The Flemish Half Moon. M. The Mons Half Moon. N. The
Luxemburg Bastion. O. The Hanault Bastion. P The Burgundy Bastion. Q. The
Namur. Bastion. R. The Limburg Bastion. S. The Brabant Bastion. T. The Flanders
Bastion. U. The Artois Bastion. X. An Outwork. Z. The Old Castle. 9. The
Anti-Court.



AETH is a City in Hanault, seated on the River Dendre, 14 Miles North from
Mons, as many South from Audenard, and about 20 South West from Brussels. It is
a place of good Trade for Linen, and by reason of the Situation near the
borders of these three Provinces of Hanault, Flanders, Brabant, it has been at
several times well Fortified, especially by the French, after they had taken it
in the Year 1667, for it being granted to them by the Treaty of Aix la
Chappelle, Mounsieur Vauban was set to Work, and by great cost it was made a
most regular Fortification; which made this most advanced Frontier a place of
great Strength. The French was obliged to restore at the Peace of Nimeguen; and
belonged to the King of Spain until this present Year.

May 17th, Aeth was Invested on all sides to the 27th of the same Month in this
manner.

The Troops which composed the Army of the Marshall de Catinat and above 20000
Pioneers, being arrived before Aeth the 17th of May and the Posts about it
having been posessed, they began to Work on the Lines of Circumvallation. The
same Day the Army of the Marshall Duke de Villeroy made a motion and stretched
it self as far as Ligne. The Countess de Roeux Wife of the Governor of Aeth
and greatest part of the Women and Maids having obtained permission of the said
Marshall (whose Army made the Siege) went out of the said City. The 18th they
began to work on the Lines and to make Bridges over the Dendre. The Mareschals
de Villeroy and Catinat with Mounsieur Vauban and other general Officers went
to view the Ground toward the Abbey of Cambron, and it was Resolved to put into
the said Abbey 6 Battallions and a Regiment of Dragoons with order to entrench
themselves, and to clap other Troops in Lens in order to shut up the passage
from the Enemy. The 19th they continued to bring all things necessary for the
Siege of the Place, and the Enemies continued to make a very great fire with
Cannon almost without any effect. The 20th the Marshall Duke de Villeroy left
Ligne with his Army, and went and encampt at Osticke where the General Quarters
were; the Rightwing at Papigny and the Left at Hamede. The Marshall Duke de
Boufflers having had Advice that the Prince de Vaudemont had moved the first
Line of the Army he Commanded as far as Leubeck upon the Senne a little on this
side Hall, made also his Army advance as far as Neaville beyond Soignies. In
the Morning the Mareschals de Villeroy and de Catinat made a review of their
Armies, and after sent them out to Forage.

The Lines of Circumvallation being finished, they sent the Pioneers home again
to their Houses; the same Day about 8 of the Clock at Night they opened the
Trenches by two several ways on the side of Brussels Gate; the Count de Tesse
Lieutenant General mounted on the Right with Mounsieur de Salis Brigadier and
the Sieur de Puy Vauban chief Ingineer and two Battallions of the Regiment of
Poveton and of la March, they made about 1500 Fathom of Trench, and joined in
the Morning the two Attacks by a Parallel of 200 Paces from the place; all
there works having been made and brought to an entire degree of Perfection
without the loss of one Man. The 21d the Marshall de Villeroy made a movement
of his Army, and advanced the Left-wing toward the River Dendre over which he
cast several Bridges. That Evening he sent a great Detachment to learn News of
the Enemy; The same Day a Convoy of 10 pieces of Cannon and 400 Wagons laden
with Ammunition and with the Baggage of the Officers was attackt at the Valley
of Maude two Leagues from Tournay, from whence it was sent by a part of the
Troops of Bavaria consisting of 200 chosen Men Horse and Foot; but a party of
the Convoy being advanced at the noise, charged them with so much Vigor that
the Commander of the Party was killed with eighteen of his Men and the rest put
to flight without any other loss on our side than of three Soldiers Killed, and
a Lieutenant of the Swiss Wounded, and so the Convoy arrived safe in the Camp.

On the 22th The French opened their Trenches before Aeth, and were advanced to
the Glacis of the Counterscarp; the same Day their Cannon began to play upon
the Town: The Besieged made a Sally with good success, killing several of the
Enemy, and Demolishing some of their Works, after which our Men retired in good
Order.

The Night following the Marquess de Vin Lieutenant General Mounted the
Trenches with the Marquess de Vilray Brigadier and 2 Battallions of Anjou's and
one of Tournay's. The Count de Garcey Marshall de Camp mounted on the Left
with 2 Battalions of Humiers and that of Vexin, they pushed on the 2 Trenches
within 200 Fathom of the Place, where they were joined the 23th by a Parallel.

The same Day the Marquess de Constans, who had Orders to throw himself into
Aeth to command there, was taken Prisoner by the Troops of the Marshall de
Villeroy, and he was conducted the 24th. to Mons. In the Evening they had
Advice that the Elector of Bavaria observing that the Post he had taken at
Deynse was of no use to him had abandoned it, and made his Army repass through
Ghent on its way to join that of the King of England, taking his way behind the
great Skelt.

Major General Fagell who camped near Newport came with 12 Bartallions to
possess the Post at Deynse, upon this News the Marquess de Crequi received
Orders to set forward with his Detachment from those that were upon the Lay,
to approach the Army of the Marshall de Villeroy at his Camp of Osticke. The
Marquess de Montreville came in his room from Courtray, with 20 Battallions.
The Marshall de Boufflers made at the same time his left Wing to advance near
to Cambron, so that the Three Armies were in a readiness to join in a few Hours
time when there should be occasion for it. The 24th. in the Evening the Trench
was mounted on the Right by the Marquess de Lorray Lieutenant General, and
Mounsieur Lee Brigadier, with a Battallion of Artois, of one Catinat, and one
of Berry; and on the Left by the Marquess de Clerembeaut Marshall de Camp,
with 2 Battallions of Vermandois, and of one Beauquis. That Night and the next
Day they carried on the Trench to the bottom of the Glacis of the Counterscarp.
The 25th. at Night the Chevalier de la Test Lieutenant General, and Monsieur
Blegny Brigadier, mounted the Trench on the Right, with Three Battallions of
the Regiment of Stoapa; and the Marquess d'Vlpion on the Left, with a
Battallion of Stoapa, and Two of Salis: They finished that Night with the Sap
the Communication of the Two Trenches by a Parallel, and they wrought to raise
5 Batteries of 6 Pieces of Cannon each.

May 26, The Enemies sent out some Musketeers, which posted themselves in the
Hedges to incommode the Workmen, but they were soon driven away by a
Detachment of 200 Men.

The Chevalier de la Tesse received a Contusion and a Wound on the Side; they
lost since the Investure of the Place but 14 or 15 Soldiers, amongst which
there were only Two Officers. At Night the Chevalier de Gossion Lieutenant
General, and the Marquess de Biron Brigadier, mounted the Trench on the Right,
with 2 Battallions of the Regiment of Malevrier, and another; and the Marquess
de Haurtcourt Marshall de Camp, with 3 Battallions of Sarebeck: That Night
they finished the 5 Batteries, and the 27th. at Four of the Clock in the
Morning they began to Fire from the Batteries upon the right Face of the
Bastion of Limbargh, and against the half Moon of Brabancon, and the rest
against the half Moon of Cambron, and the left Face of the same Bastion of
Limbargh.

On the 28th Brigadier Lumly being sent out with a Detachment, met with a
French Party of 200 Carabineers and 150 Hussars, Commanded by the Colonel of
the Hussars, with whom having engaged, the Colonel with a Captain and 20 Men
were brought in Prisoners, besides several killed.

The 29th The Army Commanded by Villeroy and Boufflers were very near each
other, and advantageously Posted to cover the Siege, which was carried on by
Catinat. The 30th Sir William Russell a Captain in Colonel Coy's Regiment,
Commanding an advanced Party in his Majesty's Army, Attackt a party of the
Enemy, and took a Colonel and a great many Prisoners.

On the 31st. The French Carried on their Trenches, and begun to batter the
Works of the Town, but with the loss of several Officers; Monsieur Vauban the
French King's principal Ingeneer received a Confusion on his Thigh by a Musket
Shot. On the 1st of June the Garrison of Aeth made a very good Defense, having
opened their Siuices which drowned several of the Enemy, and several Officers
in carrying on their Trenches, though they endeavored by their Bombs and
Cannons to destroy its effects: There were several Bombs throw'd into Town
which set several Houses on Fire; but were presently Extinguished.

On the 2 of June his Majesty was Encamped at Genap, and the Elector of Bavaria
at Deynss, Villeroy and Boufflers were at their Camps at Lessines and Silly,
not far from Aeth: The 3d a person who got out of Aeth reported the French took
a Half Moon after two Repulses and loss of Men, and that there Bombs at last
had ruined the Sluices, which had much in convenienced the Besieged, putting
several of the Streets in the Town under Water; but at the same time broke the
Enemies Bridges of Communication. Monsieur Negrini Lieutenant General and
second Ingeneer of France was Killed.

June 4, One part of the Right of the Bastion of Limburg fell 14 or 15 Yards in
length, and we shot from the Breaches of these two Bastions to render it more
easy, and cast in Faggots to fill up the Ditch. They perpetually shot from two
Batteries of 12 Morters each, which were placed upon the Cover'd-way before the
Demilune, to hinder the Besieged from retrenching behind their Bastions. 5 in
the Morning the Ditch was almost filled up, both by Earth and Faggots, in such
manner that the Breach became so even that 30 Men might Mount by the Bastion of
Namur, and 20 or 25 by that of Limburg.

The Marshall Catinat Commanded 20 Companies to Attack the place under the
Command of Count de Mercia, with an assurance that they could not miss of
carrying the place by Assault. But at two of the Clock the Besieged being
afraid of a Storm, and being without hope of any succor beat a Parley, and
demanded to Capitulate: They sent Hostages at 4 of the Clock; and a little
after the Capitulation was agreed upon, in the following Terms.

I. THat the Besieged should deliver a Gate to the French at 6 in the Morning
upon the 6th instant; and upon the 7th That the Garrison should go out at 10 in
the Morning by the Breach, with Arms and Baggage, Drums beating, Colors
flying, but without either Cannon or Mortar, and to be conducted in 3 Days to
Dendermond, and not to Brussels or Audenard as they had requested. II. That
they should have 50 Wagons to Transport their Baggage, Sick and Wounded; which
as it is said was above Five Hundred. III. That they should have 6 Covered
Wagons, but however that they should be searched. IV. That they should deliver
up all the Deserters, and that they should send in Five particular Officers to
be kept for Hostages till such time the five Prisoners kept in the Citadel of
Anvers since the taking of Namur, upon pretense of pay due to the Inhabitants
by the French.
These Articles were executed; the 7th the Garrison marched out to the Number of
2500 Men, with the Governor the Count de Reaux, and next to him the Prince of
Anhault at the Head of them, and other Principal Officers, who saluted
Marshall Catinat, and the Duke de Tholouze as they passed along. The five
Hostages for the Prisoners of Namur were delivered, to wit the Prince of Chimay
Knight of the Golden Fleece, The Sieur de Catoire Lieutenant Colonel, a Major
and two Captains, and were the same Day conducted to Valenciennes. Above one
half of the Italian Battallion Deserted and put themselves into the Kings
Service: So the City of Aeth one of the strongest and best Walled places of
Europe was taken in 13 Days after the Trenches opened, with the loss only of 50
Soldiers, and the Sieur Courtin Ingenier Killed, The Sieur Frene Gentleman of
the Horse to Marshall Duke de Villeroy, the Sieur Emonia Captain of the
Artillery Carriages dead of their Wounds. 150 Wounded, among whom was a Captain
of Granadiers and 7 Ingineers,

LONDON: Printed by G. Croom at the Blue-Ball near Bride-well-Bridge, 1697.
Price. 2 d.


