THE EFFECTS and VIRTVES OF The CROSS or MEDAL OF THE GREAT PATRIARCH St.
BENEDICT.

Extracted out of the Original Printed in Germany.

Printed in the Year, 1669.

(...) of St. Benedict; the effects whereof are so wonderful and so well known
in Germany.

It is not a very easy matter to find out the first beginning of these Medals,
but it is manifest, that St. Benedict, and his Disciples, had the Cross
evermore in singular honor and veneration. The chief furniture which this Holy
Patriarch carried with him into his Cave at Sublake, was a Cross which may be
seen remaining this day in St. Scholastica's Monastery: and for a pledge of his
affection to his Disciple St. Maurus, he gave him when he sent him into France
a parcel of the true Cross. If he drives away that importunating Black bird, or
rather that wicked Devil which tempts him to impurity^ if he discovers the
poison which they present to him in a Cup to destroy him: if he expels the
Spirit of Pride from the heart of one of his Religious Monks: in a word, if he
will dissipate the delusions of a fantastical conflagration, it is by means of
the sign of the Cross.

With this divine Instrument St. Maurus, and St. Placidus wrought all their
Miracles invoking at the same time, the name of their Holy-Father Benedict,
though he was then living, and his devotion to the Cross was spread abroad,
throughout the whole Order proportionably to its extent and dilation, witness
Rabanus Maurus in his age, who left to posterity such variety of ingenious
Crosses: and perhaps it proceeds from the examples of St. Maurus, and St.
Placidus, that an occasion was taken to join the invocation of St. Benedict
with the sign of the Cross, and even to grave upon Medals his name, in manner
of a Cross. This practice was abolished, and the very memory thereof, would
have been totally lost and extinguished, had not a miraculous discovery of
these Medals been made in th^se latter times in Germany, after the manner here
ensuing.

In the year 1647. a diligent inquest being (...) after Witches, and Sorcerers
in Bavaria, and several of them having been executed in the Town of
Stroubingen: some amongst the rest, averred to the Judges in their ^rogatories
and Examinations, That their charms and enchantments could work no effect upon
the Persons or Cattle of the Castle of Nattremberg, neighboring upon the Abbey
of Mettew, of St. Benedicts Order; by reason of certain Sacred Medals, which
were there in certain places by them discovered.

And the said Medals being accordingly found, no one (no not the Witches
themselves) could explicate the meaning of the Characters engraved upon them,
till such time as they light upon an ancient Manuscript in the Library of the
said Abbey, which perfectly (...) the difficulty.

A relation of all this was made to the Duke of Bavaria, who being desirous to
inform himself exactly of all the particulars, caused the aforesaid Medals and
Manuscripts to be brought to Ingolstad, and from thence to Monachiu^ and having
(...) one with the other, it was concluded, That the said Medals might
profitably be made use of, without the least suspicion of Error, or danger of
Superstition: Of all which, he caused a Verbal Process (as they term it) to be
drawn up.

As concerning the Characters, engraven upon these Medals; each Letter betokens
a Word: And behold the Figure with the Interpretation.

V.R.S.N.S.M.V..S.M.Q.L.I.V.D.

IHS

medal(amulet) C.S.S.M.L.N.D.S.M.D

C.S.P.B.

medal (amulet)

In one of the Faces of the Cross, where you see these Letters, C. S. S. M. L.
N. D. S. M. D. you must read, Crux Sacra Sit Mihi Lux.
Non Draco Sit Mihi Dux.


Which founds somewhat after this sense in our Language. O Sacred Cross, be
thou my light.
Satan, avoid out of my sight.


The four Letters standing in the four Corners, to wit, C. S. P. B. signify
these words, Crux Sancti Patris Benedicti.
The Cross of the Holy Father Benedict.


In the other, these two Verses are traced, Vade retro Satana, nunquam suade
mihi vana;
Sunt mala que libat, ipse venena hibat.
Avaunt foul ^iend, vain are thy tempting charms;
The Cross shall ward me (...) p^yseneus harms.


The Fame of this (...) being noised abroad in the Country; every devout
person was desirous to have some of these Medals: whereupon many were made
according to the model of them which were thus found; Which being blessed by
the Religious of the Order, have produced wonderful effects, principally
against all sorts of Charms and Witchcrafts; as they have happily experienced,
who have made use of them for themselves, or for their Cattle bewitched, by
dipping them in the water which they gave them to drink. And surely no one can
doubt but that the use of such Sacred things is very profitable, when
accompanied with true Faith in God, and devout Veneration toward the Holy
Cross, and the Glorious St. Benedict, both whose wonders are otherwise so well
known. And by the sensible effects, which this devout practice daily produces,
we may judge of the invisible effects which it operates in the Souls of them,
who use it with the requisite dispositions.

FINIS.

