THE Earl of PEMBROKE's Case, In Reference to the Amendments in Wales.
PHilip late Earl of Pembroke, the Brother of the now Earl, having married the
Duchess of Portsmouth's Sister, in pursuance of an Agreement made by him, in
Order to that Marriage, for settling a Jointure on her, in case she survived
him, did by Demise and Redemise settle the yearly Rent of 1500 l. per annum,
issuing out of all his Manors and Lands in Glamorganshire; and in order to
make that a good Security to her, he having only in those Manors and Lands an
Estate tail-male, with a Remainder in tail-male to the now Earl, did in the
Year 1675, levy a Fine, and suffer two Recoveries of all the said Manors and
Lands, but declared no Use of the Freehold and Inheritance thereof, there being
no Agreement for settling of any Estate on any Issue, Male or Female, on that
Marriage. After the suffering of which said Recoveries, the said Earl Philip
died without Issue-Male of his Body, having only one Daughter, the Lady
Charlott Herbert, now Wife to the Lord Jefferye; after whose Death the now Earl
of Pembroke being informed that there were several gross Errors in the said
Fine and Recoveries, did bring several Writs of Error to reverse them, but
could procure no Return to be made on the said Writs of Error, till after the
late Lord Chancellor Jefferye had concluded the said Marriage of his Son; and
two Persons were sent down by the said late Lord Chancellor to procure
Amendments to be made in the said Fine and Recoveries; and then the Records and
Writs were returned in the Court of King's Bench, as they were amended; some of
which Amendments being illegal, and not warranted by Law, and being procured by
Power and Practice, the Effect of the said now Earl's Bill is to set aside the
said Amendments.

The Amendments that the now Earl i^sists on to be made contrary to Law, is in
altering of the Date of the Writ of Covenant, which was dated the 1st of April,
in 27 Car. 2. which was altered and dated the 3d of November before, which they
did to make it precede the Dedimus, for taking that Fine which was dated that
5th of November; which being an Amendment of an Original Writ, is not warranted
by the Common Law, or any Statute, and was so declared by the Judges, whilst
this Bill was depending in the House of Peers; and that the Judge of the Grand
Sessions could not by Law make any such Amendment.

The other Error insisted upon by the said Earl, is, That Earl Philip being not
in Person in Wales at the time of suffering the Recovery, a Commission, styled
a Dedimus, issued to several Commissioners named in that Commission, impowering
three or two of them to take the Earl's, naming his Attorney to appear for him,
as Vouchee in the said Recovery, which was executed by Herbert Salladin, and
Francis Negus; whereas Herbert Salladin was no Commissioner named in that
Commission, and so was executed but by one of the Commissioners therein named,
and therefore void. To supply which gross Error, the Judge of the Grand Sessions
ordered a new Dedimus to be made, and put Herbert Salladin's Name into it, on
pretense that the former Dedimus was lost; and that Herbert Salladin was
therein named one of the Commissioners for taking the said Warrant of Attorney;
which Pretense none of the Lord Jefferye's Witnesses, being examined at the
Lords Bar, could make out or prove that Herbert Salladin's Name was ever in
such Commission.

And the now Earl insists on it, that his Name was not in any such Commission
for these Reasons:

First; That in the Entry of the said Commission on the Roll on Record, neither
the Christian Name nor Surname of Herbert Salladin is mentioned.

Secondly; That the Name of Herbert Salladin in the Commission for taking the
Fine, is written on a Razure; and it is very probable it was so put into that
Commission after the Sealing of it; the Lord Jefferye's Witness who made out
the Commission, being examined to that Matter at the Bar of the Lords, said, he
could not tell that it was put in before the Sealing thereof.

Thirdly; That when the now Earl sent for Copies of the Records and
Proceedings, in order to bring his Writs of Error, Mr. Hughes, the Officer who
kept the Records in the Grand Sessions, did in examining the Copies of the
Records, after they were writ, refuse the now Earl's Agent to peruse the
Dedimus, and did read to him the Dedimus for taking the Fine, instead of the
Dedimus for taking the Warrant of Attorney for the Recovery.

That the Deputy Prothonory, who had the Custody of the said Records being then
Agent for the Lady Pembroke, did in the Year 1688, before the said Amendments
were made, offer one Anthony Phillpott one hundred Guinea's, if he would
acknowledge he had seen the said Dedimus for taking the said Warrant of
Attorney, and that the Name Herbert Salladin was therein written as a
Commissioner.

All which the now Earl thinks are plain Proofs that Herbert Salladin was never
therein named a Commissioner; and that the Commission is purposely imbezzl'd
and concealed, that the Truth might not appear; that there might be a Pretense
for making a new one under Color that the former Commission was right and
casually lost.

In the engrossed Bill there is a Proviso to make the said Manors and Lands,
in case the said Fine and Recoveries should be reversed, liable to such Debts
of the said Earl Phillip, as the said Manors and Lands would have been subject
unto, if the said Fine and Recoveries had stood good, and not been reversed.
And also that in case the other Manors and Lands descended and come to the
Lady Charlotte, Wife of the now Lord Jefferyes, should not be of the Value of
10000 l. to be sold, being her Mother's Portion, to make those Manors and
Lands, of which the said Fine and Recoveries were levied and suffered, liable
to the raising of such Part of the 10000 l. as the said other Manors and Lands
shall not amount unto.

THE CASE OF THE Earl of Pembroke.


