Maij 13 1643.
At the Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of Money and other
Necessaries for the ARMY.
IT is Ordered, That in regard of the present, urgent occasions for money for
supply of the Army, the Collectors nominated and appointed for the weekly
Assessements in the City of London, and jurisdiction of the Lord Major of the
said City, do forthwith repair to the several houses of persons assessed
upon the Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament for the weekly Assessement,
and gather in the several sums by them due to be paid, and move them to pay
the whole assessement for three months, at one entire payment; And that they
do give unto the Collectors, appointed to take distress where the sums
assessed are unpaid, a note of the names of all such persons as upon Tuesday
next shall not have paid in the sums of money, then due by them to be paid
upon the weekly assessement, and the particular sums of money that shall then
be unpaid by each person; To the intent the said Collectors appointed to
distraine, may make distress for the sums assessed, and due, and unpaid,
according to the said Ordinance in that behalf made; And such sums of money as
the said Collectors appointed to distraine as aforesaid, shall receive without
Distress, are hereby ordered to be paid to the Collectors first nominated for
the said weekly assessements, in the several Wards and places where such
moneys shall be paid, which Collectors are to pay the same to the Treasurers in
Guild Hall, upon receipt thereof. And such moneys or goods as shall be
distrained on, shall be paid, and carried to Guild Hall London; And lastly, it
is Ordered that this be Printed and published.

Martin Dallison Clerk to the said Committee.


