Anno Regni GULIELMI ET MARIAE, REGIS and REGINAE Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae, TERTIO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Twentieth Day of March, Anno Dom.
1689. In the Second Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, WILLIAM
and MARY, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King
and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc.

And from thence Continued by several Prorogations and Adjournments to the Two
and twentieth Day of October, 1691. being the Third Session of this present
Parliament.

DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion on one side and the Scottish unicorn on the
other

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
Deceased; Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. MDCXCI.

Anno Tertio GULIELMI and MARIAE.
An ACT for Granting to Their Majesty's certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and
other Liquors, for One Year.
Most Gracious Sovereigns,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, having entered into a serious Consideration of the Extraordinary
Expenses in which Your Majesty's are Engaged for the necessary Defense of Your
Realms, and for the Effectual carrying on the War against France, and being
desirous to raise Aids and Supplies proportionable to the greatness of the
Occasions, have toward the Ends and Purposes aforesaid, found it Expedient to
Grant for One other Year certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors;
And have Unanimously Given and Granted, and do hereby Give and Grant unto Your
Majesty's the several Additional Rates, Duties, and Charges upon Beer, Ale, and
other Liquors herein after Expressed, and do most humbly beseech Your Majesty's
that it may be Enacted:

And be it Enacted by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That from and after
the Seventeenth Day of November in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six
hundred and ninety one, there shall be throughout this Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, Raised, Levied, Collected,
and Paid unto Their Majesty's, and Their Successors, during the Space and Term
of One Year, commencing from the Seventeenth Day of November aforesaid, and no
longer, for Beer, Ale, Cider, and other Liquors, Brewed, Made, Imported, or
Sold, by way of Excise, over and above all other Duties, Charges and
Impositions by any former Act or Acts Set and Imposed, the several Duties,
Charges and Impositions herein after mentioned, and in manner and form
following, that is to say:

For every Barrel of Beer or Ale above Six shillings the Barrel, which from and
after the said Seventeenth Day of November, and before the Five and twentieth
day of July, One thousand six hundred and ninety two, shall be Brewed by the
Common Brewer, or any other Person who does or shall Sell, or Tap out Beer, or
Ale Publicly, or Privately, or at Fairs, Wakes, Chutes, Bydrinkings, or
otherwise, to be paid by the Common Brewer, or such other Person or Persons
respectively, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity, One
shilling Nine pence.

And for every Barrel of such Beer or Ale Brewed on or after the said Five and
twentieth Day of July, and before the Eighteenth Day of November, One thousand
six hundred and ninety two, Two shillings Six pence.

For every Barrel of Beer, or Ale of Six Shillings the Barrel or under, which
from and after the said Seventeenth day of November, and before the Five and
twentieth day of July, One thousand six hundred and ninety two, shall be Brewed
by the Common Brewer, or any other Person or Persons who does or shall Sell, or
Tap out Beer or Ale, Publicly or Privately, to be Paid by the said Common
Brewer, or by such other Person or Persons respectively, as aforesaid, and so
proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity, Three pence.

And for every Barrel of such Beer or Ale Brewed on, or after the said Four and
twentieth day of July, and before the said Eighteenth day of November, One
thousand six hundred ninety two, Six pence.

And for every Barrel of Vinegar, or Vinegar-Beer Brewed, or Made, on, or after
the said Five and twentieth day of July, and before the said Eighteenth day of
November, One thousand six hundred ninety two, of any English Materials, by any
Common Brewer, or Vinegar Maker, or other Persons for Sale, to be Paid by the
Maker thereof, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity, One
shilling.

For every Barrel of Beer, Ale or Munt Imported, After the said Seventeenth day
of November, and before the said Five and twentieth day of July, from beyond
the Seas, or from the Islands of Guernsey or Jersey, and so proportionably for
a greater or lesser Quantity, to be Paid by the Importers, before Landing,
Three shillings.

And for every Barrel of such Beer, Ale or Mum, Imported on, or after the said
Five and twentieth day of July, and before the said Eighteenth day of November,
One thousand six hundred ninety two, Six shillings.

For every Tun of Cider, or Perry Imported on, or after the said Five and
twentieth day of July, and before the said Eighteenth day of November, One
thousand six hundred ninety two, from beyond the Seas, and so proportionably
for a greater or lesser Quantity, to be Paid by the Importer, before Landing,
Ten shillings.

For every Hogshead of Cider, and Perry, Made and Sold by Retail, after the
said Seventeenth day of November, and before the said Five and twentieth day of
July, One thousand six hundred and ninety two, to be Paid by the Retailer
thereof, One shilling Three pence, and so proportionably for a greater or
lesser Measure.

And for every Hogshead of Cider and Perry, Made and Sold, as aforesaid, on or
after the said Five and twentieth day of July, One thousand six hundred ninety
and two, and before the said Eighteenth day of November, One thousand six
hundred ninety and two, Two shillings Six pence, and so proportionably for any
greater or lesser Measure.

For all Metheglin, or Mead made for Sale, whether by Retail or otherwise, on
or after the said Five and twentieth day of July, and before the said
Eighteenth day of November, One thousand six hundred ninety and two, to be Paid
by the Maker for every Gallon, One penny.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Rates
and Duties of Excise hereby Imposed on the Liquors aforesaid, shall be Raised,
Levied, Collected, Recovered and Paid unto Their Majesty's, and Their
Successors, during the term before mentioned, and in the same Manner and Form,
and by such Rules, Deductions, Allowances, Ways and Means, and under such
Penalties and Forfeitures as are mentioned, Expressed and Directed in and by
one Act of Parliament made in the Twelfth Year of the late King Charles the
Second, Entitled, A Grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale and other
Liquors for the Increase of His Majesty's Revenue, during His Life; And one
other Act made in the said Twelfth year of the Reign of the said late Kings
Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for Taking away the Court of Wards, and
Liveries, and Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, and Purveyance, and for
Settling a Revenue upon His Majesty in lieu thereof; And also in and by one
other Act of Parliament made in the Fifteenth year of His said late Majesty's
Reign, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better Ordering and Collecting the
Duty of Excise, and preventing the Abuses therein; or in one Act of Parliament
made in the First year of the Reign of Their present Majesty's, Entitled, An
Act for an Additional Duty of Excise upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors, or by
any Law now in Force, Relating to the Revenue of Excise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons who do
or shall usually Entertain, or Lodge any Waggoners, Carriers, Strangers or
Wayfaring Men, shall be taken and esteemed Retailers, within the meaning of
this Act.

And that Their Majesty's may not be prevented of the Duties hereby Granted by
any Frauds or Practices to lessen the same, Be it further Enacted, That no
Person or Persons (Except Victuallers, Retailers, and Common Brewers)
Inhabiting in any Market Town, or in any City, or Suburbs of the same, or in
any Town Corporate, or in parts Adjoining to any City, or Suburbs, Town
Corporate, or Market Town, where there is or shall be a Common Brewer or
Brewers, Brewing, Making or Selling Strong Beer or Ale, and Small Beer, who
within the space of One year next before the Seventeenth of November, in the
Year One thousand six hundred and ninety, did not Brew, or Make the Strong
Beer, Small Beer, or Ale, Drunk, Consumed, Spent or Sold in his or their
respective Houses, Outhouses, or other places, shall not during the Term
aforesaid, Brew or Make any Strong Beer, Strong Ale, Small Beer, or Ale, to be
Drunk, Consumed or Spent in his or their respective Houses, or Families, under
pain to Forfeit for every such Offense, Twenty pounds.

Provided, That in case any Person within the space of a year before the said
Seventeenth Day of November, One thousand six hundred and ninety, did usually
Brew the Strong Beer, Small Beer and Ale, Drunk and Spent in the House or
Houses where he and his Family have Inhabited, for the use of himself and his
Family, and shall remove his Family to any other House, It shall and may be
Lawful to and for such Person to Brew his own Ale or Beer, as he did before,
and not be liable to the said Penalty.

And be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be Lawful to and for the
Commissioners of Excise, and Justices of Peace respectively, upon any
Information exhibited before them, for any Offense committed against the Laws
of Excise, to Summon any Person or Persons (other then the Party or Parties
Accused) to Appear before them at a certain day, time and place, to be inserted
in such Summons, and to give Evidence for Discovery of the matter in
Controversy before them, and in case of Neglect, or Refusal to Appear, or if
upon Appearance such Person or Persons shall refuse to give Evidence when he
shall be thereunto required; Every such Person so making Default shall Forfeit
and Lose for every such Offense any Sum or Sums of Money, not exceeding Forty
shillings, to be Imposed, Recovered, Levied and Disposed in manner as herein
after is mentioned.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Fines,
Penalties and Forfeitures by this Act Imposed, shall be Sued for, Recovered and
Levied by such Ways, Means, and Methods, as any other Fine, Penalty or
Forfeiture is, or may be Recovered by any Law or Laws of Excise, or by Action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record
at Westminster; And that one Moiety of such Forfeiture or Penalty shall be to
Their Majesty's, Their Heirs, and Successors, and the other Moiety to him, or
them that shall Discover, Inform or Sue for the same.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon any
Person or Persons Exporting any sort of Strong Beer, Strong Ale, Cider or Mum,
according to the true intent and meaning, and pursuant to the Directions of an
Act made in the First Year of Their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the
Exportation of Beer, Ale, Cider and Mum, The Commissioners and Officers of
Excise, where the Entry thereof shall be made, are required to make Allowance,
or Repay, as well the Additional Duty of Excise by this Act Imposed upon all
such Beer, Ale, Cider and Mum, as the Duty in the said Act mentioned unto the
Brewer, or Maker thereof within One Month after such Exportation, deducting the
Three pence per Tun for the Charges of their Officers, by the said before
mentioned Act directed to be deducted.

And to the end Their Majesty's may be duly answered the Rates and Duties
hereby Granted, and intended in the Proportions designed, Be it further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That no Brewer, or Victualler who does, or shall
Sell, and Deliver Beer, or Ale to any of their Customers in Cask, do or shall
without giving Notice to the Supervisor, or Gauger Appointed for the Place and
Division where such Brewer, or Victualler does, or shall Inhabit, Cleanse,
Carry off, or convey away any part of his or their Guile of Beer, or Ale,
before the whole of such Guile shall be Brewed off, and be in the Tuns, Backs,
or Coolers, and until such Officers shall or might have taken an Account of the
same, and of the distinct Qualities thereof in their respective Vessels; At
which time the Brewer, or Victualler, or his, or their Servants working the
same, in case he, or they intend to make a party Guile thereof, shall declare
to such Gauger, or Officer, how much thereof he intends to make into Strong
Beer, or Strong Ale, and how much into Small, upon Penalty of Forfeiting Twenty
shillings for every Barrel of Beer, Ale, or Worts, he shall so Cleanse, Carry
off, or Convey away, over and above the Penalties already Imposed for Conveying
away, or Concealing Beer, or Ale; And in case such Brewer, or Victualler, or
their respective Servants, Brewing such Beer, or Ale shall refuse to Declare to
such Officers how much of their Guile, or Brewing they intend to make into
Strong Beer, or Ale, and how much into Small, It shall be Lawful for such
Officer to Return and Charge the whole of such Guile to be Strong, and such
Brewer, or Victualler shall Pay the Duties thereof accordingly; And in case
after such Gauge taken, or Declaration made, such Brewer, or Victualler shall
make any Increase of the Strong Drink so Gauged, or Declared by any ways or
means whatsoever, such Increase shall be Deemed and Taken to be, and proceed
from mixing Small Beer with such Strong Beer, or Ale, and such Brewer, or
Victualler shall Forfeit Twenty shillings for every Barrel so Increased over
and above the Penalties already Imposed for mixing Small Beer with Strong, and
so proportionably; And further, that if any Brewer, Victualler, or Retailer
shall out of the Brew House, or Place of Brewing, Start or Mix any Small Beer,
or Small Worts with or amongst Strong Beer, Strong Ale, or Strong Worts in
Cask, such Brewer, Victualler, or Retailer, so doing shall Forfeit and Lose for
every such Offense Twenty shillings.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That the Duty of Excise Granted by this
Act shall be Chared on, and Paid by the Common Brewer, and not by the Retailer,
or Spender, save only where the Retailer Brews for Retailing in his own House
or Houses, and does not Buy his Drink of any Common Brewer; Any thing in this
Act, or any other Law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act,
or any Clause, or Proviso therein contained shall not Continue, or be of Force
longer then for the said Term of One year, Commencing from the said Seventeenth
day of November, One thousand six hundred and ninety one, other then for the
Levying and Collecting the Arrears of the Rates, and Duties, Granted by this
Act, which shall be Unpaid at the end of the said Term; And for the Levying
such Fines, Forfeitures, and Penalties Imposed by virtue of this Act, as shall
not be Levied, and Paid before the end of the said Term.

And forasmuch as the Collectors, Supervisors, Gaugers, and other Officers of
the said Excise, and Officers concerned therein by reason of the Greatness of
the said Duty, and the extraordinary Powers they have given them, in Charging
or Raising the same, being resident in most Parts of the Kingdom where
Elections of Members to serve in Parliament are made, have very frequently,
either by Threats or Promises so prevailed upon several Electors, that they
have absolutely been Debarred of the freedom of giving their Votes, which
according to the known Constitutions of this Kingdom every Person ought to
Have, and Enjoy, when he is to Choose his Representative: For remedy of which
Mischief, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
Second Day of February, One thousand six hundred ninety one, every Collector,
Supervisor, Gauger, or other Officer concerned in the Charging, Collecting, or
Managing the said Duty of Excise, that shall either by Letter, or Message, or
Word of Mouth, endeavor to persuade any Elector to give, or dissuade any
Elector from giving his Vote for any Person, or Persons that shall be put in
Nomination to be Elected a Member or Members of Parliament, shall for so doing
forfeit the Sum of One hundred Pounds, one Moiety thereof to the Informer, and
the other Moiety to the Poor of the Parish, where such Offense shall be
committed, to be Recovered in any of Their Majesty's Courts of Record, by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Wager of Law,
Protection, or Essoign, or more then One Imparlance shall be Allowed: And
further, That every Person or Persons that shall be Convicted in any such
Action, Bill, Plaint, or Information, of the said Offense, shall immediately
from and after such Conviction be Disabled, and Incapable of ever after
Executing any Office or Place concerning the said Duty of Excise.

And it is hereby Declared and Enacted, That true Notes in Writing of the last
Gauges Made or Taken by the said Gaugers, shall be left by them with all
Brewers, Makers, or Retailers of Beer, Ale, or other Exciseable Liquors
respectively, or some of their Servants, at the times of their taking the said
Gauges, containing the Quantity and Quality of the Liquors so Gauged, upon
Penalty of Forty shillings for every Offense, or Neglect of the said Gauger or
Gaugers.

FINIS.

