AN ACT FOR INDEMPNIFYING OF Such PERSONS as have Acted FOR THE Service of the
Public.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.

depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1657.

AN ACT FOR INDEMPNIFYING OF Such Persons as have Acted for the Service of the
PUBLIC.
WHereas the Parliament, his Highness the Lord Protector and the Council, by
reason of some late Rebellions and Insurrections within this Commonwealth, and
upon occasion of many dangers and troubles threatened from beyond the Seas, have
been necessitated to employ diverse Persons in their Service for suppressing the
said rebellious Insurrections, and for securing the Peace, and carrying on the
Public Service of these Nations, which the said Persons have willingly engaged
in; whereof his Highness and Parliament well approving, and being fully
satisfied of their Fidelity and Integrity in such their Actings, and that their
Endeavors tended only to the Security and Advantage of the Public, and
Reformation of these Nations, without any sinister respects of their own; and
therefore conceive themselves to be obliged in Honor and Justice, that they be
protected and acquitted from any Suit, Action, Prosecution or Molestation, for
or in respect of such Service.

Be it therefore Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector and this present
Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That all and every person and persons,
who have before the twentieth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and
seven, mediately or immediately, acted or done, or commanded or appointed to be
acted or done, or by command or appointment have acted or done any matter or
thing whatsoever by Virtue or Authority of Parliament, his Highness the Lord
Protector or the Council, by any Commission or Instructions from them, or any
of them, That every such person and persons shall be, and are hereby fully
Acquitted, Pardoned, and Discharged of and from all Actions, Suits,
Indictments, Informations, Prosecutions, Judgments, Executions, and
Molestations whatsoever, for or concerning the same; but that such their
Actings and Service, and whatsoever has ensued thereupon, shall in no time
hereafter be called in question, whatsoever be the Quality of the person, or of
whatsoever kind or degree, Civil or Criminal, the Offense or Injury is supposed
to be; And that no mention be made thereof in time to come, in Judgment or
Judicial Proceedings, but that the same be had and put in perpetual Oblivion;
And that the said Council for all Acts done, or advised to be done by them as
aforesaid, shall be and are hereby likewise Acquitted, Pardoned, and
Discharged, to all intents and purposes aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Richard Hill Esquire;
Samuel Wilson, John Sparrow, Humphrey Blake, Robert Turpin, and Richard
Blackwal, the late Commissioners for Prize-Goods, and John Carleton Treasurer,
and every of them shall be, and are hereby Indempnified and Discharged, for and
concerning the Payment of all such Sum and Sums of Money, which by Order of his
Highness and Council, they, or any of them have paid in to the use of the
Commonwealth; And that the said late Commissioners for Prize-Goods, and the
said Treasurer, shall not be liable to any Suit or Action for the Payment of
the said Sums of Money, or any part thereof.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Acts,
Ordinances and Orders of Parliament, which have heretofore been made for the
Encouragement, Indemnity, and saving harmless of such persons as have in any
sort, either by Sea or Land, Engaged, Acted, or done any matter or thing
whatsoever, by Authority, or for the service or benefit of the Parliament; and
every Clause, Article and Sentence in them, or any of them contained, shall
stand and remain, and be in full force, effect and virtue, and be put in
practice and execution, and be pleadable and made use of in all Courts of
Justice, as fully and absolutely to all intents and purposes, as if the same
had been now made particularly for such purpose.

And be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
the Words, Clauses and Sentences in this Act, and in all and every other the
Acts, Ordinances and Orders of Parliament, shall be adjudged, expounded, and
taken in all Courts and proceedings of Justice, and elsewhere, most beneficial
and available unto all and singular the persons that have so acted or done by
any Authority as aforesaid, or for the service or benefit of the Parliament, or
otherwise as aforesaid. And for further relief and ease of the persons
aforesaid, It is likewise Enacted; That if upon any Trial or Proceedings in any
Court of Justice, it shall appear unto the Judge or Judges before whom such
trial or proceedings shall be had or made, that the party that has so acted by
the Authority as aforesaid, or for the service or benefit of the Parliament, or
otherwise as aforesaid, has not had or cannot have such full benefit and just
relief, as by this and other Acts, Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament, was
intended or provided, Then such Judge and Judges shall, and are hereby required
to make Certificate thereof to the Barons of the Exchequer; upon which
Certificate the said Barons, or any two of them shall have Authority, and are
hereby empowered, authorized and required, upon such Certificate and Complaint
of the party grieved, to proceed and do therein to all intents and purposes;
And they have hereby given unto them the same and like Powers, Authorities,
Jurisdictions, and Course of Proceedings in all Causes for relief of such party
or parties grieved, in any the premises, as any Committee or Commissioners of
or for Indemnity appointed by Authority of Parliament, had or might have
lawfully exercised.

And it is hereby lastly Ordained, That all and every the matters and things in
this Act mentioned and intended shall be adjudged and deemed to be within all
and every the said Acts, Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament, as if the same
had been particularly expressed and comprised in the same, and to have relief,
and be proceeded in accordingly.

Provided, That nothing in this Act be construed or understood to revive the
Power of the said Committees in any of the former Acts or Ordinances of
Parliament named, so as to enable the said Committees to intermeddle in the
execution of any of the said Acts or Ordinances.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church. Anno Dom. 1657.


