Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS. Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
Vicesimo secundo and vicesimo tertio

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth day of May, Anno Dom. 1661.
In the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord
Charles, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

And there continued by several Prorogations, to the Fourteenth day of
February, 1669/70.

And thence continued to the 22th of April 1671. On which day the said
Parliament was Prorogued to the 16th day of April which shall be in the year
1672.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of
arms

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queens most Excellent Majesty's. MDCXC.

Anno XXII and XXIII. CAROLI II. REGIS. An Act for the Relief and Release of
Poor Distressed Prisoners for Debt.
FOrasmuch as very many Persons now Detained in Prison, are miserably
Impoverished, either by reason of the late unhappy Times, the sad and dreadful
Fire, their own Misfortunes, or otherwise, so as they are totally disabled to
give any Satisfaction to their Creditors, and so become, without Advantage to
any, a Charge and Burden to the Kingdom, and by Noisomness (inseparably
incident to extreme Poverty) may become the occasion of Pestilence and
Contagious Diseases, to the great Prejudice of the Kingdom; Be it therefore
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for any Justice of the Peace of any County, City, Town or Liberty within
the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, by
Warrant under his Hand and Seal, to require the Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of
any Prison within his respective Jurisdiction, to bring without delay, the Body
of any Person, being in Prison for Debt on the Fourteenth day of April, One
thousand six hundred seventy and one, or Damages (and Petitioning such Justice
to be Discharged) to some convenient Place within the distance of One mile from
the said Prison, and shall certify the Cause and Causes of the Imprisonment,
before the same Justice; Which Warrant every such Sheriff, Jailer and Keeper is
hereby commanded to obey.

And in case such Prisoner coming before such Justice, shall take an Oath to
this effect; (Viz.)

I A. B. do upon my Corporal Oath Solemnly Profess and Declare before Almighty
God, That I have not any Estate Real or Personal, in Possession, Reversion, or
Remainder, of the Value of Ten pounds in the whole, or sufficient to pay the
Debt or Damages for which I am Imprisoned; And that I have not directly, or
indirectly Sold, Leased, or otherwise Conveyed, Disposed of, or Entrusted all
or any Part of my Estate, thereby to Secure the same, to receive or expect any
Profit or Advantage thereof, or Defraud or Deceive any Creditor or Creditors
whatsoever, to whom I stand Indebted.

Then after the taking of such Oath, the said Justice shall Remand the Prisoner
to Prison, and shall give a Certificate there of in Writing under his Hand and
Seal, to the same Prisoner, to be served upon such Person or Persons, his, or
her Executors or Administrators, or to be left at the place of the usual abode
of such Person or Persons at whose Suit the Prisoner stands Charged and
Imprisoned, thereby appointing as well the said Person or Persons, as the said
Prisoner, to appear before the Justices at the next General Quarter Sessions of
the Peace to be holden for the same County, City, Town, or Liberty; When if it
shall appear upon Oath (which Oath the said Justices are Empowered to
Administer) that the said Certificate was so served or left Forty days or more
before the said Sessions; And that the said Oath taken by the said Prisoner, be
not disproved by good Testimony of any credible Person or Persons upon Oath, to
be administered by the said Justices, by virtue of this Act; Then the said
Justices being satisfied therein, shall direct there Warrant under their Hands
and Seals, commanding the said Sheriff, Jailer, or Keeper of the Prison, to set
at Liberty, and Discharge the said Prisoner, if Imprisoned for the Causes
aforesaid, and no other, without paying any thing for Fee, or Chamber-Rent;
which Warrant shall be a sufficient Discharge to the same Sheriff, Jailer or
Keeper of Prison, and no Action of Escape, or other Action, shall be brought
against them, or any of them, for the same in any wise.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Tha^ when such
Prisoner or Prisoners for Debt shall have Legally taken the said Oath in this
Act proposed to be taken, and shall have duly Summoned his or their Creditor or
Creditors; And after the said Forty days time, if the said Creditor or
Creditors shall make no Discovery of his, her, or their Estates, nor disprove
nor detect the said Prisoner or Prisoners of Forswearing themselves; That then
if such Creditor or Creditors will not be satisfied therewith, (that the said
Prisoner or Prisoners may be set at Liberty) or will insist to have the said
Prisoner continued in Goal, That then the said Creditor or Creditors shall at
his and their own proper Costs and Charges, allow and pay Weekly a reasonable
Maintenance to the said Prisoner or Prisoners, such as the said Commissioners
of the Peace, or any Three of them, in their respective Divisions, shall order
and appoint, not exceeding Eighteen pence a Week; and upon Nonpayment of the
same Weekly the said Prisoner or Prisoners shall be set at Liberty, according
to the true intent and meaning of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon any Action of
Escape, or other Suit, brought or to be brought against any Sheriff, Jailer or
Keeper of any such Prison, or other Officer or Person, for any thing done in
Obedience to this Act, it shall and may be lawful to and forsuch Sheriff,
Jailer or Keeper of Prison, or other Officer or Person, to Plead the General
Issue, and give this Act in Evidence, which shall be a good and sufficient
Discharge, and shall save harmless every such Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of
Prison Pleading the same; And if the Plaintiff in any such Action shall be
Nonsuited, or Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall have double Costs,
to be Taxed by the Court where such Action shall be brought.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
notwithstanding the Discharge of the Person of such Prisoner, as aforesaid,
upon taking the Oath aforesaid, all and every Judgment had and taken against
him or her, shall be, and stand good and eff^ctual in the Law, to all intents
and purposes against the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels
only of the said Prisoner so Discharged as aforesaid; And it shall and may be
lawful to and for such Creditor of such Prisoner or Prisoners so Discharged as
aforesaid, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to take out any new
Execution against the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of
such Prisoner or Prisoners (his or her wearing Apparel, Bedding for him and his
or her Family, and Tools necessary for his or her Trade and Occupation only
excepted) for the satisfaction of his or their said Debt, in such sort, manner
and form, as he or they might have done, if the person or persons of such
Prisoner or Prisoners had never been taken in Execution; Any Act, Statute or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
at any time after the taking of the said Oath, the said Prisoner or Prisoners,
shall upon any Indictment or Indictments, or by his or their own Confession, or
Verdict of Twelve Men, be Convicted of False Swearing in any Point or Article
contained in the said Oath, as he or they shall or may be by force of this Act,
Then such Prisoner or Prisoners so Convicted as aforesaid, shall suffer all
such Pains and Forfeitures, as by the Statute of Quinto of Queen Elizabeth, are
to be inflicted upon any person Convicted of wilful Perjury. And also the Court
by Process out of which the Prisoner was Imprisoned, shall Award a Capias ad
satisfaciendum infinite, or other Process, directed to any Sheriff or Sheriffs,
for the Apprehending of the said Prisoner, and upon Return of Cepi Corpus,
shall remand the said Prsoner into the Prison whence he or she was dismissed,
there to remain in Execution, in such manner and condition as he or she was
before his or her said Enlargement; And then and from thenceforth he or she
shall be adjudged to be in Execution fully, as if he or she had never been
discharged thereof; And the Execution and Executions upon his or her Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, if any such happen to be, after
his or her said Discharge out of Prison, and before he or she shall be
Remanded, shall stand also good and effectual in Law; Any Act, Statute, or
Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any
Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of Prison, shall refuse or delay to Bring, or
Discharge or set at Liberty any Prisoner according to the Order of the Justice
or Justices, to be made in manner as aforesaid, Every such Sheriff, Jailer or
Keeper of Prison, shall forfeit and pay to such Prisoner detained contrary to
such Order, the Sum of One hundred pounds, to be Recovered by Action of Debt in
any Court of Record, and shall be also subject to any Fine and Punishment, as
the said Justices shall Order or Award.

And whereas it is found by common experience, That such person or persons that
are under Arrests, or committed to the Custody of Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Goalers,
Keepers of Prisons or Goals, are much abused and wronged by extorting of great
Fees, Rewards, and other Exactions, and put to great Expenses under pretenses
of favor, or otherwise, whereby they are greatly oppressed, and many times
ruined in their Estates: For remedy thereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That if any Undersheriff, Bailiff, Sergeant at Mace, or other
Officer or Minister whatsoever, shall at any time or times hereafter, have in
his or their Custody, any person or persons, by virtue or color of any Writ,
Process, or other Warrant whatsoever, It shall not be lawful for such Officer
or Officers to convey or carry, or cause to be conveyed or carried, the said
person or persons to any Tavern, Alehouse; or other Public Victualling or
Drinking house, without the free and voluntary consent of the said person or
persons, so as to charge such Prisoner with any Sum of Money for any Wine,
Beer, Ale, Victuals, Tobacco, or any other things whatsoever, but what the said
person or persons shall call for, of his, her, or their own accord; And shall
not demand, take or receive, or cause to be demanded, taken or received,
directly or indirectly, any other or greater Sum or Sums, then what by Law
ought to be taken or demanded for such Arrest, Taking, or Waiting (until such
person or persons shall have procured an Appearance, found Bail, agreed with
his or their Adversaries, or be sent to the proper Goal belonging to the
County, City, Town or Place where such Arrest or Taking shall be) nor take and
exact any other Reward or Gratuity, for so keeping the said person or persons
out of the Goal or Prison, then what he, she, or they shall or will, of his,
her, or their own accord, voluntarily and freely give; Nor take nor receive any
other or greater Sum or Sums for each nights Lodging, or other expenses, then
what is reasonable and fitting in such cases, or shall be so adjudged by the
next Justice of the Peace, or at the next Quarter Sessions; And shall not cause
or procure the said person or persons to pay for any other Wine, Beer, Ale,
Victuals, Tobacco, or other things then what the said person or persons shall
voluntarily, particularly, and freely call for.

And that every Undersheriff, Jailer, Keeper of Prison or Goal, and every
person or persons whatsoever, to whose Custody any person or persons shall be
delivered or committed, by virtue of any Writ of Process, or any pretense
whatsoever, shall permit and suffer the said person or persons, at his and
their will and pleasure, to send for, and have any Beer, Ale, Victuals, and
other necessary food, where, and from whence they please; as also to have and
use such Bedding, Linen, and other things, as the said person or persons shall
think fit, without any purloining, detaining or paying for the same, or any
part thereof; nor shall demand, take or receive of the said person or persons,
any other or greater Fee or Fees, whatsoever, for his or their Commitment,
Release, or Discharge, or for his, her, or their Chamber-rent, then what is
allowable by Law, until the same shall be Settled by Three Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, of each particular County, City, and
Town corporate, in their several Precincts; And for the City of London, and
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, the Two Lords Chief Justices of the Kings
Bench and Common Pleas, and the Lord Chief Baron, or any two of them, and the
Justices of the Peace of the same, in their several Jurisdictions.

And likewise that the said Lords Chief Justices, Lord Chief Baron, and
Justices of the Peace in their several Jurisdictions, and all Commissioners for
Charitable Uses, do use their best endeavors and diligence to examine and find
out the several Legacies, Gifts and Bequests bestowed and given for the Benefit
and Advantage of the poor prisoners for Debt, in the several Goals and Prisons
in this Kingdom, and to send for any Deeds, Wills, Writings, and Books of
Accounts whatsoever, and any person or persons concerned therein, and to
Examine them upon Oath, to make true Discovery thereof, (which they have full
Power and Authority hereby to do) and the same so found out and ascertained, to
Order and Settle in some manner and way, that the Prisoners hereafter may not
be defrauded, but receive the full Benefit thereof, according to the true
intent of the Donors.

And that these Accounts of the several Legacies, Gifts and Bequests given and
bestowed upon the several Prisoners for Debt within this Kingdom, and the
several Rates of Fees, and the future Government of Prisons, be Signed and
Confirmed by the Lord Chief Justices, and Lord Chief Baron, or any two of them
for the time being, and the Justices of the Peace in London, Middlesex, and
Surrey, and by the Judges for the several Circuits, and Justices of the Peace
for the time being, in their several Precincts, and fairly written, and hung up
in a Table in every Goal and Prison, before the First day of November, One
thousand fix hundred seventy and one, and likewise be Registered by each and
every Clerk of the Peace within his or their particular Jurisdiction; And after
such Establishment, no other greater Fee or Fees then shall be so Established,
shall be demanded or received.

And whereas it is become the common practice of Goalers and Keepers of
Newgate, the Gatehouse at Westminster, and sundry other Goals and Prisons, to
Lodge together in one Room or Chamber and Bed, Prisoners for Debt, and Felons,
whereby many times honest Gentlemen, Tradesmen and others, Prisoners for Debt,
are disturbed and hindered in the Nightime from their natural Rest, by reason
of their Fetters and Irons, and otherwise much offended and troubled by their
lewd and profane Language and Discourses, with most horrid Cursing and
Swearing (much accustomed to such persons) Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That it shall not be lawful hereafter for any Sheriff, Jailer or
Keeper of Goal or Prison, to put, keep or lodge Prisoners for Debt and Felons
together in one Room or Chamber; but that they shall be put, kept and lodged
separate and apart one from another, in distinct Rooms, upon pain that he, she
or they which shall offend against this Act, or the true intent and meaning
thereof, or any part thereof, shall forfeit and lose his or her Office, Place
or Employment, and shall forfeit treble Damages to the Party grieved, to be
recovered by virtue of this Act; Any Law, Statute, Usage, or Custom to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Anno XXX. CAROLI II. REGIS. An Act for the further Relief and Discharge of
Poor Distressed Prisoners for Debt.
WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, made in the Two and twentieth
and Three and twentieth years of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles
the Second (In ituled, An Act for Relief and Release of Poor Distressed
Prisoners for Debt) Provision has been made for Relief and Release of such
Prisoners as were in Prison for Debt or Damages upon the Fourteenth day of
April, One thousand six hundred seventy and one, in such way and manner as in
the said Act is provided and declared; Notwithstanding which, the persons of
such Prisoners have not been discharged of their Imprisonments, the words Debt
or Damages mentioned in the said Act, being construed doubtful, as not
Warranting the Discharge of any Prisoner, unless Charged in Execution.

For Explanation whereof, and to supply other Defects which have obstructed the
good ends and purposes of the said Act, Be it now Enacted by the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That all persons being in Prison upon the Nine and
twentieth day of May, One thousand six hundred seventy and eight, being the
Anniversary day of His Majesty's Birth and happy Restoration, for Debt or
Damages, or for or upon any Action or Actions, or upon any Mean-Process for
Debt, Account or Trespass upon the Case, which Actions by Prosecution of Law
may be Judgments for Debt or Damages, or who have Judgments entered upon Record
against them, or are Charged in Execution, or Imprisoned upon Attachments for
Debt, or upon Outlawries before or after Judgment for Debts, or upon any other
Process whatsoever issuing out of any Court of Law or Equity, for the Cause of
Debt or Damages, or Costs only, whether the said persons were in Prison upon
the said Fourteenth day of April, One thousand six hundred seventy and one, and
have taken the Oath in the said Act mentioned, or have been Committed to Prison
since that time, who shall take the Oath in the said recited Act mentioned,
shall and may be Released and Discharged from their Imprisonments, in such way
and manner as such as were in Prison for Debt or Damages upon the said
Fourteenth day of April, One thousand six hundred seventy and one, by the
former Act were or might have been, in case the said Debt and Damages had been
ascertained by Judgment.

And all Justices of the Peace within their several Counties and Divisions, are
hereby Authorized and Empowered to put in Execution all such Powers, Directions
and Authorities, for the full Release and Discharge of such persons as were in
Prison on the said Fourteenth day of April, One thousand six hundred seventy
and one, as aforesaid, and of all such other persons as have been since that
time committed to Prison, and are in Prison on the said Nine and twentieth day
of May, as aforesaid, as the said former Act has made and provided for the
Release and Discharge of such who were in Prison for Debt or Damages upon the
said Fourteenth day of April, One thousand six hundred seventy and one, and
every Clause, Matter and Thing in the said former Act contained, shall be
construed and taken to the benefit and advantage of such as shall be in Prison
upon the said Nine and twentieth day of May, One thousand six hundred seventy
and eight, as fully and amply as by the said Act it ought to have been, for the
Benefit and Discharge of such as were in Prison on the said Fourteenth day of
April, One thousand six hundred seventy and one.

And whereas by the said former Act it is provided, That if any Creditor shall
insist to have his Debtor continued in Prison after he has taken the said
Oath, and will allow him a weekly Maintenance to be appointed by the Justices
of the Peace, not exceeding Eighteen pence the week, the same Prisoner shall
continue and be detained in Prison: Be it now Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That such weekly Allowance shall be paid to the Prisoner himself,
and not to the Goal-keeper, or any other person for him; and it within the
space of Three Months after such weekly Allowance by any Creditor, no Estate of
the Prisoner shall be discovered or made out before Two Justices of the Peace
of that County and Division where the said Prisoner is kept in Prison, then the
said Prisoner shall forthwith be discharged by Warrant under the Hands and
Seals of any Two Justices of the Peace of the same County and Division where
the said Prisoner shall be so in Prison, to the Keeper of such Prison in that
behalf directed, as fully and amply as if such Prisoner had been Discharged by
the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions, as in the said recited Act
is mentioned; and that then and from thenceforth the said weekly Allowance
shall cease and determine, as if the same had never been made.

And all Prisoners by this present Act, or by the said former Act Freed and
Discharged from their Imprisonments, are hereby Acquitted and Discharged of and
from the payment of Chamber-Rent, and all and every other Fee and Fees due to
the Jailer or Keeper of such Prison or Prisons in any manner or wise.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Prisoner
Discharged out of Prison by virtue of this present Act, or by virtue of the
said recited Act, shall at any time hereafter be Imprisoned for or by reason of
any Debt or Damages, or any Sum or Sums of Money contracted or grown due to, or
recovered by any person or persons at whose Suit the said Prisoner did then
stand Charged in any Prison, or any other person or persons to whom such
Prisoner did give notice under the Hand and Seal of some Justice of the Peace
of the same County, City or Place, the space of Forty days before the time of
his Discharge, of his intention to receive the benefit of this Act, and of the
way and course he intended to take for obtaining the same, before the time of
their Discharges, as aforesaid; But that upon any Arrest for such Debt,
Damages, or Sums of Money, it shall or may be lawful for them, showing a
Duplicate of their Discharge under the Hands and Seals of the Justices of the
Peace by whom they were Discharged, or of any Two of them, or of such Justices
of the Peace, in case such Prisoner be Discharged after an allowance of
Maintenance by the Creditor for Three Mouths, as aforesaid, which the said
Justices are hereby required to give to every Prisoner so by them Discharged,
to retain an Attorney to appear for them, and File Common Bail to every such
Action, and Plead thereunto; so that the Plaintiff, if he please, may recover,
and enter Judgment against such Prisoner, to be executed and levied upon the
Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels of such Prisoner so Discharged, as
aforesaid, his or her Wearing Apparel, Furniture for his or her Dwelling house,
the said Furniture not exceeding Ten pounds in value, and necessary Tools for
his or her Trade and Occupation only excepied, but not upon the person of the
Prisoner, the persons of such Prisoners being hereby for ever Freed and
Discharged from Imprisonment for any Debt, Trespass upon the Case, Duty, Sum or
Sums of Money, or thing thereunto relating, Contracted or due before the time
of their Discharge, having had notice, as aforesaid.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any Sheriff,
Jailer, and Keeper of Prison shall refuse and delay to bring and Discharge, and
set at Liberty any Prisoner or Prisoners, according to the Order of the Justice
or Justices of the Peace, made in pursuance of this Act, or of the said former
recited Act: Every such Jailer, Sheriff, or Keeper of Prison, shall forfeit and
pay to such Prisoners so detained contrary to such Order, the Sum of Twenty
pounds, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any of His Majesty's Courts of
Record, and shall also be subject to such Fine and Punishment as the said
Justices of the Peace shall upon complaint thereof to them made Order and Award.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon any Action of
Escape, or other Suit brought or to be brought against any Justice of the
Peace, Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of Prison, for any thing done in obedience to
this Act, it shall and may be lawful to and for any such Justice of the Peace,
Sheriff, Jailer and Keeper of Prison, to plead the General Issue, and give this
Act in Evidence, which shall be a good and sufficient Discharge, and shall save
harmless every such Justice of the Peace, Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of Prison
pleading the same; And if the Plaintiff in any such Action shall be Nonsuited,
or Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall have double Costs, to be Taxed
by the Court where such Action is brought.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That the Discharge of any verson or
persons by virtue of this Act, shall not amount unto, or be construed to Free
or Discharge any other person or persons jointly or severally bound for, or
liable to answer or satisfy the said Debt, or any part thereof, either as
Principal or Surety, but that such other person or persons shall be liable to
answer the said Debt and Damages in such manner, to all intents and purposes,
as they were before the Discharge of such Prisoner.

Provided also, That no person shall be Discharged by this Act, that has not,
or shall not before such Oath made, have remained in Prison by the space of Six
months.

Provided also, That no person by virtue of this Act shall be Discharged out of
Prison, who shall stand Charged in Execution with more then the Sum of Five
hundred pounds to any one person, Principal Money, and Damages.

Provided also, That no Creditor insisting to have his Debtor continued in
Prison, shall be bound to make any Weekly Allowance for the Subsistence of the
Prisoner, where the Father, Mother, Son or Daughter, or other person who by the
Laws of this Realm are bound to Maintain him in Discharge of the Parish, if he
were at large, are of sufficient Ability to Maintain such Prisoner.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, That if any Creditor insisting to have his
Debtor continued in Prison, and Ordered to make Allowance toward his
Maintenance, shall desire to have his Debtor, being a person formerly using any
Handicraft or Day-labour, removed to any public Workhouse, there to be kept at
hard Labor, and shall within One week next after notice of such Order for
making Allowance, at his own proper Costs and Charges, cause such Prisoner by
Habeas Corpus and Commitment, or other Order, to be removed to any public
Workhouse in the same County where the said Prison is, or within Twenty miles
distance of the said Prison, That then such Prisoner so removed to the said
Workhouse, shall and may be there held to Labor suitable to his Ability, and
the Creditor or Creditors shall-afterwards contribute toward his Maintenance,
only such Sum as over and above the profit of his Labor shall be requisite to
Maintain him, to be ascertained by the two next Justices of Peace; And in case
the profit of his Labor shall exceed the value of his Maintenance, One moiety
of the overplus shall go toward the payment of his Debts for which he remains
in Execution; the other Moiety shall be paid to the hauds of the said Prisoner,
the said Moieties to be distributed accordingly by the two next Justices of the
Peace.

And be it further Enacted, That after any person shall by virtue of this Act
have continued at any Workhouse by the space of Two years, he is then to be
Discharged from his Imprisonment, and enjoy the full Benefit of this Law.

And be it Enacted, That any Judge of such Court whereto such Debtor is a
Prisoner, or the two next Justices of the Peace to such Workhouse, shall and
may have power to commit such Debtor, being brought before him or them by
Habeas Corpus, or Order under the Hands and Seals of two such Justices, unto
any Workhouse within the County where such Prison is, there to remain according
to this Act.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That if any Prisoner that shall be
Released by virtue of this Act, shall at any time afterward be found or
suspected by any of his Creditors to have in ready Money, Goods or Chattels in
his own hands and possession, or in the hands of any others, to his or her use,
or in Trust for him or her, in value over and above what he or she is allowed
by this or the said former Act to have, other then such Goods in his Shop or
Workhouse as he shall have been Credited or Trusted with since the time of his
Discharge, and for what he shall be really Indebted at the time of his making
such Oath, and he or she will not or do not upon convenient Demand, pay his or
her Debt or Debts therewith, as far as the same will reach, That then, and in
such case, at the Request of any Creditor, the said Oath shall be tendered to
him or her again, by any Justice of the Peace in this Act before Empowered to
Administer the said Oath for Discharge or Prisoners, or by any Judge of the
Court wherein there is Judgment against him, which he or she refusing to take,
shall be Remanded to Prison in Execution for such Debt or Debts; Any thing in
this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to any person or persons in
Execution for any Fine on him or her Imposed for any Offense committed before
the said Nine and twentieth day of May, One thousand six hundred seventy and
eight.

Provided that such person or persons as is or are detained in Prison upon any
Mean Process, if it shall be desired by any Creditor, before any Justice of the
Peace to whom such Prisoner has applied for his Discharge, shall forthwith
give a Warrant to some Attorney to Appear, or File common Bail for him or them,
in the Court out of which the said Mean-Process Issued, and to receive a
Declaration at the Plaintiffs Suit, and that such Prisoner shall thereupon have
the full Benefit of this Law, as to the Liberty of his Person, against his said
Imprisonment upon the said Mean Process, and against any Judgment or Execution
that shall be had against him in that Suit, and against any other Suit that
shall be brought against him for the same Matter or Cause of Action, to all
intents and purposes, as fully and beneficially as if he had been Charged in
Execution at the said Plaintiffs Suit before the Nine and twentieth of May, One
thousand six hundred seventy and eight; but such Prisoner upon Mean-Process,
shall, in case of his refusal to give such Warrant of Attorney, lose the whole
Benefit of this Law.

Provided always, That no Merchant Stranger, or other Alien or Foreigner that
has been Arrested, and is in Prison on any Action or Suit, for or by reason of
any Debt, or other Engagement Contracted or Entered into beyond the Seas, shall
have any Benefit by this Act; but that all and every such Merchant Stranger, or
other Alien or Foreigner, shall and may be detained in Prison, and proceeded
against as it this Act had never been made.

Provided always, That no Prisoner shall be Discharged by virtue of this Act,
until he shall before the Justices of the Peace who are by this Act Empowered
to Discharge him, Declare upon his Corporal Oath (which Oath the said Justices
are hereby appointed to Administer) what Effects are belonging to him, or what
Debt or Debts are then owing to him within any of His Majesty's Dominions, or
elsewhere, and by whom, and for what Cause, and upon what Security; of all
which a Schedule shall be made in the presence of such Justices, and Subscribed
by the Prisoner, and shall be by such Justices Returned to the next Sessions,
there to be kept for the better Information of the Creditors of such Prisoner,
who, or such of them as will join, may thereupon Sue for such Debts, or so much
thereof as will reasonably satisfy them, in the name of the Prisoner, and
after the same Recovered and Received, to render the overplus (their own Debts
and Charges first deducted) to the Prisoner.

Provided always (and to deter all persons who are by the Charitable intention
of this Act to be Relieved, from abusing the Favor hereby to them intended)
That if any person, who shall in pursuance of this Act take this Oath for any
of the purposes hereby appointed, shall Forswear or Perjure himself, Then such
person being thereof lawfully Convicted, shall beyond, and over and above the
Penalties which may by the Law now in being be Indicted, suffer Imprisonment
for the space of Seven years, without Bail or Mainprise.

FINIS.

