depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp
AN ACT GIVING LICENSE FOR Transporting Fish in Foreign Bottoms. At the
Parliament begun at Westminister the 17th Day of September, Anno Domini, 1656.
BE it Enacted by His Highness the Lord Protector, and this present Parliament,
That it shall, and may be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever, to Buy,
and Transport out of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to any Part or Place
beyond the Seas, these following sorts of Fish in Foreign Ships or Bottoms, or
in the Ships or Bottoms of this Commonwealth, manned with any person or
persons whatsoever, any Act, Order, or Ordinance to the contrary
notwithstanding; And that the Custom to be paid for the same by the Natives of
this Commonwealth, be as follows. viz. For every hundred of Newland Fish,
containing six score, three pence. For every Hundred of Hake, containing six
score, six pence. For every hundred of Conger Dulce, six pence. For every Tun
of Pilchards, one pound five shillings. For every Barrel of winter Herrings,
white, full, and Packed, eight pence. For every Last of winter Herrings, white,
full, and Packed, containing twelve Barrels, eight shillings. For every Last of
winter Herrings, white, full, and unpacked, or Seasticks, containing eighteen
Barrels, eight shillings. For every Barrel of winter Herrings, white, shotten,
and Packed, four pence. For every Last of winter Herrings, white, shotten, and
Packed, containing twelve Barrels, four shillings. For every Last of winter
Herrings, white, shotten, and unpacked, or Seasticks, containing eighteen
Barrels, four shillings. For every Cade of winter Herrings, red, and full,
containing five hundred, four pence. For every Last of winter Herrings, red,
and full, containing twenty Cades, or ten thousand, six shillings. For every
Cade of winter Herrings, red, and shotten, containing five hundred, two pence.
For every Last of winter Herrings, red, and shotten, containing twenty Cades,
or ten thousand, three shillings. For every Barrel of summer Herrings, shotten,
white, and Packed, four pence. For every Last of summer Herrings, containing
twelve Barrels, shotten, white, and Packed, four shillings. For every Last of
summer Herrings, shotten, white, and unpacked, or Seasticks, containing
eighteen Barrels, four shillings. For every Cade of summer Herrings, red,
containing five hundred, two pence. For every Last of summer Herrings, red, and
shotten, containing twenty Cades, or ten thousand, three shillings. For every
Barrel of Salmon, one shilling and six pence. And all and every Stranger, or
Alien, to pay for every sort and kind of Fish before mentioned, double the
aforesaid Rates and Proportions respectively.

Provided always, and it is further Enacted, That it shall, and may be lawful
for any person or persons whatsoever, to Buy and Transport out of
Newfound-land, or New England, or any of the Ports thereof, any sorts of Fish
whatsoever, without paying any Custom, or other duty for the same.

And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act is to
continue until the five and twentieth of December, which shall be in the year
of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, and no longer.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1657.


