Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
DVODECIMO.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the Five and twentieth day of April,
Anno Domini 1660.

In the Twelfth year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES,
by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of
the Faith, etc.

London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1660, CVM PRIVILEGIO.

And Reprinted at Dublin by William Bladen Anno Dom. 1660.

Anno Regni CAROLI II.
AN OF ACT Free and General Pardon, INDEMNITY AND OBLIVION.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty taking into his Gracious and Serious
consideration the long and great Troubles Discords, and Wars, that have for
many years past been in this Kingdom, And that diverse of his Subjects are by
occasion thereof, and otherwise, fallen into and be obnoxious to great pains and
penalties: Out of a hearty and pious Desire to put an end to all Suits and
Controversies, that by occasion of the late Distractions have arisen or may
arise between all his Subjects, And to the intent that no Crime whatsoever
committed against his Majesty or his Royal Father, shall hereafter rise in
Judgment, or be brought in Question against any of them to the least
endamagement of them, either in their Lives, Liberties, Estates, or to the
prejudice of their Reputations, by any Reproach or Term of Distinction; And to
bury all Seeds of future Discords and remembrance of the former, as well in his
own breast as in the breasts of his Subjects one toward another: And in
performance of his Royal and Gracious Word, signified by his Letters to the
several Houses of Parliament now Assembled, and his Declarations in that behalf
published, Is pleased that it may be Enacted, And be it Enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, with the Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, First, That all and all manner of Treasons.
Misprisions of Treason, Murders, Felonies, Offenses, Crimes, Contempts and
Misdemeanors, Counseled, Commanded, Acted or Done since the first day of
January, in the year of our Lord, 1637. by any person or persons before the 24.
day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1660 other then the persons hereafter by
name Excepted, in such manner as they are hereafter Excepted, by virtue or
color of any Command, Power, Authority, Commission, Warrant or Instructions
from his late Majesty King CHARLES, or his Majesty that now is, or from any
other person or persons, deriving or pretending to derive Authority, mediately
or immediately from both or either of their Majesty's, or by virtue or color
of any Authority derived mediately or immediately of or from both Houses, or
either House of Parliament, or of, or from any Convention or Assembly, called
or reputed, or taking on them the Name of a Parliament, Or by, from, or under
any Authority styled or known by the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of
England, by Authority of Parliament, Or by virtue or color of any Writ,
Commission, Letters Patents, Instruction or Instructions of or from any person
or persons, Tituled, reputed, or taken to be Lord Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, or
Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereto belonging, or assuming the Authority or
reputed to be chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth, or Commander in chief of
the Forces or Armies of this Nation by Sea or Land, or by any Pretense,
Warrant, or Command whatsoever, from them or any of them, or their or either of
their respective Councils, or Council, or any Member of such Council or
Councils, or from any person or persons whatsoever, deriving or pretending to
derive Authority from them, or any of them, be Pardoned, Released,
Indempnified, Discharged, and put in utter Oblivion.

And that all and every the person and persons, Acting, Advising, Assisting,
Abetting, and Counselling the same, they, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, (Except as before is excepted) be and are hereby Pardoned,
Released, Acquitted, Indempnified, and discharged from the same: And of and
from all pains of death, and other pains, Judgments, Indictments, Convictions,
Attainders, Outlawries, Penalties, Escheats and Forfeitures therefore had or
given, or that might accrue for the same; And that all such Judgments,
Indictments, Convictions, Attainders, Outlawries, Penalties, Escheats and
Forfeitures, and every of them, and all Grants thereupon made, and all Estates
derived under the same, be and are hereby Declared and Enacted to be from
henceforth Null and void. And that all mean profits not yet received by such
Grantees shall be, and are hereby discharged: And that all and every person and
persons, bodies Politic and Corporate, their and every of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Successors, shall be and are hereby restored to
all and every their Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels and
other things Forfeited, which to his Majesty do or shall appertain by reason of
any offense herein before mentioned, and not hereafter in this present Act
excepted and foreprised.

And be it further Enacted, That all Appeals, and all personal Actions, Suits,
Molestations and Prosecutions whatsoever, for or by reason of any act of
Hostility, Trespass, Assault, Imprisonment or breach of the Peace, Advised,
Counseled, Commanded, appointed, Happened, Acted or done by reason of the late
Troubles, or the late Wars in his Majesty's Dominions, or relating thereunto,
and all Judgments and Executions thereupon had before the First day of May, in
the year of our Lord, 1658. stand and be from henceforth discharged; But not to
restore to any person or persons any sums of money, mean Profits or Goods
already received or taken upon such Execution, or to give any account for the
same.

And be it likewise Enacted, That all Appeals and all personal Actions and
Causes of such Actions, Suites, Molestations and Prosecutions whatsoever, for
or by reason of any Act or thing Advised, Counseled, Commanded, Acted or done
by virtue or color of any Authority or Commission granted by his late Majesty,
or his Majesty that now is, or by virtue or color of any Order or Ordinance of
one or both Houses of Parliament sitting at Westminster; Or by any Act or Order
made by any persons assuming the Name of a Parliament, and sitting as a
Parliament at Westminster after the death of the late King CHARLES the First;
Or by the Authority of the said Keepers of the Liberties of England; Or by any
Ordinance by either of the late Protectors and Council; Or by or upon any
Commission, Writ, Procels, or Warrant by them or any of them, or by Authority
derived from them or any of them: And all demands of Arrearages of Rents and
mean Profits of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments heretofore incurred or grown
due, which have beed paid, received or disposed by virtue or color of any the
Authorities or pretended Authorities aforesaid; other then such Arrearages or
mean Profits as are or shall be otherwise disposed by any Act, or Acts of this
present Session of Parliament, be from henceforth discharged.

And it is further by the Authority aforesaid Enacted in the second place, That
all and every the Subjects of these his Majesty's Realms of England and
Ireland, the Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Iersey and Garnsey, and the Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, and other his Majesty's Dominions, the Heirs, Executors,
and Administrators of them, and every of them, and all and singular Bodies in
any manner of wise Corporated, Cities, Buroughs. Shires, Ridings Hundreds,
Lathes, Rapes, Wappentakes, Towns, Villages, Hamlets and Tythings, and every of
them, and the Successor and Successors of every of them, shall be, and are by
the Authority of this present Parliament Acquitted, Pardoned, Released,
Indempnified and Discharged against the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, and every of them, of and from all manner of Treasons, Misprisions
of Treason, Felonies, Offenses, Contempts, Trespasses, Entries, Wrongs,
Deceits, Misdemeanors, Forfeitures, Penalties, and sums of Money, Intrusions,
Mean Profits, Wardships, Marriages, Reliefs, Liveries, Ouster le mains, Mean
Rates, Respits of Homage, Fines and Seisures for Alienation without License,
Arrearages of Rents, (other then the Arrearages of Rents due from the late
Farmers, or pretended Farmers of the Excize or Customs respectively, and other
then such Arrearages of Rents, or Mean Profits, as are or shall be otherwise
disposed by any Act or Acts of this present Parliament) and of and from all
Arrearages of Tenths and First Fruits, Fines, Post-Fines, Issues and
Amerciaments, and all Recognizances, Bonds, or other Securities given for
Payment of them, or any of them, Concealments of Customs and Excize,
Arrearages of Purveyance, and of Compositions for the same, and of and from all
Pains of Death, Pains Corporal and Pecuniary, and generally of and from all
other Things, Causes, Quarrels, Suits, Judgments and Executions in this present
Act hereafter not Excepted nor Foreprized, which may be or can be by his
Majesty in any wise, or by any means Pardoned, before and unto the 24. day of
June, in the year of our Lord, 1660. to every or any of his said Subjects,
Bodies Corporate, Cities, Buroughs, Shires, Ridings, Hundreds, Lathes, Rapes,
Wappentakes, Towns, Villages and Tithings, or any of them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Grants and
Patents since the 25. of March, 1641. touching the Wardship and Custody of the
Body and Lands, or touching the Marriage of any Heir within Age, and all Mean
Profits yet unreceived, and demandable by reason thereof, shall be, and are
hereby from henceforth discharged.

And also the Kings Majesty is contented, That it be further Enacted by
Authority of this present Parliament, and be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That this his said Free Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion shall be as
good and effectual in the Law to every of his said Subjects, Bodies Corporate,
and others before rehearsed, in, for, and against all things which be not
hereafter in this present Act excepted and foreprized, as the same Pardon,
Indemnity and Oblivion should have been, if all Offenses, Contempts,
Forfeitures, Causes, Matters, Suits, Quarrels, Judgments, Executions,
Penalties, and all other things, not hereafter in this present Act Excepted and
Foreprized, had been particularly, singularly, especially, and plainly named,
rehearsed and specified, and also pardoned by proper and express words and
names, in their kinds, natures and qualities, by words and terms thereunto
requisite to have been put in, and expressed in this present Act of Free
Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion: And that his said Subjects nor any of them, nor
the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of any of them, nor the said Bodies
corporate, and others before-named and rehearsed, nor any of them, be, nor
shall be sued, vexed, or inquieted, by, or on the behalf of the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors, in their bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements,
for any manner of Matter, Cause, Contempt, Misdemeanor, Forfeiture, Trespass,
Offense, or any other thing suffered, done, or committed before the said 24.
day of June 1660. against His late Majesty King Charles, or his Majesty that
now is, His Crown, Dignity, Prerogative, Laws or Statutes, but only for such
Matters, Causes and Offenses as be excepted and fore-prized by this present Act
out of the same, any Statute or Statutes, Laws, Customs, or Usages heretofore
had, made or used to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding: And that all and
every the Kings said Subjects, and all and singular the Bodies Corporate, and
others before rehearsed, may by him or themselves, or by his or their Deputy
or Deputies, or by his or their Attorney or Attorneys, according to the Laws of
this Realm, plead and minister this present Act of Free Pardon, for his or
their Discharge, of or for any thing that is by virtue of this present Act,
Pardoned, discharged, given or granted, without any Fee or other thing, paying
to any person or persons for writing or entry of the Judgments or other Cause
concerning such Plea, Writing, or Entry, but only sixteen pence to be paid to
the Officer or Clerk that shall enter such Plea, Matter, or Judgment, for the
parties Discharge in that behalf, any Law, Statute, Usage or Custom to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And furthermore the Kings Majesty is contented and pleased, That it be
Enacted, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this his said Free
Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, by the general Words, Clauses and Sentences
before rehearsed, shall be reputed deemed, adjudged, expounded, allowed, and
taken in all manner of Courts of His Highness and elsewhere most beneficial and
available to all and singular the said Subjects, Bodies Corporate, and others
before rehearsed, and to every of them in all things, not in this present Act
excepted or foreprized, without any ambiguity, question, or other delay
whatsoever it shall be, to be made, pleaded, objected or alleged by the King
our Sovereign Lord, His Heirs or Successors, or by his or their General
Attorney or Atorneys, or by any person or persons for his Highness, or any of
his Heirs or Successors.

And furthermore be it Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, and by the
Authority aforesaid, That if any Officer or Clerk of any of his Highness
Courts, commonly called the Chancery, King's Bench, and Common Pleas, or of his
Exchequer, or any other Officer or Clerk of any other of his Highness Courts
within this Realm, at any time after the passing of this present Act, make out,
or write out any manner of Writs, Process, Summons, or other Precepts, whereby
any of the said Subjects, or any of the said Bodies corporated; or others
before rehearsed, or any of them shall be in any wise Arrested, Attached,
Distrained, Summoned, or otherwise Vexed, Inquieted, or grieved in his or their
Bodies, Lands, Tenements, Goods, or Chattels, or in any of them, for, or
because of any manner of thing pardoned or discharged by virtue of this Act of
Free Pardon; or if any Sheriff or Escheator, or any of their Deputy or
Deputies, or any Bailiff or other Officer whatsoever, by color of his or their
Office, or otherwise, after the passing of this present Act, do levy, receive,
take, or withhold of or from any Person or Persons, any thing pardoned or
discharged by this Act; That then every such Person so offending and thereof
lawfully convicted or condemned by any sufficient testimony, witness, or proof,
shall yield and pay for recompense thereof to the party so grieved or offended
thereby, his or their treble damages, besides all costs of the Suit, and shall
also forfeit and lose to the Kings Majesty for every such desault Ten pounds:
And nevertheless all and singular such Writts, Process and Precepts so to be
made for, or upon any manner of thing pardoned or discharged by this present
Act of Free Pardon, Indemnity and Oblivion, shall be utterly void and of none
effect.

Except and always foreprized out of this Free and general Pardon, all Murders
done or committed by any Person or Persons other than such which are Pardoned
and Discharged in the first Clause of Pardon above mentioned: And also excepted
and always foreprized out of this General and Free Pardon all and every
offenses of Piracie and Robbery done upon the Seas, not done in relation to the
Differences and Wars aforesaid, and every procuring or abetting of any such
Offenders, and the comforting and receiving of them, or any of them, or any
Goods taken by way of such Piracy or Robbery upon the Seas as aforesaid: And
also excepted the detestable and abominable Vice of Buggery committed with
Mankind or Beast: And also excepted all Rapes and carnal Ravishments of Women:
And also excepted all Ravishments, and wilful taking away, or manying of any
Maid, Widow, or Damsel against her will, or without the assent or agreement of
her Parents, or of such as then had her in Custody; and also all Offenses of
aiding, comforting, procuring, or abetting of any such Ravishment, wilful
taking or Marrying, had, committed or done: And also excepted all offenses made
Felony by a certain Act made and ordained, Entitled, An Act to restrain all
Persons from Marriage until their former Wives and former Hushands be dead:
And also excepted all offenses of Invocations, Conjurations, Witchcrafts,
Sorceries, Enchantments, and Charms; and all offenses of procuring abetting, or
comforting of the same: and all persons now attainted or convicted of any the
said excepted Offenses: And also excepted all and singular the Accounts of all
and every person and persons appointed by any of the Authorities, or pretended
Authorities aforesaid, to be Treasurer, Receiver, Farmer or Collector, (other
than the Sub-Collectors of the several Parishes, Towns and Hamlets
respectively, for, and concerning their Receipts before the ^4. day of June in
the year of our Lord 1659) who have received or collected any Subsidy,
Custom, Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage, Prize-goods, Assessment,
Sequestration, New Impost or Excise, or of any the Rents and Revenues of any
Lands or Hereditaments, of or belonging unto the late King, Queen, or Prince,
or King that now is, or belonging to the late Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics,
Deans, or Deans and Chapters, Canons, Prebends, and other Officers belonging to
any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, or Popish Recusants convict, or of Persons
Sequestered for their Recusancie, or other sequestered Estates Received or
Collected by, or paid unto them since the 30. of January in the year of our
Lord 1642; and of all Moneys and other Duties grown due or contracted upon the
Sale or Disposition of them, or any of them.

Provided, That the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Tertenants of the Lands
of any Accomptant within this Exception now deceased, shall not be charged
with, nor liable unto any Account for the matters in this Exception mentioned:
Except for such Sum or Sums of Money as remain due upon any of their Accounts
already stated and determined, and are not yet paid in, and that no Accomptant
as abovesaid, now living, shall be liable to make account of any Sum or Sums of
Money, paid or disbursed, or otherwise allowed, or discharged, by virtue or
color of any Order or Ordinances of both or either House or Houses of
Parliament, or any Convention or Assembly called, or Reputed, or taking on them
the name of a Parliament, or of Oliver Cromwell, pretended Protector, or of
Richard his Son, while he continued, or was styled, or obeyed as Protector, or
by any Persons acting as a Committee appointed by the said two Houses, or
either of them, or by any such Convention, or Assembly, or any Order or
Direction of such Committee or Committees, or any Person or Persons acting as a
Public Council, though having no legal Authority so to do, or by their, or any
their Order or Orders, or Direction.

It being further Declared and Enacted, and is Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid. That no person or persons shall be charged for any Moneys by him
received for the Fees, Salaries, and Wages then allowed, or for Moneys by him
disbursed upon any public use, or pretense, though the Direction, or Authority
whereby the same Money was Issued, was not, or be not Legal and Warrantable in
Law.

And be it further Provided, That no Military, or Commissioned Officer of the
Armies, or Navies, or Soldier, or Mariner, who before the 25. of March, 1659.
has received any Moneys for his own Pay, or the Pay of other Soldiers, or for
any other Contingencies of the Soldiers, or Guarrisons under his Command, or
by way of reward, shall be called to account therefore.

And that no person whatsoever shall be called to account for any the matters
in this Exception mentioned, after the 24. of June. which shall be in the year
of our Lord God, 1662. now next ensuing; And that in case any person who stands
accomptable for any moneys received since the first of January, 1642, and
before the 30. of January 1648, have been robbed, or plundered by Soldiers, or
others, of the moneys in their hands, or of any Notes, or Books of receipt,
touching their payments or discharge, Then the oath or oaths of such party or
parties of the same respectively, shall be a good discharge for so much of
their account. And that the Oath of every Accomptant in or between the years,
1642, and 1648. of what they have paid to any public use, by, or according to
any public or pretended Order or Authority whatsoever, shall be a good
discharge, as to so much of the account of such person or persons. And except
all First fruits and tenths in the hands of any Receiver not having disbursed,
as in the last Exception is expressed.

Provided, That all and every Judgment of Discharge, or quietus est, had, or
given at any time upon any account in the Public Exchequer, since the year
1648, be allowed, and shall not be avoided; except all accounts of the Revenues
of Churches and Vicaridges in Wales, and the County of Monmouth, and all
Judgments of discharge, or quietus thereupon obtained, and also Excepted out of
this Pardon all offenses of Bribery, Perjuries and the Subornation of Perjury,
or Witnesses and Offenses of Forging or Counterfeiting any Deeds, Debentures,
Bills of Public Faith, Escripts, Wills, or other Writings whatsoever, or of
any Examinations or Testimonies of any Witness or Witnesses, tending to bring
any person or persons in danger of his Life, Liberty, or Estate, and the giving
the same in evidence, and the compelling or procuring of any such
counterfeiting or forging to be had or made.

And who excepted all Offenses in detaining, imbesling, or purloining any the
Goods, Money, Chattels or Jewels of the late King, Queen, or Prince, or any of
the children of the late King and Queen, other then Shipping, Stores, and
Ammunitions of War, and other then such Goods and Chattels as have been sold or
disposed of to any of the Servants or Creditors of his late Majesty, in, or
toward satisfaction of their Debts or Wages.

And also Excepted out of this Pardon, all Issues, Fines, and Amercements,
Rents, and other Public Duties being Leavyed, Received or collected by any
Sheriff, Undersheriff, Bailiff, Minister, or other Officer, to, or for the use
of the late King, the Parliament, or the said Keepers of the Liberty of
England, or any other person stiling himself Protector or for his Majesty that
now is, and not accounted for, and discharged.

And also Excepted out of this Pardon, all and every offense and offenses
committed or done by any Jesuit, Seminary, or Romish Priest whatsoever,
contrary to the Tenor or Effect of the Statute made in the 27, year of the
Reign of the late Queen Elisabeth, Entitled, An Act against Jesuits,
Seminaries, Priests, and other disobedient Persons, or of any part thereof, and
all Out-lawries, Proceedings, Judgments, and Executions for the same offenses,
or any of them.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall
and may be lawful, to, and for all and every Clerk, and other Officer of the
Courts at Westminster, to award and make Writs of Capias Vtlagatum, at the suit
of the Party Plaintiff, against such Persons Out-layed, as be pardoned by this
Act, to the intent to compel the Defendant, or Defendants to make answer, to
the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs, at whose Suit, he or they were Out lawed. And that
every person so Out lawed shall sue a Writ of Scire Facias, against the Party
or Parties, at whose Suit he or they were so Outlawed, before this Pardon in
that behalf shall be allowed him or them so Outlawed.

Provided, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That this Act of
General Pardon, shall not in any wise extend to Pardon any Out-lawries upon any
Writ of Capias ad Satisfaciendum, until such time as the Party so Outlawed
shall satisfy, or otherwise agree with the Party at whose Suit the same Person
was so Outlawed or Condemned.

And also excepted out of this Pardon all Informations and other Proceedings
Depending, Concerning any Common Highways or Bridges, and all Issues, returned
upon any Process, concerning the same, since the 30 day of January, 1648;
Except also all Recognizances, Obligations and other Securities given, or
Entered into, since the 25. of March, 1640, by any Receiver, Reeve, Bailiff,
Collector, or other Accountant in the Court of the Public Exchequer, and their
Sureties and their Accounts Respectively.

Provided always, and be it Enacted; That this Act or any thing therein
Contained, shall not extend, or be Construed to Pardon, or Discharge any
Recognizance, Obligation or Bond which is not yet forfeited.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That all Acts of
Hostility and Injuries, whether between the late King, and the Lords and
Commons then in Parliament assembled; or between any of the People of this
Nation, which did arise upon any Action, Attempt, Assistance, Council, or
Advice, having Relation unto, or falling out by reason of the late Troubles, or
in the late Wars, or Public Differences between the late King and Parliament,
or between his now Majesty, or any of his Subjects, and which are not in this
Act excepted; that the same and whatsoever has ensued thereupon, whether
trenching upon the Laws and Liberties of this Nation, or upon the Honor of his
Majesty, or upon the Honor of Authority of the Parliament, or to the prejudice
of any Particular or Private Person, shall in no time, from and after the 24.
of June, in the year of our Lord 1660. be called in question, whatsoever be the
quality of the Person, or of whatsoever Kind or Degree, Civil or Criminal, the
Injury is supposed to be; And that no mention be made thereof in time to come
in judgment or judicial proceedings.

And to the intent and purpose that all names and terms of distinction may be
likewise put into utter Oblivion, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid; That if any Person or Persons, within the space of three years next
ensuing, shall presume maliciously to call or allege of, or object against any
other Person or Persons, any Name or Names or other words of Reproach, any way
tending to revive the Memory of the ^^te Differences or the Occasions thereof;
That then every such person, so as aforesaid Offending shall Forfeit and Pay,
unto the Party Grieved, in Case such Party offending shall be of the Degree of
a Gentleman or above, ten Pounds; and if under that Degree the Sum of forty
Shillings, to be recovered by the Party grieved, by Action of Debt to be
therefore brought in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no E^^oign,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed, or any more than one Imparlance,
so as the same Action be commenced or prosecuted within six Months next after
the Offense Committed: And if the Jury sworn to try any Issue or Issues that
shall be joined in such Action shall find for the Plaintiff, they shall
likewise give to every such Plaintiff forty shllings Damages, over and above
the Penalty aforesaid.

Provided, always that this Act, or any thing therein contained shall not
extend, or give any Benefit to any Person or Persons, who have had any hand in
the Plotting, Contriving, or designing the Great and Heinous Rebellion of
IRELAND mentioned in one Act passed in the Parliament, begun at WESTMINSTER the
3. day of November, In the sixteenth year of King CHARLES Entitled, An Act for
the speedy and effectual Reducing of the Rebels in his Majesty's Kingdom of
IRELAND to their due obedience, to his Majesty and Crown of ENGLAND, Or in
Aiding, Assisting, or Abetting the same: (other then such as by another Act
intended hereafter to be passed, shall be therein named, mentioned, or
expressed to be pardoned,) Nor to enure to restore to any person or persons,
Bodies Politic or Corporate, other then then the Marquess of Ormond, Lord
Steward of his Majesty's Household, and other the Protestants of IRELAND) and
their Heirs, and such other person and persons as in, and by an Act intended
hereafter to be Passed, shall be therein named, mentioned, or expressed in that
behalf, any Estate, Liberties, Franchises, or Hereditaments in England or
Ireland, sold, or disposed of by both, or either Houses of Parliament, or any
Convention assuming the Style or Name of a Parliament, or any person or persons
deriving Authority from them, or any of them, or which was approved or
confirmed by them, or any of them; Nor to the Mean Profits, Rents, or
contingencies of advantage of the same.

And it is further Provided and Enacted, That every person or persons hereby
pardoned, may plead the general issue, without special pleading of this pardon,
and give this Act of Pardon in evidence for his discharge, and that the same
shall be thereupon allowed, and the advantage thereof had as fully to all
intens and purposes, as if the same had been fully and well pleaded; And in
such manner as any Justice of the Peace, Constable, or other Officer,
questioned for matters acted by them as Officers, or in execution of their
Offices, may have advantage of the matter of their justification, upon the
general Issue by them pleaded, by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom.

Provided also, That this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall Extend or
be interpreted to extend to Pardon any Person or Persons whatsoever, for any
Theft or Stealing of any goods, or other Felonies, since the fourth day of
March in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, any
thing in this Act contained to the contrary thereof in any wise Notwithstanding.

Provided also, That neither this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall
Extend to Acquit or Discharge any person or persons, from making Restitution of
all such Rents, Sums of Money, Horses, Cattle, or other Goods, which by a
certain Act, or pretended Act lately made, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of two
Acts for Sequestrations, Are required to be restored to those from whom they
were taken; Nor shall this present Act be construed to Disable, or Bar the
Respective Owners, or Proprietors, of and from their Several and Respective
Actions, or Suits at Law, or in Equity, for, or by reason of the said, or any
other Rents, Moneys, Horses, Cattle, or Goods, which since the Five and
twentieth day of July, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, have been by
any person or persons wrongfully received, or taken away, and for which the
said wrong doers are not in any wise Indempnified by the said or any other Act
of Repeal.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons who by virtue of any Order or Warrant mediately or immediately derived
from His late Majesty, or His Majesty that now is, or by virtue of any Act,
Ordinance or Order of any or both Houses of Parliament, or any of the
Authorities aforesaid, or any Committee or Committees acting under them, or any
of them, have Seized, Sequestered, Leavied, Advanced or paid to any Public Use,
or into any Public Treasury within this Kingdom, any Goods, Chattels. Debts,
Rents, Sum or Sums of Money belonging to any person or persons whatsoever,
shall hereafter be Sued, Molested or Drawn into Question for the same, but that
they and every of them shall be Discharged against all persons for so much and
no more of the said Goods, Chartels, Debts, Rents, Sum or Sums of Money, as
their several and respective Orders of Discharge or Acquittances extend unto.

Provided also, That nothing herein contained shall extend to Discharge any
person or persons who have been by private Order or instructions employed and
entrusted, or have undertaken the employment to Receive any Sum or Sums of
Money for the Kings Majesty's Service or Supply, ^nce the Year One thousand six
hundred forty and eight, from making their Accounts for the same.

Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to pardon or Discharge from
Account to the Kings Majesty, any person or persons for any Sum or Sums of
Money received for that illegal Tax of Decimation, or upon the Account of any
Militia settled or acted in since One thousand six hundred forty and eight, and
not Accounted for, or paid over, or Discharged to or by any that had Authority,
or pretended Authority to Discharge the respective Receivers of the same.

Provided also, That if any person or persons being His Majesty's Mesnial
Servant or Servants, or having or pretending to have received particular
Intructions or Directions from His Majesty, have during the time of such his
or their relation unto His Majesty, or whilst he or they were acting, or
pretending to act for His Majesty's Interest, in pursuance of the said
Instructions or Directions, Wilfully, Maliciously and Traitorously held
Intelligence with any Forain Prince or Princes, State or States, or with any
person or persons usurping Supreme Authority in this Kingdom, or other His
Majesty's Dominions, or with their or either of their Ministers or Agents, and
without His Majesty's license, and to the intent to betray His Majesty's Person
or Counsels, or have received any Sum or Sums of Money, or Pension for such
Treachery, That then such person and persons, as to the Offense in this Proviso
mentioned, shall be and is hereby Excepted out of this Act, any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding; so as such Person or Persons be
Outlawed, or otherwise legally Convicted of such Offense or Offenses within the
space of Two years from the Five and twentieth day of April, One thousand six
hundred and sixty.

Provided, That this Act of General Pardon, or any thing therein contained,
shall not extend to the Pardoning or Discharging of any Debts or Sums of Money
due to or for the Excize of any Goods or Merchandise, whereof any Entries have
been made in the Custom House, which have grown due since the Twenty fifth day
of March, One thousand six hundred fifty and eight, or to the Pardoning or
Discharging of any Debts or Sums of Money due to the Farmers, or pretended
Farmers of Excize, since the Twenty fifth day of March, One thouand six hundred
fifty and seven.

Provided also, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to
Pardon, Discharge, or give any other Benefit whatsoever unto John Lisle,
William Say, Sir Hardress Waller, Valentine Wauton, Thomas Harrison, Edward
Whalley, William Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Henry Martin, John Barkstead,
Gilbert Millington, Edmund Ludlow, Sir Michael Livesey, Robert Titchborn, Owen
Row, Robert Lilburn, Adrian Scroop, John Okey, John Hewson, William Goff,
Cornelius Holland, Thomas Challoner, John Carew, John Jones, Miles Corbet,
Henry Smith, Gregory Clement, Thomas Wogan, Edmond Harvey, Thomas Scot, William
Cawley, John Downs, Nicholas Love, Vincent Potter, Augustine Garland, John
Dixwell, George Fleetwood, Simon Meyn, James Temple, Peter Temple, Daniel
Blagrave, Thomas Wait, John Cook, Andrew Broughton, Edward Dendy, William
Hewlet, Hugh Peter's, Francis Hacker, Daniel Axtel, nor any of them, nor to
those Two persons, or either of them who being Disguised by Frocks and Vizors
did appear upon the Scaffold erected before Whitehall upon the Thirtieth of
January, One thousand six hundred forty and eight: All which Persons for their
Execrable Treason, in Sentencing to death, or Signing the Instrument for the
Horrid Murder, or being instrumental in taking away the precious Lise of Our
late Sovereign Lord CHARLES the First of Glorious Memory, are left to be
proceeded against as Traitors to his late Majeny, according to the Laws of
England, and are out of this present Act wholly Excepted and Foreprized.

But in regard the said Owen Row, Augustine Garland Edmond Harvey. Henry Smith,
Henry Martin, Sir Hardress Waller, Robert Titchborn, George Fleetwood, James
Temple, Thomas Wait, Simon Meyn, William Heveningham, Isaac Penington, Peter
Temple, Robert Lilburn, Gilbert Millington, Vincent Potter, Thomas Wogan, and
John Downs, have personally appeared and rendered themselves (according to the
Proclamation bearing Date the Sixth day of June, One thousand six hundred and
sixty, to Summon the Persons therein named, who gave Judgment and Assisted in
the said Horrid and Detestable Murder of our said late Sovereign, to appear
and render themselves) and do pretend thereby to some favor, upon some
conceived doubtful Words in the said Proclamation;

Be it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority of the same (upon
the humble desires of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled) That if
the said Owen Row, Augustine Garland, Edmond Harvey, Henry Smith, Henry Martin,
Sir Har^ress Waller, Robert Titchborn George Fleetwood, James Temple, Thomas
Wait, Simon Meyn, Willtam H^veningham, Isaac Penington, Peter Temple, Robert
Lilburn, Gilbert Millington, Vincent Poeter, Thomas W^gan and John Downs, or
any of them, shall be legally Attainted for the Horrid Treason and Murder
aforesaid; that then, nevertheless, the Execution of the said Person and
Persons so Attainted shall be suspended, until His Majesty by the Advice and
Assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, shall Order the Execution by Act
of Parliament to be passed for that purpose.

Except also out of this present Act Oliver Cromwell deceased, Henry Ireton
deceased, John Bradshaw deceased, and Thomas Pride deceased.

Provided that nothing in this Act contained shall extend to Discharge the
Lands, Tenements, Goods. Chattels, Rights, Trusts, and other the Hereditaments
late of the said Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw and Thomas Pride;
or of Isaac Ewer deceased, Sir John Danvers deceased, Sir Thomas Maleverer
Baronet, deceased, William Purefoy deceased, John Blakiston deceased, Sir
William Constable Baronet, deceased, Richard Dean decealed, Francis Al^ya
deceased, Peregrin Pelham deceased, John Moor deceased, John Aldred, alias
Alured, deceased, Humphrey Edwards deceased, Sir Gregory Norton B^r^^et
deceased, John Venn deceased, Thomas Andrews Alderman, deceased, Anthony
Stapely deceased, Thomas Horton deceased. John Fry deceased, Thomas Hamond
deceased, Sir John Bourchler deceased, of and from such Pains, Penalties and
Forfeitures, as by one other Act of Parliament intended to be hereafter Passed
for that purpose, shall be Expressed and Declared.

And also Except out of this present Act, William Lord Mounson, James
Challoner, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir James Harrington, John Phelps, and Robert
Wallop; All which persons did Act and Sit in that Traitorous Aslembly, which in
the Month of January 1648 acted and proceeded against the Life of our late
Sovereign, King CHARLES the First of blessed Memory; and are therefore reserved
to such Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, not extending to Lise as by another
Act intended to be passed for that purpose shall be imposed on them.

And also Except Sir Arthur H^silrigg, for and in respect only of such Pains,
Penalties and Forfeitures, not extending to Life, as by one Act intended to be
hereafter passed for that purpose shall be Inflicted and Imposed.

Provided always, That John Hutchinson Esquire and Francis Lassells, shall be and
are hereby made for ever incapable to Execute any Place or Office of Trust,
Civil or Military, within this Kingdom; And that the said Franeis Lassells
shall pay unto our Sovereign Lord the King. One ^ul^ years value of his Estate,
Any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to the Pardoning, or to give any other benefit whatsoever unto Sir Henry
Vane, John Lambert, or either of them, but that they and either of them, are
and shall be out of this present Act wholly, Excepted and Foreprized.

Provided that if William Lenthall, William Burton, Oliver St. John, John
Ireton Alderman, Col William Sydenham, Col. John Desborow, John Blackwel of
Moreclack, Christopher Pack Alderman, Richard Keeble, Charles Fleetwood, John
Pyne, Richard Dean, Maj. Richard Creed, Philip Nigh Clerk, John Goodwyn Clerk,
Sir Gilbert Pickering, Colonel Thomas Lister, and Col. Ralph Cobbet, shall
after the First day of September 1660 accept, or exercize any Office
Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military, or any other Public Employment within this
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed that then
such Person or Persons as do to accept or execute as aforesaid, shall to all
intents and purposes in Law stand as if he or they had been totally excepted by
name in this Act.

Provided likewise, That all those who since the Fifth of December, One
thousand six hundred forty eight, did give Sentence of Death upon any Person or
Persons, in any of the late Illegal and Tyrannical High Courts of Justice in
England or Wales, or signed the Warrant for Execution of any Person there
condemned (except Colonel Richard Iugoldsby, and Colonel Matthew Thomlinson)
shall be and are hereby made incapable of bearing any Office. Ecclesiastical,
Civil or Military within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales, or of
serving as a Member in any Parliament after the First day of September, One
thousand six hundred and sixty.

Provided also and it is Enacted, That all and every the Persons appointed
Trustees in a late pretended Act or Ordinance made in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred forty nine, for and concerning Tithes appropriate,
Oblations, Obventions, Pensions, Portions of Tithes appropriate, Offerings,
Fee-farm Rents, issuing out of the Tithes therein mentioned, First Fruits and
other things, and Enacted or mentioned to be Enacted to be vested, settled,
adjudged, or deemed to be in the actual Seisin or possession of such Person and
Persons in the said pretended Act or Ordinance mentioned, and their Heirs,
shall account for and be responsible for all Rents and Profits of the Premises
which came to their hands, and have not been by the said Trustees or their
Order disbursed, disposed or employed, for the maintenance of Ministers or
other uses, according to the said pretended Act or Ordinance, or some other
Act. Order or Ordinance made in the years of our Lord, 1650, 1654, and 1656. by
any Assemlby called or reputed a Parliament, or assuming the power of
Parliament, according to the intention of such Act, Acts, or Ordinances, and
the Agents and Receivers under the Order of the said Trustees, and the
Occupiers and Tenants of the Premises, who have taken the premises or profits
thereof into their hands, without agreement to pay Rent therefore, and (...)
made no account or satisfaction to the Trustees aforesaid, or to some other by
their Order; (...) also the Persons who have held the same, or taken the
profits thereof under any agreement to pay Rent or Money for the same, and have
not paid the same, shall respectively account, pay and make satisfaction for so
much of the Premises, and profits of the premises as are unsatisfied or
unaccounted for as aforesaid, and pay such Arrearages of Rents or Money, as by
such Agreement remains unpaid by them: all which payments and accounts shall
be made to such (...), and in such manner as in Parliament shall be directed.
Nevertheless it is not hereby (...), That any Minister, Schoolmaster, or other
Person for whose benefit or maintenance the said pretended Acts or Ordinances
were made, shall be accountable or liable to make satisfaction for any Profits,
Rents, or sums of Money paid to, or taken by them respectively, by virtue or
color of any Order or Appointment of the said Trustees, or any of them, or
otherwise.

Provided also, That this Act do not extend to Pardon any Bond taken in his
late Majesty's Name, before the Month of May One thousand six hundred forty
two, for securing the proper debt of any Servant or Receiver of the Revenue of
His said late Majesty, that has not been paid to or by Order of some lawful
or pretended Authority; And whereas by an Order of the six and twentieth day of
May in the year One thousand six hundred forty one, the then House of Commons
in Parliament did accept the sum of One hundred and fifty thou and pounds, as a
Composition from the Farmers of several Customs, Voted to be Illegally taken,
and some of the said Farmers did procure and pay the said whole sum of One
hundred and fifty thousand pounds at the desire of the said House of Commons,
and upon their Declaration, that such of the said Farmers as did not pay their
proportions, should not be Pardoned but proceeded against, and out of their
Fines Satisfaction should be made to those who had paid the aid One hundred and
fifty thousand pounds, and in pursuance thereof did on the First of June then
next following, Resolve, That the Estates of such Persons living or dead, as
have by color of any Patent received moneys from the Subject under pretense of
such Cus^o^ns or have been under-sharers with the Patentees, ought to be made
liable to Restitution; It is therefore Provided, That this Act shall not extend
nor be construed to extend to Pardon or Indem^nifie any Person or Persons,
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, who have not paid their
proportions of the said One hundred and fifty thousand pounds, or ought to have
been contributary thereunto, from or against Misdemeanors or Offenses relating
to the said Customs, or from payment of their Proportions: But that the Estates
of the dead, as well as of the living, of such who ought to have been
Contributary, in whose possession soever (Purchasers Bona fide, and upon
valuable considerations only excepted) shall continue, and be charged and
chargeable with the payment of their Proportions to all intent and purposes as
if this Act had not been made, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
or be construed to Pardon or Discharge any Sum or Sums of Money due and in
Arrear for Excise of Beer, Ale, or other Native or Inland Commodity, since the
Twenty fourth day of June, One thousand six hundred fifty and nine

Provided also, That nothing in this Act contained shall extend to the
Pardoning or Discharging of any Sum or Sums of money, due from any Officers or
Soldiers to any of the Subjects of this Kingdom for Free quarter, since the
Second day of July One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, or to Discharge any
moneys borrowed by any Officers for preventing of Free quarter.

Provided always and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Conveyance, Assurance, Grant, Bargain, Sale, Charge, Lease, Assignment of
Lease, Grants, and Surrenders by Copy of Court-Roll, Estate, Interest, Trust,
or Limitation of any use or uses, of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, not being the Lands, nor Hered taments of the late King. Queen,
Prince, or of any Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans or Chapters, nor being
Lands, or Hereditaments, Sold or given or appointed to be Sold or given for the
Delinquencie, or pretended Delinquency of any person or persons whatsoever, by
virtue or pretext of any Act, Order or Ordinance, or reputed Act, Order or
Ordinance, since the First day of January, 1641, nor any Statute, Judgment, or
Recognizance had made, acknowledged or suffered, to any person or persons,
Bodies politic or Corporate, before the Nine and twentieth day of September,
One thousand six hundred fifty and nine, by any of the persons before in this
Act by name excepted, or their Heirs, or by any other person or persons
claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, other than the Wife or Wives,
Child, Children, Heir and Heirs of such person and persons or any of them, for
money Bona fide to them or any of them paid or lent; nor any Conveyance,
Assurance, Grant, or Estate made before the Five and twentieth day of April,
One thousand six hundred and sixty, by any person or persons to any (...)
person or persons excepted by name as aforesaid, in Trust and for the Benefit
of any other person or persons, Bodies politic or Corporate not excepted by
name as aforesaid, shall be Impeached, Defeated, made void, or frustrated
hereby, or by the attainder or conviction of any such excepted person or
persons, but that the same shall be held and enjoyed by the Purchasers
Grantees, Leslees, Assignees, Cestuy que use, Cestuy que trust, and every of
them, their (...) Executors, Administrators, and Assigns respectively, as if
this Act had not been made, (...) if the said person or persons had not been
excepted, attainted, or Convicted, any Law, Stature, Usage, or Custom to the
contrary thereof in any w^^e notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, nor any thing therein contained shall not
extend to Indemnifie any person or persons whatsoever, who have entered into
any Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments called Fabric Lands, or
possessed themselves of any Rent or Revenues given for the repair of any
Cathedral or other Church, or who have Sacrilegiously enriched themselves by
converting the Plate, or Utensils and Materials of or belonging to such
Churches to their own private use and advantage, for or in respect of the said
Crimes only.


