At the COURT at WHITEHALL, The Seventeenth day of January, 1676/7. By the
KINGS Most Excellent Majesty, and the Right Honorable the LORDS of His
Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
WHEREAS upon the Humble Petition of Sir John Clayton Knight, setting forth,
That by virtue of His Majesty's Letters Patents he had Erected, at above Two
thousand Pounds Charge, several Light-houses upon the Northern Coasts, for the
Benefit of Navigation; One of which being at St. Nicholas-Gatt near Yarmouth,
and of great use to Ships sailing on that Coast, as well as the Fisheries, the
Petitioner, at the Instance of the said Town, and of the Masters of Ships
there, and in other Parts upon that Coast, kindled the same: Of which the
Trinity-house of Deptford made Complaint to this Board, and gave several
Reasons why the said Lights should be extinguished, as useless and dangerous:
All which the Petitioner having answered, His Majesty was pleased (amongst
other things) by Order of the Eleventh of August last, to recommend the
Consideration of the Arguments severally brought as well by the said
Trinity-house, as by the said Sir John Clayton, touching the Expediency or
Inexpediency of the said Lights, to the Bailiffs, Justices, and Masters of
Ships at Yarmouth, who were fully and impartially to report their Opinion
touching the general or particular Usefulness of each of the said Lights, and
how far they, and the Masters and Mariners belonging to that Place, are
consenting to pay for the Erecting and Maintenance of the same. In pursuance
whereof, there being presented to the Board Certificates signed as well by the
Bailiffs and Justices, as by the Masters of Ships and Mariners of Great
Yarmouth aforesaid, representing, That after long Debate amongst them, and
serious Consideration of the whole matter, it was concluded and agreed most
unanimously, both by the said Bailiffs and Magistrates, and all the said
Mariners then appearing (except one William Rix) That the said Light at St.
Nicholas-Gatt, as it is now erected, if it be blinded until it come upon the
West-and-South, to prevent the danger of the South-head of New-orke and the
Knowle, is and will be greatly useful and advantageous to Trade, and a great
Security to all Ships that shall pass that way, and may be a happy means to
prevent for the furture the loss of the Lives of many Persons, and to preserve
their Shipping and Goods from Wrecks; and that the said Light will in all
probability be a great means to increase and encourage the Fishery of those
Parts; insomuch that they shall at all times be ready to join their Assistance
to obtain a Confirmation of His Majesty's Grant to him the said Sir John
Clayton; the Magistrates of the said Town declaring their free Consent to the
Payment to him and his Assigns, for and in respect of the Benefit of the said
Light, One Farthing per Ton, and no more, for such of their Laden Ships and
Vessels as shall pass by the said Light: And the said Masters of Ships and
Mariners adjudging One Farthing per Ton to be but a reasonable Allowance for
every Light and Laden Ship, except such Ships as shall hap to come from any
Port Northwards of this Town, into the Harbor, and there unlade; they
apprehending such Ship to have no Benefit by the said Light. Which having been
read at the Board, and it appearing, That by the aforesaid Certificates there
was not any mention made of the Light-houses erected by the said Sir John
Clayton at Cromer, Flambrough-head, and Farn-Island, which by the aforesaid
Order of the Eleventh of August was likewise referred to their Consideration;
It was the First of December last Ordered, That the Bailiffs and Magistrates of
the Town of Yarmouth should inform themselves by the Masters and Owners of
Ships, and Mariners of that Town, and Parts adjacent, of the Expediency or
Inexpediency of each of the said Lights erected by the said Sir John Clayton,
at Cromer, Flambrough-head, and Farn-Island, and report their Opinion touching
the same to this Board; which they accordingly did this day, as follows; Viz.

In Obedience to an Order of Your Majesty in Council, bearing date the First
day of December last past, requiring us Your Majesty's Bailiffs and Magistrates
of the Town of Great Yarmouth to inform our selves by the Masters and Owners of
Ships, and Mariners of our Town, and Parts adjacent, of the Expediency and
Inexpediency of the several Light-houses erected by Sir John Clayton Knight, at
Cromer, Flambrough-head, and Farn-Island, and to report their Opinion touching
the same, and how far the Masters and Marines belonging to this Place are
consenting to pay for the Erecting and Maintenance of the said Lights, or any
of them: We therefore the said Bailiffs and Magistrates whose Names are
hereunto subscribed, in pursuance of Your Majesty's said Order, do humbly
certify, That on the Nine and twentieth of December last, we did summon the
greatest part of the best and most experienced Seamen, Masters and Mariners of
our said Town, then at home, to appear at our Common Hall; and upon an
indifferent and impartial Proposal of the Objections, Answers, and Observations
made and given in reference to each and every of the said New-erected Lights,
it was concluded and most unanimously agreed by all the said Mariners then
present, as appears by their several Subscriptions remaining by and with us the
said Bailiffs, That the said Light-house erected on Flambrough-head, was very
happily designed, and if built than now it is, will be greatly useful to Trade,
particularly to the Collery, and a great Security to all Ships that shall pass
that way. We do further humbly certify, That at the same time and place, and
upon debate of he Objections, Answers, and Observations aforesaid, the
Light-house erected at Cromer, and the other at Farn-Island, were by the
generality and greatest of the said Masters and Mariners agreed and subscribed
to, to be useful and necessary, and commodiously situated for the Benefit of
Navigation; but by the residue apprehended and judged to be of less use and
importance: And that the said Masters and Mariners so approving of the said
Lights, are consenting to the Payment to him the said Sir John Clayton, and his
Assigns, for and in respect of the apparent Benefit and Advantage of the said
Lights so erected at Cromer, Flambrough-head, and Farn-Island aforesaid, One
Farthing per Ton, and no more, for each and singular the said Lights, for such
of their Laden Vessels as shall happen at any time to pass by any or every of
them. All which matter is in all humble manner certified and submitted to Your
Majesty's Princely Wisdom and Consideration, by Your Majesty's most loyal, most
dutiful, and most obedient Subjects,

Bailiffs.
Rich. Huntington, Ben. England,


All which being taken into consideration, and the said Sir John Clayton by his
humble Petition praying liberty to continue the Lights by him erected, and that
the Grant now lying before the Lord Chancellor, being only an Explanation of
his former Patent, may pass the Broad-Seal; It was thought fit, and accordingly
ordered by His Majesty in Council, That the said Bill for explaining His
Majesty's former Grant to Sir John Clayton, for Erecting the several
Light-houses aforesaid, upon the Northern Coasts, do pass the Great Seal of
England: And that the said Sir John Clayton do take especial care that the
Light-house erected by him at St. Nicholas-Gatt, aforesaid, be blinded until it
come upon the West-and-by-South, to prevent the danger of the South-head of
New-orke and the Knowle, as is advised in the first-recited Certificate. And
His Majesty does farther recommend it to the said Sir John Clayton, to raise
the Light at Flambrough-Head somewhat higher than now it is, if he shall be
thereunto desired by the Masters of Ships and Mariners Trading on that Coast.

EDWARD WALKER.


