AN ACT FOR THE Assuring, Confirming and Settling OF Lands and Estates IN
IRELAND.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster, the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.

coat of arms of the Protectorate

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church, 1657.

AN ACT FOR THE Assuring, Confirming and Settling of Lands and Estates IN
IRELAND.
WHereas by a Commission under the Great-Seal of England, and Instructions
thereunto annexed, Entitled, A Commission and Instructions to Charles
Fleetwood, Esquire; Lieutenant General of the Army in Ireland, Edmond Ludlow, Esquire;
Lieutenant General of the Horse, Miles Corbet, Esquire; and John Jones, Esquire;
Impowering them to cause all the Lands therein mentioned to be forfeited to the
Commonwealth, to be forthwith surveyed, in order to the satisfying of
Adventurers for Ireland, and Arrears of Officers and Soldiers, and for the
Settling and Planting of Ireland, with security to the Inhabitants and such as
shall Plant the same, the said Commissioners therein named, are thereby
authorized to cause the said forfeited Lands to be surveyed accordingly: And
whereas by further Instructions, Entitled, Further Instructions unto Charles
Fleetwood, Esquire, Lieutenant General of the Army in IRELAND, Edmond Ludlow,
Esquire, Lieutenant General of the Horse, Miles Corbet, Esquire, and John
Jones, Esquire, the said Commissioners are thereby further authorized and
required, for the better security of all those parts of Ireland which were to
be planted with English Protestants; And to the end that all persons in Ireland
who had right to Articles, or to any Favor or Mercy held forth by any the
Qualifications in an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the settling of
Ireland, might enjoy the benefit intended unto them respectively, to publish
and declare, That all and every the said persons which had such right to
Articles, or to any Favor or Mercy held forth by any the said Qualifications,
should before the first day of May, 1654. remove and transplant themselves into
the Province of Connaught and County of Clare, or one of them, there to inhabit
and abide, and to have set forth to them and every of them respectively, such
Proportions of Land, and for such Estates and Terms, and under such Conditions,
Reservations and Covenants, as should be answerable in value unto so much of
his and their Estates, as by such Articles or Qualifications he or they were to
enjoy in such place and manner, as the said Commissioners, or such as they
should Authorize, should appoint and direct; And to that end the said
Commissioners were likewise authorized and empowered to nominate Commissioners
under them, and to authorize them to allot to any such person or persons, who
by Articles granted unto them, or by virtue of any the said Qualifications,
were to enjoy any part of their Estates, a like proportion of Land by measure,
or in value in the said Province of Connaught, or County of Clare, of like
Estate of Inheritance, Freehold, Term of Years, or number of Lives, to be by
them held and enjoyed in lieu or satisfaction of such part of their Estate,
which by such Articles or Qualifications he or they were to enjoy. And whereas
by a late Act, Entitled, An Act for the speedy and effectual Satisfaction of
the Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, and of the Arrears due to the Soldiery
there, and of other Public Debts, and for the Encouragement of Protestants to
plant and inhabit Ireland, It is Declared, That by the Blessing of God upon the
Forces of the Commonwealth, the Rebels of Ireland are subdued, and the
Rebellion there appeased and ended; And that therefore, to the end all just
Satisfaction might be made unto the Adventurers, Officers and Soldiers, and
other persons in the said last recited Act mentioned, and that the Country of
Ireland might be planted and settled with security unto such as should plant and
inhabit the same, the said Commission and Instructions, and Further
Instructions are ratified and confirmed; And whereas by the said Act of
Satisfaction, it is declared to whom, how, and in what manner, and at what
Rates the forfeited Lands in Ireland shall be divided, allotted, given,
granted, set out and distributed to the said Adventurers and Soldiers, and
others in the said Act of Satisfaction expressed, and that for so much of the
said Lands as should be assigned or set out to the said Officers and Soldiers
in satisfaction of their Arrears for their Service there, and in England, by
virtue of the said Act of Satisfaction, the Ordering, Allotting, Granting,
Disposing and settling thereof unto, and upon such the said Officers and
Soldiers should be managed by the then Commissioners of Parliament in
Ireland, in such sort and manner as in and by the said Act of Satisfaction is
declared; And whereas by an Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector and
his Council, dated the Twenty third of June, One thousand six hundred fifty
four, Entitled, An Ordinance for the further Encouragement of the Adventurers
for Lands in Ireland, and of the Soldiers and other Planters there, It is
thereby (amongst other things) Ordained, That for, and in consideration of
every Rent, Service, Charge or Duty, issuing, reserved, charged, due or payable
on, or out of the Lands, or other the Hereditaments granted or intended to and
for the said Soldiers and Adventurers, or either of them, to any person or
persons who have duly claimed the same, and according to this Ordinance, shall
have the same allowed and ordered, Every such Adventurer and Soldier, on or
out of whose Lands or Hereditaments the same shall be issuing, reserved,
charged, due or payable, shall have set forth and enjoyed to him and his Heirs
for ever, so much Land in the County of Kildare (according to the Values of
Adventurers, at such measure as was allowed to such person for his Adventure,
in satisfaction whereof such Lands so charged were allotted unto them) as would
have been produced, or due for an Adventure of such certain sum of Money as the
Purchase or buying out of such Rent, Service, Charge, or Duty shall be computed
to amount unto, computation being thereof made and certified by such person and
persons as shall be authorized by his Highness the Lord Protector, with the
Consent of his Council; And whereas in pursuance of all and every the said
Commission and Instructions, further Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and
Ordinance for Encouragement, the said Commissioners of Parliament, the Lord
Deputy and Council of Ireland, and his Highness Council for the Affairs of
Ireland, or some of them, have caused the said forfeited Lands in Ireland, to
be Surveyed, and have caused the Papist Proprietors in the Province of
Leynster, Ulster, and Munster, (Except those in the County of Clare) who had
any such Right to Articles, or who fell within any the Qualifications
aforesaid, to remove and transplant themselves and Families into the said
Province of Connaught, or County of Clare, and have likewise caused the Lands
of all and every such person and person so transplanted, to be surveyed, and
have likewise by their Commissioners thereunto by them deputed and appointed,
caused to be allotted and given out unto such person and persons, so removed
and transplanted, such proportions of Land in the said Province of Connaught,
and County of Clare, or one of them, as are equal in measure or value to such
Lands, and for such Estate and Estates, as the said person and persons so
removed and transplanted, ought to have had and enjoyed in any other part of
Ireland, by virtue of his, or their Articles or Qualifications.

And whereas the said Commissioners of Parliament, the Lord Deputy and Council
of Ireland, and his Highness said Council for the Affairs of Ireland, or some
of them, in further pursuance of the said several aforementioned Powers and
Authorities, have proceeded by themselves and their Commissioners, and others
by them authorized, to allot, distribute, grant, assign, set out and deliver
several parts, shares and proportions of the said forfeited, escheated and
exchanged Lands of the said Rebels, Papist Proprietors, and Transplanted
persons, unto several Officers and Soldiers, in full or part of their
respective Debentures, for the Arrears for their respective Services there and
in England, and to several other person and persons, comprised in the said
Commission and Instructions, Further Instructions, Acts and Ordinances, or some
of them, and have likewise ordered, made, granted, set out, distributed and
delivered over, to several Officers and Soldiers and others, whose Lands so to
them allotted, distributed, granted, assigned, set out and delivered as
aforesaid, proved to be legally encumbered with any such Rent, Service, Charge
or Duty, as in the said Ordinance of Encouragement is expressed, other Lands
(equal to the said Encumbrance) by way of reprisal, out of the forfeited,
escheated, or exchanged Lands in the said County of Kildare, according to the
Tenor of the said Ordinance of Encouragement as aforesaid; All and every which
said person and persons, to whom such Allotments, Distributions, Grants,
Assignments and Reprisals were, and have been made as aforesaid, their Lessees
or Assigns have entered into their said several shares and proportions of Land,
and have many of them disbursed several great sums of Money in Buildings,
Reparations and Improvements upon the said Lands so to them allotted, granted,
assigned, distributed, set out, and delivered, or given in reprisal, as
aforesaid, so that the securing and confirmation of the said Allotments,
Distributions, Grants, Assignments, and Reprisals is now become of great use
and necessity to the Plantation and Peace of Ireland; Be it therefore Enacted
and Declared by his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and this present Parliament, and the Authority
thereof, That all and every Act and Acts, Thing and Things which have been done
by the late Commissioners of the Parliament, Commissioners of the Commonwealth,
Lord Deputy and Council, or the Lords of his Highness Council there, or any of
them, or by any other person or persons thereunto authorized by them, or any of
them, upon, or in pursuance of the said Commission and Instructions, Further
Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and Ordinance for Encouragement, or any of
them, for the surveying, allotting, setting forth, disposing and distributing
of any of the said Rebels and Papists forfeited, escheated, or exchanged Lands,
according to the true intent and meaning of the said Commission and
Instructions, Further Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and Ordinance for
Encouragement, or any of them; And all and every Commission and Commissions, or
other Authority granted by the said Commissioners of Parliament, Commissioners
of the Commonwealth, Lord Deputy and Council, or by his Highness said Council
for the Affairs of Ireland, to any person or persons for the Adjudication of
Claims, or for the Adjudication of the Qualifications of the Irish, or for
setting forth of Lands unto them, And all and every Judgment and Judgments,
Decree and Decrees, Disposition and Dispositions of Lands made by them, or any
of them, in pursuance of their respective Commissions, And also all and every
Division, Allotment, Grant, Assignment, Order, Act and Thing already done,
made, executed and performed, or caused to be done, made, executed or performed
by the said Commissioners of Parliament, Commissioners of the Commonwealth,
Lord Deputy and Council of Ireland, or his Highness Council for the Affairs of
Ireland, or any of them, or by any other person or persons by Commission or
Authority from them, or any of them, upon, or in pursuance of the said
Commission and Instructions, further Instructions, Act and Ordinance
aforementioned, or any of them, for the disposing of the said Rebels and
Papists forfeited, escheated or exchanged Lands, shall be, and are hereby
adjudged, deemed and declared to be good, firm and effectual to all intents and
purposes, and are hereby for ever ratified and confirmed. And be it further
Enacted and Declared, and it is likewise further Enacted and Declared by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and every such person and persons, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, to whom any such forfeited,
escheated or exchanged Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments have been so allotted, assigned, given, granted, distributed, set
out, delivered or reprized by the said Commissioners of Parliament, or
Commissioners of the Commonwealth, the said Lord Deputy and Council, or his
Highness said Council for the Affairs of Ireland, or any of them, or by any
other person or persons by Commission or Authority from them, or any of them,
are and shall be, and are hereby respectively adjudged and declared to be in
real and actual Seisin and Possession of all and every such Manors, Castles,
Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, so to him and them allotted,
assigned, given, granted, distributed, set out, delivered or reprized
respectively, as aforesaid; And that all and every such person and persons,
their Heirs and Assigns, shall, and may for ever hereafter have, hold, and
enjoy the same to him and them respectively, and to his and their respective
Heirs and Assigns in free and common Soccage, as of the Castle of Dublin, under
such Rents, Services, Covenants, Conditions, Qualifications, Remittals, and
Abatements, as in and by the said several Commission and Instructions, Further
Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and Ordinance for Encouragement, or any of
them are expressed.

Provided, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein, nor in the said
aforementioned Commission and Instructions, Further Instructions, Act of
Satisfaction, and Ordinance for Encouragement, or any of them contained shall
any ways extend to the forfeiture, extinguishment, defeating, making void or
prejudicing of any Contract, Bargain, Sale, Grant, Demise, Lease, Release,
Rent, or Exchange, heretofore made or granted of, or out of any the said
forfeited, escheated or exchanged Lands, by any the said Officers or Soldiers,
or others to whom the same have been so formerly allotted, assigned, given,
granted, distributed, set out, delivered or reprized as aforesaid, or of any
Contract, Bargain, or Sale of any Debenture or Debentures, in satisfaction
whereof any the said forfeited, escheated or exchanged Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, are, have been, or shall be allotted, granted, given out, or
distributed to any person or persons whatsoever, but that all and every such
person and persons to whom any such Contract, Bargain, Sale, Grant, Demise,
Lease, Release, Rent or Exchange, has or have been so made or granted, and the
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns of all and every such person and
persons respectively, shall and may at all times hereafter peaceably and
quietly enjoy to his and their respective Use and Uses, the benefit and
advantage of every such Bargain and Contract, so to him and them respectively
made as aforesaid, Any thing in this Act, or in the said Commission and
Instructions, Further Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and Ordinance for
Encouragement, or any of them, contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to the end the said Commission and Instructions, Further Instructions, Act
of Settlement, Act of Satisfaction, and Ordinance for Encouragement, may be
further put in execution as to the said Officers and Soldiers, whose Arrears
or any part thereof are yet to be satisfied in Ireland; Be it further Enacted
and Declared, and it is further Enacted and declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Lord Deputy and Council, or other chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland, with the Council there for the time being, or the Council
there in the absence of the chief Governor, shall be, and are hereby required
and authorized at all and every time and times hereafter, to do and execute, or
cause to be done and executed, all such further Act and Acts, thing and things
necessary to be done in pursuance of, and according to the tenor of the said
Commission and Instructions, Further Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and
Ordinance for Encouragement, or any of them, as the said Commissioners of
Parliament could, might, or ought to have done thereupon, for the setting
forth, allotting, distributing or assigning of the remainder of the said
forfeited, escheated, or exchanged Lands, to such of the Officers, Soldiers,
and others, in the said Act of Satisfaction mentioned, who have not yet
received satisfaction of their respective Arrears; All and every which said Act
and Acts, thing and things hereafter so to be done, or caused to be done by the
said Lord Deputy and Council, or the chief Governor or Governors of Ireland,
with the Council there for the time being, or by the Council there in the
absence of the chief Governor, according to, and in pursuance of the said
Commission and Instructions, Further Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and
Ordinance of Encouragement, or any of them, to the purposes aforesaid, shall
be, and are hereby declared to be good, binding and effectual in Law to all
intents and purposes. Provided, and it is hereby declared, That no such further
Act or Acts, thing or things so to be done, or caused to be done by the said
Lord Deputy and Council, or by the chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, with
the Council there for the time being, or by the Council there in the absence of
the chief Governor, or by any of them, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever by Order, Commission, Authority or Direction of them, or any of
them, shall any ways alter, change, impeach, destroy, defeat, extinguish or
make void all or any the said former Allotments, Assignments, Grants
Distributions and Reprisals, or any of them, made to any the said Officers and
Soldiers, or other persons aforementioned, by the said Commissioners of
Parliament, Commissioners of the Commonwealth, Lord Deputy and Council of
Ireland, and his Highness said Council there, or any of them, or by any other
person or persons by Commission or Authority from them, or any of them as
aforesaid; saving nevertheless to the said Lord Deputy and Council of Ireland,
and the chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, with the Council there for the
time being, all such Power and Authority of Resurveying any the said forfeited,
escheated or exchanged Lands so already allotted, set out and disposed of to
the Officers and Soldiers as aforesaid, as in and by the said Act of
Satisfaction is expressed and contained; And saving likewise to his Highness
and the Commonwealth, all such benefits and advantages of the surplusage of
Land which shall be found on the returns of the said Surveys, according to the
tenor of the said Act of Satisfaction in that behalf.

And for the better and more perfect Execution of all and every the former
Branches of this Act, Be it Enacted and Declared, and it is likewise Enacted
and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Lord Deputy and Council,
or the chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, with the Council there for the
time being, or the Council there in the absence of such chief Governor or
Governors, shall be, and are hereby further authorized and required at all
times hereafter (upon request to them to be made) to cause Letters Patents,
under the Great-Seal of Ireland, to be made unto such of the Grand Allottees,
or other persons to whom the said Allotments, Assignments, Grants,
Distributions or Reprisals of the said forfeited, escheated, or exchanged Lands
in Ireland, have been, or shall be respectively made as aforesaid, or to the
respective Heir or Heirs of such Grand Allottees, or other persons aforesaid,
in case of his or their Decease, or to so many of them as shall desire the
same, for the better, more perfect, and effectual Conveyance and Assurance of
all and every such Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
to every such person and persons, his and their Heirs and Assigns, to be held
by such Tenures, and under such Rents, Services, Conditions, Qualifications,
Indulgences, Remittals and Abatements, as in and by the said several
Commission and Instructions, Further Instructions, Act of Satisfaction, and
Ordinance for Encouragement, are expressed and declared; and in and by the said
Letters Patents to create such Manors, constituted and made up of such
proportion and number of Acres in the several Provinces of Ireland, and with
such Jurisdictions, Liberties, Privileges and Immunities, as in and by the
said Commission and Instructions, Further Instructions, Act of Satisfaction,
and Ordinance for Encouragement, or any of them, is declared: And, that the
said Grand Allottee or Allottees, or other the said Patentee or Patentees, in
case of his or their decease, shall for so much of the said forfeited,
escheated, or exchanged Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments to him and them so allotted, granted, assigned, set out,
distributed and delivered, as shall justly belong to any other person or
persons, whose shares and proportions were comprehended within the General Lot
of every such Grand Allottee, shall after the perfection of the said Letters
Patents, upon Thirty days warning to him or them in that behalf respectively
given by the said person or persons so concerned, or any other person for their
use as aforesaid, and at the Costs and Charges of him or them so concerned,
make, execute and perfect any such Assurance or Conveyance in the Law by Deed,
Fine, Feoffment, Release, Confirmation, or otherwise, for the sure granting,
assuring, and conveying of all and every the said share and proportion of such
several person and persons so concerned, in all and every the said respective
Grand Lots, to all and every the said person and persons so concerned, and to
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, with Warranty against every such Patentee and
Patentees, and his and their Heirs, and all and every person and persons
lawfully claiming by, from, or under him and them respectively, as by the said
several person and persons concerned, his or their Heirs and Assigns, or by his
or their Counsel learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, advised or
required; And that all and every the said person or persons to whom such
Assurance or Assurances shall be so made as aforesaid, and his and their Heirs
and Assigns shall and may, and are hereby declared, immediately from and after
such the said Assurance so to him or them perfected by the said Patentee or
Patentees, or his or their Heirs as aforesaid, to stand and be seized of all
and every such share and proportion of the said forfeited, escheated and
exchanged Lands so to him and them granted and conveyed as aforesaid, to the
several use and uses of every such Grantee, and of his and their Heirs, freed
and discharged of and from all former Gifts, Grants, Bargains, Sales, Leases,
Ioyntures, Dowers, Charges, Debts, Statutes, Judgments, Extents, Executions and
Encumbrances whatsoever, for, or by reason of being so vested as aforesaid, in
the said Patentee or Patentees, or any of them, and shall accordingly hold and
enjoy the same for ever freed and discharged of and from all and every the said
encumbrances.

Provided nevertheless, and it is hereby likewise further Declared, That all
and every person and persons of the Protestant Religion, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, and their respective Heirs and Successors, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, who have already obtained any Decree or Decrees in the late Court
of Adjudication of Claims in Ireland, or in the Court of Exchequer there, for
any part of the said forfeited, escheated or exchanged Manors, Castles, Houses,
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or for any Rent out of the same, or for any
Charge or Encumbrance thereupon, lying and being within any the Ten Counties,
appointed in and by the said Act of Satisfaction, for the satisfaction of the
Adventurers, Soldiers, and others, or in the County of Lowth, or in any other
County or Counties in Ireland, or who have before the Three and twentieth of
October, One thousand six hundred fifty four, exhibited his or their Claim or
Claims, in the said late Court for Adjudication of Claims in Ireland, and shall
at or before the First day of December, One thousand six hundred fifty seven,
obtain any Decree or Decrees for any the said forfeited Manors, Castles,
Houses, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, or for any Debt, Rent, Charge, Duty,
Profit or Encumbrance arising, growing due out of, or charged upon the same, by
reason of any Deed, Grant, Mortgage, Statute-Staple, Recognizance, Judgment, or
other Encumbrance whatsoever in the said Court of Exchequer, or who shall on or
before the first day of June, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred fifty eight, obtain any Decree or Decrees for any part of
the said forfeited, escheated, or exchanged Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments
lying and being in any other County or Counties in Ireland, besides the said
Ten Counties, and the said County of Lowth, or for any Debt, Rent, Charge, Duty
or Encumbrance, arising or growing due out of the same, or thereon charged or
chargeable as aforesaid, shall and may for ever hereafter have, hold, possess
and enjoy all and every such of the said forfeited, escheated or exchanged
Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or the said Debt,
Rent, Charge, Annuity, Duty or Profit arising or growing due out of the same,
so to him or them decreed or to be decreed as aforesaid, for and during the
respective Estate and Estates so to him and them decreed, according to the
tenor and effect of every such Decree so by him or them obtained, or to be
obtained as aforesaid, Any thing before in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, and it is Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That if any the said Person or Persons, Bodies Politic and
Corporate, who have any such Encumbrance upon any the said forfeited, escheated
or exchanged Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, shall
not exhibit and prosecute his or their Claim to the same with effect, to the
obtaining his or their Decree or Decrees for the same, within the respective
times to that end appointed as aforesaid, That then and from thenceforth all
and every such the said person and persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, who
had any such right to any such Encumbrance as aforesaid, and the Heirs and
Successors, Executors and Administrators of every such person and persons,
Bodies Politic and Corporate, and every of them respectively, shall for ever
be from thenceforth respectively barred to make his or their Claim to the same;
And that then and from thenceforth the said forfeited, escheated and exchanged
Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, shall be, and are
hereby adjudged and declared to be for ever freed and discharged of and from
all and every the said Encumbrances respectively, Any thing before in this Bill
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Saving likewise, and reserving out of this Bill unto the Provost, Fellows and
Scholars of the College of the Holy and Vn-divided Trinity at Dublin, all such
Right of Action and Entry, Condition, Possession, Reversion, Remainder,
Annuity, Rent and Common, which they have, or ought to have in or out of the
said forfeited, escheated, or exchanged Lands in this Act mentioned, or any of
them.

And also, saving and reserving to all and every person and persons, who were
Protestants on the said three and twentieth day of October, One thousand six
hundred forty one, and have so continued ever since, all such Right, Title,
Interest, Benefit and Advantage, which they, or their Heirs, or the Executors
or Administrators of them, or any of them, have or may have, in, to, or out of
any the said forfeited, escheated or exchanged Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, by virtue of any Articles, or by virtue of any Composition,
Indemnity or Exemption upon, or in pursuance of any Articles, or of one
Ordinance of his Highness the Lord Protector and his Council, dated the first
day of August, one thousand six hundred fifty four, Entitled, An Ordinance for
Indemnity to the English Protestants of the Province of Munster in Ireland; or
by virtue of one other Ordinance of his said Highness and Council, dated the
second day of September, one thousand six hundred fifty four, Entitled, An
Ordinance for admitting Protestants in Ireland to Compound; which said
Articles, and last mentioned Ordinances, and all Compositions made or to be
made thereupon, or in pursuance thereof, are hereby likewise Ratified and
Confirmed, or by any or either of them.

And also, saving to all other person and persons, who have been pardoned by
his said Highness, or admitted to compound for his or their Estates in
Ireland, the benefit of his and their respective Pardons and Compositions, Any
Law, Ordinance or Act of Parliament to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
prejudicial to any person or persons, their Heirs or Assigns, for any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, given or granted to him or them, or any in trust
for him or them, or his or their Heirs, since the first day of November, one
thousand six hundred forty one, by or in pursuance of any Act or Acts,
Ordinance or Ordinances, Order or Orders of Parliament, or of his Highness and
Council, or either of them; but that every such person and persons, and his and
their respective Heirs, or such as they are entrusted for, and their Heirs,
shall and may have and enjoy all and every the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, according to the purport, true intent and meaning of all and
every the said Acts, Ordinances and Orders respectively, Any thing in this Act,
or any other Act of Parliament to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
settle upon any Officer, Soldier, or any other person, more then his or their
first Proportions and due Allotments.

Provided always, and be it hereby Declared, That nothing in this present Act
contained, shall be construed or taken to Ratify, Confirm, or Establish the
Estate or Possession of Edward Dendy Sergeant at Arms, in any Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments in the Barony of Slain in the County of East-Meath
in Ireland, against Sir John Barington Knight and Baronet, Sir Gilbert Gerard,
Sir William Masham, Sir Richard Everard, Baronets; Sir William Waller, Sir
Thomas Wharton, Sir Jacob Garet, Knights; Alexander Pym, Edward Turner, Esqs
William and John Arnold, or any others who were Adventurers for the reducing of
the said Nation, by virtue of the Act made in the seventeenth year of the late
King Charles, and whose Lots are fallen in the said Barony of Slain, or against
any of their Heirs or Assigns; but that they be left to their several Remedies
and Proceedings for the making good of their Rights and Titles according to the
Law.

Provided always, That neither this Act, nor any thing therein contained,
shall extend to the prejudice of any Adventurer or Adventurers for Lands in
Ireland, their or any of their Heirs or Assigns, nor to any Honors, Castles,
Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments in Ireland, that are granted,
assigned, or duly set apart, allotted, or fallen by Lot, according to the
Surveys and Returns by which the same was made for toward the satisfaction of
the said Adventurers, their Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, within the Moiety
of the said Ten Counties assigned to the Adventurers, and within the County of
Lowth (except the Barony of Atherdy) and except all such Lands and
Hereditaments as are already duly Compounded for by Protestants, within the
said Ten Counties and County of Lowth, by virtue of the aforesaid Ordinances of
his Highness and Council, of the first of August, and second of September, One
thousand six hundred fifty and four.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone Church. Anno Dom. 1657.


