AN ACT For Approbation and Admission of Ministers of the Gospel TO Benefices
and Pulique Lectures.

Friday, March 16. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



depiction of the state arms of the Commonwealth (1649-60) consisting of the
cross of St. George (patron saint of England) and the Irish harp

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.

AN ACT For Approbation and Admission OF MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL TO Benefices
and Public Lectures.
FOrasmuch as it is the Duty and Interest of Magistrates to take Care of the
Church and of the Provision of godly and able Ministers for it, Be it enacted,
That every Person who shall from and after the fifteenth day of March, One
thousand six hundred fifty and nine be presented, nominated, chosen or
appointed to any Benefice, formerly called Benefice with Care of Souls, or to
preach any Public settled Lecture in England or Wales, shall before he be
admitted unto any such Benefice or Lecture, be judged and approved by the
Persons hereafter named, to be a Person of godly life and sufficient abilities
for the work of the Ministry, and a Person ordained thereunto. And that no
Person to be presented after the said fifteenth day of March, but such as shall
be so approved and admitted, shall be a public Preacher, or take or receive
any such Benefice as aforesaid or the Profits thereof. And be it further
Enacted, That Doctor Reynolds, Mr Calamye, Mr Manton, Mr Ash, Mr Haviland, Mr
Jacombe, Mr Jenkin, Mr Cooper, Mr Case, Doctor Spurstow, Mr Bates, Mr Poole, Mr
Woodcock, Doctor Drake, Mr Nalton, Mr Whitaker, Mr Guibon, Mr Carryl, Mr
Jackson, Mr Row, Mr Sangar, Mr Sheffeild, Mr Barker, Mr Watson, Mr Tailor, Mr
Lie, Mr Ralph Breddock, Mr George Griffith, Mr John Meriton, Doctor Ho^^on,
Doctor Annesley, shall be and are h^reb^ nominated, constituted and appointed
Commissioners for such approbation and admission as is aforesaid; And the said
Commissioners, or any five or more of them met together in London, are hereby
authorized to Judge and take knowledge of the ability and fitness of any Person
so presented, nominated, chosen or appointed, according to the Qualification
abovementioned; And upon their approbation of such his ability and fitness, to
Grant unto such Person admission to such Benefice or Lecture by an Instrument
in Writing under a Common Seal to be appointed by the said Commissioners or any
five of them, and under the hand of the Register for the time being to be also
nominated by the said Commissioners or the great^r number of them; which
Instrument, the said Register shall cause to be entered in a Book for that
purpose, and kept upon Record.

And it is hereby Enacted, That the said Person so admitted into any such
Benefice, shall be Possessor and perfect Incumbent to all intents and purposes
of the same, and entitled thereby to all the Profits, Perquisites, Rights and
Dues incident and belonging thereunto, as also the Person that shall be so
admitted to any Lecture as aforesaid, shall be thereby enabled (according to
the Establishment and Constitution of such Lecture) to preach ther^in, and to
have and r^ceive the Stipend or Profits to such Lecture belonging.

Provided always, That no Person who shall be nominated or presented for
approbation as aforesaid, shall be concluded by any Vote of the said
Commissioners which shall pass in the negative as to his approbation, unless
for reasonable Cause, and that nine or more of the said Commissioners be
present at such Vote; And that the names of the Refusers be registered in a Book
to be kept for that purpose, whereunto any Person may resort.

And it is further Enacted, That all Patrons of any Benefices that are now
void, shall within six months next after the 15th day of March aforesaid, and
of any Benefice that shall hereafter be void, within six months next after the
avoydance of the same, Present unto the said Commissioners or any five of them,
some fit Person to be admitted; and for default of such Presentation within
that time, the Presentation for that turn shall devolve by Lapse unto the
Chancellor and Scholars of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge
respectively, according to the Distribution of the Statute in the Case of
Popish Recusants in the third year of the late King James, Chapter the fifth.

Provided that the Patrons, any time before the University have presented, may
have the same Liberty to present their Clarks after the six months Lapse
incurred, as according to Law they might have done in former times.

And be it further enacted, That the Patron or Patrons shall have the same
remedy against the Commissioners aforesaid, as in like case he or they had
against the Ordinary heretofore, and also against Disturbers; And that in case
of suit to be had against the Commissioners, it shall be sufficient without
naming any Person, to bring such suit against them by the name of Commissioners
for approbation and admission of Ministers, and Process against them shown to,
and a Copy thereof delivered by the Sheriff or his Ministers to the Register,
be a sufficient serving of such Process, and shall be a sufficient Warrant for
the Sheriff to return the Process served.

Provided also, and be it hereby enacted, That she Courts in which such suits
shall be, are hereby respectively enabled to award any Writ to the Sheriff of
the County where such Benefice or Lecture shall be for the putting of any Clark
into possession, as heretofore they might have done to any Bishop or
Metropolitan.

Be it further enacted, That the said Commissioners or any nine of them, shall
have power by writing under their Seal, to nominate four or more Persons of
known Piety and Learning, for and in every County of England and Wales, who or
any three of them so nominated in their respective Counties, shall have power
to examine such Person as shall be presented or nominated to any Benefice, or
is to be admitted to any Lecture within the said respective Counties, touching
his fitness and abilities for the same, and to Certify in writing with their
names subscribed, their Opinion and Judgment thereupon to the Commissioners
herein named; And in case that Certificate shall be made of the fitness and
ability of such Person, the Commissioners shall proceed thereupon to admit him,
as fully to all intents as if that he had been examined and approved by
themselves. And it is further Enacted, That during the vacancy of such
Benefices, in default of such Presentation, the said Commissioners or any five
or more of them, have hereby Authority to sequester the Fruits and Profits
thereof, for providing an able and godly Preacher to serve the Cure, and giving
him a reas^nable allowance, rendering the Overplus to the next Incumbent. And
be it further declared and Enacted, That no person shall be admitted unto such
Benefice or Lecture, unless he bring with him a Testimonial or Certificate
from three Ministers of the Gospel of known piety and learning, and do also
give satisfaction of his fitness to the said Commissioners or any five of them.
And whereas for the better maintenance of Preaching Ministers, several
Augmentations have been heretofore granted, Be it further Enacted, That all
persons or person to whom after the said 15th day of March any Augmentation
shall be granted, before he or they receive the same, shall obtain the
approbation of the said Commissioners or five of them as a person qualified, as
is before mentioned; And in case of approbation, such approbation shall be
entered by the said Register, who under his hand shall also signify the same to
such person or persons as are or shall be authorized to pay such Augmentation,
who are hereby required and authorized from time to time to pay the person or
persons so approved, such Augmentation as shall be granted as aforesaid unto
him or the place where he preaches, taking his or their Acquittances for the
same. Provided, and it is hereby declared, that this Act, or any thing therein
contained, shall not be construed to extend unto any Benefices Ecclesiastical,
that were not presentative before the Ordinance for the Abolition of Bishops,
nor to any Lectures preached or read in any of the Universities or other
Colleges.

Provided also, and be it hereby Enacted, That all Ministers having Parochial
Charge, do read the Scriptures, Preach, Administer the Sacraments of Baptism
and the Lords Supper, Catechize, and perform all other Duties according to the
Directory for the Public Worship of God, established by Ordinance of
Parliament the third of January 1644.

Provided also, and be it hereby Enacted, That the Fees upon every Approbation
and Admission, be only Thirteen shillings and Four pence; that is, To the
Register, six shillings eight pence only; and the other six shillings eight
pence to be disposed of for the defraying of incident Charges, as the said
Commissioners or any five of them shall appoint.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That such Persons or any five or more
of them that the Commissioners in this Act named from time to time according to
the Instructions mentioned in this Act, shall nominate and appoint in the
respective Counties of England and Wales for the approving of Preaching
Ministers unto Livings, with Cure and Lectures in their respective Counties,
shall from time to time have Power and Authority; And are hereby Authorized to
ordain Preaching Ministers in their respective Counties, according to the Form
and Directions of an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled
of the 29. of August, 1648, Entitled, The Form of Church Government to be used
in England and Ireland, So as such Persons, nominated as aforesaid, be Ordained
Ministers.

And Be it further Enacted and Ordained, That the public Professors of
Divinity, and the Divinity Lecturers, and the Heads of the Houses respectively,
in the respective Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, or any Five or more of
them, being Ministers Ordained, shall from time to time have power and
authority, and are hereby authorized to Ordain Preaching Ministers in the said
respective Universities, according to the Form and Directions of the said
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons of the 29 of August, 1648.

And Be it further Enacted, That the said Ordinance of the 29. of August, 1648,
Entitled, The Form of Church Government to be used in England and Ireland,
shall stand and be in force, and put in Execution. And whereas in the said
Ordinance of Lords and Commons, bearing Date the 29. Day of August, 1648, there
was a Clause inserted for the dividing of the several Counties of England and
Wales into distinct Classical Presbyteries, where they were not already
divided, which was not put in Execution accordingly, by reason whereof that
work remains yet undone, Be it therefore Enacted, That the several Justices of
the Peace in the respective Counties, Cities, and places, within England and
Wales,, or any Five or more of them, of the several Counties of England and
Wales, with the assistance of such Ministers and others, as they shall think
fit, Do forthwith meet and consider how their several Counties respectively
may be most conveniently divided into distinct Classical Presbyteries, where
they are not already divided; and what Ministers and others are fit to be of
each Classis: And they shall accordingly make such Division and Nomination of
Persons for each Classical Presbytery: Which Divisions and Persons so named for
every Division, shall be certified by the said Commissioners to the Lord
Keeper, or Lords Commissioners for Custody of the Great Seal for the time
being. And that the Chancellor, Vice-Chancellors, and Heads of the
Universities, do likewise consider how the Colleges and Halls may be put into
Classical Presbyteries, and do certify the same up to the said Lord Keeper, or
Lords Commissioners for Custody of the Great Seal. And that the said
Certificate be made before the 29. Day of September next, which the Council of
State is required to approve and confirm the same as they shall think fit,
immediately upon receipt of such Certificates, and cause the same to be
Registered by the Clerk of the Commonwealth in Chancery. Provided, That this
Act, and every thing therein contained, shall be and stand in force only
until the Parliament take further Order.

Wednesday, March 14. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.


