THE GLORY of the English NATION: Being the Manner of the Crowning of King
William the III. and Queen Mary the II.
In Westminster-Abby, on Thursday the 11th. of April: Also what passed in the
Banqueting House at White Hall, on the 11th. day of May, 1689. At the delivery
of the Crown of SCOTLAND.
elaborate coronation scene in Westminster Abbey, with numbers marking points
of interest 1 2 3 4 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 11 12 12 13 13 14 15 16



THursday being the 11th. of April, Their Majesty's came from Westminster, Hall
between Twelve and One of the Clock into the Palace-Yard* through the Gate
House, along the great Sanctuary to the West end of the Abbey, upon Blew Cloth
which was spread upon the Ground* from the Throne in W^stminster-ha^^, to the
Great Steps in the Church.

1. The First that entered the Abbey was the Drums and Eight Trumpets, Four a
Breast. Then the Kettle Drums. Then Eight Trumpeters more Placed over the Door
of the West end of the Qu^re; when being Seated, they began Four Sounds.

2. The Six Clerks of Chancery came into the Quire, and ascending the Steps
leading to the T^rone divided themselves to the Right and Left, and so fell
Backwards to the farther end of the Seats, on both sides of the Quire, toward
the West

3. Then the Sheriffs and Aldermen of London, took their Seats under them The
Masters of Chancery were placed just ascending the Steps. The Solicitor and
Attorney General, their Places in order. The Lord Chief Baron, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, Masters of the Rolls, and Lord Chief Justice of
the King's Bench, (...) the top of the Steps near the Throne. The Children and
Chope of Westminster coming after, when they came to the Door of the Quire of
the Abbey, divided themselves to the Right and Left, and so stood before the
Soldiers in the Abbey, receiving the KING and QUEEN; when they came up to them,
they began an Anthem, and then walked before the KING and QUEEN into the Quire.

4. Then the two Pursivants at Arms went forward to the top of the Steps, and
directed all concerned where to sit in their proper Places.

5. The Peeresses Ascending the Steps leading to the Throne, were placed on the
Northside of the Abbey, against which was Seated the House of Commons.

6. The Peers Ascended, and were placed on the South Side of the Abbey. Then the
KING and QUEEN Ascending the Steps of the Throne, were Seated in two Chairs of
State on the Throne; and being so Seated, all the Peers and Peeresses sat down;
(none being by Order to do it till their Majesty's were Seated)

7. Then the Bishop of London making the Recognition, standing near the Throne,
and speaking to the Peers and House of Commons, telling them, That he Presented
to them KING William and QUEEN Mary, to be their Undoubted and Lawful KING and
QUEEN; asking them if they would accept of them as the same, and to them
Faithful and True Allegiance bear? Which concluded with three great Huzza's.
Then the KING and QUEEN went to the Altar, and after their first Oblation,
where they were presented with the Regalia severally by those that brought them.

The Bishops being placed near the Altar, the Litany was Sung by the Bishops of
St. Asaph and Rangor.

8. The Epistle was taken out of the 1 Pet. 2. v. 13. to 17. And read by the
Bishop of Carlisle.

SUbmit your selves to every Ordinance of Man; for the Lord's Sake! whether it
be to the King as Supreme: Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
him, for the Punishment of Evil doers, and for the Praise of them that do well.
For so is the will of God, that with well-doing, you may put to Silence the
Ignorance of foolish Men: As free, and not using your Liberty for a Cloak of
Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. Honor all Men. Love the
Brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King. 9. The Gospel taken out of St. Mat. 22.
v. 16. to 22. It was read by the Bishop of St. Asaph.

ANd they sent unto him their Disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we
know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly, neither carest for
any Man* for thou considerest not the Person of Men. Tell us therefore, what
think thou? Is it Lawful to give Tribute unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus
perceived their Wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me. Ye Hypocrites? Show me
the Tribute-Money: And they brought unto him a Peney. And he said unto them,
Whose is this Image and Superscription? They said unto him, Cesers. Then says
he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Cesar's, and
unto God the things which are God's. When they heard these words, they
Marvelled, and left and him, and went their way. 10. Then Doctor Burnet, Bishop
of Salisbury went up into the Pulpit, it being Seated on the North Pillar of
the Abbey; and he rehearsing the Lord's Prayer, began his Sermon, 2 Samuel 23. 3.
4. The God of Isarel said, The Rock of Isarel spoke to me, He that rules over
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God: And he shall be as the light of
the morning, when the Sun rises, even a morning without Clouds; as the tender
Grass springing out of the Earth by clear shining after rain. The Sermon being
over, their Majesty's took the Oath as follows.

Then the Bishop said, WIll you Solemnly promise and Swear to Govern the People
of this Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereto belonging, according to
the Statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the Laws and Customs of the same?


I Solemnly promise so to do.


Will you to your power cause Law and Justice in Mercy to be Executed in all
your Judgments?


I will.


WIll you to the utmost of your power, maintain the Laws of God, the true
profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Religion, Established by
Law? And, will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of the Realm, and to
the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights and Privileges as by
Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of them?


After this the King and Queen laying his and her Hand upon the Holy Gospel,
shall say, The things which I have here before promised, I will perform and
keep. So help me God.
And after an Anthem Sung, they were Anointed with the Consecrated Oil; and
then being conducted to their Chairs, and Seated on the Theater adjoining to
the Throne, they were Seated on the Throne, and presented with the Spurs and
Swords

11. After which they invested them with the Imperial Robes Rings and Sc^pters;
then the Crowns were set upon their Heads by the Bishop of London, and assisted
with several other Bishops, viz. York, Rochester, Winchester, and Bristol.

12. The King and Queen being Crowned, the Nobility and Gentry round about them
paid their homage to them on the Thrown.

13. The Dukes and Dutchesses attending the King and Queen.

14. The House of Commans on the North-side of the Abbey.

15. The Music.

16. The two Chairs that the King and Queen sat in to hear the Sermon. Then the
Holy Bible was presented to Their Majesty's; after which, the King and Queen
Kissed the Bishops; then the King and Queen being Enthroned the Bishops Kissed
their Majesty's Left Cheeks; the Temporal Lords did the same, and all touched
their Crowns on their Heads: Then the Lord High-Steward threw about the
Coronation Medals. Their Majesty's making their second Oblation, and the King
and Queen having received the Holy Sacrament, and the Bishop read the final
Prayers, Their Majesty's went in State into St. Edwards Chapel, and their
being divested of their Imperial Palls, the whole Company, (except the Church
of Westminster) returned to Westminster Hall, Their Majesty's wearing their
rich Crowns of State, and all the Nobility their Coronets on their Heads. And
being entered into the Hall, were conducted to their several Tables to Dinner:
Charles Dymock Esquire; Their Majesty's Champion, in complete Armor, between the
Lord High-Constable and Earl Marshall all on Horseback, performed the Ceremony
of the Challenge, after the usual manner.

The Manner of what passed in the Banqueting House at White Hall, on Thursday
the 11th. of May, 1689. At the delivery of the Crown of SCOTLAND.
THe Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorly, and Sir John Dolrymple
of Staire, the Commissioners sent (by Post) by the Meeting of the Estates of
Scotland, to offer Their Majesty's the Crown of that Kingdom; About three of
the Clock met at the Council Chamger, and from thence were conducted by Sir
Charles Cotterel, Master of the Ceremonies, attended by most of the Nobility
and Gentry of that Kingdom, who reside in and about this place, to the
Banqueting House, where the King and Queen came, attended by many persons of
Quality, the Sword being carried before them by the Lord Cordross (and their
Majesty's being placed on the Throne under a rich Canopy.)

In the last place the Coronation Oath was tendered to their Majesty's; which
my Lord Argy^e pronounced distinctly word by word, and their Majesty's repeated
it after him, holding up their Right Hands, according to the Custom of taking
Oaths in Scotland.

The Scotch OATH.
WE William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland Faithfully Promise and Swear,
by this Our solemn Oath, in presence of the Eternal God, that during the whole
course of Our Life, we will serve the Eternal God, to the uttermost of Our
power, according as he has required in his most ho^y Word, revealed and
contained in the New and Old Testament, and according to the same Word shall
maintain the True Religion of Christ Jesus, the Preaching of his Holy Word, and
the due and right Ministration of the Sacraments, now Received and Preached
within the Realm of Scotland; and shall abolish and gain-stand all false
Religion contrary to the same, and shall Rule the People committed to our
Charge, according to the Will and Command of God, Revealed in his aforesaid
Word, and according to the Loveable Laws and Constititutions received in this
Realm, no ways Repugnant to the said Word of the Eternal God, and procure, to
the utmost of Our power, to the Kirk of God, and whole Christian People, true
and perfect Peace in all time coming. That we shall preserve and keep
inviolated the Rights and Rents, with all just Privileges of the Crown of
Scotland, neither shall we transfer nor alienate the same; that We shall forbid
and repress in all Estates and Degrees, Relief, Oppression, and all kind of
Wrong. And we shall Command and Procure that Justice and Equity in all
Judgments be keept to all Persons without Exception, as the Lord and Father of
all Mercies shall be merciful to us. And we shall be careful to root out all
Heretics and Enemies to the true Worship of God, that shall be Convicted by
the true Kirk of God of the foresaid Crimes, out of Our Lands and Empire of
Scotland. And We faithfully affirm the things above Written by Our Solemn Oath.


Licenced according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street near
Baynard's C^stle. 1689-


