An EXACT and TRUE ACCOUNT Of the taking Five FRENCH SHIPS Laden with
AMMUNITION, By the Dutch, designed for Ireland: Together with the particulars
of the Blowing up of DVNKIRK by the Magazine taking Fire.
THE French Letters say, and the Dutch Letters confirm, that Five French Ships
laden in the Port of Dunkirk with all sorts of Munitions of War, and going
under the Convoy of two of their small Frigates designed for Ireland, were
intercepted and taken by three Dutch Men of Wat; the French Convoys, after
receiving the first Broadside, sheeting off, escaped; and they are now actually
brought into Rotterdam, where being examined into, are found to be Freighted
with these following Particulars, viz.

In one of them are 16 Demi-Culverins upon Carriages, with Sponges. Ladies and
all other Materials thereto, as Traces, and Harness for the Draught of Horses
236 Barrels of Gunpowder. 6000 Iron Bullets. 120 Quintals of Match. 500 Barrels
of Musket. Carbine, and Pistol-shot. 1500 Chevaux de Frize. 400 Tunespiks. 8
Gabions, and other Baskets. 7000 Mattocks, as many Shovels. 300 Wheel Barrows.
2 Mortars 600 Bombs, from 60 to 100 l. weight each. 6000 Horse-shoes. 2000
Saddles, as many Bridles, with Holsters for Pistols, and Cruppers. 4000 New
Tents. 3000 Firelock Muskets. 2000 Matchlocks. 1000 Fusees 6000 Swords,
Bandaliers, Belts, etc. with much other Materials, too long to insert, all
which are condemned as Prize, and are to be brought to Amsterdam, and the
greatest part ordered to Maestricht and Breda for the use of the States Army.
And this direful Misfortune (as the English Proverb denotes, seldom Comes
Alone) is ushered in with another worse than that before mentioned; whereof
take the Particulars.

At Dunkirk there happened a Terrible and Surprising Disaster in the French
Garrison there: For the same being looked upon the Metropolitan over all the
French Garrisons in the New Conquests in Flanders, whereby mighty Stores of all
sorts of Munitions of War were Reposited, for the carrying on the Designs of
Leuis the XIV, was by one Fatal Blow and Disaster, through the Negligence of a
Drunken Workman, or Soldier, with a lighted Pipe of Tobacco, entirely Blown up
and Destroyed.

The certainty of the Occasion cannot be authentickly known, because the Powder
gave no minutes for Enquiry, but precipitatly carried all before it into the
Region of the Air, which as it was more Inclusive, had greater Extensive
Essicacy on the Garrison, it having destroyed and wholly mined one Third of the
Interior Fortifications, and made a large Breach in the Wall of the Side
toward the Sea, there being computed 2000 Barrels of Powder to be lost, which
is an extreme Injury to France, the same being valued at eight Pounds ten
Shillings Sterling each Barrel, besides the Store of Arms and Ammunition
adjoining, are either broke to pieces, or burned in the Ruins, there not being
one part of the said Garrison, but what received its dreadful Effects, either
by the destruction of the House, (...) some People therein, the tops of all the
Buildings, being either carried away, or broke down afterward with the Stoues,
or other ponderous weight which fell thereon. And the Damage is almost
Irreparable, one hundred thousand Pounds Sterling being not sufficient to put
it into its pristine Condition, for the terrible Shock which it made, has
created a great many Cracks and dismal Casma's in the very Wall of the
Fortifications, which must be wholly taken down to the ground to be repaired,
otherwise Untenable; and upon a strict Examination, about 530 people, as well
Soldiers as Inhabitants, have perished in this Catastrophe, among them 43
Officers, and above 300 others are miserably shattered or wounded with the
Stones: And there are some which conclude that it was occasioned by the
Treachery of sevetie new Convert Soldiers, but considering that the person
which perpetrated it, was a Companion in the misery which ensued; we believe
that it was more Misfortune than Design; and the rather, for that it was known,
that a considerable Quantity of Powder brought from Foreign parts, had, by the
Saline and Vaporous Quality of the Sea received some Detriment, whereby it was
drying, and making again serviceable. However it was (as all Advantages with
Enemies are best) it betokens a lucky progress of Assairs to all the
Confederates in the ensuing Campagnes especially in the Kingdom of Ireland, to
which place the said Powder was principally designed, and where we do not doubt
the French Rhodomantado's as soon as appear, will vanish in Smoke.

Printed in London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh 1690.


