A FRENCH PROPHECY: OR, AN ADMONITION TO THE ENGLISH, CONCERNING THEIR NEAR
APPROACHING DANGER, AND THE MEANS TO ESCAPE IT. Being a Prediction of a
Gentleman of Quality in Languedoc, concerning the Downfall of the French King,
and several other Things relating to England.

Translated from the French Copy, and printed at London, with License, Feb.
1690.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following paper accidentally fell into the hands of the Editor, bound up
with a number of other fugitive pieces. -- The title struck him, as every thing
that may seem to have any reference to the great events of the present time is
ready to do. He lays no undue stress upon extraordinary admonitions, much less
upon pretensions to modern prophecy; seeing we have Moses and the Prophets, and
the holy Apostles, to testify unto us; a more sure word of prophecy to which we
do well to take heed. Yet it would be wrong to limit the divine sovereignty as
to the ways in which Providence may give warning to a guilty people, and
impress the minds of some with regard to approaching danger. -- The following
is written in a pious strain, and bears at least evident marks of sincerity and
good intention in the writers. Every one is left to judge of the mavelous
part of it, as he thinks proper: But whatever opinion he may form of that; the
advice given may appear both salutary and seasonable for Britain in the present
awful crisis. It is therefore presented without farther comment, and without
alteration, except in one or two phrases wherein the English translation does
not so exactly express the meaning of the French original.

Introduction by the English Publisher.
THE original French of the following Admonition I received lately in Holland
of the Author, whose name is thereunto subscribed; a gentleman of an ancient
family in Languedoc, whose seat is an ancient castle of the same name with
himself, above three English miles from Montpelier, with a considerable revenue
thereunto belonging. But he was forced to leave it and all that he had, after
two years imprisonment, for religion. And this is his condition at present. The
Author of the Admonition, which he mentions, was his younger brother, who died
near three years since, of about forty-eight years of age, a person, as he
says, of great piety and credit, and of extraordinary knowledge of things
absent and future. And of him our author received both admonition beforehand
of the things here said to have happened to him, and an explication afterward
of the mysteries of them, and the signification thereof. He is not without
witnesses of the truth of what he relates; but they are dispersed into several
parts, and some of them now in England.

It was the author's desire to have it committed to the English as soon as it
might be, and my good will to my country, and desire to serve them, inclined me
to lend my assistance therein, without much difficulty, both because it does
agree so much with the known prediction of Bishop Usher, and because the state
and course of affairs seem to agree bur too much with both, in a manifest
tendency to the accomplishment of them. And that the Reader may not to be so
much disturbed, as admonished by it, for his better direction and instruction
how to use it, I thought fit to subjoin the principal part of the Bishop's
predictions Bishop Usher's prophecy is not here subjoined, as it has been
lately and repeatedly printed in Scotland.
: which I can assure the reader to be no imposture, but true and genuine, from
the testimony of two witnesses beyond all exception. The one, the late Lord
Chief Justice Hale, who, when I showed it him in writing before ever it was
printed, and desired his judgment of it, told me he had heard him say the
substance of it, the substance of it (repeating those word) twenty times with a
great deal of confidence: The other, a person whom I ought not to name without
license, but of great honor by degree, and much greater by real worth and
virtue, to whom the words were spoken hy the Bishop, and who committed them to
writing, and was pleased to favor me with the perusal of the original.

An Admonition to the Christians of England.
HE must be very blind, who perceives not that the wrath of GOD has long since
been kindled against all parts almost of Europe; so that he seems resolved to
destroy all flesh again as it were with a new deluge, since it is but too true,
that they have abandoned themselves to all kind of wickedness. But the
indignation of the Almighty has begun to manifest itself more especially
against those who are called Protestants. And by those means ought we to have
been induced to repentance, and the reformation of our manners. But heaven and
earth are witness, that we have not so much as known, or well considered, what
it is to afflict our souls and amend our lives. Hence it is that the judgments
of God, which we so little regarded, though the decree has again and again
brought forth so terribly, have been daily more and more increasing. This we,
in France, have been made to see by experience, since we neglected the
admonitions which were given to us.

It is now twenty years and upwards, since I received a letter, which
admonished me of our approaching miseries [in France] and the means to prevent
them: which were, to call together the governors of our church, and acquaint
them that they should appoint a 3 days fast in that church, which soever should
first be attached, [by process of our enemies]; and they should see the effects
thereof. But I neglected that advice, not knowing whence it came. But about ten
years after, when I understood that, and saw the event of much of that which
was foretold, I acquainted those gentlemen with it: but they regarded not what
I said; which made the consequence so sad. There are now in England diverse
ministers, who were present when I showed the letter which was sent me. -- The
same advice which was given to me, was sent also to Madam Turene, and to the
Sieur Rouvigny, and to Mr. Gache, minister of Charenton, and to the Synod of
Languedoc. And when the author who sent these Admonitions, understood that
nothing was done thereupon, he wrote thus to me:

"Very unhappy is that ship, which being shaken in a grievous storm, the
mariners will not be roused even by a child to pump out the water, which he
sees running in, till he is forced to cry out, Every one shift for himself. Woe
to him who loves not our Lord Jesus, and does not carry the Divine Crucified
One daily in his heart."

About eight or nine years since, a sudden stroke as of thunder struck me down
in the daytime (about 8 in the morning) according to three several warnings
thereof given to me three years before. This was followed about six weeks after
by a thunder in the night: whereof I had also been admonished. Whereupon I
called up all who were in bed in my house, and we went into the chapel, where
we were wont to have sermon The original is, "au lieu ou je fasois precher."
The London copy reads, "the room where we used to have prayers."
, and there read the scriptures. While that was doing, it thundered under my
feet, though the place was paved and upon a rock. We all heard the noise of
thunder (directly) under me, (who was at a distance from them, though all in the
same room,) as loud as it used to be in the air, and for some time. Yet we left
not off our reading the scriptures. Those were terrible claps, and mysterious
presages and forerunners of the calamities, which are ready to break out upon
the kingdoms of France and England. There are in England several persons who
were at my house when these things happened: They understood not the mystery of
them; but I am able to prove what I here declare.

About five or six years since, when I was to leave the country where I dwelt,
the author of these Admonitions, (who lived so Christian a life as none could
blame, and whom God had favored with such extraordinary graces, as few, I
believe, in several ages have heard the like,) deposited with me a sealed
paper; and told me the time when I should open it. In the beginning were these
words:

"O King (meaning the French king), a greater King than thee commands (or
rules) thee: consider of the reckoning thou art to make, sooner than thou
think."

And in the end,

"O England, if thou make thyself partaker in the crime, thou shall take part
in the punishment."

The storm is violent, full of horror and destruction: Endeavor to prevent it,
that your country may be a country of peace, a fortunate island, and a garden
of Eden: which is the hearty desire of your most obedient servant, Saint Jean.

Postscript.] You, who are watchmen of Israel, this is the time to watch and
pray; this is the time to cry aloud and spare not: "Sound the trumpet in Sion;
awaken the sleeping people: Be instant in season, and out of season, and speak
boldly to Jerusalem, that she repent, that so peace may be unto her, and not
sudden destruction; for the thunder has already [Here a few words are wanting,
being cut off in binding.]

SOME PASSAGES EXTRACTED FROM A SCARCE BOOK, WRITTEN BY THE EMINENTLY PIOUS MR.
J. WELSH, WHEN MINISTER OF JONZAC, DURING HIS EXILE IN FRANCE; RELATING TO THE
APPROACHING DESTRUCTION OF THE ANTICHRISTIAN KINGDOM, AS FORETOLD IN THE
PROPHECIES OF SCRIPTURE. TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH COPY, ENTITLED,
L'ARMAGEDDON de la Babylon Apocalyptique: pr. in 1612.
-- AS the Lord rained fire and brimstone from heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah,
and overthrew the cities and all the plain, so that the smoke of them ascended
as the smoke of a furnace; -- so undoubtedly will the Lord surprise papal
Sodom, as in a moment; in one day shall her plagues come, death, sorrow, and
famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire: "For strong is the Lord of
hosts that judges her." -- In an instant shall she be made desolate -- her
great riches shall come to nothing, and "the smoke of her torment shall ascend
up for ever." "The beast and the false prophet shall be taken, and cast alive
into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone; and all who worship the
beast, etc." Rev. xiv. 9, 10, 11. -- The Lord has seen in thee, and in thy
prophets, great and horrible enormities, adulteries, whoredoms, lies, and
abominations more than Sodomitical. Have you not wrought wickedness with a high
hand? Has not profaneness gone forth from you among all nations? You
strengthen the people in their superstitions and idolatries. Hear then, Italian
Sodom! Hear, ye princes of Sodom, and ye people of spiritual Gommorah! what the
Lord has pronounced against you: "He will feed you with wormwood, and make you
drink the water of gall:" Thou shall be made a desolation; -- so that every one
that goes by, shall be astonished, and hiss at all thy plagues; -- "No man
shall abide there, neither shall a son of man dwell in it:" -- for who is like
me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that shepherd that shall stand
before me? Jer. xlix. 17, etc. Hear then the counsel he has determined against
thee, O Italy! and the thoughts that he thinks against the inhabitants of
Rome: The earth shall be shaken at the noise which shall bring upon them ruin.
He shall come up as an eagle; he shall fly, and stretch his wings over that
great city, and the hearts of her mighty men in that day, shall be as the heart
of a a woman in travail; "Behold a people shall come from the north, and a
great nation, etc." Jer. l. 41, 42, 43. -- Thou shall become like Sodom in thy
punishment, as thou wast Sodom in thy sins; and thy children as Gomorrah; -- a
place for breeding of nettles, and salt pits, and of desolation for ever. This
shall thou have for a reward of thy pride: Even as thou have used reproaching
taunts and boastings against the people of the Lord, so the Lord shall be
terrible against thee: He will famish all thy gods. Depart then quickly, ye who
are his people, tarry not: Save your lives, your souls, your bodies, your
families, and your posterity: "Wash you -- make you clean." -- Lo, you are
admonished of this. Behold the patience and goodness of God leading thee to
repentance. Therefore, while it is said, "today if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts," make haste, arise, save your life; stop not in any
place of the plain of this spiritual Sodom: Ascend and save yourselves in the
mountain of God. -- Arrange yourselves on the side of the Lamb; for those who
are with him are called, and holy. Linger not; and if there are any others
pertaining to you, kinsman, son, or daughter, remove them far from these
places; for assuredly the Lord is about to destroy them, because the cry of
them is become exceeding great before the Lord. He will send his delegates, and
his holy ones, to destroy them. Therefore, do not scoff at the warning; for if
you do not believe and obey the voice of the Lord, you shall perish in these
judgments. And as for you who have departed thence, tarry not in that plain:
Suffer not yourselves to be allured by the pleasures, the plenty, the opulence,
or delights of it: Stretch not out your tents so far as Sodom, for the men of
it are "wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly." -- Their cry is
increased -- their sin highly aggravated, and the Lord is come down to see,
whether it be not so. Remember the wife of Lot, who is proposed for an example
to all those who put their hand to the plough, and look back; and lay to heart
that most alarming word of God, enough to make ten thousand worlds to tremble;
"If we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, etc."
Heb. x. 26, 27, 28, 29, 31. and chap. vi. 4, 5. -- "How fearful a thing is it
to fall into the hands of the living God!" L'Armaged. chapter v.. 13.


"In Egypt the firstborn and the chief of their strength were smitten: So in
the Romish church (which spiritually is Sodom and Egypt, Rev. ii. 8.) many of
their firstborn and chief of their strength have been smitten, in many
kingdoms, and are dead, yea, the very posterity and memory of them are rooted
out of the earth, as in Germany, France, Flanders, Scotland, England, and
several other kingdoms. The deliverance of the churches of God was accomplished
"by a strong hand, and stretched out arm, with signs and wonders: Et quand le
premier ne qui est assis sur ce throne tenebreux de Pharao occidental sera
frappe, lors la delivrance sera accomplie: -- And when the firstborn who is
seated upon that darkened throne of the western Pharaoh shall be smitten, then
the deliverance shall be completed Ibid. chapter x.. 3.
.

"As those who departed out of Egypt were for the most part rebellious, and
fell through their unbelief in the wilderness; so shall it befall those still
who, having left this Egypt, rebel against the Lord, in order to return
thither. Not even the king himself, the higher powers ordained of God, to whom
all persons ought to be subject, can again bring back the Lord's redeemed,
seeing he has said, ye shall never again return this way. -- For we must
"render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are God's." We must obey God God rather than men. "Woe unto them that go down
into Egypt for help, and rely upon their great number of horses, chariots and
horsemen; but they look not to the Holy One of Israel:" for they are men, and
not God. "The Lord shall stretch forth his hand, and he who helps shall fall,
and he who is helped shall stumble, and they all shall fall together. And if ye
will return, he will bring upon you all the sicknesses of that land, and make
them cleave to you: he will make your plagues and the plagues of your children
wonderful, even great plagues, and of long continuance. -- Betake not
yourselves to the shadow of Egypt; for that shall be your confusion, seeing it
is a people that shall not profit you at all; their help shall be in vain, and
to no purpose, but 'your strength is to sit still;" and to stay yourselves
entirely upon the Lord: "for it is a land of trouble and anguish, from whence
come the old and young lion," to devour, "the viper and the fiery flying
serpent" to bite and to sting. -- Let every one cast away his idols of silver
and of gold; for your fortresses shall pass away for fear, and your princes and
captains shall be afraid of the ensign, says the Lord, "whose fire is in Zion,
and his furnace in Jerusalem." Isa. xxxi.

-- "Ye pastors of the Romish church, who feed your flocks with the wind of
traditions, the commandments, and ordinances of men, even doctrines of devils,
howl and cry! and ye magnificent cardinals, archbishops and bishops, roll
yourselves in the dust! for the days of your slaughter, and of your dispersions
are accomplished, and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel: your peaceable
habitations are cut down, because of the fierce anger of the Lord. He shall
kindle a fire in the houses of yours Gods, and shall burn them, and break the
statues of your gods in pieces. Does not the Lord remember the incense you have
burnt to them in all the cities, and in all the streets of that great city --
you, and your fathers, your kings, the chief men among you, and your people? Is
not all this come into his heart, so as no longer to endure your wicked and
abominable deeds? Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle;
harness the horses, and get up ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets,
furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines. Wherefore are they dismayed,
and turned away back? -- The swift cannot flee away, nor the mighty man escape;
they shall stumble and fall toward the north; for out of the north comes
destruction. Jer. xlvi. 3, 4, etc. Go up to Gilead, and take balm, O daughter
of Egypt; in vain shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall not be cured.
Declare ye this in Italy, and publish it in Naples; publish it in Milan, and in
Rome, and in all the strongest cities thereof: all thy plains shall be ravaged,
and the strong shall fall upon the strong, and both shall fall down together. O
inhabitress of Italy! prepare thyself for removing. Thy military men, thy
cardinals, bishops, canons, monks, Jesuits, and all thy troop of locusts
maintained by thee, are as fatted calves; they shall turn their backs, and fly
together, they shall not stand their ground, because the day of their calamity,
the time of their punishment is come upon them: for thine adversaries shall
march with power, and come against thee; with an ax, as fellers, they shall cut
down thy forest, although the trees thereof cannot be numbered. Pharaoh thy
king with his triple crown, is but a sound; and the noise of thy frogs and
locusts shall pass like the hissing of a serpent. -- All the fowls of the air
are called to the banquet of the great God; they shall all be assembled to eat
the flesh of those who take part with the beast; and then you shall know that
the Lord is the God and Reedemer of the reformed churches. -- Many kings and
princes have served, and made their subjects perform great services, against
the Turks, etc. without receiving their wages. -- See then, O kings, and
princes, and ye who follow him who rides on the white horse! Behold the land of
Italy, behold the great city that has enriched her merchants with her wealth,
and made them princes in the earth, lo, they are given you for the recompense
of your service: ye shall gather the booty thereof, and seize upon her spoil;
this shall be your pay, and the wages of your armies, inasmuch as ye have
wrought for me, says the Lord. -- Howl ye, gentlemen (Messieurs) of the Romish
church, and cry, Alas! alas! woe worth the day! for the day of the Lord is near
-- thy foundations shall be overthrown -- thy primacy, that thou have laid as
the foundation of thy reign -- thy wicked hierarchy, thy diabolical doctrine,
superstitions, and the burden of thy commandments which thou have bound upon
the shoulders of the nations. And not only thou, but those who shall support
thee, shall fall: thy strength shall be brought low; and those who shall give
thee aid, shall be broken; for the armies gathered together, and the kings that
are with the beast to make war with him who sits on the white horse shall be
killed. Rev. xix. 19, 20, 21. Those who shall afford thee aid, shall be broken:
It will be your great wisdom then, O ye kings, and princes of the earth, who
have committed whoredom with her, you her merchants in the sale of souls, ye
masters of ships, and all ye mariners whoever you be that trade upon the sea of
this beastial monarchy, and all you, who love it, and bear affection to it; --
ye will do well, I say, to stand at a distance from it, and venture not to
approach, when you shall see her condemnation, and the day of God's vengeance
which shall come suddenly upon her -- If you choose not to join with the Lamb,
and those in heaven and earth, who sing, Hallelujah -- for judging the great
whore -- at least come not near, keep at a distance for fear of her torments,
when you shall see the dunghill deities, her gods created by the blowing of
their breath, her gods of bread, and graven images are but vanity and
abomination. O ye Romanists, this sentence is sure, "The gods that have not
made the heavens and the earth shall perish." -- Thy wisdom and knowledge shall
perish: He has turned your counsels into foolishness; he will break your bars
and your arms, and will put his sword into the hand of his delegates.

-- A lamentation shall be taken up over the multitude of thy people, and the
daughters of magnificent nations: the kings of the earth shall weep, and
lament, saying, Alas! alas! Babylon the great city; the city so powerful! --
They shall convey thee to the grave with those who descend into the pit,
saying, Go down, daughter of spiritual Egypt, and be with the uncircumcised.
The mighty shall speak to thee out of the midst of the grave, and say, Alas!
the great and powerful city; "Thou also art become weak as we; thy pomp is
brought down to the grave L'Armaged. p. 138, etc.
."

The Apocalyptic Babylon, the Romish church, has oppressed the church of
Christ; she has brought it into a harder and longer bondage, than the
Chaldean. -- Like ancient Babel; she has instructed her young captives in the
science of her mythology and mateology, her scholastic babblings, missals, etc.
having abolished the language of Canaan. -- She has likewise set up statues of
gold, silver, wood and stone, all the false gods they adore, especially that
grand idol the Mass, the great Diana of Italy, the goddess of papal Rome. She
has commanded all people, nations and languages to fall down before it, and
worship it. It is she that has kindled a burning furnace in all her provinces,
commanding those who would not fall down to worship the idol to be cast into
it. But the Lord has marvelously preserved his church, as he did the three
young men in the furnace, in the midst of her most bloody persecutions, that
furnace seven times hotter than that of Nebuchadnezzar, in all the kingdoms,
where there was any resistance made to her idolatry. The Son of God has walked
with them in the midst of the flames. They overcame by the blood of the Lamb,
and by the word of their testimony, for they loved not their lives even to the
death: Now they are clothed, in white robes; and live and reign with him; --
while many have been raised up with the same spirit, to maintain and justify
their cause before their enemies: But the flame of their fiery furnace has
killed those who at the commandment of that beast cast the children of God into
it; witness, the violent and miserable death of such as were the executioners
of that bloody beast and the instruments of her butcheries committed on the
professors of the truth: These examples are yet fresh in our eyes and ears: But
the king of Babylon in the west is worse and more obstinate than the Chaldean
-- for the latter, upon seeing the wonderful deliverance, approached, and
called upon the servants of the Lord to come forth, confessing the true God,
and made an edict that none should speak a word against the God of Shadrach,
etc. -- and he promoted them in the province of Babylon.

But do the great deliverances of the servants of God astonish our Roman
Babylon? Does she hastily arise -- call out -- assemble her counselors,
governors, etc.? -- Does she strive to convince them that their fires, swords,
treachery, imprisonments, butcheries, are of no avail? Do they confess the true
and living God? Do their kings and governors dread the cruel orders; or publish
contrary edicts? Quite the reverse. They cease not to heap fire to fire, and to
inflame the furnace still more. And though they had seen the flame devour their
mighty and valiant men who had cast the children of God into it, at their
urgent command, yet the dragon, the beast, and false prophet, having collected
all their force and deceits into one, desist not from sending unclean spirits
out of their mouth, to gather together the kings of the earth in battle against
the Lamb, and those who follow him: for which cause that great tree of the
papacy that has become so strong and high, shall not only have its branches
hewed down and scattered, but the trunk also shall be cut up and plucked out of
the land of the living. -- This is the decree of the Almighty that shall come
upon the king and his kingdom, when the word shall yet be in his mouth, "Is not
this great Babylon that I have built, etc." -- The voice from heaven shall cry,
O bloody beast, O Romish Babylon! thy kingdom is departed from thee. When the
seventh angel shall pour out his vial in the air, a great voice from the temple
shall proclaim, It is done: and then the great city shall be divided into three
parts, etc. A grievous vision is declared against thee; "the treacherous dealer
deals treacherously, the spoiler spoileth: Go up, ye Elamites, besiege ye
Medes; ye kings and princes who have departed from Babylon, go up and besiege.
O Belshazar, king of Romish Babylon, make a great feast to thousands of thy
lords and great men; drink, proclaim your solemn festivals; praise your gods of
gold, silver, brass, wood, stone, and flour: Make good cheer. But mark the
decree of the Most High! See the fingers of the man's hand gone forth writing
on the wall of thy royal palace, a writing that shall make thy countenance
change, and thy joints to shake; a writing which none of thy astrologers or
divines can read or interpret. That writing shall be the destruction of all thy
grandees, thy prelates, princes, cardinals, thy red hats and servants. Hear the
writing that is written; Mean, etc. --

God has brought thy kingdom to an end; he has divided it, and given it -- to
whom? to these ten kings, who shall hate thee and burn thee with fire: even to
all the birds that fly in the midst of heaven, who shall eat thy flesh, and the
flesh of thy kings, captains, of great and small; -- thy patrimony, and the
revenues of thy cardinals, which are like kings -- of thy archbishops, and also
of thy bishops, and of thy abbeys; and the flesh of all thy monasteries,
colleges, and societies, both of the small and of the great.

Arise then, ye captains and princes, and anoint your shields; for thus says
the Lord, "Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods
are broken and cast to the ground." The watch is set; and prophecy is added to
prophecy to confirm the vision. -- See the chariot of men, with a couple of
horsemen, that come against thee -- thy defense shall forsake thee; thy great
river Euphrates is dried up; -- thy friends shall be turned another way; and
thy firstborn Spain, shall keep at a distance, and not dare to approach thee
to help thee: those who love thee, shall mourn for thee, but they will not draw
near thee to afford thee help. Lo, I have declared unto you, what I have heard
from the Lord of hosts: So we believe, and therefore we speak. It is he who
performs the word of his messengers -- that says to Jerusalem, and to the
temple, thou shall be built again, even in the midst of thee, O Italy.

Hear then, ye kings, who are anointed of the Lord; thus he speaks to you; "I
hold your right hand;" he shall subdue the nations before you -- he shall loose
the reins of kings who take part with the beast. They shall open the doors, and
the gates of cities shall not be shut against you. He shall go before you, make
rough places plain, break in pieces the gates of brass, and will give you the
hidden treasures, riches hoarded there with the utmost secrecy, that you may
know that the Lord is the God of the reformed churches, who has called you by
your names, for the love he bears to his chosen who serve him. Be of good
courage, and let not your hearts fail you. It is he who formed the earth, and
created man upon it, who stretched out the heavens, and gives law to all their
host; it is he who has raised you up in righteousness, and who directs all
your designs against her. L'Argamed. p. 199-207.


Rev. xviii. 1, 2, 4. One angel proclaims, Babylon the great is fallen, etc.
and another voice from heaven says, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." -- The former
voice is a prediction of her ruin; the latter, is a command, pointing out the
duty of the children of God to withdraw from her; both are heavenly and divine:
The first, obliges our consciences to believe; the second, to obey. He who
believes not the Lord foretelling and denouncing her ruin, will not obey the
Lord, charging men to depart from her. Infidelity is the cause of disobedience.
You obey not the divine order, Come out of her; because you believe not the
divine oracle, Babylon is fallen. Believe, and then you will obey that voice
from heaven, "Depart from her, my people." Purge your hearts of infidelity, and
you would not rebel against the voice of the Lord. If the world believed the
ruin and fall of Babylon, men would not remain one hour in her communion. What
have you to do, O kings and princes, small or great, with that disgraced and
wasted harlot, grown old in her whoredoms. You have neither part, nor lot, with
her: retire therefore to your tents, retire to the tabernacles of Zion. What
madness, what frenzy, to be found exposed to the avenging hand of God, in the
arms of this whore, when become the habitation of devils, and the haunt of
every unclean spirit! What infatuation to be found on the side of the beast,
and of the false prophet; whose ornaments are employed to make war against him
who sits on the white horse, having on his vesture and thigh the name
written, King of kings, and Lord of lords. He shall gather the vintage of the
earth, for her grapes are ripe, and he shall tread the wine press of Divine
wrath without the city. "And the beast shall be taken, etc." chap. xiv. and
xix. Wherefore withdraw from her, for this is her end; this her condemnation,
and fixed doom: "for strong is the Lord God who judges her L'Argamed. p. 269,
etc.
."

"What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? What communion has
light with darkness? What concord has Christ with Belial? Or what agreement
has the temple of God with idols? Therefore come ye out from among them, and
be ye separated, says the Lord God." 2 Cor. vi. 17, etc. Be ye separated -- in
respect of her doctrine, which is a lie, the seduction of iniquity; it is the
mouth of the dragon, the doctrine of devils, the efficacy of error; it subverts
and overthrows completely the foundation of our salvation; it is spiritual
adultery, that dissolves the conjugal bond of the spiritual marriage with Jesus
Christ. He therefore that would be in covenant with God, and who would not
drink of the wine of his wrath eternally, must have no communion with her
doctrine, or her religion. In respect of her religious services, and idolatrous
assemblies; "I would not," said the Apostle, "that you should be partakers with
devils," for such is the service of idols. 1 Cor. x.

-- Also in respect of alliances for mutual aid and protection with them; "Why
should thou help the ungodly," said the Prophet to Jehosaphat, "and love them
that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord." 2 Chronicles. ix. 2. "Woe to them that go down into Egypt for help," etc. Isa. xxxi. --
"Depart ye thence, and touch not any unclean thing:" Take heed to the
interdict, for fear lest you fall under the curse, and bring the camp of Israel
under an interdict, and thereby trouble it. Covet not these Babylonish
garments, these ceremonies, and ornaments, nor the wedge of gold. -- Keep
yourselves from the accursed thing: for none may take any stone from that
cursed city for a corner, nor a stone for a foundation; otherwise the curse
would fall on the takers, and the whole camp of Israel, so that they could not
stand, but would turn their backs before their enemies. "Go forth then, be ye
clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." "Go forth, and be ye as the he-goats
before the flock;" for Italian Chaldea in the west shall be delivered up to
pillage, and all those who spoil her shall be satiated, and the arrows of those
whom the Lord shall raise up against her shall be as those of a mighty man,
skillful to destroy, for they shall not return empty. Ye therefore who have
escaped, march, halt not, although you be already far off. Remember the Lord,
and let Jerusalem come into your mind. Come forth, and deliver every man his
own soul from the heat of the Lord's anger: for she shall become a heap, etc.
-- Go forth, in body and soul: Have no communion with her either in her
doctrines, or idolatrous assemblies, nor in her ceremonies, nor in her
ecclesiastical hierarchy and episcopal government, nor in her religious customs
and modes, nor in her iniquities, nor in any unequal yoke with these who belong
to her, nor finally, in aid and mutual protection. Go forth yourselves, and go
with all your household; leave not a hoof behind: and go thence, never more to
return L'Argamed. p. 274, etc.
.

"Be not partakers of her sins:" Obey not those who would command you or
constrain you to this; or who would entice and counsel you. Should even your
father or brother, your wife or husband, your companion or your master, your
lord, your prince, or your king, should your minister, or even an apostle, or
angel, command or counsel you to do so, hearken not to them. Gal. i. 5. -- Away
with all authority, human or angelic, in the matter of religion, in the matter
of our faith and religious obedience. Ye princes and kings, ye fathers and
magistrates, command not, constrain not, entice not nor draw away others to
communication with, or participation in your own iniquities, or those of
others, especially to a participation of the iniquities of Babylon, for they
are great, and shall certainly be punished, both in those who commit them, and
on those who are or shall be partakers of them.

L'Argamed. p. 274, etc. FINIS.

