A Full and True Account of the Confession, Behavior, Last Dying Speeches and
Penitent End of Greenway Field; Who was Executed at Tyburn for the Murder of
Andrew Charleton, on the 25th of September, 1689. With the Paper he Read under
the Gallows, Signed by his own hand, desiring it might be Printed as a Warning
to all People, etc. to prevent their coming to Untimely Ends.
AT the Sessions holden at the Old Bailey on the 28th and 29th of August last,
Eight Persons were Convicted of sundry Crimes, which the Law makes death, viz.
Barbara Wolf, Lawrence Welsh, Mary Cross, Mary Amor, Hannah Holding, John
Harman, Elizabeth Locker, and Greenway Field: But passing over the rest, who
have hitherto been respited from that Penalty, expressing at once their Sorrow
for Sin, and Thankfulness for Mercy received, we shall in this Paper give an
Account of the penitent Behavior and pious End of Mr. Field, the only person
of the Number yet Executed.

After Sentence of Death had passed upon Mr. Field for the Murder of Mr.
Charleton, he being Remanded to Newgate, was visited by many able Divines, as
Dr. Horneck, Mr. Wells, and others, who gave him spiritual Consolation, and
were aiding to Mr Ordinary in that Pious and Christian like Duty, to whom he
gave Attention, receiving the Sacrament, and expressing no small Acknowledgment
for the Mercies of God, and the Favor of the King, that he had a longer time
than usual to repent of his Sins, enquiring after saving Knowledge and praying
frequently, behaving himself modest and seemly in all his Carriage and Actions,
when on the 25th of September Instant, the Day of his Execution, about Ten of
the Clock in the Morning (having a little before been visited by the Divines,
and some of his Relations) he was put into a Cart, and conveyed to Tyburn,
where Mr. Ordinary and Mr. Wells being in the Cart with him, after he had
declared himself to be a great Sinner, and desired Forgiveness of all he had
Injured, desiring the Spectators to be warned, etc. being demanded what he had
further to say, he produced the following Paper, publicly reading it with an
audible Voice, then gave it to Mr. Ordinary, and desired it might be printed
and published.

GENTLEMEN,
SInce it is my hard Fate to die this Igneminious Death, I suppose it is expected
I should give some account of my self, as well for my past Life and
Conversation, as for the Fact I die for. I shall briefly do it for your
Satisfaction, and I hope it may serve for a Caution to others.

I was born of good Parents in the County of Somer setshire, where I had good
Education in the Free School of Bruton. I since served an Attorney some years
in an Inn of Chancery, and was admitted afterward, and sworn an Attorney my
self; but being young, gave my self too much Liberty. And, since my maturer
years, I have greatly neglected my Duty toward God, I have profaned his
Sabbaths, and broken the Covenants I made with the great God for amendment of
Life, and giving my self too much pleasure in offending my Creator. I
accidentally, tho farally, became acquainted with one Mrs. Godard, alias
Hannan, near Three years since, whose Conversation then suiting with my Fancy,
and being often told by her, That she was at Liberty to make choice of a Man, I
made my Applications to her, and in process of time, at a meeting in Salisbury
we were Contracted each to the other under our Hands, which I intended
Inviolably to observe: But coming to London a few Months after, being furnished
by my Friends with what was needful in order to make a progress in my
Employment, I made my first Visit to her, and continued with near two years to
the best of my memory, in which time we had often difference: For I was
troubled I had spent Money and Time so idly, and thereby disobliged my Friends,
our Contract not performed, and another Man owning her: Yet; nevertheless, I
was so far Infatuared, upon the Reasons she gave concerning this Matter, that I
had no very ill Opinion of her, there often passing fresh and mutual assurance
of our Friendship: Yet, nevertheless, some few months since she coming
acquainted with the Deceased, Mr Charleton, and (as I have great Reason to
believe) they used too much Familiarity, notwithstanding he had a Wife of his
own. Whereupon I several times desired him to desist, but to no purpose; and
reflecting on the Time and Money I had trifled away with the Friendship and
Kindness that yet remained for her, with the several AFFRONTS I had received
through the means of the DECEASEd, I lay under GREAT CONFLICTS of MIND, and he
refusing all things that were Generous, and having sent for her as she desired
to a Public House (the fatal day the Deed was done) the Deceased followed the
Porter and told me she should not come, which answer I did not take well of him
considering he was a Married man, and knew of the pretentions I had to her,
although I must confess I have been informed since my Imprisonment that
another, if not others, have a better and prior Title to her than mine, being
both Married to her, if so I heartily beg both their Pardons, but I unhappyly
going to her House soon after the Deceased had been with me at the aforesaid
Alehouse, the Deceased was unluckily there, whereupon a difference arose, and
he unfortunately received a wound which I believe occasioned his Death, but nor
as he was Sitting in his Chair as Reported, now the said Mrs. Godard alias
Hannam must be blameworthy in keeping another Woman's Husbands Company and the
more considering her Circumstances, and I do hereby declare had she not done
it, I should in no wise have prejudiced the Deceased who had fair warning, and
in all probability we might have Lived both many Years to the comfort of all
our Friends, and where^ (...) ^emory will be a great discomfort and very iro^
(...). I must confess I had several Affronts but that can (...) no excuse for
Bloodshed; I freely forgive them both, and hope God has and will do so too. And
I beg forgiveness first of my Infinite Creator then of all the World, and as
some debts are due from me, I am by these means made incapable of giving
satisfaction, I desire, nay I hope the Lord will give it Threefold where its
due. I declare I dye in Charity with all Mankind, and I do humbly desire to be
forgiven of all, and let this my untimely end I beseech thee O Lord be a
Warning to all Youth of what company they keep, and if so, it will in part
answer the end designed,

G. Field.

The Prayer.
O Most Glorious God, thou that art Infinite and Incomprehensible, thou that
Revealest thy wrath from Heaven against all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of
Men, where then shall I appear being in so sad, so miserable a condition? Of
whom may I seek for Succor, but of thee O Lord, who for my Sins art justly
displeased, wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin,
against thee and my Neighbor have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight,
that thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
Judge; Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God of my Salvation, and my Tongue
shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness, O Lord most holy. O holy and most
merciful Savior Deliver me not into the pains of Eternal death, shut not up
thy Merciful Ears to my Prayers, but spare me Lord, most holy, O God most
mighty; O holy and merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge Eternal, suffer me
not for any pains of Death to fall from thee, the Remembrance of this my Sin is
grievous unto me, and the Burden of it intolerable; have mercy upon me O Lord,
have mercy upon me, who Repent with as lowly a spirit, as ever I sinned with a
high hand; O Lord help my Repentance, and when Justice shall lay my Blood upon
my own head, let the Blood of Jesus Christ be there to pardon O Lord, all my
Sins; not only the Sins of Blood, but all others, both small and great, for thy
Sons sake: O Lord Sanctify this Afflictions to me, that I may say with David,
It was good for me I was Afflicted, and grant O Lord, that the Minutes I have
had, I may find improved for the advancement of thy Glory and my own Eternal
Benefit. Comfort O Lord my disconsolate Father, and the rest of my Relations;
give them patience under this their Affliction. Comfort likewise O Lord, I
beseech thee, the Relations of the Deceased Mr. Charleton, and grant that none
are, or may be impoverish't by this disaster, either of his Friends or mine. I
hope, O Lord, that he made his peace with thee before he went out of this
World; And that I, O Lord, that am following hard after, may, in and through
the Merits of my dear Savior Jesus Christ, be admitted into the Saints Eternal
rest, there to sing Hallelujah, Hallelujah, before the Throne of thee, O God,
for ever and ever Amen.

Greenway Field.

Veni, Oh veni Domine Jesu, Stella matutina veni. Oh veni ^^pio dissolvi, and
esse tecum.
Mr. Field having read this Paper, Mr. Ordinary repeated diverse comfortable
Expressions, to strengthen his Faith in a true Reliance upon the Mercies of
God, through the Merits of Jesus Christ for Salvation, causing him to repeat
the Lord's Prayer after him, and afterward he made his Confession of Faith, in
repeating the Apostles Creed, declaring that he had been always educated and
now died a Protestant. When Mr. Ordinary had prayed with him, and given him
sundry good Instructions, he desired that Mr. Wells might pray with him, and
accordingly he did with much Fervency. Then he prayed himself a considerable
time, desiring in his Prayer, above all things, that God would not lay to his
Charge the Blood he had rashly shed, seeming to grieve at nothing more, than
that he had hurried a Person out of the World without any time to repent,
acknowledging on the contrary, that Mercy and Divine Providence that had not
suffered himself to go off the Stage of the world by sudden Death. He begged
Pardon of all he had injured, but more particularly of the Relations of Mr.
Charleton. After his Prayer was ended, Mr. Ordinary again exhorted to try and
examine his Thoughts, that he might not be deceived by the Depravity or
Corruption of his heart, prayed with him, etc. As afterward did the
aforementioned Gentlemen. Then he prayed again himself and desired the
Spectators to take warning by his Misfortune, expressing an extreme Sorrow for
his misspent Life, warning all People of that wicked Woman that had been the
occasion of his Untimely End, shaking Hands, and bidding Farewell to diverse of
his Friends and Acquaintance; who took Leave of him with Tears in their Eyes.
Then part of a Psalm was sung, after which he was tied up; and the Ministers
giving further Advice, together with the Benediction and Absolution of the
Church of England, to be pronounced to such as unfeignedly repent. He again
prayed, and exhorted the People, desiring God to bless them, and keep them from
such Untimely Ends. After which desiring their Prayers, and that God would send
his Angels to receive his Soul into any corner of Heaven, and not suffer it to
dwell with Infernal Spirits, he recommended to his Maker to the last moment of
his Life. And so fell this Unfortunate Gentleman, whose Untimely End we wish,
according as himself heartily desired almost with his last Breath, may be a
warning to such as lead dissolute Courses, etc.

Licensed,

September. 25. 1689.


Advertisement.
These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public, That
Mr. Elmy Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25
Years Practice, Lives as the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone-Court, at the Lower End
of Bartholomew-lane by the Royal Exchange, who most safely and expeditiously
Cures Deafness and Noise in the Ears in any of what Age soever, (if Curable)
and at First Sight, by Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or not, as most
Eminent Persons of Quality in this City can Testify. He has likewise a most
excellent Gargarism or Mouth-water, will make black or yellow Teeth as white as
Ivory, in a few times using; and it will certainly cure the Scurvy, and all
other Diseases incident to the Mouth, Teeth and Gums, which in many persons
causes a stinking Breath, which (by the blessing of God, and the use of this
Water) I dare affirm you will be freed from those Maladies beforementioned,
with Directions. His Pills only prepared for the French Disease, and the
Running of the Reins, may be had in Boxes of several prices, with other
Venercal Arcana's, as occasion requires, with Directions.

London, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-bridge. 1689.


