A RELATION OF THE SEA Fight BETWEEN THE United FLEETS OF The English and
Dutch. AGAINST THE FRENCH, As it was sent to the States General, By Admiral
EVERTSEN, And Published by their Authority at the Hague, in the Monthly
Accounts of July last.
Licensed November the 27th.

THE 4th. of July Admiral Evertsen joined the English and Dutch Fleets, riding
near the Isle of Wight, with Three Men of War; there he understood that the
French Fleet had been descried riding in several places, to the number of
Fourscore and Two Men of War, great and small; thereupon it was resolved, That
they should weigh Anchor, with a Resolution to find them out, and observe their
Motion.

Under. Vice Admiral Collenberg were 1 The Vtretcht, Guns 64 2 Alkmaer 52 3
Tholen 60 4 West Friestandt 82 5 Princess 92 6 Costricam 52 7 Agatha 50 Under
Admiral Evertsen, 8 The Stadtenland, G. 52 9 Maeght Van Enchysen, 72 10 Nort
Hollands 44 11 Maega van Dort 60 12 Hollandia 70 13 Velue 60 14 Province of
Vtreicht 50 15 De Maes 64 Under Vice Admiral Vander Putten. 16 The Vreislandt,
G. 68 17 Elswout 50 18 Reigersberge 74 19 Gekroondeberge 62 20 North Hollandt
72 21 Veere 60 22 Cortine 50

Before the Arrival of Admiral Evertsen, it was agreed between the Two Nations,
That the Hollanders should have the Vanguard, which was in all likelihood to
do them Honor; but at the bottom, to conceal Torrington's Designs, after they
had been under Sail about Two or Three Hours, they were obliged to come to an
Anchor, by reason of the Foggs and bad Weather: But soon after they perceived
the French Fleet to bear up toward them, with the Wind at East-Immediately
they weighed Anchor, and endeavored to gain the Weather-gage, which they did
with that success, that Torrington gave the Signal for the first Squadron to
Engage, but the French thought fit to retire. The 6, 7 8, and 9th. the Two
Fleets were always in view of one another; but in regard the French Fleet was
much the stronger, both for Number and biguess of Ships, it was judged most
proper not to fight in the open Sea, and Torrington did his part so well, that
he avoided engaging till he was come to the Bevesier, which was favorable for
his Purpose. And there it was that he received the Queen's Orders, not to delay
Engaging, if the Wind and Weather would permit, which was the Reason that upon
the 10th. by break of day, we went to seek the Enemy, who expected us in order
of Battle, and so by nine of the Clock, the Engagement began between the Blew
Squadron of the French, and the Vanguard of the Dutch; and both sides fired
desperately for Three Hours together, till the French Squadron not liking their
Entertainment, bore away with all the tack they could make; but about one there
happened a Calm, which not only prevented the Hollanders Pursuit, but put them
into a little Disorder; upon which, the French (whom the same Calm hindered from
getting away, were constrained to begin the Fight again, which lasted till five
a Clock in the Evening, with an incredible Fury. As for what concerns the
English, most certainly, unless it were some few Vessels that fought against
Torrington's Order, the rest did nothing at all: So that the main Body of the
French fell into the Rear of the Dutch Fleet; so that having fought from
Morning till Evening, and having defended themselves so long against such a
prodigious Number of the Enemy, that assailed them on every side, they were so
very much battered, that hardly Three were capable of making any Defense; which
constrained them to make their way through the French Fleet, and bear away to
the Coast of England, between Bevesier and Ferly; Admiral Frackel, Jean Dick,
and Captain Northey were slain; the Vreislandt having lost all her Masts, and
not being to be towed off by reason of the Calm, was taken toward the end of
the Fight. Admiral Evertsen gave this Testimony of all the Dutch Officers and
Soldiers, That there was not one that did not exactly perform his Duty; and as
for the Admiral himself, though he would not speak his own Praise, in his
Letter to the States; yet all Men give him this Character, That he signalized
himself by the greatest Actions that a true Valor could inspire, and which
deserve an equal Fame with that of Trump or de Ruyter. In short, it was never
heard that ever Twenty two Ships fought so long against Fourscore and Two, of
which Seventeen carried no less than some Fourscore and some an hundred Guns.

As for what concerns the English, had we known no more than what the Admiral
of Holland out of his Modesty writes, we had known nothing at all: But in a
Letter which a person of Honor in England wrote to the Lord Dursly, there is
this Expression, which better informs us, That the Holland Squadron behaved
themselves with so much Bravery, that if the Lord Torrington had done his Duty,
in all probability we had won an absolute Victory. The English had but Two
Captains slain, and Three Ships disabled, which are thought to be the only
Ships that fought without the Lord Torrington's Order.

Printed in the Year 1690.


