Dear Friends,
KEep your Meetings in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that never fell, in
which you may see over all the Meetings that are gathered by all the Sons of
Adam, that be out of the power and Life. You that be gathered in the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ that never fell, him will you feel in the midst of your
gatherings; and then the Light, Life, and Truth, and so look (over all the
wickeds) pounds, at the seed of God, Christ, which was before they were, and
will stand when they are all gone.

And so never heed the wickeds tempest, storm, nor hail, nor his arrows, nor
Instruments of cruelty; let the back, and the hair, the cheek and the shoulder,
be never turned from him; though many weapons be formed against thee, yet they
shall never prosper, for the seed Christ shall reign over all, and will stand
when they are gone, which was before they were.

And so be faithful unto the Lord God, and be Valiant for his Truth upon Earth,
Showing that something will oppose it, or else what need the word valiant be
spoken; and so mind the Truth, (and not the wickeds pounds) and the living way
which is Christ Jesus, who never fell, nor changes, in which you may see over
all Adams Sons and Daughters ways, in the Fall, who does change. Being in the
way Christ Jesus that never fell, who does not change, in this way you have
Life Eternal, in which you see over all in the Fall (in which is death) and so
Christ being the way, he that forsakes his way, forsakes his Life; and he that
does not come out of the way of Adam that fell, (into the way of Adam that
never fell) lives in death. So let all haste and run for their lives into Adam
that never fell, out of Adam that Fell (and Eve) For Adam that Fell, is the ways
of death, but Adam that never Fell is the way of Life, In Adam in the Fall is
trouble, and unquietness; but in Adam that never fell, is Peace and Rest: In
Adam in the Fall, is shadows and turnings; but in Adam who is the Living way,
is no shadows nor turnings: so every one in Adam that never Fell, Christ Jesus,
who never Changes; the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, then you are in
the living way, in which you all have Life, in Christ the Living way, which
never Fell; and so he is the way, and he that forsakes the way, forsakes his
Life. In this all may sound forth, who has any thing against my way, who never
Fell, nor changed. 'Twas Adam changed, and Eve changed, and their Sons and
Daughters in the Fall be in the falling, changing, changeable ways: But who are
in Christ that never Fell, sees over them all in the Fall, that turns about
with every wind as it arises: And so in your way Live all in Christ Jesus, so
will you feel Light, Life, and Power; that Life which was with the Father
before the World began; in that all feed, and in that feel, and that way never
changes with the winds and tempest; and the cry is, Haste, haste, out of Adam
and Eves ways, in the death, Fall, and changes: and run, run, out of them into
Adam the Life, and the way that never Fell nor changes.

This is the Word of the Lord God to you all, feel the seed of God set over all
that which makes to suffer, which was before that which makes it suffer, and
will be when that is gone which makes it suffer. Spread This Abroad. G. F.


