OF THE CONVERSION OF SINNERS TO God in Christ: The 1. Necessity, 2. Nature, 3.
Means, 4. Signs of it.
WITH A concluding SPEECH to the UNCONVERTED. By MARTIN FYNCH a Servant of
Christ in the Work of the Gospel.

Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God; John 3.3. Repent
therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; Acts 3.19. Then will I
teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be turned unto thee; Psalm
51.13. LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Sign of the Phoenix in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF Great GRIMSBY IN THE COUNTY of LINCOLN, Salvation in
Christ Jesus our LORD.
IT is said of Paul when he was at Athens, his spirit was stirred when he saw
the City wholly given to Idolatry. Act. 17.17. The Servants of Christ are to
have their Spirits stirred with a Holy Zeal for God, and with bowels of
compassion to the Souls of men; when they see People wholly given to ignorance
and profaneness. That is a good stirring of our Spirits, and from the Holy
Spirit of God, to endeavor to turn men from darkness unto light, and from the
power of Satan unto God. Charity to the Souls of Men is the highest Charity;
those that know the terror of the Lord, and what a fearful thing it is to fall
into the bands of the living God should be very earnest to persuade men to flee
from the wrath to come, if by any means they may be instruments in Christ's hand
to save some: This small Treatise written in your Town, and much for your
sakes, I dedicate unto you as a Testimony of my love to your souls; I write not
unto you about controversies and about lesser things, my design is higher, that
is, to show the necessity of the New Birth; and the Nature thereof If Persons
be truly converted from Sin to Christ; though they may err and mistake in
somethings about the manner of the outward worship of God in this World, God
will sooner or later reveal it unto them, or however Pardon it to them through
his grace in Christ, so that those mistakes shall not hinder their Salvation.
But if persons be never so right in the outward way of their profession and
worship, and yet be strangers to a work of grace and conversion upon their
hearts, they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

There are two sorts of Persons especially, with whom I have to do in this
Treatise; First those that think that the practice of some formalities and
outward things will bring them to Heaven without a work of grace and conversion
upon their Souls. If men think that the being of this or that Church, and being
of this or that way of outward profession of Religion, will bring them to
everlasting Life, whilst in the mean time they are grossly ignorant of the
things of God; of loose and licentious lives or unacquainted with a Sanctifying
change wrought by the Spirit of God upon their Souls, let them consider what is
written in this Book, to undeceive them, and show them what of necessity must
be done, or else they are undone for ever. The second sort that I deal with in
this Treatise are those who though they are for devotion, strictness of Life
and a change of men's Spirits and ways, yet carry it no further then a kind of
Civility, Moral virtues and reformation of life produced by a mere awe of a
Deity and fear of Hell without the true knowledge of Christ and faith in him;
In true Conversion there is a coming to Christ, a receiving of Christ, a being
Sanctified by Faith in him. Christ is little known as the justifier and
Sanctifier too of lost and sinful man. Christ is made use of by many, but as
upon the by, and for fashion-sake both in the matter of justification, and in
the business of conversion; therefore it is the design of this Treatise to lead
men to a more distinct knowledge of Christ, and that they may se how God
blesses us with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly things in him. I have not
adorned this discourse after the manner of some, I Study to set forth the
things of God to the meanest capacity. I wish what I have written were yet more
plain and easier to be understood. Now that the God of all grace would bless
what I have written to the furtherance of your salvation, and to the
everlasting good of others, who shall peruse it, is the prayer of

Your Servant in Christ, MARTIN FYNCH.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the Necessity of Conversion. Chap. II. That in the ordinary way of
the Lords converting of Souls, God does first work upon men in a more common
way, making a change upon men which yet falls short of saving work. Chap. III.
Shows, what Special Grace and saving Conversion is. Chap. IV. Shows, what
outward means God is pleased to make use of in the Conversion of Souls. Chap.
V. Shows, that whatsoever outward means the Lord makes use of for the
Conversion of Souls, the work is done by his own Almighty Power. Chap. VI.
Shows, that God converts men at several Ages, some in youth, some in their
latter time, as it pleases him. Chap. VII. Shows, how we may know that we
are Converted and passed from death to Life. Chap. VIII. Is a concluding Speech
to the unconverted.
THE NECESSITY OF Conversion.
CHAP. I. Of the Necessity of Conversion.
BEfore I open the Nature of Conversion, it is requisite that I should speak
something of the Necessity thereof.

This Proposition therefore I lay down; That every Man by Nature is so
Degenerated from God, so utterly corrupted and tainted by Sin, so prone to all
Evil, so opposite to God and all that is spiritually good, that except he be
Converted and Changed, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

There is a twofold Misery come upon us by our Fall in Adam:

First, The loss of the Favor of God.

Secondly, The loss of the Image of God in Holiness and Righteousness.

First, We have lost the Favor of God by Sin, so that as we are by Nature the
Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. God is angry with us, Psalm. 7.11. We are under
the Curse of his holy Law, Galat. 3.10. The Law curses us for Original Sin:
the Law curses us for Actual Sins. The Law pronounces the Sinner to be vile
and abominable to God: to be such a One as his Soul has no pleasure in, but
will bring into Judgment and punish according to all the Evil that he has done
to provoke the Eyes of his Glory.

Now from this part of our Misery we are recovered by the Grace of
Justification, which is an act of Gods free Grace, whereby he forgives a poor
Sinner for Christ's sake all Trespasses, and imputes the perfect and glorious
righteousness of Christ as our Mediator and Surety to make him pure, clean, and
without spot in his sight.

This great Article of Religion is held forth in such Scriptures as these: In
the Lord shall all the house of Israel be justified, and shall glory, Isa.
45.25. This is the Name whereby he shall be called, (speaking of Jesus Christ)
The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. Being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.23. But to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the
man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4.5, 6. But of him
are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made of God unto us wisdom and righteousness,
and sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

Most excellently does the holy Scripture set sorth this Point, telling us,
That there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; that their Sins
are blotted out, remembered no more, cast into the depths of the Sea; not
imputed unto them, cast behind Gods back; and that in Christ Believers are
righteous, all fair, and no spot in them. God beholding them clothed and
beautified in the best Robe, the Garment of Salvation: he is not ashamed to be
called their God, and their Father, but takes them near unto him, to stand
before him for ever.

The Lords marrying of a Soul to Christ, by giving us Faith in him, does
actually acquit us from the debt of Sin: Christ our heavenly Husband answers
all. As we need no more to bring us into an actual state of Condemnation, but
that we come to be actually in the first Adam; so we need no more to our actual
Justification, then that we be actually in Christ the second Adam, who is a
root of Justification, and communicates Righteousness to all that are in him.

As there is a Fountain and first Union between Adam and his Posterity in the
Covenant of Works: So there is a Fountain and first Union between Christ and
the Elect in the Covenant of Redemption. And as Wrath and Condemnation stand
ready to seize upon us, as soon as we come to be actually in Adam, because of
what he has done in our own room, as our Head and public Person: So Life and
Justification stand ready to be bestowed upon the Elect as soon a^ they come to
be actually in Christ, because of what he has done and suffered i^ their room
and stead.

As we are not actually in Adam till w^ come to be quickened in the Womb of
Nature: So we are not actually in Christ, ti^^ we come to be quickened in the
Womb o^ Grace.

As when we come actually to have imputed to us the Guilt of Adams Sin, we have
an inherent taint and corruption of our Nature from him: So when we come to
have the Righteousness of Christ actually imputed to us, we have inherent Grace
and Sanctification of our Nature from him. So that as the first Adam is the
Root both of Condemnation and Corruption to us: So the second Adam is the Root
both of Justification and Sanctification to us.

When the Scripture says, We are justified by Faith, it is not meant that we
are justified by it as a work or quality, but that by this Grace of Faith we
receive Christ who justifies us.

The Righteousness by which we are justified, is a righteousness without us:
the righteousness of another, wrought by another, inherent in another; it is
the righteousness of Christ, God-Man. That Robe of Righteousness which covers
our Sins, is put on by Faith, and we wear it here and for ever in Heaven: But
though it be upon us (as the Apostle speaks) the righteousness of God which
is by faith in Jesus Christ, is unto all and upon all them that believe, Romans
3.22. Yet it is never inherent in us, but only imputed to us.

No man under Heaven has a persect Legal righteousness of his own to justify
him, therefore he must have an Evangelical righteousness that is a
righteousness that answers the Law, but is brought to light by the Gospel. No
man has a righteousness of his own to justify him, therefore he must have the
righteousness of another even the righteousness of Jesus our Lord.

Justification is perfect when we first believe in Christ, though not as to our
participation of all the joy and comfort, and blessed effects of it; so it
extends it self to everlasting, yet it is perfect in it self, because the
righteousness of Christ which we receive in our first believing, is a perfect
righteousness: we never have any other to justify us at Gods Bar, neither do
we need any other. We rejoice and glory more and more in the righteousness of
Christ, are more taken with this best Robe, and are more thankful for it: But
this Robe of righteousness that covers Sins, and makes us lovely in the eyes of
the Lord, is the same for ever.

Justification and Sanctification must by no means be confounded: The Grace of
Justification is for one purpose, the Grace of Sanctification for another.
Justification is for the taking away of the guilt of sin; Sanctification for
the taking away of the filth and power of it. Justification brings us into a
state of favor and acceptance with God; Sanctification is to enable us to
walk suitable to this New and happy Estate.

The Lord Jesus is not our Half-Saviour, and works the other half, or any part
of a Savior; but Christ is All in this business. There is a washing of
Regeneration, which is also from Christ our Savior, Titus, 3.5. But this is of
another nature and to other ends and purposes then the washing of
Justification. Not only Ministers, but all Believers should labor to have a
clear and distinct knowledge of the Doctrine of Justification, for it is our
Life. When the Apostle James says, That Abraham was justified by works, the
meaning is, That he was approved, declared and manifested to be a true Believer
by his works.

When the Holy Scriptures speaks of the Lords giving rewards and eternal life,
upon working and obedience. Those Scriptures must be understood declaratively,
not casually, that is as nothing, and declaring who are the persons to whom he
gives eternal life, and not as showing the cause thereof, for that is only his
free grace in Christ. Likewise those Scriptures show the certain connection that
there is between Grace and Glory, that where the Lord freely gives Glory
hereafter, there he gives Grace here. What is Glory in heaven for the substance
of it, but Grace, Holiness and Communion with God perfected: So that such
Scriptures hold forth no more but this, That whom the Lord justifies freely by
his Grace in Christ, and sanctifies in him; he trains them up in holiness,
obedience, and fellowship with him, until he brings them to the fullness of
that, which at first they have but the last and the first fruits of.

So that when afterward in this Discourse I speak of a saving work of the
Spirit wrought in those whom the Lord brings unto life. You must not think
that this work of Regeneration is the matter of our Justification. By Grace we
are saved, freely by Grace through the Redemption which is in Jesus Christ our
Lord. The work of Conversion, and the Graces of the Spirit wrought in us, do
only accompany Salvation, as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 6.9. are wrought in
those that are saved, and go along with them, and accompany them to Heaven:
Yea, those Graces for the substance leave them not, when they have accompanied
them thither, but are persected here. But the work of Conversion is called a
saving work of the Spirit, because it is wrought in all them, and only in them
who are saved by the free grace of God in Christ.

Now my way will be clearer to proceed.

Secondly, We have, as we are in the state of Nature lost the Image of God,
consisting in spiritual knowledge, holiness and righteousness. Regeneration is
wrought in those that are saved, to deliver them from this part of their
Misery. Man was at first made upright, made in the Image of God, in respect of
those spiritual and heavenly Endowments he was furnished with. But it is
otherwise with us by our Fall; our Understanding is darkened like Sampson, our
Eyes are put out.

That glimmering of light to know that there is a God, and that some things are
evil and some things good, seems rather to be a new Gift of God, and common
Illumination of the Spirit since the Fall of Adam, to be some curb and
restraint to Sin in the World, then any remainder of Gods Image, which was upon
us in our first Creation. For the peace of Gods Church, for the benefit of
humane Society, and such like reasons, God bestows this common illumination and
conviction upon men, without which this World would be like Hell, and men would
be like Devils.

Marvel not at this saying, that men would be so vile, if it were not for this
common illumination of the Spirit, and common light that God gives to the Sons
of Men; seeing the Nature of Man is wholly corrupted, and the thoughts of his
heart are evil, and only evil, and that continually.

A dangerous mistake it is of the people commonly called Quakers, that they
make the heeding and attending to this common light to be Conversion, (which
thing is to be found among many sober Heathens.) But it is not to be much
wondered at in that People, seeing they are generally very Ignorant, even of
the very Fundamentals of Religion. It Is true, this common light is a great Gift
of God to the World, to keep up some Peace and Order, and common honesty
amongst men: But the New Birth and true Conversion is a thing of a far higher
Nature, consisting in a more special Illumination of the Spirit, to show us our
lost estate by Nature, and to reveal Christ to us as an Object of Faith; and it
is such a work of the Spirit upon the Soul, as does enable us to believe on the
Name of the Son of God, to mourn for Sin, to hate Sin, and to walk in Obedience
unto God, not merely from Convictions of Conscience, and fear of the Wrath to
come, but from a delight to do the Will of God, and a fixed Principle of Gospel
ingenuity and gratitude to God, for the exceeding riches of his Grace and
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.

But for a further discovery of the depravedness and corruption of our Nature,
whereby it may appear that there is such a need of a new Birth and Conversion,
let us consider things more particularly.

1. As was touched before, There is wonderful ignorance in men about Heavenly
things: It is an amazing thing if you enquire into people (yea those that are
grown to be Men and Women, yea many that have gray hairs upon them) how
ignorant they are about Adams Fall, Man's lost estate by Nature, the
Incarnation of Christ, and redemption by him: And if so many be so grossly
ignorant amongst us where they have the Bible in their own Tongue, and where
they live under the Preaching of the Word, and such helps to get Knowledge; how
ignorant and spiritually blind are we by Nature, and without the means of light!

2. There is a strange carelessness in man about his future and Eternal State;
looking only at these seen things which are temporal; That except a man be
awakened and roused up by Afflictions, or Convictions of the Spirit, men are in
a profound and deep sleep, and take no care what shall become of their Souls
when they die and go hence: But live without studying of the Scriptures,
without serious and constant praying to God, without speaking of Heavenly
matters at all, as if they had not immortal Souls that must be happy or
miserable for ever in another World And if one tell them of Heaven and Hell,
and that upon this moment depends Eternity, they think a man is Brainsick and
Fantastical.

3. There is a proneness, yea, a strong bent and inclination in man to all
evil, To Blaspheming of God, to Murder, to Theft, to Covetousness, to all kinds
of Uncleanness, to Drunkenness, to Lying; and though by education, company,
employment, terrors of Conscience, fear of punishment from God or man, respect
to name, and reputation in the World, and by the temper and constitution of the
Body, this wicked bent of the heart may be much curbed and kept in; yet there
is in all by nature, such an evil frame and disposition, that there is no sin
so black, so horrible, so heinous, but man is prone to it.

4. There is in man, not only an Indisposition but Opposition of the heart to
any thing that good is, not only to Gospel Grace and Holiness to believe in
Christ, to repent, and to walking in the Spirit, but even to Civility and
Morality, and those things which yet natural men many times do. So that, I take
that common change that is in men, from the grossest vices, to some sobriety,
temperance and justice, to proceed not from the power of corrupt nature, but
from a kind of common Grace, and common Illumination of the Spirit, which God
distributeth to man as it pleases him, to make him useful to humane Society.

If there be any need to enlarge upon this Subject, to show the Sinfulness and
Corruption of man by Nature, (omitting many other ways of Sin) let us but
seriously consider the Sins of the Eye, the Sins of the Tongue, and the Sins of
the Thoughts.

1. The Sins of the Eye show the wonderful corruption that is within the heart
of man. Sin within in the heart sits looking out at those Windows of the eyes,;
and there when it sees a suitable Object how it lusts after it: When we see
beauty, then we have wanton eyes, when we see fine houses and riches we have
covetous eyes or envious eyes; when we view our own gifts and greatness, and
converse with those that are below us, what scornful eyes and looks have we?
The eye is a curious piece of Gods workmanship, all the Angels in Heaven could
not make such a piece, it is the most beautiful member of the Body, and it is
the light of the Body; it is endowed with a mavelous power to discern and
take in Objects; the eye should be pure, holy, chaste: But it is full of
Adultery, Covetousness, Pride and Envy. Even Holy Job, one in the State of
Grace was fain to make a Covenant with his eyes, and put a Law and restraint
upon them. It is strange what impressions are made upon the mind from the sight
ofthe eye in a moment, how the eye affects the heart and stirs up the
corruptions of it: There may more corruption be stirred in the heart by one
glance of the eye, than we can get rid of many days, it may be weeks: Even
those that are in the state of Grace have need to watch the outward senses of
the Body. The eye makes sudden and strong impressions on the mind. Ah! what
need is there to look to Christ for a chaste eye, a mortified eye, a sanctified
eye.

2. The Sins of the Tongue show the wonderful Corruption that is within in the
heart of man. The Tongue is a fire, an unruly evil, full of deadly poison,
James 3.6, 7, 8. Full of cursing and bitterness, Romans 3.14. The Tongue and
Speech is an excellent gift of God; it is man's glory above a Beast, that he can
express his mind by Speech, but man makes it his shame.

If all our passionate Speeches, proud and boasting Speeches, backbiting
Speeches, obscene and filthy Speeches; lies, curses, oaths, indiscreet, rash
and idle words throughout our whole Lives should be written down, what a
strange Book would it be?

So much Sin is committed by the Tongue and such an unruly evil it is, that
David, a man in the state of Grace, and one that was eminent in Grace too,
prays earnestly to God to set a watch before his mouth, and to keep the door of
his lips.

3. The Sins of the Thoughts do show the wonderful corruption that is within
in the the heart of man: There is nothing that may sooner convince us of our
own vileness, and make us cry out, We are unclean, We are unclean, than a
serious reflection upon our Thoughts. O how many proud Thoughts, wanton
Thoughts, envious Thoughts, uncharitable Thoughts, discontented Thoughts! What
a multitude of sinful Thoughts arise in the heart in a little time, then what a
numberless number is there in ones whole life that lives any considerable time
in the World. None but he that tells the number of the Stars, and calls
them all by their names, is able to count the number of our vain and sinful
thoughts, and he knows all the thoughts that come into our minds every one of
them.

As for good and holy Thoughts, if God did not put them in and keep them in the
heart, how rarely should we have a thought of God, of Death, of Heaven, and the
way that leads unto Eternal Blessedness.

The Thoughts of Foolishness is sin though it never come into outward act,
there is Heart Adultery, Heart Theft, Heart Murder, Heart Disobedience to
Parents, Heart Blasphemy against God, Heart Pride. He knows nothing almost of
Religion, that knows not that Thoughts may be Sin as well as outward acts,
and that abundance of sin may be committed in the heart that never appears in
the Life. After Conversion nothing usually humbles men more than the sinfulness
of the Thoughts and the unsuitableness of the heart to God; sinful thoughts
were far more before God wrought upon them: but as Believers grow more
spiritual and holy, the more they take notice of their Heart-sins, and abhor
themselves for them.

What should I more say, to set forth the corruption of our Nature, whole
Volumes might be written of this Subject, and yet the half, no not the thousand
part told us of it. But it is briefly comprehended in those words of our
Savior, Mark 7.21, 22. For from within out of the heart of men proceed evil
thoughts, adultery, fornication, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness,
deceit, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness. And in Jeremiah 17.9. The
heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it?

To treat fully therefore of the corruption of Man's Nature, is one of the
vastest Subjects that can be spoken of, next to that of the Immensity and
Infiniteness of God, and his Grace in Christ; but these few things are written
of it, that we might know the Plague of our own hearts, as an Introduction to
the following Discourse, that we may see what need we have to believe on the
Name of the Son of God, that we may be pardoned and sanctified through him.

By what has been already said, we may see what a gross and dangerous mistake
it is of those that think there is no other Conversion than being Baptized, and
taking upon us the outward profession of Christianity. Now that any should
speak thus, and count all trouble of Conscience about our eternal estate, and
looking after a work of Grace upon our Souls, to be Enthusiasm, Melancholy and
Mopishness, shows their wonderful ignorance of the Scriptures, and their utter
unacquaintedness with the Grace of God in their own Souls.

When the holy Scripture speaks so much of a new heart and spirit; of the
taking away of the heart of stone, and giving us an heart of flesh: of writing
Gods Laws in the heart: of putting his fear into our hearts: of circumcising
our hearts: and speaks of the necessity of being born again: of believing on
Christ: of repentance and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. To
make all this to be only our being baptized, and making an outward profession
of Religion, shows men to be wholly strangers to the way that leads to
eternal life.

And such men as they are utterly ignorant of the case and condition of Souls,
that are in spiritual trouble and fear of the wrath to come, crying out, What
shall we do to be saved? So they prescribe as strange remedies for their cure;
as to be merry, to go into Company, to play at Cards, to go to Plays, and such
like: when if they get rid of their trouble for sin by such means, and be not
brought to Christ, who only can give them rest; their remedy is worse than
their disease, and they had better continue in their trouble of Spirit, than
find ease by such things.

COMMON WORKINGS of the SPIRIT.
CHAP II. That in the ordinary way of the Lord's Converting of Souls, God does
first work upon men in a more common way, making a change upon, men which yet
fall short of a Saving Work.
THat there is a Common work of the Spirit upon men, as well as a Special and
saving work, appears by many Scriptures: Those Hearers and Professors that are
compared to the Stony ground, and heard the word with joy, Matthew. 13. have
common motions and workings of the Spirit; and so have such as are called the
foolish Virgins, that took their Lamps and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.
And the Apostle Peter shows, that some escape the pollutions of the world (in a
sense) and yet return with the Dog to his vomit; are again entangled and quite
overcome by their old sins, and their latter end is worse than their beginning.
So likewise we read of those that have been enlightened and tasted of the
Heavenly gift, and of the Powers of the world to come, and yet fall away.

Not that these Scriptures or any other, do hold forth a total and final
Apostasy in any from special grace, but only from common grace. The Doctrine
of the certainty of the perseverance of all sound Believers, shines forth so
gloriously from many plain Texts of Scripture, and from the Nature of the
Covenant of Grace, and the purchase that Christ has made for them that are
his; and the Almightiness of God, who has undertaken and promised to keep
them, that they shall not depart from him and perish: that there is scarce any
part of Religion that has been controverted, that is with more facility
defended against all Opposers.

But such Scriptures hold forth that there is Common Grace, as well as Special:
Judas his profession and gifts: Simon Magus his believing when he saw the
Miracles and Signs which were done: Herod's hearing John Baptist gladly, and
doing many things: Agrippa's being almost persuaded to be a Christian: come all
under this Head of Common workings of the Spirit; so called, because that not
only those that are saved, but those that perish, have many times such
workings of the Spirit.

Now therefore observe, that amongst those that God is pleased to bestow Common
grace upon, some are ordained to eternal life; and upon these the Lord sooner
or later bestows special grace. And as for others, the holy Lord does either by
the common motions and influences of his Spirit, keep them in the profession
and practice of it all their days; in his infinite wisdom and good pleasure
making use of their common grace and gifts for the good of others, and for the
preventing of their own greater damnation; or else God in his righteous
judgment so orders it, that those common influences and workings of the
Spirit depart from them, and so they openly fall away into gross error or
profaneness of life to their greater damnation.

As to Common Grace and preparatory workings of the Spirit, some carry that
point so far that they confound common and special Grace, darken the Doctrine
of Conversion, and cast a stumbling block before weak Christians, puzling them
exceedingly, speaking of some things under that Head, that are wrought only in
those that are effectually called.

But these things following may be brought under this Head of Common Grace, and
preparatory workings of the Spirit.

1. An Illumination of the Spirit, to make impression upon the Soul, that there
is a God, that Man is fallen in Adam, that Jesus Christ is the Mediator, that
there is Heaven and Hell; yea one that has only this common illumination, may
have knowledge, notional knowledge and utterance about these and other points
of Religion, beyond many sincere Christians. Hence it is that men may go to
Hell with their heads full of knowledge and notions of Religion: Some that we
think for their knowledge and excellent parts, are happy men, yet may have
only common illumination and perish.

2. Conviction of Sin comes in also under this Head of Common Grace, and
preparatory workings of the Spirit. The Lord uses before he infuseth Faith in
Christ, and the habit of special grace into the heart, first to convince men of
Sin. Those that were converted, in the Second Chapter of the Acts, were first
pricked in their hearts with the sense of their sins, verse 37. afterward God
gave them Faith in Christ.

What sins the Lord will set home upon the Conscience, first of all to awaken
and startle a secure Sinner, depends upon his holy pleasure.

Sometimes the Lord shows men so much of their own vileness, as does almost
sink them in their Spirits; sometimes the Lord deals with them in a gentler
way: Usually God sets home gross sins, special sins, with most terror upon the
heart. It is no matter how long it is since the sin has been committed; God
can set it home upon the Conscience with as much terror, as if it had been but
yesterday.

The universal depravedness and corruption of our Nature is sometimes set home
upon the Conscience, that the convinced sinner sees himself more vile upon
that account, than upon the account of his sinful acts.

It is said of the Holy Ghost, that he shall convince men of sin, because they
believe not on Christ, John 16.8, 9. From whence we must not conclude, that men
are not so thoroughly convinced of sin, as God does convince men in the
preparatory workings of the Spirit, except the Lord do set it home particularly
upon the Conscience; that the person besides many other sins, is guilty of the
sin of unbelief, taking it for the Soul's not coming to Christ, and believing
and relying upon him as a Savior: But we may take the not believing on Christ
there in a large sense, for being in a course of impenitency and gracelesness:
Or we may thus conceive the meaning of the place, that the Holy Ghost in
converting Souls will convince them of sin, (what sins he pleases) and show
them that they are in danger of Hell and damnation, being such persons as are
not yet in Christ, and believe not on his Name, and so have not their pardon in
Christ, to plead for their discharge from the guilt of their sins.

It is true, where persons have been long under convictions of other sins, and
have lived under much preaching of Christ, and yet have gone on a great while
in a way of secking to be justified by their own righteousness, and are not
brought to give God the whole glory of his free grace in Christ, in justifying
and saving of them, the Lord may set home this unbelief of theirs, and
slighting of Christ their only remedy, as a great sin and folly, but that the
Lord does set home this particularly upon every one that is under conviction,
in order to a sound conversion, and that conviction is not through and
sufficient without this, cannot be made out by Scripture.

Under this Head it must be considered, That though the Lord uses to convince
men of sin, and fright men with the terrors of the Law, whom he intends to
convert and bring to Christ.

Yet first, all that are converted feel not the like terrors and fears of the
wrath to come, before their closing with Christ.

2. Though the setting home of sin upon the Conscience, and putting the Soul in
fear of the wrath to come, is the work of the Spirit, making use of the
terrors of the Law to that purpose; yet not every thing that sometimes follows
the reupon, as a man's concluding that he shall never find mercy; or his going
on in a legal way to seek peace, and healing of his wounds by his own
righteousness and duties, without the blood of Christ; these things come not
from the holy Spirit, that first convinced the Soul of sin, but from Satan, and
from the corruption of our own hearts, that mix themselves, and put in with
these convictions and workings of the Spirit.

3. All that are convinced of sin, and have terrors, yea it may be very great
terrors of Conscience thereupon, are not converted. Cain and Judas had great
terrors of Conscience, and yet never were converted: yet alas, many in giving
account of their conversion, build too much upon this, that at such a time they
were much troubled for their sins, when as trouble for sin is not a sufficient
evidence of a sound conversion, if it be only for fear of Hell and damnation:
But if after sight of our sins, and fear of the wrath of God, we were brought
to know Christ, to prize Christ above all, to rest our weary souls upon him,
yea upon him alone, and were made willing in the day of his power, to take his
yoke upon us, that as we live by him, we might also live to him: then the work,
the good work of special and saving grace is begun in us, Praises to Jehovah
for ever.

3. There is some stop put to sin especially gross sin, by this common
illumination and common convictions of the Spirit. So that a Man being awed
with the terrors of the law, dare not run into that excess of riot and
profaneness that he has done, but having some feeling of the bitterness of sin
cannot commit it with that greediness that he has done. But begins to leave
more open and gross sins, and persorm duties of Religion and sets upon
reforming of his Life; and finds some kind of joy and peace therein, which yet
we may not think comes from the comforter the Holy Ghost, for he gives no joy
and peace to any, but what flows from the beholding God's reconciled face in
Christ, or a reflection upon the effects of his grace and presence with us,
leading us forth in ways of holiness and obedience in his Name. So that we
must diligently consider that although these common workings of the Spirit, do
lay some restraint upon Sin, and put us upon good duties and reformation of
Life, yet we must not rest here and say surely the bitterness of Death is
past; but careful must we be as for our Lives, that now our Souls be rightly
bottomed upon Christ, that he may be our righteousness, to justify us and the
only Fountain of sanctification and holiness to us.

Many other things might be added under this head of common grace and
preparatory workings of the spirit; as that the Lord does sometimes make great
impressions upon men of the holiness of the Law, of his justice if he should
cast us into hell, of the insufficiency of our own righteousness to make our
peace with him and that we must come to Christ if we would have life.

But we must not extend the preparatory workings of the Spirit to far as some
do, as if there were any saving work upon the soul, before union with Christ.

That which I aim at here, is to show that in conversion ordinarily there is
legal repentance before Evange lical, sight and sense of sin, before Christ be
brought into the Soul, but no special grace and saving work until union with
Christ and infusion of a new heart and spirit: of these things this is the sum,
The Lord does usually work common grace, before he works special grace: Some
have these common workings of the Spirit and yet are never savingly converted.
In the elect these common workings of the Spirit are the preparing the way to
special grace, that the Lord intends to bestow upon them, that is, that the
common illumination, convictions and humbling for sin, that the holy Ghost
works in the elect before their conversion, are in order to their conversion.

CHAP. III. Showing what Special Grace and Saving Conversion is.
NOw to show what Special Grace and Saving Conversion is; First I shall give a
short definition of it.

It Is a work of the Spirit of God upon the soul, whereby the habit, the
principle and seed of all grace is infused, changing and sanctifying the heart,
to the bringing of us to trust wholly in Christ for salvation, to repent of our
Sins, to love God and unfeignedly desire to walk before him in obedience and
newness of Life according to his will.

Those who have this change wrought in them are passed from death to life,
shall undoubtedly be saved and inherit everlasting Life.

But to open the doctrine of conversion more fully and plainly to every ones
capacity, I know no better and surer way then to explain some of those
expressions of the holy Scripture, by which special grace and conversion is set
forth to us.

First, special grace and conversion is frequently, (especially in the new
Testament) called believing on Christ. To as many as received him, to them he
gave power to become the Sons of God, even to as many as believed on his name.
John 1.12. He that believes on the Son has everlasting Life, John. 3.36. This
is the word of God that ye believe on him whom he has sent, John. 6.29.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved Act. 16.31. With the
heart Man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.10. By grace are ye saved
through Faith. Ephesians. 2.8. yea this grace of believing is spoken of in the Old
Testament, though not so clearly as in the new.

Look to me and be saved, Isa 45.22. where by looking is meant believing and
verse. 24. surely shall one say in the Lord (viz the Lord Jesus the Mediator)
have I righteousness and strength, even to him shall men come, 24 verse. where
by coming is meant believing. Those that were saved under the Old Testament saw
Christ's day of coming in the flesh affar off, and were glad and put their
trust in him, having the same spirit of Faith in Christ, that the Saints have
now.

Well then it is clear that where there is a true believing on Christ there is
true conversion Now therefore let us inquire when a man does believe to the
saving of his soul? And there is a necessity to enquire into the true nature of
Saving Faith; because a Man may have some kind of Faith, and yet never go to
Heaven? some are said for awhile to believe, and afterward to fall aaway Luke.
8.13. Simon Magus, is said to believe, Act. 8.13. Which Scripture do show that
there is an assent to the Doctrine of the Gospel, which is but a temporary
Faith, an historical Faith from common illumination and convictions. Yea it is
said, the Devils believe and tremble, James. 2.3. The devils, by the power of
light, and convictions are forced to believe that there is a God, though yet
they are Enemies to him, and wish there were no God. The truth is, if a man do
believe the Doctrine of Religion, so as that he makes no question of the truth
thereof, he does well, and he ought to be thankful for this common light and
help of the spirit, for all men have not this Faith of Assent to the truth of
Christian Religion. Yea at some special seasons of temptation, a Child of God
may be much troubled about some main points of the Gospel: but the God of all
Grace will (after they have seen their own weakness a while, and been greatly
humbled) established them and settle them again. But I say, that a mere Assent
to the truth of Religion, is not enough to prove a man to be converted, for
that may be without the true love and liking of Religion in the heart.

That believing in Christ which is peculiar to those that are saved, may be
thus described: It is a principle infused by the Spirit of God into the heart,
whereby a poor sinner enlightened to see the truth of Christian Religion, and
convinced of his lost and miserable estate by sin, and taken off from all hope
and confidence in himself, does trust and rely upon Jesus Christ, our great
high Priest and Mediator, to be pardoned and accepted, and be made an Heir of
Eternal life through him.

The nature of this Grace may be further understood, by considering how it is
set forth by various expressions in the Scripture.

1. It Is called a trusting in Christ, or a hoping in Christ, Ephesians. 1.12, 13.
That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ,: In
whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth. Now this
Expression holds forth thus much to us, That when a poor Sinner is convinced of
his miserable estate by sin, if the Lord have a gracious purpose to him, he
will take him off from trusting in any thing in himself, to justify him in
Gods sight, and reveal the Lord Jesus Christ to him, the only Redeemer, and
mighty to save, and so enable the poor Sinner to trust in him, and lay the
whole weight and stress of his Soul upon him.

2. Believing in Christ, is called a flieing for refuge, to lay hold upon the
hope that is set before us in the Gospel, Heb. 6.18. When the Soul is said to
flee for refuge, it is an illusion to the City of refuge under the Law, to
which the Manslayer was to flee from the Avenger of blood, and it is to show,
that when the Lord converts a Sinner, he makes him see the danger he is in, he
makes him cry out, O the Avenger of blood; O the wrath of God is fit to
overtake me! How shall I escape? What shall I do? The Lord fills a poor Sinner
with fear and solicitousness about his condition, as the Manslayer under the
Law was, about the saving of his life from the Avenger of blood. If the Lord
take delight in us to make us his people, he will convince us of sin, and make
us see that the Curse of the Law is pursuing of us to take vengeance on us for
our sins, and make us cry out for a City of refuge, and will show us that all
other things are but refuges of lies, and that the Lord Jesus is the only City
of refuge, and safety for a poor Sinner to flee unto, he is the strong City,
the salvation that is in him will be as Walls and Bulwarks about a poor guilty
Sinner for ever, that gets into him: Till Sinners be sensible of sin, and see
in what an evil case and condition they are, the vengeance of eternal fire
being ready to seize upon them, they regard not a City of refuge: what care
they for Jesus Christ, let others look after him and take him that see their
need of him, they apprehend no danger in their present condition; they see no
need of an Ark for the saving of their Souls; they see no deluge of wrath
coming, till it may be it is too late, and then they cry out an Ark, an Ark, a
Christ, a Christ, when their day of Grace is past: They see no need of a City
of refuge, they think they are safe and well enough, what should they sear?
till it may be the time is past, and the Gate of the City of refuge shut
against them: then, O who shall bring us into the strong City? Who will bring
us into the City of refuge? O a Christ, a Christ to save me, or else I am now,
even now, sinking into the bottomless Pit.

But as many as are ordained to eternal life, shall believe on the Name of the
Son of God, to them he shall be precious, they shall make him their strong
City, their hiding place, their Tower of defense, and City of refuge.

There is another Expression in this place to set forth the work of believing,
and the Nature of it, when the Apostle shows that the design of the Soul, in
its coming to Christ, is to lay hold upon the hope that is set before us in
him, namely, the hope of pardon, salvation, and eternal life. The Lord shows a
poor Sinner, that as much as he has broker the Law, yet there is One that came
to seek and to save lost sinners, and that there is hope set before miserable
sinners in the Gospel, and so Christ is called our hope, 1 Tim^ 1.1. the Object
and Ground of Hope, He it whom there is hope for poor sinners. Now then the
laying hold of this hope is believing on Christ: Many never knew what it was to
fear and tremble, and see what a storm their sins had raised, that they were in
danger to be cast away for ever; nor ever yet knew what it was to Iay hold on
the hope that i^ through Christ, to be as the Anchor for their Souls, both sure
and steadfast, to hol^ them and keep them from eternal ship wracks.

By the way, if any shall say in these Expressions about believing, here is no
mention of the Souls submitting to Christ's Lordship, consenting to be ruled and
governed by him renouncing the dominion of sin.

I answer, that Frame of spirit, that Principle is wrought in all that do truly
believe; but there is so much spoken in the Scripture of Faith under these
notions of trusting on Corist fleeing for refuge to him, and laying hold on the
hope that is set before us in him, for such reasons as these following.

1. Because although when a Soul is converted, he takes Christ as a Sanctifier
as well as a Savior, and is affected with the filth of sin,, as well as the
guilt of sin; yet the principal thing that the Soul is affected withal, the
first is, What shall I do to be saved? As the Jailer cried out, Acts 16.13.
This is not yet so fully his great question, What shall I do to be sanctified?
But O how shall I be saved from Hell and eternal damnation, that I may not have
the wrath of God abide upon me for ever; and so the poor sinner is directed to
spy out that in Christ that answers to this great difficulty to save it from
wrath, and in the receiving and applying Christ as a Savior and propitiation
for our sins: the Soul is also secretly and powerfully wrought upon, to desire
heartily to be turned from sin, and to live to Christ for evermore.

2. Because although where true Faith is, there is a principle of new Obedience
also, yet Faith as it is said to justify, does only apprehend and receive
Christ, as our perfect righteousness and atonement with God, and is to be
carefully distinguished from new Obedience, which in that respect is but the
effect and concomitant thereof.

3. Because this is a great, a very great work of the Spirit, (greater then
most think) to bring a poor convinced sinner to venture his soul, and eternal
condition upon the Mediation and righteousness of Jesus Christ. Not but they
that know him may well put their trust in him, who is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God by him; but for a poor Sinner that sees what a
holy, and righteous Law he has broken, what a great and holy God he has
offended, what great and sore punishment he has deserved; and which is
infflicted upon the generality of his fellow sinners to all eternity, when
these things are realized to a Man, (as they are to those that are brought to
Christ) and that he is also convinced that he has no righteousness of his own,
to make satisfaction to the justice of God: and to give unto God a ransom that
he should be delivered from going down to the pit. For this Man thus
enlightened, awakened and convinced to put his trust in the righteousness of
another, one whom he never saw, when he manifested himself in the flesh, and
suffered for sin, the just for the unjust; for a poor sinner to reject all other
confidences pitched on by the Sons of men, and to flee only to this City of
refuge, and his heart to trust fasely there, is an eminent work of the Spirit:
And so it will appear when God shall be glorified in his Saints, and be
admired in all them that do believe, not only for giving such a sure object of
Faith, as Jesus Christ is, but for drawing poor sinners to him. It Is an any
easy thing for ignorant un-convinced sinners, to say they have Faith: and say
they believe on Christ; but no Man can come to Christ and truly believe on his
Name, except he hear and learn of the Father, and be drawn by an Almighty
Power unto him.

4. Believing in Christ is called in the Scripture. Our coming to Christ: But I
said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not all that the Father
gives me shall come to me, Joh. 6.36, 37. If any man thirst let him come unto
me, and drink. Joh. 3.7. Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have life, Joh.
5.40. By this coming is not meant a local coming, but a spiritual unto Christ.
He that truly comes to Christ does, come indeed from the power and filth of
Sin, to put himself under the government and obedience of the Lord Jesus: but
that which is principally held forth by this coming unto Christ, is the coming
unto him as a Savior from the guilt of sin, to be washed and made white in his
blood, and be pardoned and justified through him.

5. B lieving in Christ is called in the Scripture, our receiving of Christ, to
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even
to as many as believed on his Name, John. 1.12. Now although every one that
truly believes, receives Christ in all his Offices, as a King to rule him,
as a Priest to save him, and as a Prophet to teach him: yet when believing is
set out by receiving Christ, it is meant especially of our receiving and
embracing him as a Savior, who is in a peculiar manner received into, and
dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians 3.17. If any desire that I should speak a
little more to open the Nature of saving Faith, and so to distinguish it from a
common, notional and historical Faith, it may be done by showing the special
properties thereof.

1. It Is a knowing Faith, it is accompanied with so much light and knowledge, as
is necessary to let Christ into the Soul, knowing that a man is not justified
by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ: We have believed on
him, that we might be justified by the Faith of him, says the Apostle, Galat.
2.16. So that except there be some knowledge of the greatness and holiness of
God with whom we have to do; some knowledge of our Fall in Adam, some knowledge
of Christ the Mediator, our estate cannot be good; for how shall we believe on
him, of whom we have no knowledge? I speak not here of degrees of knowledge, as
if every one that truly believes in Christ, had a great measure thereof, but
that there must be some competent knowledge.

This does distinguish true Faith from that ignorant Faith that many have, who
while they think they believe on Christ, know nothing of their lost estate by
Nature, and of the Person and Mediation of the Son of God: for if men do not
know Christ in some measure, neither do they believe on him.

But here let me be understood, not to speak of Infants, nor of Idiots, or deaf
and dumb persons born so, whose Ignorance is invincible, as to any outward
means to bring them to the knowledge of Christ, through their natural
incapacity of receiving information by the Scriptures and Ministry of the
Word, we are not to have such hard thoughts of their condition, as if none such
could be saved, for doubtless some of them are saved, and even by the blood of
Christ, as well as others, and have the seed and habit of Faith and Repentance,
and the habit of spiritual knowledge infused into them also by the Holy Ghost,
though in a way altogether undiscernable to us. And what should hinder, or why
should it be thought incredible, that God who quickneth all things, and infuses
a rational soul into Infants in the Womb, and has given a rational soul to
Idcots, (however the actings of it are obstructed by some defects of the Organs
of the Body:) I say what should hinder but that God can and does, when it
pleases him, infuse spiritual life, and the habit of all grace into Infants
and Idiots.

But for persons that are grown up to years, and have the exercise of reason,
it is the way of God, if he please to convert them, so to enlighten them as to
exercise their thoughts about the matters of Salvation, and to give them a
sight of their Sins and make known sensibly unto them, that Jesus Christ is the
only way of help and salvation for them; So that though there may be knowledge
without Faith, yet in grown persons and those that have the exercise of reason
there cannot be Faith, without some competent measure of knowledge. Therefore
such as are grossly ignorant, and scarce know from any inward illumination,
whether there be a Christ or no, or whether they have any need of him to
deliver them from the wrath to come, are not to flatter and deceive themselves
in thinking they believe in Christ, because it is not the way of God to make a
New Creation in persons grown up to years, and having the exercise of reason,
but he says Let there be light. Commanding Light to shine out of darkness, and
shinning into them to give them the knowledge of Jesus our Lord. I know there
is great difference of men's parts, education and the means of knowledge that
men have, but God has none of his Children borne blind altogether, spiritually
blind, and ignorant. Though men go blindfold to Hell; yet they do not go
blindfold to Heaven, but the Lord shows them first how they are out of the way
that leads unto Life, and are in the broad way that leads to destruction
and then reveals Christ to them, as the way to Life, and that Faith in him,
repentance and holiness do accompany Salvation. Therefore those that are grossly
ignorant are certainly in a bad estate, though they are loath to see it, let
them consider what the Scriptures say of them. This is a People of no
understanding, therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them will show them no favor, Jsaiah. 27.11. They do always err
in their hearts they have not known my ways, Heb. 3.10. Which shows that Men
must needs err in their hearts, and can never walk with God, when they do not
know his ways at all. There is none that understands there is none that
seeks after God, Romans 3.11. Until men come to have some understanding that
they have lost the favor of God and his Image, and that there is a way in
Christ to come unto God and be accepted with him, they will never seek after
God, if happily they may find him, and so we see by Luke, 1.70. That those that
sit in darkness and total ignorance and blindness, they also sit in the region
and shadow of death; In the very Suburbs and gate of Hell.

2. It Is a penitent Faith, that is, true Faith is always accompanied with true
repentance; this distinguishes it from that notional Faith that many have;
they pretend to believe in Christ, but they never mourn for sin, they do not
loath themselves for their iniquities. Some may talk of Free Grace, and of
believing in Christ, but look upon sorrow for sin as a bondage-frame, and know
not what it is to be vile in their own eyes, and abhor themselves for their
evil ways and doings against the Lord: Where it is so there, is not true faith,
their faith is but a fancy and a mere notion, who make sin a light matter, and
have their hearts never rent and broken for it.

3. It Is an affectionate Faith, that is, true Faith is accompanied with Love to
the person of Christ, in whom we do believe: Indeed that which first affects
a poor convinced sinner toward Christ, is, that he is a Savior and Deliverer
from the guilt of sin: but in the looking toward him as a Savior, the Soul
falls in love with him also, as he is God blessed for ever, and as he is
filled with the spirit of Grace in our Nature; so that union with him is every
way desirable to the Soul: to them that do believe Christ is precious, not
only for his Benefits, but for his Person; that when a poor Sinner looks to
Christ with an eye of faith, he looks to Christ with an eye of love too, and it
is in his heart to say, O Lord Jesus, to whom I come as a poor lost Sinner, to
be washed from my sins with thy blood, I love thee, I prize thee, thou are
excellent and glorious: Did thou vouchsafe to be manifest in the flesh? Did
thou come to seck and save that which was lost? My heart cleaves to thee in
love: And O that I could love thee more, O thou excellent, most excellent Lord
Jesus! O thou art fairer then all the children of men, fairer then all the
Angels in Heaven! O a Savior and such a Savior, the brightness of the Fathers
Glory, and the express Image of his Person! O thy Name is as an Ointment poured
forth! there is none like unto thee: I believe in thee and love thee too, thou
art most sweet, thou art altogether lovely, O my dear Lord Jesus! I first cast
mine eyes toward thee as a Redeemer and Savior, being forced and necessitated
to look out for a rest for my weary Soul, and being a little acquainted with
thee, thou have taken my heart with thy glorious person: O thou art the mighty
God, one with the Father; O I be hold something of thy glory, as of the only
begotten Son of God; thou art God manifest in the flesh: O it is Immanuel, God
with us! It Is the Lord of glory that was crucified for poor sinners! He is
worthy to be praised, he is worthy to be beloved: Blessing, and glory, and
honor to this great Mediator: Praise him, O ye Sons of men! Praise him all
the Angels that excel in strength: How little can I one poor creature do in
praising and admiring of him. O help, help to praise him, help to admire him,
help to love him; let every one have a Psalm of praise to him, utter your Songs
aloud, aloud sing Hallelujahs to this King of glory.

But if any man does not admire and love the Lord Jesus, neither does he
believe in him.

4. It Is an holy Faith, not only in regard of the Object of it, the Lord Jesus
Christ, the holy One, but in regard of the effects of it; true Faith is always
accompanied with Holiness, in some comfortable measure with the principal
desire and endeavor of Holiness.

Our Hearts are purified and sanctified by Faith, for he that does rightly,
looks to Christ as a Savior, submits to him as a Sanctifier also; and it is in
his heart to say, O Lord Jesus, thou art a blessed Mediator indeed, thou art
able not only to save me from the guilt of my sins but to deliver me from the
power of my vile lusts: Come in thou blessed of the Lord, come into my heart,
set up thy Throne there; cast down all my lusts to the ground, turn me from my
iniquities, bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of thee, let me
be partaker of a second benefit, not only be justified by thee, but sanctified
by thee. Come in thou blessed of the Lord, stand not without, welcome Christ as
a Savior, welcome Christ as a Sanctifier; thou art he whom my Soul delights
in, come into thy Temple, drive out all my lusts even all of them, as thou once
did the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple; show the power of thy grace, O
mighty one, go forth conquering and to conquer, subdue mine iniquities, strong
is thy arm, strong is thy right hand: let me see my desire upon thine enemies,
and my enemies, these vile lusts of my heart, smite thom to the ground, that
they may not rise a second time until this be perfectly done, and my heart be
brought to perfect obedience to thee, I shall sigh and never be at rest.

Thus we may distinguish true Faith, from counterfeit Faith that many have, who
while they pretend to believe on Christ as a Savior, have no intention and
desire to be sanctified and walk holily but rather are more emboldened to sin
by seeming to lean upon Christ for salvation.

5. It Is an abiding Faith, true Faith in Christ is a fixed and permanent thing.
One that has but common workings of the Spirit, may for a fit in great terrors
of conscience, or at the hearing of a Sermon of Christ, seem to believe in
Christ, and prize Christ above all; but when the trouble of Conscience, is
worn of and those Common workings of the Spirit fail, Christ is despised and
made nothing of.

Though a Believer is not always acting Faith on Christ yet he has always
the habit of Faith, such a Frame and bent upon his heart that though he is not
at the present under terrors of Conscience, and though his heart and Life be
more reformed then it has been, yet still he lives upon Christ as Jehovah his
righteousness, not only at the first looking to Christ but evermore desiring to
be found in him; whereas others grow wanton against Christ when they get out of
terrors of Conscience, and think they can do well enough, with their own
righteousness without his. If a man has found that through the Grace of God
his heart has been carried out in a constant way, from time to time, since the
Lord first wrought upon him, still to be humbled for sin and to prize Christ,
and to live wholly upon his righteousness, it is a sign of true Faith in
Christ.

By such things as these we may examine our selves whether we have Faith or no
and prove our selves whether Christ be in us or not.

Secondly, special grace and conversion is frequently called repentance.
Repentance from dead works Heb. 6.1. Repentance, to salvation 2 Cor. 7.10. God
commands men every where to repent Act. 17.30. Repent and be converted that
your sins may be blotted out, Act. 3.19. Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto Life, Act. 11.18. Him has God exalted with his right
hand to be a prince and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel and
forgiveness of Sins.

Therefore if the Lord has given a man repentance he is in a state of grace,
and his sins are forgiven him.

But there is a Legal repentance so called; 1. Because it is wrought only by
the terrors of the Law and fear of damnation, 2. Because the person that
repents only in that way and manner as to his state and condition, is yet
under the Law and the curses of it, and not under Grace. Now this is not that
which the Scripture calls repentance unto Life, and repentance unto Salvation
but may be in those that never shall be saved. The Holy Ghost says, that Judas
repented himself saying, I have betrayed the innocent blood, Matthew. 27.3, 4.
And Ahab when he heard of Gods Judgments against him, rent his clothes, put
sackcloth upon his flesh and fasted and humbled himself, 1 Kings. 21.27.29. yet
we find not in the Scripture that he was converted, but the contrary. Men are
in nothing more deceived then about Repentance, deferring it to old age, when
they have had their fill of Sin as if they were sure of their lives, as long as
they please to count their time in the world, and as if they could repent at
any time when it shall please them to think best; and so likewise many are
deceived about their having Repentance already, taking every sigh in a good
mood and trouble for their sins, to be sufficient Repentance; whereas there is
a repentance for sin, that arises only from fear of Hell, shame in the world,
and apprehensions of outward inconveniences and dangers that men have exposed
themselves to by their vile courses. What Thief or Murderer except he be
extraordinarily stupid and hardened, does not in such a common way bewail his
sins, and yet it may be no signs of true conversion do appear, and the person
wholly ignorant of Christ and the way of salvation by him.

Therefore it is necessary to distinguish between common and legal repentance,
and that repentance which is to salvation, which may be done by these
particulars.

1. True repentance is always accompanied with Faith in Christ, so that he
that does not truly believe in Christ, neither does he truly repent Many
persons think if they be but forry for their Sins, that this is enough, and
that this will make satisfaction for their sins, and never know what it is to
believe in Christ and to be washed in his blood from the guilt of their sins.
This therefore must be considered, that as when the Scripture says; believe on
the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, it is to be understood of such a Faith
as is accompanied with repentance and sorrow for sin: So when the Lord
commands us to repent, it is to be understood of such a repentance as is
accompanied with believing in Christ, without which all our sorrow for sin, and
abstaining from some outward act of it signifies nothing. And this is
observable that ignorant people make a Christ of their repentance, for they
rest in this, that they are sorry for their sins (though the Lord knows the
generality of them scarce know what trouble of Conscience for sin is) and never
look after Christ as a Savior to know him and believe on his name, So that
their pretended repentance and trouble for their sins, does but keep them at a
distance from Christ, and makes them that they hunger and thirst not after him.

But where a poor sinner looks to Christ with an eye of Faith and reliance on
him, and looks upon his sins with an eye of Sorrow and grief for them, that is
the true Penitent. Many are so blinded by the God of this world, and the Gospel
(the way of Salvation by Christ) is so hid from them, that all that they look
at is, that when they sin, if they be but sorry for it, and purpose to amend
they think that all is well, and that God is pacified for all that they have
done against him, and are strangers all their days to believing in Christ and
being accepted in him.

2. True repentance is a sorrowing for sin, as it is an offending and
displeasing God; and not mearly for the hurt and mischief that Sin has brought
or may bring upon our lives. Indeed as we are often said in the Scripture, to
sin against God; so we are said to be Sinners against our own souls, Number.
16.38. As sin is an offense it is committed against God, but the hurt and
mischief of it is to our own souls, and upon both these accounts, we are to
repent of it: but it is not godly sorrow that we have for our sins, except we
have a respect to God grieving that we have violated his Laws and so offended
his Blessed Majesty, as well as that we have wronged our own Souls, and
destroyed our selves without he prevent it by showing us mercy in Christ. So
that it is in the heart of a true Penitent to sigh out such lamentations as
these; O most glorious God against thee, against thee have I sinned, against
thee my Creator, from whom I have my being, against thee the pure and holy
Majesty, holy, holy, holy, against thee, who art the Lord God, gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in mercy, O thou infinite goodness, O thou Father of
mercies, against thee have I sinned, I have transgressed, I have rebelled, and
I, whither shall I cause my shame to go, I cannot put it away from me, for to
me belongs shame and confusion of Face, because I have sinned against thee,
I cannot stand before thee, because of my sins, but through the blood of Jesus.
Lord I cannot abase my self enough before thee, nor be vile enough in my own
eyes. I see a little of thee, what a blessed and glorious Majesty thou art whom
I have offended, and I see a little of my self, that behold I am vile,
wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes: O that thou would make my head
as waters and mine eyes as a Fountain of tears to weep day and night for my
sins: O that thou would smite and speak to this Rock of my heart, that the
waters of godly sorrow might gush out: O that thy Spirit might work more upon
me this way to give me a more broken and contrite Spirit for sin, I do not
desire thou should speak any more to my Soul from Mount Sinai with those
Thunderings and Lightenings, and that terrible voice out of the fire and
darkness and tempests presenting thy wrath to me for the breach of thy holy
Law but now thou have brought my poor weary fainting soul to Jesus the Mediator
and to the blood of sprinkling, speak to me from the mercy seat, speak
comfortably to me, melt and soften my heart, with the sight of thy grace in
Christ, and let my soul be filled with that Sorrow for Sin that is accompanied
with the sense of pardon in Christ, which sorrow is most genuine, filial, free,
and acceptable unto thee.

3. True repentance is accompanied with the hatred of sin. David a true
penitent hated every false way, Psalm. 119.128. Paul in his Lamentations for the
remainders of corruption in him says; that which I hate, That do I, Romans 7.15.
a true Penitent not only mournes for sin committed but hates it, abhors it
from his New Nature; he has an everlasting Anripathy against Sin, that if the
Principle of grace in him was not hindered in its actings by Sin that dwells
in him, a true Penitent would show himself another manner of person then he
does: we must not think that after true repentance a man sins no more for
there is no man that lives here below and Sins not; neither must we think
that such a one may not possibly fall into the same Sin again. Indeed for
gross Sins, ordinarily God keeps his people from them, from the time of their
first conversion and if he leave them to falll into them at any time; as he did
Noah, David and Peter after particular repentance for them, and recovery out of
them, it is a rare and unusual thing for them to fall into them again, but as
for vain thoughts, distractions in holy duties and passions, and such Sins as
do suddenly Surprise and overtake us as at unawares no doubt after true
repentance a godly Man may fall into them again and again, to the great grief
of his Soul; yea after much repentance particularly for those things and many
Prayers and supplications to God for power and strength against them so that
not once or twice, but often and every day the best Saints have need with Paul
to cry out, O wretched Man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of
death.

Notwithstanding all this remainder of corruption that the best Saints upon
earth will confess, there is yet in them as Paul himself complained (though
ignorant and proud Pharisees that know not themselves, and the plague of their
own hearts think themselves to be perfect) yet I say this truth abides firm,
that a true penitent hates Sin, it is besides his intention, it is against the
general purpose of his heart, it is contrary to his new nature and it is the
grief of his Soul when he Sins against God; he so hates sin, that he will
never be at peace with it but opposes it and looks to Heaven it self for aid
against the enemy.

4. True repentance is an abiding thing upon the heart, not that a true
Penitent is always acting the grace of Repentance; but though it may cease
sometimes in the act, yet it never ceases in the habit: that is, there is
always in such, an habitual frame upon the heart to live low before God, and
walk humbly with him.

A natural man may sometimes in great afflictions, and in terrors of
Conscience mourn for sin, but it is a forced thing, he would get it off from his
spirit, and it leaves not an habitual humiliation upon him, but that filial,
evangelical sorrow that a Believer has for sin, is a frame of spirit that he
likes and loves, and cherishes, and would have more of, for (which is a great
mystery to a natural man) that kind of sorrow for sin that a man in the state
of grace has, may be accompanied with the greatest sense and assurance of
pardon in Christ, and so be a very sweet and pleasing, and desirable frame of
spirit. At the same time a poor soul may rejoice in Gods pardoning grace in
Christ, and mourn for sin too; and a poor brokenhearted Believer finds this
sorrow to be better and sweeter then all the laughter and merriment of the men
of the World.

3. Special Grace and Conversion is frequently called in the Scripture, the
Fear of God. Job's character is, that he was a man that feared God, Job 1.1.
Obadiah's, That he feared the Lord greatly, 1 Kings 18.3. Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is
the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. Praise our God all ye his servants, and
ye that fear him, Rev. 19.5. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him,
Psalm. 147.11. And it is one great promise of God in the New Covenant, to put
his fear into our hearts, Jerem. 32.40. So that where there is a right fear of
God, there is true conversion.

But because there is a common awe of a Deity in most men, a certain slavish,
servile, fear of God, searing him, only as a Male factor fears the Judge, not
as a dutiful Son fears a good Father, and that upon judgments that God sends,
some are said, to fear the Lord, 2 Kings 17.32, 33. that is, with a slavish
fear, yet v. 34. it is said of the same persons, They fear not the Lord, nor do
after his Statutes; that is, they had not a gracious and obedient fear of God:
And likewise because the very Devils are said to tremble, Jam. 2.19. that is,
they even shake with fear of the wrath of God; therefore it is necessary to
distinguish between that slavish fear of God that is in the very wicked of the
World, and in the Devils themselves, and that right gracious fear of God that
is in those that are truly converted, which may be done in these following
particulars:

1. A right fear of God is accompanied with hope in his free mercy in Christ.
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his
mercy, Psalm. 147.11. Some they pretend to hope in Gods mercy in Christ, but
they do not fear God, their hearts are not awed with his Majesty, nor afraid to
offend him: such a hope is not right; on the other hand, some pretend to fear
God, and fear sinning a against him, but they hope not in his mercy, but in
their own merits; they go on under a Covenant of works, cast not their Souls
upon Christ will not lay their hold upon the hope that is set before them in
the Gospel. These men have not a right fear of God: He that is so moved with
fear of the Majesty and Wrath of God, that he gets into Christ, the Ark that
God has prepared for the saving of Souls, and places all his hope for his
eternal safety in Christ the Son of God; this is the man that fears the Lord
aright. But if men fear God only as a Judge and Avenger of Sin, and look upon
him as a hard Master, and so are afraid of him, and their hearts secretly rise
against him, but they never look toward his Mercy-seat, that they may set
their hope in his grace in Christ, such have not a right fear of God, neither a
right reverential, nor a right filial fear of God, but only a slavish and
servile.

2. A right fear of God is accompanied with eschewing evil. Job is said to be a
man fearing God and eschewing evil, Job. 1.1. The transgression of the wicked
says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes, Psalm,
36.1. The gross and horrible profaneness of some wicked men proclaims to every
one, that they are so far from having a right fear of God, such as he puts into
the hearts of his people, that they have no fear of God, no common awe of a
Deity at all in their ordinary course, for they live as if there were no God
that regarded the ways of the Sons of men, and would bring them into judgment:
But where there is a right fear of God, there is not a bare eschewing evil, but
an eschewing evil from an inward principle of the fear and love of God in the
heart, and delight in his Commandments.

Now when eschewing evil is made a sign of the true fear of God in the heart,
it must not be so understood, as if Job of whom that character is given in the
place abovementioned or any other (who yet truly fear God) can so totally
eschew evil in this life, as to be wholly free from sin; for we see by the holy
Story, that Job himself of whom this is spoken, had his passions and sinful
failings, for which he confessed to God he was vile, and abhorred himself in
dust and ashes; but when such are said to eschew evil, the meaning is, that
they do so in a comfortable measure, and in the sincere and earnest desire and
endeavor of their Souls.

3. A right fear of God is not an involuntary passion and fear which torments
the mind, but is a pleasing and delightful thing to the Soul. Fear has
torment, 1 John 4.18. Slavish, sinful and irregular fear has so; but a right
reverential fear of God is delightful to the Soul, it has no torment in it to
the mind. The Angels in Heaven, and the Saints in all their glory have an high
degree of this reverential fear of God. And so they find here in this World,
that they never have sweeter duties, then when their hearts are most filled
with a reverential fear of God, and so in their whole conversation they find
that the more they walk in the fear of the Lord, the more they walk in the
comfort of the Holy Ghost.

Indeed in such extraordinary appearances of God by outward signs of the Glory
of his Majesty, as were to Abraham, Genesis 15.12.17. to Moses when the Lord
appeared in the flame of fire out of the midst of the bush, Exodus 3.2. and 6.
to Elijah, 1 Kings 19.13. and to Isaiah, Chap. 6.5. the best Saint in this
mortal state may be over-set and faint, and be troubled at the Lords presence;
for it is said, that when God so appeared to Abraham, an horror of great
darkness fell upon him: it is said of Moses, he hid his face, and was afraid to
look upon God, and at another time when God spoke out of the fire upon Mount
Sinai, Moses said, I exceedingly fear and tremble. Elijah hid his face in his
Mantie: and Isaiah cries out, Woe is me, I am undone, for mine eyes have seen
the King, the Lord of hosts. But it is to be considered, that it was not merely
the apprehension of the greatness and glory of the Majesty of God, and the
reverence of God thereupon, that caused this trouble to their spirits, but
these extraordinary signs of Gods presence, which their bodies and spirits in
this frail and mortal state could not bear. That nevertheless it stands good
what has been laid down, that a reverential fear of God is a most pleasing and
delightful thing to the Soul of a Christian, yea it helps much to compose the
body and natural spirits in the service of God, and walking with him.

In a word, to distinguish a right fear of God from a slavish or hipocriticall
fear, it is of that nature, that the more we fear him, the more we hope in
his mercy, the more we fear him, the more obedient we are to him; the more we
fear him, the more we would fear him, and desire to fear his Name, and the
more we fear him, the more we love him: he that finds in any measure such a
fear of God put into his heart as is here described, is converted and in the
state of grace.

4. Special grace and conversion is held forth in the Scripture by love to
God, 1 Cor. 8.3. If any man love God, the same is known of him, Ephesians. 6.24.
Grace be with all them that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. John.
21.17. Simon Son of Jonas love thou me? and Peter said, Lord thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee. Men may have notional knowledge, parts
and gifts, and this may but puff them up with pride and do their souls no
good; but if a man so know God as to love him and delight in him, that is the
man that is known of God, owned and approved of him.

Quest. what are the signs of love to God.

Answ. 1 High and raised thoughts of God fixed and settled in the heart, are a
sign of love to God; an habitual frame of heart to look upon God as most
excellent and glorious, and to adore him as well for his holiness and infinite
purity, as for the exceeding riches of his grace in Christ.

It is true, a Saints love to God is not come to perfection in this life, it is
not come to its height by a Thousand degrees, yet there is such an impression
of love to God upon the heart of a Believer and amongst other things, for his
wonderful dispensation of grace in Christ, that he thinks (and well he may)
that he can never love and praise the holy Lord as he should do. And sometimes
it may be his heart waxes hot, and this fire of love to God burns and flameth
in him, and he can cry out to this effect, Oh, O Lord, how excellent is thy
name in all the earth, and thy glory is above the heavens; Look, Look, O my
soul, upon this great King, the King of glory, the King eternal and immortal,
and admire him and love him for ever. O thou infinite goodness, O thou Fountain
of Life, will thou vouchsafe to be loved of me? O thy condiscention, thy
condiscention, that thou will not account it presumption for me to love thee,
such a poor worm as I am and so vile and sinful! O blessed Lord, if I may love
thee, then O my base unworthiness that I love thee no more! O love, love flame
out, flame out, here is thy right object, this is he that is to be loved with
all my heart, with all my Soul, with all my might and with all my strength;
here is infinite power, here is infinite wisdom, here is infinite holiness,
here is infinite mercy; more love, more, more love for the holy and blessed
lord: what shall I love him no more, O my soul, are thy faculties enlarged to
love as far as a poor finite creature is capable to love? O my soul, love as
Jehovah is to be loved, love suitably to the Object thou art now set upon, love
not as if thou were loving a creature, love not at such a poor and low rate,
but love as one that is loving an infinite and glorious God; love as one that
is loving him that is love it self, and has manifested it in sending his only
begotten Son into the world to save sinners. O what manner of love was this,
and O with what manner of love should this blessed God be loved? O Lord thou
art above all love, above all praise! O that ever I have loved any thing else
besides thee, when there was thy self to love! O that ever I should love such a
vile thing as sin, and such a poor trifle as the world is! Lord now set my love
right, put my heart into the highest pitch of love to thee that poor clay is
capable of, and there hold me to eternity.

Thus possibly a poor Believer may sometimes find his heart raised to God in
love and delight in him; however there is a rooted, grounded, settled affection
in the soul of a Believer to God, so that he does not only see reason why he
should love God, but it is his desire to love him and delight in him above all
things, though the actings of this love may be much kept down by manisold
temptations and by the opposition of the flesh, as the actings of other graces
in us are also.

2. Hating of sin because God hates it, because it is displeasing to him, is a
sign of love to God, ye that love the Lord hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. it is not
only their duty to do so, but in some measure it is so with every Child of God.

Though after conversion sin does yet remain, it is hated and abhorred so, that
it is in the heart to say, O Sin what do thou here? thou art not only my
greatest enemy, but thou art an enemy to that holy and blessed God whom my soul
loves. O when shall I be rid of thee? time was when thou and I were all one,
we were wedded together, but now I see it was an unlawful marriage, I was to be
for the Lord and not for another, therefore I will love thee no more: O if it
be so that thou will not leave me, till death us do part, I wait for that good
hour when the Lord will take me to himself, that so I may be freed from thee
wholly and for ever, and be with my heavenly Head and husband.

3. Love to the Saints is a sign of love to God, he that says, he loves God
and hates his Brother is a liar; he that loves not his brother whom he has
seen how can he love God, whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.20. He that loves
not the Image of God in grace and holiness, which he sees in his people how
can he love God, whom in his glorious essence he has not seen. An universal
love to all in whom we see the grace of Christ, is a certain sign of our love
to God: so that one that truly loves God, can in some measure appeal to God, to
this effect; O Lord, however I have hated thy people in time past, and my heart
has secretly risen against them, for the good that was in them, yet since thou
have been pleased to turn me from darkness to light, I make an high account of
thy people, I look upon them as the excellent on the earth; I am troubled that
I love them no more, and that I can do no more for them; I love them not merely
because they are of my judgment in some lesser points, but I love them because
they fear and love thee, because they repent of their sinning against thee, and
believe on thy Son, and desire to walk so as to please thee, so far as thou art
pleased to give them the knowledge of thy will: My heart is knit to them, whose
hearts are knit to Christ, who cleave in their hearts to that one Mediator,
that one Offering, that one Sacrifice for sins for ever, so far as they
manifest this, they are dear to me, they must needs be precious to me, to whom
Christ is precious. And though because of some errors and mistakes that in my
poor thoughts I may judge some of them to be in, I cannot comfortably join with
such in some things; yet O Lord, thou that know all things, know that I
love them, and though through passion and ignorance, and misguided zeal, I may
carry it unscemly sometimes to some of thy servants, and have a hand in their
troubles and sufferings, (as it is possible for the Saints in some sort to
persecute one another in this imperfect state) yet O Lord, thou know that my
heart is not set against any of them, for that which I judge to be good in
them, but do love and honor them for it. And though my love is most exercised
and drawn out to those Saints whom I am most acquainted with, and to whom I am
nearest joined in the fellowship of the Gospel, there being more occasion and
opportunity for the drawing out of my love to them; yet thou know there is
love in my heart to all Saints, and there is not that man living that makes
profession of thy Name, though differing from me in opinion, and violent
against me, of whom I should not rejoice to have thoughts of meeting him in
Heaven.

But if men be Despisers of those that are good, hate them, and speak evil of
them falsely for Christ's sake, though they may flatter themselves, and think
they love God, yet they do not. They that scoff at the Godly, and their hearts
rise against them for their grace and holiness, though they will say they love
God, or else it were pity they should live, they are utterly deceived, for
indeed they are Haters of God and Goodness. Many other signs of love to God
might here be mentioned, as grieving when God is dishonored, longing for the
coming of his Kingdom, that his Name, and Truth, and Glory may be more
manifested in the World, and desiring to bring all that we can to love him and
obey him.

Likewise many other expressions by which Conversion is set forth in the
Scripture, might be opened, but these things that have been spoken, may suffice
to show wherein Conversion lies, if God give men hearts to examine their
spiritual estate, which shall read these things.

CHAP. IV. Of the Outward Means that God is pleased to make use of in the
conversion of Souls.
THat God does make use of outward means in the bringing of Souls home to
himself, is evident both from Scripture and Experience, which is not because
God cannot do the work without Outward Means (for in Elect Infants, and
sometimes in others, God works Grace without them) but it is merely from the
pleasure of his will, what way he will take to convert a soul, and whatsoever
the outward means be, the inward, spiritual and effectual means of Conversion
is, the Almighty Power of God, as I intend to set forth in the next Chapter.

But to give some account of this matter, concerning the outward means that the
Lord makes use of for the conversion of souls.

1. Sometimes the Lord has made use of great and sore afflictions to awaken
men, convince them of their sins, and so to bring them to Christ: And if they
be bound in Fetters, and be holden in Cords of affliction, then he shows them
their work and their transgressions that they have exceeded, he opens their
ear to Discipline, Job 36.8, 9. Job 33.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. As one who being
sick and restless some nights, it pleased God to put in with the affliction,
and set this upon his heart, that if it were so grievous to him to pass away a
few Nights, though he was in his own House, and amongst his dear Relations,
because he had pain and sickness upon his body, how miserable should he be if
he should bear the torments of Hell for ever; and so the Lord brought him to
look after an interest in Christ, that he might be delivered from the wrath to
come. The Lord sometimes makes use of shame in the World, poverty,
imprisonment, yea the sentence of death, to be the means of bringing men to a
sight of their sins, and to look after Christ.

2. Sometimes the holy and convincing lives of the Saints, have been blessed of
God, to put ignorant and wicked men upon enquiring after Religion, saying
within themselves, Surely there is an excellency in the ways of God,; surely in
those ways must I find blessedness and peace, and not in these ways of
debauchery and profaneness: And so the Lord lets in light into their souls; and
the Apostle Peter exhorts godly Wives to carry themselves with that holiness
and circumspection, that their carnal husbands who it may be are so obstinate
and profane, that they will scarce hear the faithful preaching of the word, may
without that means be won by their heavenly conversation, 1 Pet. 3.1.

3. We read of many that in the Primitive times when such great multitudes laid
down their lives for the Name of the Lord Jesus, by beholding their patience
and joyfulness in their sufferings, were convinced of the truth and excellency
of Christian Religion, and were converted unto God.

4. Some observing how earnestly godly Ministers or others have wrastled with
God in Prayer for their conversion, have been awakened by it, and God has put
it into their hearts, to think with themselves, that if the salvation of their
Souls be so much set by in the eyes of others, how much more should the
salvation of their Souls be regarded by themselves; and upon such thoughts the
Lord has begun the good work in them.

5. The hearing of the great horror of Conscience, that others are in for sin,
and talking with them about the cause of their trouble, has been blessed of
God to the conversion of some. This has convinced some that were almost
Atheists, that there is a God and that it is a fearful thing to lie under the
sense of his wrath; this has put them upon looking into their own estate, and
so brought them to Christ, and so they have found that it was better to hear
the shrieks, and cries, and groans of those that were heavy laden with the
sense of their sins, then to hear the jollity, merriment and songs of fools,
and spiritual Madmen who go laughing to Hell.

6. The Instructions of Parents and Masters, have been oftentimes blessed of
God, to the conversion of their Children and servants: Godly Parents as their
Children grow up, should desire to be instruments of bringing their Children to
Heaven, as well as they were instruments to bring them into this World. And
some Children bless God that they had praying Fathers, and praying Mothers, and
such as taught them the fear of the Lord. Some servants bless God that ever
they came to live in Praying Families, and where they were instructed in the
ways of God.

God sometimes brings to remembrance the instructions of Parents and Masters,
to do their Children and servants good, when they are at rest in the dust; even
those instructions, which when they were first given, took no impression upon
them. That the good seed which they had sown, and could not see any effect of,
the Lord waters it by his Spirit: when they are dead and gone, then to their
Children remember the words which were spoken unto them, and they come with new
life and Power upon their hearts.

To these many more might be added, but let me come to speak of that which is
the most ordinary way of conversion.

7. The word preached is the most ordinary means of conversion; the reading of
the word our selves, or hearing it read by others, and likewise the reading of
other good Books, have been blessed of God to the conversion of Souls, and all
these things are to be used: But the opening, urging, and applying the doctrine
of the word unto people in a way of preaching is the ordinary means of
Conversion Acts. 2.37.41. Acts. 11.21.22. Acts. 26.16, 17, 18. Romans 1.16. Mat.
28.19. Go teach all nations. 2. Tim. 4.1.2. Preach the word, be instant in
season and out of season, Romans 10. How shall they believe on him of whom they
have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher. And so it appears
throughout the story of the Acts of the Apostles, that the declaring of the
Gospel by lively voice was the great means that God made use of for the
Conversion of Souls.

And here it is to be noted, That those who are converted out of this ordinary
way, whatsoever outward means the Lord pleases to take occasion by, for their
conversion; yet he does, (though more immediately by his Spirit,) set home the
same things (for the substance) upon their hearts that are held forth to
others, who are converted by the Ministry of the word, that is, the Lord shows
them their sinful and miserable estate, and reveals Christ to them, as the only
way of justification and acceptance with him.

Now then seeing God is Pleased to make so much use of the preaching of the
word for the conversion of Souls; let all the true ministers of Christ go forth
in his name, and strength, let them look to him for assistance and success in
the work, and as ever they would be Instrumental for the conversion of Souls,
let them preach with all plainess of Speech, let them not be desirous of vain
glory; let them Preach without all ostentation, without all dark and affected
expressions, and let them in their Preaching insist much upon common and
fundamental truths, as about the greatness and holiness of God, the sinfulness
and misery of Man; The necessity of conversion and the way of redemption by the
blood of Jesus. Such subjects as these are so vast, and also so necessary that
they may take up much of a Ministers Preaching: It is a great fault in
ministers if they do not with all their might, set forth unto men their
miserable estate by nature, and if they do not endeavor to bring their hearers
acquainted with Christ? holding forth him upon all occasions to them, not only
as he by whom we must be delivered from the wrath to come, but as the fountain
and Spring of all grace, and Spiritual strength, whereby we may walk in
holiness, and new obedience.

For Ministers to put men upon for saking their evil ways and so promising
them Life without directing them to Christ, to put their whole trust in him,
for their justification; and to fetch strength and virtue from him, for the
mortification of Sin and for new obedience, is but to teach men to build upon
the Sands, and to show them a cleaner way to Hell.

For Ministers to preach so much at random, not having well digested themselves
the doctrine of original Sin, the difference, between the Law and the Gospel,
the necessity and nature of conversion, the doctrine of justification by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them that believe, and the nature of Gospel
grace and true sanctification, tends to the making of their Preaching useless
to the salvation of men's Souls: And though such Preachers may have applause
from the ignorant for their Method, delivery and learning, yet they do but
mislead men and trifle with them about a thing of the highest moment, the
salvation of their Souls.

As a Physician must not play with the life of a man, It Is such a precious
thing, but had need to be well advised in his Judgment of the nature of the
disease and of a right Method for cure, and have many things in his eye; so had
a Minister need to be careful much more, in dealing with such a thing as the
Soul of a man is, to know the original cause of Soul Ma ladies, and the only
way of cure, which is by the blood of Jesus. But if Preachers do but play with
their Texts, and play with the Souls of their hearers, not having their hearts
awed with a holy reverence of God and his Word, and affectionately desirous of
the eternal salvation of the People, great is their Sin.

What with the differences amongst us about lesser things, and invectives that
Preachers stuff their Sermons with, against those that dissent from them; what
with errors of Doctrine, that some Preachers seem to be tainted with; what with
the new coined words and Fantastical expressions that some preachers use: and
what with want of experience in their own souls, of the nature of conversion:
it is to be feared there is a great decay of sound, plain and profitable
preaching, especially about the points of justificiation and conversion.

Next to erroneous preaching it is most offensive to an intelligent, and
spiritual hearer, when a Minister preaches with high words, affecting such a
style as is no way suited to the profit of his hearers. And though such may
admire themselves, and also have their reward, that is, applause of the
ignorant, yet their preaching is nauseated of the judicious. It is a more
difficult thing, and requires more substantial learning, to set forth the
mysteries of the Gospel, to the capacity of ordinary hearers, then to stuff
Sermons with quotations, Scraps of Latin and School terms, made ready to our
hands.

But it may be said, seeing that the habit of grace and spiritual Life is
infused into the Soul by the spirit of God (as has been shown:) when a Soul is
converted by the preaching of the word, how does the Lord effect this work
thereby? Answer, 1. Negatively.

1. It is not the holiness of the Preacher that does convert the Hearers. All
that heard Christ himself preach, the holiest Preacher that ever was, were not
converted.

2. It is not the affections of the Preacher that does convert the Hearers; his
Zeal and his Compassion to the Souls of the people, are very good, and God is
pleased so to work, that sometimes the affections of the Preachers do affect
the hearts of the Hearers; but except the Lord put in, nothing is done, all his
weeping will not break their hearts and reclaim them from their sins.

3. It is not merely the sublimity and excellency of the matter that is
preached, that does convert the Hearers, for then all should be converted that
hear the Gospel preached. It may be the person that is converted at a Sermon,
has heard the same Points opened many a time, and that more fully then at that
time, yet was never affected till now; the Reason is, because now God speaks
to his heart, as well as the Minister to his ear.

4. It is not the excellency of speech or wisdom of the Preacher that does
convert the Hearers. All the Oratory in the World cannot convert a Soul:
Arguments, Promises, Threatenings, and Entreaties set forth with the Tongues of
Men and Angels, (if they were to assume humane shape and speak to Sinners)
about their everlasting concernments, could not prevail to bring them from Sin
to Christ, except the Lord put forth his Almighty power.

5. It is not from any power of Nature that before lay dormient and idle, that
now awaketh and yields obedience to the Word that a Soul is converted: For
there is no such power of Nature, it is an idle speculation of those that think
it is so; for in conversion the Spirit of God is put into us, and the fear of
God, (and so consequently the Seed and Principle of Faith, and Repentance, and
other Graces) is put into our hearts where before it was not.

2. Positively I answer, That the efficacy, power and virtue of the preaching
of the Word when a Soul is converted by it, is wholly from the Spirit of God.
When the Scripture says, That faith comes by hearing, it is only as an outward
means that God works by, when it pleases him: for bare hearing of the Gospel
works Faith in no man, for Faith is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Philip.
1.29. The fruit of the Spirit, Galat. 5.22.

And when the Gospel is said to be the power of God unto salvation; it is not
to be understood as if the bare preaching of the Gospel did save and convert
men, but it is called the power of God unto salvation, in opposition to the Law
and the Covenant of works, because it reveals and holds forth the way of Grace
in Christ, by which God saves lost Sinners, which the Law does not. How the
Spirit of God does work in and by the preaching of the Word for the conversion
of Souls, is a deep mystery. And O that we may experimentally know that the
Holy Ghost has made use of the Word to convert our Souls, though we cannot
exactly conceive of the way and manner of his working thereby. The workings of
the Holy Ghost in Conversion are compared to the wind, as for the freeness and
powerfulness, so for the mystery that is in them: As the wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it
comes and whither it goes, so is every one that is born of the Spirit, John
3.8.

But for further light into this Question, let us observe these Scriptures
following: It is said, The Lord opened the heart of Lydia that she attended to
the things that were spoken by Paul: Ministers do but call and knock at the
doors of men's hearts, it is God that by a secret work of his Spirit opens
their hearts, Acts 16.14. And it is said, Acts 10.44. While Peter yet spoke
these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard him. Peter's preaching,
and the Holy Ghosts falling upon them that heard him, were two distinct things,
the one might have been without the other, the one was the work of man, the
other was the work of God. And that which is said, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. will make it
yet far more evident, For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but in
power and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance: The Gospels coming to
people in word, and in the bare preaching of it, is one thing, and the Gospels
coming to them in power and in the Holy Ghost, is another: to some the Gospel
comes only in word, they hear a sound of words, and as they are rational men,
they may have a notional knowledge thereof; but unto the Elect it comes with
power and with the Holy Ghost, even with such powerful workings of the Spirit,
as turns them from Sin to Christ. Of these things this is the sum, the
preaching of the Word shows us the way of salvation, it is the Spirit of God,
that by a secret and strong hand puts us into that way: The preaching of the
Word shows us our lost estate by Nature, it is the Spirit that inwardly makes
us sensible of it, and affects our hearts with it: The preaching of the Word
shows us Gods Grace in Christ, holds up Christ as the Brazen Serpent; it is the
Spirit that gives us an eye of faith, to look to him that we may live: The
coming to the Ordinance to hear the Word, is like the Woman in the Gospel,
touching the hem of Christ's garment, others touched him as well as she; but
there came a secret virtue from Christ to heal her of her Bloody Issue. Many
come to the preaching of the Word, and to some of their Souls there comes
secret virtue from Christ, that they find in themselves, that now they are
humbled for sin, now they prize Christ, now they cleave unto the Lord with a
full purpose of heart to walk in his ways: Praise the Lord for ever. It was not
the Minister, it was not the bare preaching of the Word, that could make this
change; but this was the day of the Lords power to thy Soul, and virtue came
secretly from our blessed Lord Jesus to thy Soul, admire him, and love him, and
cleave to him, to carry thee on by the same power of his Spirit unto the end.
It may be many others in the same Sermon found no virtue come from Christ to
their Souls, it was a burden and tedious to them: Admire free Grace, and love
the Lord Jesus for ever.

When we find good to our Souls by the preaching of the Word, we must not look
upon poor Ministers with admiration of them, as if by their power and holiness
we had such a change wrought in us; but know, that God has made bare his own
arm, and glorified his own power and the exceeding riches of his grace in
Christ Jesus to usward.

And this is one reason why God makes use many times of persons of meaner parts
and small repute, to be Instruments of converting more Souls, than he does of
others that excel them, that it may appear that the high and excellent power
that converts the Soul, is of God and not of man. It is not fit that the Glory
of God should be given to Ministers and Ordinances, if we get any good to our
Souls by them, look upon them but as the Conduit-pipes, and let all the Glory
be given to him who is the Fountain of life; for thine, O Lord, is the Kingdom,
and the Power, and the Glory for ever.

CONVERSION Wrought by the POWER of GOD
CHAP. V. Showing that whatsoever Outward Means the Lord makes use of for the
Conversion of Souls, the Work is done by his own Almighty Power.
IT has been shown that the Lord in Converting Souls does usually make use of
Outward Means, and especially the preaching of the Word. Now let us enquire
more fully how those that were spiritually dead, come to be made alive, and
those that were darkness, come to be made light in the Lord.

Those that think man has such a principle and seed of Grace lying hid in his
heart by nature, which if it be drawn forth by persuasions and exhortations,
and man will make use thereof, is sufficient to convert him; do not enough
consider how utterly corrupted every man is by the Fall of Adam, and without
any spiritual strength.

It is true, men are reproved in the Scripture for loving darkness rather then
light; and because they will not come to Christ that they may have life: But
such Scriptures are so far from implying, that we are able to change our own
hearts, wills and affections: that they show the (to us) invincible prejudice
and opposition that is in our hearts to the Lord, that we have neither power
nor will to turn unto him: such sayings of the holy Scripture do show what need
we have of the exceeding greatness of Gods power to work upon such not only
impotent but wilful and desperate Creatures as all are by nature.

There is indeed a certain kind of willing and running, and striving in natural
men upon great Convictions; such as Balaam had, when he said, Let me die the
death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. But this one
Consideration will be of much use to guide us in this question, That when God
commands men in his word to pray, to repent, and to believe in Christ; the
meaning is, that they do these things from a principle of grace and spiritual
life, that God only can work in us, and which we are to look to him for. All
the sudden flashes of seeming repentance, and prizing of Christ that come not
from a principle of grace infused by the Spirit of God into the heart, but are
the mere struglings of an awakened Conscience, to get from under the wrath of
God, will bring no man to Heaven; neither do these workings of the heart answer
to those Commands of God, to believe, and to repent, but are only a show of
those Graces: they are something like Conversion, but are not Conversion.

This which has been said, may be Illustrated from the Parable of the stony
ground, Matthew. 13. to which they are compared that hear the word with joy, and
for a time believe, and after fall away: this was only some sudden flash from
the natural workings of the heart upon the hearing of the word, accompanied
with some common convictions, and common workings of the Spirit: But the Text
says, they had no root, they had not the root and habit of grace in their
Souls, planted in them by the Holy Ghost, from whence these things did proceed.

If any shall say, How shall we know these sudden workings of the heart, and
flashes of seeming Conversion that arise but from natural Conscience awakened
and startled with common convictions of the Spirit; as in Balaam, Herod, Felix,
and such as are described in the Parable of the foolish Virgins, from that
believing, repenting, and those spiritual affections that flow from the habit
and principle of grace put into the Soul by the Spirit of God. I answer, That
the difference may be known by the permanency and continuance. Such sudden
flashes as were in Balaam are soon over, and leave the heart unmortified,
unpurged: But the principle of grace in the hearts of Believers is eternal and
remains for ever; where there is the root of grace in the heart, though it be
not always putting forth it self, yet there is a fixed principle and desire in
the heart to admire free grace, to prize Christ, and to cleave to Christ, to
mourn for sin, and to walk with God, though there is not always the same vigor
and activity of grace in such, yet there is a fixed bent and inclination and
desire of the heart toward the Lord, which no time can wear off, which no
temptations and opposition can wholly quench and extinguish.

But to come nearer to this Point, to make it most manifest, that Conversion is
wrought by the mere grace and power of God.

1. Many that have the greatest outward means of grace are never converted:
Though they have godly Parents which instruct them diligently, and live under
excellent preaching, and have met with many startling Providence and great
afflictions, yet they are never brought home to God; when as others that have
carnal Parents that set them very bad examples, and have been brought up in
ignorant and profane places and families, and have lived where there has been
very poor and dark preaching, are sometimes converted: this shows that
Conversion is wrought by the mere grace and power of God. It may be some godly
Parents after many and many prayers for their Children, and great care to
instruct them in the ways of God, have so little fruit of all, that thev count
it a great matter if their poor Children have a little Civility and common
Morality; it may be they have not that, but are profane Esaus, and rebellious
Absoloms, when as others that have had wicked Parents that prejudiced them what
they could against Religion from their Infancy, and when they began to look
after Christ, have opposed them with great rigor, threatening to turn them out
of doors, and never own them, or do any thing for them if they follow Religion;
yet they are turned to the Lord, and cannot be beaten off from his ways: this
shows that it is the great and invincible power of God that works in them
that believe.

2. Some at the same time when the Lord began to convince them and convert
them, have been going on as desperately and resolutely in their sins as ever
they were all their days. As Paul was going to Damascus to make havoc of the
Saints, being (as himself after confessed) mad and outrageous against the
Church of God, yet then, and in that Journey the Lord converted him, Acts, 9.
was not this the mere grace and power of God?

Some have gone to hear godly Ministers on purpose to scoff at them, or bring
them into trouble,, and yet have been Converted at the hearing of them, finding
a mavelous working of the Spirit of God upon their hearts, which was very
strange to them, and filled them with astonishment at the free grace and power
of God.

Some ignorant and carnal people, who at the beginning of a Sermon have
slighted and despised it and the Preacher in their hearts, and have been filled
with indignation, yet by and by before the Sermon has been ended, something
has been set home upon their hearts, that has convinced them of their
miserable estate, and brought them to Christ for help and salvation.

Some at the same time when they were converted, have been more indisposed and
unwilling to hear the word, then at other times, but were even as it were
hurried and thrust upon the Ordinance that they knew not how, and when they
have come there, have been more drowsy, sleepy, and unwilling to hear the word
then they used to be; when lo on a sudden the Lord awakens and startles their
Consciences by the Ministry of the Word, as if he himself had spoken
immediately from Heaven to them by name, and so the Lord has made that
unlikely time the time of love, and the Day of his power to their Souls.

Sometimes when Ministers have been straightned in their affections and
expressions in Preaching, more then they have used to be, that they have gone
on heavily in the work, and haver reflected upon their service with much
humiliation to their own Spirits, yet God has sometimes done much by such weak
means, and converted some effectually at that time, that there has been more
good done at that time, then at many other times, (so far as comes to their
knowledge) when they have been much assisted in the work. God knows how his
faithful Servants would preach and set forth his truth, and he is pleased to
enlarge things by the inward light of his Spirit upon the minds of the hearers.
sometimes above what they did sufficiently clear to them. All these
Observations run into this, that God works all in all, he is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, and that Ministers can do no good, nor People that hear
them receive any good, but as it is given from above, and when he will work
nothing shall let it, not the ignorant indisposedness and prejudice of the
hearers, nor the defects and weakness of his Servants that speak in his Name.

3. Some of the worst natural tempers, not only of the weakest parts, but of
most froward and cross Spirits, are wrought upon by the grace of God; and men
of ripe wits, and of more affable and courteous natures are never converted
unto God. Those differences among men that arise from their constitutions of
body, whether it be for the better or the worse, alter not the case, God has
mercy on whom he will have mercy; God can convert those who are of the worst
natural tempers, and without he infuse grace, those who are of the sweetest
natural dispositions, will never turn unto the Lord; yea the composedness of
their natural temper may turn much to their prejudice, making them think they
are in a good estate, because they do not break out into such passions and
intemperances that others are very Subject to, although they know nothing of
any New birth and sanctifying work of the spirit upon their souls.

4. Some very dissolute and profane persons are converted, and many others
that are free from such gross vice are never born again: Publicans, and
Harlots, and such as the theif upon the Cross, are sometimes brought to a sight
of their sins and to repent and believe in Christ, when others that never were
so vile, go on quietly, resting in their formality and morality, and never see
their need of Christ and a work of grace upon their hearts, and so perish for
ever.

When God does convert men that have been notorious Sinners filled with all
unrighteousness, drunkards, swearers, scoffers at Religion and old in sin, too
habituated and accustomed to all kind of evil, he proclames unto us, that the
power of converting souls is of God and not of man.

It is true, it does require the exceeding greatness of Gods power to convince
a proud Pharisee, that trusts in himself that he is righteous and despises
the righteousness of Christ; that he is in the gall of bitterness and bonds of
iniquity and to bring him as a poor, lost and undone Sinner to seek for life
from Christ, and in some respects such have greater difficulties to be carried
thorough to Christ then others; yet in regard that some of the other sort are
so outrageous in sin, and almost down right Atheists that make a mock and jear
of all religion and regard of God and the world to come, if the Lord please to
convert such (as sometimes he does) the exceeding greatness of Gods power
shines forth most eminently therein.

When the passages of men's Conversion shall be known in the world to come, it
will be matter of everlasting wonderment and astonishment to Angels and men,
for then it will appear that God is to be admired for his free grace, and the
exceeding greatness of his power to all that believe.

Lastly, that I may stand no longer upon this Point, let us consider a few
places of Scripture more, that beyond all contradiction to establish this
truth, that conversion is wrought in the soul of man by the power of God alone.
It is said, the exceeding greatness of his power works toward them that
believe, and that according to his mighty power which wrought in Christ when he
raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. He that has wrought us to the self
same thing is God, 2 Corin. 5.5. Hence it is a very proper expression that we
commonly use when we speak of men's conversion, to say, they were wrought upon
at such a time; for indeed except God had wrought them by the exceeding
greatness of his power to this self same thing, they had never turned from Sin
to Christ. A new heart also will I give you and a new spirit will I put within
you, I will take away the heart of stone and give you an heart of flesh, Ezekiel.
36.26, 27.

In Conversion the habit of grace is secretly infused into the heart, as life
into a dead man; the soul is passive at first: hence it is said of God in
reference unto this work Jam. 1.18. That of his own will begat he us. [of his
own will] that shows it is of his own mere grace and when it is said [he begat
us] that shows that it is of his own power, and that the Soul is first passive
in the work. When a Soul is converted, it does repent and does act says on
Christ, and is active in a way of Grace, but first the Lord begets us
spiritually, and in uses spiritual life.

We must not imagine that the soul never acts at all first or last, and that
there are no created habits of grace; but first, the Lord infuses the habit of
Grace wherein the Soul is passive, and the Soul being changed and sanctified
thereby through the help and influence of the spirit, exciting and assisting
that New spiritual Life put into us, we are enabled to put forth acts of Faith,
Repentance and other Graces. First the Lord puts spiritual Life into us, and
then in him (through his concurrence and secret assistance) we move and act
spiritually and graciously. The sum of all is this, God first gives
repentance, and then we repent, God first gives faith, and then we believe.

All those Scriptures were it is said, that God gives repentance, and gives
Faith, and works in us to will and to do, might all be insisted on for
further confirmation of this truth, That conversion is wrought by the power of
God alone.

Likewise all those Scriptures that set forth the weakness of the Saints, even
after they are in the state of grace, how they yet cry out to be delivered from
the body of death, what need they have of assisting grace, of new influences of
the Spirit, and to be kept and upheld by the power of God unto the end of their
days, and their continual prayers and Supplications to God still to teach
them, quicken them, enlarge their hearts, incline their hearts unto his
Testimonies, and make them to go in the path of his Commandments (as David did
in the Book of Psalms) do show, that we are both at first converted and
afterward carried on in Gods ways, and kept and preserved to the heavenly
Kingdom by the power of God alone, to whom be glory for ever and ever; Amen.

Some are Converted young.
CHAP. V. Showing that God Converts men at several Ages, some in Youth, some in
their latter time, as it pleases him.
NOw if we enquire into the times and seasons when God has Converted those
whom he has Predestined unto Life, there is great variety, according to the
Counsel of his Will, there is a set time for the new and spiritual birth of the
Elect, as well as there is an appointed time for every ones first birth and
coming into the World. The self same day and hour and moment that God has d
creed from Eternity, shall all the Elect of God be brought out of the Egypt of
their natural condition, to travel toward the heavenly Canaan.

Therefore passing by what might be said of Gods infusing grace into some in
their Infancy, as he does in Elect Infants that die in their Infancy, although
the manner of his working grace in them, is a great secret to us; I shall only
speak of the times and seasons of Gods working grace in them that live some
considerable time in the world.

First then I say, that God converts some in their youth, yea very young; this
we know by Scripture and Experience, Josiah, Obadiah, and Timothy are recorded
in the Scripture for early Converts. All should remember their Creator in the
days of their youth: and some God helps by his grace so to do. It is a happy
thing when in this sense young ones first seek the Kingdom of God, before they
seek after Wealth or Wife, or are scarce capable of regarding such worldly
matters. It is infinite mercy to be converted at all, and a great privilege to
be converted young.

1. Those that are converted very young, usually have not such terrors and
frights of Conscience as others have in their Conversion, such thundrings and
earthquakes of Law terrors, but God speaks to them with a stiller voice, and
deals more gently with them.

Indeed such are sometimes sorely tempted to question the truth of their
Conversion, because they have not had such great terrors of conscience as some
others have had, which they have heard or read of, yet there is no ground for
it: for as if a man has had as great consternation of Spirit and terrors of
conscience as ever Cain and Judas had, this were not sufficient to prove that
he is converted: So if a man has had little feeling of those terrors, and yet
can find that he loathes himself for sin, prizes Christ, believes on his Name,
and heartily desires that he should reign over him, his estate is as good and
safe for eternity, as if he had been twenty years under extreme horror of
conscience night and day, and afterward found peace in Christ.

Secondly. Those that are converted very young, usually are prevented by the
grace of God from committing many gross sins which others are guilty of, as
drunkenness, whoredom, scoffing at religion, and swearing, (though the two last
of these sins now a days are rise amongst some that are very young, even to
amazement) usually Youth is not so debauched, I mean, the beginning of Youth as
afterward; so that if God please to convert one before he has run into that
excess of riot, it is to be for ever remembered with thankfulness unto the
Lord. If our souls never came (in act) into some secret and open wickedness,
which natural men in process of time as they grow in years do commonly fall
into, but that the Lord before our vile nature was ripe for the commission of
those sins, was pleased to Sanctify us and put his fear into our hearts that
we know not what many of those things mean, but by hearsay and report we are
to take it as a great favor of the Lord.

Yet by reason of this, some that were converted young are apt to fall into
temptation and a snare, being apt to be ever and anon leaning something to
their own righteousness; But as God takes them off by his grace from putting
any confidence therein, and leads them forth again by his holy spirit to
account all their blameless walking before or since their conversion, but dung
in point of justification, and to the end of their days, after all their doing
and suffering, desiring only to be found in Christ, having on them his
righteousness to justify them at Gods Bar. And herein lies much of the light
and leading of the spirit of God in them that are true Believers, that although
others that are ignorant of these things, may think that they have not much
need of the righteousness of Christ because they have not been stained with
gross sins all their days, (and they themselves at times may be tempted to
such thoughts) yet the Lord shows them that they are so vile by nature, and
their best righteousness so imperfect, that they have as much need to prize
Christ, and to live purely and folely upon his righteousness, as any poor
creatures in the world.

Again, those that are converted young, and have not committed some gross sins,
that others have committed, are apt to carry it not with that compassion of the
ignorant, and of them that are out of the way, and utterly debauched, as those
many times do who have run to the same excess of riot and are now converted
unto God.

Whereas that is the right Spirit of the Gospel to be very pitiful, yea very
gentle in our carriage to the vilest of man, yet rightly tempered with a holy
zeal against sin.

Likewise those that are converted young, and have not committed such
abominations as others have done, are apt to be lifted up with a conceit of
their own strength, and not to be so sensible of the corruption of their
natures as others are; wherefore the Lord does sometimes leave them unto great
temptations, and sometimes to fall foully in some things for a season (even
after their conversion) that they may see what is in their hearts, and that
they should have been as vile as any in the World, if the Lord had not bestowed
his grace upon them: Whereupon the come to have great humiliation before the
Lord, and loath themselves in his sight. And if God do keep some that are
converted young from being tainted with gross sins, first or last all their
days, yet sometimes they may be so near the Commission of them (but that God
does graciously prevent, either by some special Providence, or by filling their
heart on a sudden with the blessed Motions of his Spirit, whereby the snare is
broken, and they escape) that the remembrance thereof is enough to keep them
humble all their days. Besides, if it have not been so with such that they
have not been almost in such evils, almost persuaded and enticed to such gross
sins, yet there is the Sin of our natures, and the sins of daily infirmity,
distractions in holy duties, vain thoughts, sinful passions, idle words, and
the like; for which we have cause to lie in the dust before God.

Thirdly. Those that are converted young do many times attain to a higher
degree of grace before they die, then others who are converted in their latter
time, especially those that are converted young, and live long afterward
before they finish their course, such have longer time to grow in grace and in
the knowledge of our Lord and sasiour Jesus Christ.

Yet that none that were converted young, may be high-minded but fear, let it
be considered that it is not always thus, but some of these through great
temptations, and falls into sin, are but weak in grace all their days; and some
that were converted many years after them do get the start of them in grace,
are more awful of God, more weaned from the world, and more fruitful in their
course.

And greatly are some humbled when they count the number of the years since God
first wrought upon them, and think with themselves how little communion they
have with God, how little mortification to the world, how little service they
have done for God, and then look upon others that have been converted many
years after them, and see to what a greater measure of grace they have
attained. Though they do not envy the goodness of God to such, but rejoice
therein, and give thanks unto his Name for his grace bestowed on them, yet they
reflect upon themselves, as those who have quenched and grieved the holy Spirit
of God, for which he is not pleased (they think) to influence and quicken and
comfort them, as he does others, that have been more obedient, and so their
souls are greatly abased before the Lord.

Of these things which have been spoken of conversion in youth, this is the
sum, That it is in it self a great privilege; and yet nevertheless such as
are converted young, had need to watch and pray, be very humble and diligent
least they fall into temptations and snares, and go on very slowly and heavily
in the ways of God. Likewise from what has been said, it does appear, that
how ever we may be advantaged in some circumstances and privileges above
others, as in being in Christ before them, and the like; yet without great
supplies of grace from above, we shall not make a proficiency according to such
advantages.

Before I leave this head it may be profitable to speak some thing more, by way
of caution and counsel to those that are converted young.

1. Have a care of errors of Judgment, Youth is usually raw and ignorant; you
may have strong and good affections, but it may be weak judgments; go not out
of novelty to hear unsound Preachers, give your selves to Prayer and to the
reading of the Word attend upon the Faithful Preaching of the word by the
Ministers of Christ.

2. Be much in proving your own selves whether you have a sound work of grace
upon your hearts, the end of it usually to them that are sincere is a suller
assurance that they are passed from Death to Life.

3. Fly youthful lusts, as Paul exhorted Timothy. (2 Epist. 2.22.) one that
was converted young, and was yet but a young man, when the Apostle wrote thus
unto him; flee pride, flee all kinds of uncleaness, flee unlawful recreations,
flee bad company and the like.

Have a care that through ignorance you do not commit some sins in your youth
that may wound your consciences much in age: In riper years you may see some
things to be sin, which you would not have done in your youth if you had known
so much then. Therefore study the Scriptures well and beg of God to show you
what sins youth uses to fall into, and knows it not then, but it may be
afterward to the great wounding of Conscience. Entreat the Lord that while you
are yet young men or Women you may cleanse your way, and take heed thereunto
according to his word.

4. Often bless the name of the Lord for revealing himself to you so soon in
your young and tender years, Wonder at the Lords free grace that he should
convert you at all, and labor to be much affected with the time when he did it
in the morning of your lives, so soon, so early.

5. Whatsoever difficulties, temptations, and afflictions you go thorough in
the course of your pilgrimage, let your hearts trust safely in the Lord, that
his grace shall be sufficient for you: He will never leave you nor forsake you;
so that you may boldly say, the Lord is your helper, what ever sad lots of
affliction are upon you; and that all things shall work together for your good.
If God has been the God and Guide of your youth, he will be the God of your
riper years, and though in your latter time you may have great decaies of body,
and can do him little service, yet he will be tender of you and care for you,
and do you good to gray hairs, and in gray hairs, he will bear you, and he will
carry you in his everlasting Arms to Heaven.

You may have many a Thorn in the flesh, many humbling temptations, least you
should be lifted up, but be not dismayed, for the Lord is your God, and he will
strengthen you, he will help you, he will uphold you with the right hand of his
righteousness.

6. Admire him that is of power to keep you, and has kept you, and will keep
you in the state of grace unto the end: remember the former days when you were
first illuminated, what difficulties the Lord carried you through, how he made
you able, by the power of his grace, to break off from evil company, and from
your sinful courses, and it may be to endure a great fight of afflictions from
carnal Parents, and Relations, and acquaintance; and though you were young,
youthful, and very unconstant, yet by the power of God, you were not afraid of
any amazement, and could not be turned aside from following the Lord.

Some that are converted young are sometimes strengthened with such might by the
Spirit of God, that though they have carnal Parents and Relations, that oppose
them in the ways of God, they carry it with that Patience, humbleness of mind
and yet with that magnanimity and courage, that is to be wondered at; even
while they are young and but Children, they may go through such difficulties
with a holy rejoicing, as would be hard for them to go through afterward
without very much assisting grace from God.

Remember therefore and forget not the kindness of the Lord to you in your
youth, and how he has yet maintained the work of grace in you, keeping grace
alive through so long a tract of time, as some of you have walked with God, who
were converted young. And though your hearts and lives are not so with God as
you would have it, and that you have not yet so far attained as to be perfect,
but still groan and sigh being burdened with your corruptions and temptations;
yet thank and praise the Lord that has taught you from your youth up, and that
hitherto he has kept you in that great and terrible wilderness you have gone
thorough, and that his spirit and his fear is yet you.

7. Have a care of abating in your first love and zeal and sincerity and
diligence in following the Lord. Let the spiritual dew of your youth be always
upon you, that you may be always green and flourishing in grace, that as your
days so may your spiritual strength be. Give not the men of the World occasion
to say, that your forwardness in religion in your youth was because you wanted
wit then, but that now you are grown wiser, you follow the World as hard as
others, take liberty in your conversation as others do, and give over
preciseness and strict walking; but let them see that now your judgments are
bettered with age and much experience you still choose rather to suffer
affliction with the People of God then to enjoy the pleasures of sin that are
but for a season.

Lastly, it is very requisite for those that are converted young and are but
yet young to read the Scriptures diligently concerning the duties that God
requires of men in those Relations that his Providence has put them into, or
shall put them into in the world. Study well the duties of Servants and
Masters, Children and Parents, Wives and Husbands, and other Relations. As the
best Saints are apt to miscarry much in their duties in the Relations they
stand in, so especially those that are young, for want of knowledge of what God
requires in his Word in those Relations. Therefore art thou called being very
young? study upon those duties that the Scripture requires toward thy Parents
(if they be yet alive) and make great conscience of them. Art thou called being
a Servant, or intended to be so shortly read over those Scriptures that speak
of the duties of Servants again and again, pray over those Scriptures often,
that God would make thee obedient, diligent, and faithful in that Relation as
his Word requires. Art thou called, and art soon to marry, or art newly
married? study those Scriptures that concern that estate: and so for Masters
and Parents, and the like. The holy Scriptures are able to teach you your
duties in all these things, that you may be thoroughly surnished with directions
from them.

Let no young people despise this counsel, for through their not giving
attendance to the Reading and study of the Scripture in these things, they many
times offend God much, and whatsoever grace they have, the beauty and luster of
it is exceedingly darkened before the eyes of men. We hear of such a young
person that is much affected with the word and prays much, speaks of good
things, and prizes Christ: but when we inquire how does he carry it to his
Parents or his Master, or to his Yoak-fellow, it is oftentimes a grief of mind
to the Godly-wise, and makes them they know not what to think, there is so
great failing in those duties.

Now I am speaking of the Lords converting some very young. Note this, that
sometimes young people, and especially those that have good education live in
godly Families, and under the faithful preaching of the word, are much
convinced and set upon prayer, and others rejoice and hope that it will be a
through work; and yet all this comes to nothing, they soon lose all sense of
those things, and grow more vile in their practices then they were before. And
others of them to please their Relations that are godly, after they have lost
the power of those common convictions they have had, will seem to be religious
still for a while, but when their godly Parents are dead, or they come to leave
good Families and be for themselves, then they will show what they are indeed.
Some are notable Hypocrites very young, and having good parts, and finding that
the profession of Religion makes them acceptable to some upon whom they have
dependence, will make a fair show to deceive others; but let them know, that
they deceive themselves most in the end when they come to have their portion
with the Hypocrites, where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

I have dwelt long enough upon this first Head, to show that God does convert
some in youth, yea very young, and have given cautions and counsel unto such.
Now to proceed:

Secondly, God does convert some in their riper years, in the midst of their
days, or in old age, as it pleases him. Abraham in the Old Testament, and
Nicodemus in the New, are recorded as persons converted in their riper years
and latter time; but whereas some say, show any other instances besides them of
persons converted in their latter time? I will say that we know not the precise
age of the three thousand that were converted, Acts 2. nor of those Acts 4.5.
nor of those Multitudes that were added to the Lord, Acts 5.14. nor of
Cornelius his friends, Acts 10. upon whom the Holy Ghost fell, neither do we
know the precise age of Lydia, the Jailer, and many others that are mentioned
by name in the Scripture, whether they were young or old when they were
converted, nor is it necessary for us to know it: It is sufficient for us to
know, that whosoever comes unto Christ, he will in no wise cast out, whether
he be young or old.

Those holy men that show what an unsuitable time old age is, to have then the
work to do, to make our calling and election sure, when we can scarce see to
read the Scriptures, can scarce hear the word of life that is preached to them,
and their Memories and parts extremely decayed, must not be understood, as if
God could not convert such, or never did it, but to show that the repentance of
such is very often feigned and counterfeit, and to warn young people that they
do not count upon old age conversion to the neglecting of remembering their
Creator in the days of their youth. It is a great truth that they say, that
God should not be put off to take the dregs of our lives, and to take the
Devils leavings, for he deserves the beginning of our strength, the best of
our days, and all our days to serve him, but better late then never, better
come into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour then not at all. There have been
remarkable conversions of old men recorded by worthy men, O that there were
more both young and old brought home to Christ. I know none that will forbid
the oldest Sinner to come to Christ: If they do not flatter God with their
lips, and feign themselves to be Saints, but are indeed born again, though they
be old, they shall enter into the Kingdom of God.

It is true, elder persons that are unconverted are more habituated to sin, and
usually more prejudiced against the power of Religion then those that are
younger, but they have more sins to humble them, and show them their need of
Christ, if the Lord please to give them a sight and sense of them. God is
pleased to convert some that were the most unlikely to find mercy every way,
very ignorant, very profane, and now waxen old also; who would have said or
thought that such should ever have turned to the Lord? But is any thing too
hard for God? wonders of grace are the greatest wonders that God does, and will
be the most admired to Eternity.

If any shall enquire further concerning these things, and ask whether God does
convert any now adays toward the very end of their lives upon their
Deathbeds, or in a dying hour?

I answer, that although none should presume upon this, and think there is time
enough yet to repent and turn to God: yet surely that famous instance of the
conversion of the Thief upon the Cross in a dying-hour, is recorded for an
encouragement of all such as hereafter come to be sensible of their sins,
though very late, that they should not say, there is no hope, and that
therefore they will not have a thought of looking after pardon in Christ, but
that they may see that (for ought they know, there is a maybe of mercy yet.

We must not say that conversion was never wrought in any in a dying-hour,
besides this Thief upon the Cross, it is not ordinary indeed for usually as men
live, so they die, those that lived in gross ignorance and profaneness usually
die so, even die like spiritual fools, without sense of sin, without making out
after union with Christ, and without any serious consideration of that eternity
of happiness or misery to which they are going: but God may work much upon some
very near their deaths, that were very ignorant and vile before, that while men
are on this side Hell, and the Gulf is not fixed between them and salvation
(how vile so ever they have been all their days) let none take away all
encouragement from them to repent and come to Christ.

Indeed it is a difficult thing, and requires much of the wisdom from above in
a godly Minister or Christian (who it may be now is sent for to come and
discourse with, and pray with an ignorant, profane, sick and dying person, that
hated and scoffed all such in times past when the thoughts of death were far
from them) to know how to speak to such, so as neither to bolster them up in
their ignorance and carnal presumption, nor to hide the Gospel, and the way to
the City of refuge from them. One that duly weighs all things will find this a
hard task indeed. Those that being called to sick and dying persons can upon
mere formalities at an adventure though they be never so ignorant and wicked
assure them that all is well, and that they have but a little bodily pain to
grapple with, and so to go to Heaven, make easy work of it. But O for one that
knows and considers that few are saved, and that except a man be born again he
cannot see the Kingdom of God, and that understands that this sick-dying-person
has been very ignorant, and has lived without God in the world, to know how
to speak rightly; to such requires much heavenly wisdom. The visitation of sick
and dying persons is upon many accounts a harder work to perform after a right
manner then most are aware of, and especially if those persons be ignorant and
profane that we are called to visit. Very dangerous is the case of those that
are near a dying hour, and are yet unconverted, there is but a step between
them and Hell,: O if they were sensible of it, what trembling would take hold
of them? but if yet at last the Lord will work grace in them, and say they
shall not go down to the Infernal Pit, (though they are so near it) I have
found a ransom, let none envy the grace of God to them. Let none from what has
been said, take heart to go on in their ignorance and profaneness in their
health and strength, and think all may be well at last, what if now and then a
Malefactor has his Pardon come when he is upon the Ladder, and the Rope about
his Neck, and he ready to be turned off, for one such are not many scores
executed and put to death. If it were but for the life of your body, you would
be loath to trust to that, but men are most careless of their Souls, and though
there be a Pardon-Office set up in Christ, yet few look after it in their youth
and health, and strength, but think their Pardon will come soon enough to save
them from Hell, it may do so, it is well if it do. But O bold sinner, thou
run'st a mighty hazard, what if this Pardon never come? What if God say, Take
him Justice, take him Devils, take him Hell, I will show him no mercy.

How we may know we are CONVERTED.
CHAP. VII. Of the way how we may know that we are Converted and passed from
Death to Life.
When a Soul is truly Converted, then his state is safe for Eternity. If one
that is converted should die presently after (as did the penitent Thief upon
the Cross) he is as sure to go to Heaven as if he had lived never so long to
serve Christ, and to suffer for his Name in the world: for in the instant of
our Conversion we receive Christ, by whom we are justified, and we receive his
Spirit which shall be in us for ever.

But whether we are to die soon, or to abide many days in this world after our
conversion, it is very desirable to know this happy change that God has made
of our condition; for the more assurance we have that God has called us into
the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, the more we shall love God,
praise God, rejoice in God; the more patient in afflictions, the more willing
to bear the Cross, the more desirous to depart and to be with Christ: And in a
word, the clearer our union with Christ is to us, the more sweet and easy will
all the duties of Religion be to us, and the more holy and fruitful shall we be
in our whole course, and that from a principle of Gospel ingenuity and
gratitude: We shall be the more constrained by the love of Christ to live to
him, when we know and are assured he has died for us, and as a fruit of his
death, has drawn us unto himself. Those that would have them that are in
Christ, to be always in suspense and stand in doubt of their eternal
conditions, accounting it a piece of Christian humility and holy modesty so to
do; yea, thinking such a frame to be a great preservative from sin, and a spur
to quicken them to more diligence in Gods ways, then if the assurance of the
love of God were shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, do err, not
considering so fully the nature of Gospel Grace, and a lively hope of
salvation, that it does strengthen and enlarge the Soul in holiness and
obedience, by urging new and further motives to our walking with God and
fruitfulness before him.

It is the duty of all to try their spiritual estates and not to rest satisfied
in some probability of the truth and power of grace in them, but to give
diligence to the attaining of a full assurance thereof.

Wherefore are we called upon so often in the Scripture, to prove our own
works, to examine our selves whether we be in the faith or no, to give
diligence to make our calling and election sure, if it be not that those that
are not yet converted may find it out, that they may not deceive themselves,
but now look after union with Christ, which yet they have not, and that those
that are converted indeed may be assured of it, and so rejoice and give praise,
and be stirred up to walk worthy in all things of the vocation wherewith they
are called.

If a man be not yet truly converted unto God, it is better for him to know how
his condition is, though for the present it fill his Soul with much anxiety and
fear of the wrath to come, then that he should go on quietly and presumptuously
to Hell. If we be foolish Virgins, without the Oil of grace in our vessels,
it is better to know it now whilst Oil may be got, then not to know it till time
is past, and the door is shut.

Many are greatly offended when they are put upon trying their spiritual
estates, they say, such preaching troubles their consciences, they are loath to
see in what a miserable condition they are, but if the Lord delight in them to
make them his people, they will bless God that ever they sat under such an
awakening Ministry by which the Lord brought them to see they were in the broad
way that leads to destruction, and brought them out of it unto Christ.

Now then in answer to this great Question, How may a man know that he is truly
converted, and in the state of grace?

1. It may be known by discerning the work of grace upon the Heart.

2. It may be known by the more immediate testimony of the spirit.

1. Conversion may be known by discerning the work of grace upon the heart. If
a man think himself something when he is nothing, he deceives himself, Gal.
6.3. Well then how shall such a man be undeceived? v. 4. Let every man prove
his own work, so shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.
That is, let him try whether the Lord has began the good work of grace in him,
let him prove and examine himself, whether he has true faith, true repentance,
true love to God, true love to the brethren, so shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, discerning that God has wrought in him those things that
accompany salvation, and not rejoice merely in the good opinion of others, who
though they be gracious and spiritual, may easily be deceived in judging of the
spiritual estate of others, being not so suspicious of others as they are of
themselves, and know not the secret passages between God and their Souls, as
they know things between God and themselves.

Many Scriptures might be brought to show that we are to take this course in
judging of our spiritual estates. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep
his Commandments, 1 John 2.3. Hereby know we that we are in him, v. 4. We know
that we are passed from death to life because we love the brethren, 1 John
3.14. Those that deny inherent grace in those that are converted, or would not
have them to try their spiritual estates thereby, are much mistaken.

Let those who would know whether they be yet converted, set themselves as in
the presence of the Lord, and examine themselves whether the Lord has made
them sensible of the danger and evil that there is in sin? whether the Lord
has taken them off from trusting in their own righteousness and strength?
whether the Lord has revealed Christ to them as Mediator, and fixed their
hearts to put their whole trust in him, Whether the Lord has wrought in them
godly sorrow for sin, and put a new bent of holiness upon their hearts, to
desire and endeavor to walk so as to please God.

He that would have these things more fully opened, let him remember or look
back to the Third Chapter, where I have shown more largely what Conversion and
Special Grace is, and to let him examine himself accordingly. But that I may
(through the grace of Christ) be further helpful to those who would try their
spiritual estates, to find out what God has done for their Souls, let these
things be observed:

1. That the work of grace is not always alike visible and discernable in a
Child of God, neither to himself nor others with whom he has to do. Through
bodily distempers, through viclent temptations, through sore falls into sin,
and great dissertions and hidings of Gods face, (from none of which a Child of
God is wholly exempted in this life) it may come to pass that a true Saint may
be very hard put to it to discern the work of grace in himself, yea very much
fear that he has no true grace, and walk in darkness and trouble of spirit
thereupon: With some it is thus a great while, God orders it thus (amongst
other holy ends of his) by such examples of troubled Consciences, to put others
upon more trial of their spiritual estates, to draw forth our pity and
compassion to such as are in these spiritual distresses, and to make us more
thankful for the light of Gods spirit, to discern the work of grace in
ourselves, which these poor sorrowful ones cannot attain unto, and to show us
that which I am now upon, that grace being so little in the best, is sometimes
scarce discernable, especially when the body is sickyl and distempered, and
there is some special hour and power of darkness upon us.

By the way, I am afraid that sometimes godly Ministers unawares may deliver
somethings that may much puzzle poor Christians about trying the work of grace
upon their hearts, and bring them into great darkness and trouble of spirit.
However that which I shall take notice of may be a Caution to such as shall
read these things, that they do not so, I have observed that Ministers do
sometimes speak so unwarily of the signs of this grace, and the other, that
those signs which they lay down, are signs only of the high actings of that
grace, and are not to be brought in as trials whether a person has the truth
of that grace which may be, and yet not those high actings of it. I affect
plainness and not obscurity, therefore I would try to make out my observation
better, suppose a Minister is preaching about the nature of Faith, and shall
make this a sign to the people to try their Faith by, if they can believe at
all times that God will bring about every particular thing for them, which
their eyes are toward him, for and which he has promised without hesitation,
wavering and considering and poring upon those things that stand in the way of
the mercy; and for this quote Abraham's Example that when he had the promise of
a Son in his old Age, he considered not his own body, nor yet the deadness of
Sarahs womb, Romans 4. 18. 19. whereas it is said there; that he being not weak
in faith, but strong in faith, was enabled to do so. That such things must be
brought in as examples of what believers should do, and of what believers are
sometimes enabled through the grace of God to do, even to act faith very highly
and strongly, and not to prove that he is not a true believer that does not
always thus. And so if this be laid down as a trial of Faith that one that
has true faith will not be daunted in the times of the greatest peril nor use
sinful ways to bring himself out of trouble, and quote for this the Heroic
courage of the three Children before Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel 3. and David's
encouraging himself in the Name of the Lord when Ziklag was taken, and the
people spoke of stoning him, 1 Samuel 30.6. How may this puzle poor souls, and
make them reflect upon themselves, as if they had no true faith because it may
be they have found many fears in time of danger, and used some sinful shifting
in time of trouble. Yea, and did not those men who were so Famous in their
gennerations Falter much in their Faith and courage sometimes as Abraham when
he twice denied Sarah to be his Wife as we see in Geneses, and Peter when he
denied Christ, and yet still the habit of Faith remained with them, and David
though all that time before mentioned he was bold in his God yet all other
times how fearful was he, and that presently after God had emminently appeared
for him 1 Samuel 27.1. and then he was sore afraid of Achish King of Gath and
changed his behavior, and feigned himself mad and scrabled at the doors of the
gate etc. all to get out off the danger he was in. Therefore careful must we be
when we set before others trials of the grace of God in them, that we do not
take Scriptures that speak of the saints of old when they acted grace highly,
and urge this upon people that if they do not always so they have not the
truth of grace in them, Indeed such examples of the Saints should be insisted
on to show others what they should do in like cases, but not to make them
trials of the truth of their grace, so as that they should conclude they have
not the truth of grace except they are in every thing at all times assisted and
influenced by the spirit of God, as they were sometimes. Abraham David and
Peter, sometimes acted above themselves through the strong help of assisting
grace, and sometimes acted as much below themselves, thorough the power of
temptations, and the remainder of corruption that was in them, and so it is
with other Saints. He therefore that will not lay a stumbling block before the
weak in speaking of these things, must carefully distinguish between what a
true Saint is in his principles, desire and bent of his heart, in which he is
holy and gracious (for the Law of God is in his heart) and what he is or may be
in some particular acts in which he may discover many fallings: We must
distinguish between what a Saint should be, and would be, and what he is and
attaineth to in this life, we must destingnish between what a Saint is
sometimes when he is strongly influenced and assisted by the holy Ghost, and
what he is at other times when the Lord leaves him (in part) for his
humilation, and that he may see what is in his heart. We must distinguish
between what a true Saint is in his maine course, so he walks with God, and
what he is at sometimes when as (Paul himself says) the evil which he would
not do, and that which he hates that he does. The life of grace in the hearts
of believers is a great mystery, the flesh opposes the spirit, and the spirit
the flesh in them, the flesh and corruption in them cannot precipitate them to
evil, as it would, because of the spirit and grace of God that opposes it, and
the grace and new Nature that is in a Saint, cannot do the good that it would
because of the flesh that opposes it.

All that I aim at is, that as Ministers doctrine should be quick and powerful
to convince ignorant and presumptuous Sinners, that they are in the way to
destruction, so they should be careful at the same time that they do not quench
the smoking flax nor break the bruised Reed, puzling and making sad any
righteous ones, whom God would not have made sad, remembering that it is one end
of the Ministry of the Gospel that we should be helpers of their joy; and so
much for this digression.

Grace is not always alike visible in true believers as has been shown
sometimes, the Saints walk in the Sunshine: and sometimes in the dark,
therefore it is needful that we should be often trying our spiritual estates
and sometimes set special times apart for self examination, if happily we may
find that God has called us into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our
Lord.

2. In trying our spiritual estates by sings of the work of grace upon our
hearts, it is best or dinarily to try our selves about the main things wherein
the work of grace does principally consist: as to try whether we have true
faith in Christ, true repentance, true love to God, and the like; or else,
through our weakness we are apt to be confounded by a multitude of signs, this
way is safe enough, for where there is only grace in truth there is all, at
least in the root and habit.

3. In trying and examining the work of grace upon our hearts, we must pray for
the light of the spirit to show us those graces that he has wrought in us,
otherwise it will be hard to discern them. The Holy Ghost can put a Insture and
shine upon our graces, and when the Conscience is in great distress, can say,
be not afraid Christ is here, see thou believe in him, thou fear God, and
love him in sincerity.

When a believer is examining the work of grace upon the heart, sometimes the
holy spirit is pleased to put Grace into fresh actings, whereby it is more
easily discerned; as for example, when a Believer is examining whether he has
true Faith in Christ, the Holy Ghost does sometimes put that grace into act at
that very time, and then he can say, Lord I believe, I see faith at this very
time working in my heart, and so for other graces; as repentance, love to God,
and the like; When it is thus, a poor believer goes thorough the work of self
examination, with great satisfaction and delight, and if it be not always so,
yet let a Believer pray and search into his heart, and wait upon the Lord: If
he hide his face, yet wait upon him for a good hour when he will come unto us
and comfort us.

4. The stronger the habit of grace in the heart is, and the more frequent and
constant the actings of grace are, the more easily may we come to the knowledge
and assurance of the work of grace in us. If faith were stronger in the habit
and more frequent in the act, we might have more assurance that we have the
truth of that grace, and usually it is so, that such have most assurance, the
like may be said of repentance, love to God, and other graces.

Happy is it, when a man can truly say, shall I question the truth of my faith
in Christ, when through the grace of God who has wrought my heart to this self
same thing, I find a strong bent upon my heart to cleave to Christ as my
Mediator for ever. I am continually looking to him he is precious to me the
Meditation of him is sweet to my soul, I have counted, do count, and will for
ever count, all things but dung in comparison of him, shall I question the
truth of my repentance, when I find that I have continual sorrow in my heart
for my sins and sighs, and cry continually to be delivered from all my
corruptions. I say happy is that man whose grace is so strong and in such
continual motion and action such a man can more easily discern the truth of it
let us pray and wait for this.

5. Believers must not be taken up wholly in trying of themselves whether they
are in the state of grace or no; but press forwards in putting forth New acts
of Faith, New acts of repentance, New acts of love to Christ, and New acts of
mortification of Sin. That we may grow up into him in all grace, who is our
head even Christ.

Yea, sometimes former grace received may be many ways so obscured, yea
weakened, that there is no other way to recover the vigor and comfort of grace,
but for the Soul to believe in Christ; repent and turn to God as if it were but
now to begin to follow Christ.

Secondly, Conversion and the work of grace upon the heart, is sometimes
manifested to us by the more immediate testimony of the spirit.

If the holy Ghost do indeed persuade and assure our hearts that we are in the
love and favor of God, then we are effectually called, for though God loves
those whom he has chosen from everlasting, and the giving of Christ to die for
them, and his drawing them to Christ is from that free love and good pleasure
of his will toward them, yet until a person be converted the holy Ghost does
not assure him, that God has ordained him to eternal life. Those whom God has
foreknown, he has predestined from eternity to the adoption of Children by
Jesus Christ, but till they be actually sons and daughters which is not till
their conversion and believing in Christ, John. 1.12. The Lord does not send
his spirit into their hearts to enable them to cry Abba Father. The Lord indeed
sends his spirit into the hearts of the Elect to convert them and work faith
in them (for without the spirit it could never be done) but it is an after work
for the spirit to come into our hearts enabling us to cry, Abba Father;
assuring us that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.16. And shedding abroad and
pouring in the love of God to us in particular into our hearts Romans 5 5.

We must not think, that the holy Ghost at first dash does assure a person that
God has ordained him in particular to eternal life, before he insufe the habit
of grace and spiritual Life into him, but first the holy Ghost having convinced
the soul of sin, and convinced the Soul of righteousness to justify, to be in
Christ, and in him alone does enable the soul to apply Christ, and come unto
him, and afterward as it pleases him does manifest to the soul the truth of
his faith, and his pardon through Christ. The Holy Ghost works as a Sanctifyer,
before he works as a Comforter, the Holy Ghost works faith in the heart
before he fill with joy and peace, which is only in believing in Christ; and
discerning the fruits of our Union with him.

The manner how the Holy Ghost does assure us that we are the Children of God,
is a great mystery. When the Holy Ghost clears to us the work of grace upon our
hearts, this is one way that he does witness to us that we are the Children of
God. But sometimes he does it more immediately, that when the believer has not
been at that time trying his spiritual estate, or it may be is in great
heaviness through manifold inward temptations, and outward dangers, and
afflictions; suddenly the Holy Ghost makes him to triumph in Christ and rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Indeed this way of the spirits
witnessing to the soul, though it is most refreshing and ravishing, yet it is
not so ordinary as the other, and it is more transient and quickly passing
away: and is rather a cordial for some sowning fit or some Antidote to
strengthen the heart in some great appraoching service or trial then the common
food of the Saints in this life.

If any shall say, how do Believers know the voice and witness of the spirit
speaking peace, and joy, by Jesus Christ to their souls from a delusion, I
answer.

1. By a certain spiritual instinct which no man knows but him that has it; by
this they know the voice of the spirit from the voice of a stranger.

2. By the signs that follow this voice and Witness of the spirit raising our
hearts to look to Christ the Mediator. As he from whom all our springs are
admiring the love of the father in giving him to be the propitiation for our
sins; loathing of our selves for our iniquities and stronger desires to walk in
universal obedience to the Lord.

But now because some seem to examine themselves little concerning the work of
grace upon their hearts, but in giving a reason of the hope they have, that
they are passed from death to life, speak not of their faith, repentance and
other graces: but say that they had such and such a word, given in as for
example I have loved thee with an everlasting love, or I have blotted out as a
thick Cloud thy transgressions, and will remember thy sins no more; Fear not I
am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee or the like. This question may be moved hereupon.

Quest. When a man has some promise or word of grace come into his thoughts so
as to make impression upon his heart, and quiet him as to his fear of the
wrath of God: how shall he know that this is spoken by the spirit to witness to
him, that he is the Child of God or whether it be a delusion.

Answ. 1 That the holy Ghost does sometimes comfort the hearts of believers, by
some promise or word of grace mentioned in the Scripture is not to be
questioned.

As the Holy Ghost in convincing men of sin and their last estate by nature
does often make use of some places of Scripture, as for example the wages of
sin is death, the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
unrighteousness of men, and setles home the commandments of the Law with the
curse anexed to the breach of them in particular to the soul, as if the Lord
did speak from heaven, to that particular person, I have said in my Law; thou
shall have no other Gods before me? But thou have made riches thy God, thy
belly, thy God, thy Name and esteem amongst men thy God; therefore thou art
cursed: I have said in my Law thou shall not take my Name in vain but thou have
done it, I have said thou shall keep my sabbath Holy, but thou have not
regarded it; and so thou have broaken this commandment, and the other, I have
said cursed is every one that continues not in every thing, that is written in
the book of the Law, to do it therefore thou art under the curse: and what will thou do. As the holy Ghost, I say does often set home such Scriptures to
convince men os sin, and show them their need of Christ, so does the Holy Ghost
many times make use of other Scriptures that hold forth Gods free grace in
Christ; both at first to work faith and draw the soul to Christ, and afterward
to fill the heart with joy and peace in believing.

Thefore it is a sign of a profane heart, and destitute of the knowledge of
conversion, and of the comforts of the holy Ghost, to make a mock and jeare of
Scriptures, and promises given into and set home upon the spirits of men.

2. Sometimes promises and words of grace are given into the soul to work grace
at that time, and not to witness that grace was wrought before, for we
ordinarily receive the spirit to work grace at first in us by hearing in the
preaching of the word (or else darted more immediately from God into our souls)
some promise or declaration of Gods grace in Christ, and if that be all our
mistake, that at such a time when we thought the Holy Ghost set home such or
such a promise; and word of grace upon our hearts, to assure us that we were
the Children of God, that he did it at that time to work the first special
grace in us, and unite us unto Christ; so that, that was the time of our first
receiving Christ: If this I say be all the mistake it is not dangerous.

3. Lastly it must be granted that all that have a promise or word of grace,
come into their minds yea though it take some impression on them and quiet
their thoughts and affect them with a kind of joy for the present, have not
these words given in by the spirit of God either to work saving grace in them
at that time, or to bear witness to them that they are in the state of grace,
for such as are compared in the Scripture to the stony ground, do sometimes
hear the word with joy and consequently have it come into their thoughts, with
some flashes of joy and those that fall away do taste of the heavenly gift, and
after a sort are made partakers of the Holy Ghost Heb. 6. In some of his common
motions, and impressions upon their hearts as has been opened more largely
before. so that for a conclusion of this matter. If there be not a work of
grace wrought in the heart, even an abiding work as well as promises and words
of grace, that transiently and suddenly pass thorough the thoughts we may be
fearfully mistaken about our spiritual estates. But if we can find such faith
in Christ, such repentance, and such love to God wrought in us as have before
been spoken of, the more promises and words of grace are cast into our thoughts
the better, for they strengthen true believers in holiness and communion with
God; and are as so many love tokens send them from Jesus Christ by the spirit,
till they come to him in heaven. Hypocrites and notional professors turn such
promises and words of grace into wantonness, and into a snare to their own
souls, but true believers get real good by them, and lay up these sayings in
their hearts and cleave the more unto the Lord in faith and holiness.

Thus I have endeavored to show how we may know we are in the state of grace,
let me speak a word or two to those that are converted and have had it cleared
up to their souls that it is so

10. Praise the Lord for the exceeding riches of his grace. Be content yea
rejoice and be thankful whatever sad loss of outward trouble and affliction lie
upon you, grace has abounded toward you, the Lord has not dealt so with many
others as he has dealt with you, look round about you and see what multitudes
lie in wickedness in gross ignorance and profaneness, and live without God in
the world, what if you be poor in the World; you are heirs of Gods Kingdom what
if you have not health of body as others have, you shall soon leave this
ruinous earthly Tabernacle; and be with Christ in Paradise, and he will also
raise up this poor frail body, and make it like to his glorious body, at the
last day what if near relations Father and Mother should forsake you, the Lord
has taken you up into his everlasting Arms where he will hold you for ever,
what though the world hate you, and curse you, the eternal God has loved you
and blessed you in Christ.

Rejoicing in the Lord and praising him cont inually, are comely for those that
are converted and pardoned in Christ? O sing and give Praise.

2 After God has once given you a comfortable assurance of your conversion, do
not call all in question upon every fit of deadness and darkness, that comes
upon your Spirits. Be humbled for the least sin, but say not upon every
spiritual fall that if there had been truth of grace; you had never done thus,
for after conversion there remains in this life flesh and corruption, that is
not wholly taken away, till death. Then indeed the house of the Old Man will
quite fall, and all these Philistines die with us. This makes poor Believers
with Sampson desire to die that all their lusts may die too.

Neither do you call all into question, because of outward afflictions, how
great and many so ever they are, for whom the Lord loves, he chastneth, and
corrects every son whom he receives. But say in your hearts the Lord has
humbled us for our sins, drawn us to Christ, put his fear into our hearts; and
has given us many times gracious hints of his favor to us in Christ, and now
though he seem to walk contrary to us in some outward dispensations, and breaks
us in our relations, and breaks us in our estates and breaks us in our esteem,
and breaks us in our-health (as it was thus with Jacob) yet will we trust in
him; and say that still he is our Father, and will not always chide nor retain
his anger for ever.

3. Let those that are converted, hate every false way, and meddle with sin no
more we may well say the time past suffices, and yet we have had to much of
sinning already. The state of grace is so far from giving any liberty to sin,
that it lays more obligation to holiness, have a care of the sins of the days
wherein we live, worldliness, mispending of time in unprofitable talk,
bitterness against those that differ never so little from us in judgment
neglect of training up Children in the fear of God, and reverence and
subjection to their parents, want of heavenly discourse, pride in apparel,
false and long hair; and abundance of other sins that are to rife amongst some
that make a great profession of Religion.

4. Show forth the Praises of him that has called you out of darkness into his
mavelous light, show forth his praises not only in words, but in works,
glorify him on the earth; let not his high and holy Name be blasphemed through
you. Be exceeding tender of the Name and glory of God: make not Religion to
stink, and the savor of it to be abhorred by your covetous practices, proud
carriage, loose conversation, adorn the profession of religion with a serious
cheerfulness, a meak zeal, a heavenly diligence in your callings, and with a
loving and yet a convincing conversation to the World; these things may well go
together and should do so. Christians should be serious and yet cheerful, they
have most cause to rejoice: and shall do it when others shall weep and howl;
and gnash their teeth. Christians should be meek, peaceable, gentle, easiy to
be entreated and yet zealous magnanimous and valiant for the truth. Christians
should be heavenly in their thoughts and affections and discourse, and yet
deligent in their outward callings, heavenly mindedness makes the yoke of
outward labor easier, and the burden of it lighter. Christians should be
affable, courteous, loving to all, yet so far from sinful compliance with the
ways of the world, that they should hold forth the grace of Christ, in their
conversations that others may be convinced that they are the Children of God,
and that though possibly they may rail at them with their mouths, they may
secretly commend them in their consciences and wish their death at last end
might be like theirs.

A concluding Speech to the UNCONVERTED.
CHAP. VIII. Containing advice and counsel to those who are yet unconverted.
HAving shown the necessity of conversion, the Nature and signs of it, I shall
now conclude with some advice and council to those who are strangers to any
work of grace upon their hearts, but are going on in ignorance and blindness
and see not into what a gulf and bottomless pit of destruction, they are going.

Wonder not that I am earnest in such a matter, and tell you so much of Hell
and damnation, it is to stop them that being spiritually blind and desparate,
are running into the lake of fire and brimston, which burns for ever. Well
then let me direct my speech unto such, if God peradventure will give them
repentance that so they may be recovered out of the snare of the Devil, and
escape everlasting destruction.

Hearken and give ear to this Alarm that is now sounded to you that are yet
ignorant, and careless of the things that belong unto your everlasting peace,
Repent, repent, get into Christ, the City of refuge quickly, quickly before the
Lord come forth against you in his wrath and fury, and you be cast into Hell. I
shall endeavor to set before you, the miserable condition, you will be in to
eternity, if you die in your sins and to that end I shall show you three things.

1. The certainty of Hell. 2. the misery of Hell. 3. The eternity of Hell.
1. Consider the certainty of Hell. This is that which I would speak of first,
That there is a place of torment and extreme misery into which the wicked are
cast, their souls entering first into this woeful place as soon as they depart
this life; and at the Day of Judgment their bodies being raised by the Almighty
power of God shall be united again with their souls, that so both in body and
soul, they may bear the wrath of God for ever.

It may be some that may read this may be so ignorant and profane that they
may think that Hell is a fable devised to keep me in awe, and think them fools
that are scared with it, therefore let me endeavor to convince them of it, for
it does appear indeed by the lives of too many, that they believe neither
Heaven nor Hell, yet there are such fools that say in their hearts, there is no
God too, Psalm. 14.1. They say so in their hearts, and say so in their lives,
though few of them are so impudent as to say it with their mouths.

To prove that there is a Hell, I might show that the very heathens as they
have a Notion that there is a God, so they have a Nation that there is a Hell;
a state and place of misery into which evil men go after this life, likewise I
might show that the boldest Athiests are sometimes struck with a Pannick fear
of Hell, all which proves that it is an universal Notion of mankind, that the
soul is immortal, and that there is happiness or misery after this life though
Atheists smother this conviction what they can. But I shall only insist upon
Scripture proof of this point.

The wicked shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9.18. How can ye escape the
damnation of Hell, Mat. 23.33 Fear him that is able to destroy Soul and body in
Hell, Mat. 10.28. God speared not the Angels that sinned but thrust them down
to Hell, 2 Pet. 2.4.

To name no more particular places; when ye read in the Scripture of
everlasting punishment, the wrath to come, unquenchable fire, all those
expressions, point at the same thing.

As there is a real Hell, as well as there is a real Heaven, so there is a
local Hell, as well as there is a local Heaven. Hell and Heaven are not
expressions, only to set forth the two states and conditions of men after this
life, but the two places, to one of which all go at death.

Let none out of curosity enquire where Hell is, 'tis-sufficient that the
Scripture tells us that there is a Hell, and tells us what will bring us
thither that we may avoid it and that Christ only can deliver us from it that
we may make sure of our interest in him.

2. Consider the misery of Hell. Though there be a Hell, yet if it were a
tolerable good place and condition though far inferior to Heaven it was not
to be so much feared but O let us consider the misery of Hell.

I might insist upon that which is commonly called the punishment of loss that
is what the damned are deprived of, and what sad reflections they may make upon
that account, being not only deprived of all the creature comforts which once
they enjoyed in this world (which the Saints in Heaven cannot reflect upon as
any loss to them, because God is there all in all, and better then all to them)
but they are separated from God, from any hope of his favor and enjoyment of
him shut out of the place where he shows the riches of his glorious Kingdom and
the honor of his excellent majesty to the Angels and Saints, not for a time
only but for ever. Shut out of the company of the Holy Angels and Saints.
Surely these things gall the spirits of the damned. If Esau wept so bitterly
for that he had lost the birthright, and lost an earthly Fathers blessing how
bitterly may the damned weep that they have lost Heaven, and the blessing of
the Father of Spirits? What better reflections the damned make upon their fall
in Adam (which now so little affects the generality of men) and their great
loss thereby we cannot conceive now, nor how it will vex and fret them to think
(some of them) what means of grace they enjoyed in the powerful preaching of
the Word, and good council of Parents, Masters, and Friends but that they have
lost all those advantages for Heaven which once they had, and made light of.

But let me speak something of that possitive misery or punishment of sense,
that the damned undergo.

1. They are miserable for their place.

2. They are miserable for their company.

3. They are miserable for the wrath of God which They bear, this is the worst
of all.

1. They are miserable for their place. I shall not stand much upon this but
surely Hell is a doleful place, therefore compared to Tophet, Isa. 30.33. To a
bottomless pit, Rev. 9.2. Utter darkness, Mat. 22.13.

Heaven is called Paradise, Luke. 23.43. Hell a Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. But I but
touch this for the truth is as the enjoyment of God in Heaven, is the Heaven of
Heaven, the best of Heaven, and not merely the splendor and glory of the
place (though it is a glorious place) so it is the bearing of the wrath of God
in Hell, that is the Hell of Hell, the worst of Hell, though it is also a
doleful and miserable place.

2. They are miserable for their company. Now men are fit to go out of their
wits if the Devil appear to them, what will they do, how will they be eternally
scared and ^^igted when they know they are amongst a throng of them shut up
with them in the same eternal Prison.

That Devils and damned Men and Women shall he together in the same place of
torment, is clear from the sentence of condemnation, at the last day, depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
Mat. 25.41.

As those of the Children of men that are saved shall be in the same Heaven
with the elect Angels, and their company will be a great refresh ng to them, so
those that are damned shall be in the same Hell, with the fallen Angels, the
Devils and their company will be a great terror to them.

And as much as profane men delight in in one another company, now it will be
very grievous to them in Hell. To hear one another, howlings, weeping,
wayling, groanings, and bitter Lamantatioas will surely be very terrible, and
especially the company of those that have been partners in sin,
fellow-drunkards, fellow-thiefs, fellow-persecutors, fellow-wantons, will be
very grievous. O how they will curse one another and course the days that ever
they saw one another.

3. They are miserable for the wrath of God that abides on them. It is not
merely the place nor the company that makes them miserable, but the sting of
Hell is the mediate sense and feeling of the wrath of God in an unsportable
manner, this is their paenal Hell, which is worse than their local Hell.

As God lets out his love and makes great impressions thereof upon the spirits
of the Saints in Heaven, so he lets out his wrath and makes great impressions
thereof upon the damned in Hell.

The damned are said in the Scripture to be punished, tormented, beaten with
stripes, burnt with unquenchable fire, all to show how the wrath of God lies
very hard upon them.

It is true there are degrees of torments in Hell, more and fewer stripes a
great difference, there is no doubt of the sufferings of the damned, some
receive greater damnation, and bear more wrath then others, it is according as
men have sinned more or less in this world (I speak of those that perish) that
they are punnished more or less in Hell. But surely those that have fewest
stripes, and the coolest places in Hell, have a sad portion.

If people do verily believe that there is a Hell, yet few believe the
extremity of misery that is suffered there.

I remember a poor Woman that suffered death for being a Witch, told me, that
after she had made a contract with the Devil, she began to be much afraid of
Hell, as a miserable place and condition, whereupon the Devil told her that
Hell was not so bad a place as people thought, that he was the prince of the
air that people lived very well in his dominions, and that she for her part
should be an hostess and keep a fair Inn there. It was to this purpose what
this poor ignorant Woman told me. The Devil has scarce the face to tell his
followers that there is no Hell but rather that it is a tolerable good place
and not bad as some zealous preachers would make them believe.

At another time I heard a profane man when he was told of Hell fire say, I
hope there are some ponds of cold water there to where I may go and cole my
self when I am heated and scorched with the flames, thus fools now make a mock
of sin and a mock of Hell too, till they came to it and then they will be past
their jesting. Hell torments put the greatest wits, and the most sanguine
tempters past their Joaks and meriment. Many go laughing and merry to Hell but
when they come once there, they laugh no more for there is nothing but weeping,
and wayling, and gnashing of teeth in Hell.

3. Consider the eternity of Hell. Though there be such misery in Hell, yet if
men were to be there but a little while, it were not so much to be feared, but
none that go thither return again, neither take they hold of the paths of Life.
Therefore it is said in the Scripture, that the wicked go into everlasting
punishment as the righteous go into life eternal Mat. 25.46. They shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1.9. Their Worm dies not, and
the fire is not quenched Mark. 9.44.

It is true, that neither utter despair nor eternity of suffering are of the
essence of the punishment due to sin, for if men could satisfy the justice of
God for the debt of sin, there were no cause of dispare, neither would they be
detained for ever under the wrath of God, but the damned being never able to
make fatisfaction for their sins, it does unavoidably follow that they are
swallowed up of dispare, and that the wrath of God abides on them for ever.

Now let those who go on desperately in their ignorance and profaneness,
consider these things before it be to late, before the decree has brought
forth before the gulf is fixed, and the day of grace be over.

God has made a Hell for the glory of his Justice to shine in, and all
impenitent and unbelieving sinners shall be as fuel for his Holy Justice to
burn upon for ever. Tremble, tremble, weep, and howl, all ye that are going on
in the broad way to destruction, for the miseries that shall come upon you,
except you repent, God spared not the Angels that sinned, God spared not the
Old World, God spared not Sodom and Gomorah, multitudes, multitudes are already
in Hell, for the same sins that you are guilty of, and if you do not now seek
the Lord and make peace with him in Christ; shall you escape?

It is time, high time to seek the Lord, to make supplication to your judge,
through the Advocate for sinners, Jesus Christ before all this misery come upon
you.

But may some say we do not love to hear so much of Hell and damnation, it is a
terror to us.

I answer, did not Christ in his doctrine tell the people much of Hell and
damnation? Mat. 5.2, 30. Luke. 16.19.20.21.22.23. And thrice in five verses he
uses that terrible expression to set forth the misery of Hell that their worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched, Mark. 9.44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Surely
Christ knew how to preach, and surely he is the best pattern of preaching, and
you see he spoke much of Hell in his doctrine. Mat. 24.51. Mat. 25.41, 46.

Indeed most people are like those of old, who said to the seers see not, and
to the prophets prophesy not, prophesy not unto us right things, prophesy unto
us smooth things Isa. 30.16. As if men should say let us go on quietly to Hell,
I pray do not trouble our consciencies, we will venture our Souls, and if we do
come to Hell at last we must bear it as well as we can. I but if the Lord
intend to make you his people, he will not suffer you to go on in such a
desperate way, but he will make you willing to hear of your danger, and make
you to enquire in good earnest how you may escape it, yea you shall bless the
Lord that ever you came to see into what a gulf and bottomless pit you were
falling, that so you might seek for help and salvation in Christ the Mediator.

All that has been said to show men the certainty, the misery, and the
eternity, of Hell is that they may avoid it, and may never come into that place
of torment. And let all know that though the Doctrine of Hell is to be urged
unto men, to awaken them, yet Ministers are not to stop there, but to hold
forth Christ as an object of faith to them that they may look to him and be
saved. The terrors of the Law are not to be preached simply for themselves, as
it were to torment men before the time, but for another end to show them their
need of Christ, and that they may prize him and believe on him to everlasting
Life; Ministers cannot speak to much of Hell, if withal they held forth Christ
as he that delivers from that wrath to come. The hearing of Hell is useful,
even to those that are in Christ that they may be continually praising God that
has delievered them from going down to that pit: whatsoever afflictions and
chastnings they have here.

He that only tells people of Hell and damnation is a mere legal preacher but
he that shows men first their miserable and lost estate in themselves, and then
holds forth Christ to them as a Savior and ransom for their souls is the right
Gospel preacher.

As I have spoken of the judgment, and fiery indignation of God that shall
consume those that die in their sins so let me show how we may be delivered
from this wrath to come, and so make an end.

The Gospel taken in a strict sense is merely the good news and glad tidings
(glad tidings indeed) of a Savior for lost sinners. A wonderful thing indeed
is the Gospel, it holds forth such a way of justifying sinners as could never
have entered into the heart of Man to conceive, if the Lord had not revealed it.
It shows us wonder upon wonder, God was manifest in the flesh, that is one
great mystery and wonder of the Gospel what a condescension and humbling of
himself was this. That Jesus Christ took upon him our Nature, our flesh, not in
appearance but really, not to lay it down soon again, but Uniting it to his
Godhead for ever, to be sure it was to do a great work, that Angels and Men
shall admire to eternity, that God was manifest in the flesh. This is such a
wonder that when it is deeply weighed does overset the Spirit of Man.

This mighty one the Son of God, not by constraint but willingly died for
sinners, had our iniquities laid upon him, Isa. 53.6. Bare the punishment of
them, 1 Pet. 2.24. This was the cause of his bitter passion of all his inward
end outward sufferings. The Jews crucified him as if he had been an evil doer
but Christ knew what was the Fathers meaning, and his own (viz) that he should
suffer and be crucified because they, in whose stead he suffered, were realy
evil doers, sinners, and had deserved all that he underwent for them. Thus he
that was perfectly just suffered in the room of the unjust, A surety paid the
great debt that others had contracted; There is a wonderful mystery in the
death of Christ, He died as the Second Adam, as a mediator, as a public
person for his people, for this cause he came into the World, for this cause he
laid down his life, else these things had never been.

This Jesus, God man, mighty, to suffer, bare that punishment due to our sins;
which if it had been laid upon us would have been eternal, but he overwrastled
it, made satisfaction, put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, made peace and
obtained eternal redemption for us whereof he has given assurance unto all
men, in that after he had the iniquities of all his people laid and charged
upon him, yet he rose again the third day, is gone unto the Father and is set
down at the right hand of the Majesty in the Heavens. By one offering upon the
Cross he did the work, he being an infinite Person, God as well as Man, his
short suffering was of an infinite value. He dies no more, there is no need at
all of it, in referance unto those, for whom he made his soul an offering for
sins, he has done the work fully, to whom be glory for ever.

This is the Sum and substance of the Gospel. Now if any hearing of the danger
they are in of the wrath of God, for their sins and sensible of the Rebellion
and perverseness of their hearts and ways against God, would have a Savior and
a sanctifier that it may go well with them for ever, this is he, Jesus the Son
of God. He is not here now upon earth to be seen with bodily eyes, he is gone
into Heaven and is on the right hand of God. Look up to him there with an eye
of Faith, put your trust in him, he is able to save to the uttermost all that
come to God by him. Get the knowledge of him out of the word, search the
Scriptures for they testify of him, they tell you what he is, what he has
done, and what he has suffered to bring us to God. Think of him continually,
prize him, set your hearts on him, if you flight him, you will find there is no
other Savior, no other Mediator, no other advocate with the Father.

If the work be yet to be done, even now whilst thou read these things look
to him, close with him, give up thy self to him to be saved and Sanctified by
him, fall in love with him, you will never repent of your choice. Poor soul,
what say thou to a Pardon for all thy sins? what say to peace with God?
what say thou to eternal life? Come to Christ and thou shall have all these,
and a New Heart and spirit to walk in holiness and obedience before God too. O
does the Lord affect thy heart (for he does this great work) that thou art
taken with Christ, and art a thirst for this water of life; then take it
freely, as excellent and precious as the Lord Jesus is, he bestows himself
freely upon poor sinners; the best qualification you can have for receiving
Christ is to see your need of him; and that you are altogether unworthy of him,
do you see your sins now, the multitude of them, the hainousness of them, let
not your sins drive you from Christ, but drive you to Christ. Come, poor
sinners, come to Christ his blood cleanses from all sin, his righteousness is
able to cover all your unrighteousness. Come to Christ but with a true Heart,
to give him all the glory of your salvation, and to desire now to have him
reign over you, and fear not he is mighty to save. Jesus is the Lord of glory,
consider his Godhead in your looking to him to take away your sins. Never any
Patient came to this Physician and missed of cure, come with all the spiritual
Ulcers running Sores and Bloody Issues of sin, touch the hem of his Garment by
Faith (as the Woman in the Gospel did) and you shall see there is virtue enough
in Christ to make you whole.

The Devil labors to make men confident and presumptuous, when they are going
on greedily in sin, but when they are convinced of their lost estate and are
looking after Christ, then he endeavors to puzle them with many doubts and
suspicions as if they were past cure, and it were too late now to lock after
Christ. Ah poor souls do not you see that the hand of Satan is in all this.
When you went on in ignorance and profaneness, he would not endure you should
hear, when Ministers preached of damnation, and now that you are convinced and
stopped in your vile courses, and are thinking how you may make peace with God,
now the Devil cannot endure you should hear of Salvation in Christ the Son of
God, least you should come unto him that you may have life.

Thus I have set before them that are not yet converted life and death pardon
of sin, peace with God and eternal life, if the Lord gives them hearts to
repent and close with Christ, The Wrath of God and eternal destruction; If they
still go on in their ignorance, profaneness, and slighting of Jesus Christ, If
any that read these things shall say in their hearts, they shall have peace and
shall do well enough (whatsoever some zealous preachers say) though they cast
Gods law behind their backs, and never look after a work of Grace, and
conversion upon their souls, the anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall
smoke against those persons, and burn against them for ever. But if they shall
now tremble at the word of the Lord, and lay hold upon the offer of Christ;
believing on his name, and submitting unto him; their sins shall be forgiven
them, for his names sake, and they shall be the heir of eternal life through
him, for though the wages of sin is death even eternal death, yet the gift the
free gift of God is life even eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom be glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by, Henry Mortlock, at the Phaenix in S. Paul's
Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall.
THe Saints Ebenezer and Pillar of hope in God when they have none left in the
Creature. Or the godly-mans Crutch or Staff in times of sadning
disappointments, sinking discouragements, shaking dissolations, wherein is
showed the Transcendent Excellency of God, his Peoples help and hope with the
unparalleled hapiness of the Saints in their confidence in him over-balancing
the Worldlings carnal dependence both as to sweetness and safety by F. English.

A word in season or 3 great dutys of Christians in the worst of times, (viz:)
abiding in Christ: Thirsting after his instruction, and submission to his
providence; to which is added by way of appendix, the advice of some Ministers
to their people for the receiving the power and practice of godliness in their
familys Oct.

The freeness of the grace and love of God to believers discovered in reference
to, First Their service and suffering, Secondly their consolations, Thirdly
their salvation and eternal glory together with the Excelency of the fear of
God.

The goodness and pleasantness of brotherly Love, the wisdom of hearing the
voice of the Rod, repentance the only way to prevent Judgments, delivered in
several Sermons by William Bridge sometimes Preacher of the Word at Yarmouth.

Death unstung in 8 Sermons, Preached at the Funeral of Tho. Moseley an
Apothecary who died July. 1669 With a brief Narrative of his Life and Death;
Also the manner of Gods dealings with him before and after his Conversion drawn
up by his own Hand and Published by James Janeway. Oct.

A Fathers Testament Written long since for the benefit of the Particular
Relations of the Author, Phineas Fletcher, sometimes Minister of the Gospel at
Hillgay in Norfolk.

The voice of one crying in a Wilderness, or the business of a Christian, both
Antecedaneous to, Concomitant of, and consequent upon a Sore and heavy
Visitation; represented in several Sermons. First Preached to his own Family
lying under such Visitation, and now made public as a thank offering to the
Lord his healer by S. S. a servant of God in the Gospel of his Son.

FINIS.

