For the Creditors of Sir ROBERT VYNER,
VV Hereas Sir Robert Vyner did publish his Proposals to his Creditors, the
12th of December last; and whereas the Generality, and most Considerable of the
said Creditors, have declared their good liking of the said Proposals; as being
the utmost of what his Estate sold to the best advantage, and by his own
Assistance, can make good, yet have forborne or delayed to subscribe thereunto,
the time prefixed for their payment being very short, viz. The 25th of this
Instant March, which notwithstanding, had certainly been performed, if complied
with on their part.

But now very lately, some Necessitous Persons, in hopes of gaining a
profitable Employment to themselves, with much pains, prevailed with a few of
his Creditors, by the hopes given them of having Preferrence to all others in
their satisfaction, to procure a Commission upon the Statute of Bankrupts
against the said Sir Robert Vyner; which Proceeding, though the most
disgraceful to the said Sir Robert Vyner, and extremely burdensome to his mind,
and that Statute supposed never to be designed, as now used, against men, that
are desirous honestly to sell their Estates bona fide, for their Creditors
satisfaction, (and especially under such Circumstances which are without
president) which he has in Print twice made known, and offered to his
Creditors.

Yet notwithstanding all this Usage, nothing shall prevail upon him to
prejudice the least of his Creditors, but he does hereby declare, that he is
resolved still to make good his first Proposal, if the Estate be not wasted, by
their further delay and expense; though it be by the stripping of himself of
his Estate, and leaving of himself and Family to the Providence of Almighty
God, and the Compassion of His Majesty.

By which Proposals, he obliges himself to pay in Money, Twenty Pound, upon
every Hundred Pound Principal, with all the Interest; which is generally about
Twenty Pound per Cent more at least, and the remaining Eighty Pound to be
secured upon the Excise, then which no greater Secucurity can be given by the
King to his people; but as this cannot possibly be accomplished, or ever was by
any other means, but by the Subscription of the Creditors, which he does
earnestly for many reasons, and for theit own sakes recommend to them; so for
the better dispatch, and that such as are Executors or Trustees to any of the
Creditors, may Subscribe; The said Sir Robert Vyner does declare, That though
it be most irksome to him, yet if he may finish his business thereby with
effect, he will submit to such Commission upon the Statute, to which he
supposes himself neither obliged nor liable; and if he should be adjudged
subject to the said Commission, he may confidently say, that the Commissioners
with all their skill and expense, and seven Years Labor, will never be able to
clear from difficulties without his own aid and assistance, near enough to
satisfy the Creditors, what is above proposed, whatever Conceit some ignorant
persons may insinuate to the contrary.

And it is further hereby signified, That the Subscriptions formerly made by
many worthy Creditors will be of no use, by reason of this Alteration, but they
are desired to sign the new Paper, to the same effect for that purpose provided.

And for Encouragement of his Creditors, to subscribe the said Proposal, there
shall within thirty days after such Subscription, sufficient Effects be
delivered to the Commissioners, by them to be vested in Trustees, by the
Creditors to be chosen, for satisfaction of the said Proposals.

But if all his Endeavors herein, for the honest discharge of his Debts, shall
prove ineffectual, and no consideration had of his Sufferings by the Public,
and vast losses in his Debts and otherwise, since the stop in the Exchequer,
amounting to above Sixty Thousand Pound, for which he asks no allowance from
any Creditor, this Paper will be a witness for him, Living or Dead, how
desirous he was to prevent the great disappointment, which he knows will ensue
upon any other Course; praying them to remember, that by this proposition,
every man would have received 73 l. 10 s. upon every 100 l. for the Interest
Money, to the 25th Instant, since the said stop, and 20 l. upon the Principal,
making in all 93 l. 10 s. Besides 80 l. charged upon the Excise, from which
they may justly expect a perpetual Interest of 6 l. per Cent.

And it is desired, That such of the Creditors, who live at too great a
distance, or cannot come in person to sign the Agreement, which for that
purpose, will be left at the Vine in Lumbard-street London, where he the said
Sir Robert Vyner formerly Dwelt, will be pleased to Sign and Seal the same
before Two Credible Witnesses, and send the same thither, or else empower some
person by Letter of Attorney, to repair thither, and Sign and Seal the same on
their behalf.

And there is an absolute necessity of doing this with expedition, in regard
before the Sealing of the Commission, the Lord Keeper did order that the
Commissioners thereby appointed should sit, and then adjourn till next Term,
that in the mean time Endeavors might be used to compose the matters; Sir
Robert knows no probable way either of Composure or Dispatch, but Signing the
said Proposals, which the Council for the Creditors (at the hearing) did aver
to my Lord, his Clyents were willing to accept of; which if Signed with
expedition, will prevent the Creditors a great Charge by the Commissioners.

London, March 22. 1683. The Paper to be Subscribed, is that which follow.
WHERE AS Sir Robert Vyner, has Signified to his Creditors, That he is
desirous to satisfy Four fifth parts of their Principal Debts, by Assignments
of proportionable parts of the Yearly Rent or Sum granted to him by His Majesty
out of the Excise, and the other fifth part in Moneys with all their Arrears of
Interest; The said one fifth part, and all such Iaterest to be paid by the Sale
and Disposition of his other Estate: NOW WE whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, Creditors of the said Sir Robert Vyner, for our selves
respectively, and for our Respective Executors or Administrators and their
Acts, but not the one for the other, or others his, or their Executors or
Administrators, do hereby Declare, Covenant and Agree with the said Sir Robert
Vyner, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators; That we the said Creditors,
our Executors and Administrators respectively from the said Sir Robert Vyner,
alone or together with Henry Lewis, and Richard Startford, or either of them,
shall and will in such manner, and under such Qualifications and Restrictions,
as are herein after Expressed, accept of such Assignments and Conveyances to us
and our Heirs and Assigns respectively, or to such as we respectively shall
appoint, and to their Heirs and Assigns respectively, of such proportions of
the Yearly Rent or Sum of 25003 l. 9 s. 4 d. Granted by his Majesty to the said
Sir Robert Vyner, his Heirs and Assigns, as the Yearly Interest, at the Rate of
Six Pound per Cent. per Anum, of four fifth parts of our Respective Principal
Debts do amountunto. And that upon payment of such Sum sof Money as aforesaid,
and at the fealing and deliver of such Respective Assignments and Conveyances,
we respectively shall and will deliver up and discharge all such Securities and
Evidences, as we respectively have of or for our Respective Debts.

PROVIDED always, and that for the Encouragement of all the said Sir Robert
Vyner's Creditors to Sign and Seal these Presents, and that they may not be
prejudiced thereby, or be in a worse condition then any Dissenting Creditors,
if any such shall be; That these Presents, nor any thing herein contained, be
not any bar or hindrance unto us, or any of us subscribing these Presents, our
Executors and Administrators, from coming into, and joining in the Execution
of, and taking the been fit of any Commission or Commissions of Bankrupts
already granted and issued out, or to be at any time hereafter Issued out
against the said Sir Robert Vyner, and all Divident and Dividents upon them or
any of them to be made, of all or any of the Estate of the said Sir Robert
Vyner; Yet so as nevertheless, when we the said Creditors shall have received
the said Twenty Pound Per Cent, of our Respective Principal Debts; as alof all
Interest due to us as aforesaid, upon, or by virtue of any such Commission or
otherwise. And the said Sir Robert Vyner, his Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, shall Seal and Execute unto us, or to the use of us our Heirs
and Assigns; And send and leave the same for our Use and uses, at the late
Dwelling House of the said Sir Robert Vyner, called the Vine in Lumbard-street
Londen; An Assignment of such proportions of his the said Sir Robert Vyners
Yearly Rent of Twenty-five Thousand Three Pounds Nine Shillings and four pence,
as is herein beforementioned and Expressed: That then we and each of us our
Executors and Administrators, shall and will deliver up our and every of our
Bonds and Securities for our Debts as aforefaid; And that then, and from
thencesorth, all and every Bond, and other Security whatsoever, which we or any
of us, have for our, or any of our Respective Debts, shall from thenceforth be
utterly Void, and of none Effect: These presents or any thing herein contained,
to the contrary thereof, in any wise not withstanding; Or, if we the said
Creditors shall by Virtue of any such Commission, or otherwise, receive more
than the said Twenty Pounds per Cent, of our Respective Principal debts, and
all Interest due to us as aforesaid; And the said Sir Robert Vyner, His Heirs
Executors or Administrators, shall seal and Execute unto us, or to the Use of
our Heirs and Assigns, and tender and leave the same at the place aforesaid, an
Assignment of such part of his said Yearly Rent issuing out of the Excise as
aforesaid, as the Remainder of our Respective Debts shall amount unto; That
then also we and each of us, our Executors and Administrators, shall and will
deliver up our and every of our Bonds and Securities for our Debts as
aforesaid, And that then, and from thenceforth, all and every Bond, and other
Security whatsoever, which we or any of us have for our, or any of our
Respective Debts, shall from thenceforth be utterly void, and of none effect;
These Presents, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding.


