The Fortunate Lawyer: OR, THE Young Students New Family, BEING A Pleasant and
True RELATION of a Young LAWYER, who lately Picked up a Fleet Street
Night-Walker, and Civilly Handed her to his own Private Chamber, in an Eminent
Inns of Court; where, after a whole Night's Dalliance, She (with little
Trouble) Presented him with a Boy and a Girl; who now Lies-Inn, in the
Lawyer's Chamber
WHatever other Trade fails, the daily and important Work of Propagation, the
fulfilling of the First great Commandment, Increase and Multiply, though the
other Ten are almost neglected is certain to go on: And indeed, the supplying
the Race of Mankind under the Reign of Wars and Battles, may be no
disacceptable Service to the Commonwealth; whilst the Men are pressed away to
one Service, it is fit the Women should be Pressed too, for Recruits.

Accordingly, a certain Gentleman of the Long Robe not far removed from the
famous Temple Cloisters, (a true Cloysterer, as you will find by his Recluse Life)
having cast an Owl-Light Glance upon a certain Fleet street Evening Walker, of
the soft Feminine Gender; very courteously invited the Fair Pilgrim to a
private Geil of his called his Temple Chamber, for a gentle Nights Repose: The
kind Itinerant, not over cold this warm Spring Season, readily embraced the
generous Proffer, and with a Hand and Heart, to Have and to Hold, a Bride for a
Night, the Match was struck up, and the kind Pair went forward to the grand
Importance, Consummation.

As to her Habit, she was pretty well Rigged, though a little Vnstay'd, being in
a kind of a Loose Bodied Gown, for some particular Reasons, as you will find by
the sequel. I dare not say, she had a Beau shape, being indeed a little
Oversizeable about the Wast: But our brisk Amourist, that stood not upon those
Niceties, made at present no other Inquiry than into her upper Tire, the good
Face he discovered, as deferring the Examination of her Middle Region till a
fitter Opportunity. Hand in Hand they moved to his Apartment, where with noe
great matter of Ceremony, the Damsel, being full as nimble as himself, Vnpinn'd
and Disrobed as quick as the Spark, and got to Bed with as frank an Expediti on
as himself; when he came to the kind Hug, and Amorous Twine, he found her a
pretty Plump Armful, being a little more than ordinary round in the Girdings,
upon this he seemed a little startled, but the kind Damsel soon dissipated that
Surprise, by assuring him, That as full as he found the Meat in the Pot, there
was still Room enough for a Cook in the Kitchen: The Spark was soon satisfied
in that Point, and resolved to Baulk no Manhood on that Score: For now, out of
a double Generosity, a little Charity, as well as Love, he remembered he had
either heard or read somewhere in Culpepper's Midwivery, or some other such
Learned Treatise, that Benevolence helps Production; and therefore, out of a
Principle of more than Common Goodness, he resolved to bestir himself rather
Brisker than ordinary, on so Generous an Account: It Is true, he could make no
new Plantation, where the Crop was so Rank, and the Harvest already so forward;
nevertheless he would not be wanting in all the Good Offices before mentioned;
and if it were not too late, (if possible) to put a Nose to the Hans en Kelder;
though he had no other Finger in the Pie.

How heartily he fell on to the Young Turtle, or rather Plump Partridge, I
shall not relate; it is sufficient to tell my Reader, That a stout Nights
Exercise created a sound Mornings Sleep. When our tired Gamester, as loudly
Snoreing as if he had been at Wages in Lubberland, the poor Girl began a little
to gruntle: A certain troublesome Rumble put her to a little more than ordinary
Uneasiness. To be short, as much as she had had of the Help of a Man before,
she wanted a little Woman's Assistance now. But to see how Destiny provides for
the Distressed! it so fell out, that without the least Motherly Matrons Hand or
Aid, she fairly dismantled her whole Load, viz. no less, then a Brace of Lusty
Bantlings, with almost as little trouble as droping the Crow a Pudding.

All this while her peaceful Bedfellow slept on; so far from wakeing, to lend
her Back a kind Hand, (and, no doubt, as little dreaming of this young Nursery
laid by his side) that the whole Mi^wi^rey was performed, before his Eyes were
so much as opened.

When fair Broad Day, and the Mounting Sun had un-seal'd his Lids, his First
Salutation was the Harmony of a Brace of Dimintive Squealing Pipes; perhaps,
none of the most Grateful, though otherwise very Natural Music: The kind Mother,
too, joined in the Chorus, by wishing him Joy of the Increase of his Family.

I cannot tell you, (for indeed, it is almost impossible) what Astonishment
struck our Young Man of Law, at this unexpected Discovery: However, he found,
that his Culpepper had spoken Oracles, and himself had played an Expert
Scholar, under so Gamaliel a Doctor: For the Benevolent Gentleman had made the
Productive Experiment, by a Probatum est.

Well, Sweet Meat must have Sow'r Sauce: He has not Danced so Briskly, but he
must Pay the Fiddler as Extravagantly: For, here is Household Charges like to
ensue; and no less than a whole Brace of Jolly Twin Brats, a Young Coke and
Littleton, said at his Door, without the Trouble of an Hand-Basket, or any such
Slovenly Conveyance: The Mother has fairly Dropped 'em, the Parish is as fairly
Cleared of 'em, and the Gallant as fairly Entitled to 'em, by Virtue of her
Tenant in Tail, as the Best Patrimony in the whole King's Bench Rolls.

LONDON, Printed for J. Sharp, at the Cock and Fountain near Fleet, street,
1695.


