AN EPISTLE TO ALL MY DEAR FRIENDS Elect and Precious IN AMERICA.
STand fast in the Faith which Christ Jesus is the Author of, by his heavenly
Ensign, in your heavenly Armor and in your heavenly Weapons, your feet shod
with the heavenly Gospel, and your Heads preserved with the Helmet of
Salvation, and your Hearts preserved with the Breast Plate of Righteousness,
and so stand feeling and seeing God's Banner of Love over your Heads,
manifesting that you are the good ground, that God's Seed has taken root
downward in, and spring upward in, and bring forth Fruits in some 60. and in
some 100 fold in this Life; to the Praise and Glory of God, always beholding
the Sun of Righteousness, that never sets, ruling the supernatural Day of which
you are Children, and the persecutors Sun (the heat of it which rises and setts
again) cannot scorch your Blade, which it may do that Seed that grows on the
stony Ground.

And therefore, be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and fear him, that
can break their Fetters, there Goals, and there Bonds in sunder, and can make
your Fleece to grow again, after the Wolves have torn the Woll from your Backs;
for the Rod of the wicked shall not be always upon the backs of the righteous.

And therefore mind Christ, who is the first and last, who bruses the Head of
him who is the Head of all Persecutors, to wit, the Devil.

And consider how all the Faithful in all Ages suffered from righteous Abel to
Just Lot, and the Children of Israel by Pharaoh, and all the true Prophets by
the false, and Christ and the Apostles by the vagabond professing Jews (out of
the possession) and what rejoicing it was to them to suffer for the Lord Jesus,
and how it was given unto them, not only to believe, but also to Suffer; so it
was a Gift of God to them, not only to believe, but to suffer, and to carry
them up in their Suffering.

And consider how all the Martyrs and Saints have suffered since the Apostles
days, by the Heathens and false Christians; and so there is no new thing under
the Sun.

And therefore keep your Meetings in the Name of Jesus, whose Name is above
every Name, in whose Name you have salvation; and be valiant for God's Truth
upon the Earth, and sound his Name abroad and keep in the Truth, and give no
just Occasion to the Adversary; for the Lamb must have the Victory; and keep in
the Lords Power, that is over all, and in his peaceable Truth, in which you
will feel the Good and eternal Welfare and Salvation of all People.

And the Prophet Esaiah speaking of Christ says, In all their Afflctions he
was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them, so all Friends feel
the Lord in all your Afflictions.

And the Apostle says, we our selves glory in you in the Churches of God, for
your Patience and Faith in all your Persecution and Tribulation that you endure.

So here you may see the Saints are one another's Joy in the Lord, who does
uphold them in all their Persecutions, Tribulations, and Sufferings; and
therefore look over the Devil, that is out of Truth, that makes to suffer, to
Christ, who bruises his Head; and in Christ, who is first and last, in him have
you Rest, Life and Peace.

And you see by faith, Moses chose rather to suffer Afflictions with the People
of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season.

So by Faith, he esteemed the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches, then the
Treasures in Egypt.

And by Faith Moses forsook Egypt, not fearing the Wrath of the King, for he
endured, as seeing him who is invisible; and so by Faith God's People now
forsake Egypt in Spirit.

And by faith the Mouths of the Lions were stopped; and by faith they endured
Tortures, not expecting Deliverance that they might obtain a better
Resurection, and by Faith they underwent all the Cruel mockings, scorgings,
Bonds and Imprisonments; and by Faith they under went Stoneing and Sawing
asunder, and were tempted and slain with the Sword, and they wandered about in
Sheepskins and Goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented, of whom
the World was not worthy, etc.

Now all these lived in the one Faith, by which they saw him who was invisible,
which is the Faith of God's elect now (which Christ Jesus is the Author and
Finisher of) which Faith upholds his People now, as it did them, against the
Persecutors in Days and Ages past.

And hold fast the hope which anchors the Soul, which is sure and steadfast,
that you may float above the worlds Sea; for your Anchor holds sure and
steadfast in the Bottom, let the Winds, Storms and raging Waves rise never so
high: And your star is fixed, by which you may steer to the eternal Land of
Rest, and Kingdom of God: So no more, but my Love to you all.

Swarthmore in Lancashire the 12th of the 12th Month, 1675. G. Fox.


