THE RESOLVTION OF HIS EXCELLENCE THE EARL OF ESSEX.

LORD GENERAL OF THE Forces, now Raised for the Defense of the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom.

Together with the Parliaments Resolution Concerning the said Earl of ESSEX.

Ordered, that this be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



July 28. Printed for J. Wels, 1642.

THE RESOLVTION OF HIS Excellence the Earl of Essex, Lord General of the
Forces now raised for the Defense of the King and Kingdom.
THe Earl of Essex being a member of the High Court of Parliament, and a
Gentleman equally Endowed with Virtue, and with Honor, Gifts which few great
men are possessed of in these Days, for the which Virtues, each greedy Eye with
Love and Awful Reverence beholds him, extolling his just merit above an usual
picth, to Excellency.

For such his Style is now, being made by the High Court of Parliament, Lord
General of the Forces now raised for the defense of the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom.

By whose appointment on Tuesday, being the 27 of July, His Excellence appeared
in the New Artillery ground, betwixt two and three of the clock in the
afternoon.

Where he was attended on by many thousands that came to behold and extol him,
and to enter themselves Volunteers under his Command.

Which multitudes with shouts and joyful Acclamations entertained him (no
doubt) to the great Comfort and Encouragement of the said Earl, and all the
Well wishers to the peace of the Kingdom,

His Excellence having received such encouragement, he was pleased to add
something to increase their Joy.

When the shouts and acclamations were ceased, his Excellence was pleased to
Declare his Resolution, to the end, he might satisfy those that came with a
Desire to be Resolved of their doubts, and encourage those, that were there
assembled and Resolved to serve under him for the Defense of the King,
Parliament, and Kingdom.

The manner and form was as follows.

To those that with a longing and earnest Desire pressed to behold him, that was
ordained to be the Instrument of their preservation.

His Excellence gave administered consolation, saying unto them;

Friends, be of good comfort, trust in God for if God be on your side, who can
be against you.

His Excellence is to march in any part of this Kingdom by the direction and
Authority of Parliaments.

But to those that were assembled as Volunteers, he gave Encouragement,
Declaring the Justice of the Cause, the maintenance of Religion, the
protection of the King, the Liberty of the Subject, and the Privileges of
Parliament.

In the just defense of which, he Declared, that he was Resolved to spend his
dearest blood, hoping withal to find their ready Concurrence, and Assistance.

Promising by his Honor, That he would equally undergo all hazard, and
Danger in the Defense of tht same with them.

And as touching the Propositions for pay, he likewise promised, that they
should have due satisfaction, according to the Propositions propounded, and if
he received more, they should have more.

The High Court of Parliament being Resolved to reward every man with a just
Guerdon that shall any way be ayding and assisting in so acceptable a service.

On Saturday last, it pleased Almighty God to give a show unto us of our
reviving hopes, in that we did behold some of those blood-thirsty Persecutors
taken and delivered up into the hands of Justice.

For after their cruel persecution, when they had sucked their fill of
Protestant blood, some of them were taken to their own Confusion.

This is the manner and means of their apprehension.

They were gathered together in a great multitude about the City of Dublin, and
in this their mutinous progress were intended to fire all the small and
scattering Houses about the City, supposing that they might by that means
surprise and invade the whole City. Notice whereof was given to the forces
within the City, which lay in a readiness, always expecting an occasion for
their service.

And now when they saw their opportunity, they issued forth of the City in a
full Body, and gave them an Encounter, which was so fierce, that the Rebels
could not endure the heat of the Combat, and amongst the slaughtered bodies
these nine persons were taken Prisoners, which for a while were kept in
custody, but of late were sent over to be adjudged and determined of by the
Houses of Parliament, and on Saturday last, were brought to London, and are at
this time prisoners in Newgate.

The Lords and Commons do also Declare, that they will live and die with the
aforesaid Earl of Essex, whom they have nominated General in this cause.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com


