THE further Depositions AND PROCEEDINGS IN THE House of Lords In the AFFAIR of
the DUKE and DUCHESS OF NORFOLK.

WITH THE BILL of DIVORCE.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, 1692.

The Oath Administered to the Duke of Norfolk's Witnesses, before the Lords in
Parliament.
YOU shall true Answer make to all such Questions as shall be asked you by this
Honorable House, in Relation to the Charge of Adultery, brought in by the Duke
of Norfolk, against the Duchess of Norfolk, with John German: You shall
declare your whole knowledge of this Matter, and shall speak the Truth, the
whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth, as well upon the Matter as you shall be
Examined on behalf of his Grace the Duke of Norfolk, as upon such
Interrogatories as shall be Exhibited on behalf of the Duchess of Norfolk,
without Favor or Affection to either Party. So help you God, and by the
Contents of this Book.

REASONS Offered to the Lords in Parliament For Receiving the following Bill of
Divorce On the Behalf of his Grace the DUKE of NORFOLK.
THE not having a Sentence for a Separation from the Ecclesiastical Court, is
thought to be no Objection against the Receiving or Passing the Duke of
Norfolke's Bill, for these Reasons; viz.

I. The House proceeds, in this Case, in their Legislative, and in their
Judicial Capacity; and in their Legislative, all Things must proceed
Originally, by Bill. II. That a Sentence in the Ecclesiastical C^urt, can give
the Duke no Relief, as to what he seeks by his Bill ((...)) To Dissolve his
Marriage, and Enable him to Marry again; but that Relief must spring originally
from the Parliament, with^^t relation to the Ecclesiastical Court. III. That in
Case there was such a Sentence, yet it would afford no Assistance in this Case:
For the Parliament, in Cases of this Nature, do not rely upon any such
Sentence, for a satisfactory Proof of the Fact; but hear Witnesses viva voce,
and thereupon proceed. IV. That there (...) Witnesses now living, to prove the
Fact, which may be Examined viva voce; whereas, if they die during the tedious
Proceeding in any Inferior Court, then there can be no other Proof, but
Depositions taken in Writing. V. That Mrs. Wharton's Case was received
Originally in Parliament.
The BILL brought into the House of Lords, by his Grace the Duke of Norfolk,
for Dissolving the Marriage with the Duchess, and to Enable him to Marry
again; which was Read once, and afterward Thrown out.
FORASMVCH as Henry Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England, having been
Married to the Lady Mary Mordant, has made full Proof, that his said Wife, is
Guilty of, and has committed Adultery on her part: And forasmuch as the said
Henry Duke of Norfolk, has no Issue, nor can have any probable Expectation of
Posterity to Succeed him in his Honors, Dignities, and Estate, unless the said
Marriage be declared void by Authority of Parliament, and the said Duke be
enabled to Marry any other Woman. The King and Queens, most Excellent
Majesty's, upon the Humble Petition of the said Henry Duke of Norfolk, having
taken the Premises into their Royal Consideration, for diverse weighty Reasons,
are pleased, That it be Enacted; And be it Enacted by the King and Queens most
Excellent Majesty's, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same, That the said Marriage between the said Henry Duke of
Norfolk, and the said Lady Mary his Wife, shall from henceforth be null and
avoid; and is, by Authority of the Present Parliament, Declared, Adjudged, and
Enacted to be null and void, to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes
whatsoever. And that it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said Henry Duke
of Norfolk, at any time or times hereafter to contract Matrimony, and to Marry
(as well in the Lifetime of the said Lady Mary, as if she were Naturally dead)
with any other woman or women, with whom he might lawfully marry, in case the
said Lady Mary was not living. And that such Matrimony when had, and
celebrated, shall be a good, just and lawful Marriage; and so shall be
adjudged, deemed, and taken, to all intents, constructions, and purposes. And
that all and every Children, and Child, born in such Matrimony, shall be
deemed, adjudged, and taken to be born in lawful Wedlock, and to be legitimate
and inheritable; and shall inherit the said Dukedom of Norfolk, Office of
Earl-Marshal of England, and all other Earldoms, Dignities, Baronies, Honors,
and Titles of Honor, Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments, from and by
their Fathers, Mothers, and other Ancestors, in like manner and form, as any
other Child, or Children, born in lawful Matrimony, shall or may inherit, or be
inheritable, according to the course of Inheritances used in the Realm: And to
have and enjoy all privileges, preheminences, benefits, Advantages, Claims,
and demands, as any other Child, or Children, born in lawful Wedlock, may have
or claim by the Laws or Customs of this Kingdom. And be it further enacted,
That the said Henry Duke if Norfolk, shall be entitled to be Tenant by
Courtesy, of the lands and Inheritances of such Wife, whom be shall hereafter
marry: And such Wife as he shall so marry, shall be entitled to Dower of the
lands and Tenements, whereof the said Henry Duke of Norfolk shall be seized of
such estate, whereof she shall be dowable, as any other Husband or Wife may or
might claim, have or enjoy; and the Child or Children born in such marriage,
shall and may derive, and make Title, by descent or otherwise, to and from any
of their Ancestors, as any other Child or Children may do, any Law, Statute,
Restraint, Prohibition, Ordinance, Canon, Constitution, Prescription or Custom,
had, made, exercised, or used to the contrary of the Premises, or any of them
in any wise, notwithstanding. And be it further enacted, by the Authority
aforesaid, That the said Lady Mary shall be, and is hereby barred and excluded
of and from all Power and Thirds, and of and from all Right and Title of Power
and Thirds unto, or out of any of the honors, mannours, lands, or
hereditaments of the said Duke; and that all Conveyances, Joyntures,
Settlements Limitations and Creations of uses, and trusts of, into, or out of
any honors, mannours, lands or hereditaments at any time heretofore made by
the said Duke or any of his Ancestors or Trustees unto or upon, or for the use
or benefit of the said Lady Mary, or any issue of her Body, or for easing,
discharging, or counter-securing any the mannours, lands, or hereditaments of
the said Lady Mary, or any of her Ancestors, shall be from henceforth utterly
void, and of none effect: And all and every the said honors, mannours, lands
or hereditaments of the said Duke, or any of his Ancestors or Trustees, shall
from henceforth remain and be to and for the use and benefit of the said Duke,
and such other person or persons, and for such estates and interests, and in
such manner and form, as if the said Lady Mary was now naturally dead, without
any Issue of her Body: And also, that all Limitations and Creations of any use,
estate, power or trust made by any the ancestors of the said Lady Mary unto or
for the use or benefit of the said Duke, his Heirs, or Assigns, out of any the
mannours, lands or hereditaments of any the Ancestors of the said Lady Mary,
shall be from henceforth void, and of none effect.

Depositions.
RObert Welbourne says, That about the middle of November last, the Duke of
Norfolk sent for him by Mr. Scott, to meet his Grace in his Room by the Lords
House, which accordingly he did; his Grace told him, there had been some
Messages and Proposals by Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir Robert Howard, but he
looked on them both, to be Men of great Business, and could not attend upon
such Matters, and therefore he sent for him, the Witness, knowing him to be
capable to understand, and willing to do any Service between Us: The first
thing his Grace desired, was to acquaint his Wife, and the Lady Peterborough,
and I think he named the Lord Peterborough, that he expected to be indemnified
from the Dutchesses Equipage; for, says he, I hear She is setting up a great
Equipage, and I desire to be free from being obliged to pay for any of that;
he, the Witness, told his Grace, That he thought he was mis-inform'd, for all
the Equipage, he the Witness saw, was a Coach, a Coachman, two Footmen, a pair
of Horses, and two or three more Servants: But says his Grace, I formerly paid
Money for Her to one Mourton, and should be unwilling to do so again; I presume
my Lord Duke, said the Witness, that was a Debt contracted while your Grace and
the Duchess lived together: But says his Grace, My Wife has some pretentions
to Castle Rising, which I could sell without her consent, by loosing 2000, or
2500 l. and besides, I very lately find, she has also a pretention upon
Billing, which I never knew till very lately, when I was upon Selling of that
Reversion; but I should have been an ill Man to pretend to do that, if I had
known of any such Encumbrance: Therefore I would have you tell my Wife, that if
she will consent to the Sale of those Estates, and make me easy in that
particular, let her consider wherein I may make her easy, and I shall do it: I
know she was a great Lover of Drayton, and I suppose is so still, and She once
offer me a considerable Sum of Money for my Life in it: Therefore, let her
consider of this Matter, and if she can propose any thing for her ease and
quiet on these Terms, I shall comply with her; I do not say it to Threaten her;
but I am told, that for the reason of there being either Twenty one, or Twenty
two Catholic Heirs of my Family, before one Protestant one; If I would --
(here his Grace stopped) Says his Grace, You understand me: But he, the Witness,
making no Answer, his Grace was pleased to say again, If I would bring a Bill
of Divorce, I should obtain it on that Account: He the Witness, told his Grace,
I should be sorry to hear of any such thing; but in Obedience to his Graces
Commands, his would acquaint the Duchess with it, and accordingly he did the
same day, and Lady Peterborough both: Her Grace was very Angry at the Message,
especially with that part that mentioned; and he the Witness was sent the next
Morning to Mr. Scott to desire him to acquaint the Duke, That as he was my Lord
Peterborough's Serv^^^, it was not fit for him to receive nor bring such
Messages; but if his Grace had any thing to say, it was most proper by a
Servant of his own, or to send for one of here is: I carried the Message next
Morning to Mr. Scott, and at my return Home, the Duchess showed me a Letter
she had writ to the Duke to the same purpose, and which was se^^ to his Grace,
but not (...) him the Witness: The Duchess did declare when the Witness
proposed the Sale of Castle-Ri^sing and Billing, as the Duke had desired, That
she would never Consent. By any of this Discourse, it did not appear to him,
the Witness, that the Duke showed any Inclinanations to live with the Duchess;
nor did he the Witness understand it so.

POSTCRIPT.
THE Witnesses to prove several Matters of Fact in 1690. and 1691. were not
Examined, the former being thought sufficient; only Mary Elliot being
Interrogated by the Council, declared farther, That she saw Mr. Germain's Y --
d come from the Duchess Reeking, slimy, and limber, casting his Sp -- m about
the Room.

FINIS.

