Something offered to the consideration of Friends, with respect to the present
difference about some things brought into the Church of late, As for instance,
the limit of a years time in the case of Marriage, where the Husband or Wife is
buried; as also that order that all persons that intend Marriage, shall lay
their intention before a Woman's meeting, distinct and apart from the Men, etc.
which we forbear further to set forth, or particularly to speak to, at this
time, because we would not make the breach wider than it must needs be, so
shall content our selves in offering something in general, at present.
FIRST, either we had what was essential to true Religion and a true Church
State, with respect to outward things, before the things in question was
brought in, or we had not; if we had not, then we must want true Religion, etc.
till those things was brought in, which we hope none will affirm: But if we had
what was essential to true Religion, etc. before those things was brought in,
about which the difference is, as we believe we had, it must follow, that those
things are but circumstantial things, and circumstantial things at best, if
good, are but accidentally good, and that is as persons are persuaded of them,
and not otherwise. Now on this account consider what reason or true ground
there can be, that persons that are found conformable to ancient principles and
practices, by which they were accepted by those of the same Persuasion, to be
professors of the truth in the way of Holiness and Purity, should be esteemed
otherwise now, in any respect by those of the same Society, only because they
conform not to some things which may be termed noval, by being brought into the
Church of late, and at best but circumstantial things, relating more to the
manner of doing a thing than the thing it self, being so far from being
essential to Righteousness, as that they are not essential to the profession we
are under, it being plain that we were esteemed by the World as Quakers, and
accepted of by Friends without them: Consider therefore if it be not an act of
great incharity to unchristian, or in respect to judge persons unfaithful, that
conform not to those lesser things, whilst it does not appear but they are
faithful in the greater; for what charitable man can suppose, that any should
wilfully or obstinately deny the lesser, whilst he performs the greater,
through the force of truth upon his mind: thus would it not be more Charity,
more Truth-like, more tending to Peace, to keep Communion with such
notwithstanding their dissent, by believing and receiving such so scrupling, as
really Conscientious in the things they scruple, as in the things they do
perform.

But if it shall be objected that this allows various practices in the Church,
and therefore not to be suffered; for answer, let such consider whether by
professing to adhere to the spirit of truth, they do not take themselves to be
of that universal Church, of which Christ Jesus our Lord is head; if they do,
then whether that Church do not take in all that fear God and work
Righteousness, now as well as it did in the Apostles time; if it do, then
whether it be to be supposed, much less asserted, that all those were of one
mind; with respect to practice in circumstantial things; and if that be not to
be asserted, then whether we can be truly like unto that Church, (seeing we
conceive as the whole is, so ought every part to be) whilst there wants
Demonstration of it in our practices, with respect to Communion with those that
agree with us in essential things, because of some differences in
circumstantial and of our own making too, wherein we go from them, and not they
from us; for this we may be sure, if the universal Church take in all that fear
God and work Righteousness in every Nation, it ought to do it in one Nation,
and doubtless will, when the judgment of truth prevails above opinion: For to
be sure every one that is born o^ God, and abides in his Counsel, owns what the
Spirit of God owns.

But if this please not, let us know upon what foot those things about which
the differences is, are brought in, that is, whether they are brought in as
terms of Communion or not; for if they are not brought in as terms of
Communion, there does not to us appear much reason we should differ about them,
because if not made terms of communion, they can at most but be recommended,
and so freely left for every one to practice as they are persuaded, but they
seem not thus to be left: if therefore they are brought in as terms of
Communion, then we desire to know where that power rests, that can make
circumstantial things terms of Communion, if it be alleged that this power
rest in the Church, then we conceive by Church we are to understand either the
whole Society, or some particular assembly, not the whole Society; First,
because they cannot come together; and if they could, no act could be made to
oblige all without the consent of all, and where all condescends there is none
left to dissent; but there is that dissent, so that we are not to understand it
here: Therefore if it rests in a Church, it must be in some particular
Assembly, for that in a sense may bear that name; now if it rest in any
Assembly, we desire to know which it is, this cannot fairly be denied, because
every true power springs from a true ground, which as well may be known as the
power which springs from it, therefore we desire it may be set forth; and in
the mean time we conceive if any such power rest in any Assembly, they must
receive it either from Men or from God; if from Men, that is, from those of the
same Society, it must be given to them either in our first coming forth, and
imbodying as a people, or at some time since; not in our first moming forth,
for then we did not as many before us had done, choose Elders, Pasto rs and
Teachers, etc. and so form a body that might be called a Church to govern us,
and to determine what should be matter of Faith for us, for the weakness of
such things we clearly saw, and therefore was directed to know the Lord for our
selves, on which account it was we were not to believe (...) any said, because
they said it, but only because we knew what they said was true, that so our
hope and faith might not stand in Men, but in the power of God; thus in our
coming forth there does appear no footsteps of any such Authority, therefore if
it was given at any time since, we desire to know when it was done, and in the
mean time offer, if any such thing be done, we look upon it out of truth, for
no man can know aforehand whether that thing shall be true or false that
rests in others, till it is brought forth, and no man that fears God is
obliged to practice any thing, but what he believes is true, and where no man
is to practice any thing but what he believe is true, it follows there must a
choice remain in every thing that is brought forth to be practiced, according
to that understanding which the Lord gives, and where a choice remains, no
such power can be given to any assemblies, because a power to command, and a
choice to obey are inconsistent: Thus we cannot find that any such power was or
could be given at first, or at any time since. But if on the other hand, any
assembly shall say that they have received this Power from God, we say, that is
to be considered of, because the power of God is consistant with it self, now
he does not require a duty of any that fears him; but first, he convinces them
of it to be their duty: If therefore it be our duty to receive what others say
is true, because they say it, and not because we know it to be true, then we
must be convinced that this Authority is Divine, on which we must thus depend;
but this we cannot be, but by a divine way, then that must be either by the
Spirit of Truth in our own hearts, or otherwise by some signal Authority of the
Truth and Power of God, which such have to convince; in both cases our
Understanding is concerned in our Obedience and Duty, but neither of those ways
that we know of are apparent, therefore to press Obedience under the notion of
Truth, where we know it not, implys a kind of contradiction; for its as much as
to say, we are to go out of the Truth to serve it, for so is blind Obedience,
and this is the high Road into it: But if any shall say, That this Authority
rests not in Men, but in the Spirit of Truth, then we say, it neither rests
in this nor in that Assembly as a standing Ordinance, but is even as the wind
that blows where it lists, so is every one that in this matter has the
Word of the Lord; for though they know from whence it comes, yet none knows
when, nor unto whom it shall come, therefore the submission is not to what this
Man, nor that Assembly says, because they say it, but because we know that
what they say is true, on which account it is plain, one may have as much
Authority over others that fear God as an Assembly, for the first may be Truth,
and the latter can be no more; that is to say, it cannot be more Truth, because
many say it, for that is to allow degrees of comparison on the side of Truth,
which is not to be admitted. Thus we cannot find that any Assembly has any
power either from Man or God, to make circumstantial things terms of Communion,
or to bring noval things into the Church upon any other foot than
Recommendation, which must be fairly left for every one to practice as they are
persuaded, so that the notion of Church Authority to enforce noval things upon
such as fear God, has nothing in it of weight or Service, for we are as much
obliged to receive the Truth from one, as from many, and no more to heed many
than one; when what they offer occurs not with our understanding, for the
submission is not unto Men, but unto the Truth, and the Truth is received
according to the understanding, and not contrary to it; and where according to
Truth our understanding is concerned in our Duty and Obedience, there is no
absolute or unaccountable authority can rest in any Assembly under the notion
of Church Order and Government; And that our understanding is concerned, in our
Obedience has been all along asserted, for Instance, William Pen in his
Address to Protestants, where the case is sufficiently spoken to: But having
come to this conclusion, perhaps some may object that this is to destroy
Discipline, and overturn Church Government, which we conceive is a great
mistake so far as Church Government is consistant with Truth and the good of
human Society; for as William Pen tells us in his Address to Protestants, that
Church Government supposes first a Church, so we say that Church implys a
Society of people agreeing in certain principles and practices, now those seem
to us to be the Foundation Rule for Government or Discipline; for if any go
contrary to what they have given up their names to believe* and practice, or if
any go into that which is evil and scandalous, or endeavor to lay a new
Foundation, or Preach a new Doctrine which we conceive is not chargeable: upon
those that are dissatisfied, such may be dealt with, because there is certain
Rules to proceed by; and here it is, that an Assembly may perhaps have more
power than a particular person, which is with respect to such that are
disorderly, who perhaps will hear the voice of many, when they will not do it
for one; but this is nothing to such as fear God, and are conform to Ancient
Principles and Practices: But if any shall object, that though it be true, that
such as truly fear God is not to be imposed upon beyond that understanding
which he gives, yet those that are dissatisfied are such as do not fear God;
to this must say, the objection is very uncharitable, and is so far from
bringing Peace, that it will help to establish Division, and that on a certain
Foundation, because such as are conscientiously dissatisfied, of which we are
sure there is, must needs know that the Judgment is false, and every one knows
that a false Judgment cannot be brought forth and stood in, but by a wrong
Spirit; this is to make the difference essential, which before was but
circumstantial, for to be sure we are as much commanded to avoid the communion
with evil and false Spirits, as forbidden to have fellowship with the works
thereof, the former being the cause, the other but the effect; it is true the
effect is to be avoided, but is more excellent to take away the cause.

These things are offered sincerely for a good understanding, that so Peace may
be established according to Truth, for Peace without Truth is but an ill
Commmunion, and that Foundation, to wit, conviction and persuasion on which we
builded our Separation from others, may still not only remain firm, but be
freely allowed as a Sanctuary against all Innovation, which is the hearty
desire of

John Hogg.

THE END.

