To the Honorable House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT: THE CASE AND
Humble PETITION OF Benjamin Harris, BOOKSELLER, Prisoner in the KING'S BENCH.
Humbly Shows,
THat Your Petitioner being a Citizen of London, that formerly Lived in Good
Fashion and Repute, Has not only been Exposed to the Indelible Ignominy of
Standing In the Pillory, before his Own House, near the Royal Exchange; But
also Confined for above Thirteen Months last past, and still continues a
Prisoner in Execution for 500 l. Fine, Imposed upon him in Hillary Term, 1680.
by the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, and the rest of the Judges of the Court of
King's Bench: Which Your Petitioner being altogether Unable to Pay, is
consequently doomed to as wretched a state, as if he had been Condemned to the
Galleys, since, like them, his Misery has no Prospect of Terminating, but with
his Life: And withal his distressed Wife, and many Innocent Helpless Children,
sharing in the same Calamity, and being hereby inevitably reduced to Ruin, and
the utmost Extremities.

And all this for no other Crime or Offense, so much as Alleged against him,
save only, That he did (In the way of his Trade) cause to be Reprinted, and
sell a certain Book, Entitled,

An Appeal from the Country to the City, for the Preservation of His Majesty's
Person, Liberty, Property, and the Protestant Religion.

In which Book, the Only Words excepted against, and charged as Criminal in
the Information brought against Your Petitioner, and upon which he received
this Unparalled Judgment, are these, [Speaking concerning Electing of Members
to serve in Parliament.]

We in the Country have done our Parts, in Choosing, for the Generality, Good
Members to Serve in Parliament; But if (as our Two last Parliaments were) they
must be Dissolved, or Prorogued, when ever they come to Redress the Grievances
of the Subject, we may be Pitied, but not Blamed. If the PLOT takes Effect, (as
in all Probability it will) our Parliaments are not then to be Condemned, for
that their not being suffered to Sit, occasioned it. And as these were all the
Words charged, as by the Information appears; And that Your Petitioner did
only Re-print it from and by a Printed Copy then commonly Sold about Town,
Published (as has been offered to the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, to be
proved) by Thompson, commonly called, The Popish Printer: So after all this
Hardship to Your Petitioner, the said Thompson, who first set it abroad, was
never in the least Questioned or Prosecuted for the same.

And as Your Humble Suppliant with all Gratitude acknowledges the abundant
Charity and Kindness of the Honorable House of Commons, in the late
Ever-Honour'd Parliament, toward him, in Repeating on his behalf the Addresses
and Requests of that Honorable House, to His Majesty, That He would Graciously
be pleased to Remit Your Petitioner's Fine. So nothing in all Your Petitioner's
Troubles has more sensibly afflicted him, than that he should be so Unhappy, as
to be misrepresented to His Majesty, by some ill Men, (speaking either out of
Malice, or merely on false unjust Reports) as a Person of Disloyal or Seditious
Principles, Your Petitioner being really and sincerely a most Dutiful and
Affectionate Honorer of His Majesty's Person and Government; Both which he
prays Almighty God, long to preserve and continue. And as to the Expressions
alleged to be spoken, That Thousands would stand by him, etc. No such words
were ever uttered by Your Petitioner; And one of the Witnesses that testified
against him at his Trial, has since Publicly and Freely acknowledged before
diverse Witnesses, That he there swore falsely, and asked Your Petitioner pardon
for the same.

Wherefore, since Your Petitioner's Misery is so Unsupportable, and the
Occasion thereof, no other than as aforesaid; And for that in the Resolutions
of the late House of Commons, the said Proceedings against Your Petitioner as
to such Excessive Fine, were declared Partial, Arbitrary and Illegal; And
because Your Petitioner can never hope for Liberty, but must certainly perish
in this Loathsome Confinement, and his Numerous Family Beg their Bread, unless
His Majesty, at the Intercession of You His most Great and Wise Council, shall
be Graciously pleased to Remit that Disproportionate Fine, which it is
impossible for Your Petitioner ever to Raise.

And since Your Petitioner has been thus Ruined, and remains still under such
Severity, And that the late Parliament were pleased to have Your Petitioner
under Nomination for Printing Their VOTES, [Though Your Petitioner did not then
get any thing thereby, but Others went wholly away with the Profit] Your
Petitioner humbly begs, That this Honorable House would take him into Their
Pious Consideration, and Allow him Now the Privilege of Printing the Votes of
this Present Parliament at Oxford, or of the sole Reprinting them at London,
from time to time, or such Share therein (to support himself and Family from
Perishing) as the Compassion and Wisdom of this Honorable House shall deem
meet.

In which Your Petitioner assures himself he shall not, because Confined, be
Postpon'd for the Importunities of others, who, enjoying Liberty, cannot
pretend so much Equity in their Requests, though they may have Opportunities of
making greater Interests: For he is confident the Justice of so wise a Senate,
will charitably extend their Favors not merely to those that stand Next, or are
most Importunate, but to such as have the most Need of them.

Or should it be said, That Your Petitioner, because in Prison, cannot so well
manage that Affair for the Service of the House, and the Public. Your
Petitioner hopes, there will not appear any weight in that Objection, since
it is well known, That Your Petitioner has, for diverse Weeks together, during
this Rigid Confinement, Published (though with very little Encouragement of
Advantage, by reason of the Swarms of Papers daily Emitted) his Intelligence,
and diverse other Sheets, tending to Unvail the Designs of the Papists, Advance
the Protestant Interest, and Vindicate the Justice and Loyalty of the Last
Parliament; And also has given the World, a true Account of more PETITIONS,
ADDRESSES and APPLICATIONS for the Sitting of this present Parliament, than any
Pretender to Intelligence whatsoever; And therefore does not doubt, but by his
Servants and Agents, he may as well either at Oxford or London, dispatch the
VOTES, where there is a certain Prospect of Profit, as he did those other
things, where there has been very little private Advantage: But besides, Your
Petitioner being an Evidence against Sir William Scroggs, who stands Impeached
of Treason, and other High Crimes and Misdemeanors in Parliament, ought, and
may, (as he humbly conceives) on an Habeas Corpus (if the Honorable House
judge his Testimony material) be brought down, and allowed de Die in Diem, to
Attend as long as You shall Sit, or till that Charge be Tried.

Your Poor Petitioner is not insensible of Your manifold weighty Affairs, which
much detered him from interrupting You with this his private Concern; But hopes
the Dismal Circumstances he is under, and the Afflicting Complaints of his Poor
Wife and Children, may Excuse the Unusual Boldness of it, and prevail with so
Christian an Assembly, to take Pity on Him and Them, so far as it is Just and
Reasonable.

And Your Petitioner (as in Duty bound) shall ever pray for Your Respective
Safeties, the Blessing of God on all Your Consultations, an Hearty Agreement
between the KING and His good Subjects, the long Life of His Majesty, the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and our just Liberties and Properties.
From my Confinement in the King's Bench, Mar. 19. 1680/1.

