IRELAND. By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND for the Affairs of IRELAND.
WHereas there has been of late years a Custom in this Country of Passing
current in payments, all manner of Clipped English Money, and likewise all
Spanish Money, (commonly called Ryals or Pieces of eight) with many other sorts
of foreign Coin and Money, at a far higher Rate than their true and intrinsic
Worth, whereby the people have been deceived, the Treasure of the Country
(through the practice of some ill-minded Persons) both wasted and corrupted,
and Trade much prejudiced, The said Commissioners of Parliament taking the said
Grievance into their serious Care and Consideration, and foreseeing many great
Evils that will follow, in case the said Custom should continue; Do, for the
better preventing thereof, and remedying the said Mischiefs for the future,
Order and Declare, And it is hereby Ordered and Declared, That it shall and may
be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever, to refuse all Clipped English
Money in payment, unless tendered and paid to them according to the true value
thereof by Weight, and that none may otherwise enforce the acceptance of it.

That no sort of Spanish Money commonly known or called by the name of Ryals or
Pieces of eight, As likewise no Rix Flemmish or cross Dollers, nor any others
of that kind whatsoever, that have usually passed or been taken at the Rate of
Five shillings sterling, be henceforth enforced in payment for more then at the
Rate of Four shillings six pence sterling each, and the Half and Quarter pieces
proportionably: Likewise that no Philips Money commonly called Ducatoons, and
usually received for six shillings, be henceforth enforced in payment for more
than the value of five shillings six pence each, and the Half-Ducatoons
proportionably. That no French Money of that sort commonly called Quardecues
shall be enforced in payment for above the Value or Rate of one shilling six
pence, And that no other sorts of foreign Coin be enforced in payment for
current Money. And for the better observance of the said Orders, the
Commissioners of the Revenue in their respective Precincts in Ireland, are to
cause due Publication to be made hereof in all Garrisons and Mercat-Towns
within their several and respective Precincts, and the same to be affixed in
all convenient public Places: To the end that all persons may have due Notice
thereof.

Dated at Kilkennie 5. of November, 1652. Charles Fleetwood. Edm. Ludlow. Miles
Corbet. Jo. Jone

Ordered by the said Commissioners of Parliament that this Declaration be (...)
Dublin 8. of November, 1652.

Signed by (...)

Printed at DUBLIN, by VV (...)


