DECREES OF OUR HOLY FATHER POPE INNOCENT XI.

Containing The SUPPRESSION of an Office of the Immaculate Conception of the
most Holy VIRGIN; And of A Multitude of INDVLGENCES.

According to the Copies at Rome: From the Printing-Press of the most Reverend
Apostolic Chamber.

Translated into English out of the French Copy; (to which the Latin was
adjoined, as also here it is;) By the direction of an Eminent Person of Honor.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printed to the University, for Ric.
Davis, 1678.

Sept. 18, 1678.
IMPRIMATUR,

JOH: NICHOLAS Vice-Can. OXON.

Prove all things: Hold fast that which is Good. S. Paul, 1 Epistle to the
Thessalonians, c, 5. Let us not make to our selves a Religion out of our own
Fancies: For what is Real and True, how small soever, is more worth than all
that we can invent of our own head. S. Augustine in his Book of the True
Religion, c. 55. What is to be uttered in the presence of Truth it self, ought
not either to be spoken, or written, but with great Reverence and
Circumspection: least we Provoke God more to wrath, even by those things
whereby we think to Pacify him. For nothing can be Pleasing to him, but what
is Honest and True. Letaldus a Monk of Man's, in his Preface to the Life of S.
Julian, Bishop of Man's. The SUPPRESSION of an Office, Of the Immaculate
Conception of the most Holy VIRGIN.
Friar Raimund Capisucci, of the order of the Preaching Friars, Master of the
Sacred Apostolic Palace, Judge Ordinary, etc. By Authority of the Office we
hold; and by express Order of our most Holy Father, by Divine Providence Pope
INNOCENT XI, to us directed; His Holiness having first consulted and heard the Advice of the most Eminent and most Reverend Cardinals, the General
Inquisitors: We do Prohibit, and Declare to be Prohibited, a small Book,
Entitled [ The Office of the Immaculate Conception of the most Holy Virgin,
our LADY; approved by the Sovereign Pontif, PAUL the Fifth; who has granted,
to whosoever shall devoutly recite the same, an Hundred days Indulgence; as
may appear by his Bull of July 10. 1615. Printed at Milan, by Francis Vigon.]
Which Office begins with these Words. At Mattins. Ave Maria, ver. Eia mea labia
nunc annunciate, etc. (i. e. Hail Mary. O my lips show ye forth, etc.) And ends
with this Prayer; Deus qui per Immaculatam Virginis Conceptionem, etc. (i. e. O
God who by the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin, etc.) Let none therefore of
what Order, Degree, or Condition soever, dare to keep, read, print, or cause to
be printed, the said Office: But, so soon as they shall have knowledge of this
Decree, whosoever shall have the said Office, be required forthwith to deliver
the same to the Ordinaries, or to the Inquisitors of the Place; under the
Penalties contained in the Index of Books Prohibited. In witness whereof, we
have given forth this present Decree, (Signed by our Hand, and ratified by our
Seal,) the XVII day of February, in the Year MDCLXXVIII.

Fr. Raimund Capusucci, of the Order of the Preaching Friars, Master of the
Sacred Apostolic Palace, etc.
The place of the Seal. This day, being Febr. 19, 1678, the abovementioned
Decree, was set up and Published at the Gates of the Palace of the Holy Office
(of the Inquisition) and in Campi Florae, and other usual and accustomed places
of the City, by me Francis Perid, Cursitor of our most Holy Father, and of the
most Holy Inquisition.

At Rome. From the Printing House of the most Reverend the Apostolic Chamber.
MDCLXXVIII.


The SUPPRESSION of a Multitude of INDULGENCES.
THe Sacred Congregation appointed for regulating Indulgences and Holy
Relics, has often times received complaints, against certain Indulgences
dispersed and carried about in diverse parts of the Christian world, which are
supposititious and purely false: and others to be examined, which upon diligent
Inquiries are found to be either Apocryphal; or by Popes of Rome revoked and
called in; or null and void, the time for which they were granted being now
past and expired: Many of which, not being easy to be discovered by Christian
people, not well skilled in these affairs; they are thereby deluded and
disappointed of the hopes they had of obtaining Indulgences and Forgiveness of
their sins. For which cause the said Sacred Congregation, earnestly desiring to
apply a remedy to this evil, which does daily spread it self more and more; and
to provide for the good of Souls, and the due respect of Indulgences; has with
great care and diligence, caused a Collection to be made of diverse of them, and
an Index or Table made thereof.

Such are those, in the first place, which are said to de granted by John II.
and Sixtus IV, to those who shall say the Prayer of the Charity of our Lord
Jesus Christ. We pray Thee most gracious Lord, etc.

By Urban II. granted to the Church of S. Mary, commonly called, of Campagnole,
and of S. Victoria.

By Eugenius III. to the Revelation made to S. Bernard, of a Blow or Stroke on
the shoulder of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By Innocent III. to the Archiconfraternity (or Arch-con-friery,) and the Order
of the Redemption.

By Boniface IX. to those who repair to the Chapel of S. Nicholas of Tolentin
on the day of his Festival.

By John XXII. to those who kiss the measure of the sole of the Foot of the
Blessed Virgin.

By Alexander VI. to the Image of S. Mary, commonly called Laghetti.

By Leo X. to those who wear the Cord of S. Francis. Printed first at Rome, and
then at Milan, in the year 1665. (but there are also true Indulgences belonging
to the Co-friers of the Archiconfriery of the Cordiliers of S. Francis.)

To them that shall say the Angelical Prayer, when the Clock strikes.

To the Image of the Immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, painted in a
circle, with the Moon under her feet.

By Pius IV, or Pius V. to the Prince of Sienne.

By Clement VIII. to those who say the Praye^ O great mystery, etc.

To the Church of our Lady (as they call it) of Mount-Serrat. Printed at
Avignon.

And likewise other Indulgences for the Soul^ of Christ's faithful people
departed. Printed a^ Madrid, July 20. 1606.

By Paul V. to those who sing the Hymn, We praise thee Mother of God, We
confess thee Virgin Mary, etc. or who be present on Saturday when it is sung.

And to the Crowns, Rosaries, and Medals, blessed by the said Pope, at the
request of the Cardinal Frederick Borromaeus in the year 161^ when the Church
of S. Charles was building a^ Rome.

And by the same Paul V, and Gregory XV, to those who say, Praised be the most
Holy Sacrament, Praise be to the most Holy Sacrament.

By Urban VIII, in honor of the same Sacrament: at the request of Cardinal
Magalotti.

And to the Priests, that, after the celebration of the Mass, shall say, Hail
Daughter of God the Father; Hail Mother of God the Son; etc.

By Clement X, to those who say, morning noon, and night, the accustomed
Anthymne, The Angel of the Lord etc. and in the end of i^* Thanks to God and
Mary.

And likewise some others, which are said to be granted by some Popes of Rome,
to the Crowns of the mysteries of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: at the
request of the Gre Duke of Tuscany.

Such also is that Indulgence of the Confrier of S. Nicholas; whereby, upon
five times r^peating the Lords prayer and the Ave-Mary, they pretend to deliver
every day one soul out o^ Purgatory.

Such are those others, of S. Sebastian and S. Roc^ at Perouse.

And, of the Society of S. Bernard at Trajan^ Pillar, at Rome.

And those of the Crosiers of S. Eustorge, a^ Milan, Arimini and Bononia.

Of the same kind are those which are said t^ be gr^nted to the Chapel of the
Rosary in th Church of S. Anthony de Rovigo or Rodige.

Or to the Church of the most Holy Trinity at Bergome.

Or to S. Peter's of mount Todon, on the Festival of the Invention of the Holy
Cross.

Or to those who wear the Cord of S. Francis de Paula.

Or to those who say the masses of S. Augustine.

Or five other masses, in honor of the five Festivals of the Blessed Virgin.

Or to those who say the office of S. Francisca Romana.

Or the Anthymn, Oh the great Passion, etc. in memory of the passion of Jesus.

Or the Rosary of S. Anne: (which the Sacred Congregation does not approve.)

Or the prayer which is wont to be printed with the Image of S. Anne, Hail full
of grace, etc. (which prayer is forbid to be said.)

Or, the Office of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin; which is
pretended to be approved by Paul V.

Or, the Prayer O God who for us in holy Linin, etc. (except the Indulgence of
an hundred days, granted in the year 1671, at the request of the Duchess of
Savoy, to continue for 25 years, for all that live in her dominion.)

Or that other, Hail Daughter of God, etc. to be said after the Communion.

Or, to those who by any outward Sign testify their veneration of the Name of
the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist.

And likewise those Indulgences for Fourscore Thousand years, coppied out of
the Ancient Table which is said to be kept in the Lateran Church, to those who
say this (truly pious) Prayer, O God who for the Redemption of the world, etc.

And those Printed at Pavia; in the year 1670, entitled A Summary of the
Indulgences granted by his Holiness our Lord the Pope, Leo X. to the Image of
the Conception of the Glorious Virgin Mary.

Or, those published at Pesaro, in the year 1608, under the name of S. Joane.

Or at Barletta (or Barule) to be obtained by by those who say certain Prayers,
(which yet are not ill ones.)

Or at Parma, for those who in the days of Lent repair to the Churches of the
Third Order of S. Francis.

Or at Pistoye, or Gastalle, for those who say the Prayer, Hail the most Holy
Mary, Mother of God, Queen of Heaven, etc.

And other Indulgences contained in a Book Printed by it self, of which the
Devout Seraphick Benefactors are said to have benefit.

To these are to be added, the Indulgences said to be granted to the Crosses of
Caravaca.

Or to the Crown, or Stellary, of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin,
consisting of Twelve Beads.

Or to the Beads, Crosses, and Crowns of Aloysia de Ascensione, a Spanish
Nun, of the Order of S. Clare.

Or to the Measure of the Hight or our Lord Jesus Christ.

Or to the Image or Measure of the Wound made in his side.

Or to the Prayer which is said to have been found in our Lords Sepulcher.

And the Indulgences, said to be granted on occasion of a certain Revelation
made to S. Brigit, S. Mechteld, and S. Elizabeth, and to S. Joanne of the Cross.

And those which are said to be granted to such Beads as have touched some one
of the Three Beads, of which the Pope keeps one, the King of Spain another, and
the other is in the hands of the General of the Friars Minors, of the Order of
S. Francis.

All and every of which Indulgences the Sacred Congregation declares to be
partly Supposititious and wholly Falls, partly Apocryphal, or on some other
account Null and void, and that they can be of no benefit to any: And does
prohibit for the future their being, in any place whatsoever, published as
true, or proposed to be obtained by Christian people: And Commands that all
Books or Leaves of Paper, wherein they are proposed or mentioned as such, be
destroyed or suppressed, unless the said Indulgences be therein carefully
defaced, or blotted out. Mean while it is not the intention of the said
Congregation^ that other Indulgences, not specified in this Decree, should
therefore be accounted true and legitimate, and to be tacitly approved.

And moreover, all Indulgences, which (before the Decree of Clement VIII, made
Jan. 9, 1597,) were granted to any Blessed or Consecrated Crowns, Rosaries,
Beads, Crosses, and Images.

Or, which (before the Bull of Paulus V, beginning The Pope of Rome etc, Dated
May 23, 1606,) were made to Regulars (or Religious persons) of any Religions or
Orders whatsoever; the Mendicants not excepted.

Or, which, (before the 115 Constitution of Clement VIII, beginning Quaecumque,
etc; and the 68 of Paulus v, beginning Quae salubriter etc. were obtained by
Aggregation or other Communication, o^ any Archiconfriery, Order, Congregation,
Society (that of the Jesuits not excepted,) Chapter, or Company whatsoever; or
of their Officials, Superiors, or other person or persons; even though such as
that special and particular mention should be made of them; (unless they have
been afterward by the authority of the Pope of Rome renewed or confirmed:) are
by the said Congregation in like manner declared to be of no force or moment.

Moreover the Summaries of Indulgences for the Congregations of the Christian
Doctrine, for the Con-frieries of the most Holy Trinity, and Redemption of
Captives, of the Name of God, of the Rosary, of our Lady de la Merce and
Redemption of Captives, of our Lady of Mount Carmel, of the Girdle of S.
Augustine, and of S. Monica; are not permitted: unless first revised by the
said Congregation.

The said Congregation does likewise declare, that the Indulgences of the
Stations of Rome, which out of a singular favor, have at some time been
granted by the Popes of Rome, or hereafter shall be granted to certain Places,
Orders and Persons, can be advantageous on no other days of Stations than
those which are expressly setdown in the Roman Missal.

And that a Plenary Indulgence granted to such as do on certain days repair to
a Church, or do some other Pious work, be not of advantage to them but for once
only the same day.

All these the Secretary having made Report of to his Holiness; his Holiness
has approved them all, and Commanded them to be observed inviolably.

Given at Rome the 7th day of March, 1678. The Cardinal Aloysio Homo-Dei.
The place of the Seal. Michael Angelo Ricci, Secretary.
The 12 day of the Month of March 1678, the Decree above said was affixed and
published at the Gates of the Court, and in Campi Florae, and other accustomed
places in the City, by me Roch de Stephanis, Cursitor of our Holy Father the
Pope.

Laurence Segni Master Cursitor.



The Rules whereby we may Judge of the Usefulness of these Two DECREES.
WE find upon accurate observation very often, that even those things which had
been judged right and good, have, upon a more exact examination of the truth,
been found far otherwise in, S. Just. 1. Discourse to the Gentiles.

The Truth is not put to shame by any thing, but by being suppressed.
Tertullian against the Valentinians.

And what, I pray, is it that we have to do? Is it not, what the Canons of the
Church require?...... But when things are done against the Canon, it is fit they
should be reformed. Pope Julius 1 Epist. ad Orientales, in the 11 Apology of
Athanasius.

It is dishonorable and pernicious to Chistianity, that those who make
profession of it, should in matters of Religion talk so absurdly, that an
Infidel who hears them so discoursing, contrary to all reason, cannot but laugh
at it. But that which is herein the greatest trouble, is not, that he who thus
talks becomes ridiculous; but, that those who are not of the Church take this
to be the sense of those that are the Founders of our Religion,...... And these
rash venturous persons, it is not to be expressed, what grief and trouble
hereby they do create to prudent, sober Christians. S. Augustine in his Book, on
Genesis, ad literam, chap. 19.

For in the prayers of a great many, there be every day many things found
amiss, if heard by the more learned: And many things therein contrary to the
Catholic Truth. The same S Aug. l. 6. of Baptism, against the Donatists. c. 25
And in Gratian's Canon Law. De Consecrat. Did 4. si non sanctificatur.

Truth gives a luster and splendour to all Art^ and Disciplines: And where this
is wanting beauty and comeliness must needs be wanting Isidore Pelusiote lib. 2.
Epist. 64.

What hope is there left, when the Master (the learned) are silent, and the
Talkers be thos^ who, if things be as they say, were never the Sholars of those
Masters? I am afraid that th^^ silence of theirs is a Connivance. I am afrai^
that it is those rather may be thought the Speakers who suffer these thus to
speak without control. Silence in such cases is very suspitiou^ For Truth
certainly would oppose it, if the fal^hood were displeasing. It Is we therefore
mu^^ answer for it, if by our silence we give countenance to the error. Let
such therefore be sharply rebuked, and not left at liberty thus to ta^^ as they
list. Pope Celestin 1. Epist. to the Bishops of France.

He that cannot content himself with a few things; it is evident that he makes
his estimate, not by the Worth of things, but by the Bulk of them. S. Avitus
Bishop of Vienna, in the Dalphiny, Epist. 2. to King Gundebald.

It Is the source of most pernicious Errors; in those Authors for whom we have
a reverence to be fond of every thing, and without distinction resolve to
justify whatever we there meet with. M. Aurelius Cassiodorus, a Senator, in his
book de divinis Lectionibus, c. 24.

Next unto God himself, we are to reverence the Truth, being that alone which
brings us nearest to God. Martinus Dumiensis, Bishop of Bragues, in his Book De
moribus.

To observe also inviolable in every point, the holy General Counsils, of Nice,
Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, of Calcedon, the second of Constantinople
held in the time of the Emperor Justinian of pious memory...... And to reform
whatever shall happen to be contrary to the discipline of their Canon. The
Journal of the Roman Church, in the Profession of Faith which the Popes were
wont to make at their Creation or Election.

There be some who think they do service to God, if, in order to the putting a
greater luster on his praise, they invent Romantic Stories full of untruths.
But they would be of another mind, if they well considered the words of the
great Apostle, who says to the Corinthians, If Christ be not risen, then is
our Preaching vain, and your faith is also vain; yea and we are found false
witnesses of God, etc. according therefore to these words of the Apostle, he
deserves to be called A false witness, who out of an indiscreet zeal to praise
God, tells a Lie: And he doubtless bears witness against God himself, who does
unworthily contrive a forgery for his praise. The Cardinal Petrus Damiani in
his Preface to the Life of S. Maure Bishop of Cesena in Italy; and in the
Prologue to the Life of S. Romuald.

It belongs to our duty as well to retrench and forbid what is amiss; as to
establish what is right, and when so established to enforce it by the strength
of our Apostolic authority. Pope Alexander the III, Epist. to Stephen Bishop
of Meaux.

As we do not intend to infringe or make void what by our Predecessors has
upon good and advised deliberation been established: so also those things which
have been gotten of them by surprise, to the Churches detriment and dishonor,
we will have reformed, and reduced to a better condition. Pope Innocent III, to
the Bishop of Canterbury, and to other Bishops.

Forasmuch as falsehood ought not to be suffered under the pretense of piety, we
do by these our Apostolic Letters to you directed, Require you to admonish the
said Abbat and Monks to desist from such presumptions....... For it is no way
conducing to their salvation or their repuration to make a gain by Preaching a
Lie.... The XV. year of our Popedom. The same Pope, l. 3. Epist. 10. to the
Abbat and Prior of S. Victor.

In this (sixth) rank, we are to reckon the Legends and Miracles of Saints, the
Lives of the Fathers, the Visions of devout persons, the Citations and Opinions
of holy Doctors. All which the Church admits, not as things necessary to be
believed in order to salvation, but as things conducing to excite devotion in
Christians, and for their edification: Provided, there be nothing therein
contained which is known to be false. John Gerson Chancellare of the Church of
Paris; in his Declaration of Truths to be believed as necessary to salvation.

The abuses, which are crept into the Church of God, it becomes us by the
exercise of our authority to take away. Pope Nicolaus V, in his Constitution
touching the conferring of Benefices in Germany.

The Wheat as yet is covered with the husks. The Bishop of Rome is not able to
pry into and search the hearts of men. Man's heart is wicked and unsearchable,
who can know it? It Is I the Lord that search the heart and try the reins. It Is
God alone is able to do this..... There are in man a thousand windings, a
thousand artifices to deceive, a thousand tricks for mischief. In his heart is
one thing, in his mouth the quite contrary. It Is but few that are truly good,
and vorthy the love of God, not carried on with varice: But the greatest part
of men by much are hypocrites and counterfeits; more are desirous to seem good,
than to be so; Wolves in Sheeps clothing. It is not therefore to be wondered at,
if the Popes prudence be sometimes imposed upon; and favors obtained for
money. Aeneas Silvius Cardinal of Seen, (afterward Pope, by the name of Pius
II.) in an Epistle to Martin Meyer Chancellar to the Archbishop of Mayence.

Care is to be had also, that by pretense of false Miracles (we may as well say
False Indulgences) we do not injury to those that are true. The Faculty of
Divinity at Paris; in answer to a consultation concerning the souls of persons
deceased appearing after they be dead, January 22, 1534.

The holy Synod (of Trent) does declare and ordain, that the use of Indulgences
being very wholesome for Christian people, and approved by authority of Sacred
Councils, is to be retained in the Church, And does Anathematize those who who
say they are useless, and deny that there is in the Church a power to grant
them. But desires nevertheless that, according to the ancient and approved
custom in the Church, a moderation be used in the granting of them: least by
too great a facility therein the discipline of the of the Church be infeebled.
But being desirous that the abuses which herein have crept in, and have been an
occasion that the favorable name of Indulgences has been reproached by
Heretics, be reformed and corrected; does by this present Decree Ordain in the
general, that all wicked ways of making gain for the obtaining of them be
wholly abolished, as from whence has issued the cause of manyfold abuses
amongst Christian people. And as for other abuses, proceeding from
superstition, ignorance, irreverence, or from any other cause, or in what
manner soever, forasmuch as they cannot easily be all prohibited in particular,
by reason of the manifold corruptions of the different places and provinces
wherein these abuses are committed; Does strictly charge all Bishops, that
every one as to his own Church do make a diligent collection of such kind of
abuses, and make report of them in the first Provincial Synod; to the end that
they may be censured by the suffrages of the other Bishops also, and thence
transmitted forthwith to the Sovereign Roman Pontif, and by his authority and
prudence it be so ordained as may be most expedient for the universal Church;
so that by this means the Treasure of the holy Indulgences be distributed to
all Christian people in a pious and holy manner, and without corruption.
Council of Trent, Sess. 25. in the Decree touching Indulgences.

I say it more out of sorrow, than by way of reproach; that the Lives of the
Philosophers by Diogenes Laertius are written with more seriousness, than the
Lives of the Saints by Christians. And that Suetonius has with much more
integrity and less corruption related the affairs of the Caesar's, than
Catholics have done (I say not those of their Emperors, but) of their Martyrs,
Virgins, and Confessors I forbear to name persons. But certain it is, that
those who thus mingle the Ecclesiastic History with fictions and falsehood,
cannot be good men, or persons of honesty; and that the whole of their
Narrations is purposely designed either in order to Lucre, or in order to
Error; the one whereof is base and sordid, the other mischievous and
pernicious... So that, those who have gone about by fictions and false stories
to stir up in men's minds a devotion for the Saints, have but (as I may judge)
by these false stories impaired the credit of those which are true; and what
has been most accurately delivered by the most serious Authors is by this means
become questionable... As though these holy men of God, who had in truth done
and suffered so much for Christ, did stand in need of our Lies! Admitting then
that these fictions, how falls soever, might with so much wit and artifice be
composed as not to do hurt; they are at best but useless and of no real
service, and (like lasy Soldiers) the burden of them is more than the
advantage; they hinder more than they help.. They do therefore a great deal of
mischief to Christ's Church, who think they can never write a good history of
the worthy deeds of Saints, unless embellished with forged Revelations and
false Miracles. Melchior Canus (who was one of the Divines in the Council of
Trent,) lib. 11. de locis, chapter 4.

Making his visit in those parts (de Liano) he understood that near the church
of that place there was a Coffin of Stone with some bones in it which were had
in great veneration, as true relics of Saints: There being a common report
that the night before the Feast of S. Peter in vinculis (or Lamm^s day,) there
did in miraculous manner come forth of those bones so great a quantity of water
that it filled the whole Coffin: and though those of the neighborhood came in
great numbers that day to take of that water, which they held to be a thing
miraculous and holy, yet was the water not at all diminished, but the Coffin
still continued full... The Cardinal (S. Charles Borromeus) who held the
relics of Saints in great Veneration where ever he met with them, would needs
come see these and examine them, that thereupon he might particularly recommend
them to the people for their greater veneration. Whence came the Proverb, That
Cardinal Borromeo would neither let the living, nor the dead be at rest.
Resolving then to visit these bones, and inquiring diligently how they came
there, he could find nothing of certainty. He thereupon began to suspect it was
some devilish cheat. And to evidence the truth, he caused the Coffin and the
bones to be well dried; and then committed the custody thereof to three
Priests, whom he could trust, that same night on which the water used to come
forth: And then there appearing no sign of water at all; it was thereby
discovered to be a mere artifice and cheat. And, to make provision against so
great an abuse, he caused both the Coffin and relics to be buried under
ground, that the people might not any more be cheated to that false worship.
Which thing was received by the people of those parts with great admiration,
extolling the Cardinal as a holy man, and having the spirit of God with him.
Johannes Petrus Issuanus, a Priest of Milan, in the Life of S. Charles; lib. 6.
chap. 7. The thing was done in the year 1580.

We Ordain that the Bishops be careful to have the Breviaries within their
Diocese to be well and accurately corrected; and that things therein appointed
to be read, be reformed by judicious and skillful persons, according to the
truth of history, out of the records and writings of ancient approved Authors.
The Provincial Council of Tours, held in the year 1583. chapter 15. De Paroecis and
Presbyteris.

Honor and Virtue, two of the Heathens Deities, had their two Temples built
close together, and unto that of Honor there was no passage but through that
of Virtue. In like manner amongst Christians, to whom all Will Worship is
interdicted, Truth and Piety ought not to be disjoined, nor indeed can they be.
It Is with them only that Devotion or Piety is built upon Truth.... Devotion
therefore is to be joined with Truth; not blended with Forgeries or Falsehood
Joh. Launoye, a Parisian Divine, in an Epistle to to the Cardinal Francis
Barberine, at the beginning of his Treatise against the Vision of Simon Stoch,
and the Privilege of the Bull called Sabbathine, etc.

The Bull called Sabbathine, is spurious: and the Vision of Simon Stoch, a
forgery of the Thirteenth Century. We commend the action of S. Martin, who
refused to offer on an Altar dedicated to a Robber, and caused it afterward to
be destroyed. Like commendations we allow to those who make it their business
to Correct the Offices of Saints: and judge those to be guilty of grievous sin,
whoever put Fables or Fictions into books of the church, or hinder them from
being put out. Theses in Divinity, of Claude Blouin, a Priest of Paris and
Licentiate of the Faculty of Divinity there; maintained in the Sorbon at the
Act of the Vespers, October 24. 1674. Column. 3, 4.

The Bull called Sabbathine is spurious; and unworthy a Pope of Rome. Theses in
Divinity, of Noel Varet, a Priest of Parise, a Licentiate in the sacred Faculty
of Paris, a Fellow of the College of Navarre; maintained in the College of
Navarre at an Act of the Vespers, Aug. 23. 1677. Col. 4.

There be a great many Constitutions ascribed to the Popes of Rome, which never
proceeded from them.... And in particular the Bull commonly called Sabbathine,
I take to be supposititious and falsely ascribed to Pope Joh. XXII. For what can
be more ridiculous, or more unworthy a Pope of Rome, than to affirm; That the
Virgin Mary should make a promise to one that he should be Christ's Vicar upon
earth, on condition that he grant a confirmation of the Order of the
Carmelites: That every one who is a Carmelite, and enters that holy Order,
shall obtain eternal Salvation: That the Saturday next afer any of the Brothers
or Sisters of the Order of the Carmelites do dye, the Virgin Mary will go down
into Purgatory and deliver thence all that she finds there, and bring them back
to the Mountain of Eternal Life. Away with these fooleries, and such as these
are, from the true Professors of the Catholic, the Apostolic, and the Roman
Faith and Religion. Theses in Divinity maintained in the School of the
Jacobins, by Noel de Bretigneres, Priest of Verneuil and Licentiate in the
Sacred Faculty of Parise, in an Act of the Vespers, September. 13. 1677.

Omnia probate: quod bonum est, tenete. Paulus, 1 Thessalonic. v. Non sit nobis
religio in phantasmatibus nostris: melius est enim qualecuuque verum, quam
quidquid pro arbitrio fingi potest. S. Aug. lib. de vera religione Cap. LV. Cum
magnae reverentiae gravitate dicenda, and scribenda sunt, quae in conspectu
veritatis recitari debent; ne unde Deus placari creditur, inde amplius ad
iracundiam provocetur. Nihil enim ei placet, nisi quod verum est. Letaldus
Monachus Cenomanensis in prologo Vitae S. Juliani Cenomensis Episcopi. (...)
DECRETUM.
FRater Raimundus Capisuccus, ordinis Praedicatorum, Sacri Palatii Apostolici
Magister, Judex ordinarius, etc. Auctoritate officii quo fungimur, ac de
mandato speciali Sanctissimi D. N. Domini INNOCENTII, Divina providentia PAPAE
XI, Auditis prius a Sanctitate sua Eminentissimorum DD Cardinalium, generalium
Inquisitorum votis, nobis imposito: Prohibemus, prohibitumque decernimus,
libellum inscriptum, Officio della immacolata concettione della Sanctissima
Vergine nostra signora, approvato dal Sommo Pontefice Paola V. il quale a chi
devotamente lo recitara concede indulgenza di cento giorni, come apparisce nel
suo Breve dato in Roma li X Juglio M.DC.XV. in Milano per Francesco Vigone.
Quod quidem officium incipit per haec verba: Ad matutinum. Ave Maria. ver. Eia
mea labia nunc annunciate, etc. Et desinit cum oratione: Deus qui per
immaculatam Virginis conceptionem. Nemo igitur cujuscunque ordinis, gradus, et
conditionis existat, praefatum Officium apud se retinere, legere, imprimere vel
imprimi curare audeat: sed statim a praesentis decreti notitia, quicunque illud
habuerit, locorum Ordinariis, aut Inquisitoribus tradere teneatur, sub poenis
in Indice librorum prohibitorum contentis. In quoru^ fidem praesens decretum a
nobis propria manu subscriptum, et sigillo nostro munitum, dedimus, die XVII
Februarii, An. M.DC.LXX VIII.

Fr. Raimundus Capisuccus, ordinis Praedicatorum, Sacri Palatii Apostolici
Magister. etc.
Loco Sigilli. Die XIX Febr. M.DC.LXXVIII. Supradictum Decretum affixum and
publicatum fuit ad Valvas Palatii S. Officii, and in acie Campi Florae, and
aliis locis solitis and consuetis Vrbis, per me Franciscum Peridum, Sanctissimi
Domini nostri, and Sanctissimae Inquisitionis Curs.

Romae ex Typographia Rev. Camera Apostolicae. M.DC.LXXVIII.


ALIUD DECRETUM.
Delata saepius fuere ad Sacram Congregationem indulgentiis sacrisque reliquiis
praepositam, Indulgentiae quaedam confictae and omnino falsae, quae per
diversas Orbis Christiani parts circumferuntur; aliae vero examinandae, quae,
adhibito studio, inventae sunt vel apocryphae, vel a Romany Pontificibus
revocatae, vel nullae, quod datum eis tempus praeteriisset: Quarum quidem
plurimae, cum non facilem cognitionem habeant Christi fideles, harum rerum
minus peritos fallunt, qui spe indulgentiae remissionisque peccatorum suorum
consequendae frustrantur. Quamobrem eade^ Sacra Congregatio vehementer cupiens
huic malo magis indies serpenti occurrere, animarum profectui, et
indulgentiarum dignitati consulere, plures illarum singulari diligentia
colligi, et in indicem referri curavit.

Tales imprimis sunt illae, uti asserunt, concessae a Joanne II. Et Sixto IV.
recitantibus orationem charitatis Jesu Christi Domini nostri: Precetor ^^ssime
Domine. etc.

Ab Vrbano II. Ecclesiae S. Mariae, ut vulgo ^ici solet, Campagnolae, et S.
Victoriae.

Ab Eugenio III. revelationi de plaga in humero esu Christi factae S. Bernardo.

Ab Innocentio III. Archiconfraternitati, and orini Redemptionis.

A Bonifacio IX. visitantibus capellam S. Nico^ai de Tolentino in ejus die
Festo.

A Joanne XXII. osculantibus mensuram plantae pe^is B. Mariae Virginis.

Ab Alexandro VI. imagini B. Mariae, vul^go dictae Laghetti.

A Leone X. gestantibus funiculum S. Francisci, primum in urbe impressae,
deinde Mediolani. An. M.DC.LXV. (suas tamen habent and veras Confratres Archi
confraternitatis Cordigerorum S. Francisci.)

Recitantibus orationem Angelicam ad pulsum horologii.

Et imagini conceptionis Mariae Virginis immaculatae, in circulo depictae,
cujus pedibus Luna subjecta est.

A Pio IV. vel Pio V. principi Senarum.

A Clemente VIII. dicentibus orationem: O Magnum mysterium, etc.

Et Ecclesiae S. Mariae quam vocant Montis-Serrati. A venione impressae.

Tum aliae pro animabus Christi fidelium defunctorum, impressae Matriti XX.
Julii M.DC.VI.

A Paulo V. cantantibus hymnum: Te Matrem Dei laudamus, Te Mariam Virginem
confitemur, etc. vel si die Sabbathi intererint, dum idem cantatur.

Et Coronis, Rosariis, Imaginibus, and Numismatibus (quae Medallias appellant)
ab eo benedictis, Frederico Cardinali Borromaeo supplicante Ann. M.DC.XI. dum
Ecclesia Romae in honorem S. Caroli aedificaretur.

Et ab eodem Paulo, and Gregorio XV. dicentibus, Sia lodato il Sanctissimo
Sacramento, Laus Sanctissimo Sacramento.

Ab Urbano VIII. in honorem ejusdem Sacramenti, precibus Cardinalis Magalotti.

Et Sacerdotibus, celebrata Missa, dicentibus: Ave Filia Dei Patris, Ave Matter
Dei Filii, etc.

A Clemente X. recitantibus, mane, meridie, ac vespere consuetam antiphonam,
Angelus Domini. etc. and in fine: Deo gratias and Mariae.

Ac demum aliae a nonnullis Romany Pontificibus tributa, ut ajunt, Coronis
Mysteriorum passionis D. N. Jesu Christi, prece Magni Ducis Etruriae.

Talis indulgentia sodalitatis S. Nicolai, qua, ^epetita quinquies Oratione
Dominica, and salutatione Angelica, unam liberari animam quolibet die a
purgatorii poenis affirmant.

Tales aliae Perusii confraternitatis SS. Sebastiani and Rochi.

Et, Romae, societatis S. Bernardi ad columnam Trajani.

Tales demum aliae Cruce-signatorum S. Eustorgii, Mediolani, Arimini, and
Bononiae.

Ejus generis sunt and illae concessae, ut ajunt, Capellae Rosarii in Ecclesia
S. Antonii de Rodigo, seu Rodigii.

Vel Ecclesiae Sanctissim ae Trinitatis Bergomi.

Aut S. Petri Montis Todoni die festo Inventionis Sanctissimae crucis.

Vel gestantibus funiculum S. Francisci de Paula.

Vel celebrantibus Missas S. Augustini.

Aut alias V. festivitatum in honorem v festivitatum B. Virginis.

Vel recitantibus Officium S. Franciscae Romanae.

Aut antiphonam: O! Passio Magna, etc. in memoriam passionis Jesu.

Aut Rosarium S. Annae [quod Congregatia sacra non probat.]

Aut orationem, quae impressa cum imagine S. Annae circumferri solet: Ave
gratia plena, etc. [quae oration prohibetur.]

Aut Officium Conceptionis B. Virginis Immaculatae, quod asserunt a Paulo V.
probatum fuisse.

Aut orationem: Deus qui pro nobis in Sancta syndone, etc. [Excipitur
indulgentia cen^um dierum An. M.DC.LXXI. concessa precibus Ducissae Subaudiae
ad Annos XXV. cunctis in illius ditione degentibus.]

Aut aeliam: Ave Filia Dei, etc. post communionem recitandam.

Vel aliquo conspicuo signo venerantibus Sanctissimi Eucharistiae Sacramenti
nomen.

Indulgentiae rursus octoginta millium annorum, veteri de tabula exscriptae,
quam in Basilica Lateranensi asservari affirmant pro dicentibus orationem illam
vere piam: Deus qui pro redemptione mundi, etc.

Tum quae impressae fuerunt Paviae, An. M.DC.LXX. sub hoc titulo (Sommario
delle indulgenze concesse dalla Santita di nostri signore Papa Leonex. all
imagine della concettione della gloriosa Vergine Maria.)

Vel Pisauri sub nomine B. Joanna An. M.DC.VIII. vulgatae.

Vel Barlettae, seu Baretuli, a recitantibus quasdam non sanc malas orationes
lucrandae.

Vel, Parinae a visitantibus per Quadragesima dies Ecclesias tertii ordinis S.
Francisci.

Vel, Pistarii and Vastellae, a recitantibus orationem; Ave Sanctissima Maria,
Matter Dei, Regina Coeli, etc.

Et aliae in peculiari impresso libro descriptae, quibus frui dicunt devotos
Seraphicos Benefactores.

His annumerandae sunt quae crucibus Caravecensibus tributae dicuntur.

Vel Coronae, sive stellario conceptionis Virginis immaculatae, quodex XII
globulis precaeriis constat.

Vel granis, crucibus, and Coronis Aloysiae ab Ascensione Hispanae monialis
ordinis S. Clarae.

Vel mensurae altitudinis Jesu Christi D. N.

Vel imagini aut mensurae vulneris lateri ejus inflicti.

Vel orationi (ut aiunt) in Sepulchro Domini nostri repertae.

Et indulgentiae, ut aiunt, innixae revelationi factae SS. Brigittae, Mectildi,
and Elizabet, vel B. Joannae de Cruce.

Et concessae, ut asserunt, granis quae aliquod ex tribus granis tetigerint
exstantibus penes Romanum Pontificem, Hispaniarum Regem, and Ministrum
Generalem fratrum Minorum, Observantiae S. Francisci.

Omnes vero and singulas jam dictas indulgentias Sacra Congregatio partim esse
confictas, and plane falsas declarat, partim apocryphas, vel ex alio capite
nullas, quae nemini suffragari possunt: Easque in futurum ullo in loco ut veras
publicari, and lucrandas Christi fidelibus proponi vetat: Foliaque and libros,
ubi sic proponuntur and afferuntur, omnino praecipit aboleri; nisi praedictae
indulgentiae fuerint diligenter expunctae. Nec ideo tamen vult alias, quas hoc
decretum non continet, pro veris and legitimis, taciteque probatis, haberi.

Ac demum omnes indulgentias concessas ante decretum Clementis VIII. latum die
IX Januarii M.D.XCVII. Coronis, Rosariis, granis seu calculis, Crucibus and
Imaginibus Sacris.

Vel ante Breve Pauli V. quod incipit: Romanus Pontifex, etc. editum XXIII
Maij, An. M.DC.VI. personis Regularibus quarumcunque Religionum and Ordinum,
etiam Mendicantium.

Vel ^nte Constitutionem CXV Clementis VIII. cujus initium: Quaecumque etc. and
LXVIII Pauli V. incipientem Quae Salubriter, etc. habitas per aggregationem,
vel aliam communicationem ab Archiconfraternitate nulla, Ordine, Congregacione,
Societate etiam Jesu, Capitulo, vel Coetu quocunque; vel ab eorum Officialibus,
Superioribus, aliisque personis, vel persona; etiamsi earum vel ejus mentio
specialis and individua facienda esset; nisi fuerint deinde Romani Pontificis
auctoritate innovatae aut confirmatae, nullius esse roboris and momenti pariter
declarat.

Porro Summaria Indulgentiarum pro Congregationibus Doctrinae Christianae,
Confraternitatibus, Sanctissimae Trinitatis and Redemptionis Captivorum,
Nominis Dei, Rosarii, B. Mariae de Mercede, and Redemptionis Captivorum, B.
Mariae de Monte Carmelo, Cincturae St Augustini and Monicae; nisi ab eadem
Congregatione recognitae, non permittuntur.

Indulgentias vero Stationum Vrbis quae a Romany Pontificibus singulari quodam
beneficio, vel communicatae sunt, vel communicabuntur interdum aliquibus locis,
Ordinibus, aut Personis, diebus tantum Stationum in Missali Romano descriptis,
suffragari posse declarat.

Semel autem duntaxat in die Plenariam Indulgentiam in certos dies Ecclesiam
visitantibus, concessam, vel aliud pium opus per agentibus lucrifieri.

De quibus relatione facta per Secretarium ad Sanctissimum, cuncta Sanctitas
sua probavit, and inviolate serve ari jussit.

Datum Romae, die VII. Martii M.DC.LXXVIII. Aloysius Card. Homo-Deus.
Locus Sigilli

Michael Angelus Riccius Secretarius.

Die XII Mensis Martii M.DC.LXXVIII. supradidictum Decretum affixum and
publicatum fuit ad Valvas Curiae, and in acie Campi Florae; ac aliis locis
solitis Urbis, per me Rochum de Stephanis Sanctissimi D. N. Papae Curs.
Laurentius Segnus Magister Cursor.



A Curata rerum inquisitio, persaepe ea quoque quae recta judicata sunt,
exactiori examine veritatis adhibito, long aliter se habere ostendit. S.
Justinus Orat. 1. ad Graecos.

Nihil erubescit veritas nisi solummodo abscondi. Tertullianus l. contra
Valentianinos.

Quid quaeso nos oportuit facere? an non quod Ecclesiastici Canonis est?......
Par autem est ^ut quae contra Canonem acta sunt, emendationem accipiant. Julius
1 Epist. ad Orientales apud Athanasium in Apologia 11.

Turpe autem nimis and perniciosum, ac maxim cavendum, ut Christianum, de his
rebus qua^^ secundum Christianas literas loquentem, ita de^irare quilibet
infidelis audiat, ut, quemadmodum ^icitur, toto coelo errare conspiciens risum
tenere vix ^ossit. Et non tam molestum est quod errans homo ^eridetur: sed quod
Auctores nostri, ab eis qui foris sunt, talia sensisse credentur...... Quid
enim molestiae tristitiaeque ingerant prudentibus fratribus temerarii
praesumptores, satis dici non potest. S. Augustinus lib. de Genesis ad literam c.
XIX.

Multorum enim Preces emendantur quotidie, si doctioribus fuerint recitatae;
and multa in eis reperiuntur contra Catholicam veritatem. Idem l. VI. de
Baptismo contra Donatistas c. XXV, and apud Gratian c.) Si non Sanctificatur,
did. IV. de Consecrat.

Veritas omnibus artibus and disciplinis ornamentum affert, quae si absit, omni
ornatu and elegantia carent. Isidorus Pelusiota Epistolarum libro II Epist.
LXIV.

Quid illic spei est, ubi Magistris tacentibus, hi loquuntur, qui, si ita est,
eorum discipuli non fuerunt? Timeo ne connivere sit hoc tacere, Timeo ne magis
ipsi loquantur, que permittunt illis taliter loqui. In talibus causis non caret
suspicione taciturnitas, quia occurreret veritas, si falsitas displiceret:
merito namque nos causa respicit, si silentio favamus errori. Ergo corripiantur
hujusmodi; non sit his liberum habere pro voluntate sermonem. Coelestinus I
Epist: ad Galliarum Episcopos.

Qui recipere pauca fastidit, non virtute, sed mole rem conjicit. S. Avitus
Viennensis Episcopus Epist. II. ad Gundabaldum Regem.

Origo saevissimi erroris est, in suspectis authoribus amare totum, and sine
judicio defendere velle quod invenis. M. Aurel. Cassiodorus Senator. l. de
Divinis Lectionibus. c. XXIV.

Post Deum veritas colenda est, quae sola homines Deo proximos facit: Martinus
Dumiensis alias Bracarensis. l. De moribus.

Sancta quoque Universalia Concilia, Nicaenum, Constantinopolitanum, Ephesinum
primum, Calcedonense, and secundum Constantinopolitanum, quod Justiniani piae
memoriae Principis temporibus cele^ratum est, usque ad unum apicem immutilata
ser^are...... Si qua vero emerserint contra disiplinam Canonicam, emendare,
Romanae Eccle^iae Diurnum, in fidei professione, quam olim ecens creatus, vel
electus Pontifex emitte^at.

Nonnulli enim se Deo defer existimant, si ad deferenda laudis ejus insignia,
falsitatis Argumen^a componant; qui nimirum, si egregii Praedicatoris verba
diligenter attenderent, talia non sentir ent. Ait enim Corinthiis; Si Christus
non surrexit, inanis est ergo praedicatio nostra, vana est fides nostra:
invenimur autem and falsi testes Dei etc........ Secundum haec ergo Apostolica
verba, Falsus testis merito dicitur, qui indiscrete eum cupiens laudare
mentitur: and adversus Deum proculdubio perhibet testimonium, quisquis in ejus
laud perversa molitur art commentum. Petrus Damiani S.R.E. Cardinalis in
praefatione vitae S. Mauri Coesenatis Episcopi, and in prologo vitae S.
Romualdi.

Sicut ad officium nostrum pertinet, quae incongrua sunt prohibere; ita nobis
potissimum convenit, quae recta sunt, stabilire, and stabilita Apostolicae
firmitatis praesidio roborare. Alexander III. Epistola Ad Stephanum Meldensem
Episcopum.

Sicut ea quae a Praedecessoribus nostris provida fuerunt deliberatione
statuta, nullatenus irritari polumus, vel infringi; sic, ea quae ab eis sunt
per obreptionem obtenta in honestatis Ecclesiasticae detrimentum corrigi
volumus, and in statum redigi meliorem. Innocentius III, l. 1. Epist. ad
Cantuariensem and alios Episcopos.

Quia igitur falsitas tolerari non debet sub velamine pietatis, Discretioni
vestrae per Apostolica Scripta mandamus, quatenus memoratos Abbatem and
Monachos, ut ab ejusmodi praesumptione desistant, authoritate nostra
moneatis..... Cum nec saluti nec famae congruat eorundem, quaestum acquirere de
praedicatione mendacii...... Pontificatus nostri Ann. XV. Idem. l. III. Epist.
X. ad Abbatem and Priorem S. Victoris.

Respicit iste gradus (Sextus) Legendas and Miracula Sanctorum, Vitas Patrum,
Visiones devotarum personarum, recitationes and opiniones Sacrorum Doctorum.
Quae omnia suscipit Ecclesia; non quod determinet talia de necessitate salutis
esse credenda, sed quia proficiunt ad commovendos affectus pios fidelium, and
in aedificationibus: Dum in talibus nihil de certitudine scitur esse falsum.
Joan. Gerso Cancellarius Paris. in declaratione veritatum quae credendae sunt
de necessitate salutis.

Quae in Ecclesia Dei incommoda inferunt, nostra nos expedit animadversione
removere. Nicolaus V. in Constitutione edita circa collationem Sacerdotiorum in
Germania.

In thecis adhuc grana consistunt: non potest Romanus Praesul introspicere, nec
rimari hominum corda. Pravum est cor hominis, and inscrutabile, quis cognoscit
illud? Ego Dominus scrutans corda and renes probans. Dei solius ea potestas
est....... Mill sunt in homine latebrae, mill fallendi arts, mill nocendi
astutiae: aliud in cord, aliud in ore gerit: pauci sancti, and digni, quos
optime amet Deus, quos avaritiae non agunt stimuli; sed maxima pars hominum
ficta, fucataque est, plures videri boni, quam esse volunt; sub ovina pelle
saepe lupinum offendes animum. Nihil igitur miri est, si Romani Pontificis
aliquando providentia fallitur, and beneficia pecuniis extorquentur. Aeneas
Sylvius Cardinalis Senensis, qui and postea Pius 11. Epist. ad Martinum Meyerum
Archiepiscopi Moguntini Cancellarium.

Attendendum quoque ne falsorum miraculorum (falsaru^ Indulgentiarum) praetextu
veris miraculis (Indulgentiis) detrahatur. Facultas Theologiae Parisiensis in
responsione ad consultationem de reditu animarum post mortem. An. M.D.XXXIV,
die XXII Januarii.

Sacro-Sancta Synodus indulgentiarum usum Christiano populo maxim salutarem,
and Sacrorum Conciliorum authoritate probatum, in Ecclesia retinendum esse
docet and praecipit: eosque Anathemate damnat, qui aut inutiles esse asserunt,
vel eas concedendi in Ecclesia potestatem esse negant. In his tamen concedendis
moderationem juxta veterem and probatam in Ecclesia consuetudinem adhiberi
cupit, ne nimia facilitate Ecclesiastica disciplina enervetur. Abusus vero, qui
in his irrepserunt, and quorum occasion insigne hoc Indulgentiarum nomen ab
Haereticis blasphematur, emendatos and correctos cupiens, praesenti decreto
generaliter statuit, pravos quaestus omnes pro his consequendis, unde plurima
in Christiano populo abusuum causa fluxit, omnino abolendos esse: Caeteros vero
qui ex superstitione, ignorantia, irreverentia, aut aliunde quomodocunque
provenerunt; cum ob multiplices locorum and provinciarum, apud quas hi
committuntur, corruptelas commode nequeant specialiter prohiberi; mandat
omnibus Episcopis, ut diligenter quisque hujusmodi abusus Ecclesiae suae
colligat; eosque in prima Synodo provinciali referat, ut aliorum quoque
Episcoporum sententia cogniti, statim ad Summum Romanum Pontificem deferantur;
cujus authoritate, and prudentia, quod Universali Ecclesiae expediet,
statuatur; ut ita Sanctarum Indulgentiarum munus pie, sancte and incorrupte
omnibus fidelibus dispensetur. Tridentinum Concilium Sess. XXV. in Decreto de
Indulgentiis.

Dolenter hoc dico potius, quam contumeliose, multo a Laertio severius vitas
Philosophorum scriptas, quam a Christianis vitas Sanctorum; longeque
incorruptius, and integrius Suetonium res Caesarum exposuisse, quam exposuerint
Catholici, non dico res Imperatorum, sed Martyrum, Virginum, and
Confessorum....... Nominibus parco. Certum est autem; qui ficte and fallaciter
Historiam Ecclesiasticam scribentes, eos viros bonos atque sincer^s esse non
posse, totamque eorum narrationem inventam esse, aut ad quaestum, aut ad
errorem; quorum alterum foedum est, alterum perniciosum..... Quamobrem qui
falsis atque mendacibus scriptis mentes mortalium concitare ad Divorum cultum
voluere, hinc mihi nihil aliud videntur egisse, quam ut veris propter falsa
adimatur fides; and quae severe ab autoribus plane veracibus edita sunt, ea
etiam revocentur in dubium...... Quasi vero sancti Dei homines nostris
mendaciis egeant, qui tam multa vera pro Christo gesserunt. Vt falsa quantumvis
licet eruditae simulati onis artificio composita, ut noxia non sint; quoniam
inutilia sunt ta men, tanquam ignavi milites, oneri sint magis quam
auxilio..... Ecclesiae igitur Christi vehementer incommodant, qui res Divorum
praeclare gestas, non se putant egregie exposituros, nisi eas fictis and
revelationibus, and miraculis adornarint. Melchior Canus, qui Concilio
Tridentino interfuit, lib. XI. de locis C. VI.

Mentra egli faceva la visita de Liano in quella riviera intese, come appresso
la Chiesa di detto luogo, era un' arca di pietra con dentro alcune ossa tenute
in molta veneratione, come vere reliquie de' Santi, essendovi publica fama che
la notte precedente alla Festa di S. Pietro in Vincola Uscisse miracolosamente
tanta copia d'acqua da quel ossa, che se n' empiva tutta l'arca; e Benche
concoressero le vicine terre, in quel giorno a pigliar di tal acqua, che si
teneva per cosa miraculosa, e santa, non scemava Pero may restandone sempre
l'arca piena..... Jl Cardinale che teneva le reliquie de Santi in somma
veneratione e dove ne ritrovava tutte, le voleva vedere e ricanoscere, metterle
in stima grande appresso i popoli, donde venno il proverbio, Che il Cardinal
Borromeo non lasciava riposare ne i vivi ne i morti, Volle visitare qu'est'
ossa; e in vestigando la loro origin, non trovo cosa alcuna di certo* Onde
commincito dubitare di qualche inganno diabolico; e per sicurarsi delle verita,
fece asciurgare benissimo l'arca el' ossa insieme, e poi la fece custodire da
tree sacerdoti fedeli la notte istessa, che l'acqua soleva scaturire: e non
apparendo may segno alcuno d'acqua, scoper se che cio veniva fatto con^rtificio
e inganno. E per provedere a un tanto disordine, commando che fosse sepulta
sotto terra la casa e l'ossa ancora, accio il popolo ingannato non le adorasse
piu falsamente. Cosa che reco in quelle parti grande ammiratione predicando poi
quei popoli il Cardinale per huomo Santissimo, il quale havesse le spirito di
Dio con lui. Joannes Petrus Issuanus Mediolanensis Presbyter. lib. VI de Vita
S. Caroli. Cap. VII. Quod factum contigit, An. M.D.LXXX.

Volumus Episcopos curare propria Breviaria, quam fieri poterit certissime and
accuratissime emendari; lectionesque insertas peritorum industria, ad historiae
veritatem, ex antiquorum probatorumque auctorum scriptis and monumentis
reformari. Turonense Concilium provinciale. C.XV. de Parcoeis and Presbyteris.

Honor and Virtus Gentilium numina gemellas aedes junctim locatas habebant; ad
honoris non nisi per virtutis januam patuit aditus: apud Christianos, quibus
omnis interdicitur Etelotresceia. Veitas and pietas nec dissociari debent, nec
possunt. Apud eos solos, veritati pietas superstruitur Ergo jungenda Veritati
aut a falsitate secernenda Pietas. Joannes Launoius Parisiensis Theologus
Epist. ad Franciscum Barberinum S. R. E. Cardinalem praefixa operi cui titulus
est, De Simonis Stochi viso. de Sabbathinae Bullae privilegio, etc.

Spuria Bulla, quae vulgo dicitur, Sabbathina; visum Simonis Stochii XIII.
Seculi figmentum est. Laudamus S. Martini factum, qui ab erecta uni alicui
latroni era se abstinuit, illamque postmodum summovit: Pari laud suffragamur
eis, qui ad emendanda Sanctorum officia incumbunt; atque vehementer peccare
asserimus omnes, quicunque in Ecclesiasticos libros commenta inferunt, vel
impediunt ne illata tollantur. Theses Theo- M.DC.LXXIV. in Sorb. pro actu
Vesper. III. and gicae Claudii Bloini, Presbyteri Parisiui, and Sacrae Facul.
Paris. Licentiati die XXIV October. An. IV Columna.

Spuria est Bulla, quae vulgo dicitur Sabbathina; indigna quippe quae a
Pontifice R^mano emanaverit. Theses Theologicae Natalis Vareti, Presbyteri
Parisini, and Sacrae Facult. Paris. Licentiati, Socii Navarrici, die XXIII.
Aug. An. M.DC.LXXVII. in Regia Navarra, pro actu Vesper. IV. Columna.

Multae tribuuntur Romany Pontificibus Constitutiones, quae ab iis non
emanrunt Bulla quoque quae vulgo dicitur Sabbathina supposititius videtur mihi
Joannis XXII. partus: Quid enim magis ridiculum and Romano Pontifice magis
indignum, quam asserere B. Virginem polliceri aliquem fore Vicarium Christi in
terris, si confirmationem Ordinis Carmelitarum concedat; Salutem aeternam
consecaturum, quicunque Carmelita fiet, and Sanctum ordinem intrabit; B.
Virginem Sabbatho primo post obitum Confratrum, and Consororum Ordinis
Carmelitarum descensuram in Purgatorium, and inde quot quot inveniet
liberaturam, ut eos in montem vitae aeternae reducat. Has and similes ineptias
apage a Catholicae, and Romanae Religionis and fidei veris cultoribus. Theses
Theologicae Natalis de Bretigneres, Presbyteri Vernolaei, Sac. facultat. Paris.
Licent. Theologi, die XIII. Sept. An. M.DC.LXXVII. in Scholis Doctoris
Angelici, pro actu Vesper. v. Columna.

Advertisement.
IT has been thought advisable, with the Two Decres above-printed, to add the
Rules and Passages subjoyned to them; that it may appe^r with what spirit our
holy Father the Pope, and their Eminencies the Cardinals have applied
themselves to the making these Decrees; and the obligation incumbent on other
Christians in this as in all other things to comply with their good intentions,
and conform themselves thereunto. It is not to be denied, that there be a great
many people who do not think the matter in hand to be a matter of so great
consequence; nor that it is so dangerous a thing to be mistaken in these
affairs, when there is (as the people phrase it) a good meaning. But the
Prelates and Pastors of the Church are not of that opinion: and do very well
know that it is a thing of great importance, not to suffer what is suspicious
and frivolous in Religious exercises. This they endeavor to make evident by
the Rules adjoined; wherein they think there is nothing contained but what may
serve for public edification. Having therein no other design, but to show the
difference that ought to be made between those Indulgences and Prayers which be
True, and those which be Falls and Apocryphal. And indeed, in such things as
these, we are not so much to look upon the great number, as the worth of them:
It Is with Truth, as with excellent Wine; it is not to be drunk with the dregs
in it.

Contemnendus Pincerna est, qui dum Vini copia jactat, foecem quoque punienda
temeritate propinat. Petrus Damiani, Praefat, Vitae S. Mauri Caesen. Episcopi.

The Drawer is not to be excused, who to make his Wine seem the more, does
(very unhandsomely) fill out the dregs with it. Peter Damian, in his Preface to
the Life of S. Maure, Bishop of Cesene.

Thus far, the French Copy.
In some places of the English Translation, where we may seem to vary from the
Latin (in the phrase, not in the sense,) we have therein followed the French,
who have taken a greater liberty in paraphrasing the Latin, than we have done.

TO filll up the vacant Pages, I have thought fit to add, (as a specimen of
such things as are here prohibited,) the Hymn, commonly called Te Deum, as I
find it perverted and by them applied to the Virgin Mary. Whence we may see,
with what boldness they apply to her, this most solemn Hymn designed for the
praise of God himself.

A Copy of this, thus perverted, I find Printed, in a stately manner, in the
close of a Book written by Melchior Inchofer, a Jesuit, in Justification of a
Letter pretended to be sent by the Virgin Mary to the City of Messina.

Two of which Books (entitled as hereafter follows) are extant in the
Bodleyan Library; at C. 4.14. Jur. and Seld. Theol. O. 1. 1.

This Hymn (so perverted) I take to be the same, (or not much differing from
it,) with that which is here said to have been recommended by Pope Paul, V.
with Indulgences granted to those who sing it, or hear it sung: which (amongst
others) are deservedly condemned by this Decree.

An Epistle written by the Blessed Virgin Mary to the Messeneses, asserted to
be True, etc. By P. Melchior Inchofer (of Austria) one of the Society of Jesus;
Printed at Messina by Peter Bree, at the charge of Joseph Materose, in the year
1629. Page 405
WE praise thee, O MARY: we acknowledge thee to be the Lady.
All the earth does worship thee: the Mother of the everlasting God.
To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens and all the Powers therein.
To thee Cherubins and Seraphims: continually do cry,
Holy, Venerable, Wonderful: Mother of the Lord God of Sabbath.
Heaven and Earth are full: of the fruitfulness of thy Virginity.
The glorious Company of the Apostles: praise thee.
The goodly number of the Prophets: praise thee.
The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee.
The Holy Church throughout the world: does acknowledge thee.
The Mother: of infinite Majesty;
Thine honorable, true: and only Son,
Conceived by the Holy Ghost; the Comforter.
Thou art the Queen of glory: O MARY.
Thou art the true Mother: of the Son of the everlasting Father.
When he took upon him to deliver man: thou did afford him thy Virgin Womb.
Thy seed having overcome the sharpness of death: the kingdom of heaven is
open to all believers.
Thou sit at the right hand of thy Son: in the glory of the Mother.
We believe that thou shall come: with thy Son the Judge.
We therefore pray thee, help thy servants: whom thy Son has redeemed with the
precious blood he had from thee.
Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in the glory of God.
O Lady, save thy people: and bless thy Sons inheritance.
Day by day: we magnify thee.
And we worship thy name: ever world without end.
Vouchsafe, O Lady: to keep us this day without sin.
O Lady have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.
O Lady, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.
O MARY, after God, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.
Epistolae B, Virginis Mariae ad Messanenses veritas vindicata, etc. Authore P.
Melchiore Inchofer Austriaco e Soc. Jesu. Messanae ex Typographia Petri Breae,
sumptibus Josephi Materosi. Anno salutis M.DC.XXIX. Page 405.
TE MARIAM laudamus: te Dominam confitemur.
Te aeterni Dei Matrem: omnis terra veneratur.
Tibi omnes Angeli: tibi Coeli and universae Potestates;
Tibi Cherubim and Seraphim: incessabili voce proclamant.
Sancta, Venerabilis, Admirabilis: Matter Domini Dei Sabbath.
Pleni sunt Coeli and Terra: foecunditatis Virgitatis tuae.
Te gloriosus Apostolorum Chorus,
Te Prophetarum laudabilis numerus,
Te Martyrum candidatus honorat exercitus.
Te per Orbem terrarum Sancta confitetur Ecclesia.
MATREM immensae Majestatis.
Venerandum tuum, verum, and unicum Filium;
Ex Sancto conceptum paracleto Spiritu.
Tu Regina Gloriae MARIA.
Tu Patris Sempiterni Filii: es vera genetrix;
Cui ad liber andum suscepturo hominem: exhibuisti Virgineum uterum.
Per semen tuum devicto mortis aculeo, aperta sunt credentibus Regna Coelorum.
Tu ad dexter am Filii seeds: in gloria Matris.
Cum Filio Judice crederis apparitura.
Te ergo quaesumus, tuis devotis subveni: quos Filius tuus pretioso Sanguine ex
te suscepto redemit.
Aeterna fac cum Sanctis Dei gloria numerari.
Salvum fac populum tuum Domina: and benedic haereditati Filii tui.
Et dirige eos, and extolle eos: usque in consummationem seculi.
Per singulos dies: benedicimus te.
Et veneramur nomen tuum: in seculum, and in seculum seculi.
Dignare, Domina, die isto: sine peccato nos custodire.
Miserere nostri Domina: miserere nostri.
Fiat misericordia tua super nos: quemadmodum speramus in te.
In te MARIA post Deum speravi: non confundar in aeternum.
Of like nature is that which they call Our Ladies Psalter; where, what the
Psalmist applies to God, is by them applied all along to the Virgin Mary. An
instance whereof, we have collected by Arch Bishop Usher, in his Answer to the
Jesuits challenge. page 490.
BLessed is the man who loves thy name, O Virgin Mary; thy grace shall comfort
his Soul. Psalm. 1. Lady, how are they multiplied that trouble me: with thy
Tempest shall thou persecute and scatter them. Psalm. 3. Lady, suffer me not to
be rebuked in the fury of God; nor to be judged in his wrath. Psalm. 6. My Lady,
in thee have I put my trust: deliver me from mine Enemies, O Lady. Psalm. 7. In
our Lady put I my trust: for the sweetness of the mercy of her name. Psalm. 10.
(or, as we reckon, Psalm. 11. and so in these that follow.) How long will thou
forget me, O Lady: and not deliver me in the day of Tribulation. Psalm. 12.
Preserve me, O Lady, for in thee have I put my trust: and impart unto me the
drops of thy: Grace. Psalm. 15. I will love thee O Lady of Heaven and Earth and
will call upon thy name among the Nations. Psalm. 17. The Heavens declare thy
Glory: and the fragrance of thine Ointments is spread amongst the Nations.
Psalm. 18. Hear us Lady in the day of trouble: and turn thy merciful face unto
our Prayers. Psalm. 19. Unto thee, O Lady, have I lift up my Soul: in the
judgment of God, by thy Prayers, I shall not be ashamed. Psalm. 24. Judge me
Lady, for I have departed from mine innocence: but because I will trust in
thee, I shall not be weakened. Psalm. 25. In thee O Lady, have I put my trust,
let me never be confounded: in thy favor receive me. Psalm. 30. Blessed are
they whose hearts do love thee O Virgin Mary: their Sins by thee shall
mercifully be washed away. Psalm. 31. Lady, judge them that hurt me: and rise up
against them, and plead my cause. Psalm. 34. Waiting have I waited for thy
grace: and thou have done unto me, according to the multitude of the mercy of
thy name. Psalm. 39. Lady, thou art our refuge in all our necessities: and the
powerful strength treading down the Enemy. Psalm. 45. Have mercy upon me O Lady,
who art called the Mother of mercy: and according to the Bowels of thy mercy
cleanse me from all mine iniquities. Psalm. 50. Save me Lady by thy name: and
deliver me from mine unrighteousness. Psalm. 53. Have mercy upon me O Lady, have
mercy upon me because my heart is prepared to search out thy will: and in the
shadow of thy wings will I rest. Psalm. 56. Let Mary arise and let her enemies
be scattered: let them all be trodden under her feet. Ps. 67. In thee O Lady
have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: deliver me in thy mercy,
and cause me to escape. Psalm. 70. Give the King thy judgment, O God: and thy
mercy to the Queen his mother. Psalm. 71. O Lady, the Gentiles are come into the
inheritance of God: whom thou by thy merits have consecrated unto Christ. Psalm.
78. Thy mercies O Lady, will I sing for ever. Psalm. 88. God is the Lord of
revenges: but thou the mother of mercy do bow him to take pity. Psalm. 93. O
come let us sing unto our Lady: let us make a joyful noise to Mary our Queen
that brings Salvation. Psalm. 94. O Sing unto our Lady a new song: for she has
done marvelous things. Psalm. 97. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good:
give thanks unto his Mother, for her mercy indureth for ever. Psalm. 106, and
117. Lady, despise not my praise, and except this Psalter that is dedicated
unto thee. Psalm. 108. The Lord said unto our Lady: sit thou, my Mother, at my
right hand. Psalm. 109. They that trust in thee O Mother of God: shall not fear
from the face of the Enemy. Psalm. 124. Except our Lady build the house of our
heart: the building thereof will not continue. Psalm. 126. Blessed are all they
who fear our Lady: and blessed are all they who know to do thy will, and thy
good pleasure. Psalm. 127. Out of the deep have I cried unto thee O Lady: Lady
hear my Voice. Psalm. 129. Lady remember David: and all that call upon thy name.
Psalm. 131. O give thanks unto the Lord because he is good: because by his most
sweet Mother the Virgin Mary is his mercy given. Psalm. 135. Blessed be thou O
Lady, who teaches thy servants to war, and strengthenest them against the
Enemy. Psalm. 143. Praise our Lady in her Saints: praise her in her virtues and
miracles... Let every thing that has breath praise our Lady. Psalm. 150. And
after the same rate is that whole Psalter of our Lady, written by Bonaventure.
Who Is own words in Latin (which I spare here to repeat) are there cited
verbatim, by that Reverend Primate.

Another like Psalter there is, framed by John Peckham, called the Psalter of
the salutations of the Virgin, or Psalterium Meditationum B. Mariae.

And Bernardinus de Senis, has the conf^dence to tell us, That the Virgin Mary
has done as much or more, for God, than he has done for all mankind. Sola
benedicta Virgo Maria plus fecit Deo vel tantum (ut sic dicam) quam fecit Deus
toti generi humano. Credo etenim certe quod mihi indulgebit Deus, si nunc pro
Virgin loquar. Congregemus in unum quae Deus homini fecit: and consideremus
quae Maria Virgo Domino satisfecit, etc. Reddendo ergo singula singulis, sc.
quae fecit Deus homini, and quae fecit Deo beata Virgo; videbis quod plus fecit
Maria Deo, quam homini Deus. Vt prosolatio dicere liceat, quod propter Beatam
Virginem, quam tamen ipse fecit, Deus quodammodo plus obligetur nobis, quam nos
sibi. Bernardin. Senens. sermon. 61. artic. 1. cap. 11.

And Bernardinus de Busti to the same purpose. as he is there cited.

And much more of such Stuff, you may find collected together by that Reverend
Prelate and Primate, in the same Book; especially from Page. 465. to page 514.

So that it is but high time for the Popes themselves (if they have but any
sense of Reason or Religion left) to put a check to these insolent
extravagances. And not encourage them by such Indulgences, as themselves (it
seems) begin at length to be ashamed of.

FINIS.

