The Heads of a Bill for the settling of the River WEY in the County of SURREY,
and for the Composing the Differences concerning the same.
I. THe scope of the Bill is to settle the Navigation of the River Wey, in
Trustees of Quality and Reputation of the County of Surrey, for the
Preservation of a Work of so public a Benefit from further decay, for want of
due and speedy Reparation; which has often been occasioned by the
Controversies of the several Pretenders, and the sudden Eruptions of Waters,
which do quickly eat great and chargeable Breaches, scarce repairable, if not
prevented by some, empowered by Parliament to take care thereof, dwelling upon
or near the Place.

II. That the Justices of the Peace of the said County, or some five of them,
may determine all Trespasses, Suits, and Differences, arising concerning the
said River, with less Charge to the Inhabitants or Pretenders and with more
speed, in regard the Damage may be easily viewed by the said Justices, when
empowered to do the same, they being nigh Neighbors thereto.

III. To prevent unreasonable Rates, that the Country be not prejudiced in
that particular.

IV. That the Land Owners may enjoy the improvement of their Lands and Estates,
according to the Laws of the Land: This River being Cut through their Lands, to
their great Damage, without any Authority but a Rump Act, and the Equity of
that Act not having been pursued neither, for most of them were never
Contracted with; and if any Agreements were made, the same were never
perfected; and yet the Bill provides, That such Undertakers (though in truth
but Trespassers) shall be reimbursed, such Money as they can make appear they
are justly out of Purse, by reason of such Undertaking


