A LETTER FROM A FREEHOLDER in the County of Edinburgh, TO HIS FRIEND in
EDINBURGH.
My dear Friend,
I Begin this LETTER without any Apology, as well knowing you will neither
grudge the Trouble of reading these Lines, nor that of answering them. Though I
live in the Neighborhood of the Town of Edinburgh, yet the Poorness of my
Health denies me the Pleasure of passing almost any Part of my Time in it: Two
or three Days Residence there shows me that my Constitution is not capable of
the stronger Pleasures, and send me back again an unwilling Exile to the
Country; but as there is no Pleasure without Pain, so there is no Pain without
Pleasure; unable as I am to keep Company with these my Heart loves, and to
partake of their Pleasures and Diversions; yet I can go near to satisfy my self
with the Thoughts, that as I love you, and some other Friends, so I am (if I
mistake not) beloved by them. -- Reflections of this Kind, together with a warm
Concern I have for my Country, which leads me to spend a good Part of my Time
in reading and enquiring what I can, into the Situation of our public Affairs:
These Occupations, I say, help me off with my Time, and though the latter, I
mean our public Affairs, afford but a gloomy Prospect; yet the Beams of Virtue
in particular Persons, that shoot sometimes athwart this profound Darkness,
give me an heightened Pleasure, which I really believe owes its additional
Strength to the Villainy which surrounds it; just as, in Painting, Light is
heightened by Shade.

FROM such general Reflections as these, I was, some Time ago, awakned by a
Call to mind my own particular Duty, as an Elector of a Representative to serve
in Parliament, for the INDEPENDENT COUNTY of Mid-Lothian. -- I have Abundance
of Time for Reflection, so I set my self down to think, not so much indeed, to
which of the Candidates named I should give my Vote, as whether I could with a
safe Conscience give it to the late Member, who has vacated his Seat, now for
the second Time, in order to accept of a new Employment; which, whether he did
voluntarily, or was compelled to do, remains still a great Doubt with me; but
as you have greater Opportunities of Knowledge, I beg you will inform me of the
Truth of that Matter. -- My Reason of Doubt is, That I cannot think he would
again wantonly put himself upon his County; nor can I think but that his
Successor, in his last Place, would have had as much Interest as our present
Candidate, to have stepped into this Place, had he chosen it.

BE that as it will, I shall now proceed, though I should exceed the Bounds of
a Letter, to inform you that I am now determined to give my Vote against the
present Candidate upon the Court Interest, who was not long ago a Candidate
upon the Country Interest: My Reasons, I shall likewise give you, and if you
please to show them to any of our Friends, I do not oppose it.

YOU know, that ever since I came to succeed to this small Estate, which I now
possess, I have always given my Vote to the Candidate, who I thought would
oppose the Court; and this I did upon a Principle somewhat singular, though, in
my Apprehension, not unreasonable. The Lowness of my Health did not allow me to
be present at the last Election. The two Parliaments preceding this, I voted
for a Member who opposed the Court, and who I see, in a late printed Letter,
dignified by the Title of SOMEBODY, an Appellation, which you know we used in
our laughing Way, to apply to a Person in a much higher Station.

THE Reasons why I thought my self bound to oppose the late Ministry (if that
may be called late, which is now) were plainly these, what influenced others I
cannot tell, they best know themselves? In the first Place, I was, and am still
of Opinion, that the late Minister was too profuse of the public Money, and
did not pay so large a Proportion of the public Debts, as he might have done,
and a Twenty Years Peace, and an easy Administration enabled him to do. -- 2do,
That he, through a Pusillanimity, which always affected him in foreign Affairs,
suffered the Nation to be insulted and abused by the Spaniards, its Trade and
Wealth to decrease, and indeed almost to perish; and when, by the Strength of
the Opposition, he was at last forced into a Spanish War, managed it so poorly,
that much Loss and Dishonor redounded to the Nation from such weak Management,
of which indeed the Cause was very visible; That, for twenty Years together, he
had disposed of all Military and Naval Preferments, not to those who knew their
Business, but to those who could best procure him a Parliamentary Interest. --
3tio, That Corruption, which before his Time was but a narrow Path, became
under his Direction a broadpav'd Way, easy for all Ministers after him to
follow, and perhaps to make it still broader and safer. -- And lastly, That, in
order to gain his M -- r's Favor, he too much sacrificed the Interest of his
native Country to that of H -- r.

SUCH, my dear Friend, were the Reasons that determined me to oppose the late
Ministry, these I imbibed when young, and, if I remember right, were strongly
inculcated upon my Mind by this terrible SOMEBODY, who now supports, with all
his Power, the Candidate for the Court. -- The Schene is now shifted, the Heads
of the late Opposition are now melted down into the old Ministry, yet not so as
to become one Metal, for the old is ever and anon throwing out some Piece of
the new; and will, in all Probability, in a little Time, free itself entirely
from the Mixture.

BUT, be that as it may, if the present Ministry, or call it by what Name you
will, does not alter these destructive Measures I mentioned above. What avails
it me, or my Country, that a few Subalterns are changed, and others put in
their Room. What I want of you, who hold a Correspondence with some of our
Members of Parliament, is, to inform me, Whether it be true, as is reported,
and which, from several Observations I have made, I am apt to believe, That our
late Friends are still more profuse of the public Money than the old Ministry,
and that, instead of paying our former Debts, they are running us into a new
and greater Debt: That the Spanish War is not only neglected, but entirely laid
aside, and the Hopes of Peace, and an Increase of Wealth and Trade from that
Quarter, by laying Hold of some of the Dominions of that Crown in the West
Indies, altogether blasted; and they who advised and urged the carrying the War
into that Quarter, are now totally silent upon that Head, and attentive only to
a War upon the Continent. Neither, if I am rightly informed, are the Wings of
Corruption shortened. Alas! We have but too many melancholy Instances of the
contrary, melancholy to us, but not less so to the Creatures themselves, who
are guilty in that Way. What say you, my Friend, to the H -- v -- n Rudder?
Does it more or less influence the Councils of G -- B --? Why? this expensive
War upon the Continent? Why do we keep such a monstrous Fleet in the
Mediterranean, upon the Cost of Italy? What has G -- B -- ado with the Treaty
of Worms? Why these odious and insulting Mercenaries? I am almost out of
Breath, and you are laughing at me, unhackney'd as I am in a World with whom
these Things go glibly down; But, pray my Friend, are these Things so? I
believe them to be so, and therefore have taken my Resolution; inform me if you
know better: One Question more, and then, Does our late Member and present
Candidate upon the Court Interest, vote along with these Ministers? Does he
take Posts and Places from them? Is he one of them? Does he, in general, concur
with their Measures? I am told it is so; What say you? For upon the Verity or
Falsehood of these Facts depends my Vote, which, for any Thing yet known, I am
to give against this Candidate; because, I am apt to believe the Facts reported
to be true, but am, nevertheless, open to better Information.

THESE are the Reasons that weigh with me in determining my Conduct at the
ensuing Election; they have all along weighed with me, and, in my poor
Apprehension, have determined nine Parts in ten of the Freeholders of this
independent County to vote as they have hitherto done, since I had the Honor
of coming among them in the Year 1727. If they still retain the same
Principles, and there be still the same Reason for exerting them, of which I
think hardly any Man can doubt, they will, without Question show themselves to
be themselves, and that, with honest Men, the same Principles, in the same
Circumstances, will always have the same Effects. -- In a certain Number of any
Kind of Men there will always be some weak and wicked, and that there are such
amongst our Electors, I have no Doubt; but that a Majority of Gentlemen
entirely independent, will in one Day, in one Hour, entirely counteract the
whole former Conduct of their Life, and flatly and avowedly contradict the very
fundamental Maxims which they have been preaching up and insisting upon, almost
ever since they could speak, and which indeed ought to govern every honest
Man's Choice of a Representative, I cannot believe. I shall be another Thomas,
nothing shall make me believe, till I see and feel.

BUT that Reason which is given for supposing only, that the Majority will go
the other Way, is to me beyond all Conception. And here again, my Friend, I
must apply to you for Information; it is reported, and I will do in this, as in
the former Reports, I will believe them till you inform me better: It is
reported, I say, That a certain -- intermeddles so strongly in this Election,
as not only to condescend to soothe, but to rise to Awe and Threatenings. Though I
told you before I believed this Report, yet I do not believe it as I do a
mathematical Demonstration; Doubts arise. Is it possible that he should know so
little of his Duty, as to use, or threaten to use that Advantage the
Constitution has given him over the rest of the Freeholders? If he knows his
Duty and contemns it, does he not know that there is in our Constitution a
Remedy for this Evil, for which I want a Name: Will not an Address from a
certain House remove him -- from this Advantage? He very well knows, what it
may cost a Judge, for makking a false Step, by using any Kind of Violence at an
Election, having been himself, not long ago, the first Mover of a very hot
Pursuit of the same Kind, although it proved ineffectual. I am really not
thoroughly informed how and by what Means Knowledge of Duty, and a Fear of
Danger from deviating, are capable to restrain any Man; so that, without paying
any Compliment, or flattering him upon the Goodness of his Heart, there is some
Reason to doubt this Report.

BUT, setting aside Considerations I have mentioned, the Folly of the Thing
makes me doubt very much; the County, as I take it, is independent in no other
Sense, than that the Members of it are independent. The Whip is for Slaves, but
free Men are not to be brought over in that Way: What Answer do you think, my
Friend, I should give any Man that would attack me in that Way? I believe it
would prevent a second Application, and, I hope, every Elector will have, at
least, as much Spirit, as a poor sickly Man, who has not much to raise his
Spirit: But if neither the Knowledge of Duty, nor Fear of Danger, can move him,
and if he is not wise enough to see the Folly of this Enterprise, let the
honest and generous Resentment of the free and independent Electors awaken him
with a Whip of Scorpions, and let him know the Difference betwixt Freemen and
Beasts of Burden.

BUT, if he is so wise as to distinguish between Men, and to threaten some,
while he soothes others; let those, who are threatened, consider, that they are
likewise Men; and they, who are soothed, reflect, why there is such an
extraordinary Change of Temper in the Soother, quantum mutatus ab illo? That
Change of Principle should change the very Man, is strange! -- That Hotspur
should, upon Occasion, become a Lamb; That a Court-Colour should sink so deep
into a Man's Constitution, is to me inconceivable: I am told, That he has been
seen carrying the meanest and poorest (in Spirit I mean) of the Voters along
with him to Meetings of his Friends, taking them under the Arm, even in the
Street, and every Way guilty of extrordinary Condescension. This indeed is a
critical Point, the Greatest must stir their Stumps; the Credit of the Party
depends upon it; they are ruined in England, if they fail a second Time;
nevertheless, the Line of Shakespeare in the Tragedy of Julius Caesar still
forces itself into my Memory;

O! Mighty Caesar, Art thou fallen thus low? BUT, Are there of our Brethren,
who are afraid of future Contingencies of Judicial Evils, which they as yet see
not? Let them consider, What Means of Power are in the Hands of him, who is
supposed willing to inflict these Evils; Are there not others of equal
Knowledge and Skill with him? Many Men of Probity and Worth. Is there not ONE
MAN, whose Integrity is above the Reach of Power, or Corruption of any Kind,
whose Abilities are too well known for me to say any Thing of them; and of whom
I may almost say, what a Roman Author, was punished with Death for, writing of
Brutus, Tacitus, Lib. 4. Annal. C. 34.
That he is Scotorum ultimus. Will not he, Will not others investigate and
defeat Partiality and Prejudice; arising from a Cause so mean, and so well
known? Were I just now under the Lash of the Law in any Shape, and were I, what
I am not, disposed to make the best of my Vote, without any Regard to
Conscience or Honor, I would vote against this Court Candidate in Point of
Interest, and expect to come off by raising a Clamor, that I was attacked
purely from Party; Prejudice, and Partiality. But these Shifts, I thank God, I
have no Occasion for, and were it so, I am incapable of having Recourse to them.

MY Dear Friend, I am now almost as much tired with Writing, as, I dare say,
you are with Reading; a Moment's Patience more, and I have done. -- I am told,
some of our Freeholders are to be neutral; if this Neutrality proceeds from
having examined both Sides of the Question, and finding not a Grain more
Principle of Determimination on one Side than on the other, I have nothing to
say, but cannot believe it; sooner shall a Peripatetick Philosopher persuade
me, that an Ass will starve between two Bundles of Hay, of equal Size and
Figure, than he shall persuade me of this. I take my Leave of Gentlemen, whose
distinguishing Faculty is so nice, as to remain perfectly in Suspense, and who
are not able to throw the thousand Part of a Grain into any of the Scales. --
The Spartan Legislator Lycurgus made it Death for any Man not to take a Side,
where any Question divided the Commonwealth. Is there a Man, who does not wish
we had such a Law in this Country; and who does not laugh at the vain Pretenses
of Neutralists? Vain and idle in this Respect above all, that both Parties
imagine they hurt them, and neither Party thanks them for not being against
them. --

ADIEU, My Dear Friend, Inform me as to Facts, and I will take the Point of
Right in my own Hands.
FINIS.

