REFORMED CATHOLIC: OR THE True Protestant.

MATTHEW. 24. 26. There shall arise FALSE CHRIST'S and FALSE PROPHETS. DVBLIN,
Reprinted, M.DC.LXXIX.

The Reformed Catholic, or the True Protestant.
THIS Paper should have come into the World under the form of a Letter (as most
Pamphlets of quality do of late) if the Author had not made a Conscience of
covering the Simplicity of his purpose under any sort of Disguise; so that
without so much as a single How do ye to usher it in, he comes point blank to
the Business in the very Title. It may be looked upon, I know, as a thing of
Ill Omen, to begin with an Alias: But there is neither Priest nor Highway-man in
our Case; and yet there be cause enough perhaps for a kind of Hue and Cry too;
for it is a matter of great moment that every man should both go, and be known
by his right Name; and (peradventure) never more necessary than in this
juncture, and in this particular: and so to my Text.

A Reformed Catholic (properly so called) is an Apostolieal Christian, or a
Son of the Church of England: a true Protestant may be so to; nay, and many
times he is so; and many a Loyal, Orthodox, Reformed Catholic calls himself
so; and (according to the style of the Age) he may be well enough said and
accounted so to be. But all this is only by Adoption, and without any color
for it in the original of his Denomination. Now a Protestant, in strictness of
speaking is a Lutheran, which this Church does not in all points pretend to be,
and then the Characteristical Note of a Christian is Catholic; so that the
Appellation is too narrow for the Principle, and draws on the very same
Implication in a Protestant-Catholique, which we make sport with in a
Roman-Catholique, that is to say, the Soloecism of a particular Universality.

Here is enough already (I suppose) to furnish an Extract of as much Popery out
of it, as may recommend some hungry Informer to a Mornings-draught; for we have
a sort of people now a days, that will read a man's Heart through his Ribs,
though they can hardly see his Nose on's face; and that give more Credit to
their Ears than to their Eyes. Now to ease the Reader in two or three peevish
Points, if he should chance to be over-critical and imperious, I will tell him
beforehand, in a few words, what he is to trust to.

To the first Question or Objection fairly supposed; the Author is no disguised
or concealed Papist, but of the Communion of the Church of England, trained up
in the strictest way of it, and standing firm to it against all sorts of
Provocation, Discouragement, Temptation, and Argument; and without warping to
the Jesuits, either on the right hand, or on the left.

To the Second: He is not set on to write this Discourse, either directly or
indirectly; by any Hint, Desire, or Appointment whatsoever; nor by any other
Motive than the sense of what he owes to the Public, and to his Conscience,
and the Consideration of some small Present from the Bookseller, if there be
any thing got by it. (A piece of Good Husbandry that he has learnt of his
Superiors.) He has no design upon any Place at Court in it, nor upon any
Church-Lease; no not so much as a Reversion: And all this is true, by the Faith
of a poor Gentleman, that has worn his Doublet out at elbows in his Majesty's
Service. It might be added, that he is grown old and Careless, and that even
Malice it self were lost upon him. Now under these Circumstances, I hope he may
securely advance to tell you a little more of his mind:

So ^a^ as Catholic and Protestant serve only as two several Names, intending
the self-same thing, (though the one by Protriety, and the oth^^ but b^
Translation) is all one to me whether of the two any man calls me; all the
danger is, the countenancing of an ill Thing under a good Name.

The word Protestancy falls under a double acceptance; the one, as it denotes
the Reformed Religion; the other, as it is taken for the Genus Generalissimum
of all Dissenters from the Church of ^ome. The former I do heartily embrace, as
transmitted to us from our Forefathers, and Signed by the Blood of Martyrs;
authorized by the Holy Gospel, and by the Law of the Land; the common Bond of
our Civil Peace, and (by Gods Blessing) the Hopes and Means of our Eternal
Salvation.

Now to the latter Acceptance, I am not at all satisfied with it, and I have
both Reason and Experience to warrant me in that d^slike. As to my Reason;
First, It is an Agreement upon an Opposition; and next, it is an Agreement of
several parties disagreeing among themselves, which carries the face rather of
a Confederacy, than a Religion: For it is not the Opposing of Error, but the
asserting of a Truth, that mast do the work. One Error may be opposed by
another, even in a single person; as one man robs his Neighbor, and a third
robs him. Here Is one Injustice opposed by another: So that as it is an
Agreement in Opposition, it is a hundred to one there will be Error in it: But
the Opposers themselves being subdivided, it is impossible it should be Right;
for the very Essence and Soul of Religion are here wanting; that is to say,
Charity and Unity. And for the proof of this, beyond all Contradiction; let but
any man look back into the late Troubles, and see, when the Factions had
destroyed the King and the Church (which they called the Common Enemy) how they
fell presently to worrying of one another; when the Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, Seekers, Ranters, Antinomians, and twenty
other wild sorts of Sectaries, under the title of Protestants, and under the
pretense of opposing Popery, destroyed the very Cause they covenanted to
assert; a Protestant-Church, a Protestant Prince, and a Protestant-People,
filled the Land with Confusion, Sacrilege, and Herefie; made the English
Nation a Reproach and a Scandal to the Christian World: And so soon as they had
possessed themselves of the Power and Revenue of the Kingdom, every man's hand
was against his Brother for the Booty.

To proceed now to the matter of Experience: I would fain see any one Instance
from the very Reformation it self, to this day, when ever there was a Clamor
advanced upon this Point, of a Conjunct Opposition of Popery, that the Church
of England was not struck at in the Confederacy; and that too, not by blind
Inferences and tacit Presumption, but by Overt Acts, and a Notoriety of
Practice: That is to say, the Men that stickled under this Notion, did
positively declare the Government by Bishops, to be Antichristian; and the
Discipline and Common Prayers of the Church, to be Popery and Superstition;
yes, and the Civil Administration it self also to be downright Tyranny. They
did just like the Fellows in Hatton-Garden, that stole Money and Plate under
the pretense of Searching for Priests; and for the Credit of the Exploit, they
robbed in Red Coats too, that they might the better pass for some of his
Majesty's Guards. The Similitude runs upon all Four, for it was the very case
of our pretended Protestants, under color of hunting for Priests, they seized
Money and Plate, and committed Robberies in the very Livery of the Government.

This they did in Scotland under the Queen Regent, and King James; and in
England, under Queen Elizabeth; and twice in Scotland again, under the late
King; and after that, in England: Two actual Rebellions more in Scotland, under
this present King, and now God bless us from another at home; and all this from
that sort of people that styled themselves Protestants. The Principles, the
Methods, and the Pretenses the very same, from one end to the other.

The Story of these Phanatical Conspiracies is almost as nauseous as the thing
it self is detestable; only this last in Scotland methinks seems to crown the
Infamy of all the rest: For a Party that calls it self Protestant; a Party in
full Cry upon the scent of Popery; a Popish Plot upon Oath too, at the same
time upon the Life of the King, upon our Religion and Government; and that Plot
at that instant, under a strict Examination; the same party at the same time
also pressing for Justice upon the Conspirators, nay, and complaining of the
remissness of the Prosecution, notwithstanding the most exemplary Rigor in the
Case that ever was known in this Nation: For this Party, (I say) under these
circumstances, to fly in the face of the Government, let the World judge if
ever there was a more consemmated piece of Wickedness. They raise a Rebellion,
and make Religion the Ground of it, they declare a War against the King, and
the Church, and yet write themselves Loyal Subjects and Protestants. They cry
out of the Danger of Popery, and yet in the same breath, draw their Swords upon
their Prince, in the very attempt of Crushing it; and all these Aggravations
complicated in one act. Is it not high time then; after an Imposture that has
cost this Nation so dear, to learn at last to distinguish betwixt a Religion
and a Faction? Betwixt what men are, and what they call themselves? Is a
Renegado ever the less a Turk for putting out English Colors? Are the Blessed
Spirits ever the less pure for the Devils transforming himself into an Angel of
Light? Is the Kings Broad Seal one jot the less valuable for being
counterfeited? So neither is our Profession. And he that dishonours Religion,
or invades Authority under the Name of a Protestant, is no more to any sober
man, than a Goth or a Vandal. Judas his Betraying of his Master was a most
ungrateful and abominable Sin, but the doing of it with a Kiss, made it by many
degrees the more execrable: And it was the height of the Prophet David's
Affliction, the Circumstance of a Familiar Friend. Where Is the harm now of
saying, Have a care of False Protestants: The Author and the Finisher of our
Faith, is (I hope) of Authority sufficient to justify that Caution. Does not
our Savior himself tell us that there shall arise False Christ's and False
Prophets? and why not False Protestants: And does he not bid us take heed that
no man deceive us; for many (says he) shall come in my Name, saying I am
Christ, and shall deceive many? Does he not bid us beware of Wolves in Sheeps
Clothing? And in his description of the Scribes and Pharisees, give us the
very Picture of our Impostors.

We have it upon the Credit of Dr. Tongue and Dr. Oats, that the Sedition of
1641. was totally contrived and carried on by Popish Counsels; and that not only
the Conventicles in that bloody Revolution, but all our Separate Meetings to
this day, and particularly the Scottish Commotions were and are influenced by
Priests and Jesuits, under the Masque of Professors of those several
Persuasions. Have we not reason then to use all possible circumspection, that
we may not be imposed upon by such as these for Protestants? No man has a
greater veneration for the memory of those Protestants that suffered Martyrdom
for their Faith: no man a greater horror for the Irish, the Parisian, and
several other Massacres; no man a higher esteem or a more ardent affection for
Protestancy it self, (so far as the Profession of the Church of England is
intended by it) than I have. But for those turbulent Spirits that lay about
them as if Heaven were to be taken by actual Violence, whose Zeal outstrips
Christianity it self, imposing upon the world their own corrupt and impetuous
passions, instead of the healing and pacifique motions of the Holy Ghost: These
are a dangerous sort of people, and their ways are not only a Contradiction to
the undeniable Principles of our Institution, but to the common Interests of
Mankind, as well Individuals as Communities: for if it be true, that Charity is
the great Lesson of the Gospel: If it be true that, Unity in Faith, and
Unanimity in the the things of Civil Government would make up the most
perfected Blessing that reasonable Nature is capable of in this Tabernac^e of
Flesh; then must it necessarily follow, that the nearer we approach to that
Agreement, the better Christians we are, and the happier Men; and the further
we depart from it the more wicked and the more miserable we are. This is either
true or false: If the former, there is no Treason in it; if the latter, we may
burn our Bibles.

Before I wade any further into this Controversy, it may do well, I think, to
give some Reason, why upon this Subject and at this Time; that the World may
not take that for the Leaven of an unquiet Humor, which in great truth, is
only an act of Conscience in the discharge of a sober and a seasonable duty to
my Prince and Country.

To the undertaking of this Office, I have been induced, by the audacious
Liberties of the Press, in the matter of Religion and Government, endeavoring
to possess the Multitude with false and pernicious Principles and Opinions, and
by artificial Hints and Scandals to dispose them (now toward the meeting of
this next Parliament) to a partial and a factious Choice: So that my Business
is only to encounter and lay open the Vanity and Weakness of those Libels, and
without confining my self to any one in particular, to sum up the Malice of
them all, for so much as concerns our present purpose, and to submit my self to
the Reader in a fair and short Reply.

It is a Note worthy of consideration, that all the Papers here in question,
(even to a single Sheet) are the Work of Men exceedingly by assed against the
established Government, as Republicans, Anabaptists, and other sorts of
Dissenters from the Church; for the Publishers of these Papers are known every
one of them, and most of the Authors. Now what advice toward the Honor and
Safety of the Government, these people are likely to give, who are united in
common Principles of defaming, discomp^sing, and even of dissolving it, let
Heaven and Earth be the Judges: And what work such a House of Commons would
make, as these forward Undertakers would have, if they were to direct and
influence the Election.

Now if these be the Counselors, let us see next if the Matter of their
Writings be not answerable to the Character of the Men; and if it be not most
evident that it is their very scope and design (so far from endeavoring the
Peace and Settlement of the Nation) to poison the people with seditious Maxims;
to create Jelousies betwixt the King and his Subjects, and to undermine the
very Foundation of the Government.

They support themselves with the Multitude, upon two general and popular
pretensions, Religion and Liberty: What Religion, or what Liberty they do not
say; but only fill the peoples ^eads with a confused Notion of things, and wild
apprehensions of Popery and Tyranny: And ^hen their next work is under color
of dating the Privileges of King and People, to erect ^editious Positions; and
after all, to prescribe Remedies infinitely worse than the Disease. We shall
now make it appear that the Religion they talk of, leads to all sorts of
Impiety; and that their pretended Liberty is the ready way to slavery. First,
of Religion.

As to what concerns Religion, they do all of them sing the same Song in their
Queries and ^opesals to the Freeholders and Electors of England, and
unanimously agree in the same me^hod of Advice to the people, how they are to
govern themselves in their next Choice.

Their first Caution is, To pursue the Discovery and Punishment of the Plot,
(the Trojan Horse ^ith an Army in the Belly of it.) To secure us from Popery;
and that no Papist may be allowed to well in the Land; Nor any man chosen into
the House, that shall dare to open his mouth for a Popish ^uccessor: And all
this attended with a dreadful Enumeration of the Massacres, Fires, Trea^^s, and
Devastations that have been wrought by the Popish party.

To this first Point, the Replicant most willingly subscribes, so far as stands
with Christian ^harity, and the Law of the Land; But then he cannot forget on
the other hand, that the ^ounterfeit Protestant Horse of 1641. had an Army in
the Belly of him, as well as the Trojan; and ^e that would be safe, must look
both ways at once.

Another Caution is, not to choose any man that is Popishly affected; (as
another has it) affected. But a third proceeds a little more warily, and
recommends the choosing only of ^ere Protestants, and not disguised Papists, who
are ready to pull of their Mosque, when time serves, ^d may be known by their
laughing at the Plot, disgracing the Evidence, admiring the Tray^rs Constancy,
etc.

This same Popishly and ill affected, lies open to several Exceptions; for one
Man is made ^dge of the Thoughts of another, which is only the Prerogative of
Almighty God. I have ^ard of a man that was indicted for Whistling; but never,
till now, of any Man that was incapa^ated to serve in the House of Commons, for
Thinking. Beside the unreasonable Latitude, ^d the horrible iniquity of the
Judgment; for if this be admitted, no man living can be se^^e: It involves the
Innocent with the Guilty, and puts a man out of all possibility to a^^it
himself. And them forward; It is but turning the Tables, and the Blot is hit on
the ^^^side: For why should not I be as well allowed to pronounce another man a
disguised Protestant, as he to judge me a disguised Papist, and the same
liberty of marking him too? You shall know him by his Shiboleth,; for the old
Covenant sticks in his Teeth still, and the whole mystery of his profession is
wrapped up in that Oracle of the Privileges of Parliament; the Kings Just Power
and Greatness; the Protestant Religion against Popery, and Popish Innovations;
the first point being wholly incomprehensible, and the other two, like Jugglers
Knots, fast or loose at pleasure.

This equal Freedom being granted on all sides, takes away all Faith,
Confidence, and Correspondence in humane Society. I know no difference in the
world betwixt one man's Infallibility and another; nor any (but in Terms)
betwixt a private man's infallibile Light, and the Popes infallible Sentence:
Nor is there any one Usurpation in Popery, that is either grievous to the
Conscience or dangerous to the Government; but a man may show very near an
equivalent of it in Schism.

As to the Marks of distinction betwixt a sincere Protestant and a disguised
Papist; the Immorality of Laughing at the Plot, favors more in my opinion, of
an unmannerly Fool, than of a disguised Papist; though for my own part, I am so
far from Laughing at it, that it wounds my soul, the very thought on it.
Disgracing of the Evidence were something indeed; but to ^ake a man a Papist
for admiring the Traitors Constancy, that, methinks is very hard, and not
answerable to what one would expect from an Advocate for Liberty of Conscience.
It is much easier to relinquish an Opinion, tha^ for a man to divest himself of
natural Affection; and more unreasonable to claim a freedom in the one, than to
refuse it in the other. I must confess, I do admire that Constancy, and if I
were to dye for so doing, I could not but admire it still: And these
Impressions are humane, and not to be resisted*

We fall now into the old Track of the whole party: They call for Toleration;
complain o^ persecution; cast all their Sufferings upon their worshipping
according to their Consciences; and the^ this lamentable condition of theirs
must be remonstrated to the whole Nation. Of these four point^ in order.

In the handling of their plea for Protestant Dissenters, there are many things
to be taken into consideration. First, Is it in matters of conscience, or only
of fancy, wherein they desire to be i^dulg'd? If the latter, the upholding of
a Law is certainly of much greater concern, than the gra^fying of a Caprice.
Now on the other side, if they demand it upon an exigen^ of Conscience: Fir^
why plurally, for Dissenters? When one man cannot honestly undertake for
another man's Conscienc^ Besides that (Secondly) they a^k an Indulgence for
several parties, of divided Consciences and Opinion And in short, they would
have the Magistrate favor all the Consciences, that will not endure ^^
another. Again; They should do well to explain what they mean by Protestant
Dissenters, upon points of Conscience; whether all in general, or only such and
such parties: If all in general, Heathen must be tolerated as well as
Christians, for they have Consciences as well as we: Or if it be restrai^^ to
Christianity, it opens a door to Heresies, more detestable then Paganism it
self. So that an Vniv^ sal Toleration is utterly unlawful; and a partial
Toleration on the other hand, is as ineffectual; for upon a plea of Conscince
they may all claim alike: So that it is an Act of Uniformity still, to those
that exclud^d; and it is not fair, in the Government, to favor one ^alf, and
exasperate another, where may as well be taken in, as any* Beside, upon the
supposal of a limited Toleration, who shall ju^^ which are fit to be admitted,
and which not? If the People, every man justifies himself, and t^ we are upon
an universal Toleration again. They tell us stories of sound Faith, good Life,
an^ distinguishing betwixt Fundamentals and not Fundamentals; which is only
treading of the s^ Ring still; for it may be every bodies plea as well as any
man's: That which the Magistrate judges one ^^ the people shall determine
another; and one man's fundamental Truth shall be another funda^^^tal Error,
which will introduce as many Religions as phansies; bring Factions into
Families as^ as into Governments, and ^ake the people both parties and Judges:
And it is not to say tha^ Word of God shall be the Judge; for that is only a
Rule by which we are to judge; and by erro^ judgments it is made the foundation
of all Heresies; For when every man may make his own Other's nothing so
impious, but he will show you a Text for it. Moreover, the very pretense of Lib^
Conscience is f^ivolous; for Conscience is out of the reach of humane power;
and the freedom of the no Law can either punish or take away.

But it is the liberty of acting, as well as of thinking, that they insist
upon, which upon the whole matter, is neither more nor less than a License to
do what they please. The League in Flanders, under Maximilian: the holy League
under Henry the 3d of France; Muncers Outrages in Germany; the Murderers of
Henry the 4^h. and the P. of Orange; and all the Villainies of the late times
here at home, were acted under the Masque of Religion. It is not for the
restraining of Opinions that Laws are provided; but for the preventing of Overt
deeds of Violence, and they are punished for Action, not for Conscience.
Neither have we any means of distinguishing betwixt Faction and Religion, if
every man's word shall be taken for his own Conscience; and then it is a
dangerous way of dividing a Kingdom against it self.

Take notice all this while, that they urge a Toleration, no body knows for
whom, or for what. Where are their Arcicles? where is the Model of their
Accommodation? or how is it possible to contrive any common Expedient to
gratify them? For nothing less than a total Liberty of doing what they list,
will please them, which must inevitably produce the Dissolution of the
Government. If they would have the wilder and more extravagant Sects excluded,
why do they plead for All in general, and not rather particularise the Opinions
and Parties that they would have indulged? But they dare not do this, for fear
of disobliging the rest, their business being to unite all Factions in the
quarrel; when yet you may as soon bring Heaven and Hell together, as reconcile
them in Religion; so that either they ask an impious thing, in the allowance of
all, or a impracticable thing in propounding any Limitation, upon a Plea of
Conscience. But the truth is ^o more than this: They ask a thing which can
neither be granted, nor so much as understood; and the people are transported
with the sound of Loyalty and Religon, to the desire of things wholly
inconsistent with either Piety or Government.

We should do well to take notice, that against this plea for Liberty, there is
one on the one side, the Authority of Law, and the solemn Judgment of the
Church for the Equity of it; and on the other, the Kings personal and political
Conscience for the Execution of it. There is also the Duty of a Subject for the
Obeying of it; and the same reason that authorizes an Invasion of this Law, may
as well invalidate all the rest. Now the Counterpoize to all this weight, is
(at best) only the naked Conscience of some private persons. The peoples
Consciences call for Liberty; and the Governors Conscience requires Order:
Their Consciences will not down with this Law, nor this Law with such
Consciences: Which of the two now shall yield to the other?

But what benefit might we now expect from this Indulgence here, if it were
granted? Or rather, in ^he first place, what color of Conscience or of reason
is there in the very demand it self (all the afore^aid Exceptions over and
above?) Is it first reasonable for them to ask what they themselves think
unreasonable to grant? Or to claim such an allowance to themselves, as a point
of Conscience, which they themselves, upon a point of Conscience refuse to
others? For there is not any one party ^n the whole mass of Dissenters, that
does not deny the same freedom to others which they do jointly challenge to
themselves: Nay, in their very Propositions to his Majesty in the Isle of
Wight, Mar. 1647. ^hey excepted the Use of the Common Prayer, when they gave
Liberty to all other sorts of Worship. (To which Concession they were then
compelled by the Circumstances of that juncture.) Their Refusal must proceed
either upon the Right of the thing, or upon Reason of State. If they did not
like our way, neither do we approve of theirs: Or if if they excluded us out of
a respect to the publik peace, the Government has still the same reason
against them.

But we shall better understand the Party, from their own words, wherein we
shall first take a short view of their Opinions in matter of Fatith and
Religion. Secondly, How they stand affected, one party to another: And thirdly,
Their positions and practices, with Relation to the Civil Government.

As to their Opinions, first, see some Extravagances of the Sectaries, Cited by
a Presbyterian, out of their own Writings, in Edwards's Gangrena, from p. 18.
to 27.

They say that the Scriptures are insufficient and uncertain. God the Author of
Sin, even of the ^^^^ness it self* That the Magistrate ought not to punish any
man for denying of a God, if his Conscience ^^ so persuaded. That every
Creature is God, an Efflux only from God, and shall return to him: That there
is but O^e Person in the Divine Nature. That the least Truth is of more worth
than Jesus Christ himself. That the Doctrine of Repentance is a Soul-destroying
Doctrine. That it is as possible for Christ himself to Sin, as for a Child of
God to Sin. That the Moral Law is of no use at all to Beli^vers. That Pe^ers
trouble, after the denial of his M^ster; issued only from the weakness of his
Faith. That Infants rise not again. Nay, he speaks of a Sectary pleading for a
Toleration of W^tches, with s^veral abominable Instances. And he charges the
Nursery and Increase of them upon the Presbyterians; and that it was their
Indulgence, not Episcopal connivance that wrought our Mischief in that kind.
They agree (says he) with J^lian the Apostate, Libertines, Athiests, Unclean,
Incestuous, Drunk^rds, Sabbath Breakers, Liars, Jugglers, Slanderers, proud and
boasting, insolent, outrageous, Hypocritical, false.

The S^ctaries on the other hand call the Assembly, Antichristian, Romish,
Bloody, Plagues and Pests the Kingdom, Baals Priests, Southsayers: The
Pre^byterian Government a Limb of Antichrist, Tyrannical, Lordly, an Egyptian
Bondage. An Anabaptist said, He hoped to see Heaven and Earth on fire, before
Presbytery should be settled; and to see it trodden under foot, as the Bishops.
Ster^y himself says, The Seed of God has two Capital Enemies, Romish Papacy,
and the Scotch Presbytery. See what the Presbyterians say now to Toleration.

It is much (says the London Ministers Letter to the Assembly,) Jan. 1. 45.
that our Brethren should separate from the Church, but that they should
endeavor to get a Warrant to authorize their Separation from it; and to have
Liberty (by drawing Members out of it) to weaken and diminish it, till (so far
as lies in them) they have brought it to nothing. This we think to be plainly
unlawful.

And then the Harmony of the Lancashire Ministers, p. 12. Toleration would be
the putting the Sword in a mad man's hand, a proclaiming Liberty to the Wolves,
to come into Christ's Flock, to prey upon his Lambs.

Toleration m^kes the Scripture a Nose of Wax; a Rule of Faith to all
Religions. And this is the great Rabby of the party. Rutherfords free Disp. p.
360.

Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration of all, or any Religion, is so
prodigious an Impiety, that this Religious Parliament cannot but abhor the very
naming of it. Baileys Disswasive Epist. Ded. 1645.

It is unreasonable (says the Defender of the London Ministers Letter to the
Assembly, Anti-toleration, p. 16) that Indep^ndents should desire that
Toleration of Presbyters, which they would not give to Presbyters.

Let it be observed from hence, that these people do first demand of the
Government that Liberty which they deny to one another. And Secondly, That they
pretend to do it upon Conscience, and yet hold the thing it self to be
absolutely unlawful; so that they justify the Conscience of our denying it to
them, by the Conscience of their refusing it to others. And the only way to
evade this, is to discover all by confessing, that though they now beg a
Toleration from the Government, yet if they get power in their hands, they will
make a Conscience again (as they did before) of allowing any freedom to the
Government.

It is a nlear case, that their demands are unwarrantable, impracticable,
unreasonable, and not grounded upon Conscience, but directly in opposition to
it; as we have it under their own hands.

Let us try now if we can discover what the design is, since it appears
manifestly what it is not; and that, not only from the reason of the thing, but
from their own deeds and writings; and those matters also, and positions,
expounded by practice.

One thing remarkable is this; That they have been still fishing in troubled
Waters, and taking advantage of all D^stresses, and necessities of the
Government. Did not Cartwright, Coppinger, Arthington and Hacket, take their
time for that exeerable Conspiracy against Q. Elizabeth, when she was just upon
the very point of securing the reformed Religion against the Power and Church
of Rome? Did not the Sectaries in 1641. take the same advantage against the
late King, when his thoughts were wholly taken up about suppressing the Irish
Rebellion? And did not the latter Scotch Tumults take the same advantage of his
Majesty's being under many troublesome Circumstances about the Plot; and when
the peoples minds were prepared to take ill Impressions in the matter of
Government? So that the very timeing of this revived Clamor for Liberty of
Conscience, looks suspiciously; and the more, because their Meetings here have
of late been very little interrupted.

To run through those pestilent principles, which the Heads of the Sectaries
have published in their own names, were endless, Wherefore I shall content my
self with some of their general positions, and refer the Reader to Husbands
Collections, or the Authors themselves for the rest; as Milton, Goodwin,
Rutherford, and a hundred more.

They make the Lords and Commons the supreme Power; nay, the people themselves
in some cases; Princes, they say, may be deposed and put to death: They
distinguish betwixt the Kings person and his authority, the Letter of the Law,
and the Equity of it; and appeal from the written Law to the Law of Nature; and
according to these maxims they govern their proceedings.

But will you see now the price of all our Blood, and Confusion?

Upon their Petition to his Majesty for a Reformation of the Liturgy, the King
most graciously issued out a Commission for a Review of the Book of Common
Prayer: An equal number of learned Divines, both Episcopal and Presbyterian
were appointed to meet about it, and to agree upon such Alterations as should
be thought most necessary. His Majesty earnestly desiring that the Ministers
would not totally lay aside the Book of Common Prayer, but read those parts
against which there could be no Exception. Now instead of most necessary
Alterations, and those to be agreed upon by both Parties, they published a new
Liturgy of their own, under the Title of the Reformation of the Liturgy, (which
is indeed the Abolition of it.) I Will give ye only a taste of some of their
important scruples that are cast into the balance, against the Unity of the
Church, and the Peace of the Kingdom: They turn Wedded Wife into Married: Do
thou Believe into Do you Believe; and all this I steadfastly Believe, into this
I do unfeignedly Believe.

Let us now suppose these people had their Askings: Let any man but show me
from the Minority of K. James, to this hour, where they were not the more
violent and importune upon yielding (even to the hazard of a downright
Rebellion) and the Author shall give any man his Head, for the President: Did
not the Assembly in 1578. impose upon the Parliament in Scotland, fall foul
upon the Archbishop of Glasgow, and the whole Order? pass a Decree against
their votes in Parliament, command them to renounce their Temporal Titles, and
Civil Jurisdiction, and set their Quarriers at work for the demolishing of
Glasgow Cathedral? (which had been done too, if the Tradesmen had not by force
prevented it.) And did they not grow bolder and bolder upon the Kings Lenity;
and command the Bishops, upon pain of Excommunication, not to officiate as
Pastors, without License from the General Assembly; and likewise order the
Patrimony of the Church to be disposed of as they should see meet? And did they
not after that, make a violent and treasonous Seizure of the King at Ruthven,
and justify it when they had done? And so on by degrees, till his Majesty was
forced, by a Tumult at Edenbourgh, in 1596. and the Ministers Bond of
Confederacy immediately upon it, to a Resolution of rigor and severity; which
(as Spottswood observes) gave him more quiet and security for the future.

His Majesty was no sooner entered upon the Government of England, but he was
assaulted in 1604. with the same sort of people, and at a Conference at Hampton
Court, this Qustion was put, How far an Ordinance of the Church was binding,
without offense to Christian Liberty? Whereupon the King gave this short
Answer, Let Us have no more of these Questions, but conform at your peril. So
that they gave him no further trouble upon that subject. And this was Queen
Elizabeth's case too, to the hazard both of her Life and Government; till by
that severe Act against them, of the Thirty fifth of her Reign, she gave her
self ease for the remainder of her Life.

What did the late King gain by his Indulgence to the Scots in 1637. but
farther Indignities and Contempt? First, the Service Book and Canons were their
Grievance; then the Five Articles of Perth, though established both by the
General Assembly and, Parliament; The High Commission next and then the Bishops
Session in Civil Judicatories. His Majesty gratifie^ them in every point:
Insomuch, that they had nothing further to complain of, but that the King would
not abolish Episcopacy, and admit the Authority of their Lay Elders; upon which
point they brake out into an open Rebelion. After this, upon the Interview of
the two Armies at Berwick (when the King had them absolutely at his mercy) upon
their Supplication for a Treaty, he trusted them again, and concluded upon a
Pacification; of which, the Covenanters did not keep so much as one A^ticle.

Upon his Majesty's return to London, he passes the Triennial Bill; abolishes
the Star Chamber and High Commissi^n-Court; passes an Act for the Continuance
of the Parliament; and in fine, denis them nothing but his Crown and his Blood,
and then by virtue of what he had given them already, they took away the rest,
and stripped him of his Friends, his Authority, his Revenue, and his Life.

They minister great cause of suspicion in their very style and scruples: Why
do they run so much upon ambiguities? As the settling of Religion in its due
latitude; a due and necessary Reformation; found Relief; Principles congruous
to a National Settlement; the Kings Just Rights; Importance of Interests;
Stated Order in the Church, etc. What is all this, but a jumbling together of
so many Amusements, to pass a colorable pretense upon the people? And it
signifies just nothing, but what Construction they shall think fit to allow it.
If they would offer any pertinent, intelligible and practicable Proposition;
and say, what Injunctions they would have abated; what Parties they would
recommend for these qualifications; where to find them, and who shall judge of
them. If they would state their Demands, and say, This is all we ask; and then
rest there: If, 28 they plead for all Dissenters, they would produce some
common Instrument, or Commission, to show that they are auth^riz'd by all to
solicit in their Names, and to treat upon such or such Points; and to go no
further, the business might be brought yet to some rational issue.

As their Style is exceeding dark and mysterious, so are their Scruples of an
extraordinary Quality too. They cannot kneel at the Sacrament, but they can
hold up their hands at the Covenant; they can dispense with the Oath of
Allegiance, and yet make a scruple of disclaiming the Solemn League: They can
swallow a Schism (or worse) and yet a Ceremony choaks them. Add to all this;
many of those very persons that promoted our former Troubles, this very way,
are now at work again upon the same pretension; and may, without breach of
Charity, be suspected to have the same design, and to remain in a state of
impenitency, if they have not manifested their Repentance by some open
Recantation: For (according to the Casuists) public sins require public
confessions.

It is an ill sign too, for a man to leap upon the sudden, from matter of
Conscience to Reason of State; and in the same breath, of a petitioner to
become a reformer. It would seem a strange thing, for a man to request a
special favor from the Master of a Family, and at the same time to put
affronts upon his Domestics, and to tell him that his Servants were all of
them a pack of Rascals; which is not much from the point in hand.

We have had abundance of Advice to the Freeholders of England, toward the
Choice of this next Parliament; as Sober and seasonable Quaeries, Englands
great Interest, the Freeholders Choice, and twenty more; and all of them
agreeing in the general Heads one with another: They tell us who are fit to be
chosen, and who not.

The former such as will remove and bring to Justice evil Counselors, corrupt
and arbitrary Ministers of State; detect and punish the Pensioners of the
former Parliament in the face of the Kingdom, and they must choose such as will
secure us from Slavery.

The people are directed on the other side, not to choose a man that has been
reputed a Pentioner, no Court-Officer, or whose Employment is durante been
placito; no ambitious men, or Non-residents, that live here in Town, and seek
Honor and preferments above.

This is the Counsel of Englands grand Interest: And methinks, in these
Qualifications, there is both too much, and too little. As to the point of Evil
Counselors, corrupt Ministers and Pensioners, he should have done well to have
advi'sd them all manner of caution and circumspection, for fear of mistaking
their Men. This was the way that brought the Earl of Strafford, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury to their Ends. under the notion of evil Counselors
too, though perhaps the most necessary Instruments that ever this Nation
enjoyed, for the Common Good both of King and people. So that as it is a great
Service to bring corrupt Ministers to public Justice, it is yet a lewd method
to make the Rabble the Executioners, and to punish Maladministration by
Sedition: For in this case the good and the bad fall indifferently without
distinction; and instead of drawing here and there a piece of rotten Timber
toward a Reparation, they fall foul upon the main pillars and supporters of the
House; so that all falls into ruins. And then the mark of a Reputed Pensioner
goes a little too far; for it lies in the power of two or three malevolent
Tongues to make any man so. They that made the last King a reputed Papist,
shall much more easily make any of his Majesty's Subjects pass for reputed
Pensioners.

The total Exclusion of all Court-Officers, or Bene-placito-men, is yet worse:
For this sets up a direct Opposition betwixt the King and his people; as who
should say, Trust no body that wears any Token of the Kings favor. And the
same reason disables him as well to any other Trust whatsoever: So that the
Kings Countenance is a kind of Incapacity. And it is the same thing with those
he calls Ambitious Men; as if any Application to his Majesty made a man unfit
for the Service of his Country. He should have done well to have warned them
against the known Enemies of the Government, rather then the suspected Servants
of the King.

The Freeholders Choice is a very Martin Mar-Prelate. His Language against the
Clergy is too course for an honest man to repeat after him, but he has ranged
them in good Company; for he says that they lay out themselves, to accommodate
their Masters with the veriest Villains that can be picked up in all the
Country; that so we may fall into the hands again of as treacherous and lewd a
Parliament as the Wisdom of God, and Folly of Man has most miraculously freed
us from. Methinks some of the Members of that Parliament should concern
themselves to call for Justice upon so foul a Scandal.

The Author of the Seasonable Quaeries does not only recommend the same
Cautions with the rest, but calls his Majesty himself to Shrift, and puts the
Question, whether Prorogation and Dissolution of Parliaments, at such a time as
this, does not fill the hearts of Protestant Subjects with evident fears of
destruction?

And Secondly (says he) Whether it be not high time for all the Protestants in
England, to resolve as one man, that they will it and by, and maintain the
Power and Privileges of Parliament, together with the Power and Just Rights of
the King, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, so as the One may not entrench
upon the Other.

The former Exp^^^^^ation upon the Reason of the Kings Proceedings, would have
been more taken notice of perhaps, if it had not been followed with one of the
most audacious Challenges that this Licentious season has produced; for the
meaning of it is, to encourage a direct Rising, as if the King and the
Parliament were going together by the Ears, (forgive the Expression) and the
people to interpose, to see fair play.

This is the very Trace of the Old Covenant: They must resolve to maintain no
body knows what on the one side; (for the Privileges of Parliament are past
finding out:) But then they are to stand by the King, on the other side, with a
Limitati^n; only in his Just Rights, and of those Bounds, they themselves are
to be the Judges. This Epithete was applied to the late Kings Case, by those
very men that cut off his Head.

The Author of Englands great Interest, having directed the good people what
persons to choose for the ensuing Parliament, and what not. His next work is to
instruct them in the Know^edge of their Powers, which he divides into three
Rights or Fundamentals. The First is Property, that is, a Right and Title to
their own Lives, Liberties, and Estates. For the Law (he says) is Vmpire
between King, Lords, and Common^; and the Right and Property is one in kind,
through all Degrees and Qualities in the Kingdom. Mark that.

Way does he not say that the King is Vmpire betwixt King, Lords and Commons,
as wel^ a^ that the Law is so? For the Law is only the Kings Pleasure made
known; and the whole force and authority of it, is but an Emanation from
Sovereign Power. And then for his Three Fundamentals: As I am a Commoner of
England my self, I should be loath to lose any Right of an English man; and yet
as I am a loyal subject also, I should be as unwilling to encroach upon the
Privileges of the Crown. I do not know what he means by his one in Kind; with
the emphasis of Mark that upon it. If it be, that the people have as much right
to their Lives, Liberties, and Estates, as the King himself has; though it be
true in some sense, it will not hold yet, as he would have it understood. For
the people may forfeit their Lives, Liberties and Estates but the King cannot
forfeit his: Wherefore Mark that too.

His Second Fundamental is Legislation: Or the Power of making Laws; for no Law
can be made or abrogated (he says) in England without them.

It is not heartily done, to call that the very Act of Legislation, which is
only consultive and preparative toward it. The making of Laws, is a peculiar
and incommunicable Prerogative of Sovereignty; so that to place the legislative
power in the Commons, is to make them Supreme; and to set a King of England
once more at the Commons Bar. Beside that, his Inference is as inconsequent, as
his Assertion is dangerous. As if a Law must necessarily be made by them,
because it cannot be made or abrogated without them. Does he that furnishes the
Ingredients, therefore make the Medicine, because the Medicine cannot be made
without the Ingredients? What signifies the form of an Instrument to the
passing of an Authority or Obligation, without signing and sealing? Yet the one
cannot be done without the other. Does the Council that draws the Conveyance
pass away the Estate; because the Act could not have been good without him? And
again, the Law in this case, is no other then a Promise under the Kings Hand
past to the people, and partakes of the nature of other promises. It was made
by the Promiser, and cannot be discharged without the Consent of those to whom
it was promised,

His third Fundamental is Executive, and holds proportion with the other two,
in order to complete both their Freedom and Security; and that is their share
(as he says) in the Judicatory Power; in the Execution and Application of those
Laws that they agree to be made.

A Judicatory Power without authority to Minister an Oath, is to me, I must
confess, a new thing: And now for the word agree; though it may be pertinent
enough to his purpose (for there needs no more to the undoing of the most
regular Government upon the face of the Earth, then first to turn the peoples
hearts against it, and then to possess them that they have a Legal Remedy in
their own hands.) Yet that word (I say) in this place, is very improper? for it
is but a Request presented to his Majesty for his Approbation. The Request or
Bill is, no doubt, agreed upon; but it were an unco^th kind of expression for a
Petitioner to say, that he does agree that his Petition shall be granted.

The Business is fairly pushed already: but the Publisher of a pretended Speech
lately printed carries it a step further. If a Prince (says he) be born to a
Kingdom, who is either Lunatique, or otherwise disabled to do the Kingdom any
good, shall not the Subjects, in this case, proceed to choose another, who may
preserve the Kingdom, when otherwise it must of necessity perish? as lately in
the case of Portugal, they chose another to succeed, because of the Disability
of the former.

This is in plain terms a Deposing principle: For if a King may be removed, in
such case of Disability, the people being made Judges of the Case, it is but
their saying that he is not fit to govern, and the work is done.

There is a Sheet printed under the Title of A Plea, etc. that has more brains
and art in it than ordinary. He says that a King is not for his own but his
Subjects sakes only; and that we have* in truth, rather Title, etc. to Him,
then He to Us: Adding, that when Kings themselves be ill ones, God not only
approves of their removal, but even himself does it: This he supports upon
Texts extremely misapplied,

Let it be agreed now that a Prince is rather constituted for the good of the
people, then the people for the advantage of the Prince. But let it be granted
also on the other side, that Providence has made Order so necessary to the
well-being of mankind, that Tyranry it self is yet more tolerable than either
Anarchy or Sedition: So that in the matter of Obedience to Superiors, we find
our convenience even in our Duty. He seems to infer, that because God himself
does many times remove ill Kings, that therefore he approves of our doing so
too. But first, we are not to draw Gods extraordinary ways into precedent. By
the same Rule, plunder was formerly justified upon a Scriptural Commission for
the spoiling of the Egyptians. Secondly, The very admittance, that an ill King
may be removed, makes way to the destruction of a good one; for it is but saying
he is so, to make him so, and it leaves him barely at the mercy of the people:
And this is not all neither, for it turns up the very root of Government, and
casts humane Affairs into a circulation of confusion. The two Houses deposed
the King; the Commons the Lords; the Multitude they deposed the Commons; and
all upon the same Charge of Misdemeanour. So that the Trustee being still
accomptable to those that entrusted him, the Order of Government is inverted,
and the last Appeal lodged in the Rabble. It is a strange thing that our
Protestant Dissenters should so unanimously agree in their methods of opposing
Authority, and yet keep at so great a distance in all things else; for how
scrupulous soever they may may seem to be in set forms of Devotion, they are
the strictest people in the world, in the observance of a set form of Wrangling
with the Government: For an Outcry of persecution dos as naturally follow a
Plea for Liberty, as one foot follows another. Does not such a day as this
(says our Quaerist) loudly call for Repentance that Protestants have been
persecuting each other; and for Unity in affection among all protestant
Subjects, whether conforming or dissenting in some lesser points; and that as
brethren they unite in such a Combination of conjunction, as was in Q.
Elizabeth's time, with good success to defend the Crown, Religion and Kingdom,
against the common Enemy of Mankind? Since the persecution of this Age lies so
heavy upon him, and that nothing will serve his tu^n, but the uniting of
Protestants in such a Combination as was in the days of Q. Elizabeth, it will
not be amiss to look a little into the Behavior of the protestant Dissenters
in those days, and the Indulgence which they received fom that Gracious
Princess.

The Non-conformists that fled in Q. Mary's time to Frankfort, and went off
from the English reformed Catholics there to the protestant Dissenters at
Geneva, these Non-conformists (I say) returned for England upon Q. Elizabeth's
coming to the Crown, and for the first ten years of her Reign, p^y'd her so
hard with Libels, Clamours and seditious Consultations, that betwixt the
Papists on the one hand, and the Protestant Dissenters one the other, she had
much a do to secure the peace of her Government: And not being in condition to
venture upon any course rigor or severity, the Protestant Dissenters in the
14th, year of her Reign, erected a Model of their own: called it the Church,
libelled the Queen, Parliament and Lords, and afterward entered into a formal
Conspiracy against her Majesty and Council; which being detected, some were
executed, and others imprisoned: So that, at last, by one severe Law of the
35th. of her Reign, she put an end to that Confederacy,

Here was the Unity of the Combination our Pamphleter speaks of; and we will give
ye now the provision it self that did the business, with the prescribed form of
their Submission. The penalties were Imprisonment, without Bail or Main-prize,
for being present at unlawful Conventicles. The Offender to be discharged if
within three months be made his open Submission and Acknowledgment, in the Form
by the said Statute appointed. But in case of Recusancy, to conform within that
time, he was required to abjure the Realm; and in case of refusing to abjure,
or of not departing, within a limited time, or of returning without License, to
be proceeded against ^s a Felon, without Benefit of Clergy. Here follows the
Form of Submission.

I A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge that I have grievously offended God,
in contemning her Majesty's lawful Covernment, and Authority, by absenting my
self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to the godly Laws
and Statutes of this Realm; and in using and frequenting disordered and
unlawful Conventicles and Assemblies, under the pretense and color of Exercise
of Religion: And I am heartily sorry for the same, etc.

You see here what Quarter was both given and taken under Q. Elizabeth, which
shows that the Quaerist was little read in History, to appeal to the practices
of those times, either for the Innocence of the party, or the forbearance of
them. But hear what Englands Interest says to this matter.

Oh! lay to heart (says he) the grievous Spoils and Ruins that have been laid
upon your harmless Neighbors for near these twenty years, Sixty pounds
distrain'd for Twelve. Two hundred for Sixty:

The Flocks taken out of the Fold; the Herd from the Stall: Not a Cow left to
give Milk to the Orphans, nor a Bed for the Widow to lie on: Whole Barns of
Corn swept away, and not a penny returned. And all this for worshipping God
according to their Conscience. If you (says he to the Freeholders) will either
compel or persecute your selves, or choose such as do, you hate the Papists, but
not Popery.

This is so errant a Cant of Begging, as if the Protestant Dissenters had
served their Trade in Moorfields; and it runs too, in the very tone and style
of their petitions and admonitions to Q. Elizabeth, and so down by a clear
Succession to this instant. There were Citations, Degradings, and
Deprivavations; some in the Marshalseas, some in the White-Lyon, some in the
Gatehouse at Westminster, others in the Counter, or in the Clink, or in
Bridewell, or in Newgate. How many good men's deaths have the Bishops been the
cause of? How many have they driven to leave their Ministry, and live by
Physic? Men have been miserably handled with Revilings, Imprisonments,
Banishments, etc. If this persecution be not provided for, great trouble will
come of it.

Under K. James, no man (they said) could be assured of his Lands or Life. And
under the late King, how were these poor people oppressed by Fines,
Imprisonments, Stigmatizings, Deprivations, suspensions, excommunicated,
outlawed beggared, proceeded against with punishments p^cuniary and corporeal;
nay, death it self: And now they are at the same lock again.

But what are these people (for the love of God) that are thus miserably used
all this while? Why truly (if we may take their own words for it under Q.
Elizabeth they were Loyal Subjects, and Gods faithful servants; most worthy,
faithful, and painful Ministers, learned and godly, unreproveable before all
men; the Strength of the Land, and the Sinew of her Majesty's Government. Under
K. James, they were men of Conscience, preservers of the Churches Right, and
asserters of the Holy Discipline. Under the late King, they took up the Titles
of men of tender Consciences, well-affected; men that had the power of
Godliness, painful, laborious preachers of the Word; faithful in their
Generation, and men zealous in the defense of the Protestant Religion, the
Privileges of Parliament, and of his Majesty in his Just Rights. And in our
days, they call themselves Lovers of God, Ordinances, and enemies of all humane
Inventions; a people zealous of Religion; sound in the Faith, intelligent,
sober, numerous, peaceable, orthodox: The Ceremonies they look upon as an
Excess; they dissent from the outward Order of Worship, (for the Conscience
will interpose in the Dictates and Injunctions of men, in Divine Worship) all
these people agreeing in this common Complaint, that they are persecuted for
worshipping according to Conscience. Whether they do well or ill; whether they
speak true or false; whether they have Reason on their side or not, in these
Remonstrances let the Reader judge.

Let it be first observed, that the Author dates this persecution from his
Majesty's Return; near these 20 years (he say^) ^s if there had never been any
such thing before; whereas from the time of Q. Elizabeth's Act abovementioned,
to the very Act of Uniformity, (the late times excepted) ^he Church was never
without a legal provision for the preventing and suppressing of Conventicles;
and the much Law more rigorously put in execution. Beside that, as they were
more or less indulged, the N^tion was still more or less at quiet. Observe
again, that there is no notice taken of the Liberty of the late times, or the
deplorable Effects of that License, though the Presbyterians little F^nger was
heavier then the Loins of the Bishops, in the point of Restraint, as we have
showed already, from the mouths of the other Sectaries. But they are too
prudent to fall foul one upon another, when their business is to join in a
Consederate party against the Government: so that they are now One and All, and
every separate Opinion sticles for all the rest: And then comes on the Cry of
the O^phans and Widows against the cruelty of the Oppressor: Sixty pouunds
distrain'd for twelve; Two hundred for Sixty, etc. Methinks the Plaintiff
should have been so ingenuous, as to have reflected upon the persecu^ions that
other men suffered even from these people that now complain of a persecution;
and that they suff^red for worshipping according to their Consciences too, and
they had not only Religion on their side, but Law also; whereas the other
founded a Rebellion upon a pretended scruple of Religion, and opposed the Rules
of Christianity and Civil Authority, both in one: But it is a persecution to
them, to be kept from persecuting.

Neither does this Clamor keep it self within the bounds of spiritual matters,
but breaks in upon the Civil Administration, and alarms the multitude with the
terrible apprehensions likewise of Tyranny and Slavery. Wherefore we are
enforced to oppose the sensible Experiment of an actual Tyranny and slavery to
the artificial and imaginary fears of it; to leave all mortals without excuse,
that shall read these plain and well-meaning Papers, if ever they should fall
into the same mistakes again.

The taking away of men's Goods and Liberties, the forcing of their Consciences,
and tying them up to an implicit Obedience to the Decrees of Government, are
terrbile things, I must confess: But yet much worse sure, where they run
directly against the Stream of a received Authority and Usage, then where the
so doing is warranted by known Laws and uninterrupted Practice.

There are several sorts of persecution: A persecution in matter of Conscience,
Good Name, Propriety of Goods and Estate; freedom of person, and that is the
most odious aggravation of persecution, when it is set up in defiance of a
public Law, and introduced under a color of kindness to all these Interests.
We will be as short in these particulars as we can, and leave the Reader to say
where the Odium of the Persecution lies.

First, to the point of Conscience. It was the judgment of the late Royalists,
that they were obliged in conscience and duty, to pay Obedience to the Laws,
both civil and ecclesiastical; and with the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes,
to endeavor the preservation both of the Church and State. The Protestant
Dissenters pretended the same respect for the King and Church, with the Royal
party: And when by popular pretexts they had ingra^iated themselves with the
multitude, they played their Game the contrary way, and took up Arms against the
Government, which they swore to defend. Now see at what a rate they treated,
not only the Friends of the Government, but the Government it self.

There were a hundred and fifteen Ministers ejected, within the Bills of
Mortality; beside Paul's and Westminster; and in proportion all the Nation over,
for refusing to comply with the Schism; and they were not so much as suffered
to take the Employment of either a Schoolmaster or a Chaplain, but under heavy
penalty. Several of our Divines were choked up, and poisoned in Peter-House,
and other Goals, either for worshipping according to their Consciences, or
refusing to act against them. No man admitted to compound, or so much as live
in the Parliaments Quarters, without swearing. Men were sequestered for not
joining in the Rebellion; for assisting the King according to the Law, and for
not Covenanting, though in express Contradiction to the Oath of Allegiance.
Upon the Abolition of the Common Prayer, severe penalties imposed upon any man
that should use it; and their own Directory imposed upon a Forfeiture too; nay,
they would not allow the King himself, in his Distresses, the Comfort of any of
his own Chaplains, nor so much as the benefit of a Common Prayer Book: And at
Fife in Scotland, there was an Oath given at the Communion, not to ta^e the
Kings Oath, nor any other then their own* -- Was all this an Invasion of the
Liberty of Conscience or not?

Touching a persecution now upon the point of Good name: Though the whole
course of the History is full of virulent and unchristian Reflections, I will
only refer my self to that Diabolical Libel of Whites Centuries of scandalous
Ministers; wherein, without any regard to truth or modesty, they have exposed
so many reverend Names to Infamy and Dishonor. In one word; After they had
represented the King himself for a Tyrant, and an Idolater, it was but
Consonant that they should cast Reproaches upon his Party.

Touching the Freedom of our Persons and Estates, the whole course of the late
War, was but one ^^ntinued Usurpation upon our Rights to both: Noble men's
Houses turned to Prisons, and peo^^e committed, without knowing either their
Accusers, or their Offense: Some clapped on Ship-^ar^ to be transported, no body
knew whither; and others sold into Plantations for Slaves. To (...) nothing of
those that fell by the Sword, in the Defense of their Country; or otherwise
past the hand of the Executioner, in justification of their Religion and
Allegiance. There was no taking of Threescore pounds for Twelve, in these days;
nor of Two hundred for Sixty, But they took All for nothing; and there was no
Living among them for any Honest man, that would not prostitute his Conscience.
And who are they now, but either the very persons, or men however of these very
Principles, that acted these Outrages upon Us, and yet now complain of being
persecuted themselves? When they startle the Common people with the Notions of
Cruelty and Slavery, as a matter now in prospect; methinks they should blush at
the memory, and upon the Guilt of those real Calamities which we have both seen
and felt, wherein our Blessed Sovereign had yet a greater share then any of his
Subjects.

They abolished Kingly Government; sold the Crown Lands; imprisoned and
murdered the King; made it Treason to deny the Supremacy of the Commons;
turned our Churches into Stables; burnt our Communion-Tables, and profaned the
very Ashes of the Dead. Let but any man read Scobels Acts, and say, if the
English were not in those times, and under these Protestant Dissenters, the
most despicable slaves in nature. See their Tax upon the Fifth and Twentieth
part, their Excises upon Excise; their Assessments for the Maintenance of the
Army, and their monthly Taxes for the same end. Ninety thousand pounds;
Sixscore thousand pounds, Sixty thousand pounds, Sequestrations, seizing of
peoples Rents and Debts, appropriating to themselves the profits of Tonnage and
Poundage, and Compositions for Wards, Authorizing the breaking open of Locks,
and Examining upon Oath for discovery of Delinquents, Money and Estates. All
this is as well known, as the very fact of the War it self; and if we have a
mind to lie down under the same Bondage again, let us believe the Stories of
Arbitrary Government and Superstition, that these people tell us of, and they
shall just so help us out of it again, as they did before.

There should be something further said to their pretense of being persecuted
for Religion; but I find little to be added to what is already delivered. The
Law stands still: They press upon the Law, and yet cry out, that the Law
persecutes them. We may lay down this, I think, for a Maxim; That whosoever
tells us that he makes a Conscience of complying with the Discipline of the
Church, and yet manifestly makes none at all, of undermining, nay and of
blowing up the whole frame of the Government, that man is most undoubtedly an
Hypocrite.

To conclude: What Is the meaning of this Remonstrating to the people? They are
no Judges of the Controversy: But they do well however, in a Cause, where
Force does a great deal more than Argument, to make their application to the
multitude, with whom clamor and pretense are of more value than modesty and
reason. It is a most ridiculous contradiction to common sense, to believe these
men to be in earnest; for if they were, they would never defame the Government,
at the same time that they beg a Dispensation from it.

Their Demand is unreasonable, the thing it self only notional and
impracticable. By Liberty of Conscience, they mean a Freedom of doing what they
please, which necessarily implies a total Dissolution of the Laws. They offer
it only a^ a Decoy to the people; and when they have gained compassion to
themselves (like beggars that move pity by showing Ulcers of their own making)
their next business is to draw Contempts upon the Government, and after that,
to enter without more ado, upon the great Work of Reformation. Let me do this
Right however to the Independents: I do not find that party ^o have given the
Government any trouble since his Majesty's Return; but that they have kept
themselves clear of all these late Broils: And if Authority had the same sense
of them, with the Author of this Pamphlet, they would be found both in their
Principles and in their Manners, to have the most reasonable Claim of all sorts
of Dissenters, to a favorable allowance from the Government. God in his mercy
open our Eyes, that we may know our Friends from our Enemies.

THE END.

