THE MAIDENHEAD LOST BY Moonlight: OR THE ADVENTURE OF THE MEADOW.

Written by JOSEPH KEPPLE.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhil. MDCLXXII.

TO THE LADIES.
YOU have in this Romance in Querpo (although I believe having read it, you
will allow it a better Title, and at least, swear it is pity it was not True)
the perfect Representation of the state of Innocence; I don't mean the time
when our first Parents, for want of Drapers, made use of Leaves, but the Age
that not long after followed; in which Love, which is now made a piece of Art,
was Natural; when Men's Affections were not biased with the Desire of a great
Estate, and without huge heaps of Gold were contented with the innocent
lightness of their Mistresses, I mean that Air, Mine and Gayety they esteemed,
and did not as we do, censure their sprightly Gestures, as if Mirth and Honesty
were inconsistent. Then how would they have laughed to hear of a Lady, that
made her Servant follow the Sent two whole Years, when perhaps she is more in
love with the Gallant, than he with her, who in his apish Apprentiship (for he
must be a Slave to her Will) has spent more Money in the Mulberry Garden, and
the Parks, than would build an Hospital; has seen more Plays than are good, and
been acquainted with all the Coach-men in Town; whose Estate at last being
spent Victoria, Victoria, the Day's our own, he at last has vanquished his
Mistresses Affections, is married, and with her Portion is just flushed for the
visit of another Lady; and then who can blame our Prophetic Gentlewomen? They
are like to enjoy little Pleasure, after the Man in black has conjured them
together, except to tell how many Rhenish-wine Glasses have been drank in
drinking her Health, by the Good Man her Husband, whow is now perhaps, lest he
should forget his Courtship, paying his Devoirs to new Madam; I know the Ladies
having read it (But not for the good of the Bookseller, let us contrive how
that may be; why, it is but feeing the Chambermaid to pretend Ignorance, and
get the Foot Boy-to buy her the new Book of the Maid that was so Blind as to
Lose her self in a Moon shine Night, and then convey it to her Lady, who will
by the Title, expect it should be horrible Bawdy, when a starched Puritan I
think would not groan in Spirit to be called the Owner of it) I say the Ladies
that read it will be cursed angry with me, that Myrtilla was so easily gained,
and that she did not, like our foolish Females, oppose, what she most desired.
For the first I dare oppose her Constancy to any of their Ladyships; and for
the other, you shall see I am so much a Gentleman, as to help a young Lady over
the Style. I know her Accusers Argument is, that she ought to have taken some
time to try her Servants Affection; but pray direct me to that foolish Fop (and
I Will procure him a Mistress of Clouts, for he deserves no better) who when he
is wooing, will offer to be deficient in his Duty, that will quarrel at an
angry look, and will threaten to bang her if she will not say she loves, which
is as ridiculous to think, as that a lame Beggar should Hector out an Alms. For
my part, I think our Myrtilla is to be commended for her Policy, she does by
this oblige her Lover, and he must belly the shape of a man, and be worse than a
Devil, that will wrong a Lady that so confidently commits her Honor to his
keeping. Well, however the Ladies quarrel at me and Myrtilla, Circe and I shall
be sure to escape with the Chambermaids, their good hearts will only envy a
little her fortune, and it may be say their Prayers every Night, and lie
cross-legg'd in expectation of the like.

It is now fit to tell you why I undertook this harmless piece of Mirth, which
was for this Reason; I saw how well one Story out of the same Author took,
being turned into English, that is out of the incomparable Erycius Puteanus,
and thinking this no way inferior to it in it self, having nothing to do, I
adventured upon the Translation of it. I confess it comes so short of the Pen
of that ingenious person that wrote the other, that fear I have done the witty
Italian an unpardonable Injury in daring to render it so pitifully. But to
excuse him of all those faults my Translation may make him seem guilty of, I
assure you the Clothes are my own; If you ask why I made 'em no better, I
assure you I could not, 'twas done for the aforesaid Reason to avoid idleness,
and then I think I am a little more excusable, than the person that having
nothing to do, went and hired in the Market a Drudgery at the expense of a
great Sum. If I have offended the Ladies, I beg their pardon, and assure them
that I am their

Humble Servant, J. K.

THE MAIDENHEAD LOST BY Moonlight. OR, The Adventure of the Meadow.
MY little Skill in Geography will not let me give you any better Account, then
that in part of the Dominions of the great Comus, dwelt a young Gentleman, by
Name Cherestratus; I shall not trouble my self nor you with a tedious Relation
of his Ancestors, and how many of them were Lord Mayors; but I am something
like a Woman, and now I think, on it cannot but tell you that one of them was
hanged, which I had not done, but that I thought it would not be any
disparagement to him, who was so well accomplished, that his first actions had
quitted the disgrace had they all suffered the like fate; He was not at all
behind hand with the Gallants of these times, either for Learning or Valor,
besides Singing, and composing of Madrigals, which seemed in those days to have
been in great use; for the Ladies being not over coy, were not so great Enemies
to the Progress of Music, as to deny themselves or Servant the pleasure of an
early Serenade, which the next day was rewarded with some signal favor, except
the Lady so courted had been waked out of some pleasant Dream, and then too she
durst hardly chide, for fear left being out with the men (who where chiefly
concerned in the Comedy) her Dream should prove but a Dream, and she should
never be made happy with the Reality. Besides this, he could Dance incomparably
well, by which the Ladies might ghess he had not been under the Surgeon's
hands, nor had much skill in Maiden heads (a thing very much to be deplored in
our days, for our Gallants not finding the first night what they look for (but
they are fools that do) seldom continue Loving above the first Month; and seem
not so much to be married as to keep a Mistress with a little more Ceremony. I
am loath to tell you that with these Perfections he was rich, for I would be
unwilling to put in any thing that might make you suspect the truth of this
Relation, and I am sure you will never believe, that a person so well
accomplished, and of a sufficient Estate should find so cruel a Lady, as not to
admit of his Addresses. But you must consider the time which according to the
best Chronologers was in Tiresias's days, and the women would not deny his
Doctrine, viz. That they take as much pleasure or more in doing the Gentleman a
good turn* than the person that received it, This made the Ladies then,
contrary to what they are now a days, count it an unpardonable Sin to take a
Reward for their mutual pleasures, and this made Cherestratus not prove so
successful in his Amors, as he might have done had he lived now.

But to come to the Story, it was the unhappiness of this incomparable Gallant,
to place his Affection on a Person that disdained his frequent Suits, which she
did with a kind of Reluctance, for she her self nor any body else could tell
why she would not let him pay his Devoirs to her, as well as any other Gallant
of the Town, to whom he was no way inferior. But the mysteries of Love are as
blind as himself, whose hidden Causes can never be understood, and I should
rather be content to be kept in ignorance, then endeavor of a discovery of
Medea's Video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor. However the Lady continued
very obstinate, whether because she was prepossessed with the Love of Hyleus
(Rival only in Love to our noble Cherestratus, for, for other things he could
not stand in competition with him) or for some other Reason, I know not. For I
do not think that the comparing of a Lady's Favors to Shadows always holds
true, for then Hyleus had been as unhappy as our unfortunate Gentleman, who
plied his Business as hotly as Cherestratus could possibly do.

By this time Cherestratus was grown a perfect Votary of Love, which made him
like the rest of that mad Religion abandon the society of men, and endeavoring
as it were to be free from himself, he would often be singing some lamentable
Ditty, of which he had store, but above all, this was the chief: Whatever I
think or whatever I do,
My Phillis is still in my mind:
When in anger I mean not to Phillis to go
My feet of themselves the way find, etc.


Now you will say this is very like a modern Song of ours, but I assure you what
follows, could I but remember it, was not at all like it, and it was only by
chance, that he thought of the first Stave, for it is certain there are common
notions, which are obvious to all that make upon the same Subject. In hitting
on which some have been so happy, that they have wrote whole Poems, and things
of greater bulk so like other men, that if compared, it was not easily told
which was which. But let this pass, sometimes you should have our Inamorato
under the reverend shade of a well spread Oak, beseeching it is senseless
Divinity to give him leave to inscribe the Name of his dear Myrtilla there (for
so was the hard-hearted Lady called,) and then taking out a Pen Knife, which
had never been put to any servile office, as cutting of Corns, or the like, he
ingraves on the bark with flourishing Letters, which searce a Writing Master in
those parts could mend, the Name of his Saint. This done like a mere heathenish
Gentleman he falls down, and worships the work of his own hands; then with a
tedious Harangue he twits the poor Tree in the teeth of the benefit he had done
it, saying that it should be now more famous for bearing the Name of the
incomparable Myrtilla, then it was for Jupiter, and that were not corn yet
found out, he might not at all fear a rape of his ripe Acorns, for as soon as
people came, and saw those Letters, rapt up in admiration, they would forget to
eat, and with fixed eyes gaze till some envious Dryades forced 'em from their
Devotion. Besides these works of supererogation, our Gallant (which was the
only comfort he had) was almost continually walking by the door of the cruel
Lady, whom he seemed to watch or rather guard with as much diligence, as Argus
did Io, or the mortified Ghost of some lately departed Usurer his musty baggs,
but yet he durst not (as being forbid by his Mistress, and fearing to displease
her) hang Garlands at her Posts so artificially woven with Enigmatical Flowers,
that she might there read his fervent affection. This and several other
Love-tricks that the Youths of those times used, to accomplish their wishes, he
was forced to forbear.

His Friends by this began to have small hopes of his Estate, or Legacies; for
his not eating nor drinking any thing, made them suspect he was grown immortal.
Amongst the rest of his acquaintance one Paneutus a Yeoman in the Country some
ten miles of the City where our pining Lover now was, hearing of the deplorable
condition his Friend lay in, and being himself a boon Companion, did not doubt,
but if he could get him into the Country, he could make him quit his humor.
To effect which he wrote this Letter.

Paneutus to his Cherestratus.
SIR,
RAther then suspect your wisdom, I must needs think, that the Lady, which
has brought you into the sad condition I hear you are in, must needs be one of
so divine a Beauty, that she would make Cato in love with her, and convert the
severest Woman-hater. However, I am so far Interess'd in you, as my second
self, that knowing a Remedy, I could not but prescribe it you, which being
followed will either make you happy with your Love, or without it. Your City
Air will something obstruct the Cure, and hinder your Physic from working. If
therefore you will accept of my House, you know you may command

Paneutus.


This Letter in Cherestratus's absence, arrived at his City House, who was just
now gone, as his custom was, to take a view of his Lady's Lodgings, which he
did so eagerly, that he had like to have paid for his gaping. For some of the
Neighbors observing him how narrowly he eyed the House, thinking he had some
bad design, acquainted the old Gentlewoman, Mother to the young Lady; who could
hardly be persuaded from carrying our Gallant before the Justice, to which her
Daughter encouraged her, which went to the very heart of Cherestratus, for she
knew well enough though she seemed ignorant of the cause. But the old Lady,
having no witness to prove any thing, dismissed him, with a severe charge never
to trouble her door again. What remains now to the desperate Lover, but to make
away with himself, and fall a Sacrifice to her disdain? which certainly he had
done, had not his hasty desire to visit Myrtilla's House made him forget to put
on his Shash, that morning. A thousand miserable thoughts offered themselves to
him in his way home, whither he was no sooner come, but throwing himself upon
his Bed, he began to bewail his hard fortune, with tears and sighs. Scarce had
he begun his Soliloquy, but his Servant came into the Room, and presented him
with the Letter; which having read, and taking a turn or two in the Chamber,
the reflecting on his Lady's incivilities made him resolve to accept his
Friend's Offer. To which end settling his Household Affairs, he commands all
things to be made ready for his next days intended Journey, which accordingly
he took, wisely choosing rather to ride a mile about, then to come by
Myrtilla's House, by which he should have passed; being safe come to his
journey's end we will leave him with his merry Friend Paneutus, who entertained
him with all the kindness imaginable, always endeavoring his diversion with
some pastime, as Hawking, Hunting, and the like, and return to Myrtilla, whose
Mother you must know, knowing what care and caution is to be used over young
Maids, made the Daughter grow weary of her Government, counting it too severe,
as depriving her of those Pleasures that young Ladies would willingly accept
of. For her Mother keeping a Dairy would often set her to make Butter and
Cheese for fear of the green Sickness, which he knew how to cure as well as any
Doctor in Europe, had her Mother been as willing as she, whereas she had rather
have been reading of some brisk Romance, or Story of the strange Metamorphosis
of a Maid into a Woman. Besides her Mother began now to oppose Hyleus's Visits,
the only comfort her Daughter had, for she being a pretty while in her Teens,
had the same desire as all her Contemporaries had, to mind nothing but the end
for which they were made, which caused her, encouraged by her Mothers rigor,
to think on some way to obtain her desires, and free her self from the old
Lady's Tyranny, which was very much increased since the death of her Husband,
to whose Education he left his Girl Myrtilla.

Long you may imagine she had not studied before she found out a Plot (for
Women's Wits on such occasions are very quick, and for my part I believe that
had not Jupiter quickly put in Execution his golden Project, Danae for all the
Tower would have found the way to his Embraces:) well a Plot is now found,
which was this, to venture her Maidenhead into Hyleus's hands, rather then
endure the slavery she was in. This she resolved to put in practice, and
contrary to a Woman, kept constant too. But she saw no way of effecting it
without making some body privy to it, and then she thought no one fitter then
her Maid Circe, a loving Girl, and welwisher to Gentlemen, for before she
happened into her Mistresses Service, she waited on a Lady, and like the rest
of that trade, very often chose before her Mistress, otherwise she would not
speak a good word for a Gallant. Myrtilla's Mother being called to a Woman's
Labor, she thought it a very fit time to communicate her Design to her Maid.
Where upon coming down to look for Circe she found her in the Garden tumbling
on a Camomile bed, lying on her back a Star-gazing, but seeing her young
Mistress starting up she quickly quitted that posture, and asked her if she had
any service to command her. Ah Circe (said she sighing) I have, could I but be
assured of thy Secrecy. Of mine, Madam? (replied Circe) why, there be a great
many Gallants in Town, would be Surety for me if need required. Why, it is the
only thing I am good for. Why then (said Myrtilla sitting down with her Maid)
you must needs have observed how my Mother pryes into all my Actions, debarring
me of all I take delight in. I have now thought how to mend this, would thou
consent to aid and assist me. Circe, who now thought she should get an
opportunity to be revenged on her old Mistress for making her rise so early,
not admitting of her Sweet-hearts company, and hindering her from wearing her
best Clothes, and going to Church a Sunday (for let me tell you Preaching is of
very old standing) made all Protestations possible to give her Mistress a good
opinion of her Secrecy, which Myrtilla, being put to a strait, soon believed,
and asked her what she thought of running away with Hyleus, without her Mothers
consent. To which Circe answered, I believe he is an honest Gentleman, and were
it to me I should take his word; now all the difficulty will be to make him
acquainted with the Design. For that too (cries Myrtilla) I Have contrived, and
now my Mother's out of the way thou shall be the happy Messenger to inform my
dear Hyleus of mine Intent. I am certain he will gladly embrace the
opportunity, which I would never have given him, but that I Am confident his
Honor will not let him stain mine. Mad Circe would have taken up her Mistress,
but the short time she had, fearing her Mother's return, would not let Myrtila
admit of her fooling. Take here said she, this Jewel (in which was neatly
wrought in Diamonds) the Story of the Rape of Proserpine by Pluto, (and you
cannot imagine Hyleus so much a fool as not at first sight to understand the
Hieroglyphick) which I have got wrought on purpose. Deliver it to him as a
token of my Affection (dear Creature) and tell him I shall with impatience
expect his coming to fetch me away at Night. Circe, who was not a stranger to
these Love Embassies, willingly applied her self to her Task immediately, took
her Pattins and away to Hyleus, who was not at home just when she came, but the
Servants told her he would be presently. It was the Butlers fortune to see her
first, who seeing her young and handsome, could not but offer the Civility of
the Cellar. Circe was very willing to accept his offer, the weather being hot,
and having come a good way, she took off her Liquor, that the Butler began to
conceive some hopes from the effect of the Drink. But they were scarce
acquainted, when Hyleus came in from Fishing, and presently Circe delivered her
message very diligently, and if I am not very much mistaken, 'twas just thus:
Sir, my Lady, Madam Myrtilla, by me acquaints you she has hitherto endeavored
to find out the means of rewarding your Affection and constancy, which you may
assure your self had been done before this, but that the old Gentlewoman her
Mother has such an aversion to any thing that she has an inclination for, and
seeing there is no way to quit scores with you but by running away, she does
this night intend to make her self happy with your good company, and for a
token of her Love she has sent you this Jewel, and desires you not to fail
waiting for her with a Horse, at her Mother's door, where you may privately
carry away your own Myrtilla.

This unexpected News was extremely surprising to Hyleus, who before was much
fretted with the sport he but just now came from, for his ill success in it.
And is it so then, ye kind Deities (cried he out) that my Myrtilla will thus
freely put her self into my hands. I should never deserve any success in my
Love, should I neglect this happiness. Nor am I one of those foolish foppish
Lovers, who having laid siege to a Ladies Affections, then begin to throw of
all respect, when she begins to throw off all her cruelty, and when she is
coming to answer their expectations. Then turning to Circe, Assure the divine
Myrtylla from me, I will not fail to expect her, and am only sorry that she
ordered nothing more difficult, that she might see my Love in daring to compass
it; take this (continued he giving her a Piece, and then kissing her) and carry
this Kiss to thy Mistress, and assure her again I will not fail.

With this Answer departed Circe, who was got home before she was aware, who
was extremely takes with Hyleus, and thinking on the Token she had for
Myrtilla, whom she now began to envy, and long as much for the forbidden fruit
as her Mistress; coming to Myrtilla, she told her the good success of her
Message, and how effectually it had wrought upon the Heart of Hyleus, who would
not fail two hours after Sunset; this done she entered on the not unpleasant
Panegyric of the expected Gentleman. The ill connection of it, as all other
Chambermaids discourses, makes me I cannot remember it, only this I am sure was
in it, that he was a fine proper Man, handsome Legged, and she would warrant as good
a Woman's Man as any in the Shire. But the old Lady coming home made her
unwillingly break off her Discourse.

Hyleus by this time had got all things in readiness for his Love-adventure,
and setting out with two Servants he had toward the City, which was about
three miles from his House, his great desire of the Prey made him there
something of the soonest, which he had not been, but that Myrtilla and Circe
were at difference; for her Mistress could not persuade her to stay behind, if
she went, although she urged the unlikeliness of their Escape together, however
she would not be contented till she had promised to send one of Hyleus's
Servants for her.

Now we are forced to a small digression, to make you acquainted that the
Country and all it is Sports, with all the persuasions of his Friend Paneutus,
could not make Cherestratus leave off thinking on his Mistress, and it so
happened that his Friend being engaged in some Business, our melancholy Lover
being left to himself, who was now taking a turn in the Garden, began to
recollect his former Affection, one while chiding himself for spending so long
a time in a vain pursuit; another while angry with himself for leaving off now,
when he was so far engaged, and then a few musty Apothegms got in his Head,
viz. Maids say No, and take it, etc. he resolves to renew the Onset, for which
he could not have met with a convenienter time, Paneutus being out of the way,
for had he been at home, he could not have been brought to have parted with
Cherestratus, whose company he took very much delight in: This being resolved
on, he marched to the Stable, and charges the Groom immediately to make ready
his Gelding, under pretense of breathing him that Evening, and indeed so he
did, for in half an hour and two minutes, he reached the door of his dearly
beloved Myrtilla.

Hyleus you must know, thinking he had been too soon, had taken a turn down to
view the Castle, thinking immediately to come back, and indeed it was not long
e're he did, but however this is the critical minute, when out came Myrtilla in
a riding Dress, making signs of dispatch to Cherestratus, who was staring on
the Windows as he used to do, not dreaming what good luck was approaching him;
Make have, make have my Dear (cries the kind Lady) my Mother else will be here
immediately. Our Gallant could scarce believe his Eyes or Ears, and thought
certainly he was a dreaming, for he could never hope for such a happiness as to
have his cruel Lady submit her self to him; but he now began to smell out the
Plot, and without more ado helped the Lady up, who had not as yet discerned the
mistake. Having got his rich Prize behind him, he thought it not safe to tarry
there long, wherefore spurring on his free Beast, away he rides, and met with
no obstacle, for the City gates were kept open for Hyleus, by the appointment
of the Servants, who had bribed the Watchmen (for you may assure your self in
Comus's City, they keep very good Hours, although the Citizens are commonly
scandalized for Revelling, or letting their Wives tarry up longer then
themselves.)

Hyleus was now returned back to Myrtilla's Door, to which he was no sooner
come, but he heard all the House in an uproar; for it seems the old Lady had
mist her Daughter, and began to ghess at the Business, for which she was
schooling Circe most bitterly, who being in her riding Clothes, expecting
Hyleus's man, could not possibly frame any thing like an Excuse, at which her
Mistress was so enraged, she began to seek for something to chastise the poor
Maid. Circe therefore seeing her scarce avoidable Doom, runs out pulling the
door after her, which hindered her Executioners pursuit. Hyleus who had been
all this while in an Agony for his Lady, to think what would become of her,
seeing Circe escaping out so boldly, and taking her for Myrtilla, lights strait
off his Horse to help her up, which done, away he rides. He was no sooner got
through the City Gate, but his Servants that accompanied him thither, came out
to congratulate his good fortune, he was so overjoyed with his Booty, he could
scarce find time to thank them, making homewards with all the speed imaginable.
Whither he was scarce come, when by his order three Maids met them strowing
Flowers all the way home, while others there were busied in providing the Cake
and Sack-Posset; at the Gate stood a proper Gentleman Usher to take down the
Lady, Madam Chambermaid; that done, off leaps Hyleus to salute her, and bid
her welcome to her Own.

And now at last it was that the miserable man perceived his Error, but he was
wonderfully surpised to see Circe, where he expected Myrtilla, he began now to
consider how improbable it was, that she should give her self up to him so
easily, and now concludes it was a Plot of Circe's, to whom he addresses
himself to be cleared of the doubt. And is it thus, base Slut, thou have abused
me, and thy Mistress? was it for your embraces I have taken all this pains and
care? were the numerous Pages about Town, that used to accompany their Masters
to visit my dear Myrtilla, grown so scarce, that I must be made a Property? I
wonder thy impudence could ever harbor such a thought, so prejudicious to thy
Lady, as to think I was reserved for thy tooth; how came thou by this Jewel,
which I am confident belonged once to Myrtilla? For none sure would buy thy
favor at the vast expense of so rich a Diamond? He would have gone on in his
tedious Harangue, but being always kind hearted to Females, he began to
consider how unmanly it was to quarrel with a Woman, and for a fault Love had
made her commit. However, his passion proceeded so far that he called her
Whore: Poor Circe who all this while stood shivering for fear (though it seemed
to her a pleasant pain, being in the company of her sweet Hyleus) was something
moved at the last word, which made a deeper impression on her mind, then all
had past before (for though I will not swear for her, yet I think she was
honest) she makes him this Answer. My kindness in helping young Gentlemen in
Addresses to my Lady, could never deserve that name. No, no, Sir, you have here
no Whore, nor one that had any designs upon you, but what were innocent and
devoted to the Service of my young Mistress. I will not indeed so far belly my
Conscience, as to deny I loved you; but I was so far from promoting my love,
that I quite despaired of it; and therefore resolved to be happy in the next
degree, namely, in mediating with you for my Mistress. The desire of following
her has thus betrayed me to your censure. And is Myrtilla gone before, then?
said Hyleus; Yes Sir, answered Circe, she is, and had not your Passion
transported you, you might e're this have been in a Capacity of recovering my
Lady, who cannot be gone far.

Circe's Answer you will say was very excusable, and indeed Hyleus could not but
approve of it, although anger for his ravished Mistress would not let him at
present acknowledge it. For he immediately commanded his Horses to be brought
out of the Stable again, but hold, I think they were not yet put in, and with
his other Fellow Travelers like a Knight Errant, resolves to go to rescue the
Lady, leaving poor Circe again to the mercy of the Butler, who was now resolved
to try the utmost strength of his strong Beer Philter on the weak Virgin. But
she, contrary to his expectation, seemed more coy, as having more hopes then
ever of marrying Hyleus, in case her Mistress could not be found out. But we
must be found as uncivil as Hyleus, and leave her to the Butlers managing, and
mad he to his Progress, and return to Cherestratus:

Who by this being ten miles out of Town, was impatient to see and salute his
sweet Prey, whose Maiden-modesty not suffering her to speak first, very much
wondered at her silent Lover. They were scarce gone a quarter of a mile
further; but the transparent Rays of the bright Queen of Night (a rare
expression for Moon shine this same) made discovery of a delicate pleasant
Meadow, which lay just by the Road-side. Cherestratus could not for his life
pass by this opportunity, he light and gently taking Myrtilla off the Horse,
began the amorous Prologue with a Kiss. That done, Madam, said he, how happy
have you made the late miserable Cherestratus! At the name of Cherestratus,
Myrtilla started, and looking upon him seriously, knew him to be the person
named. The poor Lady was so extremely troubled at this unexpected Accident,
that she swouned away in Cherestratus's Arms, and truly me thinks it was
ominous, for ever since that night the Lady was troubled with Qualms. But I
fear I shall be censured for playing thus with a Gentlewomans misfortunes; all
I have to excuse it is, that knowing the the fifth Act of the Play and how they
came off, it is pardonable to be merry, and laugh before as she did after
sufficiently.

Cherestratus you may imagine was in a sweet kind of taking to think that he
had lost his Mistress before he had her (which was true enough, if you can make
it out) besides a Constable and a grave ignorant Jury came in his head, for
some might think he had killed her, besides the plaguey fear of being wrote
against, like Philaster for being the death of his pretty Miss. All this
considered, the poor man was extremely put to his shifts, what to do. And
though men say our wits are best in cases of necessity, he at present could not
think of a better Remedy, then Hudibras's, so that he was forced to give her a
gentle twinge oth' Nose, for Water in that place there was none, nor any thing
else that might conduce to the recovering of a Lady out of that sad condition.
Myrtilla by this was something come again to her self, and gave Cherestratus
some small hopes of her, to whom in a lamentable tone she said. By what Magic,
Villian, have thou deprived me of the company of my dear Hyleus? who were he
but present, would teach you better manners, then to lie Evesdropping thus, to
betray the secrets of miserable Lovers. But alas, why blame I you? It was my
own rashness, for which I am justly punished, since I could not distinguish
betwixt the Worthy Hyleus and the base Cherestratus. Our Gallant, that thought
himself well enough to pass, as never having a Rupture, or any thing else that
might reduce him to the using the Wedding Ring the wrong way, in case Art had
conquered Nature, could not endure to hear Myrtilla prefer Hyleus so much
before him, and was going to vindicate himself when thus she continued. O my
unhappy Fate! have I for this proved disobedient, and left my old Mother? to
fall into the hands of him I so much hated, who is in pretense only a Lover? if
it be not so as I say, prove your Affection, and redeem your fault by killing
the miserable Myrtilla. Faintly he thought she spoke, for all the while --
stay, I think there was no smile in the case; however Cherestratus who came
communi Animantium appetitu, did not care to satisfy his Lady in that point,
and had rather get the King a Soldier, then lose him a Subject, for Ladies do
good Service. No, Madam, said he, that were to injure you, and rob my self of
the greatest happiness in the world. Your misfortunes are not such, as to make
you boldly wish for Death, that Bugbear to all Ladies. It Is time enough for it
yet, you have no reason to think on it, being in the hands of a Person, of whose
incivility you never yet had any proof. I cannot imagine you are really angry,
when if you are pleased to remember I took you up in a ready Dress for the
March, as if you as well as Heaven were willing to make me happy. For
doubtless, Madam, it was not by mere chance, I left my Friend in the Country
at so unseasonable time of Night to come and visit your door, where unlookt
for, my good Genious had prepared me a sight of my divine Myrtilla. No, no, the
Powers above, whose will we ought not to resist, ordained this, to see how
happy they could make a mortal Man by the presence of a person so nigh their
Divinities, as your incomparable self. This done, he put his Handkerchief to
his Eyes, and used such comforting expressions to the Lady, that they
dissipated her clouds of Sorrows. Her Eyes shot such luster, that the Moon with
all the noise of Brass Pots and Kettles that could be rung out feared an
Eclipse. To be short, she seemed so well satisfied, that Cherestratus tying his
Horse to a Tree, did not much offend her, in desiring her to repose her self on
a neighboring Bank. They were no sooner sat down, but our Gallant began before
his Mistress to admire the works of Nature in that pleasant place, in whose
commendations he insisted so far, that soon after he forced her to yield to
some Arguments he brought. He showed her all the pretty Sceletons, the fair
Flowers I mean, that once were Bodies of young Men and Ladies, and turned into
that fading condition for denying their Admirers some small Courtesy or other.
He might have gone on longer, for seriously the place was so pleasant that it
is impossible to imagine any thing beyond it in natural Bravery. Adonis's
Garden, and whatever Antiquity has made famous for Pleasures, could not reach
it. I would have strove for a little Poetry, but that at present I I am not in
the Humor, but if I make a modern Poet of ours describe it better then perhaps
I should have done, I suppose it is all one.

NAture is wanton here, and the high way
Seemed to be private, though it open lay,
As if some swelling Lawyer for his health,
Or frantic Usurer to tame his wealth,
Had chosen out ten miles -- to try
Two great effects of Art and Industry.
The ground they trod, was Meadow fertile land,
New trimmed and levelled by the Mowers hand,
Above it grew a Rock, rude, steep and high,
Which claims a kind of Reverence from the Eye,
Betwixt 'em both there glides a lovely stream
Not loud but swift. Meander was a Theme
Crooked and rough, but had the Poets seen
Strait and even (for I have forgot the name) it had immortal been,
This side the open Plain admits the Sun,
To half the River then did Silver run:
The other half ran clouds, where the curled Wood
With his exalted head threatened the flood, etc.
They had not been in this delightful Scene long, but Cherestratus found his
Lady's mind to sympathize with the pleasantness of the place, which so revived
on a sudden her drooping Spirits, that she seemed so brisk, airy and gay, as
gave our Gallant good hopes that the thoughts of Hyleus were removed, and that
she had no small Affection for him, who was now musing how to compass the great
design, for the obtaining which he thought nothing more efficacious, then the
disparagement of Hyleus, his Rival. Madam, cries he, you cannot now but be
satisfied how noble all my actions have been to you, far beyond Hyleus's, by
whose unpardonable neglect I have now the happiness of seeing my dear Myrtilla.
Lovers, Lady, are seldom slow when invited by their Mistresses, which makes me
confident Hyleus had only an intent to abuse and disgrace you, who had not the
hours above sent me to that happy Station, your door, had been exposed to the
censure of the Neighbors, besides the Anger you might have incurred from the
old Gentlewoman your Mother. Ungrateful man, that could disesteem so great an
obligation!

These words so wrought upon her, that she became more obliging than before, so
that she very complaisantly rendered thanks to her Lover for his true
Affection, and vowed she would never have an esteem for his Rival, which was
all the recompense she could make him. No, Madam, (replied Cherestratus) if I
have deserved any thing of you, you may soon think of a better way of rewarding
your Lover; who for all those favors he saw you daily heap on the unworthy
Hyleus, could not diminish his Affections to you, which must now be rewarded,
or he will sacrifice his miserable life before you. Then taking out a true
Bilbo blade, that had never killed a man yet, and therefore wanted seasoning,
he set it to his Breast, and desired his Sentence. The tenderhearted Lady that
but just now desired to die her self could not endure to see her Lover fall a
Victim at her feet, and resolved to withstand manslaughter, said. Hold, Sir,
your case is not so desperate, nor I hope your love for me so little, as to
kill him I esteem, thy self I mean, my dear Cherestratus. And assure your self,
that you or no man, shall be the Person that shall make me happy. Our young
Gentleman could not have desired a more satisfactory Answer from his Lady, to
whom (putting up his naked tool) he replied. Then, Madam, assure your self, you
have bestowed your favors on one that will study to deserve them, while the
careless Hyleus shall die with envy at my good fortune: After the Peace thus
concluded between both parties, there passed many amorous Dialogues, all which
were begun and ended with a sweet Kiss.

Myrtilla you must understand, whether enticed by his pretty discourse, or
moved with an equal desire, seemed extraordinary loving, so that Cherestratus
could not but put forward, had he been less modest then he was. At my first
view I was extremely amazed, for, but that I had seen the Moon with all her
twinkling Attendance, I should have sworn I saw the Lady Aurora in one of her
richest Vermilion Suits. For it seems something that Cherestratus had said in
her Ear, had died her Cheeks with a Rosy blush. I expected now she should have
rattled him soundly, but it seems she was not so angry as I took her for: They
continued their Discourse for some time, which though I could not hear; I soon
perceived it was no Treason they spoke; for soon after I saw Myrtilla with
small reluctance receive a Green Gown from her lusty Lover, who was now
preparing to make his Lady amends to the utmost of his power for her former
Favors. We will leave 'em in mutual Embraces, and instead of an Epithalamium
(for I am loath to be idle) make an Apology for their not staying the Parson's
leisure. To which these grave Reasons induce them.

First, Here the Bridegroom is sure next morning to have all his Ribbons upon
his Breeches.

Secondly, The Bride, or the Woman lay with, will not be at a loss to find her
Stockings, which at Ceremonious Weddings are thrown over her Head, nor will her
Pins be lost to dress her with.

Thirdly, While they lie on the Grass, they need not fear cutting the
Bed-cords, or sowing the Sheets together.

Fourthly, There can be no Bell under their Bed, unless a natural Blew-Bell.

Fifthly, The Lady need not be put to the blush the next morning by a company
of her Chronies with asking her how she does, and how she likes it.

Sixthly and lastly, No troublesome crowd of Fiddlers betimes in the morning, to
spoil better sport with their miserable scraping. For these and some other
Reasons, our Lovers may deserve your pardon, which I question not but you will
give them without petitioning for.

Cherestratus now began to fail in his vigor, and was sounding a Retreat in a
whole Volly of Kisses, which she returned very willingly, as being now
conscious of the Obligation she had to him. And then they settled themselves for
a gentle Repose, which they did in so sweet a posture, she enfolding his Neck
in her delicate Arms, that they seemed like Cynthia and her beloved Endymion,
whose soft Embraces she so often courted. They had not lain long thus, but a
sweet Sleep seized them both, in which they dreamed over again what they had
just now been the real partakers of. Where we will leave them to their natural
Rest, and return to Hyleus and his three Companions, who just now unfortunately
arrived at this Scene of Love, whither they were no sooner arrived, but Hyleus
spied out the Pair of Lovers in that loving Condition, that I described them in.

Hyleus was enraged to see his Myrtilla as it were with her own Consent given
up to another. He immediately draws his Rapier, and swears most damnably that
he will be the death of Cherestratus, as in effect he had, but that those who
accompanied him, having a kindness for his happy Rival, persuaded him to desist
from his purpose, at least they told him he ought to stay till he waked, for
then he might force him nobly either to resign up his Life, or his Mistress,
supposing he had forced her against her Will (as the loving posture they were
in, was proof enough to the contrary) for otherwise, it was not worth the
while. Well, with much ado, Hyleus was at last persuaded to stay till he
waked, but then he swore to be revenged on him.

Hereupon for this purpose lighting off their Horses, they all sat down by our
sleeping Lovers; It had been you will say, a great temptation to his fellow
Travelers to lie by so handsome a Lady, but being weary with accompanying
their Master in his wild pursuit, they thus seemed with him rather to have a
desire to sleep, than any thing else; they strove indeed a great while against
the drowsy Distemper, but Morpheus at last arrested them, in the King's name,
and charged them to keep the Peace, which they had broken with their loud
Jangling.

They had not been long under the Leaden Sceptered Gentieman's hands, but the
two Lovers awaked very much troubled to see any Company there, but much more
when they knew them to be Hyleus and his men. Cherestratus bid his Myrtilla not
be afraid, but prepare for her Journey, by which he doubted not, but they
should escape the Enemy, which Myrtilla as much now endeavored to avoid, as
not long before she coveted the Sight of Hyleus. Cherestratus that had before
learned of Myrtilla, that Hyleus had received a rich Diamond of her, which was
to be worn in his Hat, was unwilling to leave that Token of his Ladies former
Affection behind him, wherefore he advanced toward Hyleus, and did without any
difficulty find out the Jewel by the extreme luster of it. Having got this, he
and Myrtilla march with full speed together toward his Friend's House, with
whom he had lodged being invited, the honest trusty Soul Paneutus.

They had not been long gone, but Hyleus and his men awake, and find the Pair
of Lovers gone, to the satisfaction of all but Hyleus, who was so much troubled
at their escape, that they had much ado to keep him from laying violent hands
on himself, but his rage was very much increased when he saw the Jewel was gone
too, and now he resolves to pursue Cherestratus, not as a Rival only, but as a
professed Enemy. The Servants did all they could to pacify their furious Master,
telling him he ought not to be so incensed against Cherestratus, since he had
done nothing but what a Lover in the like case would have done, and that
doubtless it was not his fault, but Myrtilla either by her free consent, or the
treachery of Circe, that loved him her self, had delivered her up to him. And
that since 'twas so, he ought not to despise the innocent flames of pretty
Circe, who excepting her Birth, seemed altogether as worthy his Bed, as the
scornful, faithless Myrtilla. What though she sent that Diamond, yet Circe
brought it, by whom he might reckon it given too, seeing there was no Remedy
left, and there appeared not the least hopes of overtaking the happy couple.

Hyleus's passion was now pretty well over, when he took Horse for Home,
intending to follow his Servants Counsel, and make poor Circe happy, who all
this while was crying, and deploring her condition. As soon as he came in, he
called for her, and with a Kiss told her, his Intention was to marry her that
Night, telling her the mad Adventures of his rash Journey. Circe you may easily
imagine, was very well pleased to hear her Mistress had sped so well, and that
she was now to enjoy her beloved Hyleus. Hyleus immediately sent for the man in
Black, and gave order for making ready that very Night for the Wedding, which
was done with all speed, and they two huddled to Bed together, for better for
worse, where I suppose they had as much satisfaction of one another, as
Cherestratus and Myrtilla did before, besides the advantage they had of a
softer Bed.

The next day early, Hyleus sent to bespeak the Wedding Dinner five miles off,
where also Cherestratus with his Lady were that day to be merry together; and
as good luck would have it, they were in the next Room to one another, though
neither Company knew of it, till about Dinner time. Myrtilla hearing Hyleus's
Voice in the next Room, swouned, Cherestratus and all his Company wondered at
the suddeness of her sickness, and suspected there was something in it more
then ordinary; and as soon as she came to her self again, she told them the
Reason, viz. That she heard Hyleus, and feared lest he should know of
Cherestratus, and there might some mischief be done. They cheered her up, and
told her there was no fear of any such thing, especially in that place. While
they were comforting Myrtilla, a Gentleman that was equally a Friend to both of
them, ran to tell Hyleus, having first engaged him to be civil, since things
could not be altered. Hyleus was at first surprised, but then one glance of
Circe's dispelled his anger, and he was resolved to join Companies, which he
presently did, to the satisfaction of both Parties. Where I Will leave them
drinking their Ladies Healths, besides some odd Brushers to the little Country
Gentleman, or Myrtilla's Hans en Kelder.

FINIS.

