C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of
arms By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
ORMONDE.

Whereas, by the direction from Us the Lord Lieutenant, several Firearms have
been lately seized upon, in which our direction, there was an exception of the
Firearms belonging to Archvishops, Bishops, Peers of the Realm, Priby
Councillors, his Majesty's Judges, and Officers and Soldiers, Members of his
Majesty's Army: And whereas the end of seizing the said Arms was only, as to
remove Arms out of the hands of persons, who upon occasion might make ill use
of them, to the disturvance of the Public Peace, so to prescrive a course for
placing Arms in the hands of Persons known to ve well affected to his Majesty's
Government, and to the Peace of the Kingdom: We therefore have resolved at this
Board, that in the restitution of the said firearms, these rules be observed.

First, That every person to whom any of the said Arms shall be restored, shall
before such restitution made to him produce to the person or persons restoring
the said Arms a Certificate under the hand of the Lord Archvishop or Bishop of
the Diocese wherein such Person resides, and that grounded upon Certificate to
be made to the said Lord Archvishop or Bishop under the hand and Scal of the
lawful Minister of the Parish wherein such Person resides as aforesaid, or some
other lawful Minister within the Diocese that such Person did within six
months last past before restitution of the said Arms, receive the blessed
Sacrament of the Communion, according to the form prescribed by the Church of
Ireland.

Secondly, That as to every other person that shall desire restitution of his
Arms, upon application made by such Person to us the Lord Lieutenant such order
shall be given therein, as we shall find the case to require.

And the Lords Presidents of the several Provinces of Munster and Connaght, or
in their or any of their absence, the Vice-Presidents of the said respective
Provinces, and the respective Governors of the several Counties in Leinster and
Ulster, where particular Governors are, and in such Counties in Leinster or
Ulster where no particular Governors are, the respective persons who were
employed in the seizing of the said Arms, or any two, or more of them upon
application made unto them, by the person or persons, whose names have been
taken from them as aforesaid, are to give order for restitution of the said
Arms, observing therein the said rules herein formerly prescribed, And whereas
we are informed, That several persons, (not excepted in the said general
directions of Us the Lord Lieutenant for seizing the said Arms as aforesaid)
ha be concealed their Arms, and not delivered them up to the persons entrusted
by Us the Lord Lieutenant in that behalf, We do hereby Order, that in case any
such person or persons shall not before the tenth day of September next produce
the said Arms so concealed and not delivered up as aforesaid, that is to say,
in the Probintes of Munster and Connaght to the said respectibe Presidents or
Vice-Presidents, and in the several Counties in Leinster and Ulster, Where
particular Governors are, to such respective Governors, and in such Counties in
Leinster and Ulster where no particular Governors are to the said persons
formerly entrusted to seize the same, or to any two or more of them, then upon
such failer, all such Arms so concealed and after the said tenth day of
September next to be found, are to be seized on (viz.) by direction of the said
respective Presidents, and Vice-Presidents in the said Province of Munster and
Connaght, and as to the other parts of the Realm by the persons formerly
entrusted to seize the same or any of them, and to cause the said Arms to be
put into His Majesty's next adjoining stores, where they are to remain and not
to be delivered out without special and particular direction from Us the Lord
Lieutenant in that behalf. And we hereby pray and require the said Lords
Presidents and Vice-Presidents of the said Provinces, and the other persons
hereby appointed for restoring the said Arms as aforesaid respectively to
cause exact Lists to be made containing the Names of the Persons to whom the
said Arms shall be restored, the places of their Residence, and the Number and
Quality of the Arms so restored, to every of them, and to return unto Us the
Lord Lieutenant, Duplicats of the said List under their respective hands with
all convenient speed.

Given at the Council Chamber in Dublin the Fifth day of August, 1663. GOD Save
the KING. Mau. Eustace, Canc. Ja. Dublin, Ossory, Kildare, Shannon, Dungannon,
Hen. Midensis, Mich. Cork, W. Caulfield, Kingston, J. Temple, Mau. Berkeley,
Robert Forth, Ja. Ware, Theo. Jones.


DUBLIN,
Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY; and are
to be sold by Samuel Dancer next door to the Bear and Ragged-staffe in
Castlestreet, 1663.


