A LETTER OF ADVICE to a FRIEND About the CURRENCY OF Clipt-Money WHEREIN All
the Material Clauses contained in the several ACTS made in these two last
Sessions of Parliament, for the Cure of that Evil, are recited;

And now Printed for the Use of the Public.

LONDON, Printed for Edw. Castle next Scotland Yard Gate, near White Hall. 1696.

A LETTER Concerning the Currency of Clipped Money.
SIR,
THE Inconveniences and Mischiefs that the currency of clipped and counterfeit
Money necessarily occasions, are so manifest to every Body, (even to the
meanest Capacity) that it is as needless to remonstrate any of them, as it is
impossible to enumerate them all. It violates all Contracts, and alters the
measure of Trade, breeding confusion in all Commerce, whether Domestic or
Foreign; and confusion is a Misfortune so extensive, that neither it, nor its
ill consequences can be described, and can only be comprehended by being felt.

Gold and Silver are the Materials which the consent of Mankind has made the
counterpoise or value of all other things; by which, Barter, or the Exchange of
one Commodity for another is avoided: And those Metals are become the
Instruments of Commerce; so that, for Example, instead of giving a Sack of
Wheat, of which I have Store, for a Yard of Cloth, which I want, I now may for
so much Gold or Silver as is by the consent of Mankind the counterpoise or
value of a Sack of Wheat, have the Yard of Cloth; and he that spared me the
Yard of Cloth may with that Gold or Silver procure from any body else a Sack of
Wheat, or a less quantity (if he wants not so much as a Sack) with part of it,
and other things which he wants with the residue.

A small quantity of Gold or Silver is equal in value to very great quantities
of other things; as for Instance, a Grain of Gold is worth a prodigious number
of Grains of Wheat; so that whilst those Metals remain in the Lump, they are
not adapted to the common Occasions of Mankind: And besides, they being capable
of being mixed with other Metals of less value, without its being discernible by
the Eye that they are so mixed, there was a necessity of having pieces of those
Metals cut out into such Sizes as suited with commerce, and of fixing a certain
Standard of Fineness that those Pieces should be of, or else those Metals would
want much of their usefulness, because 'twou'd be difficult to cut the Pieces
out of the Lump, and weigh them exactly as Men's Occasions required: And the
generality of People could not (for want of Skill) essay them, and might
thereby be liable to be cheated.

Hence it came to pass that all Governments, whose proper Office it is to take
care their Subjects should receive no Injury, ordained that the Weight and
Fineness of these Metals, which should be made use of in their Dominions,
should be ascertained, and made known to the People; and to that end coining
was instituted, and the Pieces of those Metals so coined are what we call
Money; so that Money is nothing else but Silver or Gold cut into Pieces of a
certain known weight and fineness, which the Stamp and Name given them by the
Government, warrants to the People to contain the quantity of Standard Gold or
Silver they are current for.

If therefore those Pieces contain not the quantity of Standard Gold or Silver
they ought, that is to say, which their Denomination imports, whosoever
receives them is cheated, and the Faith of the Public violated, and the
Government dishonored; and this is the reason that counterfeiters of Coin, and
clippers or dimishers of the true Coin in every Country are punished capitally.

If in a time of necessity the Government should coin Pieces of baser Metal or
less weight than the Standard, as the City of Rome did when straightened by
Hannibal, and in other Countries has been done in an Exigency of the State,
those Pieces would not be Money, but Counters or Tickets, which the Government
would in Honor and Justice be obliged to make good, and receive in again when
the Exigency was over, and return and pay the Possessors the full value of them
in Standard Gold or Silver; and nothing but a confidence that the Government
would faithfully do so, could give them a currency as if they were true value:
For Gold or Silver coming in the place of Commodities, and being taken instead
of them in Barter, must of necessity be in the same condition that other
Commodities would be, in case there were no Money. Now in case of Barter, it is
not the Name, but the Quantity and Usefulness of the commodity gives it the
value. And the Government could not arbitrarily set a certain Value for Goods
in Barter, but the Value must and would be (in spite of all Laws to the
contrary) according to the Plenty or Scarcity of the Commodities, and Needs of
the People. As suppose in a Country where there was no Money, a Law were made
that a Bushel of Wheat should exchange for a Yard of Cloth, What Effect could
that Law have, if Wheat were plenty, and Cloth were scarce? But if there should
after that be another Law made, that half a Bushel should be called a Bushel,
and exchanged for as much as a Bushel did before; if the Government should have
never so much need of Cloth, I doubt they would hardly get their Subjects to
make it, and supply them therewith on those Terms, unless the Government could
teach them how to feed as many Mouths with half a Bushel, as they did, or could
with a whole Bushel. But methinks there needs no Argument to prove, that the
Government of any Country cannot make half an Ounce of Silver (or any thing less
than an Ounce) purchase as much of any Commodity as an Ounce; whatever Name it
gives to the half Ounce, though it were the very same Name the Ounce was called
by before; unless any body could think that a Man that had 400 Crowns, weighing
an Ounce each, was no Richer than one that had 400 Crowns, weighing but half an
Ounce each; and if there be any such Person, let him enjoy his Fancy, I will
not dispute with him.

The quantity of Gold or Silver, being (then) that which gives the Value to the
Coin; all that any Government ought to do (or indeed can do) in coining, or
making Money, is to essay the Metal, and weigh the Pieces, and set a Stamp on
them, as a Mark, by which the People shall be informed what quantity of Gold or
Silver is in each Piece.

All this I confess might be done by the Subjects themselves, were they fit to
be trusted: but since, if every one might coin his own Money, it would be
impossible to prevent Fraud; therefore this Trust is Lodged in the Government,
which is presumed to do all things for the good and safety of the People, and
nothing to their Prejudice, or in Deceit of them.

The Government of England has generally in all Ages been very careful in this
Matter, as will appear by the ancient and constant Constitutions and Indentures
of the Mint: And with great Reason: For besides the Duty of taking care that
the Subject be kept from wrong; the Interest of all Governments, obliges them
to be careful and just in this Point; for its Stamp being a Warranty of the
Weight and Fineness of the Money, the Government is bound by that Warranty to
make it good to the Subject, if the Money be defective in either Respect, and
so the Parliament has judged this Session, or else I can see no Reason at all
for their Resolution, that the Deficiency of clipped and base Money, should be
made good to the People, at the Charge of the Public.

And as the Government of England has always taken care, that the Money should
be coined of its due Weight, and Fineness; so it has provided by Law, that none
should pass, or be received, or payable, that was diminished in its Weight; for
by the ancient Orders of the Exchequer, none was to be taken there, but what
was weighed and tried as well as told; and in common commerce, every body might
refuse false or light Money; and if any Person uttered counterfeit or
diminished Money, knowing it to be false or diminished, he might be indicted,
and punished as guilty of a great Misprision; and if he knew the
Counterfeiters, or Diminishers of it, or uttered it for them, he was partaker
of their Crime, and guilty of High Treason.

But of late years notwithstanding the good Provision of our Laws, our Silver
Money has been (almost all that has been current amongst us) either
counterfeited or clipped, or otherways diminished, and every body guilty of
Misprision in uttering it, knowing it to be such.

What has been the Occasion of this general Corruption, as well of the People
as of our Money, is not my Business to enquire, my purpose is only to acquaint
you what Remedy the Wisdom of the Parliament has provided these two last
Sessions, in order to our relief from a Misfortune, our Negligence (to say no
worse of it has suffered to grow upon us to such ^ Height, as had almost
brought us to utte^ Ruin.

The Parliament last Year observed tha^ the Moniers with adulterated and clip
Money, bought up the broad and weight^ Money, in order to clip it, or melt i^
down, and therefore in an Act to preven^ counterfeiting, and clipping the Coin
of the Kingdom, Clause 1.
made 6 and 7 Guliel. Tertii, amongst other Things, it is enacted, Th^^ from the
first of May 1695, Unclipt Money not to be sold for more in Tale of Clipped.
If any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall at any Time (...) Payment,
exchange, lend, sell, borrow, or buy receive or pay any broad Silver Money, or
Si^ver Money unclipt, of the Coin of this Kingdom, for more in Tale, Benefit,
Profit, or A^vantage, than the same was coined for, an^ ought by Law to go for,
be lent, sold for, bo^row'd, received, or paid, shall forfeit the Su^ of Ten
Pounds, for every Twenty Shillings, th^^ shall be so exchanged, lent, sold,
borrowed, bought, received or paid, and so in Proporti^^ for any greater or
lesser Sum: And this Penalty is given by the Act, one half to the King, the
other to the Informer.

Before this Act, it began to be a common Trade to buy up weighty Silver Money,
with clipped Pieces; and a Milled Crown-Piece would readily yield five clipped
Shillings and three Pence, and some were bought and sold for five and Sixpence,
and so it would have gone on, and the milled Money have risen (as long as any
had been left unmelted) until it had come to such a Price, as that the clipped
Pieces must have been so many that their Weight would have near equalled the
Crown to have bought it; but this Act put a stop to this Trade, and then the
Dealers in Money, taking Advantage of the Acts not providing against giving
more Pieces in Tale for coined Gold, than it was Coined for, presently began to
raise the Value of Guyneas, and gave 23 clipped Shillings fo a Guynea, which at
Highest never yielded above 22 s. nor commonly more than their real Value, viz.
21 s. 6 d. till the beginning of March was twelve Month, and then few would
take them as those Jobbers and Moniers gave for them, I mean at 23 s. till
these Traders in Coin had been about a Fortnight buying up all they could get
at that Rate, and then they rose apace; for by the beginning of May, they came
to pass at 25 s. the Guynea, which was near the Par to the Value of the clipped
Silver that was then current (and there was no other but clipped Money current)
for immediately after the passing this Act, and rise of Guyneas, all the
weighty Money disappeared, and was hoarded up, as being of a certain Value, and
therefore to be reckoned real Treasure, and more worth than Gold, when it had
obtained such an Imaginary (and I might add) criminal Value, and evidently
better than the current Money, which had lost so much of its Weight by
clipping. At this Rate of 25 s. the Guynea, stood for two or three Months,
because so much clipped Money weighed, one with another, as much as 21 s. or 21
s. 6 d. ought to weigh: But in these two or three Months, the Clippers were
very busily employed to make a new Advance of Gold, by lessening the Silver and
(wanting broad Weighty Money to work on) clipped over again that which had been
before clipped, and as this second clipping increased, the Guyneas began to rise
again in their Price, till they came to 30 s. or upwards; nor would they have
stopped there, had not the Exchequer and Receivers of the public Money refused
to receive them, which gave them a check, at which many considerable Bankers,
and Dealers in Money, raged and stormed extremely, and omitted no endeavors to
force the Treasury, to receive them at 30 s. at least. And all this while the
Dealers in Money gave all the Encouragement they could to the currency of clipped
and base Money, by receiving it, though never so much clipped or apparently
counterfeited.

And all along as our Guyneas rose, and gained their hurtful Value, the
Exchange in bur foreign Trade grew more, and more to our Disadvantage; for
Foreigners, when they found we our selves judged a quarter of an Ounce, and
Nine Grains of Gold (which is the Weight of our Guyneas) was worth 25 or 30 s.
of our Shillings, they exchanged their Money, or gave Bills (which is the same
thing) accordingly. And so we lost as much by that, as the Guyneas advanced in
their Price, which was ^ust so much real Loss to the Nation.

In this Condition the Parliament found us when they last met, viz. November.
22.1695. And His Majesty in his Speech, at the opening of the Session, took
Notice of the great Difficulty we lay under, by reason of the ill State of our
Coin. The Redress of which may (says He) prove a farther Charge to the Nation;
King's Speech.
but this is a matter of so general Concern, and of so very great Importance,
that I have thought fit to leave it entirely to my Par^ament.

The 5th. December. the House of Lords resolved on an Adress to be presented to
His Majesty, to issue out a Proclamation that from such a Day, or Days, as his
Majesty should think fit, Lords Address.
no clipped Money, of any sort, should pass in Payment, as the current Coi^ of
this Kingdom, which they communicated to the House of Commons, and desired
their concurrence in it. The next Da^ the Commons took it into Consideration
and went into a Committee of the whol^ House, to consider of the State of the
Coin, and to consider of a Fund to mak^ good the Deficiency of clipped Money; an^
not going thorough with it that Day, the^ went into a Commit on it the next
Day and (that being Saturday) so they did the Monday following, when they
perfecte^ their Resolutions; which the next Day viz. Tuesday, December. 10th.
were reporte^ and agreed to by the House, and were follows, viz. That the most
effectual Way, put a stop to the Mischief, which the Nati^^ suffers by the
currency of Clipped Money, is, to coin the same.

That all clipped Money be recoined, according the Established Standard of the
Mint, Commons Votes.
both to Weight and Fineness.

That the Loss of such clipped Money, as is Silver, and coined at the lawful Mint
of this Kingdom, shall be born by the Public.

That a Day or Days be appointed, after which no clipped Crowns, or half Crowns
be allowed in Payment, or to pass, except only to the Collectors and Receivers
of His Majesty's Revenues and Taxes, or upon Loans in Payment into the
Exchequer.

That a Day or Days be appointed, after which no clipped Crowns or half Crowns,
shall pass in any Payment whatsoever.

That all such Crowns and half Crowns, as they come into his Majesty's Receipt,
be recoin'd into milled Money.

That a Day or Days be appointed, after which no Money clipped within the Ring,
be allowed in Payment, or to pass, except only to the Collectors and Receivers
of His Majesty's Revenues and Taxes, or upon Loans, or Payments into the
Exchequer.

That a Day or Days be appointed, after which no Money clipped within the Ring,
shall pass in any Payment whatsoever.

That a Day or Days be appointed for all Person to bring in their clipped Money
to be recoin'd in milled Money, after which no Recompense shall be made for the
same.

That a Fund or Funds be settled for supplying the Deficiency of clipped Money.

The next day was a Day of Fasting and Humiliation; but the Day following they
ordered an Address to be made to his Majesty on these Resolutions, and ordered
a Bill to be brought in for Regulating the Silver Coin of this Kingdom.

Commons Address.
The 14th. the House agreed to the Form of the Address to be presented to his
Majesty on their Resolutions, wherein they desire him to appoint the Day or
Days, after which no clipped Money shall pass.

Kings Answer.
The 17th. the King sends them word, He would issue out a Proclamation
accordingly, which was published the 19th. wherein is recited, that the Lords
and Commons had severally addressed to him (by his Proclamation) to prevent the
Currency of clipped Money, Proclamation.
and declares and commands, that after the first of January then next ensuing,
no clipped Crowns or Half-Crowns, should pass in any Payment except to his
Majesty's Collectors and Receivers, etc. nor after the 3d of February in any
Payment whatsoever, within London or 40 Miles thereof, nor after the 22th. of
February in any other Part of the Kingdom, etc. And that after the 13th. of
February no Shilling clipped within the Ring should pass in any Payment, except
to his Majesty's Collectors, etc. Nor after the second of April in any Payment
whatsoever.

This Proclamation, nay even the Votes before the Proclamation, had the good
Effect, that immediately the Exchange altered to our Advantage very
considerably, in so much, that whereas a Pound Sterling, which formerly yielded
Thirty six Dutch Skillings in Exchange, and since the Clipping our Money, and
Advance of Guinea's would bring but 27 Dutch Skillings in Exchange (nay I have
been told it was fallen to 25 Skillings) would now bring 31 Skillings and
upwards. But this lasted not long, for the unlawful Price, or mischievous Value
of Guinea's keeping up, and some Delays and Difficulties happening in the
passing the Act for Remedying the ill State of the Coin, the Exchange altered
again, so that the Exchange was at about 28 Skillings, because every Body being
able to coin his Gold into Guinea's, without any Expense, or much Delay, the
Mint being obliged to do it gratis, our Silver was bought up, and sent into
Holland, where less than 16 Ounces of it would buy an Ounce of Gold, which
being brought hither and coined, would make Four Guinea's within Two-peny
Weight, and those Guinea's passing at 30 (...) each, produced six Pounds;
whereas 16 Ounces of Silver coined here make but 4 l. 2 s. 8 d. and by this
Means all our new Money, and all the Silver in the Kingdom was like to have
been melted down, and carried away, and at the same time the Nation must have
lost as considerably by the Exchange. Therefore the Parliament resolved to make
an Act for taking off the Obligation and Encouragement for coining Guineas for
a certain time therein mentioned. which passed soon after the Act for Remedying
the ill Seat of the Coin: The Effect of a part of these Acts I shall here
insert for your Perusal, together with some Clauses that are in other Acts
passed this Session with relation to the Silver and Gold Coin, without stating
to you the Occasions of them, because neither my Time nor Paper will permit it;
for I must spare enough o^ both to make some Remarks on what the Parliament
has done, and suggest to you what I take to be your Duty, and the Duty o^
every good Englishman to do on this Occasion, the Omission of which may not
only continue, but increase the Mischiefs these Acts were made to cure, and in
a little time bring the Nation into utter Confusion, and irrecoverable Ruin.
In the Act for Remedying the ill Estate of the Coin of this Kingdom, The
Preamble declares, That the Course of clipped Money amongst us is to the
unspeakable Wrong and Prejudice of his Majesty and his good Subjects in their
Affairs, as well public as particular, and no sufficient Remedy can be applied
to the manifold Evils arising from Clipping the Money, without re-coining the
clipped Pieces, and then provides regular and effectual Methods for re-coining
it. And in that Act are these Clauses following.

Clause 2.
Be it Enacted, That the Receivers and collectors, and other Officers entrusted
with the Receipt or Collection of his Majesty's Revenues, Impositions, Duties,
Taxes, Aids, or Supplies, or any of them granted and in being, or hereafter to
be granted, shall, and by this Act are severally required to accept and take in
Payment for his Majesty's Use, for or upon Account of the said Revenues,
Impositions, Duties, Taxes, Aids, Supplies respectively, such clipped Moneys
being Sterling-Silver, or being Moneys of coarser Alloy than the Standard, from
such Person or Persons as shall tender the same in or for such Payments
respectively, at any time or times before the 4th of May, 1696, at the same
Rate or Value as if such Moneys were unclipt or undiminish'd, and shall not
refuse any Piece or Pieces of Silver Money, so tendered, by Reason or Pretense
of their being worse, or holding more Alloy than Standard-Silver, so as such
price or prices do not evidently appear to be made of Copper or base Metal
plated over or washed with Silver only.

And the Tellers in the Receipt of his Majesty's Exchequer respectively shall
at any time or times before the 24th of June 1696, not only receive and take to
his Majesty's Use at the receipt of Exchequer the said clipped Moneys which shall
have been so received or collected by the Receivers-General and Collectors or
other Officers which shall be by them brought to the said Receipt for the said
Revenues, etc. but also any Loans in such Money which shall be authorized to be
made or received there, unless such Loans or Payments shall be specially
directed by Act of Parliament to be received in other kind of Money.

Another Clause in the same Act recites Clause 4.
That the Money made with the Hammer and not with the Mill and Press, which
remains whole and unclipt, will be liable to clipping and rounding. For the
Prevention thereof, it is enacted, that every Person having unclipt hammered
Money in his or her Custody or Possession do before the 10th of February 1695,
or before they dispose of the same, cause such unclipt Money to be struck
through about the middle of every Piece with a solid Punch that shall make a
Hole without diminishing the Silver; and that after the said 10th of February
no unclipt hammered Money, that is to say, such Pieces as have both Rings, or
the greatest Part of the Letters appearing thereon, shall be current unless it
be so struck through. And if any Piece so struck through shall appear
afterward to be clipped, no Person shall tender or receive the same in Payment
under the Penalty of forfeiting as much as the clipped Money so punch'd through
shall amount unto in Tale, to be recovered to the Use of the Poor of the Parish
where such Money shall be so tendered or received. And his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace, or the major part of them in the general Quarter Sessions upon
Complaint to be made to them of such Offense, are hereby empowered to take
Cognizance thereof and to determine the same, and for that purpose to cause the
Party complained of, to appear before them and on Conviction to issue their
Warrant or Warrants to levy such Penalty upon the Goods and Chattels of the
Offenders.

7mo Guil. 3tii.
And in the Act for granting to his Majesty an Aip of Four Shillings in the
Pound for one Year, for further Ease of the People, Clause 5.
it is enacted, That those that are willing may at any time before the the 4th
of May 1996, pay together with the first Quarterly Payment twice, thrice or
four times as much as shall be assess'd or payable for the first Quarterly
Payment, for or in respect of any Mannours, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Offices,
personal Estate or other matterr or things respectively in clipped Moneys being
Sterling Silver, or Silver of worse Alloy than the Standard, and the Collectors
are empowered to receive the same, and required on every such Payment to give
an Acquittance expressing, the Sum received for such Quarterly Payments, etc.
and every such Acquittance shall be a good Discharge against his Majesty, his
Heirs, and Successors, as if the Sum chargeable by the Act on such Mannours,
Lands, etc. were assess'd or answered at the several and respective Quarterly
Payments appointed by the Act.

7mo and 8mo Guil. 3tii.
An Act for taking off the Obligation and Encouragement for coining Guineas for
a certain time therein mentioned,

Recites that great Quantities of Gold have been lately imported from Foreign
Parts, which bein coined here into Guineas have been (Occasion of the present
ill State of our Silver Coin) taken and accepted by the Subjects of this Realm
at very high and unusual Rates and Prices, tending to the great Damage and
Loss of the Public, the Continuance of which Practice (says that Act) unless
speedily prevented, will run the Nation vastly in Doubt to Foreigners, for the
Repayment whereof the Silver Moneys of this Kingdom must be inevitably
exhausted on Terms of great Advantage: Therefore to prevent the further Growth
of so great an Evil, enacts, That from and after the 2d of March 1695, till the
1st of January then next following, Clause 6.
there shall not be any Obligation of receiving into his Majesty's Mint or
Mints to be coined any Gold whatsoever, nor shall any of the Officers of his
Majesty's Mints be obliged to coin any Gold within the time aforesaid for any
Person whatsoever, except the Royal African Company, as to such Gold as they
import from Africa for their own Use.

And declares that the Importation of Guineas from beyond the Seas may prove
prejudicial to the Kingdom; and therefore enacts That all Guineas imported from
the said 2d of March to the said 1st of January shall be forfeited, half to the
King, and half to the Informer.

In the Act to encourage the bringing Plate into the Mint to be coined, 7 mo.
and 8 vo. Guil. 31 ii.
and for further remedying the ill State of the Coin of this Kingdom, there are
Clauses to this Effect, viz.

Clause 7.
And to the end the Subject after so great Contribution and Charge for making
for making good the Deficiency of clipped Money may not remain under any Part of
the Mischiefs which the Continuance of the Currency of such Money will
occasion, be it farther enacted, that whoever after the 4th of May 1696, shall
take or receive any such clipped Money otherwise than according to the
Directions, and in pursuance of an Act of this present Session of Parliament,
Entitled an Act for remedying the ill State of the Coin of this Kingdom in any
Payment whatsoever as if it were lawful Money, shall forfeit double the Value
of the Silver so received to the Use of each Person as will inform or prosecute
for the same, to be recovered in such manner and form as the Forfeiture for
uttering clipped Money after a Hole has been punch'd through it, in pursuance of
an Act made in this present Session of Parliament is directed to be recovered
by the said Act. Vide the Act for remedying the ill State of the Coin, etc.
And the Justices of the Peace are hereby empowered to hear and determine such
Information or Prosecution accordingly.

Clause 8.
And whereas the uncertain Value of coined Gold has been highly prejudicial to
Trade, and an Encouragement to certain evil-dispos'd Persons to raise and fall
the same to the great Prejudice of the Landed Men of this Kingdom: Be it
therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid that from and after the 10th of
April 1696, no Person shall utter or receive any of the Pieces of Gold Coin
commonly called Guineas at any higher or greater Rate or Value than two and
twenty Shilling for each Guinea, and so proportionably for every greater or
lesser piece of coined Gold. And whosoever shall offend herein, shall incur the
Penalty and Forfeiture, provided in an Act made this present Parliament for
those that shall receive or pay Guineas and other pieces of coined Gold at a
greatrr or higher Rate than in that Act is directed to be recovered by the same
Ways and Means that the Penalties and Forfeitures of that Act are to be or may
be, recovered.

The Act in this last Clause referred to, is the 7th and 8th Guil. 3 tii.
entitled an Act for continuing several Duties, etc. upon Wine, Vinegar, and
Tobacco, etc. and the Penalties are the Forfeiture of double the Value of the
Gold paid or received, and also twenty Pounds, half to the King and half to the
Informer, to be recovered with Costs of Suit by Bill, Plaint, Information, or
Action of Debt in any of his Majesty's Courts, etc.

And an Act (is passed) for granting to his Majesty several Rates or Duties
upon Houses for making good the Deficiency of clipped Money.

This Tax is laid for seven Years, and I believe will be thought very
burdensome and disagreeable by some of those that are to pay it before it be
expired; and I am apt to think the Parliament intended the People should
sensibly feel what they pay on this Occasion, that they might thereby be
induced to take care not to permit the like Mischief to grow among us any more:
For no body can wholly excuse himself from having contributed to it, since by
Law every body might have refused clipped Money, and every body is punishable
that utters such as is apparently clipped or diminished: If therefore the People
had (as they ought to have done) generally refused to take any but lawful
Money, and prosecuted the Moneyers and other Corrupters of our Coin for
uttering such as was visibly deficient, we could no^ have been brought into the
Condition w^ now are, and therefore the Parliament ha^ reason to make us repair
the Loss by a Ta^ almost as odious as Chimney-Money; nay, I am told they had it
under Consideration whether they should not do it by Chimney-Money it self.

The Sum of all the Provisions made b^ the Parliament to prevent the Currency
o^ clipped Money, are,

1. That whosoever gives more in Ta^^ of clipped Money or deficient Money for
broad or milled Money than it was coin^ for, forfeits ten Pounds for every
twent^ Shillings, and so in Proportion for a greater or lesser Sum, viz. 6 and
7 Gul. and M^^ An Act to prevent counterfeiting and clipping the Coin of this
Kingdom. vide Clause the 1st.


Vide Proclamation. and Commons Votes. Vid. Clause 2d and 3d.
2. That no clipped Money shall be cu^rant in any Payment except to the King,
after a Day which is now past.

3. That the King shall receive no cli^^ Money in his Revenues or Taxes after
t^^ 4th of May, 1696.

4. That whosoever after the 10th of April 1696. shall pay or receive Guineas
for more than 22 s. and in proportion any greater or less piece of coined Gold,
shall forfeit for every offense double the value of the Gold, and 20 l. half to
the King, half to the Informer.

Vide Clause 8.
5. That whosoever has in their Custody, after the 10th of February, any unclipt
hammered Money, whereon are both Rings, or major part of the Letters, shall
punch a Hole through the middle thereof, without diminishing the the Silver,
before they dispose thereof, and who ever fails in this, may be indicted, and
fined.

Vide Clause 4.
6. That if any Person tender or receive any Piece so punch'd, which is
afterward clipped, he shall forfeit double the Value of the the Money so tendered
or received amount to it Tale.

Vide Clause 7.
7. That whosoever shall after the 4th of May 1696, receive any clipped Money as
Lawful Money, other than such as is punch'd pursuant to the preceding Article,
or Six-pences not clipped within the innermost Ring, shall forfeit double the
Value thereof to the Informer, to be recovered before the Justices in the
Sessions.

And for the ease of the People, that the clipped Money may not remain in their
Hands,

Vide Clause 2.
1. They may pay in all their Taxes, Debts to the Crown for Excise, Customs,
etc. and the whole Year's Land Tax, if they please, to the Collectors at any
time before the Fourth of May 1696. in Clipt-money.

Vide Clause 3.
2. They may lend to the Exchequer, on any Act, or any Act whereon a Credit to
borrow is given by Parliament, and the Loans on Clipt-money shall be taken at
any time before the 24th of June, as if the same were good and lawful money.

By these means all the Clipt-money may certainly come into the Exchequer
(unless new be made as fast as the old is paid in) and there melted down (as
the Parliament has ordained that it shall) for it has been computed that all
the Silver Money in England amounts not to above five millions (whereof near
two are supposed to remain whole and unclipt) and here is provided room for the
taking in above six millions. The-Land Tax must be reckoned double, viz. the
money it will produce, and the Loans to be made on it, which may be both in
clipped money, if therefore it shall bring in seventeen hundred thousand pounds
that, and the Loans make three millions four hundred thousand pounds. The
Impositions on Merchandise given this Session is taken by the Government for
fifteen hundred thousand pounds, which is to be borrowed on them for this years
Service. The Duty on Distillers, etc. is likewise taken for five hundred
thousand pounds, and the Customs, Excise, and other Branches of the Revenue to
the 4th of May, School. together with what remained unpaid of the last years
Taxes (when the Act requiring Collectors to receive Clipped money passed) cannot
be less than a million, if not a million and a half: but estimating it at a
million, the whole come to six millions four hundred thousand pounds, which is
two millions four hundred thousand pounds more than was computed to be of Clipped
money in the Nation.

Thus, Sir, you so the Parliament has taken all imaginable care, that none of
the deficient or adulterate Money should remain and be a loss in the hands of
the Subjects; and made it the Peoples Duty as well as In^erest not to suffer
themselves to be cheated with Names, and an Imaginary Fairy Treasure ^nstead of
real Riches for the future. Who^oever therefore receives or pays Gold or
^^lver, or connives at others doing so here^fter otherwise than these Acts
allow, ought to be esteemed an Enemy to his Country, and the Welfare thereof,
and a Promoter of the Designs of those, for whose Private or By-Ends have
endeavored to rob the Public, and put us in Confusion, after our Legislators
have spent so much Time and Trouble in endeavoring to relieve us from the
imminent Ruin we are threatened with from it. And therefore do you, Sir, and
let every good Englishman, conform their Practice to these Laws, and force
others to do so too, which only can preserve us, lest we relapse into a worse
and incurable Condition.

I am, SIR, Your humble Servant, R. J
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Must beg your Pardon for an Omission in my Letter, and Leave to add it in a
Postscript.

The Parliament observing that a pernicious Doctrine was publicly vented, viz.
That the King by his Prerogative might alter the Standard of our Coin, and that
it must be altered, and new Money made lighter than the old, and a new Name
given to the old, whereby it should be made current for more than it was coined
for; (which they, that promote this Doctrine, call raising of our Money) were
sensible that the Expectation of such an Alteration would make, Men keep up all
their weighty Money; because, after the Change of the Standard (if it would buy
no more Commodities than before) it would pay more Debts, and foreseeing that
such an Apprehension in the People would lessen, if not break the public
Credit, in regard it is not probable that any one would be persuaded to lend the
Government 5 Ounces of Silver, if he thought he should be repaid again with
only 4 Ounces. To prevent the Evils that such Opinions had occasioned, or might
occasion; and to secure the People, that when they trusted the Government they
should not be repaid by Words and new Names, but in the same Coin, or Weight
and Fineness of Metal they advanced upon its Credit. In the Act for Remedying
the ill State of the Coin of this Kingdom, It is Enacted, That the clipped Money
(which that Act requires to be melted down) shall be Recoin'd by the Mill and
Press into Current Money of this Realm, to hold such Weight and Fineness as are
prescribed by the present Indenture of the Mint, which Weight and Fineness (as
they are the old Lawful Standard of England, so by that Act) are declared to
Be, and shall Be and Remain to be the Standard for the Lawful Silver Coin of
this Kingdom.

I need not remark to you, that the Word, shall remain to be, being indefinite,
imports as much as if it had been said, shall always. remain to be.



FINIS.

