blazon for the City of London, consisting of a shield bearing the cross of St.
George (patron saint of England) with a sword (emblem of the martyrdom of St.
Paul, patron saint of London) in the first quarter of the shield
By the Mayor.
WHereas by an ancient Law and Statute of this Realm, It is provided, That no
Fairs or Markets be kept in Churchyards, Nevertheless in the late times of
Disorder, Rebellion, and Confusion, the Churchyard belonging to the Cathedral
of Saint Paul London, to the great dishonor of God, and contrary to the said
Statute, has been, by the Men of those times, voted and made a Marketplace,
and a Market there kept; Now Forasmuch as at a Common Council holden in the
Chamber of the Guild Hall London, this nineteenth day of October, in the
thirteenth year of the happy and blessed reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES
the Second, by the Grace of God, of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND,
King; Defender of the Faith, etc. that now is: It is ordained by the right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the right Worshipful the Aldermen, and the
Commons of the City of London in the said Common Council assembled, That the
said horrid abuse of the said Churchyard be forthwith removed, And that from
thenceforth there be no Market kept in the same; And for the ease and benefit
of such of his Majesty's Subjects within this City and Liberties, who have
occasion to sell or buy Roots, Herbs, Fruit, or other Garden commodities, two
places only, namely the Streets called Aldermanbury and Broadstreet London,
are by the said Common Counsel appointed for a Market to sell the same Wares
in; and that only on the Market days, and times usual within this City, and on
no other days or times: These are therefore to give Notice of the Premises:
And in his Majesty's name straightly to charge and command, that no person or
persons whosoever resorting to this City with such or any other wares, presume
to pitch down, or stand with any Roots, Herbs, Fruits, or any other Market
Commodities, or keep any Market in the same Churchyard, And also that all such
persons at any time hereafter resorting to this City or Liberties to sell such
Garden commodities, do not pitch down or stand with to sell the same in any
other place or places within this City or Liberties, saving only in the said
Streets of Aldermanbury and Broadstreet, upon pein that all and every such
person and persons who shall offend against any the Premises, shall be severely
dealt withal and punished according to Law.

Given at Guild Hall London, the nineteenth of October, in the said Thirteenth
year of his MAJESTY'S reign.
Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


