woodcut of Massachusetts Bay colonial seal circa 1691 SIGILLVM: GVB: ET:
SOCIET: DE: MATTACHVSETS: BAY: IN: NOVA: ANGLIA
AT A GENERAL COURT For Their MAJESTY'S Colony of the Massachusetts BAY in
NEW ENGLAND, Sitting at BOSTON, upon Adjournment, December. 22th. 1691.
FOrasmuch as these Coasts have been and still are infested with diverse
Piratical Sea Rovers and other Enemies; whereby Sundry Depredations, Robberies
and Damages have been done to and Committed upon many of the KING and QUEENS
Majesty's Liege Subjects, their Vessels, Goods and Estates to the great
Impoverishing and hurt of the same.

For the Guarding and Defending of the Seas and Coasts against all Persons
intending, or that shall intend the Disturbance of The^r Majesty's Subjects and
the inter course of Trade: And for ^he better Defraying of the Necessary
Expenses thereof, which cannot otherwise be Eff^cted.

This Court does Enact, and be it Enacted by the Authority thereof, That to the
Intent aforesaid, the several Duties and impositions hereafter m^ntioned, on
all Goods and Commodities coming in and going out of This their Majesty's
Colony, and on all Ships and other Deck Vessels, coming in and going out of
said Colony, be duly Collected and Paid from the Fifteenth day of J^^uary nex^,
to the Tenth Day of May next ensueing, which will be in the Year of our LORD
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Two.

That is to say,

On Goods and Commodities coming into this Colony.

Inward
For every Pipe of Wine, five Shillings and so Proportionably for smaller
Caske. For every Hogshead of Rhum, five Shillings and so Proportionably for
smaller Caske. For every Hogshead of Sugar, twelve Pence. For every Hogshead of
Molasses, six Pence. For every Hogshead of Tobacco, six Pence. For every Ton of
Logwood, twelve Pence. For every Barrel of T^aine Oil, three Pence. For every
Barrel of Pork, three Pence. For every Barrel of Beife, one Penny half Penny.
For every Hundred Bushells of Pease, or Wheat, two Shillings. and so
Proportionably for l^sser Q^^^t^^i^s. For every Hundred Bushells of Indian
Corn, Rye, or Barley, one Shilling and so Proportionably for l sser Q^^^t^^i^s.
For every Hogshead of Salt, two Pence. and so Proportionably for l^sser
Q^^^t^^i^s. And for all other Commodities, Goods, Wares, Silver, B^llion and
Money, the sum of Ten Shillings for every Hundred Pounds V^lue. For every Ship
or Deck Vessel coming in, the sum of six Pence Per Ton.
On Goods and Commodities going out of this Colony:

Outward.
For every Hundred Quintals of Merchantable Fish, the sum of six Shillings and
eight Pence For every Hogshead of Fish, three Pence, For every Barrel of
Mackarel, one Penny. For every Thousand feet of Deal board^, Planke, or Joyce,
three Pence. For every Thousand of Pipe, Hogshead or Barrel Staves, three
Pence. For every Thousand of Hoopes, four Pence. For every Thousand of
Shingles, one Penny. For every Barrel of Strong Beer or Sider, one Penny. For
every Hundred Pounds Value in Peltry, the sum of Ten Shillings. For every Ship
or other Deck Vessel, going out, the sum of six Pence Per. Ton.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Goods or
Merchandise whatsoever, whereof the Duties and Impositions aforesaid, are or
shall be Due, be brought into any Port, Place or Creek of this Colony, and
Unladen out of any Ship, or other Vessel; Or if any be put on Board any Ship or
other Vessel for Tran^portation; the said Duties and Impositions due for the
same, not being paid in Money, or lawfully Tendered to the Collector or
Collectors thereof, according to the true meaning of this Act, from and after
the Fifteenth day of January aforesaid: That then all such Goods and
Merchandises shall be forfeited, one M^^ety ^n the value thereof, unto Their
Majesty's, for the use aforesaid; and the other Moiety to him or them that
shall Seize or inform and Sue for the same.

And if an^ Master or Commander of any Ship, or other Deck Vessel Arriving
here, from other Parts, do break Bu^k, or Unlade any part of his Lading before
the pa^ment of sixpence in Money Per Ton for his Ship or Vessel; Or if any
Master or Commander of any Ship or other Deck Vesse^, do take in any Lading,
before the paymen^ of six p^n^e (...) Money Per Ton for his Ship or Vessel, such
Master or Commander so Offend^^^ contrary to this Act, shall pay fi^e shillings
Per Ton for what his Ship or Vessel shall measure; to be Recovered of such
Master or Commander, One half for Their Majesty's; to the use aforesaid, and
the other half to the Receiver of the Duties aforesaid, or to him that shall
Inform and Sue for the same.

And for the more effectual Collecting and Receiving of the Duties and
Impositions before mentioned, And that the Money arising upon said Duties and
Impositions may be Appropriated to and Employed for the Intents and Uses before
mentioned, and no other whatsoever; This Court does Nominate and Empower Mr.
Eliakim Hutchinson, Mr. John Foster, Mr. Nathanael Oliver, Mr. John Air, and
Mr. Andrew Belcher: (or such others as the Governor and Council shall Appoint)
to be a Committee o^ Commissioners to manage the same; who are also empowered to
appoint Co^^ectors and Receivers under them to Collect and Receive all the
Moneys which shall a^ise and become due upon any Goods, Wares, Merchandise and
Tonage of Vessels by virtue of this Act, and to dispose of the same for the
said Uses from time to time, according to the O^ders they shall receive from
the Governor and Council.

THIS Court being Sensible, That although several French Protestants, who fled
from Persecution, coming lately over Sea into this Country, were orderly
Entertained and Succored here Yet since that, many others of a contrary
Religion and Interest have been brought hither; and some have obtruded
themselves; whereof freq^ent Compla nts have been made.

And it being a time of War between the two Crowns of England and France, and
the Public Safety Endangered by Suffering such a mixed Company among us,
especially in and about the Sea Ports and Frontier Towns.

For Prevention thereof,

It is Ordered, That from and after the last day of January next Ensuing, none
of the French Nation be permitted to take up their Res dence, or be in any of
the Seaport, or Frontier Towns within this Government, but such as shall be
Licensed by the Governor and Council.

Nor shall any of said Nation open Shop, or Exercise any Manual Trade in any of
said Towns, without the Approbation of the Select Men of such Town first
orderly obtained. On pain of Imprisonment, by Warrant from any Magistrate or
Commissioner; there to remain until Released by Order of the Governor and
Council.

And the Select-Men and Constab^es in said Towns are appointed to have
Inspection of the due Observance of this Order.

Printed and Published by Order of the Court.

Isaac Addington, Sec^.


