arms armsBy the Mayor.
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
WHereas according to the directions of a late Ordinance made, amongst other
things, for reforming the great defects in streets and pavements, Scavengers
have been lately chosen within the several Parishes of your Ward, and
accordingly sworn to execute that office: To the end therefore that the said
several Scavingers within your Ward may diligently apply themselves to the
execution of their office, and that none may pretend ignorance of their duty;
These are to desire you that you cause speedy notice to be given by sending of
copies of this Precept to the several Scavengers of the Parishes within your
Ward, that they forthwith under the penalties mentioned in the said Ordinance
speedily take an exact view of all the streets and lanes within their
respective Parishes, and thereupon consider what defects are within their
respective Parishes by defective Pavements, or by the Channels and
Watercourse not having a good current, and what nusances are committed by
suffering Laystals, heaps of dirt and filth to lie in any Streets or Allies,
and whether the said Mischiefs are occasioned by the neglect of any particular
persons, and by them proper to be remedied, or whether the same abuses or any
of them be fit for the whole Parish to contribute to the amendment of; and in
that case what reparations will be needful to be made, and what sum of money
will be necessary to be raised for amending the same. And that the said
Scavengers do after such view give public notice (if the same have not been
already done) to the Parishoners to meet for the making of an Assessement (if
need require) by a pound rate upon all occupiers of Houses, Lands, or other
hereditaments according to the true yearly value thereof, and upon dead goods,
commodities, or stock in Trade, of every Parishoner rated to the poor; rating
twenty shillings goods to twenty pounds per Ann. land, so as all the rates
together exceed not in one year 12. d. per pound, according to the directions
of the said Ordinance. Which rate being so from time to time made and
collected, is to be laid out for the public charge of cleansing and carrying
away the soil and filth, and for making the watercourses and channels so that
the current may freely pass, and not to make any rate or disburse any money
for the reforming of defective pavements, but that the same are expected to be
duly, and from time to time repaired by particular persons, who according to
the Law and custom of this City are to repair the same upon pain of incurring
such fines and penalties as by Law are to be inflicted upon the offenders. And
that the said several Scavengers do take notice that at the time aforesaid, or
at some other convenient time before the next public Sessions to be kept for
this City, they do not fail to summon the Inhabitants of their several
Parishes to meet together, who according to the fourteenth Article of the said
Ordinance, are to make and set down such Rules and Orders as the said
Parishoners so met shall think meet for the particulars aforementioned, or in
any thing tending to the reformation of the premises; which Orders together
with the Rates aforementioned are to be by the respective Scavengers delivered
to me in writing before the first day of August next, to the intent the same
may be presented at the next public Sessions for the Peace to be holden for
this City, that thereupon such proceedings may be had as shall be just. And
hereof fail you not.

Dated the eight and twentieth day of June 1654. Sadler.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


