arms armsBy the Mayor.
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
WHereas by a late Act of Parliament, For repairing the Highways and Sewers,
and for paving and keeping clean of the Streets in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, etc. it is (amongst other things) enacted and
commanded, That all persons within the City of London and Liberties thereof
shall sweep and cleanse, or cause to be swept and cleansed, all the Streets,
Lanes, Alleys and public places before their respective houses, buildings and
walls, twice every week, (that is to say, on Wednesdaies and Saturdaies) and
cause all the Soil, Dirt and other Filth to be taken up into Baskets, Tubbs or
other Vessels, ready for the Raker or Scavenger to carry away, upon pain to
forfeit three shillings four pence for every offense or neglect respectively:

And that no person or persons whatsoever shall throw, cast or lay, or cause,
permit or suffer to be thrown, cast or laid, any Sea-coal-ashes, Dust, Dirt, or
other Filth or Annoiance, in any open Street, Lane or Alley within the said
City or Liberties, before or against his, her or their dwelling-houses,
buildings or walls, on the penalty of five shillings; nor before the houses,
buildings or walls of any of their neighbors or other Inhabitants; or before
or against any Church or Churchyard, or any other public houses, buildings,
or places whatsoever; nor shall cast, lay or throw, or cause to be cast, laid
or thrown into any common or public Sink, Vault, Watercourse, Common sewer or
Highway within the said City and Liberties, or any other private Vault or Sink
of any of his Neighbors or other Inhabitants, any Ashes, Dust, Filth, Ordure,
or other noisome thing whatsoever, but shall keep or cause the same to be kept
in their respective houses, back-sides or yards, until such time as the Raker
or Scavenger do come to carry away the same, and then shall carry or cause the
same to be carried out and delivered to the Raker or Scavenger, upon pain to
forfeit for every such offense twenty shillings:

Also it is enacted, That no person shall hoope, wash or cleanse any Pipes,
Barrels, or other Cask or Vessels, in any Street, nor set out any empty Coach
to make or mend, or rough Timber or Stones to be sawn or wrought in the
Streets, on the penalty of twenty shillings for every offense:

And further, that the Rakers and Scavengers every day in the week (except
Sundaies and other Holy Days) shall bring or send their Carts into all the
Streets, places, Wards, Parishes and divisions where the same can pass, and at
or before their approach, by a Bell, Horn, Clapper, or otherwise, shall give
notice of their coming, and give like notice in every Court, Alley or place
into which the said Carts cannot pass, and abide, and stay a convenient time
for the bringing forth of their Ashes, Dust, Dirt, Filth and Soil to their
Carts, upon pain of forty shillings for every offense or neglect respectively:

And likewise that every Householder forthwith sufficiently repair or cause to
be repaired or paved the Street, Lane or Alley before his house, wall or
building, to the Channel, upon pain to forfeit twenty shillings for every
default, and of twenty shillings a week for every week til the same be amended:

Now inasmuch as there is an apparent neglect of the said Act throughout this
City and Liberties, and to the intent that the same may be henceforth duly
executed in all the particulars before recited, and none be surprised through
ignorance either of his duty or the penalties of his disobedience, It is
thought fit to give you this intimation thereof, hereby requiring you in his
Majesty's name to give present notice and warning of the same to all
Inhabitants, Scavengers, Rakers and others in any wise concerned within your
Ward, strictly charging and commanding them and every of them respectively to
be diligently intent in performance of their several duties in and about the
premises, upon the utmost penalties of the said Act; for recovery whereof, and
the impartial prosecution of all offenders in any the cases above mentioned,
effectual care is taken that the Sergeant and Yeoman of the Channels (the
proper Officers in this behalf) be vigilant, active and faithful in their
duties.

You are further to give this special direction, that in sweeping of the
Streets the Soil be removed and swept up from the Channels to an heap under the
houses, and not left or suffered to lie near the Channel, to be forced by the
motion of Carts and Coaches, or washed into the same by showers of Rain. And
herein, and in all other means conducible to the performance of this service,
so acceptable to his Majesty, and so many ways concerning the honor, health
and good government of the City, you are to use your utmost care and
endeavors, as you tender his Majesty's pleasure, and the welfare and happiness
of this City.

Dated the 22 day of July, 1662. Weld.

^


