A LETTER From the Camp near the River
Ricton the fo^rteenth of AVGUST.
AS those that are saved from a Shipwrac^ delight themselves exceedingly in
relating those dangers they have avoided, so I think it is very just, that
after a bloody Battle, I may have the pleasure to tell you the particulers of
it. The Zeal I have for the glory of my Prince, and the Employment with which
he has honored me in his Army made me a party concerned in this Action. To
entertain you Cavalieremen of a Battle, that is now the universal talk of all
Europe: I will tell you the particulers of it the most impartially and the most
succinctly that I can.

The tenth of August the Prince of Conde, was informed by a Spy, that the
Confedrate Army was to March toward Marimont, upon that advice His Highness
sent the Count of St. Martins with five hundred Horse to discover the truth of
this Report, he had the good fortune to meet with a Party of two hundred Dutch
Horse, he fell upon them briskly, and after a short resistance in which most of
them were Killed, and the rest taken Prisoners, he came back to our Camp and
his Prisoners did confirm the truth of those informations we had received from
our Spy immediately after the Prince of Conde gave Orders that the whole Army
should be in a readiness to March and to Fight, and Satturday last at break of
the day, we went out of our Frenches, our General sent five thousand men to
take possession of a Wood, as a Post very commodious, and of great advantage to
our Army, to be short, about ten of the Clock in the morning our Men fell upon
the Rear of the Enemy, the Spaniards that composed it, were the first exposed
to the fury of our Soldiers, and in ^ess then two hours they were forced to
Retire in great conf^sion to the main Body of the Dutch. A little before his
Highness had sent ten thousand Men to attaque eight Regiments that the Prince
of Orange had left to keep his baggage, the sight was vigorously disputed in
this place, but at last the French made themselves Masters of it. So far the
Enemies had lost six times more men then we. ^ut the Van of our Enemies
composed of the Germans turning fell upon our Troops the Massacre was here the
greatest and the most terrible, about six of the Clock both Armies were wholly
engaged. The Confederates had at least fifteen thousand men more then we, but
magure those odds we forced them to Retire, and to abandon us the victory, the
Spaniards have lost about four thousand men, the Dutch as many, but the
slaughter was greatest of all amongst the Germans for above five thousand of
them were left dead or mortally wounded upon the Field, we have lost above four
thousand men, and amongst them about eight hundred Gentlemen Of two Italian
Regiments that were in the Confedrates Army there are hardly men enough left to
make up a Company Mondony one of the Colonels was killed, and the Marquis de
Sarondi is Prisoner and dangerously wounded, the Regiments of Holstein of
Waldeck, of Vaudemont, Medode and Lorrain, have not above five hundred men
left, the Marquis Daslentar who Commanded the Spanish Cavalry, was taken
prisoner and dyed last night of his wounds: Le Marquis del Guardo, le Comte de
Falstanel, and le Marquis don Alonzo del Prado were killed. The Prince of Salme
the Duke of Holstein the Comte de Merode are Prisoners, le Prince Pio, le
Prince Charles de Lorrain, le Comte de St. Cuarin, le Marquis del cada are
dangerously wounded, we hard yesterday that Geneaal Souches had been wounded
with a Pistol shot in the Shoulder, but without any danger. The Prince of
Orange, escaped without any hurt though he thrusted himself into the thickest
of our Troops all our Officers do praise exceedingly the stout Carriage of that
young General. There is a true relation of our Enemies losses, ours are nothing
so great, but yet they are considerable enough our General was preserved as by
a Miracle for he had two horses killed under him. He acted the part of a
Commander like a judicious and experienced Prince, and that of a Soldier like
a stout Man. His son the brave Duke of Enguin, that son so worthy of such a
Father did wonders in this Battle but I fear that his glorious actions will
cost us very dear since in all probability his wounds will prove mortal, the
Duke of Navailles has done nothing in this occasion contrary to the glory of
his past actions. Luxemburg behaved himself like a gallant Soldier, and a wise
and a stout Commander, he is wounded with a Pike in the side but not
dangerously In short the whese Army did all that could be expected from gallant
men, we have lost a great many men of quality in this Battle and amongst the
rest the Comte de Boise, le Marquis de Merillon, le Comte de Lustan, le
Vice-comte de Herrer le Chevalier de Lauerdun, are Killed. Monsieure le Comte
de Montal, after a thousand actions of valor was wounded in four several
place, but the most dangerous is of a Musket shot in the Thigh, le Chevalier de
Fourilles the Comte de Buiston le Marquis de Beaurgard are dangerously wounded,
our Brother that Commanded the Regiment of Vandesme in the absence of the young
Colonel is wounded in three several places, but without any danger of his
life, he has lost above eight hundred men of his Regiment, for my part I have
been so happy as to escape without any hurt from an occasion where Death had so
plentiful a Harvest, we are in a daily expectation of a second Battle for the
Prince is resolved to attaque the Enemy once more upon any favorable occasion
it I am so happy to escape a live from the neat as I have from the last. I will
let you know all the particulars of it. In the intreim give me leave to assure
you that no man in the world loves you better then,

Your ever kind friend and humble servant: R. M.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1674.


