The TREATY of Pyrennes: OR, Articles of Peace, Between the Crowns of FRANCE
and SPAIN; Concluded and Signed the Seventh of November, 1659. With Reference
to the PEACE in Hand.
Printed in Paris by His Majesty's Command, and now faithfully rendered into
English.

IN THE NAME OF GOD THE CREATOR. To all present and to come, Be it known; That
whereas a long and bloody War, has, many Years since caused great Miseries and
Oppessions to be suffered by the People, Kingdoms, Countries, and Dominions
under the Obedience of the most High, most Excellent, and most Potent Prince
Lewis the XIVth. by the Grace of God, most Christian King of France and
Navarra; and of Philip the IVth. by the Grace of God, Catholic King of Spain:
In which War, other Princes and Republics; their Neighbors and Allies, having
also taken part, many Towns and Countries of both the Parties have been exposed
to great Evils, Miseries, Ruins, and Desolations. And although at other times,
and by several ways, diverse Overtures and Negociations for an Accommodation,
have been made; yet none of them, through the Mysterious Secrets of the Divine
Providence, could take the effect most earnestly desired by their Majesty's,
until at length that Supreme God who has in his Hand the Hearts of Kings, and
has particularly reserved to himself alone, the precious Gift of Peace, has
had the Goodness, through his infinite Mercy, to inspire at the same time, both
the Kings, and so to guide and direct them, that without any other
Interposition or Motives, but the only sense of Compassion they have had of the
Sufferings of their good Subjects, and of a Fatherly desire of their good and
relief, and of the Peace of the whole Christendom, they have found the means
how to put an end to so great and long Calamities, to forget and extinguish the
Causes and the Seeds of their Divisions, and to settle to the Glory of God, and
the Exaltation of our Holy Catholic Faith, a good sincere, entire and lasting
Peace and Fraternity between them and their Successors, their Allies and
Dependants; By means whereof the Damages and Miseries suffered, might quickly
be repaired in all parts.

Imprimis, It has been concluded and agreed, concerning the Low Countries,
that the Lord the most Christian King shall remain seized, and shall
effectually enjoy the Places, Towns, Countries and Castles, Dominions, Lands
and Lordships following.

First, Within the Country of Artois, the Town and City of Arras, and the
Government and Bailiwick thereof; Hesdin and the Bailiwick thereof; Bapaume and
the Bailiwick thereof; Bethune and the Government or Bailiwick thereof; Lillers
and the Bailiwick thereof; Lentz and the Bailiwick thereof; the County of St.
Pol; Terroane and the Bailiwick theteof; de Pas and the Bailiwick thereof; As
also all the other Bailiwick and Chastellenies of the said Artois, whatsoever
they be, although not here particularly named and mentioned, Except only the
Towns, Bailiwicks and Chastellenies, or Governments of Air and St. Omer, with
their Appurtenances, Dependencies and Annexes, which shall remain all unto his
Catholic Majesty: As also the Place of Renty, in case it be found to be of the
said Dependencies of Air or St. Omer, and not otherwise.

Secondly, within the Province and County of Flanders, the said Lord the most
Christian King shall remain seized, and shall effectually enjoy the Places of
Graveling, the Forts Philip, of the Sluice, and Hannuin Bourbourg and the
Chastelleny thereof; and St. Venant, whether it belongs to Flanders, or to
Artois, and their Dominions, Appurtenances, Dependencies and Annexes.

Thirdly, Within the Province and County of Hainaeut, the said Lord the most
Christian King shall remain seized; and shall effectually enjoy the Places of
Landrecy and Quesnoy, and their Bailiwicks, Provostiships, or Chastellenies,
Dominions, Appurtenances and Dependencies.

Fourthly, Within the Province and Duchy of Luxemburg, the said Lord the most
Christian King shall remain seized, and shall effectually enjoy the Places of
Thionville, Montmedy and Damvilliers, their Appurtenances, Dependencies, and
Annexes, Provostships and Lordships: The Provostship of Ivoy, Chavancy,
Chasteau, and the Provostship thereof; and the Place and Post of Marville,
situate upon the small River called Vezin, and the Provostship of the said
Marville; which Place and Provastship did formerly belong, partly unto the
Dukes of Luxemburg, and partly unto the Dukes of Bar.

Fifthly, His most Christian Majesty having strongly declared that he could
never consent to the restitution of the Places of la Bussea, and Bergh St.
Wynox, Chastellany of the said Bergh, and the Royal Fort erected upon the
Channel, hard by the Town of Bergh; and His Catholic Majesty having
condescended that they should remain to the French, unless an Exchange of the
said Places, with others of the like consideration and mutual conveniences
could be agreed upon, both the said Lords Plenipotentiaries, have at last
agreed that the said two Placer of la Bassee and Bergh-St. Wynox, the
Chastellany and Royal Fort of the said Bergh; should be exchanged with the
Places of Marienbourg and Philippeville, situate on the Rivers Sambre and Maez,
their Appurtenances, Dependencies, Annexes and Dominions: And therefore his
said most Christian Majesty restoring, as it will be said hereafter, unto His
Catholic Majesty, the said Places of la Bassee, Bergh St. Wynox, and the
Chastellany thereof, and the Royal Fort, with their Appurtenances,
Dependencies, Annexes and Dominions, His Catholic Majesty shall at the same
time put into the Hands of His most Christian Majesty, the said Places of
Marienburg and Philippeville, His said most Christian Majesty to remain seized
of them, and effectually enjoy them, and their Appurtenances, Dependencies, etc.

Sixthly, His Catholic Majesty, for certain considerations hereafter
particularly expressed in another Article of the present Treaty, does promise
and oblige himself to put into the Hands of His most Christian Majesty, the
Town and Place of Avennes, situate between the Sambre and the Maez, with the
Appurtenances, Dependencies, Annexes, and Dominions thereof. And because it
has been reported, that within the said Places of Avennes, and the
Appurtenances, Dependencies, Annexes and Dominions thereof, the ordinary
Jurisdiction, the Rents and other Profits do belong to the Prince of Chimay, it
has been declared and agreed between the said Lords and Kings, that whatsoever
is contained within the Walls and Fortifications of the said Place, shall
remain to His most Christian Majesty; so that the said Prince shall have no
kind of Right, Rent, or Jurisdiction within the said Walls and Fortifications;
it being only reserved unto him to keep whatsoever in time past did belong to
him out of the said Place, in the Villages, Countries and Forests of the said
dependence.

The said Places of Arras, Hesdin, Bapaunie, Bethune, and the Towns of Lillers,
Lens, County of St. Pol, Teroane, Pas, and their Bailiwicks; as also all the
other Bailiwicks and Chastellenies of Artois, (except only as aforesaid the
Towns and Bailiwicks of Air and St. Omer, their Appurtenances, Dependencies,
Annexes and Dominions) as also Renty, in case it be not found to be any of the
Dependencies of Air or of St. Omer; together with the Places of Graveling, and
the Forts Philip, the Sluice and Hannuin Bourbourgh, and St. Venant in Flanders;
the Places of Landrecy and Quesnoy, in the Hainaeut; as also those of Avennes,
Marienbourgh and Philippeville, which are to be put into the Hands of the most
Christian King, as aforesaid: And likewise the Places of Thionville, Montmedi,
and Damvilliers, the Town and Provostship of Ivoy, Chavency, Chasteau and the
Provostship thereof, and Marville, in Luxembourgh, their Bailiwicks,
Chastellanies, etc.

And as concerning the Countries and Places taken by the Arms of France, during
this War toward Spain: As it had been formerly agreed by the Negotiation begun
at Madrid, in the Year 1656; upon which this present Treaty is grounded, that
the Pyrenean Mountains, which anciently had divided the Gauls from Spain,
should also make henceforth the Division of both the said Kingdoms, It has
been concluded and agreed, that the Lord, the most Christian King, shall remain
in possession, and shall effectually enjoy the whole Country and Viquery of
Roussillion, and the Country and Viquery of Conflans, the Countries, Towns,
Places, Castles, Borroughs, Villages and Places, which make up the said
Counties and Viqueries of Roussillon and Conflans: And to the Lord, the
Catholic King, shall remain the County and Viquery of Cerdana, and the whole
Principality of Catalonia, with the Viqueries, Places, Towns, Castles,
Boroughs, Hamblets, Places, and Counties, that make up the said County of
Cerdana, and the Principality of Catalonia. Provided, that if there be found
any place of the County and Viquery of Conflans only, and not of Roussillon,
that be in the said Pyrenean Mountains toward Spain, it shall likewise remain
to His Catholic Majesty: As likewise, if any place be found of the said County
and Viquery of Cerdana only, and not of Catalonia, that be in the said Pyrenean
Mountains toward France, it shall remain to His most Christian Majesty.

The whole County and Viquery of Roussillon, County and Viquery of Conflans,
except the places that shall be found to be situate in the Pyrenean Mountains
toward Spain, in the manner aforesaid, according to the Declaration and
Agreement of the Commissioners that are to be appointed for that purpose; as
also that part of the County of Cerdana, that shall be found situate in the
Pyrenean Mountains toward France, according unto the same Declaration of the
Commissioners, the Countries, Towns, places, Castles, that make up the
Viqueries of Roussillon and Conflans, and part of the County of Cerdana, in the
manner aforesaid, shall remain for ever to the Crown of France.

The said Lord the Catholic King, shall re-enter into the possession and
enjoyment of the County of Corrolois, to enjoy it by him and his Successors,
fully and peaceably, and hold the same under the Sovereignty of the most
Christian King, as he held it before the present War.

The said Lord the most Christian King, shall restore to the said Lord the
Catholic Ling, in the Low Countries, the Towns and places of Ypres, Oudenard,
Dixude, Furnes, with the fortified Posts of La Fintelle, and La Quenoque,
Marville upon the River of Lys, Menin and Comines, their Appurtenances,
Dependences and Annexes. As also his most Christian Majesty shall put again
into the hands of his Catholic Majesty the places of Burgh, St. Wynox, and its
Royal Fort, and the place of la Bassee, by way of exchange for the places of
Marienburgh and Philippeville.

Secondly, The said Lord the most Christian King, shall restore in Italy, unto
the said Lord the Catholic King, the places of Valence upon the Po^ and of
Mortara, their Appurtenances, Dependences and Annexes.

Thirdly, in the County of Burgundy, the said Lord the most Christian King,
shall restore unto the said Lord the Catholic King, the places and Forts of
St. Amor, Bleverans and Joux, and their Appurtenances, Dependences and
Annexes, and all the other Posts, fortified or not fortified, which the Armies
of his most Christian Majesty have taken in the said County of Burgundy,
without keeping or reserving any thing.

Fourthly, toward Spain, the said Lord the most Christian King, shall restore
to the Catholic King, the places and Ports of Roses, the Fort of the Trinity,
Cap-de Quers, La Scau d'Urgel, Toxen, the Castle of Bastide, the Town and place
of Baga, the Town and place of Ripol, and the county of Cerdana, wherein are
Belver, Puicerda, Carol, and the Castle of Cerdana, in such a condition as they
be now, and all the Castles, Ports, fortified or not fortified, Town, Boroughs,
Villages and other places, Appurtenances, Dependences and Annexes, belonging to
the said places of Roses, Cap de Quers, Scau d' Urgel, and county of Cerdana,
although not named nor specified here: Provided, that if any of the said Posts,
Towns, places and castles aforenamed, should be found to be in the Viguery of
Cerdana, in the Pyraenean Mountains toward France, they shall remain to his
most Christian Majesty.

The said Lord the Catholic King, shall restore unto the Lord the most
Christian King, the Towns and places of Rocroy. Le Catelet, and Linchamp.

As the three places of Avennes, Philippevile and Morienbourg, are yielded by
the present Treaty, as aforesaid, unto the Lord the most Christian King, to be
united and incorporated to the Crown of France, if there be found any places,
which not being of the said Appurtenances, Dependences, or Annexes, ought to
remain in the said propriety and sovereignty of the said Lord the Catholic
King, neither his said Catholic Majesty, nor the Kings his Successors, shall
have power at any time to fortify the said Borroughs, Villages, Posts or
Countries, nor to make any new Fortifications between the said places of
Avennes, Philippeville and Morienbourg, by means of which Fortifications, the
said places or any of them, might be cut off from France, or the communication
between them disturbed: As likewise it has been concluded and agreed, that in
case the place of Rent in Artois remain to his Catholic Majesty, as it ought
to remain to him, in case it be found to be of the Dependences of Air or St.
Omer, neither his said Catholic Majesty, nor the Kings his Successors, shall
have power, at any time to fortify the said Renty.

By virtue of the present Treaty, all the Catalonians and other Inhabitants of
the said Province, as well Prelates, Ecclesiastical Persons, Religious Persons,
Lords, Gentlemen, and Burgesses, as other Inhabitants, both of the Towns and of
the Country, none excepted, shall have power to re-enter, and shall effectually
re-enter, and be left and established in the possession and peaceably enjoyment
of all their Goods, Honors, etc. And for that end, his Catholic Majesty shall
grant and cause to be published, in good form, his Declarations of Amnisty and
Pardon, in the behalf of the said Catalonians, which publication shall be made
upon the same day, as the publication of the Peace.

Although his most Christian Majesty has never been willing to engage himself,
notwithstanding the pressing instances made to him heretofore, backed even with
very considerable offers, not to make the Peace without the exclusion of the
Kingdom of Portugal, because his Majesty has foreseen and feared least such an
Engagement might be an unsurmountable obstruction to the conclusion of the
Peace, does now restore by the present Treaty unto his Catholic Majesty, all
the rest of the Conquests generally made by his Arms during this War, and
wholly to restore the Prince of Conde; Provided and upon that condition that
the affairs of the Kingdom of Portugal should be left as they are now; which
his Catholic Majesty having refused to accept, but only offering that in the
consideration of the Offices of the said Lord the most Christian King, he would
give his consent for setting all things in the said Kingdom of Portugal, in the
same state they were before the change arrived therein the Month of December, in
the year 1640. pardoning and giving a general Amnisty for all what is past: And
his said most Christian Majesty willing to prefer, as it ought to be, and is
most just, the general quietness of Christendom, to the particular interest of
the Kingdom of Portugal, it has been at length concluded and agreed between
the said Lords and Kings, that it shall be granted unto his said most Christian
Majesty, a space of three Months time, to begin from the day of the exchanging
of the Ratifications of the present Treaty, during which his said Majesty may
send into the said Kingdom of Portugal, to endeavor so to dispose things
there, and to reduce and compose that affair, that his Catholic Majesty may
remain fully satisfied. Which three Months being expireed, if his said most
Christian Majesty's Cares and Offices have not had the desired effect, his said
Majesty will not further meddle with that affair.

His Catholic Majesty does renounce by this Treaty, both in his Name, and of
his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, unto all the Rights and Pretentions, without
keeping or reserving any thing, which his Majesty may, or might hereafter have
upon the Upper and Lower Alsatia, the Zuntgaw, the County of Ferrese, Brisac,
and Dependences thereof, and upon all the countries, places, and rights left
and yielded to his most Christian Majesty by the Treaty made at Munster, the 14
of October, 1648. to be united and incorporated to the Crown of France: In
consideration of which, his most Christean Majesty do offer to satisfy to the
payment of Three Millions of Livers, to the Archdukes of Inspruck.

The Duke Charles of Lorraine having showed much sorrow for his Conduct toward
the Lord the most Christian King, and to have a firm intension to give him more
satisfaction for the future, both of himself and of his actions, then the time
past, and the occasions have formerly enabled him to do, his most Christian
Majesty, in consideration of the mighty offices of his Catholic Majesty, does
from this time receive the said Duke into his good Grace, and in contemplation
of the Peace, without looking to the Rights his Majesty may have acquitted, by
several Treaties made by the late King his Father, with the said Duke, after
the demolishing, which shall be first made, of all the Fortifications of both
the Towns of Nancy, which he shall not have power to raise again, shall put
again the said Duke Charles of Lorraine into the possession of the Dukedom of
Lorraine, and even of the Towns, places, and Countries, by him formerly
possessed, depending of the three Bishoprics of Mentz, Thoul and Verdun,
except first, Moyenvie, which, though within the Marches of Lorraine, yet
belonged to the Empire, and has been yielded to his most Christian Majesty, by
the Treaty made at Munster, the 21 of October, 1648.

Secondly, Except the whole Dukedom of Bar, Countries, Towns, and places,
making up the same, as well that part thereof as does hold from the Crown of
France, as that which might be pretended not to hold of it.

Thirdly, except the County of Clermont, and the Dominion thereof, and the
places, Provostships, and Lands of Stenay Dun, and Jametz, with the whole
revenew thereof, and the Territories belonging to them. Which Moyenvie Dukedom
of Bar, therein comprehended the part of the place and Provestship of Merville;
which part, as it has been said before, did belong to the Dukes of Bar,
places, County, Provostship, Lands, and Dominions of Clermont, Stenay, Dnn, and
Jametz, with their Appurtenances, Dependences, and Annexes, shall remain for
ever united and incorporated to the Crown of France.

Neither the said Duke Charles of Lorraine, nor any other Prince of his House,
or of his Adherents and dependents shall not have power to remain in Arms, but
both the said Duke, and the other aforesaid, shall be bound to disband their
forces at the Publication of the said Peace.

Whereas the said Cardinal Mazarin, his most Christian Majesty's
Plenipotentiary, has represented, that for the better obtaining of a good
Peace, it is necessary that the Duke of Savoy, who has intermedled in this
War, joining his Arms to those of the Crown of France, whose Ally he is, should
be comprehended in the present Treaty: His most Christian Majesty loveing the
welfare and preservation of the said Duke, as much as his own, because of the
propinquity of blood and alliance whereby they are related* and his Catholic
Majesty finding it reasonable that the said Duke be comprehended in that Peace:
upon the instances and by the interposition of his most Christian Majesty; It
has been concluded and agreed, that for the future there shall be a cessation
of all manner of acts of hostilty, as well by Sea and other waters, as by land,
between his Catholic Majesty and the said Duke of Savoy

In consequence of the said Peace, and in consideration of the Offices of his
most Christian Ma^^sty, the said Lord the Catholic King shall restore unto the
said Duke of Savoy, the Town, place and Castle of Verceil: And shall therein
demolish nothing, nor damnify the Fortifications that have been made there: And
as to the place of Cencin in the Langs, it shall likewise be restored to the
said Duke of Savoy, in the same state it is now in, with the Dependences and
Annexes.

As for the Dower of the late Serenissime Infanta Catharina, about which there
has been some difference betwixt the Houses of Savoy, the Artears that may be
due to his House, since the said Dower was appointed, until the 17th of
December in the year 1620. At which time the late Duke Charles Emanuel of Savoy
gave in Appanage the said Dower, to the late Prince Philbert his Son, as it
shall be verified by the date, out of the Books of the Royal Chamber of Naples.

And because the Divisions, or contrary Pretensions of the Houses of Savoy and
Mantua, have several times caused some Troubles in Italy, because of the
assistances the said Lords and Kings have at diverse times given, each of them
to his Allies; that for the future, no subject or pretense may be left, that
might afresh after the good Intelligence and Amity of their Majesty's; It has
been concluded and agreed, for the good of the Peace, that the Treaties made at
Querasque, in the Year 163^. about the differences of the said Houses of Savoy
and Mantua, shall be executed according to their Form and Tenor.

And because the said Lords and Kings have considered, that the differences of
the other Princes their Friends and Adherents, have often drawn them, against
their Wills, and the Kings their Predecessors, to the taking up of Arms; The
two Lords and Kings have agreed, that they will jointly interpose, their
Offices and Supplications toward our Holy Father the Pope, until they may have
obtained of his Holiness that he might be pleased to cause the disserence to be
ended without delay, either by an Agreement or by Justice, which the Duke of
Modena has had so long since, with the Apostolical Chamber, touching the
Propriety and Possession of the Valleys of Comachio: Hoping of the Sovereign
Equity of his Holiness, that he will not refuse the just satisfaction that
shall be due to a Prince, whose Ancestors have so well deserved of the holy
See. Their Majesty's seeing, with a great Grif, the present Disposition of
Germany, and of other Northern Countries, where the War is kindled, and may
yet inflame the Empire, have concluded to send their Ambassadors, jointly to
act for the managing, in their Name, a good and speedy Accommodation, both of
all Differences that may trouble the Peace of the Empire, and of such, as some
Years since, have caused the War in the other Parts of the North.

The Prince of Monaco shall be restored, without delay, into the peaceable
possession of all the Goods, Rights and Revenews belonging unto him, and which
he enjoyed before the War, in the Kingdom of Naples, Duchy of Milan, and other
Places of the Obedience of His Catholic Majesty.

All Prisoners of War, of what Nation or Condition soever, being detained on
either side, shall be set at liberty, in paying their Expenses, and what they
may otherwise owe; but without paying any Ransom, unless they have agreed
before otherwise; in which case the Treaties made by them before this Day, shall
be executed according to their Form and Sense.

Provided all the Premises be duly observed, it has been concluded and
agreed, that the Treaty made at Vervins in the Year 568. is again confirmed and
approved by the said Plenipotentiaries, in all its Points, as if the same was
here inserted word for word, and without innovating thing therein, nor in any
of the other former Treaties, which shall remain in their full force, in
whatsoever it is not derogated unto by this present Treaty.

LONDON, Printed for W. Drury, near the Royal Exchange.


