Animadversions ON The Defense of the Answer To a PAPER, ENTITLED, The CASE of
the Dissenting Protestants of Ireland, In Reference to a BILL of Indulgence,
from the Exceptions made against it.

TOGETHER, With An ANSWER to A Peaceable and Friendly Address TO THE
Non-Conformists.

Written upon their desiring an Act of Toleration without the SACRAMENTAL TEST.

Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand.
Printed in the the Year, 1697.

To the Protestant Reader.
THe Publication of these Animadversions, tho designed some time ago, had
ceased, if a late Pamphlet, called, A Peaceable and Friendly Address, etc. had
not importuned it. For seeing some men judge it their Interest to mis-represent
to the world them they are pleased to call N. Conforming Brethren, as a factious
and schismatical people, whereby we are mis-apprehended and pre-condemn'd. We
cannot in justice to Truth and Innocence, suffer such so to prey upon the
Credulity of some, and our Reputation, as thereby to hazard their Souls, and
our Safety: Yea, compassion to our Adversaries, in endeavoring the prevention
of their being wise in their own conceit, (a case more despcrate than that of
Fools) obliges us to vindicate our selves, and inform mis-guided people, with
words of Truth and Soberness.

The people we plead for, are not the Idle and Consuming Caterpillars of the
Nation, but Industrious Laborers, Ingenious Artists, and Honest Traders: whose
religious Principles will abide in their strength, while one j^t or tittle of
the Law of God indures: becase they adore the fullness of the H. Scriptures as
the perfect and only rule of Faith and Manners. They believe the necessity of a
standing Gospel Ministry in the Church; to whose directive Authority they
submit themselves; not by an implicit Faith, but by a judgment of Discretion.
All God's holy Ordinances and instituted Worship they embrace, but their Fear
toward God is not taught by the Commandments of men. Their doctrine bears
conformity with that of the Reformed Churches abroad, and harmoniously agrees
with that of Ireland declared in her Convocation, An. 1615, excepting in what
relates to Prelacy and Ceremonies. They are willing to give unto Caesar what is
Caesar's, and unto God what is God's. They profess their Credenda, Petenda, and
Agenda, ought all to be regulated by the word of God. These Principles we
believe are able to abide a Fiery Trial.

And as their Principles are true, so their Petitions are modest: Episcopal
Grandeur, Jurisdiction, or Revenues, is not demanded for their Ministers, or by
them. A liberty to serve God according to these foresaid Principles, with a
relief from some Penal Laws formerly framed against them, and that no new ones
be forged to their prejudice, is all they require. And if such modest Requests
may be with Christian Conscience denied a people of such Principles, we leave
to the determination of our Judge, that stands at the Door, if Men should
give sentence against us.

Animadversions On the Defense of the Answer to a Paper, ENTITLED, The Case of
the Dissenting Protestants in Ireland, etc.
WHen Diogenes trampled upon Aristippus's Cushion, and insulted over himself in
these words; See how I trample on Aristippus's Pride: he had this return; thou
do it but with no less Pride: So when the Defendant of the Answer, etc.
salutes the Vindicator of the Dissenters Case, with a charge of sourness, and
vanity of temper. In the very entrance of his diseourse, he discovers so much
of the distemper in himself, that if Civility coult not, yet Conscience of the
same evil in himself, should have obliged him to treat his Adversary more
decently: But whether the sourness of his temper, or his vanity to comprize an
Iliad of Railing Accusations in a Nut-shell, has induced him, with one breath,
to upbraid the Vindicator with sourness, and vanity of temper, dexterity in
perverting, little sincerity, dising enuity, injustice, etc. I determine not,
but if his Reasoning ta^ent, be equivalent to his Railing, no Dissenter will be
able to stand before him.

Lest he should be suspected of transgressing the 9th Commandment, he attempts
to make good this charge, by, as he calls it, A remarkable Instance of the
Dissenters injustice to him, viz. The phrase, general Indulgence used by him
(which, as he says, does plainly signify no more than a legal toleration of
Dissenting Protestants); the Vindicator wrests to import a comprehension of all
sorts of Religion.

Answ. If this be Injustice, he has cause to fear, that all who have sense to
discern words, will be injurious to him, seeing General Indulgence natively
signifies, Indulgence to all sorts of Persons and Opinions: And it is improper
to say, that General Indulgence imports only toleration of Protestant
Dissenters, which is but Special, unless Protestant Dissentors should
comprehend all sorts, which himself does not assert.

As the Vindicator has not wrested his Expressions, so neither has he
misrepresented his Sense, seeing all the arguments he uses against the
Indulgence pleaded for, militat only against an unlimited and general
Indulgence of all sorts.

The next thing disgusts the Defendant, is a rule laid down by the Vindicator,
that these are of the same Religion with the Established Church, who subscribe
her Doctriual Articles: this rule he will not allow to be true; and that because,
there being three general parts of Religion, viz. Doctrine, Worship, and
Government, unless we agree in all these, we are not of the same Religion.

A. If the Rule be not good, why do the Books of Articles in England, an. 1552,
and 1562, and those in Ireland in 1616, unanimously declare, that they were
agreed upon in Convocation, for avoiding of diversities of Opinions, and for
Establishing Consent touching true Religion.

Do not the Subscribers to the 6th Article, concerning the sufficiency of holy
Scripture for Salvation, subscribe to the Worship and Government of the Church,
as well as to its Doctrine? if they do not, as the D. insinuates, it must be
because that Worship and Doctrine is not read in the holy Scripture, nor may be
proved thereby: which is no honor to the Liturgy, Ceremonies, or Prelacy.

Dr. Stillinfleet in his Irenicum has endeavored to prove that Men may be of
the same Religion, and yet not under the same particular form of Church
Government: And I am persuaded 'twill be hard for the D. to produce any Church
that is, or has been in the world, with which the Established Church of England
does exactly agree in Form of Worship and Government. And thus by his Rule
excluding us from the same Religion with the Established Church, he does also
cut her off from Communion in the same Religion with any Church in the World.
The Anabaptists against whom the D. excepts as unfit to be comprehended in the
Indulgence, are of age, let them speak for themselves, we are none of their
Advocates: Yet the V's. reason for including them, and his Charity also, was
their being included in the Act of Indulgence for England, An. 1689. And in a
Bill prepared by the Council of Ireland in my Lord Sydneys Government, and
approved by the K. Q. and council of England, and Re-transmitted to be Enacted
by the Parliament here in 1692. But if the Reason of his dissatisfaction with
them be only, their denying one of the Doctrinal Articles, durst he be so
Impartial, he has no less cause to look upon many of his Brethren, Fathers and
Sons of the Church, as intolerable as the Anabaptists; for they are too truly
suspected to have no sincere veneration for several of the Articles. And Bishop
Bramhall has taught us concerning the 39 Articles, that the Church does not
define any of these Questions, as necessary to be believed either necessitate
praecepti, or medii, nor does look upon them as Essentials of Saving Faith, or
Legacies of Christ, or his Apostles; but as pious Opinions, fitted for the
preservation of Unity, Stillingst. Ratif. p. 54, 55.
neither does she oblige any man to believe them, but not to contradict them.
Whence we may see what great esteem the great Prelates of the Church have for
the 39 Articles: Seeing then (by such) the Incarnation, Death and Resurrection
of Christ be not Essentials of Saving Faith, but only pious Opinions; why
should Anabaptists be looked on as intolerable for denying Infant Baptism, when
the Doctrine of Biptism is only a pious Opinion. We notice this, not in defense
of Anabaptists, but to lay open the D's gross partiality, who knowing how
little regard many Sons of the Church have for these Articles, yet tacitly
justifies them, when he condemns others for the same, or less faults. But for
this, let him read Bishop Taylor's Liberty of Prophesying, p. m. 227.

The V. asserted, that the Bill pleaded for by the Dissenters, would multiply
no other Sects, than those mentioned in it, and tolerated by it; which the D.
tells, has little show of Reason to recommend it; and that because such a
Toleration may occasion the Rise and Increase of many others not pleaded for.
To confirm which, he instanceth Holland, where in few years the Anabaptists
spawned 50 Sects all under the same name.

A. The Reason given to disprove the V's Assertion, has as little substance of
Reason to recommend it, as the V. had show; for what if Toleration to some
Protestant Dissenters should occasion the Rise of other Sects, must it be
therefore unreasonable to tolerate them: By this way of arguing, we might prove
the Reformation from Popery, yea, Christianity it self Intolerable; because
they occasioned the Rise of many Sects, and most bloody Persecutions, tho they
were not the proper causes of these Evils: even so, the tolerating two or three
can never be the cause of multiplying more, if no other be tolerated save those
two or three: Further, the Instance of Holland is disingenuously offered; for
he knows the Toleration there granted, is nothing like what is here desired,
seeing there are comprehended all sorts, Jews, Papists, etc. And therefore all
multiply where they are equally tolerated, but here only three are pretended.

But again, his Inference with its Reason, are neither fairly not prudently
produced; his Inference is, That persons in Authority should deny an unlimited
and irrestricted Indulgence to Presbyterians and Independents: his Reason is,
lest the general and legal Allowance granted, should be productive of many
Sects, which, tho different from each other, should disire to be called by
their names, to take away their reproach, and that they might enjoy the benefit
of the public Toleration.

A. This Inference unjustly insinuate, that on unlimited Toleration is desired,
when, as in matters of Religion, we are satisfied to be limited by the Law of
God: In matters Civil, by the Law of the Land. The imprudence of his Reason is,
that it militats as much against a legal Establishment, as a legal Toleration,
and more; for Experience reaches us, that many desire the Ruler's favor, and
to be called by the name of the Established Church, and shroud themselves under
her cover, both to take away their reproach, and also to share of the Honor,
Rise, and plentiful provision allowed the Sons of the Church.

The D. being dissatisfied with the V's weakness, or unwillingness to apprehend
the mischievous consequences of this legal Toleration, notwithstanding all he
had said, complains of him, that he had propounded several Questions to little
purpose; among which, he instanceth one, viz. Whether the Popish Interest will
be ever the stronger, because there are more Protestants to oppose it, and
because their mutual forbearance will more unite their endeavors against the
common Enemy. so this the D. answers; 1st. That tho the Popish interest will
be sensibly weak, and by the increase of Prote^ants of the same Communion, yet
it will be considerably strengthened by the multiplicity of Sects, which Legal
Indulgence generally promotes. 2d. That Dissenters on the grant of Legal
indulgence will grow far more insolent and tumultucus than they were before, as
has been observed in a Neighbor Kingdom.

A. To his first it is plain that the increase of Protestants, though not of the
same Communion, does, not considerably strengthen, but weaken the Popish
Interest, for has not the Increase of Protestants in Germany, France, Britain
and Ireland since 1691, particularly in the North, though of different Communion,
considerably weaked the Popish Interest? Much more would the greater increase
of the number of Protestants here in Ireland, weaken them in their Civil, and
consequently in the defense and maintenance of their Religious Interests, were
they encouraged by a legal Indulgence: And it is too well known to be with
modesty denied, that the Popish Interest here has been, and yet is weakened by
other hands than those of the Established Church only, for he and all may know
how formidable Vlster appeared to Tyrconnel and his Party in Winter 1688, and
how undauntedly it resisted and foiled King James's Army, and Reinforced Duke
Sconberg's. And he, and every Man of sense knows the far greater Number there
are Dissenters; for the truth whereof we vouch Bp. King for 30000 in his
Diocese, and leaves him in his next to publish their Numbers in his own and
Neighboring Diocesses.

But bless't be God we are not divided in defending the British and Protestant
Interest against a Popish Irish Interrest; And I hope as the many Parties of
different Religions and Interest now confederate against France, do
considerably weaken that King, while they unite all in one to make him just and
peaceable; so will we the Protestants of Ireland against our common Enemy; for
the Union of many Parties Syncretizing against a common Foe, is not that which
strengthens the Adversary, but when these several Parties divide in heart and
hand by mutual conflict, that impedes their joining for the common good, which
is the native Fruit of one prevailing Party's persecuting the rest: And this
the Papists labor to effectuat, whose drudgery he and his Brethren do with all
their might, while they daily labor to keep us off and at under, with this
silly shift of bending the Knee in the Eucharist, which came in with Popery,
they call indifferent, and well know we will not do contrary to our Conscience;
while they do not try us with the Doctrinal Articles for a Test; let all Wise
Men judge of this Policy and Religion.

His second Observation of Dissenters growing much more tumultuous since the
Legal Indulgence has been granted them, I apprehend has been made by the D.
in his Dream, arising from frightful Ideas he has of the Dissenters; for sure
since the commencement of a Legal Indulgence in 1689. no instance of Dissenters
Tumults can be produced: Though we can instance Bloody Tumults, Rebellions and
Conspiracies against the King and Government, carried on by those who call
themselves the Sons of the Church, both in England and Scotland; in which no
Presbyterian has been concerned.

The V. having desired to know from the D. wherein a Toleration to Dissenting
Protestants will advance the Popish Interest in Ireland, he promises to give a
full and ample satisfaction in this matter: And 1st. He desires him seriously
to consider whether there be not violent presumption, that a public Legal
Indulgence to Protestants, does not highly advance the Popish Interest; since
all Romish Emissaries so eagerly desire, and industriously promote Tolerations,
tho limited to Protestant Dissenters; and when all other measures failed, have
readily expended considerable Sums of Money to purchase them; And it is
generally known that the Declaration A. 1671/2. was of the Papists procuring.

A. If this Declaration was not granted in favor of the Dissenters in Ireland
(as he knows it was not) his Answer cannot satisfy the V's demand, who would
only know, wherein a Toleration to Dissenters in Ireland would advance the
Popish Interest here: but the Declaration he speaks of, seems to be that
emitted in England, A. 1691/2, and then he most disingenuously represents the
matter, for it was procured by an Exigence of State Affairs; England then being
engaged in a War against Holland, it was thought unsafe to persecute so
numerous and wealthy a part of the Nation as Protestant Dissenters then were,
and in the interim to carry on a War against their Friends abroad; therefore to
keep matters at home as quiet as possible, a Declaration for Indulgence was
Published, but so far from limiting the Indulgence to Protestant Dissenters,
that Popish Recusants had apparently the greatest share in that Liberty, which
so much disgusted the Nation, that the King was necessitated to make Apology
for it; as appears by his Speech to the Parliament, Feb. 5. An. 1672. In which
he says, I put forth my Declaration for Indulgence to Dissenters, and have
hitherto found the good effect of it. There is one part that is subject to
mis-construction, which is that concerning the Papists, as if more liberty were
granted to them, than to other Recusants; when it is plain there is less: I do
not intend to prejudice the Church, but will support its Religion in its full
Power; having said, I shall take it very ill to receive Contradiction in what I
have done, and I will deal plainly with you, I am Resolved to stick to my
Declaration. The Lord Chancellor also spoke the same thing, viz. His Majesty
has so fully Vindicated his Declaration from that Calumny, concerning the
Papists, that no reasonable scruple can be made against it, by any good Man, he
has sufficiently justified it, by the time it was Published in the Effects he
has had from it, and might have done it more from the agreeableness of it to
his own natural Disposition, which no good Englishman could wish other ways
than it is: he loves not blood nor rigorous severities, but where mild and
gentle methods may be used by a Prince, he is certain to choose them: and
concludes that head thus; But His Majesty is not convinced that violent Ways
are the Interest of Religion, or the Church. By this we may see if the D. does
not Rival the V. in setting (as he says of him) things in a false light, for
what can be less candid than this Representation of that matter: Seeing, 1.
There was no legal Toleration, but a Liberty granted by a Declaration, which is
questionable, whether Law, or not. 2. Nor was it limited to Protestant
Dissenters only, but included also Papists. Nor, 3dly. Procured by money. By
this we may see the merciless disposition of some Churchmen, who first extort
from the Magistrate Rigorous Laws, and then reproach Dissenters for disloyalty
in not obeying them, which they have squeezed from the Magistrate, contrary to
his Inclination and Interest.

The D's second Argument to prove that the free exercise of Protestant
Religion, according to different Modes, will advance the Popish Interest here,
is drawn from his experience; for, says he, when Protestant Dissenters, or (as
he calls them) pretended Protestants have been Legally Indulged, it has been
experimentally found, that Popish Emissaries were more numerous, their
Application greater, and Harvest more plenteous than at other times.

A. If the D. had as sincerely intended, as he vainly promised ample
satisfaction in this point, he would have instanced the time when, and place
where, a legal Indulgence granted to Protestant Dissenters produced that
effect: for tho he values his own testimony as demonstration, others do not;
for it appears not that this fell out in Queen Elizabeth's, K. James's, or K.
Charle's 1st. time; it then must be either in Oliver's time, as by the date of
Bishop Bramhall's Letter in 1659 (which he cites) would appear: but then the
Papists do not glory in their Harvest here, unless it was, that many of them
were cut down at the same rate, being set on a Priest's Head in Ireland, as on
a Wolf, which occasioned Emissaries to be never less numerous than then; or
after the Restoration of K C. 2d. during whose Reign, Dissenters had no Legal
Indulgence here, tho we confess the application of Papists was strong, the
Harvest plentiful, and Emissaries numerous; or for King James the 2d's time, in
which, no such Toleration, limited to Dissenters, was thought on: The charge
then must lie on K. W. and Q. M. since 1689. but then his experience will be
found false: for neither (we bless God for it) are Popish Emissaries so
numerous as in former times have been, nor their harvest so plentiful; nay, we
have found it experimentally, that when Protestant Dissenters has been
violently Persecuted, Popish Emissaries has been most warmly Entertained; for
when Dissenters in the North of this Kingdom were forced in the beginning of K.
C. I's. Reign to undertake a troublesome Voyage to America, there to shelter
themselves from Persecution (though providentially driven back) then a Toleration
for Papists here was granted.

Concerning Bp. Bramhall's Letter to Primate Usher produced to prove his
experience Anno 1659. in which it is said, that several of the Popish Clergy of
France were taught manual Trades to qualify them as Emissaries to foment
divisions in England. A few Instances given of these mechanic
Priest-Missionaries that came into England, would prove the truth of that
Letter better, which will be suspected till then, by all that consider how hard
it would be to persuade lazy Priests to undergo the long fatigue of learning
Handycrafts, which would do them little service without the language of the
Land: And they who know the strict scrutiny made by Presbyterians and
Independants e're they admit any as members of their Congregations, or
Ministers, will be more afraid that such should thrust themselves in the
Established Churches than ours.

His 3d. Argument to prove that Toleration to Dissenting Protestants will
increase Popery, is, because it is the cause of our Divisions; whereof the
Papists take great advantage. For proof whereof, he cites Mr. Baxter.

A. That Papists, and all other Adversaries, make their advantage by our
Divisions, is seen and bewailed by all good men with Mr. Baxter; but that our
mutual forbearance of one another in matters not necessary to Salvation, was
ever the cause of divisions, Mr. Baxter has nor taught, but the contrary: Yet
if he desire an account of the true causes of our divisions, he may learn them
from one of the Ornaments of the Church of England; the memorable Mr. John
Hales of Eaton, in his Tract of Schism, page 201. Who teaches us, that all
Schisms have crept into the Church by one of these three ways; (1st.) Upon
matter of Fact; (2d.) Upon matter of Opinion; (3d.) On point of Episcopal
Ambition: I call that matter of Fact, when something is required to be done by
us which we know, or strongly suspect to be unlawful: So the first notable
Schism of which we read in the Church, contained in it matter of Fact; for it
being upon Error taken for necessary that an Easter must be kept; and upon
worse than Error, if I may so speak, (for it was no less than a point of
Judaism forced upon the Church) upon worse than Error I say, thought further
necessary, that the ground for the time of keeping that Feast, must be the Rule
left by Moses unto the Jews: There arose a stout Question, whether we were to
celebrate with the Jews on the 14th of the Moon, or on the Sunday following.
This matter, tho most unnecessary, most vain, yet caused as great a combustion
as ever was in the Church: the first separating, and refusing Communion with
the last for many years together. In this fantastical hurry, I cannot see but
that all the world were Schismatics; neither can any thing excuse them from
that Imputation, excepting only this, that we charitably suppose, that all
Parties out of Conscience did what they did; a thing which befell them through
the Ignorance of their Guides, (for I will not say their Malice) and that
through the just judgment of God, because through Sloth and blind Obedience
men examined not the things which they were taught, but like Beasts of burden,
patiently couched down, and indifferently underwent whatsoever their Superiors
laid upon them. Further, page 210. For in these Schisms which concern Fact,
nothing can be a just cause of refusal of Communion, but only to require the
execution of some unlawful and suspected Act: for not only in Reason, but
Religion too, that Maxim admits of no Release; Cautissimi cujusque praeceptum,
quod dubtias, ne feceris. And speaking of the second Council of Nice, where
Image Worship was established, where was the first remarkable Schism upon just
occasion of Fact; he tells us, The schismatical Party was the Synod it self,
and such as conspired with it; for concerning the use of Images in Sacris. 1.
It is acknowledgby all, that it is not a thing necessary. 2. It is by most
suspected. 3. It is by many held utterly unlawful. Can then the injoyning the
practice of such a thing be ought else but abuse; or can the refusal of
Communion here, be thought any other thing than duty here, or upon the like
occasion to separate, may peradventure bring personal trouble and danger;
(against which, it concerns every honest man to have pectus been preparatum) so
that in these cases you cannot be to seek what you think, or what you have to
do.

His 2d sort of Schism arising upon occasion of variety of Opinion, is thus: It
has been, says he, the common disease of Christians from the beginning, not
to content themselves with that measure of Faith, which God in Scripture has
expressly afforded us; but out of a vain desire to know more than is revealed,
they have attempted to discuss things of which they can have no light, neither
from Reason nor Revelation; neither have they rested here, but upon pretense of
Church Authority, which is none; or Tradition, which is for the most part but
figment; they have peremptorily concluded, and confidently imposed on others a
necessity of entertaining conclusions of that nature, etc. After he tells, were
Liturgies, and public Forms of Service, so framed, as that they admitted of no
particular and private Fancies, but contained only such things, as in which all
Christians do agree: Schisms in opinions were utterly Vanished; for consider
all the Liturgies that are, or have been, and remove from them whatsoever is
Scandalous to any Party, and leave nothing but what all agree in, and the event
shall be, that the public Service and Honor of God shall no ways suffer,
whereas to load our Public Forms with the private fancies upon which we
differ, is the most Sovereign way to perpetuate Schism unto the Worlds End.
Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading of Scripture, Exposition of
Scripture, Administration of Sacraments in the plainest and simplest manner,
were matters enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing either of
private Opinion, or of Church Pomp, of Garments, of prescribed Gestures, of
Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning the Dead, of many superfluities which
creep into the Churches, under the Dream of Order and Decency did interpose it
self: For to charge Churches and Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the
first beginning of all Superstition: and when scruple of Conscience began to be
made or pretended, then Schism begun to break in: If the spiritual Guides and
Fathers of the Church would be a little sparing of incumbring the Churches with
superfluities, and not over-rigid, either in receiving absolute Customs, or
imposing New, there were far less danger of Schism, or Superstition, and the
inconveniency were likely to issue, would be but this, they should in so doing
yield a little to the imbecillities of Inferiors; a thing which St. Paul could
never have refused to do; in the mean while, where ever false and suspected
Opinions are made a piece of the Churches Liturgy, he that separates is not
Scismatick; for it is alike unlawful to make profession of known and suspected
falsehoods, as to put in practice unlawful and suspected Actions.

The third Cause of Schism is Episcopal Ambition, p. 218, says he, Aristotle
tells us, that necessity causes but small Faults, but Avarice and Ambition are
Mothers of great Crimes: Episcopal Ambition has made this true, for no
occasion has produced more continuing and more sanguinary Schisms, than this
has done; the Sees of Alexandria, of Antioch, of Constantinople, and above all
of Rome do abundantly show this much, and our Ecclesiastical Stories Witness no
less of which the greatest part consists in factionating, and tumultuating of
Great and Potent Bishop, etc.

This Episcopal Ambition showed it self especially in two Heads, one concerning
plurality of Bishops in one See, another the Superiority of Bishops in diverse
Sees: As to the first he tells us, That the general Practice of the Church
since the Original of Episcopacy as now it is, was never to admit at once, more
than one Bishop in one See, and to prevent Spiritual Polygamy, neither would
they admit of two Cathedrals, but from the beginning it was not so; for even at
Rome, and Hippo there were two Bishops at one time; neither does it savor of
Vice, or Misdemeanour, that it should be so still, their Punishment sleeps not,
who go about unnecessarily and wantonly to infringe it: But the other head of
Episcopal Ambition, concerning Supremacy of Bishops in diverse Sees, one
claiming Superiority over another, as it has been from time to time, a great
Trespasser against the Churches Peace, so it is now the final Ruin of it, the
East and West through the fury of the two prime Bishops, being irremediably
separated, without all hope of Reconcilement; and beside, all this mischief is
founded on a Vice contrary to all Christian Humility, without which no Man
shall see his Savior, for they do but abuse themselves and others, that would
persuade us, that Bishops, by Christ's Institution, have any Superiority over
other men, further than that of Reverence; or that any Bishop is Superior to
another, further than positive Order agreed upon amongst Christians has
prescribed: for we have believed him that has told us, that in Jesus Christ
there is neither high n^r low, and that in giving honor, every man should be
ready to prefer another before himself: which sayings cut off all claim most
certainly to Superiority, by title of Christianity; except men can think that
these things were only spoken to poor and private men. Nature and Religion
agree in this, that neither of them have a hand in this heraldry of secundum,
sub and supra; all this comes from composition, and agreement of men among
themselves: wherefore this abuse of Christianity, to make it lacquy to
ambition, is a vice for which we have no ordinary name, and an ordinary one we
will not give it; lest you should take so transcendent a vice for a trivial:
Thus the Memorable Mr. Jo. Hales. And would to God all would consider his words
most seriously, by which we may see what are the true causes of Schism, and who
are the Schismatics. Whence also it will appear that a public Indulgence to
weaker Brethren, in matters not necessary, and suspected to be unlawful, is no
cause of Divisions; but on the contrary, an ambitious claim of Superiority,
imposing private Opinions, and commanding suspected Practices, are the true
causes of them, and ever will be.

The D's 4th Argument against Public Indulgence is, That they have not only
fatally conduced to the perverting a considerable number of Protestants, but
also effectually hindered the conversion of many Papists, who tho sensible of
many gross Errors in Principles and ungodly Practices in the Worship enjoined
them by Rome; yet have been so highly scandalized by the Divisions amongst us,
that they have rather chosen to continue in them, etc.

A. Had not the D. trusted more to the Rhetoric than Logic of this Argument,
he had concealed it; being a Sophism, as they call it, of non causa, pro causa,
and is no stronger than this; the legal establishment of one of the divided
parties, perverts many, and hinders the conversion of Papists, because they
are scandalized at our Divisions; for a legal toleration of some, is not the
cause, but consequent of our Divisions, seeing Divisions must be before the
necessity of a Toleration to the Parties divided. 2dly. If our Divisions
scandalize the Papists, as I am persuaded they do; he may enquire at the
Memorable Mr. John Halos, who are the Dividers, and to whom the Woe is due,
that belongs to such as cause Offenses. 3dly. Such Papists as are sensible of
gross Errors in Principles and ungodly Practices in the Worship enjoined them,
and yet continue in them, would have had the same object on against
Christianity it self, had they lived in Corinth in the days of the Apostles,
for then were Divisions: nor do I see what loss the Church sustains by want of
such Converts, as can live, for Union's sake, in gross Errors, and ungodly
Practices, whereof they are convinced: And why Division should terrify them
from Conversion, I see not, seeing if they will be converted to us, they must
divide from Rome. 4thly. But what if the rigid severity of the domineering
party of Protestants against all who differ from them, be the cause of Offense?
Sure Intelligent Papists are not ignorant of the Divisions among themselves,
but neither Party being permitted to bite and devour each other, except by Pen
and Ink, they glory in their Union, notwithstanding these Divisions Bishop Hall
in his Letter to Mr. Laud (afterward Archbishop Laud) expostulating with him
about his unsettledness in Religion, hanging betwixt the Romanists and
Protestants, upon the account of our Divisions, tells him, Whither will ye go
for Truth, if ye will allow no truth but where there is no Division? To Rome
perhaps, famous for Unity, famous for Peace: See now how happily ye have
chosen, how well have you sped, So their Cardinal Bellarmin himself, a Witness
above exception, under his own hand, acknowledges to the world: and reckons up
237 contra^^^^^ of Doctrine amongst the Romish Divines; no, they are no more
peaceable, but more subtle, they fight more closely, within doors; all our
frays are in the Frield, our strite is in Ceremony, theirs is in Substance; so
the Decad, 3 Ep. 5.

The D's 5th Argument to prove that this legal liberty to Protestant Dissenters
will advance the Popish Interest, is taken from the different state of Denmark
and Swedland, from that of the United Provinces, in reference to the numbers of
Papists in these Countries: For as the strictness of the Laws against those who
differ from these Established Churches has been remarkably effectual for the
rooting out of Popery from amongst them, so the unlimited Toleration granted in
Holland to all sorts of Religions, has multiplied the Papists there, etc.

A. As the strictness of the Laws in Denmark and Sweden are remarkable for
rooting out Popery, so are they for rooting out all Protestants, save
Lutherans: And if their strictness be their perfection; we can tell him of more
perfect Laws, viz. the Laws of the Holy Inquisition, which are as sovereign
prophylactick for the Established Churches of Spain and Italy, as these of
Denmark and Sweden are; so that he may thus recommend Lords Inquisitors to the
Parliament to be authorized, as Guardian Angels to the Clergy of Ireland. 2dly.
It is not want of strict Laws against Popery that has preserved them in
England, but the not employing the Laws made against them; and mis-imploying
them against the dissenting Protestants. 3dly. His comparing the state of the
United Provinces with that of Denmark and Sweden to the desired Toleration, is
unjust; seeing we plead for no Toleration to Papists, as is granted in Holland.
That the rectricting the Indulgence to those pleaded for by the V. will not
prevent the advancement of the Popish Interest here, as he says, seems
strange; for if the Law granting liberty to two or three Parties, excluding all
others ruined, prevent the creeping in of Priests and Jesuits amongst us; how
can tho Law Establishing the Church, prevent the like among them? For if the
evil be prevented by virtue of the Law, it may have the same influence to
preserve both; yea, Experience teaches us, that it is easier to preserve from
being infected by such Vermin the poor and depressed Party, than the prosperous
and exalted: Few play the Hypocrite, to be thereby made miserable; tho many
may, and daily do, for Profit and Preferment.

His 6th Argument against this legal Toleration is, that in stead of widening
the Basis of the Protestant interest, as is alleged by the V. this Indulgence
would undeniably weaken the foundation of the Protestant Security in this
Kingdom, because each tolerated Party will rather industriously promote their
own distinct Interest, than unanimously oppose the common Enemy, as Experience
has taught us: And to make good his Assertion, he instanceth the case of the
Famous Mr. Houston in the North of this Kingdom,

A. If the Defendant would allow the Dissenters to be Protestants, to which
they pretend as good title as the Established Church, seeing they protest
against Popery as much as they, then the increasing of their numbers would
infallibly increase the number of Protestants, and so both widen and strengthen
the Basis of Protestant Interest: But if he will monopolize the name of
Protestant to the Established Church, and by the foundation of its Security
understand Penal Laws against the Dissenters; tho the Indulgence might ruin
that Foundation, the Church might stand, and be better secured by its Innocence
and Affection of its Neighbors, than by its own guilt, and their enmity; but
it is strange he should assert that experience has sufficiently taught us, that
each tolerated Party will rather distinctly promote their own Interest, than
unanimously oppose the common Enemy, when the experience of the whole Nation
knows the truth of the contrary, that we maintained no separated Interest from
the common; for as our Civil Interests are embarked in the common, so we cannot
desert the one, without destroying the other: no more can we maintain our
Religious Interest either without opposition to the Popish in Ireland: His
Instance to prove his Experience, is as ridiculous as Mr. Houston himself, who,
as he says, scandalously separated from the main body of the Protestants in the
North of Ireland; and had not extraordinary Providence intervened, the
Intestine Animosities of these seeming Friends had been of more mischievous
consequence, than the open hostilities of our professed Enemies: And the
Divisions which these few pretended Protestants endeavored to foment, were
really more formidable than the united Force and Power of a numerous Popish
Army, and had been more fatal to our common Interest.

A. All who know the truth of that Instance of Mr. Houston, and his rise and
retinue in the Diocese of Connor, which many thousands were witness to, will
ridioule him for its motion; for that man being Irregular, was suspended and
deposed by the Presbyterians, and had only a few silly ignorant people to
adhere to him; and when the whole North arrayed, he also ranged his company to
oppose the common Enemy; so that this discovers the folly and unreasonableness
of the D. in making use of it: for it seems strange, that about 200 men, his
compliment, without Arms, Ammunition, or Order, should be more formidable than
the united force and power of the numerous well-appointed Popish Army: nor did
any in the North fear those mischievous consequences he talks of; for by a
prudent neglect of that man, and his silly Followers, we have lived to see them
vanish into Smoke: we know not what that extraordinary Providence was, that
prevented these fearful misohiefs, except it be the Irish prevailing to scatter
unprovided men; and it would appear, that the D. was not very apprehensive of
the mischiefs of the open hostilities of our professed Enemies, when he is more
terrified with the thoughts of Mr. Houston's company, who had little formidable
in it, except the Motto of his Bannar: possibly a second 1641 would not have
been so mischievous in its consequence (in his opinion) as the Divisions of
these two parties of Dissenters, whereby he discovers either little fear of
Irish Hostility, or too much of the ill consequences of Division among
Dissenters.

The D. suspecting that all he had said might be of little weight with the V.
attacks him with the judgment of a Protestant Parliament, who in Feb. 25. 1662
in an Address to King Charles the 2d, say; We have considered the nature of the
Indulgence proposed, with reference to these consequences, which must necessary
attend it; It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of
the Church precarious, and the censures of it of no moment or consideration at
all: It will be a cause of increasing of Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers
will weaken the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will be at last
difficult to defend it self against them; and, which is yet further
considerable, these numbers, which by being troublesome to the Government, find
they can arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, that at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, and in
time some prevalent Sect will at last contend for Establishment; which, for
ought can be foreseen, may end in Popery.

A. To this I shall return him the words of a moderate and learned Conformist
in his Plea for the Non-Conformists, Plea 2. page 39. Who says, That the House
of Commons, A. 1662. did argue against Indulgence, and for keeping up the Act
of the Uniformity by way of prophecy and foresight of consequences; and their
humble advices to the King contain the strongest reasons against an Indulgence,
that have been found out, contain the great evils of a forbearance; all which
he reduces to six Heads, but answers to them all thus: As Events prove
Prophecies true or false, so Events have proved these Arguments weak or strong.
That very Parliament, the true Protestant part of it, that did faithfully serve
their King and Country, with the additions made to them by a latter Election,
to fill up vacant places, saw where they were, and became sensible of the
necessity of Uniting Protestants by Act of Parliament. And many Episcopal
Divines, and some Bishops were for it; a clear discovery, that the mischiefs of
our Divisions are of that sort, that it were better that an abatement were made
of some things made necessary to Uniformity, without which the Dissenters will
not unite, than suffer them to hang over our heads, and come upon us; we
plainly see that many of these reasons of the Commons were of no force; we will
observe what is of present use to our times, which is the first; and for the
other, it became their Wisdom, and Religion, to Pass a Bill taking from the Act
of Uniformity; his Majesty has not been molested by the Importunities of the
Dissenters, who have not so much as opened their Grievances, or Petitioned the
King and Parliament these many years. There is no new Sect appearing, or
increase of any by the Non-conformists, to weaken the Protestant Religion, who
have used endeavors to Increase and Maintain it, it is is in no danger from
them, they are not troublesome to the Government, are not for a Toleration of
intolerable Sects and Sectaries, contend not for an Establishment which they
would rejoice in, but as it become learned men, and rational, with as great a
temper at least as theirs that writ against them, the Peace of the Nation is
not disturbed by them, and if Popery come in, it is against their wills, Pains
and Prayers to expose and baffle it: It is their trouble that they are thought
troublesome to the Government, which may by no extraordinary exercise of
Patience, and Love, overcome the trouble in their own Breast, which is the seat
of trouble; and for the only remaining, which is the evil of Schism, it is
clear, that Connivance gives no Establishment to it, etc.

But seeing the D. is so confident of the Authority of the Commons in that
Parliament, and lays so much stress upon it, we hope he will not decline the
Authority of the whole, when the Experience of Ten Years had made them wiser,
for p. 22. our Author tells, what England knows, That that very Parliament
which was observed for a great part of it, to be young Gentlemen growing Elder
became more cool and moderate toward Dissenting Protestants, more suspicious of
Popery, and the more Resolute they grew in Maintaining Property, and the
Protestant Religion, and break the legs and arms of growing Popery, the more
temperate they grew toward Nonconformists, etc. And therefore at that meeting
of the Parliament in Feb. 24. 1672. An Act passed against Papists; and a Bill
was presented by the same House of Commons to the Lords in favor of the
Dissenting, and for Uniting Protestants, which, as some, who have as much
reason to know, as any that write, say, would have passed, if they had got time
to sit, and from that time, that Long Parliament, who had made the Act against
Conventicles, A. 1670. how Resolute soever they were against Indulgence, Feb.
15. 1662. they saw the incompatibility of the Execution of their own Law, and
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and have ever since taken other
Measures. Now whether or not the same Parliament, after ten years Experience of
the weakness, and some worse evils of their own Prophetical Arguments, upon
which they retract their former Sentence, is to be more regarded, than when
they gave their first unexperienced thoughts, we shall leave all thinking Men
to judge, and of the D's Candor in concealing this part of the History: And if
we were to manage this Argument by Authority, we have an Act of Parliament,
consisting of as good Protestants, A. 1689. to balance the Addrese of the
Commons in 1662. with the concurring Authority of all our Kings, who have been
experienced in these our differences, asserting the convenience of Indulging
tender Consciences, as we could give him undeniable Instances: But one for all,
is the Vote of the House of Commons passed Jan. 10th. 168 where they say, It is
the Opinion of this House that the Persecution of Protestant Dissenters upon
the Penal Laws is at this time Grievous to the Subject, and weakening to the
Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of
the Kingdom.

His 7th, and last Argument, which he calls the most forcible of all, is the
judgment of the Ministers of London, with those of Lancaster, against
Toleration. Printed Anno 1648.

A. Though we allow the Truth of all those Ministers say, yet they never intended
that, for that end, which he perverts their words to: For it will be hard to
persuade the world, that these men judged the Toleration of Presbyterians
unlawful, seeing themselves were such; and because his whole Argument runs upon
a false supposition, that we desired an universal Toleration of all Sects, he
may receive our judgment in this, from our confession, Cap. 20. Sect. 3.

They, who upon pretense of Christian Liberty do practice any Sin, or cherish
any Lust, do thereby destroy the end of Christian Liberty, etc.

And because the Power which God has ordained, and Liberty which Christ has
purchased, are not intended by God to destroy, but mutually to uphold one
another; they, who upon pretense of Christian Liberty shall oppose any lawful
Power, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, resist the Ordinance of God; and for
their publishing such Opinions, and maintaining such Practices, as are contrary
to the Light of Nature, or the known Principles of Christianity, whether
concerning Faith, Worship, Conversation, or the Power of Godliness; Or such
Erroneous Opinions or Practices, as either in their own nature, or in the
manner of publishing and maintaining them, are destructive to the external
Order, which Christ has Established in the Church, they may be lawfully called
to account, and proceeded against by the Censures of the Church, and by the
Power of the Civil Magistrate. Thus far our Confession of Faith.

By this it is apparent, that we justify no unlimited Toleration; and when he
has made it appear, that we maintain Opinions and Practices inconsistent with
the light of Nature, and known Principles of Christianity either in Faith,
Worship, or Conversation, or destructive of the external Order by Christ
Established in his Church, then let us be looked upon as deserving no
Toleration; and till then, we judge our title to it as good as theirs who enjoy
their legal Establishment: and tho we are not for encouraging any Evils, yet we
believe if no Sinner were tolerable, the D. himself would be intolerable; for
the Apostle teaches, G. 6. 1. that even Brethren may be overtaken in faults;
but then they are to be restored with the spirit of meekness, not rigor: Every
Sin is not the object of Church Censure, or the Magistrate's Wrath; but they
may, and ought to bear one another burdens, and not to bind more heavy
burdens on the backs of our Brethren, and then lash them for their inability
to bear them.

For his Remark, about that which he calls the fortune of Toleration, which is,
as he says, to be always in extreems very good, or very bad, and is at several
times highly applauded, and violently decry'd by the whole Body of Dissenting
Protestants; it has some truth, but not the whole truth in it; for both
Papists, and Sons of the Church, have, and do decry, and commend it according
to their need: for do not the Papists in England, and Ireland, and his
Episcopal Brethren in Scotland plead for it as much as Protestant Dissenters:
We suppose he has seen Bishop Taylor's Liberty of Prophesying; and when he
has answered the Preface to that Book, he may possibly prevent men's looking on
Toleration as unlawful. If he had the wisdom of the unjust Steward, he might
improve his Remark, that should he be put out of his Stewardship (which is
metaphysically possible) he might have Friends to receive him into their Houses.

To the V's. Question whether he could produce one Instance of any Protestant
Dissenter even in the late Reign, turning Papist. The D. gives a woman's reason,
he could give several Instances, but will not mention one; which certainly
flows not from tenderness of our Reputation, which he labors on all occasions
industriously to blast, but either because he cannot, as we are sure he cannot
fairly, or because he is tender of their honor now they are turned Papists, and
will not expose them, or fears if we come to balance Accounts with him, he
shall be much a Loser.

But however, He tells the great reason why so few of theirs or our Communion
were perverted, is (under God) to be ascribed to the excellent Discourses wr^t
against Papists by the Episcopal Clergy; and amongst the vest numbers of those
admirable Tracts, two only were wrote by Dissenters; and then he falls to
downright calling and revi^ing Dissenters.

A. (...) think it unjust to derogate from the worth of any man's labors, yet
it is only native to Animals of (...) their own Praise, and inconsistent with
the (...) of God, which directs us to let another man praise (...) Lips. A
stranger and not thine own (...); but (...) D. being jealous none would
undertake to be his Parties Herald, but with so much Vanity, That he calls to
our remembrance, a frantic man, who before the Troubles wandered about in the
North, under the Title of King of the Rainbow, who with great assurance
asserted he defended Britain and Ireland from all foreign Enemies, that he
fought our Battles, and that we owed our lives to his Valor and Conduct, and
has been observed busy in an old Fort in his imaginary War: So, tho we will
not deny all good that such discourses may have done, yet we are confident that
their influence upon Dissenters has been very weak, seeing very few of them
has heard or seen these Admirable Tracts, which would justly deserve the
Epithete, if they could preserve those who never saw nor heard them: But how
comes he to know, that only two were wrote by Dissenters against Papists? does
he know all of that nature is done by them, we suppose the Morning Exercises
Preached and Printed, by the Dissenting Ministers of London to that purpose,
may vi^ with any of these admirable Tracts, several others also might be
Instanced: But yet we see not that the Irish-English Clergy have any great
share in this Honor, except it be the Bishop of Derry in his Admirable Tract
against Manby, in which he has taken the same method to prevent Dissenters
being perverted, that so did, wh^ recommended cutting off the Head as a
Sovereign Remedy against the ^oothach, for lest the Catholic Church should
lose its Members by their being perverted, he prudently cut them off from being
Members of it; And left the Lawful Spiritual Governors of the Church should
laugh at Presbyterians and Independants, he appears to us to treat them no
better, if his Difinition of the Catholic Church hold good, ^or page 4. He
defines it to be the whole Body of Men, professing the Religion of Christ, and
living under their Lawful Spiritual Governors. Now the Lawful Spiritual
Governors cannot live under the Lawful Spiritual Governors, for then should
they be undermost and upmost at the same time, and therefore a Bishop is as
little a member of the Catholic Church as a Presbyterian. Bishop Sheridon also
Preached a Sermon against Popery, which we have seen; but how it preserved him
in his Bishopric, the D. knows: and yet notwithstanding all these admirable
Tracts he boasts of, the Established Church has furnished Rome with twenty
Proselytes to one, more than all the Dissenting Protestants in Britain and
Ireland; so that their Works has been better Amulets for their Neighbors, than
themselves: If we intended to render railing for railing, we would charge the
Episcopal Clergy with what he falsely accuses all Dissenting Ministers, as
being Trumpoters in State Tumults and Seditions: But we leave that work to his
Jacobitish Brethren, who have upbraided many of their own Clergy with that
Evil, under the aggravation of Treachery and Perjury; But wickedness proceeds
from the wicked, my hand shall not be upon them.

Tho the D. endeavors to ridicule Preaching the Gospel under the name of
raising the Hue and Cry, etc. Yet it has pleased God, by the foolishness of
Preaching, to save them that believe: The Gospel was planted by Preaching, not
by Printing, and shall be preserved by the same means, Acts 20. 32. And as
Rome's first wound was given by the faithful Preaching of the first Reformers,
more than by their Printing; so we understand not, that the Walls of Rome shall
be battered by Books, but as the Walls of Jericho did fall by Faith, even so
shall Rome's 2 Thessalonians. 2, 8. The Lord shall consume it with the spirit of his
mouth; and Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by God's Word Preached, Romans 10.
14, 15.

The V. having told, to mortify the man's vanity, that years experience might
convince them how unsuccesful they had been in gaining Dissenters to their
Communion; the D. tells, that this is mainly to be attributed to the unwearied
labors of Dissenting Preachers; in raising unreasonable prejudices, and in
fixing invincible aversion to our Ecclesiastical Discipline and Constitutions,
etc. in them.

A. As their endeavors have been very unsuccesful as to the numbers they have
gained from us, so the worth of such is inconsiderable, being persons whom a
worldly Interest, and a more licentious Life prevailed upon; and as they are no
Ornaments to their Church (except their admired Bishop of Derry) so they are no
loss to us, who could spare them more such, when we detect them. Nor is this to
be attributed so much to the unwearied labors of Dissenting Preachers, (as he
says) as to the Dignified Clergy's easy wearying in their labors, and
inverting the Apostle's words into, Woe to me if I Preach the Gospel; and the
unwearied pursuit of Dignities, and Revenues of the Church, more than
Ministerial Duties: nor need the Dissenting Preachers weary themselves to beget
in people an aversion and prejudice against the Discipline and Constitutions of
the Church; for it is the selling the management of Church Discipline to
Officials and Registers, and their ways of exercising Church Discipline, more
by picking men's Pockets, than bringing them to due Penitence, that has rendered
Discipline odious and nauseous even to all sober Conformists, while they see
Ecclesiastical Discipline used as an Engine to drain men's Purses, more than
reform their Manners. And the Keys of Heaven and Hell entrusted with such
hands, who for trifles deliver men to Satan, but will not relax them without
sums of Money, whereby they show themselves too liberal to the Devil but not so
careful to deliver out of his power: These are things not done in a corner, but
such as the Nation is dissatisfied with; besides this, the manifest partially
in the Exercise of Discipline, makes men think there is little regard had to
Paul's charge given to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these things,
without preserring one before another, doing nothing by partiality: For it is
known, that Great Men's Immorality (though never so heinous) escape without
rebuke, and the truly poor free to sin, because they want Silver, according to
the Rule in the Official Court.

Deux, 6. Ace non possunt, six cinque non solvere volunt. Hoc tamen est notum
quater tres solvere totum.
By these, and such like Methods, many are driven to us. If he say the Church
does not allow these Practices, why then are Dissenters Excommunicated for
disobedience to that, which the Church allows not of? But lest our words should
give offense, we hope Dr. Andrews will not, which he Preached before the
Convocation, viz. The Church Censures now a days reach the Purse only: Evil
doers, when they have paid their Fees, return Scot-free; If no Money, then have
at the Offenders with the Episcopal Sword, presently at one blow they are cut
off from the Church, dilivered over to Satan, proclaimed Publicans, Heathens,
Anathema, for the most ridiculous things, and against every good Man these
Brutish Thunderbolts do fly up and down, and only to be feared of the Purse.

The D. having Arraigned Dissenters as the chief Dividers of the Church, has
been so just not to make them the only Dividers, but has done them the honor
to join the Magistrates as Fomenters of division with them: which he charge,
1. Upon the prodigious Licentionsness in a late Reign. 2. The Governments too
easy Condescentions at another time. 3. The rigorous Executing the Laws against
Dissenters at some times: And thus he disciplins the Magistrates.

A. Seeing the Government has had a hand in fomenting our Divisions, he might
have honored the King and Magistrates so far, as to give them the pre^eminence
above Dissenting Preachers: yet as to his Dividers, 1. Prodigious
Licentiousness, he may enquire at Ezekiel. 33. 34. If the Clergy might have a hand
in it, and had they spent the one half of their Thunderbolts employed against
Dissenters, against the prodigiously licentious, they might have purged
themselves from that Division caused by prodigious Licentiousness: yet we know
that great Men of the Church have caught; That it is absolutely necessary to
the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom, that there be set up a more severe
Government over Men's Consciences, and Religious Persuasions, than over Men's
Vices and Immoralities. Thus Teaches Bp. Packer in his Ecclesiastical Policy,
page 53. And that Princes may with less hazard give Liberty to Men's Vices than
their Consciences, page 55. And what he Taught, others have Practci'd. 2. For
easy Condescentions to Dissenters: The Church may safely purge her self from
this guilt; yea, we assure her the Dissenters will be her Compurgators herein.
3. The Rigorous Execution of the Laws we confess has given cause to abhor the
Executioners: but then how can he be guiltless of the Sin of Dividing, who
pleads for the perpetuating these Laws, which he confesses, gives just
occasion to abhor them, and are Pomenters of Division? How inconsistent is he
with himself and reason in this? for if these Laws may not be Executed without
prejudice to the Union of the Church, why are they continued in force? if
Rigorous Laws foment Divisions, as is confessed, these cannot be guiltless of the
Divisions, who urge the making and executing such Laws as the D. now pleads for.

The Lesson he prescribes to Magistrates, That their behavior toward their
People should resemble that of discreetly tender Parents toward their
Children, not indulging their folly, by an imprudent fondness, nor punishing
their faults by too harsh a Correction, but by constantly keeping a strict hand
over them, which will prove the most Effectual means of preventing or
restraining their Exorbitancies. This we hope the Magistrate will learn, and
look upon the Sons of the Church to be no more B^st^rds, than Dissenters, but
use the Rod of Correction to drive out that solly is bound up in their Hearts,
and so prevent or restrain their Exorbitancies.

The 2d Lesson this D. prescribes to Magistrates is, That at present they keep
a strict hand in managing the public Affairs in this Kingdom, etc. His Reasons
for their being strict, are these: 1. Within these 5 years many thousands of
Families have come from Scotland to settle in this Nation. 2. They and their
Teachers are zealous for the Covenant. 3. They have come from a place where
Episcopacy is abolished. 4. He fears, from their aversion to the Ecclesiastical
Policy of the Church, when their Numbers and Preachers are increased, they will
overturn the truly Apostolical Government of the Established Church. And then
he prescribes an Antidote against this Plague, viz. That their Preachers be
obliged to perform their Quarantine, and to undergo some Religious Test before
they be admitted to Preach in their Conventicles.

A. This Admonition having apparently its rise from fear, must be considered
with its Causes, and Remedy. His fear seems to arise from his gift of Prophecy;
by laying aside which, or prophesying better things, he might cure himself of
that panick fear: for we dare assure him, that some of us are so far from
desiring the over-turning of the truly Apostolical Government of the Church,
that we could wish them over-turn'd, who turn it out to turn in another of
their own: tho we are persuaded, if the Bishops were turned out of Parliament
from all their Civil Honors, excessive Revenues, and sole Exercise of
Church-Jurisdiction, and should be obliged to Preach the Gospel constantly, and
not to Lord it over God's Inheritance, we should not lose any thing of the
Apostolical Government; which we may the more boldly say, because we find in a
Speech of the Lord Delamare's in Parliament, against the Bishops Voting in case
of Blood, these words: I like Bishops very well, but I wish that Bishops were
reduced to their Primitive Institution: for I fear, while there is in England a
Lord Bishop, the Church will not stand very steadily.

To his first cause of this fear, viz. The many thousand Families that are come
out of Scotland, whether the Government will judge it the Interest of the
Kingdom, to hinder its Planting with his Majesty's Industrious and Loyal
Subjects, to gratify the D. and cure him and the Irish Papists of their fears,
is very doubtful. But I believe, those, who value the Protestant and British
Interest in Ireland, could wish that many more thousand Protestant Families
were Planted here, tho they were not all of the D's. persuasion; nor do we see
that this would lessen the Revenue and Strength of the Kingdom, abate
Gentlemen's Rents, spoil the Nations Trade, nor hinder the Clergys Tithes; so
that it is questionable wherein the Nations Interest can be to obstruct
Protestants settling here. If his fears be because such are Scotch, it is but
the ordinary effect of such panic fear as to bereave Men of considerate
thoughts which seems to be the D's Case: For beside the little Religion he
Evidenceth in his Antipathy against that Nation, there is as little policy as
piety, in its seeing the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom (whom he boasts to
be Members of this Established Church) cannot but resent such a public affront
done to their Nation.

To the second cause of his fear, viz. Their Preachers Zeal to the Covenant: If
by it he means the National Covenant Subscribed by King James the 6th. and all
Ranks of Persons in Scotland in 1580, 1581, and 1590, they will own it, as the
ancient Confession of that National Church; and we suppose his Scotch Episcopal
Brethren dare not disown it, seeing it was a part of that Contradictory Test
which they imposed, the old professional part contradicting the new promissory
part: but we suppose he intends the solemn League and Covenant: and here we
believe he may be mistaken of their Zeal for that, as it is a League with
England and Ireland obliging them to a Reformation, seeing as a ^ these Leagues
formerly made with France oblige England since the French have violated them.
The Antidote against Ireland's Planting by Protestant Subjects from Scotland,
smells rank of National Antipathy, and smites his Majesty King William, with his
now blessed Consort Queen Mary, as Plaguers of that Nation, by Abolishing
Episcopacy: but yet let this Antidote be no worse than its words are, and we
refuse not to perform a just quarentine, and undergo any truly Religious Test,
that His Majesty shall think necessary to promote God's Glory, the Nations
Peace and Prosperity by: Yet Experience has found some of these called
Religious Tests to be National Pests, and should others observe them no better
then the D. and some of his Brethren have done, the Government may possibly be
rendered more secure, but not more safe by them.

But we perceive the D's. fears are increasing, and therefore he would have all
the Nation Alarmed with the Danger of the Cameronians, who (as he says) are
lately Landed in considerable Numbers!

A. These considerable Numbers of Cameronians lately landed must have come from
Vutopia, for there be no considerable Numbers of them now in Scotland, and
other Nations bring forth no such Fruit: For since the late happy Revolution,
all, except very few, unite with the Established Church there, and their
Preachers now orderly and ordained Ministers, one whereof is a Chaplain to a
Regiment in Flanders, and in good esteem with his Majesty for his Zeal and
Courage, whereof he has given good proof: And we dare say, that those, whom he
calls so dangerous, have spent more blood in the defense of the Protestant
Religion, and in the Service of their King and Country both at home and
abroad, than all the Episcopal Clergy in Britain and Ireland; for the truth of
which we doubt not but the best of the three Nations will vouch. But while he
is allarming the Kingdom with (...) from (...) does he not also, as a Faithful
Watchman warn it of his Jacobitish Brethren, who swarms hither daily, and
notwithstanding their publicly declared Contempt of His Majesty's Government
and Authority, in denying Allegiance to him in Scotland, are entertained as
bosom Friends by some Clergymen in Ireland, tho they performed not their
quarantine, by swearing Allegiance to K. William: And if the Government desire
satisfaction in this matter, they may (by search of Records in the several
Counties where they are entertained) find out the truth of this and much more
concerning such course men.

The Vindicator had told, That there had been avowed designs of Extirpating
Protestant Dissenters, declared by many Sanguinary Laws past against them both
in England and Scotland, and that there were later ones in Scotland that made
it capital to be present at their Meetings, which the D. reckons unpardonable
disingenuity ('it is well it is not the sin against the Holy Ghost) and to prove
it, these irrefragable Arguments are produced. 1. He never heard it. 2. He is
informed by those, who have reason to know better then the Vindicator, that
there is not one Sanguinary Law in England against Protestant Dissenters, and
in Scotland not one, except one, which was August 13. 1670.

A. To his first demonstration taken from his not hearing it, it seems his ears
are of a prodigious length, when every matter both of Fact and Law must be
within the sphere of their activity: if things cease to be because he heard
them not, a great many have had no being, of whom he never heard. The next from
his Informer, is little better; for Episcopal Informers have not been always
men of the best reputation; yet it is strange that they should be ignorant of
those Laws, by which they had so much of other men's wealth; but it is like, that
being now out of date, they are not fond of owning their old friends, lest they
should purchase new Enemies: But if the D. (who sees by his Neighbors eyes)
will receive truer Instruction from a Dissenter, we will make appear that what
the Vindicator asserts is real truth.

To begin then with England, because its Laws against Dissenters are of eldest
date, we will find that Sanguinary Laws were there, First, against the Soul;
Secondly, against the Body; Thirdly, against the Estates of Protestant
Dissenters.

And to give the Church the deserved pre-eminence in this case, by her Canons
made Anno 1603. eleven of these in the Van are levelled against Dissenters, by
most of which they are to be excommunicated ipso facto, and not to be restored,
but by the A. Bishop after Repentance, and a public Recantation of such wicked
Errors: And when by this Canonical Cimiter they are cut off from the Church
Militant, and by virtue of the keys of Heaven committed to it, the gates of
Heaven, which it seems were formerly potent, are now shut against Dissenters,
and alti janua ditis, made open, and they delivered to the Devil, lest he
should prove too merciful in not receiving their Mittimus, the poor Dissenters,
by a Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo is to be apprehended by the Sheriffs, or
his Bailiffs, and without Bail or Main-prize cast into Prison, there to lie
till he for, or recan^, by which he is deprived of the benefit of the Law and
Clergy both. Now, if this be no sanguinary Law, to cast men out of the Church,
(out of which they teach there is no Salvation) and to deprive them of their
Liberty, and Protection of the Laws, only for impugning the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, according to the 6th Canon, and at once to
cut men off from their part of Heaven and Earth, unless they would counter-act
their Conscience; let the World judge.

Secondly, the Civil Laws made against Dissenters in England were sanguinary,
if that may be construed such, which deprives men of Livelihood and Liberty;
For 1. The Act of Uniformity; by which, If any Minister convicted to have
refused to use the Church Service, or to have used any other Rite or Ceremony,
Order, Form or Manner, than what is set down in the Common Prayer Book, he
loses a whole years profit, and must undergo six months Imprisonment for the
first fault: For the second, to be deprived, and suffer a whole years
Imprisonment: For the third, he is to be deprived, and Imprisoned during life;
and if he be not a Beneficed person, for the first fault he is to be imprisoned
a whole year; and for the second, during life: So that a man, for not using the
Cross in Baptism, and Kneeling at the Sacrament, (things which God never
required) must be deprived of his Office, Livelihood and Liberty, and thus
starved in Prison; but for this, perhaps the D. has a Turkish distinction,
that strangling is no shedding of Blood, and yet we reckon he would judge it
sanguinary, were he tried by it. But farther, all persons not resorting to the
Church on Sundays and Holy Days, are to be fined 12 d. per day, and to incur
the Censures of the Church, which according to Canon 9, 11, 12, is
Excommunication ipso facto, with its appurtenances; yea, by Canon 10, if we
shall dare to say, that we have long time groaned under the burden of certain
Grievances imposed upon us, we are to be Excommunicated, and not restored until
we repent, and publicly retract such our public Errors. 2. Act is that made
in the 13 Eliz. to which every person not repairing to Church, according to
Statute 1 Eliz. The second shall forfeit 20l. for every month, if they so make
default; and if they forbear for the space of 12 months, they are to be bound
with two sufficient Sureties in 200 l. Bonds to good Behavior: And by a
Statute 29 Eliz. All Grants made by such Offenders, which are by them
revocable, intended for his maintenance, left at his disposal, or in
consideration whereof, he and his Family are to be kept, shall be utterly void
against the Queen; for the levying the forfeitures for not coming to the
Church, and the Queen may seize all the Goods, and two thirds of the Lands and
Leases of every Offender not repairing to Church as aforesaid; which after
their first conviction, do not pay at the next Term, at the rate of 20 l. per
month, and tho the party be not in the Realm, the Indictment is to lie, and
upon an Indictment found, a Proclamation is to be made that such Offender is to
render himself to the Sheriff before the next Assizes; which if he do not, he
is to be held Convict: These who are not able to pay their Forfeitures are to
be committed to Prison till they pay or conform, which if they refuse, makes
the Imprisonment perpetual. And 35 Queen Eliz. It is Enacted, That if any above
Sixteen absent themselves from Church above a Month, or frequent Conventicles,
or persuade any other so to do, they shall be committed to Prison, there to
continue, till he or she Conform, and make open submission, and confess that
they have grievously offended God, etc. And if within three Months they refuse
to Conform and make such submission they are to abjure the Realm, and if they
refuse to abjure, or return after without leave, they are to be proceeded
against as Fellons, and have no benefit of Clergy. This we suppose was
literally a Sanguinary Law. Again by a Statute the 16 Car. 2d, this 35 Q. Eliz.
was revived. And farther Anno 17. Car. 2d. Non-conformists who take not the
Oxford Oath there set down, which is this. I A. B. do Swear that it is not
lawful on any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against the King, and that I
abhor, that Traiterous Position of taking up Arms by his Authority against his
Person, or against those that are Commissionat by him in pursuance of such
Commissions, and that I will not endeavor any Alteration of Government, either
in Church or State. Likewise, If any Nonconformist Minister Preach in a
Conventicle, or come within 5 Miles of any City or Corporation, or place of his
Ministry, except on his Journey, or summoned by a Subpena, he shall forfeit
40l. Furthermore the Crimes in 22 Car. 2d. against Conventicles, are, 1. To be
present at an Assembly under color of Exercise of Religion any other way then
according to the Liturgy, etc. where 5 Persons, or more besidess those of the
Family are. 2dly. If any take on him to Teach or Preach in such Meetings, for
the first Offense he forfeits 20l. For the second, 40 pounds, etc. 3d ly, If
any person suffer such Meeting to be in his House, Out-House, Backside, or
Garden; for his first Offense, he is to pay twenty pounds; for the second, 40
pounds, etc. and every Hearer five shillings, with Ecclesiastical Censures,
which is Excommunication ipso facto, according to the 11th Canon.

Now from all this, we leave it to the judgment even of Adversaries themselves,
whether the Vindicator might not assert, that there were sanguinary Laws in
England designed to extirpate Protestant Dissenters; in exerting whereof, the
Prelates of the Nation had a warm Vote, though now (blessed be God) they be
abolished by Act 1689.

His vindicating Scotland against the guilt of sanguinary Laws against
Dissenters, is proof that he hears ill, else the cry of that Blood shed there
by virtue of these Laws, (which has even reached Heaven, and brought deserved
Vengeance upon the shedders thereof) might have pierced his ears; and that he
sees ill, if he sees not these Laws yet in record; but his own confession, that
there was one sanguinary Law (tho he borrowed Sir Geo. Makenzy's Commentar on
it) is a sufficient proof of a design to extirpate Protestant Dissenters there,
seeing that one Law, De Heretico Comburendo, as employed in England by Q. Mary,
was supposed sufficient to extirpate the Protestant Religion out of England;
but had he not designed to blindfold his Reader, a little more pains, and
honesty, might have enabled him to discover many sanguinary Laws in Scotland:
of which, take these few instances.

The 1 st Parliament of C. the 2 d. Sess. 1. Act 4. It was Enacted, that none
be Masters in Universities, Schoolmasters, or Pedagogues, who would not own
Prelacy, which that Nation had abjured; even the Lawmakers themselves, whereby
many were deprived of their livelihood because they would not be perjured.

Sess. 2. Act 2. It is Enacted that all Petioning, Writing, Printing, or
Remonstrating, Praying or Preaching showing any dislike of the King's absolute
Prerogative, be punished as Seditious, and that no Meetings be kept in private
Houses. Upon which accounts some suffered death.

Sess. 3. Act 2. It is Enacted, That all Nonconforming Ministers, that presume
to Exercise their Ministry, be punished as Seditious Persons: And that all
Persons in in acknowledgement of his Majesty's Government Ecclesiastical,
attend the service of the Curates: Noblemen and Gentlemen refusing, to lose the
fourth part of their Rents; Burgesses their freedom, and fourth part of their
Movables; Yeomen a fourth part of their Movables; and others, twenty
shillings every time, leaving the Council to inflict other Punishments as they
thought fit. It is also Enacted, That if there were three above the Family at
Preaching, or Prayer,, it should be esteemed a Conventicle. And for putting
these Laws in Execution, a High-Commission-Court was Erected, by the King,
contrary to Act 13. Parl. 10. Jacob 6. with power to Examine upon Oath, Desuper
inquirendis.

Parl. 2. Lauderdale Commissioner. It is Enacted by Virtue of the King's
Supremacy, that ordering the Government of the Church, does properly belong to
His Majesty and his Successors, as an inherent Right to the Crown, and that he
may Enact and Emit such Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning Church
Administrations, Persons, Meetings and Matters, as he in his Royal Wisdom shall
think fit. And thus a fair way was laid for K. James's reforming the Church.
This Act was to be obeyed by all Subjects, any Law or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Sess. 2. Parl. 2. It is Enacted, That who should be required to depose upon
Oath, their knowledge of Meetings, or Persons at them, should do it on pain of
Fining, Imprisonment or Transportation.

Act 5. Enacted, That outed Ministers, found Preaching or Praying in any House,
but their own Family, be imprisoned till they find bond of 5000 Marks, not to
do the like again, every hearer, toties quoties, 25l. if a Tenant, 12l. if a
Subtenant; and then all who Preached in the Field, or in a House, if any of the
people be without doors, shall be punished with death: And they who can seize
or secure any such Minister, dead or alive, shall have 100 Marks Reward. The
Magistrates in Boroughs to be fined at the Councils pleasure, for any
Conventicles held in their Boroughs. Men to be fined if their Wives or Children
went to Meetings.

Act 6. Fines were imposed from 10 to 20l. sterling. on such as had their Children
Baptized at such Meetings, and Servants in half their Wages.

Act. 11. Sess. 3. The same Fines were imposed on them who kept their Children
unbaptised for 30 days, and by Act 7. of the same Ses. Intolerable Fines were
imposed on all who absented themselves 3 days together.

Anno 168^. The D. York being Commissioner, without taking the usual Oath
appointed by Law, and against Actmaking Papists incapable of that Trust; the
Fines were doubled for Field Conventicles. Gentlemen were obliged to remove
Tenants, and Masters their Servants, without warning, if they went to Meetings.

Act. 6. They imposed on all a self-contradictory Test, obliging them to own
the Confession of Faith recorded in Parliament, 1 Ja. 6. which disowns the
Supremacy, and asserts the lawfulness of defensive Arms, though the contrary to
both was Sworn in the promissory part of the Test, without so much as a Non
obstante; and for taking this Test with his own Explication, was Argile
Beheaded.

Parl, 1. Ja. 7 D. Queensbury Commissioner. I^ is Enacted, that such as being
cited as Witnesses, in cases of Treasons, or Conventicles, and refused to
depone, should be liable to the punishment of the same.

Act 8. All who Preach or Hear at House or Field-Conventicle, shall be punished
with death, and confiscation.

We hope now by this Account, (which if any doubt, we refer them to the Printed
Statutes of the Nation). If the D's Conscience be nor seared, it will be so
much his friend as to smi^e him for the injustice he has done to truth, in
^sserting that there were no sanguinary Laws in Scotland, save one. And tho
these Laws were so severe, as to deserve abhorrence of all in whom any spark of
Christian humanity remains: yet the execution of them was more cruelly rigid:
Dragoons, and a barbarous Pagan Highland-Host being employed to execute them,
without any Process of Law. All that can be said for the D. is, that if he
thinks as he writes, he is scandalously ignorant of what all Britain knows; if
otherwise, he is gtolsly disingenuous to impose upon the credulity of his
friends.

As the D. has given a sad specimen of his intelligence, so he gives equal
discovery of his prudence, while he upbraids the Scots Conventicle Rebels, for
refusing to Pray for K. Ja. For do not his Jacobitish Brethren deal so by K.
William; and does not himself so now, as they did then, though under some other
obligations to do it than ever they were; whence we may tell him in his own
words; that his Principles and Practices are destructive to the Established
Church and Government, if not Praying for K. Ja. be so. And that there be
several distracted Cathedral Rebels, who refuse to save their Livings and
Bishoprics at so dear a rate, as Praying for the King. Therefore he and his
Party are no^, in bonafide, to accuse any for such Principles and Practices,
tho we despise both, as much as his folly, in laying these things to our charge.

Secondly it is great imprudence what he says next, vizt: Certainly these who
refuse to give the Government under which they Live, all reasonable assurances,
of their Fidelity and Obedience; and will not solemnly disown their turbulent
Principles, but still retain their inveterate prejudices, and pernicious
disaffection to the Established Church, cannot with any modesty expect to be
treated as sincere and hearty friends, but as declared open Enemies, to the
lasting Peace and Settlement of the Nation. For hereby he smites his dearly
beloved Episcopal Clergy of Scotland under the fifth rib, and justifies all
that the Government there has done against them, though they should declare them
open Enemies to the Peace of the Nation, seeing they have refused to give the
Government under which they have lived these 5 years, any reasonable assurance
of their Fidelity and Obedience, but still retain their inveterate prejudices,
and pernicious disaffection to that Church and State, so far does partial
passion Transport him, that he mortally wounds them he pretends to defend.

The V. having asserted as a good effect of the indulgence granted in England,
that since Conformists and Dissenters, converse more sociably and live more
peaceably than formerly. This is Contradicted by the D. for this reason, he
has been oredibly informed, that Dissenters in England were grown very
insolent on the News of the Dissolution of the last Parl. and resolved to
necessitate the Government to some larger Concessions to their Ministers.

A. Dissenters have little reason to expect a just account of their Actions,
from Bp's. informers, who have been so great a plague to them in England: But
though the Authority he makes use of were good, his reasoning is bad: for while
the V. tells what has been done for time past; he resutes that History, by a
Prophecy in telling what they resolve to do, though it is hardly credible English
Dissenters would communicate their Intreagues to Episcopal Informers: But, time
now can tell the World both the falsehood of his History and Prophecy.

His unjust reflection on those he calls our Nonconforming Fathers in Q. Eliz.
time, as persons of restless Tempers, who for meek Petitions proceeded to
Admonitions, then to Satirical Remonstrances, and thus threatened first the
Bishops, and then the Q. and Parl. evidenceth him to be of such a Spirit, that
neither Heaven nor the Graves of Godly Men do secure their Names from the venom
of his tongue and pen, yet we count it our honor to be Children of such
Parents as many of those persecuted for Nonconformity were, being Ornaments to
their Nation for their Learning and Godliness. And most opposite to the
Character he and Walton unjustly gives them, as their own Works and the best
Historians of their time inform us.

The D. being, as he says, led by the V's. method, to consider the Reply's made
to his Answer to the first Paper: Had this reply to an Argument of his against
granting any further favor to Dissenters, then these several marks of Regal
favor which they enjoyed. That it is reasonable that the continuance of the
same favor should be secured to them by Law. To this the D. rejoins that a
Legal Security of the same favor is not denied them, if they be pleased to
accept of it with these Clauses and Restrictions that their equally deserving
Brethren do now enjoy it in England.

A. If the favor which we now enjoy through His Majesty's Clemency, should
have these Restrictions added to it which our Brethren in England have annexed
to theirs, it would not be the same we now have, so far is he mistaken. 2. We
look upon the Restriction annexed to the Indulgence granted to the Dissenters
in England, neither suitable to the Rules of Christian Religion, nor the true
interest and safety of this Nation. Not of the first for these reasons.

By this Sacramental Test (which is annexed to the Indulgence of England)
Dominion must be founded in grace, for if Men's Right to their Civil Privileges
must depend upon their capacity to receive the Sacrament, to the receiving
whereof the Church in the order of the Communion, requires true Repentance:
then it requires grace to capacitate them for Civil Rights and Privileges, and
for want of true Repentance they must forfeit Employments to which they have a
Hereditary Right. Which Notion has been Condemned as Irrational and
Irreligious: yea, Balaam's Ass Taught better Divinity, when it said, Master, am
not I thine Ass? Acknowledging his Right, though he had not grace. It this
principle should once obtain, its fatal consequence might possibly reach the
Mitres.

2. But what is yet worse, this Test shall make a Ceremony, viz. (kneeling at
the Sacrament) the Condition of both State and Church Membership: For if none
but such as kneel at the Communion, shall be admitted to share of these
Privileges, to which as Christians and free born Subjects they have right, the
gate unto the Church-Militant, is made straiter then that into the
Church-Triumphant. From which we hope Men will not be so uncharitable as to
exclude all who do not kneel at the Sacrament, seeing Christ and his Apostles
used no such posture.

3. This makes kneeling at the Sacrament, Lord Paramount over all the rest of
the Ceremonies, by putting the keys of the Church door only into its hand, and
so it becomes the only evidence of saving grace, when all that scruple it must
be debarred from the Sacrament as Profane, and these who bow to, and kneel ^t,
the A^tar, are the only holy.

4. Not to kneel in receiving, by this Test, is made equally criminal with
believing Transubstantiation, the Idolatrous Worshipping of the Bread, and all
the abominations of the Mass with Papists: and with denying and contemning both
Ceremony and Substance with the Quakers; whenas the same and no other
punishment is inflicted upon Papists and Quakers, than is upon Protestant
Dissenters (for refusing the same Test) though we agree with them in the Doctrine
of the Sacrament.

5. To put Men upon this Dilemma is the tender mercy of the wicked, and is to
tempt Men to damn their S(...) preserve their Bodies; And to give sacred things
to dogs. For if the persons have by Christ's Institution a right to the
Sacrament, by what Authority can Man debar them by their Inventions, if they
have none, then these are not faithful Stewards of the Mysteries of Christ, who
abuse them to serve their own secular ends.

6. By this the Validity of the King's Commission, must depend upon the Curates
Certificate. And so His Majesty must have a Conge Des Lire from the Clergy,
before he can give out his Commission for any Civil Office, lest he lose his
labor. For the D. tells us plainly so much p. 27. that there are several
Ecclesiastical Laws, sti^l in force, by which though Dissenters be not wholly
unqualified for Admittance unto Civil Offices, yet they are perfectly
dis-enabled from continuing in them. So that their present quiet enjoyment of
Employments, is not so much owing to their Legal Qualifications, as to the
Lenity and kindness of the Ecclesiastical Governors. And so no Thanks to the
King for the Dissenters Employments, but to the good Lord Bishops. It seems the
Bishops of Rome are not the only pretenders to a Supremacy in Temporalitus.

As it is not consistent with the Piety, so not with the interest of this
Nation, to impose unnecessary Tests and Ceremonies, whereby men are frighted
from coming to Plant in this kingdom, when all wise men have thought fit to
decoy Inhabitants, by granting large Immunities and Privileges: By this policy
the Roman Empire grew from small beginnings to be the Mistress of the World.
But to set up Scarcrows to fright any from coming to Plant and Trade in the
Nation, cannot be consistent with the wisdom of its Government: And sure we
are, neither the Heads or Hands of Papists in Ireland are so few, and
despicable, nor their friends abroad so weak or unwilling to help them, that we
should think Ireland over-stock't with Protestants to defendit: which
Ceremonies will never do (for the Papists are better acquainted with them, than
to be terrified by them) if another 1641 and another 1688 should recur. And we
may tell the World, that the first Test contrived against Dissenters in
Ireland, though it proved fatal to its Contrivers, was, by God's Providence, a
means of preserving the Dissenters; who forsaking the Nation on that account,
were preserved from the Massacre 1641; and these same persons returning, were
the first relief that Ireland got, which can be made evident by many yet alive,
and may be instructive to pasterity.

The V. having (to prove the equity of giving freeborn Subjects, the same
legal Indulgence, in their Dissenting, as is given to Foreigners) asserted,
that the French Protestants, if left to their liberty, would choose a Discipline
and Worship more conformable to their own, than that of the Established Church.
Has this Answer: We are not to pass judgment on a particular Church, from the
inconsiderate words and actions of some of the meaner sort of the Laity, but by
the solemn Declarations, and constant Practices of the Learned Clergy of that
Communion. And to show the Sentiments of the French Church, produces a triple
testimony of three French Divines in favor of the Established Church, and
censuring the Dissenters separation from it: from three Letters written fifteen
years ago on this Subject, by Monsieur Lamoyne, M. D. Langle, and M. Cloud,
which we shall not transcribe; But,

1. We think it strange, that the Bishops of the Church of England, should own
the French Protestants to be a Churh, and to have a learned Clergy, when in the
mean time they deny them to have a Lawful Ordained Ministry: and force them to
be Re-ordained who come for Refuge into England, and are willing to conform. So
that this seems to be but a complement, given for these 3 Letters, and no
sincere acknowledgment of their being a Church. A Reverend French Minister
informs us, that flying from Persecution into England, he with some others were
permitted to Preach in London, but upon his refusal to be Re-ordained, he was
not only hindered to Preach, by the Bishop of London, but denied any part of the
public Charity collected for the French Protestants, and so was necessitated
to leave England. The same entertainment others of them met with here in
Ireland about Anno 1680 or 1682; who flying to Dublin, and setting up the
beginnings of several useful Manufactures: but being averse to join in the
Church Service, a certain charitable Peer lent them his House to Worship in,
where they served God, according to the manner of the French Churches;
whereupon their Minister was seized and imprisoned, etc. until, for obtaining
his liberty, he consented to quit or abjure the Kingdom. And yet Liberty was
publicly allowed the Papists. And we are well informed how the Papists now
insult over them, as having (by their disowning the validity of their own
former Ordination; and being Re-ordain'd by Bishops in England) thereby
declared, that they have hitherto been no Church, have had no Sacraments
lawfully Administered among them; which is a great addition to their former
miseries: so that whether it be worse to destroy the being of that Church in
all time past, or persecute some of its Members in time present, be the greater
severity, and so whether the Popish or English Clergy have been more merciful
to the Protestant Church of France, we leave to be considered.

2. The Testimony of these 3 Men, are not the solemn Declaration, and constant
practice of that Church, as he vainly says, but the opinion of three private
Doctors, to whom he might oppose the Judgment of 3000, and the constant known
practice of that Church, solemnly declared, in its public Confessions of
Faith, and Synodical Constitutions, disowning the Form of Worship and Discipline
of the Church of England: And it seems as unequal to judge of a Church by the
Sentiments of several of her learned Clergy, as by the Laity: What a Monster
would the Church of England be, if we were left to judge of her, by the several
opinions of her Learned Clergy, whereof some approve, others condemn Arminiasm;
some are passive obedient Doctors, others not, some for Episcopacy jure Divino,
others think it only jure Humano, some have been for, others are now against,
Liberty of Prophesying, etc. The justest way then of judging what are the
sentiments of a Church, is neither by the private practices or opinions of
Clergy or Laymen; but by their Unanimous, deliberate and publicly declared
Judgment in their Confessions of Faith and Synodical Constitutions: which had
he produced against us, had been some service to his cause. And we have just
cause to except against the Evidence. Some of whom have conformed, and have
disgraced their Church, by renouncing its Ordination, so that these who have
dishonored their Parents, will little regard their Brethren.

3. We know that indirect means have been used to obtain such Testimonies
against us, and can tell of one who had 4 good fat Benefices in England, with a
Faculty of Nonresidence, to Enable him to Traffic in France, introducing
Dissenters, and Exalting and vindicating the Prelacy and Ceremonies of England.

4. The Testimonies are not fairly produced, but a part concealed of the
Letters, which had he repeated would have condemned himself. And therefore M.
Cloud in his Letter as Published by Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 448. has this. I
hope my Lord, you will not be wanting in the Duties of Charity and Spirit of
Peace, and that when the dispute shall be only of some Ceremonies, which are
stumbling blocks. and which in themselves are nothing, in comparison of an
entire reunion of your Church, under your holy Ministry, you will make it
seen, that you love the Spouse of your Master, more than your selves; And that
it is not so much from your greatness and Ecclesiastical Dignity, that you
desire to receive your joy and glory, as from your Pastoral Virtues, and the
ardent care you take of your Flocks.

M. De Langle tells you that even amongst these separating Brethren, there is a
very great Number of good Men, whose Faith is pure Piety sincere; And it seems
to me that the good and charitable Bishops ought to say of them, as Optatus
Melivitatus said of the Donatists, in something a different sense, Si Collegium
Episcopate notunt habere nobiscum, tamen fratres sunt. And I Am sure, says he,
that if there were nothing wanting to cure your Divisions but tho abstaining
from some Expressions, the quitting some Ceremonies, the changing the color of
some Habits, you would resolve to do that, and something more difficult. But
this the D. disingenuously conceals because of his Moderation, which is
contrary to his Nature or Design.

The V. having asserted also, that a further security ought to be granted to
Protestant Dissenters, than to Papists; for this reason, that some difference
should be made between them who deserve well, and them who deserve ill, of the
Govarnment. The D. allowing the reasoning to be unque6ionably true, yet will
have it understood with this supposition; that if the Civil Parent be forced by
the pressure of some unfortunate occurrences, to a concession of such favorable
and advantageous conditions to an Enemy; which if he were left to the freedom
of his own will, neither his fatherly kindness would incline him, nor his
prudence permit him, to allow even to some of his own Children; this were no
reflection on his justice, or kindness.

A. Supposito quolibet sequitur quodlibet; But let us suppose as well as he,
what is real matter of fact, that the Civil Parent is under no such pressure,
but delivered from it by the assistance of his dutiful Children: It would
reflect on his justice, not only to treat equally dutiful Children unequally:
but to deal worse with the dutiful Children, than with rebellious
heart-Enemies. And it is but to Preach up Rebellion, to tell us, that our Civil
Parents may reward Rebellion with privileges, not to be granted to Loyal
Subjects. For if Rebellion be the way to obtain privileges, men will easily be
induced to Rebel.

To the D's reflection on Dissenters, as men of uncertain measures, and
unsteady tempers, and therefore not to be trusted; for it is unknown, what
changes some sudden turns of public Affairs, might make in the passions and
interests of such men. We Answer, that tho we pretend not to immutability, yet
most Dissenters dare assert the certainty of their measures, and steadiness of
their tempers, to have exceeded their Accusers: for neither can he charge us
with breach of our Oath to any King, after Swearing never to take up Arms
against him, nor any in Authority by him, upon any pretense whatsoever: nor did
we violate our Faith by endeavoring alteration of the Government in the State.
Having never taken such an Oath. Some of his own Brethren can tell him, that
the Pillars of his Party, who in former Reigns were fixed Stars, are now become
Planets. And that of the seven Golden Candlesticks, put in the Tower by King
Ja. five of them proved Princes Metal. The Speech made by the Bishop of M. in
the name of the Clergy, to King Ja. at the Castle of Dublin, March 1688. And
that made to K. William at his Camp nigh Dublin, 7 July, 1690. by the same
Persons, convince us, that sudden turns of public Affairs, will change men's
passions, yea, and prayers to, witness that set framed 1688. against the
Invasion intended by the Pr. of O. and the new Edition framed since for K.
William, where God is thanked for not hearing the former prayers, so that Turpe
est doctori cum culpa reda^guit ipsum. If they be afraid of our unsteady
tempers, let us be Established by Law and that prevents the evil in us as well
as them.

The D'^ consequence from the uncertain measures, etc. of Dissenters, viz. that
all prudent and unbiased persons will agree in judging that a limited
Indulgence will be more proper for the Non-Conformists, than a legal and
restrictive Liberty, etc.

A. We are of opinion, that neither We, nor the Established Church have right
to unlimited Liberty; for as Rex habet in Regno suo superiores, Deum legem and
Parliamentum, as a great Lawyer says; so we are satisfied, that both C? and N.
C? be limited by these, only we desire that our Liberty granted, be not clogged
with Tests destructive of that Liberty, by which only the best and most capable
of serving their King and Country, amongst the Dissenters, are Disenabled
thereto: And though as he says, that none blame the Chinese for building a Wall
to defend their Frontiers from the Incursions of the Tartars: yet we are told
by as good an Author as himself, that, that great Wall does not keep the Cham
of Tartary from invading that rich and plentiful Country, insomuch that his
successors have been quiet possessors of it, ever since 1650. But though Walls be
good for defense, yet the Chinesies were never such fools as to make partition
Walls to divide their Kingdom.

The D. vain gloriously boasting, that he had beaten the V. out of his several
Arguments, pursues him with open mouth to matter of fact. And is as follows.

The V. had hinted a memorial of the State of the Church of Scotland since the
Revolution, to vindicate the State and Church from the unjust Calumnys of the
Answerer to the Case, which Memorial he had from two Scotch Gentlemen,
particularly acquainted with the affairs of that Nation: which the D. will have
to be a forgery pretended to be wrought by a friend, when it was the V' s own
Act and Deed; and his reasons for this forgery are, 1. The Title discovers it
to be his. 2. The Genius of the Person, who is not like other Men, for setting
things in a false light.

A. The D, pretends indeed to an Extraordinary Sagacity in discerning Styles.

And yet what the V. asserted in that is firm truth, for the Gentleman (if
needful) can be produced, and will own that Letter to be theirs, and prove
every tittle in it to be true; so that if there be any Genius's more remarkable
for raising and false accusing of the Brethren than others, the D. is unhappily
matched with one of those.

But let us come to the Merits of the Cause: The first thing in the Letter he is
offended at, is a general reflection cast upon the whole Body of the Scotch
Bishops, for their declaring their utmost abhorrence of his presens Majesty's
descent into England, their Unanimous deserting of the convention of States,
both which he denies to be true for this reason, That if they had been guilty
of these things, it would have occasioned some public and severe remark, to be
passed upon them, and would have been insisted on, as the most plausible, if
not the greatest reason for extirpating of Episcopacy, whereas in the Act for
Abolishing Prelacy, there is not the least censure passed on any of the
Bishops. etc.

A. That the Bishops of Scotland did both declare their abhorrence of the
Prince of Orange's descent, and Unanimously desert the convention of States,
are such evident truths, that nothing but wilful Ignorance, or gross Impudence
would make a man deny them, because they were not done in a corner, but in the
face of the Nation, now their Address to King James will sufficiently prove the
first, which take as follows.

The Address of the Arch Bishops and Bishops of Scotland to K. James, upon the
news of the Prince of Orange' s Undertaking, Nov. 10. 1688. Vide Gazette, Numb.
2398.
May it please your Most Sacred Majesty.
WE prostrate our selves to pay our most devout thanks and adoration to the
Sovereign Majesty of Heaven and Earth, for preserving your sacred Life and
Person, so frequently exposed to the greatest hazards, and as often delivered,
and you miraculously preserved with Glory and Victory, in defense of the Rights
and honor of Your Majesty's August Brother, and these Kingdoms, and that by
his merciful goodness the ragings of the Sea, and madness of unreasonable men
have been stilled and oalmed, and Your Majesty, as the darling of Heaven,
peaceably seated on the I hrones of your Royal Ancestors; whose long
Illustrious and unparalled Line is the greatest glory of this your Ancient
Kingdom: we pay our most humble gratitude to Your Majesty for the repeated
assurances of your Royal Protection to our National Church and Religion, as the
Laws have Established them, which are very suitable to the gracious
countenance, encouragement, and Protection, your Majesty was pleased to afford
to our Church, whilst we were happy in your presence amongst us.

We Magnify the Divine Majesty for blessing you with a Son, and us with a
Prince, whom we pray Heaven may bless and preserve to sway Your Royal Scepter
after you, and that he may inherit with Your Royal Dominions, the Illustrious
and Heroic virtues of his August and most Serene Parents.

We are amazed to hear of the danger of an Invasion from Holland, which excites
our prayers, for an universal Repentance, to all orders of men, that God may
yet spare his people, preserve Your Royal Person, prevent the Effusion of
Christian blood, and give such Success to your Majesty's Arms, that all who
invade your Majesty's just and undoubted Right, and Disturb or Interrupt the
Peace of your Realms may be disappointed and clothed with shame; so that on
your Royal Head the Crown may still flourish.

As by the grace of God we shall preserve in our selves an unshaken and firm
Loyalty, so we shall be careful and zealous to promote in all your Subjects an
intrepid and steadfast Allegiance to your Majesty, as an essential part of their
Religion, and the glory of our holy Profession: Not doubting but that God in
his great mercy, who has so often preserved and delivered your Majesty, will
still preserve and deliver you, by giving you the hearts of your Subjects, and
the necks of your Enemies, so Pray we, who in all humility are,

May it please your most Sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most
Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects and Servants. Edinburgh Nov. 3 1688.
Signed by the Lords Bishops. B. St. Andrews. B. Glasgow. B. Galloway. B.
Aberdeen. B. Dunkell. B. Buchan. B. Orkney. B. Murray. B. Ross. B. Dumblaine.
B. Isles.



Here is a Specimen of those Gentlemen's Genius whose heads the D. would
preserve while he bold^y opposes truth, and necessitates us to lay open to the
world this Trial of Skill of his Episcopal Brethren, who all yet (except the
Bishop of Rapho whom an Irish Bishopric has converted) glory in their being
counted worthy to suffer for K. James, and continue to deny Allegiance to K.
William, with many of their fellow Brethren.

That the Scoth Bishops unanimously deserted the convention of States, we
suppose none of themselves will deny, which if any do, we shall.

In Answer to his reasons proving these Reflections untrue, because that the
conversion would have passed some public and severe mark upon them had that
been true, we say, that by this he sees the mildness and tenderness of that
convention, who without laying open to the world their grossest Iniquities,
only voted the Bishops and their Clergy the great and unsupportable grievance
of the Nation, and thereupon voted the total abolishing of Prelacy, and if
these be not public and severe marks indeed upon them, why does he make such a
horrid Noise about their Persecution; further it is not to be attributed to want
of matter, that in the Act they are excluded by, there is no particular mention
of the misbecoming actions of their Lives, etc. for Parliaments are not
Historians, but yet if he long for a Legend of their Lives, he may possibly
obtain his desires e're long, little to their Credit, or his Comfort, for there
are many recorded Instances of their misbecoming actions noticed by those who
smarted under them, which if he necessitates us to lay open to the world,
possibly his Brethren may thank him: For does he think, that so long as it
remains in the Records of Counsel that they imposed, and took a contradictory
Test, that it will not be alleged that they are perjured themselves, and the
cause of it in others? or that they abjured what they had formerly sworn with
great Solemnity, and betrayed the truth committed to them. Yea sure so long as
it continues in the Records of these Counsels, whereof they were Members, that
they ordered men to be killed without any Trial or Color of Law, or so much as
with an exception whether they resisted or no, it will be hard to purge them
from the guilt of Murder: for it is very evident that these Prelates had a hot
hand in all the Innocent Blood shed in Scotland in K. Charles II. and K. James
I. times, which we leave to those who may write their History: Possibly the D.
believes not this, because he heard it not, and therefore we urge him to inform
himself better from Authentic Proofs and Records of that Nation, that the
Stains of his Brethren there may be a warning to him and all Clergymen to
fright them from merciless cruelty, to which from a small trial of his skill
already given, we fear he may be too much given.

His second exception against those two Gentlemen's Letter is, That it
confidently asserts, that there is not so much as one single man, who was in
the Possession of their Churches and public Livings when K. James abdicated
and forfeited, who has since K. William' s accession to the Crown been thrust
out for any other Crimes than either, 1. for not reading the Proclamation
whereby K. William and Q. Mary were Declared King and Queen, or 2. for their
not Praying for His Majesty, or 3. for not Swearing the Oath of Allegiance and
Assurance, or 4, for such Immoralities as the Church of England as truly
disallows as Prebyterians. To contradict which, he produces an Instance of one
Mr. Samuel Mowat a Clergyman of Scotland in the Diocese of Glasgow, and at the
time in Dublin, etc. who was in possession of his Church in Scotland after K.
William and Q Mary's accession to the Throne, and read the Proclamation, etc.
published by the Council of Scotland, April 13. 1689. by the appointment of the
General Assembly, 2. Prayed for Their Majesty's, 3. took the Oath of Allegiance
and Assurance, 4. was free of Immoralities, etc. and declared himself willing
to submit to the Presbyterian Government, according to his Majesty's Formula,
and yet he was rejected by them because he would not renounce the Episcopal
Government, and declare his sorrow for submitting to it.

A. We might satisfy our selves with this, that Mr. Samuel Mowat point blank
denies what the D. has written, to be his Testimony, and that it is grossly
falsified; but though he had said all this, his single Testimony does not prove
it is Truth, for while he says that the Assembly appointed the reading the
Proclamation whereby K. William and Q. Mary were Declared King and Queen, which
Proclamation was published April 13. 1690. This must be false seeing there was
no Assembly till October 16. 1690. when they first sat after the Revolution.
It Is true he Petitioned the Assembly who referred his Case to the Presbyteries
of Lanerk and Hamilton where he had formerly been officiated, but was by them
rejected for his Immoralities which himself knows, and all have cause to
believe, seeing Bishop Foley late Bishop of Down and Connor did for gross
Immoralities fully proven against him, deprive him of his Curacy he had got in
the Parish of Dunean in the County of Antrim: So that if he was barbarorsly
robbed by Presbiterians in Scotland, he has met with as little mercy from his
Brethren in Ireland, as the Records of the Diocese of Connor can testify.

His third Exception to these Gentlemen's Letter is to these words in it, viz.
So far are they in Scotland from exercising severities against men, for being
Episcopal in their Judgment, that a great part of the Ministers of that
Kingdom, who enjoyed not only the Protection of the Government, but the free
and Public Exercise of their Ministry, together with the legal Established
maintenance before the first of September last, were or professed to be of the
Episcopal Persuasion, and had not at that time so much as taken the Oath of
Allegiance to his Majesty, and yet of these no more is required for their
continuance in their Parishes, than that they take the said Oath of Allegiance
and Assurance and that they behave themselves worthily in Doctrine, Life and
Conversation, as appears by the Act of Parliament past July 16. 1695.

Before the D. can answer this he throws himself into a paraxism of
astonishment, at those who pretending to be more then ordinary strict and holy
Ministers of Jesus Christ, and the most faithful Servants of the God of truth,
that they can allow themselves the liberty of wilfully misrepresenting the
most notorious matters of Fact, and the plainest State of public Affairs, and
flatly contrary to truth and the mind of the writer; of which he offers to
prove the V. scandalously guilty. But had he rightly pitched on the guilty, and
as truly confessed his own fault, as he fa^sly accuses the V. he might have
deserved compassion; to cry out against those Sins in others, which we nourish
in our own Bosoms, is hypocrisy.

But in answer to these words, he first concedeth a matter of Fact, viz. That
the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland have enjoyed the free Exercise of their
Religion and quiet possession of their Parishes, etc. which indeed many in the
North yet do. But says he, 1. These Instances are but seeming favors. 2. They
be produced as arguments of the moderation of the Presbyterian Government,
whereas they are nothing else but the effect of the weakness of the Party.

A. If the Protection of the Government in the free and public Exercise of
Religion with the Legally established maintenance, be but seeming favors: Let
the Dissenters here have only such seeming favors and we shall promise in
their name real thanks for the same. But, 2. He might have owned them real
favors, had he considered on whom they were conferred even the Abetters of
Viscount Dundee's Rebellion: For by his silence to the third Paragraph of that
Letter, viz. That at the Abetters of Viscount Dundee's Rebellion were, or
pretended to be of the Episcopal persuasion, as have also all those that have
made any Public Commotion in that Kingdom since this happy Revolution, he
tacitly confesses the truth thereof. But thirdly that these favors were the
effects only of the Presbyterian parties weakness, will not be so easily
believed by considering men, for why should the Party be able to destroy the
Root, the Bishops and their prelacy and yet not be able to Lop off the
Branches, is improbable: These sure who could extirpate prelacy in the North,
had Power to drive out Curacy there too. But to make it evident that it was not
the effect of weakness but their moderation, they have now driven out all that
rebellious brood, who had contemned the King's Clemency and Churches
moderation. Yet farther, had the Church of that Kingdom been weak, the State
was not, but could easily extirpate them, for he is mightily mistaken of
Scotland, if he thinks that many of that People would be Martyrs for Prelacy.

That the Episcopal Party in the North are a formidable Party, and therefore
kept it depends on the Credit of his Informers: for were they such as he says,
they are neither stout nor kind in suffering their Reverend Fathers to be laid
aside: Why might not the Children who were able to secure themselves, being so
formidable, been willing also to defend and continue their Fathers? Yet his
reason to prove them a formidable party, viz. That part of Scotland on the
North of Tay is known to be little less than the half of the Kingdom is not
very formidable: for if the Highlands and Isles of Scotland be comprehended in
this, his Geography may hold good, but his reason's lame, for he will have
little Credit of many of the Episcopal Highlanders, who possess more Land than
Religion: And that the Episcopal Party there is eleven to one, depends on the
veracity of his Informers, who, we see, are no friends to his Reputation, and
will at last cause him to turn Bankrupt of it, if he continue to give such
Left Handed News-mongers such Credit: For deduce from the number Papists (the
most of whom are in the North) he must abate of the proportion; for in the
Shires of Sutherland, Stranaver, Ross and Murray there might be, and has been
a force (which was a terror to it is Enemies) raised to defend the Settlement of
State and Church. Besides all this, considerable numbers are in every part of
that Country, and these as strict as any in Scotland; by which we see he is
little acquainted with the State of that part of the Kingdom.

These favors then werenot the effect of weakness, but the genuine supple fruit
of the Clemency and Moderation of that Church, which by long experience of the
evil of oppression (which is apt to make wise men mad) are resolved upon it as
the surest method to secure themselves; and indeed their moderation is that
which now is become most formidable to their wisest Enemies, and the true cause
why not the same moderation but distinct courses were taken with the Episcopal
C^ergy in the North and in the West, is because the Ministers in the North were
generally men of better Learning and Lives, and less concerned in these
Cruelties and Oppressions, by which the West was harassed; and so, having done
less harm, were more favored, while those in the West met with Adonibezek's
Reward. Now from all this let the Reader judge if the D. had just cause for his
so rash judging the Vindicator.

His 2. Reason to prove the V. scandalously guilty of Disingenuity, and
representing things contrary to Truth, and his certain knowledge is, that there
are no Acts of Parliament in favor of the Episcopal Clergy, save that of July
16. 1695. And therefore leaves it to the Reader to judge what sort of usage the
Episcopal Clergy had for five years past, not only from the unparalleled rage
of a barbarons Rabble, but also from the intemperate zeal of their bitter and
bigoted Enemies in Authority.

We join issues with him, in referring to the consideration of the prudent and
impartial Reader, what sort of usage the Episcopal Ministers in Scotland have
had these five years past, and though we think he will be none of these Readers,
yet let him judge of his own words page 7. where he has confessed that the
greatest part of them (for these in the North he has labored to prove so)
have had the Protection of the Government in the free and public Exercise of
their Religion, and the quiet possession of their own Parishes, and legal
maintenance, notwithstanding that they had not taken the Oath of Allegiance to
His Majesty, nor made any Submission to the Presbyterian judicatories. Is this
barbarous usage? we wish the Government here would treat us thus barbarously.
Let him seriously reflect on what he says page 10. Certainly these, who refuse
to give the Government under which they live all reasonable assurances of their
Fidelity, and Obedience, and will not Disavow their turbulent Principles, but
still retain their inveterate prejudices, and pernicius Disaffection to the
Established Church and State, cannot with any Modesty expect to be treated as
sincere and hearty friends, but as declared and open Enemies ^o the lasting
Peace and Settlement of the Nation. How applicable all this is to his Scotch
Brethren, we leave all knowing men to judge: and though now that Government might
justify it self, himself being judge, though they had used his Brethren as
declared Enemies to the Peace of that Nation, because they have hitherto for
five years (though often required) refused to give the Government, under which
they lived, any reasonable security for their Fidelity and Obedience, yet has
it dealt favorably with them.

But, says he, They have made but one Act in their favors.

A. Let us have but one such, though two years after theirs, and we shall pardon
all that is bypast. But does not the Church of Ireland think herself
Established by one Act of Uniformity, yet it is false that they had no more
Acts than one past in their favors, for April 13. 1689. The Convention of
States did prohibit any injury to be done by any Person whatsoever, to any
Minister of the Gospel, either in Church or Meeting house, who are presently in
possession and exercise of their Ministry. By this Act a stop was put to all
Rabbling which had been in the Interregnum; and in Aug 16. 1689. a Proclamation
was issued out, Restoring all that had been put out by violence after April 13.
1689. So that they had more Acts in their favor than they deserved, seeing
they continued to deny Allegiance to K. William and Q Mary.

To what he says of the unparalleled rage of the barbarous Rabble, (though
neither Reason nor Religion will justify tumultous and confused outrages) yet
that same rage had a parallel in the same proportion as near thirty years are
to three months, during all which time more blood was shed in Scotland for
Nonconformity, then in the bloody Reign of Q. Mary, for that which Papists
call Heresy. The Act of Council October 1662. is another parallel to the
Rabb^e's rage, by which 300 legally Established Ministers were turned out of
their Churches and Houses, without either Citation or Hearing; whereas that
Rabble some days beforehand gave a Citation to those whom they turned out, and
told them why they did so treat them.

Further, it is no wonder that this man dare speak evil of Presbyterians as
such, when he dare revile the Gods, and speak evil of Dignities; not paying
that respect to the Authority of Scotland, which the Archangel paid to the
Devil; when, contending with him, he durst bring no railing accusation against
him: but this man dares Arraigne, without distinction, the Authority of that
Nation, whereof His Majesty is Head and Fountain, as Intemperate Zealots and
bitter, and bigoted Enemies to Episcopal Ministers. Had a Dissenter used half
such Language, we know who would have cried out, Crucify him, Crucify him. And
indeed such scurrilous Language may a waken Authority, to consider what they
may expect from some sort of Clerks, if their Mitres and Bellies be once
touched.

Having railed upon the Authority of Scotland, he next falls foul on the Act of
Parliament, July 16. 1695. notwithstanding all it is Clemency; Complaining of it
as a Continuation of Severities. And that for these reasons, 1. says he, the
favor is granted only to these Ministers who were at His Majesty's Accession
to the Crown, and have since continued actual Ministers of their particular
Parishes, and so no Provision made for those who were Rabbled out, though they
should take the Oath of Allegiance, etc. which he hopes the V. will allow to be
Severity.

A. It needs not be thought severe to keep our some of those, whom the Rabble
put out, seeing many of those 300 Ministers, who were thrust out October 1662.
by the Counsel without and against all Matter or Form of Law, were yet alive;
And never were by the prelatical Church it self Canonically suspended or
degraded, nor legally deprived by the Magistrate, so that they are continued
still dejure Ministers of these Parishes: when then that violence by which they
were barred from the Exercise of their Ministry was removed, they might
peaceably re-enter, having all right to officiate there, there being neither
Canonical nor legal Impediment to obstruct them; in the same manner as the
Episcopal Incumbents here, (after they were forced from their Parishes in K.
James's time) returned to them in K. William's; the parallel being the same,
because the Bishops came last into Scotland, not by Law but the Will of the
Governor. If any severity by done then it is justly deserved by those, who
unjustly thrust themselves into other men's Possessions: But 2. many if not all
in the West, were violently thrust in upon the people, to whom by Law the
Election of their Ministers belongs, and therefore they never looked on them as
Ministers, for the Scotch Law allows no man to be put on any Parish without the
People's Election and Consent. Again 3. Those men had been active for the most
part in all the oppressions of that People, at least, as Informers and
Promoters, and were voted by the convention the griivance; If then they were
happily delivered from the Yoke, which neither they nor their fathers were able
to bear, it needs not be wondered at, that the Government was not willing to
gall the necks of that People with such yoaks again; Besides all this, these
very men were, and are known to be heart-Enemies to the Revolution, and were
they let in again, undoubtedly they would open a door to K. James's re-entry.
Let all men judge then if it were not severe to humor such men.

But his other ground of dissatisfaction with that Act is, That it excludes
those who were under Sentence of Deposition or Deprivation.

A. Does not the Law of England also deprive men of the Benefice, who are
degraded from the Office, seeing Beneficium datur propter Officium; for none
were deposed by Presbyteries; but such, whose Crimes upon full and fair Trial
deserved such Treatment. Is that severe in a Parliament to deny those men
wages, who have cut themselves off from service in the Church.

Further, to evince the more than ordinary severity in Scotland, against the
Episcopal Clergy since the Revolution, the D. alleges an Act of Parliament
June, 12. 1693. whereby is is Enacted. That no Person be admitted or continued
to be a Minister or Preacher within the Church of Scotland, unless he own the
Presbyterian Government to be the only Church Government of that Church, that
he will submit thereunto, and and concur therewith, and never endeavor
directly or indirectly to do any thing to the prejudice or subversion thereof.

A. The disingenuity so often complained of in the V. seems not to be so much a
dislike of the evil, as that this D. would make a monopoly of it for himself;
for in this report we have a considerable deal of it, for he waves the
consideration of what it was brought to prove, that a great many Episcopal
Ministers enjoyed the Protection of the Government in the free Exercise of
their Ministry, and legally established maintenance, 2. That the places of
greatest trust are in the hands of those who are Episcopal in Judgment, several
of whom were instanced, so that no severity is exercised merely for men's
judgments in that matter, all which by his silence he seems to confess, and yet
insisteth in his ordinary rote of of exclaiming against the Government, But we
say, 2. The Act cited does not inflict any penalty on any for being Episcopal
in Judgment, 3. There is nothing in this Act but what upon the matter was
agreeed to by the Episcopal Clergy in their Address presented to the General
Assembly of that Church, held Jan. 15. 1691/2. with the following Formula they
promised to Subscribe.

The Address of the Episcopal Clergy to the General Assembly held at Edinburgh.
WE under-subscribers for our selves, and our constituent Ministers of the
Gospel humbly show, that since the Episcopacy is abolished and Presbyterian
Government is established as it was 1592. we being desirous to exercise the
holy Function, wherewith we are invested, in our several Stations, for the
Glory of God, Advancement of Religion, their Majesty's Service, and the Peace
of the Nation, do therefore humbly desire that stops and impediments may be
taken off, so that we may be admitted as Presbyters to sit in Presbyteries,
Synods, and General Assemblies in concurrence with the Presbyterian Ministers
in the Government of the Church as now established by Law in this Kingdom.

The Formula Proposed is,
I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Declare, that I will submit to the
Presbyterian Government of this Church, as now by Law established in this
Kingdom under K. William and Q. Mary, by Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and
General Assemblies, and that I will as it becomes a Minister of the Gospel,
heartily concur with the said Government for the suppressing of Sin and
Wickedness, the promoting Peace, and purging the Church of all Erroneous and
Seandalous Ministers, and do further Promise that I will Subscribe the
confession of Faith, the Larger and Shorter Catechisms now Confirmed by Act of
Parliament as containing the Doctrine of the Protestant Religion Professed in
this Kingdom.

By all this it appears that the Act obliges to nothing but what these
Addresses offered, except a promise not to subvert the Government; which they
indeed refused as a severity; but we leave the world to judge of the sincerity
of such Ministers of the Gospel, who will promise to submit to a Government,
and concur with it, but will not promise not to subvert it; but (if needful) we
could fully detect to the world the juggle of that whole design. But 4. Knows
he not that the Act of Uniformity requires the same from all Conformists, which
he exclaims against in the Church of Scotland? is not then the height of
partiality to condemn that as rigid severity in others, which we applaud in
ourselves as Justice and Prudence.

But his second Exception against this Act is, it is ordering that uniformity of
Worship and Administration of all public Ordinances in the Church of Scotland,
be observed by all Ministers and Preachers, as it is at present performed, or
shall be hereafter declared by the Authority of the same: which he looks on as
equally unreasonable, as the Papists requiring Implicit Faith, or subscription
to the Oath, etc.

A. It is very unjust in him to instance that as a piece of severity against
the Episcopal Clergy, which by the Act all Presbyterian Ministers as well as
they are obliged to. But if uniformity of Worship and Administration of all
public Ordinances be so Popish and unreasonable, why so much noise about it in
his Church? to deprive men of a birthright privilege, if they comply not: But
it is Scottish Conformity only disgusts him, for what concerns the English and
Irish, he can say, ego mihimet ignosco.

But says he, They are to subscribe to what shall be Ordered by the Church, as
well as to what is at present Ordered.

A. We ask him seriously whether he that swears Canonical Obedience to his
Ordinary, does not oblige himself to be ruled according to such Canons, as
shall be made by the Church as well as by these which are already made, or when
a Judge swears to administer Justice according to Law, whether he obliges
not himself to Judge by Acts of Parliament that shall be made, as well as by
those that already are? And if so, he dare not say, (whatever he may think)
that they are guided by an implicit Faith or takes an Oath, etc. Even so when
the Ministers of the Church of Scotland promise to govern their flocks, and be
governed themselves by such constitutions as are already made, or hereafter
shall by the common consent of the Church established, what man compos mentis
can condemn them? does not natures light reach us, that all who join themselves
to a Society ruled by Laws, are obliged to be governed by these Laws already
made or to be made, especially when they are made by themselves? if this be
Popery, he must be such, or resist the Government in the execution of Laws made
since his creation, but men of inconsiderate and slippery judgment must be
dilemma'd.

His last instance of Scottish severity is from an Act made July 5. 1695.
against Intruders, by whom are understood all who have not an orderly call from
the Heritors, Elders, and People, with a legal Admission by the Presbytery; now
such by that Law are to be removed from these Churches, into which they have
intruded, and rendered incapable of any Church or Stipend within the Kingdom for
seven years, etc. but he tells, that by these Intruders are chiefly means
Episcopal Ministers thrust out by the Rabble, who had repossess'd their own
Churches.

A. This Act was made against allIntruders without exception, Presbyterian, or
others; and we suppose thought Rational by all reasonable men, for the English
Law justifies not a forcible Entry, even though a Person has a right. And I
doubt not, but the Church of Engl. would condemn it in her own case: for I
question if the D. could defend the late Bishop of Down and Connor with the
Archdeacon, (who looked on themselves unjustly deprived of Bishopprick and
Livings by the late Regal visitation) should they re-enter and possess
themselves of what they have lost, without owning Church or State.

But we say that those who were rabbled out, neither have nor dare intrude into
those Churches from which they were rabbled, and challenges him to instance
one who has so done. But the truth of the matter is this, some of those who
were rabbled out in the West and South, went to the North, and there by the
connivance of the Inheritors, and some of the Parishioners did intrude into
vacant Parishes: some also had been deposed by the Church for Immoralities,
others who were put out of their Benefices by the Counsel, for refusing to
swear Allegiance to K. William, and supported by the Jacobite party, did enter
into Churches in contempt of both Civil and Ecclesiastical Government. Against
these this Act was made, so that none are counted Intruders, meenly for
repossessing the Church out of which they were turned by the Rabble, seeing
that by the Proclamation Aug. 6. 1689. all who had been Rabbled since the
Settlement of the Government, were restored to their Churches.

By this the D. (as he thinks having proved the Parliament of Scotland guilty
of great Severity, for making an Act against Intruders) concludes, undoubtedly
the reason of the V's. not publishing that Act of Parliament July 16. 1695. not
to be what is alleged, but his fear of setting matters in a true light, and
exposing too plainly his gross and willful misrepresentations of the present
State of that Kingdom.

A. We leave it to the Parliament of Ireland, whether they will thank him for
inveighing against the Parliament of Scotland thus at random, when both have
the same head, and in all these Invectives his Sacred Majesty is reflected on:
But how ridiculous is it to reason thus? The Vindicator durst not publish the
Act of July 16. 1695. lest he should have exposed the severity of the
Parliament against Intruders, when there is nothing in that Act against
Intrusion, but it is, (as himself tells us) by an Act July 5. 1695. what needs
the V. fear the publishing that Act, which all allow to be an Act of C^emency,
we are satisfied the V. had not seen that against which he so much Inveighs:
Nor needed he fear the publishing that other Act which was in Print: yea so far
were Dissenters, from any sear from that Act that they industriously spread it
amongst Members of Parliament here, as a good precedent of Moderation.

The D. having discharged his spleen upon the Parliament of Scotland, returns
upon the Church Government, saying, by way of mock, I must indeed acknowledge
that we cannot boast of our coming up to, or equal in the example which the
present Presbyterian Government in Scotland has set us. For first, our
moderation to Dissenters has not expressed it self in raising of the Rabble
against them; much less in returning them public and solemn thanks for the
greatness of their Zeal in so doing.

A. His first instance of this Churches negative moderation to Dissenters,
contains an unreasonable calumny thrown upon the Presbyterian Government of the
Chapter of Scotl. for during the Rabble's Reign, there was no legal Government in
Church or State: And therefore the Church is not chargeable with things done
before it was re-established or had power. That the Church gave the Rabble
public and solemn Thanks for their Rabbling, is false; but the truth was this,
the Prelates of Scotland, with the Jacobitish Party, headed by the Viscount
Dundee, having conspired against the Convention of States, then assembled at
Edenburg, to settle the Crown of that Kingdom upon K William and Queen Mary,
had secretly conveyed 200 and upwards of armed men into the Town, in order to
scatter the Convention, and so defeat the Nations Settlement. Hereupon the
Gentlemen and Commons of the West, being then in Arms, came with all expedition
to Edinburgh, whereupon the Viscount of Dundee with his party immediately fled
and entered into an open Rebellion, which ended with his Life at Killycrankie.
These Gentlemen who protected the Convention of Estates, till they had
established the Government, are by him and his Episcopal Brethren in Scotland,
called the Rabble. These indeed received the public thanks of the Convention
of Estates, instead of their pay, and so went all home peaceably. But at this
time there could be no Established Church, seeing there was no Established
Civil Government.

2. That he and his have not raised the Rabble against Dissenters in Ireland,
we owe not to him or his, but to the Rabble (if any such be) who if once up
might possibly turn their rage upon others. Yet he and some of his have not
failed to incense the Magistrate against Dissenters, who have thereupon
employed armed force against them: For notwithstanding all that the Dissenting
Ministers had suffered in the North for their Loyalty to Chapter 2. (being all
banished by Oliver for refusing the Oath called the Tender, which many
Episcopal Clergymen easily swallowed) yet upon his Restoration the Prelates
stirred him up, contrary to his inclination, to imprison all Dissenting
Ministers, and so persecute the People for Nonconformity, which was
accordingly done: This, the Living Generation can abundantly Testify.

A Second Evidence of the Churches Moderation to Dissenters he offers, is, That
the Church of England Parliament, in this Kingdom, has not declared that
Nonconformist Ministers, in exercising any part of their Ministerial Function,
have offered a high contempt of the Law, as tending to perpetuate Schism, and
of dangerous consequence.

A. Seeing, as he says, The Church of England Parliament has not declared
Nonconformist Ministers contemners of the Law, in exercising any part of their
Ministry. How comes it to pass, that the Church of England Clergy daily
declare them guilty of offering high contempt to the Law? As being
Schismatics; that the exercise of their Ministry is of dangerous consequence.
We have cause to thank the Church of England Parliament, for their Justice and
Moderation; but neither of us have reason to thank the Clergy for declaring the
contrary. And tho we may be satisfied with this Confession, that there is no
Act of Parliament against us, vet we have cause to fear he will retract, else
he has labored in vain in this Pamphlet.

The third Instance given of the Churches Moderation to us, is, They have not
made an Act of Parliament against ut, making Nonconforming Ministers
Intruders, (although they be really such) into Parishes.

A. If the Law does not make Nonconforming Ministers Intruders, by what Law
does he call them so? The Law of the Land he vindicates from this Aspersion,
and we are sure the Law of God lays no such crime to our charge. For
Ministers, duly qualified, and by the unanimous consent of a Christian People,
elected and called to be their Ministers, are not intruders, though their
Election be not ratisy'd by the Civil Sanction; else all the Ministers of the
Gospel for the first 300 years of Christianity had been Intruders. That a
Christian People have power to Elect and call their own Ministers is according
to the Primitive Pattern. Cyprian's Rule Lib. 1. Ep. 4. is consonant to
Scripture, viz. Plebs ipsa, potestatem habet vel eligendi dig nos sacerdotes
vel indig nos recusandi. And even in Rome it self, in Pope Leo's time, it was a
Rule, Qui prae futurus est omnibus ab omnibus Elegatur. And such we are able to
make appear our Election to the Ministry to be.

2. Nor has the Parl. of Scotland made any Act against intruding into
Parishes, but against intruding into Churches and seizing upon Manses and
Glebs: which if N. C's. here had done; it is possible they had both heard and
felt that there are Acts of Parl. against such intruders.

The fourth instance of Moderation is that the Established Church has not
forbid these Dissenters, whom the Calamities of the late times had driven away,
to return and perform any Ministerial Acts in the places where formerly they
held their Conventicles for want of a Legal Call.

A. Had Dissenters as obstinately refused to swear Allegiance to K. W. and Q.
M. as his Episcopal Brethren did in Scotland: we should have had as little
favor as the Nonjurant Clergy there have had, and justly deserved it. But why
the Government of Scotland only should be condemned for severity, when both in
England and Ireland the Non-jurant Bishops and Clergy have met with the same
measure, and yet he dates not tax the Government here, or in England, of
severity upon that account, so that he is either grossly impartial, or a
Jacobite in heart, though he appear for King William.

The Fifth Instance of Moderation, is, That they have not here authorized or
required the Mayors of Corporations, and Justices of the Peace, to remove all
those who have intruded, or shall intrude, as they have done in Scotland.

A. If the Civil Magistrate were subject to the Authority of the Church, we
have cause to be confident of being otherwise dealt with than at present we
are, God be blessed for it. We think he deserves a fee, if he will make good that
Dissenters may, without counter acting Acts of Parl. enter and possess Churches
and Tithes: but then why makes he such a hideous outcry against the Minister
of Letterkenny for his intrusion.

His Sixth and last Instance of Moderation exceeding that of Scotland, is, that
they have not ordered Writs of Rebellion against Dissenting Ministers, in order
to the removing them out of Parishes where they live, and making them desist
from exercising Ministerial Acts.

A. For all this boasted of Moderation, the time was when there were Writs out
against all the Dissenting Ministers to apprehend them, whereupon many were
apprehended and imprisoned, which is well known. And we owe but little thanks
to Churchmen for the mercy we now enjoy. But by this he insinuates, that the
Episcopal Clergy are by Writs and Capias's driven from living in any Parishes
in Scotland, which is a Calumny, and by it we may see how safe his Majesty's
Government is like to be, under such Directors of Conscience, who labor to
possess his Subjects against him and his Government, as cruel and severe,
notwithstanding all the Clemency he has used to such as are declared Enemies to
his Authority.

The D. having triumphed in the victory of the Established Church of Ireland
over that of Scotland in point of Moderation, seems to be moved with a
Prophetic Spirit, to ^orete^l, that in case such Revolution of Church Affairs
should happen in this Kingdom, as has lately been in Scotland; the V. and his
Adherents would imitate the Presbyterians in Scotland, and make the Episcopal
Clergy desist from exercising any Ministerial Acts, and Issue out Writs of
Rebellion against them.

A. Either he fears, what he supposes, will come to pass, or not. If he does
really fear such Revolution, then we think 'twere his wisdom to be preparing an
Ark for saving himself and household: tho it be no policy to declare his fears,
seeing thereby he incourageth Dissenters, and weakens the hands of his Friends,
by representing us as a formidable party: But if he believes no probability of
what he supposes he needs not trouble us or his party with such Prophecies;
for if he were not conscious to himself that he had deserved ill of Dissenters,
he would not fear ill from them.

To make his Prophecy probable, he tells us, that the Professors in Colleges of
Scotland felt the rigor of the Presbyterian Visitation, which he calls by the
odious name of Inquisition practiced upon the Professor of the College of
Edinburgh in Aug. and Sept. 1690. according to an Act passed the 4th of July
1690. By which it is ordered, that no Minister or Professor in any College or
School shall be allowed to continue in the Exercise of his Function, but such
as shall subscribe to the Confession of Faith ratified by this present
Parliament, and submit to the Government of the Church now Established by Law.

A. To stigmatize the Visitors of the University's acting by his Majesty's
Commission, and Parliamentary Authority with the odious name of Inquisitors,
and the Visitation with the name of Inquisition, does palpably insinuate, that
tho the Heroic Ancestors of our King did drive the Inquisition out of the
Netherlands, yet he and his Queen have brought it into Scotland. And tho he
will swear he intended no such ^^flection on his Majesty, yet it is too apparent
he would make him, and these acting by Authority under him, successors to St.
Dominick. 2. He falsely attributes to the Church the Act of the State. 3. When
he would prove a removal of Persons Episcopal from Civil Employments he
instances in Professors of Divinity, which are not esteemed Civil Employments
in Scotland. 4. The ground of their removal was their refusing to swear
Allegiance to K. W. and Q M. and the reason they gave for their refusal was
that they were not crowned K. and Q. of Scotland, though they made no such
scruple of swearing to K. James, whether or no by justifying them in this he
partake with them in their evil deeds, let all Men judge. 5. It Is highly
hypocritical to rail at that as Sin in others which we applaud in ourselves as
a Virtue, for what more criminal is it in the Church of Scotland to oblige its
Professors of Divinity to subscribe its legally Established Doctrine, and to
submit to its legally Established Church Government, then it is in the Church
of England to require Subscription to their 39 Articles, Assent and Consent to
her Liturgy and Ceremonies, and Canonical Obedience to her Bishops.

For an Epilogue to his History of Scots Affairs, since the Revolution, he
gives a mock Commendation (as he is pleased to call it) the ingenuous temper of
the General Assembly in their Act for a solemn National Fast. Nov. 12. 1690.
wherein they gave a particular Confession of the Sins of the Nation. To which
he says, Amen, wishing they may be as sincere in repenting, as they have been
ingenious in Confession.

A. To have our Prayers and Fasts turned to reproach, is but what befell our
betters, Psalm. 69. 10. and therefore we may the easier bear it; but does not
the Church of England daily confess, we have erred and strayed from thy ways;
we have done these things which we ought not to have (...) to require his
Charity to the Church of (...) (...) wish him ingealous and (...) in his ^.

The D. having made his progress through Scotland, in his return home to
Ireland, gives us a taste of his skill in persuading, while he would have us
believe, that the gently Penal Laws, are not (as the V. insinuates) a severe
lash designed as Instruments of an Unreasonable Correction, but as the
necessary means of keeping such Children, as are of a froward and ungovernable
temper, within the bounds of a due Subjection: and therefore it ought not to be
esteemed an unkind severity, but a prudent tenderness in a Parent, to deny them
such indulgences, as in all propability will be abused, to the dive^^ing him of
his Parental Authority, and to the encouraging of them, to a total withdrawing
of their Filial Duty and Obedience for the future.

A. This D. seems to be, or at least would have Dissenters be, like the Wives
of Mascovy, who are jealous of their Husbands affection unless they correct
them severely; But he must beat us out of reason and sense both, e're he
persuade us to this, and had he but tasted as much of these gentle Penal Laws
as some have lately done, for refusing the Oath of a Churchwarden, he would
change his Note. If to be Excommunicated, thrown into Prison, till a Man and
his Family be utterly ruined, be gentle correction, how dares he exclaim
against the severity of Scotland, where there is not one such Penal Law, nor
one instance of a Layman's being fined, and imprisoned, for mere
Nonconformity, much less for refusing to be Lay Elders. And we suppose he
cannot give instance, of any Church in the World, who Excommunicate, Fine and
Imprison Men for refusing to be Officers in the Church, especially these, whom
they condemn as Schismatics. And to thrust Men into Places of Trust in the
Church out of Malice. That many more Episcopal Children, have discovered their
froward and ungovernable temper (since the happy Revolution) then of
Dissenters, is sensibly felt by the Government, and therefore the reflection on
us has as little Truth as Charity. Nor is it rational to suppose us such
enemies to our own case, and peace, as to endeavor to divest these of
Authority, by whose powerful Clemency we are protected from the claws of some
of the angry Clergy.

As to the second thing desired by Dissenters, viz. That there be no such
Clauses annexed to the Bill of Indulgence, as might disenable them from serving
their King, and Country, he observes to be the same Argument the Papists made
use of in the late Reign for taking off the Penal Laws and Test, and that the
design of Dissenters is the same, with that of the Papists, viz. not only to
capacitate themselves for all Employments, of Honor, Trust and Profit, but
also to exclude others, of a different persuasion, from having a share in any,
unless perhaps in mean and unprofitable ones.

A. The Observation (tho his own) is not observable either for it is Wit or
Honesty, for if Dissenters ought not to use the Argument, because Papists have
used it; then the Church ought far less to Cross in Baptism and kneel at the
Sacrament, seeing the Papists have gresly abused them. But it is well known that
Dissenters did refuse, to join with the Papists in taking off the penal Laws
and Test, tho they thereby might have had their own Fetters knocked off; yet
they rather chus'd to continue in chains, then to suffer such ravenous
Creatures to run loose; And we remember what fair promises were then made to
Dissenters, for this piece of generosity, but the world knows how religiously
these promises have been kept. And he may see that where Presbyterians have
more then we desire, they have not engrossed to themselves, all places of
Honor and Trust, as now in Scotland, where such employments are enjoyed, by
Persons declared Episcopal in Judgment; And its ridiculous to tell, that
Dissenters won'd inhanfe all employments, to those of their own persuasion, and
exclude others, seeing all of them are not of one persuasion, and so cannot
inhance all to their own Party. But unless the Magistrates (to whom the grant
of such Offices belongs) should turn Dissenters, it is unreasonable to fear that
Dissenters should be able to make such a Monopoly.

While he tells us That it is not reasonable that they should pull down any part
of their Church, to furnish Dissenters with Materials to build and strenthen
theirs. We must say that we knew not before now, that Penal Laws against
Dissenters were any part or parcel of the Church of England: which if they be,
as is said, it will be no demonstration of that Churches Antiquity, at least
for that part of it: which must commence with the Act of Uniformity. Surely the
Primitive Church had no such Pillars to support it, for 300 years and more, and
yet the Gates, of Hell were not able to prevail against it. Bp. Tailor liberty
of prophesying p. 18. will better inform him That imposing on Men's
understandings, being Masters of their Consciences, and Lording it over their
Faith, came in with the rotinue and train of Antichrist, The increase of
Interest, and abatement of Christian Simplicity, when the Churches Fortune grew
better, and her Sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers worst of all. And
cites Tertullian, saying, S^d nec Religionis est cogere religionem, quae
suscipi debet sponte non vi. To this he adds, That all wise Princes till they
were overbo^n with Faction, or solicited by peevish Persons, gave To eration
to different Sects, whose opinions did not disturb the Public Interest.
Heretical Persons who are impatient of an Adversary, were the first, who
entreated the Emperors to persecute the Catholics, but till 400 years after
Christ, no Catholic Persons, or very few, did provoke the secular Arm, or
implore its aid against Heretics.

The D. having given his judgment with more passion than truth, against
Dissenters, particularly these in the North, to make it appear reasonable (as
he says), he attempts to prove it by matter of fact since the Revolution,
attested by several persons of known Prudence and Integrity in the North, who
have given an account of many hard things against two Ministers there, both
doctrinal and practical; the first of these is Mr. Liston, late Minister of
Letterkenny; the 2d is Mr. William Holms. Mr. Liston is accused, First, of
constant declaring the Church of England Popish and Antichristian. 2. Praying
for its destruction. 3. Preacb'd against its Feastivals, and said that they
worshipped the Devil. 4. Discharged his Hearers to entertain any Conformists as
Servants, but allowed them to keep Popish Servants. 5. That he persuaded the
Parents of a Gentlewoman who had conformed, to deny her Meat, Drink, and
Lodging, and to hang her for her Apostasy. 6. He abused the Legal Incumbent,
and pulled him out of the Church of Letterkenny.

A. Were this heavy charge as fully proven, as it is confidently alleged, it
would not amount to all that is intended thereby, viz. To make all the
Dissenting Ministers of the North odious to the Government, as a factious and
violent people; no more, than the Simony, Adultery, Drunkenness, habitual
Non-Residence, and neglect of Office proved against the Bishop and Clergy of
Down and Connor, at the late Regal Visitation, will prove all the Clergy of
Ireland guilty of the same crimes: Tho some are of opinion, that those on whom
that Tower of Siloam fell, were not the only Sinners,; but if other Diocesses
had umdergone the same Ordeal, these condemned might have some comfort in
having more companions. If any desiderate proof of this, they shall have
satisfaction from more Authentic Records than these produced to prove Mr.
Liston's Lybel.

2. Had he designed impartial justice in this matter, he had been as particular
in naming the witnesses, as he is in naming the accused, and their crimes; for
before judgment pass, the Law allows the Accused to see their Witnesses, to
know if they have any exceptions against them; but by his hiding them, he gives
the world ground to suspect they are not evidence beyond exception. And seeing
the Civil Law denies them to be good evidence, or have been but lately
reconciled: for this cause, in offensus affectus iestiam queritur ne irati
nocere cupiant laesi ulcisci se velint. We have cause to suspect the Evidence;
for those who persecute men when alive, and reproach them when dead, are not
their friends. Yea, all this evidence is but on hearsay, seeing we have it
from Conforming Clergy, who could no otherways know what he Preached and Prayed
constantly, but by others testimony: And the Law says, Testimonium quod ab
aliena relatione dependet non valet. And indeed, to accuse a man long after his
death, as here Mr. Liston is, when yet while alive, he was not pursued (though
the Law both Civil and Ecclesiastical was open to them, and the faults, if
proved, punishable by the Judge) is contrary to the Light of Nature, and Law of
Nations, which teach, that Citatio and defensio sunt juris naturalis, and
condemn no man uncited, unheard. The Civil Law says, that sententia contra
mortuos ferenda non est; for that were, cum larvis pugnare, to fight with men's
ghosts, which is neither Humanity nor Religion. And several of the things
asserted are so improbable, that they must be scant in Charity who believe them.

As for the 2d Instance of Mr. W. H. It Is an arrow out of the same quiver, the
person being a Probationer, upon the rumor of what is here alleged, was called
to account for it, but vindicated himself sufficiently, whereby it appears we
encourage no such intemperate, and indiscreet actions amongst any of our
persuasion, but bring them to account for it; and we know by whose industry all
the Aurea Legenda that can be collected in that part of the Country, are
confidently published with test meipso.

From these Instances he draws, as he calls it, an undoubted conclusion, that
if Dissenters had the uncontrolable liberty of a legal irrestrictive
Indulgence, they would be most turbulent, insolent, and tumultuous, which he
proves by the representation made by the House of Commons to King Charles the
2d above 30 years ago, as we heard before.

A. Were these two Instances as true, as we have made them appear to be false
and malicious; his conclusion might be doubted, as much as a conclusion from
the many Instances of Simony, Adultery, Drunkenness, and constant Non-Residence
judicially proved at the late Regal Visitation at Lisburn, to prove all the
Clergy of Ireland guilty of these Crimes; and seeing he can produce no
Instances of intemperate speeches, and illegal violences of Dissenters in the
North, except these two pretended: this may satisfy the Government how far we
are from such a distemper as he reproaches us with, tho we have had
provocations from the intemperate speeches of some Clergymen.

As for his only strong Argument; his fear of the increase of the power and
number of Dissenters, and therefore the Established Church should not be
over-fond of these seeming Protestants.

A. His Party has no cause to thank him for his policy; for by representing
the Dissenters as so formidable a party, he encourages them, and weakens the
hearts and hands of his Brethren by these frightful Prophesies: If he be so
really afraid of our power and increase, his wisdom will be seasonably to
yield, and unite with us: For these penal Laws have not lessened our numbers,
or weakened our power, seeing since their commencement we are in Ireland 100 to
one; and if upwards of 100 years experience of the absolute insufficiency of
these Laws to prevent the daily growth of Dissenter^ from the Established
Church will not convince him of their being useless Engines to defend it, we
cannot help him more than these do his cause.

The V. having urged, That a Legal Indulgence was needful, in case another
Rebellion, which God forbid should happen: else what Gentleman among us would
rise, for others to command? or would Tenants cheerfully rise with them on whom
they have no dependence? and in whom they can as little trust.

The D. tells us there is no danger of that, for the generality of the Nobility
and Gentry of the North are Conformists, their Landlords, and Acquaintances,
and men of great Estates to manage that.

A. If the Nobility and Gentry that are Conformists, who in the late troubles
promised fair things to Dissenters, should by the importunity of some of the
hotter Clergy, be overpersuaded, contrary to their own moderate temper and
interest, to for^eit that place they have now in the esteem of Dissenters; it
would be impossible to induce reasonable men to trust them in a time of War,
who had deceived them in a time of Peace. But we hope the Nobility and Gentry
value as and their own interest more, than to sacrifice both to some implacable
men for Ceremonies. It would be no prudence to provoke such multitudes, which
in times of confusion little regard such distinctions as in Peace they do; and
rather follow whom they love, and have been obliged by, than them they suspect,
and have been hurt by.

That those who shut the Gates of Derry were Conformists, and those who were
Governors in it the time of the Siege, is asserted with more vanity than truth,
if he say they were the only persons: But as both parties were united in heart
and hand in that matter, so we shall not divide them in the praise: Tho we
believe, what is well known, that the common Soldiers were the Governors, else
it seems the Event had proved worse than it did.

As to his credible information, that in the succesful party at Enni^killen,
there was not one Commission Officer, not so much as one Ensign, that was not
of the Established Church, and of the private Sentinels, there were six
Conformists to one Dissenter.

A. We fear his Informers have imposed too much on his credulity, and to the
hazard of his reputation, have employed him to retail many untruths. For we are
as fully persuaded of the contrary, as we can be of a thing of that nature,
having it from those who know well, that there were above eight Captains of the
Presbyterian persuasion before, and at the Troubles, and some of us have been
at the Tent of one of them at Dundalk, whose Father and Grandfather were
Presbyterian Ministers of good esteem in Ireland; and is now in the Army in
Flanders. There were seven Lieutenants, and several Ensigns, whose names we
shall not publish without their leave. Mr. Kelso the Presbyterian Minister at
Enniskillen, while he lived was very active, and died at Enniskillen: at that
time one of his Congregation had a Company consisting of 140 men. It Is true,
most of them occasionally heard the Church of England Ministers; and after Mr.
Kelso's death, and the removal of the rest, they had none else to hear, yet
declared they themselves Presbyterians, and the most of them who are alive, do
so still: And he must allow us to know our own better than he does. But as we
do not take all for ours who come occasionally to hear us, no more ought he to
take all for his, who occasionally hear him.

The V's Argument against the Test, viz. If the Parliament of England had
thought the Sacramental Test needful, they could easily have added it, as they
have the Test against Popery mentioned in the same Act. We have this Answer: If
the Parliament of England had intended to excuse the Protestant Dissenters in
this Kingdom from a Sacramental Test, as they had to the Test against Popery,
they might have as easily forbid the former, as they have positively enjoined
the latter.

A. This Answer is a weak Brother to some of the rest; for if the Parliament
does not enjoin, we think they do excuse^ and had they not enjoined an Act of
Uniformity, we think we should be excused for our Non conformity; for where
there is no Law, there is no transgression.

The Charge given against Dissenters in the North for not paying Conformist
Ministers their dues, till his Majesty put forth his Royal Proclamation for
payment of them, is not fairly said. 1st, Because all the Dissenters were not
guilty, several of those who staid in K. James's time, and had Stocks, etc. in
the lower part of Down and Antrim did pay to these Incumbents who staid with
them. 2d, The Conformists were as guilty of this as Dissenters; the reason of
both was inability in the most parts, having nothing left to support their
lives and families; and when the Army came where there was any thing, they took
free quarters. And as they were not able, so they thought not themselves bound
in Conscience to maintain Non-Residents and Pluralists, who, had they not been
prodigal in time of Peace, had been under little necessity. Besides, some of
the Clergy were in England, some Chaplains in the Army; yea, some of the Clergy
will confess, that they were more kindly and justly dealt with by Dissenters,
than by their own people, as all moderate men did find, and will upon such
occasions. But if this was injustice, the Landlords suffered far more, who got
nothing, and after the troubles did freely forgive one, two, or three years
Rent, and yet make no noise. It Is well known the Bishops did not abate one
farthing of their Rents, even for those times in which they could not keep
their Tenants in peaceable possession, which severity was so much resented by
some Conforming Gentlemen, that they threatened to turn Presbyterians on that
account.

As for the D's great fears, that if the desired liberty were granted to
Dissenters, the door being once opened, they would all rush into the profitable
and honorable Employments. This shows an earthly constitution of Soul, to have
fears and cares mainly employed about things secular, and like Demetrius, who,
tho he pretended the glory of the Diana of the Ephesians, yet his and the
Crafts-men's trouble, was, the fear of the loss of their wealth.

In defense of the Sacramental Test, the D. tells us, they do not drive any to
the Sacrament; but since the Civil Magistrate is God's Vicegerent, it is surely
not unfit that he should imitate Almighty God, whom he represents, in proposing
temporal advantages, as encouragement to the performance of religious actions;
and they are best qualified for public Employments of the greatest profit,
trust and honor, that give most public and signal evidence of their piety
toward God, and obedience to the Civil Magistrate.

A. Is it not driving to the Sacrament, when men are forced to it under pain of
being driven to the Devil? Seeing such as refuse to communicate with the Church
of England, are to be excommunicated ipso facto, according to Canon 9. of the
Constitution 1603, and Canon 5. Constitution 1641. And is it not to drive men,
when they must either quit their Civil Employments, and be made incapable of
them; and to starve themselves and families, unless they will Communicate
according to the form prescribed? And do not we daily see, that all the
Soldiers are forced to Communicate, how ignorant and vicious soever they be?
else they lose their pay.

That Civil Magistrates may encourage those that do well, and be terrors to
evil doers, we fully believe; but that kneeling at receiving the Sacrament
(about which the debate between you and us is) is a religious action, or a
public and signal obedience of piety to God; we admire how you dare assert,
seeing he has no where required it at our hands; and there are true acts of
piety to God, and obedience to the Magistrate, which we see are not so much
regarded as this act of Will Worship is: And why one single Ceremony should be
made the test of our piety to God, and obedience to the Civil Magistrate, no
man can give a rational account. That there be so many of the Established
Church fitly prepared according to the Rubric for reception of the blessed
Sacrament as are fit for all the profitable and honorable Employments, we are
satisfied; but are forty that so small a proportion of them fall in the hands
of such, and that they are treated no better than Dissenters for the most part*
while some, whose Rubric fitness is shrewdly suspected, thrive better.

As to what the V. says of the modes of Receiving the Sacrament, who is against
making sitting, standing, or kneeling the only posture of Receiving: we must
allow him to abound in his own sense; but know that the most part of
Presbyterians and Independants in Ireland are otherwise minded: who all judge
and declare, that the Table gesture in receiving the Sacrament, and not the
Adoration, is most agreeable to the first pattern given us by Christ and his
Apostles, and practiced in the Primitive Church: and to charge the sitting
posture with undecency, is an undecent reflection upon Christ and his Apostles.
That the Receiving in the posture of Adoration, was not brought into the Church
until the 14th Century, and that only into the Latin Church, with the opinion
of the corporal presence, is so well known, that it cannot modestly be denied.
And therefore Dissenters wonder that so late an invention, brought into the
Church upon so bad an occasion, and for worse ends, should be insisted upon by
persons prosessing reverence to Antiquity, and declare their abhorrence of
corrupting the doctrine of the Sacrament, with its ill consequence.

Yet we do not see what danger the Church is in, of having its Authority
infringed, or Laws nulled by the V's opinion; who, tho he looks upon sitting,
standing, or kneeling, too narrow enclosures, to keep people from the Lord's
Table, yet will, it seems, allow liberty to Churches to determine in these
things as they shall see meet.

As for the Churches Authority to make Laws: 1. We think her power not
Legislative, but Ministerial, and exetuti^^ of Divine Laws. 2. That her
Constitutions, at such, do not immediately and directly bind the Conscience. 3.
That her Authority to appoint Rites and Ceremonies of mystical signification,
or as parts of Worship, is none. 4. That her power is in determining
Circumstances, and that these determinations are of the same extent and
continuance with the reasons thereof; and that all her Conclusions,
inconsistent with Edification, Order, Unity and Peace of Christ, are ipso facto
void, and nullities. So that the world needs not be so much terrified with that
great word, Church Authority, if they truly understand it, and the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free.

When he tells us, that he cannot be counted a wise man, that wilfully
entertains seruples in his mind, and suffers himself to be influenced by them
in his practice, we do not comprehend him, seeing scruples are fears of the
mind, which vex the Conscience, as a small stone in the shooc does hurt the
foot; and are therefore sins of weakness: if they be wilfully entertained, they
are not scruples, but wilful wickedness: so that we know neither wise man, nor
fool, that will wilfully entertain any such diseases. But yet as wise men as
himself, have had scruples, as the Apostles Peter and Barnabas, who scrupled
converse with the Gentiles, Acts 10. Gal. 2.

His Principle laid down, viz. That it is more agreeable to the Character of a
truly wise man, so be scrupulously fearful of disobeying, than obeying the
commands of Authority; will hold good where the Authority is infallible,
otherwise not: for we may as lawfully scruple, yea, deny obedience to their
unjust commands, as to disobey their lawful commands; and we find it agreed
well with the character of the truly wise Apostles, to scruple obedience to the
commands of Authority. It had been Ephraim's wisdom, not to have walked
willingly after the command of Jorohoam, for which he was broken in judgment.
Shall we suppose the seven Bishops put in the Tower, for (...) to obey the late
King Ja's Authority, were no wise men. Seeing therefore we owe no implicit
obedience to any man, we ought to be as afraid of obeying unlawful, as
disobeying lawful commands.

Why he should be surprised with the V's asserting, that Non-Conformists have
been both before and ever since the Revolution qualified with Civil Offices, we
do not see: seeing they had both Physical, Moral, and Civil Qualifications, and
are not barred as yet by a Sacramental Test: but it seems the V. did forget
that a Canonical qualification was necessary for being in any Civil Office. For
there are, as he says, Ecclesiastical Laws, by which, tho Dissenters be not
wholly unqualify'd for admittance into Civil Offices, they are wholly disabled
for continuing in them. Tho this be possible, it seems not reasonable, that any
cause should disable a man to bear and execute an Office, which did not disable
him to enter in it, when the matter is known before. By this the Ecclesiastic
Laws are like Decoy Ducks, which let in their fellow creatures, and then catch
them in the Net. But it seems Dissenters must pay the thanks for all their
Civil Offices, to the lenity of Ecclesiastical Governors, and not to the bounty
of the Civil Magistrate, who seems to be as much sub ferula of the Church as
Dissenters are; for tho they may give, they cannot make good their grants.

If the D's modesty could have allowed him to suffer others to commend his
Answer for its fullness, or had he been so patient, as to hear what could be
said against it, he would not have so severely reflected on the V. or boasted
of himself as he does.

That there might be a symetry in this defense, as he began, so he ends with
hard words, in which he taxes the V. with undecent and profane ridiculing the
first Constitution of the Apostles against eating of blood.

A. To accuse any of so great Crimes without sufficient proof, is rather
reviling than reasoning, which is ordinary with men of stronger passions than
reason, when they are not able to answer Arguments, they fall upon them and the
Arguer, employing bantering as a succedanium for reason.

His 2d. Accusation, that the V. unjustly and irreverently applies the words
of our Savior, Mat. 7. 10. to the celebrated Parl. of Ireland. We believe the
Members of Parliament will not look on these words with the D's eyes, but will
rather consider them as an allusion, and that upon supposition that the
Parliament should give a toleration to Dissenters clogged with such a Test; it
would be as giving a stone when bread is asked.

To conclude, There are some reflections on the doctrine and practice of some
Dissenters occasionally communicating with the Established Church: where he
observes the inconsistency of some of the V's words, which we not being able to
justify, leave to their Author to vindicate them, and will ingenuously
acknowledge, with the Author of that Book called Vox Clamantis; which he cites,
That such Non-Conformists as upon occasion to get into places of Honor, and
Profit, will and can take all manner of Tests that have been of late imposed,
or can on such occasions take the Sacrament according to the form and way of
the Church of England, tho they never did it before, and perhaps never intended
it after, except on the like occasion, are too justly ob^oxious to be
suspected, as men of flexible and profligate Consciences. But we are sure the
V. intended to justify no such persons.

Having now impartially considered this Defense, we must tell him, that if he
had borrowed as much out of Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenicum, as he has stolen out
of his Unreasonableness of Separation, and given less credit to his Jacobitish
Pamphleteers in the affairs of Scotland, he had better consulted for his own
reputation, and our ease and might have spared several reflections he too
liberally bestows on his Majesty's Government in Scotland: but hereby he has
given a Commentar upon the old Prelatick Maxim, No Bishop, no King: that is, if
Kings do not support Bishops, there shall be no Kings.

But we wish that our Zeal may be better employed about things wherein the
glory of God, the good of Souls, and the peace of the Church and State may be
more concerned, than either they enjoying their Ceremonies, or we our Civil
Offices.

AN ANSWER TO A Peaceable and Friendly Address TO THE Non-Conformists, etc,
Although the reasonings of this Address appear not to be so powerful, as to make
us Schismatics, and thereby incapable of a Legal Toleration; yet, left our not
pleading to such an Indictment as is here drawn up against us, should be
construed to flow from sullenness, or conscious of a weak and ill cause; we
cannot but consider them, and that either to prevent the Addressor's conceit of
his Work, as if it were impregnable, or choler for looking on it as
contemptible.

If it be malum omen cespitare in limine, the Doctor has snappered on a piece
of disingenuity in the very frontispiece; for what he calls a Peaceable and
Friendly Address to Non-Conformists, upon perusal, appears to be a Libel
against them as Schismatics, and it is design to provoke the Civil Magistrate
to keep us still under the lash of penal Laws for Nonconformity; so that, as
it is reported of a Polish Ambassador sent to Queen Elizabeth, at his arrival,
he pretended he came for Peace, but when he had his public Audience, he
proclaimed War, whereupon the Queen said, Heu quam decepta fui Legatum
expectavi, Herauldum accept, I looked for an Ambassador, but have received a
Herald; so when ye have raised our expectations with the name of a Peaceable
and Friendly Address, bring in an Accusation against us, as guilty of a Crime
(which if what Divines say of it be true) is no less than renting the mystical
Body of Jesus Christ, and if this be your kindness to your friends and
brethren, you must excuse us if we be not fond of that relation.

In your Epistle, seeing you flatter your self with hopes of doing some good,
and confidence of doing no hurt, by publishing this Address, and that because
of the calmness and temper, ye have studed in it, to prevent giving offense to
your Non Conforming Brethren, as ye call them, we hope it will be no hurt to
tell you, that the studied temper and calmness of your words, will not make an
atonement for the distemper of its matter, and windy storm and tempest thereby
designed; for you mistake your Nonconforming brethren, if you think them so
simple as not to be offended with good words and fair speeches, whereby men lie
in wait to deceive, and, though your words be smoother than butter, yet it is
evident to us that war is in your heart, while ye cast iniquity upon us, and
were they softer than Oil, we must look upon them as drawn Swords, while by
them ye are stirring up those, who bear not the Sword in vain to employ it
against us.

As for the large encomium you exalt your Patron with, as an eminent example of
temper and moderation to Dissenters, and that none was more mild and gentle to
them than he, even in those times when it was in his power to use severity
toward them; we cannot but from experience of the contrary, dissent from you
in this, as well as in some other things: for Non-Conformists do remember, that
they never met with greater severity, at least in the North, than when the
Primate of all Ireland and Chancellor rode both upon one horse; and we advise
you for his honor, and your own honesty, not to put us upon the proof of it.

As for that remarkable effect of his arguments and moderation that he obliged
diverse Nonconforming Ministers to receive Ordmation at his hands, according to
the form prescribed by your Church, and to conform to the Worship and
Discipline thereof; if such were ordained Ministers before, though by Presbyters,
you will find it hard to convince any of the Reformed Churches, or all of your
own either that this was the proper effect of moderation, but rather of
Prelatick Domination, and an uncharitable condemning of the foreign Reformed
Churches as none, and their Ministerial Administration as void and null, for
want of Episcopal Ordination: and we fear that love of the world prevailed more
powerfully than any other arguments, else it is hard to believe that
conscientious Ministers would have renounced their former Ordination, which if
they did, without a public declaration of their former sin, in unlawful
invading the Ministerial Office, and cheating the world by a pretended
Administration of Sacraments, when they had no power so to do, as ye have not
by them gained honest Ministers, so we have lost as few; and if this be the
native fruit of his Moderation, we bless God that has delivered us from it;
and thus we shall apply our selves to the Address it self.

It has ever been the honor of Peace to be well spoken of by all men, Pacem
le poscimus omnes; but the unhappiness of many men to be under the dominion of
such Lusts, as disenable them to pursue it; that there are, and shall be
divisions among us we confess; but to convince the guilty of their Sin, is this
hoc opus, hic labor est: seeing it is as rare to find men impartial as
infallible.

Considering what brevity I intend, I shall not catch all advantages I might
take by some unnecessary phrases of this Address, in which the Doctor rather
catechiseth the Non-Conformists, by asking questions, than convinces them by
reasons, proving his own, or disproving their principles and practices; and tho
some short categorical answers of yea and nay might suffice, I shall give
answer with a reason to it, tho not bound more than he, who gives none for his
questions. And, (1st) While he tell us that there is a separation between us,
and thereby a Schism in our National Church, the consequence is not good; for
there may be a separation without Schism, as there is between all the Parochial
Churches which are locally separate, without any Schism of your National
Church. Paul and Barnabas separated, Aands 15. 39. yet were no Schismatics;
and there may be Schisms where there is no separation of Churches, 1 Cor. 3. 1.
(2d) Before ye had (as with confidence ye do) asserted a Schism betwixt you and
us, it had been requisite that ye had proved that there was once an union in
these things in which we divide, seeing all division presupposes a prior
union: if then we were never joined in one, how can there be a division? now I
apprehend, it will puzzle you to prove, that the Presbyterians in the North
ever joined with the Established Church in these things in which we now differ,
to wit, Church Government, Liturgy, and Ceremonies: therefore if you would
succesfully attack Dissenters, you must not use the same Topics for all; some
you must prove Schismatics tho they never joined; others you must convince
that there is a National Church, before you will be able to persuade them that
they have divided it.

To your first Question; Is there any of these things which are necessary to
the salvation of a Christian, wanting in the Communion of our Church? Do we not
profess and teach the true Christian Faith in all its Fundamental Articles?
Answer, (1st.) Tho you may be so inured to officiate by Delegates, as to think
we should serve the Cure for you, we do not find our selves obliged to prove
what you affirm, seeing the rule has hitherto universally obtained affirmanti
incumbit probatio: It lies upon you to show that your Church teaches all the
Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, and not on us, who are not bound
to give the reason of the Faith that is in you: Christ and his Apostles proved
their Doctrines, and left them not to be disproved by Jews and Pagans, until
they had first proved them. (2.) But in reverence to the antiquity of the
question, which is old Roman Catholic, I shall give it a Protestant's answer,
which cannot be excepted against for Nonconformity, being the learned
Chillingsworth's in his Book, The Religion of a Protestant the safe way to
Salvation, in answer to a Papist who maintained the contrary. The Papist had
put this Question, Page 4. Parag. 14, 15. If the Roman Church did not fall into
any Error that was damnable, how can it be damnable to live in her Communion?
and if her Errors were not damnable, nor did exclude Salvation, how can they be
excused from Schism who forsake her Communion? etc. To this Chillingworth
answers, Page 16. All that we forsake in you, is the belief, profession, and
practice of your Errors; Hereupon you cast us out of your Communion, and with a
strange contradictious and ridiculous confidence complain that we forsake it,
as if a man should thrust his friend out of doors, and then be offended at his
departure; but for us not to forsake the belief of your Errors, having
discovered them to be Errors, was impossible, and therefore to do so, could not
be damnable, believing them to be Errors; not to forsake the profession and
practice of them, had been damnable hypocrisy: so that either you must free
your Church from requiring the belief of any Error whatsoever, or whether you
will or not, you must free us from Schism: for Schism there cannot be, unless
we were obliged to continue in it. Man cannot be obliged by man, but to what he
was formerly or virtually obliged by God. God, the eternal Truth, neither can
nor will oblige us to believe any the most innocent falsehood to be a divine
truth, that is to err, nor to prosess a known Error, which is to lie; so that
if ye require the belief of any Error, among the conditions of your Communion;
our obligation to Communicate with you cease, and so the imputation of Schism
to us vanishes to nothing; but lies heavy on you, for making our separation
necessary, by requiring unnecessary and unlawful conditions of your Communion.
Hereafter I therefore entreat you demand not, how came we to forsake your
Communion without Schism, seeing ye erred not damnably; but how could we so do,
seeing ye erred not at all? Which if either ye do prove, or we cannot disprove,
we will turn to your Communion, or subscribe our selves Schismatics: In the
mean time let us continue as we are. Yet notwithstanding of all your Errors, we
do not renounce your Communion totally and absolutely, but only leave
Communicating with you in the practice and profession of your Errors; the trial
whereof, will be to propose some form of worshipping God, taken wholly out of
the Scriptures, and herein, if we refuse to join with you, then, and not till
then, let us be condemned as Schismatics; so he whom the late Archbishop
Tillotson thought it an honor to be his Scholar.

To the next Question; Is there any thing required by us from them that
Communicate with us, that is a Sin? We answer affirmatively, there be things
required, which to us are so.

To the third Question; Are there any of our Constitutions contrary to God's
Law? We answer, to us it appears there be.

To the 4th; Has God any where forbid us to use the sign of the Cross after
Baptism, a Ring in the Celebration of Marriage, a Surplice in divine Service,
the posture of kneeling at the Reception of the Lord's Supper, or any of those
Rites and Ceremonies which are appointed to be used among us?

Answer; Things are either forbidden expressly, or by just and necessary
consequence: though then they be not expressly by name forbidden, they be by
good consequence: for whatever is not commanded by GOD, and is required by men
as a part or means of the worship of God, is forbidden by God. (1st.) Then,
whatever part or means of divine worship is not commanded, is forbidden, is
evident from that reason given, Lev. 10. 1. Why God destroyed Nadab and Abihu
for offering strange fire, which is this, for I commanded them not. The reason
of God's rejecting what was offered, Isa. 1. 12. is given, Who has required
these things at your hands? the cause of God's Judgments on false Prophets,
Jer. 14. 14, 15. is, I sent them not, neither have I commanded them. Fear or
Worship of God taught by the commandments of men, is not only vain, Matthew. 15.
9. but brings plagues on them who abuse their wisdom that way, Isa. 29. 14. And
we are lately taught this to be the doctrine of the Established Church by the
Bishop of Derry, in his Vanity of Humane Inventions, page 3. (1st.) says he,
It belongs to God only, to give rules how he will be worshipped, which is a
truth naturally implanted in the minds of men, and universally acknowledged at
all times. (2.) The holy Scriptures contain the revelation of God's will
concerning his own Worship. (3.) It concerns us to keep as close as we can to
the directions which God has been pleased to afford us, without adding to,
omitting, or altering any thing that he has therein laid down; for since God
has vouchsafed us a certain and perfect direction for his Worship in the holy
Scripture, it is to be supposed, that all ways of Worship are displeasing to
him, that are not expressly contained or warranted by the examples of holy men
mentioned therein. Now, if Cross, Ring, etc. be not expressly contained in
Scripture, or warranted by the examples of holy men therein, they must,
according to the Bishop of Derry's reasoning, be displeasing to God, and so
forbidden by him.

I know nothing that can be excepted against this, but that Cross, etc. are
neither required as parts, nor ways and means of Worship; but that they are
required as such, is evident. (1st.) The Liturgy or Divine Service, is a
principal part of the Worship of God, and those Ceremonies are a part of the
Liturgy, therefore they are parts of the Worship of God; for quod est pars
partis est pars totius. (2d.) That they are reputed ways and means of the
Worship is plain, because no solemn public Worship can be performed without
them, no Sacraments given or received without crossing or kneeling; yea, if all
Ministers should refuse to say Common Prayer, or Administer Sacraments
otherwise than prescribed by the Common Prayer, that is, with all these
Ceremonies; then, according to the Act of Uniformity, it would be unlawful to
worship God publicly in this Kingdom.

Hence, we see an Answer to his Question, Can any thing be called a Sin which
God has not forbid? Answer, it may; for uncommanded Worship is Sin; to Baptize
without the Sign of the Cross, Communicate without Kneeling, etc. are not
forbidden of God, and yet the Established Church account these Sins; else why
are men Imprisoned and Excommunicated for what is acknowledged to be no Sin;
yea, punished more severely, than for some gross immoralities, for which they
are not excommunicated ipso facto, tho for Nonconformity they ought to be,
according to the Canons. (2d.) Oil, Salt, Chrism, Spittle, etc. are no more
forbidden than the Sign of the Cross, etc. why then has the Church rejected
them, they being lawful? The same Arguments are used by the Papists for all
their Ceremonies; selling Doves, and changing Money, were not forbidden, yet
Christ drove all out of the Temple.

To vindicate your Ceremonies, you tell us, you place no holiness in them.
Answer, If they be not holy, they are not civil nor natural Ceremonies, and
therefore must be profane, nor does your placing no holiness in them, free them
from Superstition, if ye super-add them as parts of Worship, to God's Statutes,
while ye tell us, that ye only use them as things in themselves indifferent,
ordained by Humane Authority for decency and Order. Ans. Though Ceremonies were
indifferent in their Nature, yet they never can be so in their use, for as our
actions are specified good or evil by their ends, the end being good or evil,
or neither, they in their use must be good, evil or idle and impertinent, and
so can never be used as things indifferent. 2. Things indifferent being neither
good or evil, can make nothing either better or worse, for add nothing to
something, and it will be no bigger, so they can make nothing decent or
orderly, seeing they have nothing of decency or order in them, else they were
things really good, and not indifferent. (3.) These Ceremonies must either be
necessary means of decency and order, or not; if necessary they are not only
not indifferent, but all worship performed without them has been undecently
and disorderly performed, and so Christ and his Apostles Baptized, Prayed and
Communicated undecently, because without Crosses, Surplices, and Kneeling; if
not necessary, why is all this needless contention for things confessedly
unnecessary.

We confess with you, that Worship cannot be performed without circumstances,
and that all outward circumstances of Worship are not expressly prescribed by
God, yet we are fully pwerswaded, that mystical Rites and Ceremonies invented
and imposed by men, as terms of Communion with them, are not circumstances,
though craftily or ignorantly they be confounded; yet all men of reason know them
not to be the same; for time, place, person, etc. are circumstances of humane
actions but none can call them Rites or Ceremonies of actions; if they were,
then Ceremonies should be necessary, and not indifferent, seeing it is
impossible to do any thing without such circumstances: We have often told you
that such natural circumstances as are necessary for a decent and orderly
performance of our actions, being included in the general Precept, we esteem
lawful; but such mystical Rites and Ceremonies as are not necessarily required
to the performance of any of God's Commandments, and not comprehended in any
general Law of Christ, we judge additions to his Institutions, and contrary to
that Precept, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. What things soever I command you, observe to do it;
thou shall not add thereto, or diminish therefrom.

Seeing you humble your self in desiring us to teach you, how ye shall more
effectually disclaim all superstition in the use of them than ye do, and
promise to confess your fault, if ye give us not satisfaction; we presume to
teach you a more effectual way, and that is, to disclaim all use of them, and
so you effectually disclaim all superstitious abuse of them; and herein we
expect the satisfaction ye promise.

When you have convinced us of that innocence of your Church wherein ye glory,
you will find it easy to induce us to join with you; but this you have not made
convincingly appear among Non-Conformists, among whom we find you have met with
two sorts; (1st.) Such as judge Communion with the Established Church
absolutely unlawful, these you tell, that their judgment is false, and
apparently uncharitable, unless they can show that something is wanting which
God has commanded, or required that he has forbidden. Answ. For such, what is
already said, let it be considered, and then judge whether their judgment be
false and uncharitable, though we know few that are for absolute and total
separation from you. (2.) A second sort of such as doubt of the lawfulness of
your Communion, to whom you offer your self a ductor dubitantium, and after
stating their Case, resolve it: Their Case is, they doubt (that is are not well
assured) whether it be lawful to conform; the resolution you propose, is, if
they are not able by any means to clear their doubts, and satisfy their
scruples, yet surely in such a case, they ought to choose that way which is
most free and safe from the danger of Sin. But we would ask you, how a person
that is not, as you say, by any means able to clear his doubts about which is
the most safe way, shall choose the most safe way? this is to oblige men to
impossibilities; for while one has used all means to clear his doubts about
which is the safest, and yet these continue, he cannot choose the safest,
because he knows it not; and if he choose without knowledge, he acts neither as
a Christian, nor a reasonable man, and so Cicero de Offic. though a Pagan, is in
my mind a better Casuist than you, who advises quod dubitas aequum an unquum
sit, ne feceris, what you doubt, whether it be just or unjust, do it not, and
herein he agrees with the Apostle, whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

But which is the safest way? to this, you say, 1. It Is Evident we should
promote the Peace and Unity of the Church. 2. Give Obedience to the Commands of
Lawful Authority, Romans 13. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13. But then it is only doubtful
whether he should conform to Ceremonies by Law Established; if then he cannot
upon solid grounds satisfy himself, that such Conformity is Lawful, such a
doubt ought not to be put in the balance with the aforesaid Commands. Answ. By
your leave, such a doubt may be put in the balance with the forementioned
duties, seeing the same God, and the same Scripture has told us, that he that
doubts is damned, if he cateth, for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, Romans
14. ult. Now, if we may not follow peace, or obey Superiors, except in Faith,
for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, then to conform doubtingly, either for
peace, or in obedience to the Magistrate, is sinful Conformity, as well as
praying to God without Faith, is Sin, Jam. 1, 6, 7. Now a little more reason
and divinity would have taught you, 1. That Negative Precepts bind ad semper,
that is, can at no time, nor in no case, be broken without sin, but positive
Precepts bind semper, that is, as Schoolmen say, they are still obliging, though
not at all times, as it is always a duty to pray, but not at all times. 2. A
Rule against which there is no exception will overbalance that which is
limited by exceptions, for this Rule, what soever is not of Faith is sin, is
without exception. The other two Precepts are rest^icted by it, as Romans 12. 18.
if it be possible as much as in you lies live peaceably with all Men; Here the
Precept is limited as far as is possible with a good Conscience, but we must
not sell peace with God, and our Consciences to purchase it with Men: Our
Obedience to Superiors is limited by lawfulness, possibilty, expedience and
Edification. 3. If your Episcopal Brethren in Scotland should doubt of the
lawfulness of submitting to Presbytery now by Law Established there, it seems
by you they are bound to conform for peace, and in Obedience to Authority,
notwithstanding of their doubts; why don't you then Preach this Doctrine to
them? or if a Man in France, Spain, Italy, etc. were in doubt, and could by no
means clear himself of these doubts, whether Popery or Protestanism were
safest, by your Rule he is obliged to be a Papist in obedience to Authority.

To your Question, why may not I say, he that doubts is damned if he refuse
Conformity, rather than if he Conform. Ans. Why does not the Apostle say, he
that doubts is damned if he refuse to eat, rather than if he eats, such a
Commentary as you make, would destroy the Text; for when a doubt is about
doing, and not about omitting, the sin must be in doing, and not in omitting;
so that all this Sophistry will not make v^id that good old Rule Cautissimi
cujusque praeceptum quoddubitas ne feceris, obey not the Precept of the most
prudent, if ye do it. But by what Authority do you Address these as
Non-conformists, who so ha^^ betwixt two Opinions, as neither to follow God nor
B^al? they are none of ours no more than they are yours, for he that gathers
not vith us scatters.

To your Non-conformists Objection, to wit, to impose such things upon us as
are in themselves indifferent, is an Infringement of our Christian Liberty,
Gal. 5. 1. Your answer is, to impose the belief or practice of any thing as an
essential part of Religion, and necessary to Salvation, which God has not
particularly required, such imposing infringeth Christian Liberty, and none
else. Answ. As you have not faithfully framed the Nonconformists Objection, so
you have not fully answered that of your own framing; our objection is, that
imposing things in their own nature indifferent, either as parts or means of
Worship, or conditions of our Communion in it, and so to determine our
practice, as to destroy its indifferency in doing or forbearing things
indifferent, is at once to destroy indifferency, and to infringe that Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and in which we are bound to stand fast;
for Christ having freed us from all parts and parcels of Worship which are not
of his own Institution, from all conditions or Communion with him and his
Ordinances, but those of his own prescribing, so he has allowed us the use of
indifferent things indifferently, as Christian Prudence and Charity shall
determine; for any men to impose otherwise, is at the same time unjustly to
invade Christ's Prerogative, and Christians Privileges, both which we judge
our selves bound to maintain.

Your Answer is not sufficient to the Objection, even as your self have framed
it; viz. That only to impose the belief or practice of any thing as an
essential part of Religion, and necessary to Salvation, not particularly
required of God, is an infringement of Christian Liberty. Answ. Christian
Liberty may be infringed, tho the thing be not required as an essential part of
Religion; for the main violation of Christian Liberty lies in a fixed, stated
and perpetual compulsion to do what God has permitted me to omit, or a
prohibition to do what he has made lawful for me: thus the Apostle teaches, 1
Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any person or thing in matters indifferent; for such a resignation of
my self to be restrained fixedly, is to bind up my self from opportunity of my
using my Christian Liberty for the spiritual good of another; for if I should
be so circumstantial, that by forbearing an indifferent thing, such as you call
the Cross in Baptism, I might do good to my Neighbor's Soul, I am so tied,
that I cannot forbear to prevent my Brother's sinning, and so we cannot imitate
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 13 Wherefore if meat make my Brother to offend, I will
not eat flesh while the world stands. (2) To submit to such predetermination,
is to alter the very nature of things indifferent, by making that sinful which
God has made lawful, contrary to your own doctrine, page 2. However
unnec^ssary or impertinent any thing may be esteemed, yet nothing is to be
look'^ upon as a Sin, but what is contrary to the Law of God. (3) By such
imposing and determining in matters indifferent, more is attributed to the
positive precepts of men, than to the moral Laws of God; for obedience to some
positive moral Laws of God may be suspended pro hic and nunc, to give way to a
greater good; but in this case we must act uniformly, without respect to
circumstances, tho thousands should be offended; and wounded in Conscience, and
prejudiced against Religion thereby.

But if we can make appear, that these Ceremonies, as imposed by you, are made
essential parts of Religion, and necessary to Salvation, then you must
acknowledge them destructive of Christian Liberty: This will appear, if it be
considered, (1.) That if these Impositions be necessary in order to Communion
with the Church, and Communion with the Church necessary to Salvation, then
they must be necessary to Salvation, that they are made necessary conditions of
our Communion with the Church, is evident by the Act of Uniformity, and your
calling us all Schismatics, who conform not to them. (2.) What is made
necessary to the Solemn Worship of God is made necessary to Salvation, but so
are they, seeing without them it cannot be solemnly performed in England and
Ireland. (3.) If the bare omission of them, though out of tenderness of
Conscience be ju^ged Schism, Sedition and Rebellion, and be made worthy of
Fining, Imprisonment, and Excommunication. (4.) If for calling them unlawful, a
man must be delivered to Satan, according to Can 6. (5) If the omission of
these, make a Minister more liable to Deprivation, etc. than Whoredom,
Drunkenness, or breaking the Lord's day. (6.) If the refusers of Conformity to
them, be judged worse than Idolatrous Papists? if they be more necessary than
the Peace and Unity of the Church, with what confidence can any man say, that
he judges them not necessary to Salvation.

That our Directory requ^reth any Ceremonies of mystical signification, or
imposes any indifferent things, save such circumstances as nature's Light and
right Reason direct us to, for the decent and orderly performance of our
duties, we deny, and demand proof from all who assert it.

Having justified, as you think, the nature of your Ceremonies, you proceed to
vindicate their number, telling us, if we should say, that your Ceremonies were
too numerous and burdensome, etc. if this were really so, it were only an
inconvenience, and not a sin. Ans. God's word tells us, that to do what is not
convenient is sinful, Romans 1. 28. Ephesians 5. 4. though to suffer things
inconvenient is not still so; and by what authority can any burden Consciences
with their own Inventions? was not this the sin of the Pharisees, Matt. 23. 4.
if Augustine complained as you say, of the number and burden of Ceremonies in
his time, why may not Dissenters do so now, who are as unable to bear them as
he was? yet had he lived in some place of the World, and complained of such a
burden, there is a Canon, called the 10th, by which he had been ipso facto
shut out of the Church. But ye'll say, he did not separate, though he complained.
Answ. How do ye know, that he did not separate? if he refused to use them, he
separated from them as well as we do, and if he used them after his complaint
of their being burdensome and too numerous, it would be hard to excuse him
from sinning against his confession, but we have more Charity for him than to
believe he did so.

To your Non-Conformists last Objection, to wit, The Ceremonies are
unnecessary, and therefore the Governors of the Church are not to lay
unnecessary impositions on the People, Ye Answer thus, Though this were true,
that Governors did impose such things, yet our compliance therewith for Peace
and Vnity^ sake, were no sin, but a virtue. Answ. That they are unnecessary,
you confess, while you declare them indifferent, and therefore the dubious
supposition, if they were, etc. is needless, but that it is a virtue rather
than a sin to comply with the unnecessary impositions of Church Governors, for
peace and unity, is asserted, not proved, seeing nothing can be a Christian
virtue, which wants Christ's Command, and we know of none he has given for our
compliance with Governors in their unnecessary impositions: Yea, we find Church
Governors obliged by their Commission to teach us to observe no more than what
Christ commanded them, Matthew. 28. 20. Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you, and the good Centurian Cornelius would submit
no further to the Apostle Peter, Acts 10. 33. Now therefore are we all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God, for
seeing God and Nature do nothing in vain, they have no power to impose things
needless, and where their power to command is void, we are under no Obligation
to obey; yea, such compliance is but a conspiracy with men usurping power, and
so partaking of their sins, Paul withstood Peter to the face in his imposing
unnecessary things on the Jews, Gal. 2. 11. And seeing the Church has no Power
but to Edification, 2 Cor. 10. 8. We are to follow them no further than they
follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. The Synod of Jerusalem, Acts 15. guided by the
holy Spirit, thought fit to impose nothing but necessary things. Bishop
Bramhall page 101 of his Vindication, says, It was not the Erroneous opinions
of the Church of Rome, but the imposing them by Law on other Churches, that
warranted the separation. So, when things unnecessary are made conditions of
our Communion, we look not upon it as a Christian virtue to comply with them.

Having asserted, not only the lawfulness, but innocence of your Communion, you
profess your self assured that we do not think every man is at liberty, either
to join himself with the established Church of a place, or to set up a distinct
Church for himself. Answ. Such as on good grounds judge your Communion lawful
and innocent, will not set up for themselves, but your asserting your selves
such, makes it not evident, seeing there is a generation, all whose ways are
clean in their own eyes, tho they be not washed from their iniquity; Therefore
we say with Memerable Hales of Eaton, page 194. Notwithstanding of the great
benefit of Communion, in regard of diverse Distempers Men are subject to,
Dissension and Disunion are often necessary, for when either false or
uncertain Conclusions are obtruded for truth, and acts either unlawful or
ministering just scruple, are required of us to be performed by us, in those
cases consent were conspiracy, and open contestation is not Faction or Schism,
but due Christian animosity: For though you value your selves mightily on account
of your legal establishment, which is indeed your most powerful argument, yet
the aforesaid Author, page 231. says, That public Assemblys, though according
to form of Law, are indeed nothing else but Riots and Conventicles, if they be
stained with Corruption and Superstition. A Legal Establishment gives
protection and provision, but makes neither Doctrine true, Worship pure, or
Government of Divine apponitment; and seeing it adds no intrinsic value to a
Church, it can merit nothing barely upon that account, else other Churches who
have had a longer title to a Legal Establishment than ye, might expect more
honor.

While you desire to know whether one or more bare inconveniences which are or
may be free from sin, can be a sufficient reason to separate from an
established Church. Answ. We tell you, that if the inconveniences are sinless,
we are willing to suffer in and with an Established Church, or though it were not
Established by Law; but if the inconveniences be to our Consciences, we must
and will Dissent, nor will our Charity bear with what is inconsistent with a
good Conscience.

Such as found their separation from your Assemblys upon this, that they find
themselves more edified in Godliness and Piety by their own Meetings than
yours, ye confess your inability to find what reason they can ground upon this
for a downright separation and utter refusal of your Communion. Answ. Though our
edification in Godliness is the great end of our joining with any Assembly, and
where that may be best had, Communion is there most eligible; yet if we may be
really edified in that Assembly whereof we are Members, we allow not separation
on pre^ence of better elsewhere, no more than a Woman's leaving her Husband to
live with another for more pleasure and convenience. Yet Edification being the
end of Church Communion, no wise men should condemn those who choose the best
means for that end: I suppose you make use of the best meat and medicines for
preserving of your life and health, and would take it ill, it is possible, if
Governors of Church or State, should confine you to the quantity, quality, and
time of your Diet, which experience teaches you to be inconsistent with health
and strength; and why may not men be as much concerned for their Souls as
Bodies. Dr. Stillingfleet Ire^. page 109. in answer to a question disputed by
Grotius, to wit, whether it be in a time when Churches are divided, it be a
Christians duty to communicate with either Party that divides the Church, or to
Communion from all of them; the Dr. says, that a Christian, by virtue of his
general obligation to Communion, is bound to adhere to that Church which
retains most of Evangelick purity in it. Bramhall in his vindication of the
Church of England, page 7. cites Dr. Holden with approbation; When there is a
mutual division of two parts, or member of the Mystical Body of the Church one
from the other; (yet both retain Communion with the universal Church) which for
the most part springs from some doubtful opinion, or less necessary part of
Divine Worship, whatsoever part you take, you are no Schismatic, because the
universal Church has condemned no part; so that real experience of edification
will warrant separation from these Assemblies where it is not found, to these
where it is found.

To such as plead for occasional Communion, who do not utterly renounce your
Communion, but sometimes come to your public Worship, and receive the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper after your form; your Question upon this, is; If
occasional Communion be lawful, why is constant unlawful? Answ. Although I allow
of no such amphibious creatures as a Non and Conformist appears to be, because
as a Neuter in the Commonwealth, nec amicum perit, nec inimicum pellit, so in
Religion he is worse, according to Christ's reasoning, Luke 11. 23. yet, if we
distinguish occasional Communion in total, and partial; total, I call a
communicating in all, Sermons, Liturgy, and Ceremonies; for such I have nothing
to say, and will not judge other men's Servants: but as for those who can, and
do occasionally hear such as are orthodox in the Faith, and sober in their
Conversation, as they do not despise others, so we do not judge them. But as
for most of us, we are of your judgment, as to such who communicate with you
occasionally in all things, according to the form prescribed; if they see no
sin in such conformity, they are but fools to suffer for non conformity.

Having heard your Doctrine, we come now to its Use, in which you ingenuously
discover your design, which is either to persuade us to Conformity, or dissuade
us from thoughts of a legal toleration. As for your desire to know our aims and
purposes in respest to an Act of Toleration, tho we are not obliged to discover
our thoughts to you, yet finding you a plain-dealing man in telling yours, we
shall tell you ours, by ingenuously answering your Quaeries distinctly. To the
first, to wit, Is it only to have the liberty of serving God in that way which
you think to be b^st, and thereby to be free of persecution, and to go the
readiest way to Heaven, as ye suppose. To this, (1.) We confess we sincerely
desire liberty to serve God according to that perfect rule he has given us,
which we firmly believe is the best way, and safest both for you and us both.
(2.) We desire by this, not only to be freed from persecution, but that ye may
free your selves from the guilt and appearance of that evil. (3.) Having bodies
as well as souls, by which we are bound to glorify God, and serve our King and
Country as we shall be called or capable, we desire that we be not deprived
of, or rendered unfit for enjoying our birth-right-privileges as freeborn
Subjects, and persons professing the Reformed Christian Religion, by yoking our
Consciences to unlawful or suspected practices, or insnaring Oaths. But ye tell
us, If liberty to serve God the way we think best, be all we desire, why are we
against the Sacramental Test? by which we are made incapable of any Office or
Employment, unless we Receive the Sacrament after the form prescribed by the
Church of England: if we be not content with liberty, unless we have share in
the Government, and be made capable of Employments of Power, Trust, and Profit;
it is apparent we design somewhat else than the Salvation of our souls, and
freedom from persecution. Answ. Tho Non-Conformists should aim at more than the
saving of their souls, and freedom from persecution, where is the great fault
of it; if we be guilty in this, you are not innocent, who we suppose aim at
something more than these things. I have already, in the Animadversions shown
the inconsistency of the Test with the true interest of Ireland, which the
Ingenuous Author of the Remarks on the Affairs of Ireland, etc. has well done:
but it seems you have low thoughts of Salvation, who rate it lower than
Employments of Trust and Profit upon Earth; for that you seem to grant us
liberty to seek, but the other is too good for us; and therefore you are either
not in earnest in permitting us to seek the best way of Salvation, or else you
overvalue earthly honor and profit, while you would monopolize that to your
party, and deprive others of the ordinary means of subsisting, and serving God
and their Country.

To the 2d Question, if it be our aim to lay a foundation for the overthrow of
the Established Church, and to get into our hands all Civil and Ecclesiastic
Power, which is already done by those of our persuasion in another Kingdom. Ye
confess ye were not wise if ye give us not all the opposition ye can. Answ.
That our design is not to overthrow any Church, is evident, because we have not
moved for the withdrawing either power or profit from you; all that is desired,
is, that we who have been, are, and may be useful to the Nation, may not be
rendered useless; and sure the Church may stand, though she don't inhance all
Offices of Power, Trust, and Profit; these are not the Rock on which Christ
built his Church. But is there no means to keep her from ruin but a
Sacramental Test? how has she been preserved hitherto without it; experience
has taught us, that such Engines have done more hurt than good to their
contrivers; and therefore it were to be wished, considering how deeply the
Nations have been involved in Perjury, they would be wiser than to make snares
wherein themselves as well as others are caught. And now we come to consider
your Politics; where first ye tell us, It becomes the wisdom of every
Government to consider even the remote, if probable, consequences of what they
do, and to set up two several Parties differing from each other in matters of
Religion, to make Factions one against the other, and to stand in perpetual
distinct opposition and competition one with the other, for all the places of
Trust, Power and Profit in the Commonwealth, you believe will be thought by
most wise men, to be very impolitick. Answ. If a State should set up Parties
for that end, no doubt they were out in the Politics; but where is want of
policy, in making persons of equal merit, equally capable? does it not rather
tend to the making of Factions, to let one party inhance all, while another
equally deserving is contemned and neglected: Jacob's fondness of Joseph begot
divisions in the Family. (2.) This being but a remote probable consequence, as
you acknowledge, may as well not be as be, nor should Magistrates be
discouraged from making good Laws, for fear of remote consequences. (3.) What
extraordinary Factions are now made about such Offices, though Dissenters are not
barred by this Test. In France the Protestants enjoyed Civil Offices of Power
and Profit by the Edict of Nants; and yet the French have been more out in
their politics since than before. And indeed Tests will never prevent that
evil in the State, no more than the Oath of Simony prevents competitions for
Dignities in the Churches; but I am apprehensive, that had the Church the sole
Power of disposing all Civil Offices, you would be less afraid of Dissenters
coming into them, and for your jealousy is, that they are not in hands who
will dispose of them right. The 2d remote and probable consequence is, That
none knows but our Successors in the next Generation may advance a little
further than what is proposed by their Predecessors in this: and since the
Presbyterian party in these Kingdoms did in the late Wars, 1641. actually
overthrow the Established Episcopal Church, and have now again overturned the
Episcopal Church in Scotland, ye have all the reason to fear, that though present
N. Conf. keep a friendly correspondence with you, animosities may probably
arise betwixt Successors, yours and ours, which if not carefully prevented may
tend to the ruin perhaps of both Church and State; and ought not the
Government to provide for posterity as well as for the present Generation.
Answ. Though all this should come to pass, yet it is severe justice, to punish
the Predecessors for the probable faults of the Successors, not as yet
committed; in hell there is more justice, where men are only punished for real
and bypast Crimes. But the reasons you give for the probability of your
Consequence, to wit, that the Presbyterian party has twice overthrown the
Episcopal, ye improve not well: It were then your Wisdom with good advice to
make War against them, for the Gibeonites policy was more successful than
Pharaoh's. However, a Sacramental Test is but a slender defense, seeing it is
well known, that the Scots Test did not preserve Episcopacy there, nor all the
Oaths in force before 1641, secure the Church, and therefore Christian
moderation, and a good Conscience, will be better armor for the Church.

But if we consider the more near consequences of denying this Toleration
desired, they will be found more certain and hurtful. (1) The weakening and
discouraging of the great part of the most industrious profitable Subjects of
the Kingdom, which will ensue, if this be denied, (2.) The alienating of the
affections of all sober men from Churchmen, who are known to be the chief, if
not sole opposers of this desire. (3.) If ever there should be a necessity of
using the service of Non-Conformists, it would be impossible to induce them to
unite with these, who notwithstanding of fair promises, in time of former
trouble, have ungratefully broken to them in time of Peace, and discover
heart-enmi^y against them.

And now seeing you profess so great a Zeal for Peace and Unity, which you
pretend to plead for, be as earnest to remove the bones of contention, else we
cannot be persuaded of your sincerity; but there are a Set of men who call to
my remembrance, a Fool which King James the first had, when in Scotland, this
fellow was pleasant diversion to the King, but being unhappily addicted to
tippling, he was frequently absent when desired, whereupon the King, to affright
him from that practice, caused to erect a Gallows at the Bridge of Stirling,
and bring forth a Quart of Ale, and set the same upon the ledge of the Bridge,
telling him, that he must either throw the Ale in the River, or the King into
the River, otherwise he must be hanged; he after much howling and many
apologies, comes and tells the King, that if he suffered hurt, he must blame
himself for it, and therefore attempts to heave him over the Bridge, rather
than part with his Ale. So some for all the affection pretended for Peace and
Unity, will rather drown Peace than part with their Ceremonies. And thus I
conclude, that there is no hurt done by this Answer to your Address, else you
were mistaken in your confidence that it could do no hurt.

FINIS.

