armsBy the Mayor.
To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)
WHereas diverse good Laws and Ordinances have been made for the due observation
of the Lords Day: And diverse penalties thereby imposed both upon the prophaners
thereof, as also upon the Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor,
Parents, Masters of Families and others, who should by their neglect suffer the
same. And albeit I have by several precepts, and otherwise, required all
persons concerned therein to perform their duties in that behalf, yet I have
continual complaint made unto me of a great neglect thereof, by suffering
servants and children to play in the fields and streets, and beggars to beg on
that day. And to the intent that every one in their own particular may be a Law
unto themselves in the observing of the Lords Day: And also that all persons,
who by the Law are appointed as instruments to prevent the profanation
thereof, and to bring to punishment such as shall offend therein, may prevent
the penalties to be inflicted upon them by the Law, These are in the name of
his Highness the Lord Protector, of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to will
and require you that presently upon sight hereof you cause notice to be given
to all the inhabitants within your Ward that they keep in their servants and
children from playing in the fields and streets on the Lords Day, as they will
undergo the penalty in the said Laws contained: And likewise that you cause
notice to be given to all the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers for the
poor, that they within their several precincts take care to put the acts and
ordinances in execution which are provided for the better observation of the
Lords Day, to which they are severally enjoined upon a penalty of twenty
shillings for every default therein. And also that the Constables within their
several Precincts do prevent the singing of Ballads, which they are enjoined to
do under the penalty of forty shillings. And to the intent that all persons may
be without excuse, you are to cause one of these precepts to be delivered to
every Constable, Churchwarden, and Overseer of the poor within your Ward, who
are hereby required once every month to give me or some other Justice of the
Peace within the City and Liberties an exact account of their doings herein,
and not to fail as they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Dated this 15th day of May. 1654. Sadler.

Printed by James Flesher, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.


