MATTHEW MEAD Minister of the Gospel

Aetatis Suce 70. An.o Do: 1699.

Printed for John Marshall and Sold by him at ye Bible in Grace Church Street



THE Young Man's REMEMBRANCER, AND YOUTH's Best Choice: BEING An Exhortation to
Conversion, in Two Anniversary Discourses from

Eccl. xii. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, in which thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCC.

THE EPISTLE TO Young Readers Looking toward the Kingdom of God.
Dearly Beloved in our Lord,
THE Hopes, that there is a Harvest of Young Ones to Christ, for which the
Fields are Already White, when Christ shall have in this sense the Dew of his
Youth from the Womb of the Morning, and You Freewill Offerings to Him in that
Day of his Power, This gives Encouragement of this Address to you, in
Confidence, there will be many of You Readers: It is Evident. Young Persons are
One Eminent Portion of the Lord Jesus his Love, and Care; and so of the Gospel
Ministry, and of the Servants of God in all Ages; God was assured of Abraham,
he would Instruct his Children after Him in his Knowledge, and Fear: Moses took
great Care of this, to leave Monuments for Young Israelites growing up; David
the Father gave Excellent Principles to his Son Solomon; And in a Holy Zeal,
and Love to Young Men, cries out, Wherewithal shall a Young Man cleanse his
Way? As if he should say, What Spiritual Engine shall I find to raise the
Hearts of Young Men, to Buoy them up from the World, the Raging Sea of Vanity,
Lust, and Wickedness? I should rejoice in such a One, and I have found it, even
thy Word, to which they should always give heed. Solomon in this Penitential
Sermon of his, after some Declinings, recovering the Piety of his Youth in
which he styles himself Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher is much engaged in it; as
you will see in the Following Discourses. Jesus Christ in Love to the Rising
Hopes of Young Ones, Blessed early, even Infant Age: The Beloved Apostle, that
lay in the Bosom of Christ, says, I write to you, Young Men, because you are
strong, Vigorous in Mind, Body, full of Spirit, and Vivacity; and in all of
them who are Christians, the Word of God abides; and as Vigorous Persons, the
Champions of Christ overcome the Wicked One, though the Strong Man; Obadiah
feared God from his Youth, that early Saint of the Old Testament: Timothy of
the New Testament, Knew the Scriptures from a Child. Christ remembers the
Kindness of Youth, the Love of First Espousals, before farther Alienations from
him, and Prostitutions to Sin, Satan, the World; His Soul desires the First
Ripe Fruit. Oh that all this might persuade; But I especially recommend the
following Directions, prepared for you, given forth by some Excellent Master of
Assembly, whom I will not attempt to suppose, who he was, being not entrusted
with it; and whether he did not Animam in Vulnere Ponere; He did not draw out
his very Spirit, and Life in shooting this Sharp Arrow of Christ into your
Hearts, that you might fall under Christ; Oh therefore, You in the Ascendency
of Life, against all Temptation, flee Youthful Lusts, sacrifice this Choice
Part of Life to God; take heed that Curse come not on you; You who have in your
Flock this Male of Life, even Youth, Oh design not to Vow, to Sacrifice to God
the Corrupt Thing of Old Age; Grown old in Sin: The Brand of a Deceiver is set
on all such; Know therefore in this your Day, the Lord has made for you the
Day of your Visitation, the Accepted Day of Salvation, the Things of your
Peace; This is recommended to you, in the following Instructions, under the
Blessing of the Eternal Father, through the Redemption of the Eternal Son, by
the mighty Efficacy of the Eternal Spirit, the One Eternal God, the Ancient of
Days, the Father of Lights, with whom is no variation of Age, nor shadow of
Turning to the West of Days, to whom be Glory for Ever.

Amen.
TO THE READER.
IT may not be amiss to inform thee, that this Piece thou have now in thy Hand
may truly he called Orphan, and therefore it cannot be expected to come forth
in such a Curious Dress, as becomes the Child of such a Parent, there being no
possibility of access to his Wardrobe to adorn it: Yet notwithstanding (I hope)
there are many Witnesses to its Birth, into whose Hands it may come, that may
give sufficient Testimony of its Legitimacy. It cannot be at all questioned,
but you who have so often desired, and have with pleasure heard its Voice, but
will also add this Request to your former, Let me see thy Face. It now with
Samuel to Eli cries out, Here am I, for thou did call me. Say not of it as
the God of Israel, How shall I put thee among the Children? But let this which
was the Parents Benoni, be thy Benjamin; and the rather, because, (as the
Reverend Mr. Mead says) Preface to Four Useful Discourses by J. Buroughs.
The Publishing the Labors of such Men of Worth, is of Happy Tendency to
promote our Communion with them in the Spirit, whom it may be we never saw in
the Flesh; and it is to be reckoned among our Mercies, when the Dead are made
to speak, that the Living may be persuaded to hear. May the God of Heaven
attend this Essay with his Blessing, that its Publication may be attended with
such Success, as was the Author's Design in its Preaching; and may thou by
this Small Tract be Enabled to have an Eye to that Reward which now he reaps as
the end of so Liberal a Seed-time here, even Everlasting Joy and Felicity in
the World to come.

Farewell.
THE Young Man's REMEMBRANCER. I. DISCOURSE.
Eccles. xii. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, in which thou shall say, I have no
Pleasure in them.


THE Two great Duties of the Christian Life, are, to Cease to do Evil, and to
Learn to do Well; the one is Negative, Godliness; the other is Positive; the
latter can never be without the former. No Man can be Good that does not Cease
to be Evil; and therefore Solomon Exhorts to the former in the Last Verse of
the foregoing Chapter, and he brings it in with an Illative Particle, Put away
Evil from thy Flesh. It referrs to the Ninth Verse, Know thou that for all
these things God will bring thee to Judgment. These things, that is, these
youthful Lusts, these sensual Pleasures, which by a sharp Satyr he does reprove
in the former part of the Verse, Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let
thy Heart Cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and Walk in the Ways of thy own
Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes. As if he should say, if thou art
resolved upon thy Lusts, and bent to spend thy Youthful Days in thy sensual
Delights, why then go on and take thy Course, but consider were this will end,
and what follows; there is a Reckoning Day a coming, thy pleasant Way will have
a doleful End; though the Beginning may be Sweet, the Conclusion will be
Bitter; for thou must Die e're long, nor can thou say how soon, and then thou
must answer to God, for all thy sinful Courses, and sensual Vanities; for Know
that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment, and therefore Put
away Evil from thy Flesh.

And then he proceeds to Exhort to the Positive Part of Godliness, and that in
the Words of the Text, Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. He
tells you in the Last Words of the former Verse, Childhood and Youth are
Vanity; and the Vanity of it appears in nothing more than in indulging to Sense
and Flesh, and forgetting God; therefore these Words of the Text are the wise
Man's Memento to young Ones, wherein he gives this seasonable Counsel for the
Cure of their Vanities, Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth,
whilst the Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I
have no Pleasure in them.

In which Words you have an Exhortation to a very concerning Duty, and it is
backed with a threefold Argument in the Six following Verses. In the Duty
exhorted to, you have Three Things.

First, The Act, Remember.

Secondly, The Object to be Remembered, Thy Creator.

Thirdly, The Time when he must be Remembered, Now. Remember now thy Creator:
But lest you should think that this now takes in the whole Time of this Life,
therefore he Excludes the latter Part of Life, and Limits this now to the
former Part, Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth.

And then you have a Threefold Argument or Motive upon which the Duty is urged.

Old Age, with its Infirmities, Hastening.

Mortality Approaching. And,

Judgment Ensuing.

First, The Approaching of old Age, with the Infirmities that accompany it;
that we have in those Words, While the evil Days come not, nor the Years draw
nigh, when thou shall say, I have no Pleasure in them; and what these Days and
Years are, he tells you in the various Allegories in the following Verses,
While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars, be not Darkened, nor the
Clouds Return after Rain, in the Day when the Keepers of the House shall
Tremble, and the strong Men Bow themselves, and the Grinders Cease, and they
fa^ that Look out at the Windows, etc.

Secondly, You have an Argument from Death and Mortality approaching, Verse 15.
Man goes to his Long Home. Verse 7. Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as
it was. Then; when? When the Sun, and the Light, etc. is Darkened, when the
Keepers of the House Tremble, when the strong Men Bow themselves, and and the
Grinders Cease, then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was.

Thirdly, You have the Judgment ensuing, Verse 7. The Spirit shall return to
God who gave it; it is the Soul that is here intended, which is frequently
called a Spirit, because of its Spiritual and Immaterial Nature; as the Body of
every one Returns to the Dust, so does every Soul Return to God; not to God as
a Chief Good, but to God as a Great Judge; not to his Blissful Presence, but to
his Judicial Presence. All Souls do not Return to God to Enjoy him, for that is
the Portion but of a few; but all Return to God to be Judged by him, both Good
and Bad, Saint and Sinner. So says the wise Man in the Third Chapter of this
Book, Verse 17. God shall judge the Righteous and the Wicked; for there is a
Time there for every Purpose, and for every Work; so that there is such a
Returning of the Soul to God, as sets it before his aweful Tribunal, where it
must be Sentenced to its Everlasting State, either to Enjoy God for Ever, or to
be Everlastingly Shut out of his Presence and Favor; so that these are the
Arguments to Enforce the Duty in the Text.

Old Age is Hastening.

Death follows it.

And then comes the Judgment.

In old Age you will have no list to Remember God, in Death you cannot Remember
God, and in Judgment you must be called to an account for not Remembering God,
and therefore since it is thus, Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy
Youth. I shall open the Words, and then apply them.

First, I will begin with the Act, Remember; this is applied sometimes to God;
he is said to Remember; God Remembered Noah, Genesis 8.1. He Remembered Abraham,
Genesis 19.29. He Remembered his Holy Covenant, Luke 1.72. But there is, to speak
properly, no such thing in God as Remembering; for he that can never Forget,
cannot be said to Remember.

But it is properly applied to Man; and so to Remember is either,

To call to Mind some Past; or,

To keep a thing in Mind for the Time to come.

Sometimes it is to call to Mind something past; thus it is said, that Peter
Remembered the Words of Christ, Mat. 26.75. and as it Imports keeping in Mind
for the Time to come, so it is said, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy,
Exodus 20.8. To Remember, is put here in a double Opposition.

First, It is opposed to a Forgetfulness of the Duty mentioned. And,

Secondly, It is opposed to a slight Performance of it. Both which are Sin.

It is a Sin to forget God, and it is a Sin to have slight Thoughts of God; the
Act should be some way answerable to the Object; the Great God is thy Maker,
and he should not be put off with slightly Respects, Remember thy Creator.

The manner in which the Duty is Enforced, is such as does import, that it
ought to be our chief Business. God does not use in his Word to put his
Memento's upon slight and indifferent Matters, but upon such Duties as are
Necessary, and of the greatest Importance. As,

First, To press us to Repentance, Rev. 2.5. Remember from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, Ezekiel. 16.61. Thou shall Remember thy Ways, and be Ashamed.

Secondly, To mind us of our latter End, Eccle. 11.8. If a Man Live many Years,
and Rejoice in them all, yet let him Remember the Days of Darkness, for they
shall be many.

Thirdly, To press upon us the Duty of Sabbath Holiness, Remember the Sabbath
Day to keep it Holy, Exodus 20.8.

Fourthly, To keep in our Hearts the great Works of Providence, Psalm 105.5.
Remember the Mavelous Works that he has done; and Mat. 16.9. says Christ,
Remember the Five Loaves that fed Five Thousand, and how many Baskets full he
took up.

Fifthly, It is used to incite to a full and complete Obedience, Number. 15.39.
Remember all the Commandments of the Lord to do them.

Sixthly, To stir us up to be mindful of himself, and therefore this Duty of
all the rest is charged both Negatively and Positively.

Negatively, Deuteronomy. 8.11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God. And,

Positively, as in the Words of the Text, Remember now thy Creator.

But why does God put a Memento upon this Duty here? Why, there is a Fivefold
Reason for it.

First, To Intimate to us the Opposition of our corrupt Hearts to this great
Duty; naturally Man cannot endure the Yoke of Obedience to God. He is without
God in the World; God is not in all his Thoughts; therefore he calls us to
Remember him.

Secondly, The Sum of all Religion lies in the Observation of this one Command;
there can be no such thing as Religion where God is forgotten. Jacob gave a
severe Charge to his Sons concerning Benjamin, because he lay nearest his
Heart; the Honor of God lies nearest his Heart of any thing; and no Man can
Honor him, that does not Remember him; therefore he gives such a strict Charge
about it. It is this that frames our Spirits for all other Duties, and makes
them fit for every good Work; Sin never prevails more upon our Hearts than when
God is shut out of our Thoughts; the Children of Israel did Evil, and forgot
the Lord, therefore Remember thy Creator.

Thirdly, It implies, that no Age is so prone to forget God, as that of Youth.
Youthful Pleasures, and youthful Lusts and Vanities, do frequently turn the
Heart away from God, therefore Solomon says, Childhood and Youth are Vanity, in
the Words before the Text. It is Vanity, both

In a Natural, and

In a Moral Respect.

It is Vanity in a Natural Respect, as being Frail and Mortal. Though by the
Course of Nature, Young Ones may think to Live long, yet by reason of the
Frailty of Nature, they may Die before the Eldest; many Younger than you lie
yonder Rotting in their Graves. Now thou have the Seeds of Death in thee, and
thou have Sin the Cause of Death cleaving to thee, and the Sentence lies
against thee, and therefore though thou may please thy self with the Thoughts
of Living many Years, like the Fool in the Gospel, yet thou may Dye before
to Morrow, as he did. Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee.
And as Youth is Vanity in a Natural Sense, so it is in a Moral Sense, for it is
Tainted and Defiled with Lust and Corruption all over. Thou art a Child of
Wrath from the Womb; under a Damning Guilt, before ever thou did commit one
actual Sin, For by the Offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation, Romans 5.18. But alas! How much Guilt have thou Contracted by thy
Actual Sin, thy Lying, thy Swearing, thy Drunkenness, thy Gluttonny, thy Pride
and Envy, thy Lewdness and Uncleanness, thy sinful Mirth and Levity, thy
Slothfulness and Vanity, thy Stubbornness and Obstinacy? These are the common
Sins of Youth. And no wonder that that Soul is prone to forget God, where these
Lusts reign; therefore Remember thy Creator.

Fourthly, It is a Duty of the Greatest Equity, not only from the Will of him
that Commands it, but from the Reason of the Command it self, which Consults
Man's Good as well as God's Glory, and is it not Equal, that we should Remember
that God that never forgets us, and that we should mind his Glory who is
mindful of our Good? Besides, how Equal is it, that God, who is the First
Cause, the Chief Good, and Last End, should be first owned, best loved, and
most served? And is it not Equal, that Time, being so rare a Jewel, so great a
Betrustment, so Rich a Talent, should be employed for him who gave it; and who
can either continue it, or cut it short, as we either lay it out upon God, or
profusely lavish it upon our Lusts? Therefore Remember thy Creator.

Fifthly, God gives us this Memento, to mind us of that strict Account we must
e're long give to him for all our Time; Youth is to Account to God for a few
Years, as well as Old Age is for many more; and therefore the Wise Man warns
Young Ones of a Judgment Day for them, as well as for those of more Years,
Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O Young Man, in thy Youth, -- But know that for all
those things, God will bring thee to Judgment. If we do not Remember to keep
this Precept, God will Remember to punish the breach of it. If we forget our
Obedience to God, he will not forget to punish our Disobedience; and therefore
God puts a Memento upon this Command, that so we may be Awakened to our Duty,
from the Sense of an Approaching Judgment. Remember thy Creator.

But it is not barely an Act of the Mind that is here called for; it is not
enough merely for you, to Remember or Think of God, for that is done in Hell;
they all Remember God there; the Memory of the Damned shall then be more quick
and strong than ever, and shall bring all your Sins into an Eternal view. Now
the Sins of Youth are committed and forgotten by us, and we are apt to think
God forgets them too, and that they shall never be remembered more; they say,
Tush, the Lord sees us not, Ezekiel. 8.12. But mark what God says, Psalm 50. ver.
21. These things have thou done (speaking of their Sins before) These things
have thou done, and I kept Silence -- But I will Reprove thee, and set them in
Order before thine Eyes. Every Sin shall be set in Order, and come into
Remembrance, in that Day. Son, says Abraham to the Rich Man, Son, Remember,
Luke 16.25. pointing him back to his Lusts. If Sinners could but forget in
Hell, it would be a Comparative Happiness. A Loss though never so great, yet
when it is forgotten the trouble of it ceases It would be an ease to Sinners in
Hell, if they could never think of God more, and if they could raze out the
Remembrance of Christ and the Gospel out of their Minds, and forget that ever
they heard of a Redeemer; to Remember what a God, what a Creator, what a
Redeemer, what a Heaven, what a Happiness they had tendered to them, and
therefore might have secured, but would not; to Remember what Calls they were
once under, to Convert and Turn to God, and Close with Christ and Live, O how
will this wound and afflict in that Day; I had once the Means of Grace, I heard
the Preacher often Calling and Wooing me to leave my Lusts and come to Christ,
I have many times felt the Convictions and Strivings of the Spirit in me, under
the Word, to bring it about, and had I had Wisdom to Consider, and a Heart to
Comply, O how Happy had I been! I might have been one amongst the Blessed
Saints in Heaven, who are here Tormented amongst Damned Spirits. O how often
have I had Life and Death set before me, and therefore this Misery is the Fruit
of my own Choice!

To Remember Lost and Past Opportunities, O how will this Torment! Fool that I
was, to have such a Price put into my Hands to get Wisdom, as once I had, and
yet to have no Heart to it. Wretch that I was, that I could find Time for every
thing else, but no Time for Eternity. I had Time to Eat, and Drink, and Sleep,
and to mind the Work of my Calling, but no Time to Work out my Salvation. I had
Time for my Mirth, and my Games, and my Sports, and Pleasures, and Youthful
Vanities, but I could find no Time for God and my own Soul.

To Remember upon what easy Terms they might have Escaped Wrath and Misery,
and have been Happy for ever, will not this wound and torment? I was not put
upon what was Impossible; Christ told me, his Yoke was Easy and his Burden
Light, that his Commands were not grievous; it was but forsaking my Lusts, and
Cordially accepting of Christ for my Savior and Lord, and I had been Happy for
ever; and how reasonable was this? If he had bid me do some great Matter,
should I not have done it? How much more then when he laid upon me no other
Conditions but these, Believe and be Saved, Seek my Face and Live. Remember thy
Creator now in the Days of thy Youth.

O how bereft of Judgment was I, when I thought my self too Young for this
Work, when I called God a Hard Master, and his Service Bonds and Bondage, when
I Censured the Holy Ways of God as needless Preciseness, and cast off his Holy
Laws as too Severe and Strict? O Cursed Wretch that I was and am, not to be
Persuaded to Own and Embrace them.

To Remember what it was that they Chose in lieu of Blessedness, and what they
parted with Heaven and Glory for, this will Amaze and Confound a few
Short-lived Pleasures, and Carnal Delights, a little Sensual Satisfaction of
the Flesh, a few Pleasant Cups, or Sweet Morsels, a Heap of Gold, or a Puff of
Honor; this is all I had for my Immortal Soul, and Eternal Salvation, and for
a God who is the Chief Good, and in whose Favor is Life; so that you see God
is Remembered in Hell. Nay, let me say it, he is in some Sense Remembered more
there than he is here; for here the Ruin is so Distracted, with diverse Lusts
and Sensual Vanities, that they divert the Thoughts from their Proper Object,
but in Hell there is nothing to flatter the Senses, no Objects to divert them;
God is perpetually Remembered there, not as a Duty, but as a Punishment; not as
a Comfort, but as a Torment. And let me tell you, it will be one of the
greatest Torments of Sinners in Hell, to Remember what a God they have lost,
what a Heaven they have missed, what precious Souls they have undone.

But this Momento here in the Text, is a very Comprehensive Duty; in this Place
it takes in the Whole of Religion, it comprehends the Whole Duty of Man.

It is usual with the Spirit of God in Scripture, to include all the Operations
of the Soul, in the mention of one single Act, and to denominate the Whole of
Religion, by some one Chief Part of it, which is a Principle Productive of all
the rest; sometimes we are Commanded to love God, sometimes to fear God,
sometimes to seek God, and here in the Text to remember God, and in any one of
these, all the rest are included; so that this Injunction, to Remember thy
Creator, points us to a fivefold Duty, without which it is not done as a Duty.

First, This Remembering implies and supposes Knowledge; you can never Remember
your Creator, unless you Know who he is; the Memory is the Storehouse of the
Soul, where known Truths are Treasured up. Christ says of the Scribe instructed
for the Kingdom of Heaven, that he brings out of his Treasury Things New and
Old.

Knowledge is the first Step to Salvation; he will have all Men to be Saved,
and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. and therefore the great
Design of the Devil is to blot out the Knowledge of God from the Mind; his
Kingdom is a Kingdom of Darkness, and he rules in the Darkness of this World;
for he can lead the Blind which Way he will; and therefore he that does not
know God, cannot remember him; and he cannot be rightly known but in Jesus
Christ. If one had a Knowledge of God as clear as that of the Angels, who never
sinned, yet he cannot be rightly known by us but in Jesus Christ; without the
Knowledge of Christ, we shall be miserable with all our Knowledge. Though the
Knowledge of Christ be not simply necessary to the Angels that never sinned,
and therefore needed not a Mediator, yet it was necessary for us who are by Sin
Obnoxious to God's Wrath, and so need a Reconciler, because of our Enmity; and
a Redeemer, because of our Slavery; a Refiner, because of our Filthiness; and a
Mediator, because of our Distance, that he may bring us to God; and therefore
the Knowledge of Christ is as necessary to Happiness, as the Knowledge of God;
both are joined together as a needful Means of Salvation. This is Life Eternal,
to know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh.
17.3. If we do not know God, we cannot know what is our Duty to him; and if we
do not know Christ, we cannot know the way of Performing that Duty; the more we
come to understand the Nature of God, and the Offices of Christ, the more we
shall know of our Duty, and how to do it. There can be no Right Knowledge of
God, but in and by Christ, He is the True Light that lightens every Man that
comes into the World, John 1.9. Every One that partakes of this Light has it
from Christ. Natural Light is from Christ, and Spiritual Light much more. No
Man has seen God at any time; the only Begotten Son, who is in the Bosom of
the Father, he has Declared him. John 1.18. And therefore this Remembering thy
Creator, includes in it the Saving Knowledge of God in Christ.

Secondly, This Remembering includes Faith; he cannot be said to Remember God,
who does not Depend upon God, and Trust in him; therefore David Expresses his
Faith in God, by Remembering of him. Psalm 20.7. Some trust in Chariots, and
some in Horses, but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God; that is, we
will trust in his Name; others trust in Creatures, but we will trust in the
Creator; others rely on an Arm of Flesh, but we will rely upon the Name of the
Lord; then God is Remembered aright, when the Remembrance of him is accompanied
with Faith and Trusting. Faith in God, is the best, the truest way of
Remembering of God.

It is said of Israel, Psalm 78.32. They believed not for his Wondrous Works;
but when he slew them, then they sought him, and they remembered that God was
their Rock, and the High God their Redeemer; that is, then they believed. So
Isaiah 26.8. The Desire of our Souls is to thy Name, and to the Rememberance of
thee; that is, to keep up the Glory of thy Name, by Acting Faith and Confidence
in thy Word and Promises.

Thirdly, This Remembrance implies Repentance; Forgetfulness and Impenitence
always go together; Repentance is a Calling Sin to Remembrance, with a Due
Sense of the Evil of it, and Sorrow for it, as it is done against God; and how
can this be where God is forgotten? If there be no right Conceptions of the
Nature of God, His Omniscience, His Holiness and Justice, there can be no
Repentance for Sinning against him. They are frequent Remembrances, fresh Views
of God, that work to Repentance and Self-abhorring. So it did in Job, Chap.
42.5, 6. Mine Eye sees Thee; therefore I abhor my Self, and Repent in Dust and
Ashes.

The Clearer Manifestations a Soul has of God, the Deeper will its Humiliation
for Sin be. When Peter remembered the words of Christ, then he went out and Wept
bitterly. Till we Remember and Consider God in the Purity of his Holiness, the
Severity of his Justice, the Tenderness of his Mercy, the Inevitableness of his
Wrath, we can never truly Repent of Sin.

Fourthly, This Remembering of God, carries Love in it. Though an Object be
every Way Amiable, and made up of Delights, yet it can never be let into the
Affections, so long as it is shut out of the Thoughts; nor on the other hand,
can it be with any pleasure Remembered, when it has no room in our respect.
God's Design and End is not so much to be Remembered by us, as to be Loved by
us; and his bespeaking a room in our Thoughts, is that he may Dwell in our
Hearts.

The Highest Act of Honor the Creature can do to God, is to trust him, and
love him. Those that Distinguish the Order of the Angels, place the Seraphims
above the Cherubims, because they have a more ardent Love, as well as a more
clearer Light; a Remembrance of God, without a suitable respect, will neither
be Profitable nor Durable; for when any other Object Possesses our Affections,
God is soon forsaken and forgotten; then a Man Remembers God aright, when his
Affections are suitable to his Apprehensions.

As it is with Sin, a Man has not the right Notion of Sin, unless he feel the
Weight of it, and loath it. Then shall ye Remember your own Evil Ways, -- and
shall Loath your Selves for your Iniquity, Ezekiel. 36.31.

Or as it is with the Word of God, no Man remembers the Word aright, if he do
not Believe it, and Love it. So no one can have right Apprehensions of God, who
has not Choice Affection to him, and his Chief Delight in him.

Look what that is which we Love best, and we always think of that most; what a
Man Loves best, is his Chief Good; and his Chief Good is his Treasure; and
where the Treasure is, there the Heart will be, Christ says.

What we Love, we Delight to think upon; as what we hate, we soon forget. So it
is said of Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 32.15. He forgot God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. He lightly esteemed him, and therefore soon
forgets him.

If one that is but a common Acquaintance with you be Absent, you soon forget
him; out of Sight out of Mind; but a bosom Friend, a dear Friend, a Friend that
is as a Man's own Soul, you cannot forget such a one; Love will remember him,
when the Eye cannot see him, and makes him Present, when he is Absent; nay, he
lives in the Mind, when perhaps he lies dead in the Grave; therefore I Pray
mind that Precept of our Lord, Matthew. 22. ver. 37. Thou shall Love the Lord
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. Mark ye, it
is not said only, Thou shall Love God with all thy Heart, and with all thy
Soul, but with all thy Mind; we Love him with the Heart and Soul, when we
Devote our selves to him; and we Love him with our Mind, when we have him daily
in our Thoughts and Remembrance; the Desire of our Souls is to thy Name, and to
the Remembrance of thee, Isa. 26.8.

Fifthly, This Remembering of him implies Obedience, Obedience to his Will; the
Will of God is the Rule of Obedience, and his Will is made known in his Word.
Obedience is Knowledge digested into Affection and Practice. Hence is that
Counsel of David to his Son Solomon, Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve
him with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind, 1 Chro. 28.9. Paul's first
Question when touched his Heart was, Who art thou, Lord? And then the next was,
What will thou have me to do? Acts 9.5, 6. to show us, that all Obedience is
produced by Knowledge. As Ignorance is the Cause of Sin, so a Right Sense of
God, is the best Antidote against it; for this begets Love; and the more God is
beloved, the more readily he will be obeyed; a weak Conception, and a fruitless
Remembrance of God, Glorifies him no more, than a Painter does the Person whose
Picture he draws.

The Glory of God consists not in the lifeless Notions of him, but in active
Conformity to him; a Natural Man may have some Pleasure in knowing the Nature
of God; Ay, but he cares not for knowing the Ways of God. Job, 21.14. They say,
-- we Desire not the Knowledge of thy ways. He would own him in his Mercy and
Goodness, but he has no regard to his Precepts, Mercy is suitable to our Wants
but Obedience is repugnant to the Interest of the Flesh. That Knowledge of God
which does not take root in the Heart, and grow up into Obedience in the Life,
it is Blindness and Ignorance in God's Account, whatever our Notions of it may
be.

Those Gentiles which are said to know God, Romans 1.21. they are said, ver. 28.
not to know God: The Sons of Eli could not but know the Lord, having such a
good Father, and being the Lord's Priests: But yet because they were Loose and
Vile in their Carriage and Behavior, therefore they are said not to know the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2.12. As there can be no Obedience where God is known; so that
Knowledge of God stands for nothing which is not fruitful in Obedience.

It is a Blessed thing so to know God, and so to Remember him, as not to forget
his Precepts. It is Moses his Counsel to that People, and it is mine to you;
Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 8.11. How is that? The next
Words tell you, in not keeping his Commandments; that is, forgetting of God.
Disobedience is called a Forgetting God; They forgot God their Savior, Psalm
106.21. And we are said to forget his Words, when we do not Remember his
Commandments to do them, Psalm 103.18. And that which here in the Text is
called Remembering thy Creator, is in Chap. 12. Ver. 13. expressed by Fearing
God and keeping his Commandments; which is said to be the Whole Duty of Man.

If the Authority of God be cast off, and we make not his Word the Rule of our
Lives, he is as much forgotten as if he were utterly shut o^ of our thoughts;
therefore says David, Psalm. 119.55. I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, -- and
have kept thy Law.

Thus you see how much this Remembering thy Creator carries in it; to wit,
Knowledge of God. Faith in God. Repentance toward God. Love to God. And,
Obedience to the Will of God.


When you Know God, so as to Believe in him; and Believe in God, so as to
Repent of Sinning against him; and Repent, so as to express your Love to him;
and Love God, so as to conform to his Will, and keep his Commandments; then is
this Duty done as it ought, and you therein answer the Call in the Text,
Remember thy Creator.

And that brings me to the

Second thing, The Object to be remembered, thy Creator: Remember thy Creator.
In the Hebrew Text it is; Remember thy Creators, in the Plural Number; so it is
used frequently, Genesis 1.1. Gods Created the Heaven and the Earth; so Isa. 54.5.
Thy Makers is thy Husband, in the Plural; so Job 35.10. None says, where is
God my Makers.

And its being thus Plurally expressed, it is very Emphatical; for it points us
to Father, Son and Spirit; all the Three made Man; they were our Makers.

The Father made Man, Genesis 6.7. The Lord said, I will Destroy Man whom I have
Created.

The Son made Man, Col. 1.16. By him were all things Created in Heaven and
Earth.

The Holy Spirit made Man Job 33 4. The Spirit of God has made me, and the
Breath of the Almighty has given me Life.

There is a great Truth (which will give you to understand this) I say, there
is a great Truth in that Maxim amongst Divines, That the Works of the Trinity,
ad extra, toward the Creatures, are undivided. All the Three, Father, Son and
Spirit, sat in Counsel to make Man; Let us make Man in our Image, in the
Plural Number, Genesis 1.22. And it is very observable, that though our Makers
here are expressed Plurally, yet the Image is put in the Singular Number; Let
us make Man in our Image; not in our Images; but in our Image to note, that
though the Persons are Three, yet the Image is but One: They have but one
Nature, and so are but one God; therefore it is said, Mal. 2.13. Have we not
all one Father? Has not one God Created us? Father, Son and Spirit, and yet
but one God; and shall we not Remember him that made us? Remember thy Creator.
It is a Term that gives a Claim; God is thy Creator, and that gives him a Right
to thee. All Souls are mine; as the Soul of the Father, so also the Soul of the
Son is mine, Ezekiel. 18.4. The Soul, that is, the Person, a Part being put for
the Whole frequently in Scripture. Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher
Powers. All Persons are mine, whether Father or Son, whether Old or Young, I am
their Creator, I am their Common Father; and this gives God a just Right to thy
Soul, to thy Body, to thy whole Person, to thy Life, to thy Strength, to thy
Talents, to all thou Art, and all thou Have, and to all thou can Do; for he
is thy Creator. He does not say here, Remember thy God, but Remember thy
Creator. God is not every one's God; we have lost him by the Fall; that
Relation is cut off by Sin, till Grace restore it: But though he be not every
one's God, yet he is every one's Creator; Fallen Creatures are his Creatures
still as much as ever, and therefore thy Remembering him as thy Creator, is that
that brings thee to Claim him as thy God: Thou owe thy Time, thy whole Time,
to him; for thou art Created every Day by him; for Preservation is a continual
Creation. Thou owe thy Self and Service to this Creator. As thou art what
thou art by his Power and Goodness, so thou ought to live to his Glory. He
made thee after his own Image; and as thou art hereby more capable, so thou art
more obliged to Remember him, and Honor him.

Thirdly, Here is the limitation of the Time when he must be Remembered, that is
now: Remember now thy Creator; which now sometimes used in a more Extended
Sense, and sometimes in a more Restrained Sense.

First, In a more Extended Sense; it is taken for the present Life, all the
Time a Man lives in this World; and then it is opposed to Death. Death is no
time to Remember God in; so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 6.5. In Death there is no
Remembrance of thee, in the Grave who shall give thee thanks? It is the same
with that of the Wise Man, Eccles. 9.10. There is no Work, nor Device, nor
Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave whether thou go; that is, when Death
comes, it cuts off all our Opportunities.

There is no Work in the Grave, that is no place of Business; there is none can
be done by us, and therefore there is none required of us.

And as there is no Work, so there is no Device; as there is nothing to be done
to procure Salvation, so there is no Devising any way to escape Damnation; you
cannot lie and think there: He returns to his Earth, in that very Day his
thoughts perish, Psalm. 146.4.

Nor is there any Knowledge there either of Good or Evil, For the Dead know not
any thing, Eccl. 9.5. And if there be no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, there
can be no Wisdom. Wisdom is profitable to Direct, but there is none of this in
the Grave.

Wisdom lies in Choosing a Right End, and Pursuing it by Due Means; but there is
none of this in the Grave.

Wisdom lies in finding and embracing the Chief Good; but there is none of this
Wisdom in the Grave.

When Death comes it puts an end to all your Opportunities: In Scripture
Opportunity is often called a Door, 1 Cor. 16.9. A great Door is opened to me.
2 Cor. 2.12. A Door was opened to me of the Lord. When God sends and makes way
for the Gospel, and inlarges the Hearts of Ministers to Preach the Gospel, and
opens the Hearts of People to receive the Gospel, then a Door is opened: Now if
Death shuts this Door, it puts an end to all our Opportunities. And is there
not a time coming when this Door, this open Door, will be shut: Pray Read Luke
13.24, 25. Strive to Enter in at the strait Gate, for many will seek to Enter
in and shall not be able; when once the Master of the House is risen up, and
has shut to the Door, and ye begin to stand without the Door, and knock,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; he shall answer and say to you, I know you not
whence ye are; the Master of the House is risen up, and the Door of Opportunity
is shut. So Matt. 25.10. it is said of the Foolish Virgins, While they went to
Buy Oil, the Bridegroom comes, and they that were ready went in with him, and
the Door was shut; a sad word.

Now you Read in Scripture of several Doors which will all be shut in that Day;
there is the Door of Gospel Grace, Rev. 3.18. I have set before you an open
Door, and no Man can shut it; but when Death comes that will shut it.

There is a Door of Faith, Acts 14.27. He opened a Door of Faith unto the
Gentiles; that is, he brought them to Believe in Christ; but when Death comes
the Door of Faith shall be shut.

There is a Door of Hope, Hos. 2.15. I will give them the Valley of Achor for a
Door of Hope; but when Death comes, this Door shall be shut for them that never
entered into the Good Land, the Heavenly Canaan in this Life, Whose Hope shall
be cut off, and whose Trust shall be a Spider's Web, Job 8.14.

There is the Door of the Heart, where God stands and knocks; Rev. 3.20. Behold
I stand at the Door and knock. And, my Brethren, God is this Day knocking at
the Door of the Hearts of you Young Ones: He is now knocking by his Word, and
what does he say? Remember now thy Creator. If any Man hear my Voice, and open
the Door, I will come in to him, and Sup with him, and he with me; that is, I
will give him the Saving Influences of my Spirit; he shall have Communion with
me in Grace here, and Glory hereafter. O how should you Young Ones beg now that
God would Put in his Hand by the hole of the Door, that you may open to him.
Open ye Gates, stand open ye everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory may come
in, Psalm. 24.7. Roll away the Stone, those Sins and Lusts that keep Christ out
of the Heart; and do it now, lest God give you up to the Hardness of your
Heart, and then when Death comes, you Perish in your Sins.

Again, there is a Personal Door in Scripture; that is, the Lord Christ: I am
the Door; by me if any Man enter in, he shall be saved, John 10.9. Now never
did God set open such a Door of Hope, such a Door of Grace, such a Door of
Salvation, as this is; In whom we have Boldness and Access with Confidence to
God by the Faith of him, Ephesians. 3.15. We have boldness to enter into the
Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.9. Now this Door stands open ready to
let you in; Christ calls you this Day to come, and he has promised he will not
shut you out, John 6.32. Is there never a Young Sinner here that has a Heart
to enter in at this Door to Day? Do it whilst it may be done, before it is too
late; for when Death comes, this Door will be shut to: If we stand out now,
there can be no entering in then, you must be shut out for ever. The Door of the
Gospel will be shut, the Door of Faith, the Door of Hope, the Door of the
Heart, the Door of Christ's Blood and Righteousness will be shut; and therefore
the Door of God's Bowels and Mercy will be shut: All these Doors will be shut
against thee in that Day; therefore then there can be no Entering, for Death
will put an end to all thy Opportunities; therefore Remember now thy Creator;
that is, now in the time of this Life; for Now is the Accepted Time, now is the
Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. And thus much for the Extended Sense of this NOW
in the Text.

Secondly, Sometimes this NOW is used in a more Restrained Sense, not only for
the present Life, but for the present Time of this present Life: So it is used
in the Text; therefore Mark, it is not said only, Remember now thy Creator;
that is, only now in this Life, but now in the Days of thy Youth, in the early
part of thy Life; and so now is opposed to hereafter; and this makes the Work
of Closing with God in Christ to be a present Duty, a Duty to be done without
delay; Remember him now in the Days of thy Youth. The Life of Man from the Womb
to the Grave, consists of Three Stages; Infancy, Youth, and Old Age; and the
Duty here is not affixed to the first, for Infancy is too soon to know God,
when we cannot know our Selves: Nor is it affixed to the latter, for Old Age is
too late to serve God, when we cannot serve our Selves: But it is affixed to
Youth; this is the only time to know both our Selves and God, and our Lost
Condition without him, and our Happiness by an Interest in him; therefore
Remember now thy Creator, now, in the Days of thy Youth. Indeed Youth is the
only time of Life for this. In Infancy we are too Young to live, being but in
our Imperfect Beginnings; in Age we are too Old to Live, being in our Droopings
and Declinings.

The Life of Man is a Life of Reason; now Children are too Young to understand,
and Old Men are twice Children; and therefore the Days of thy Youth are the
only Days of thy Life to Remember thy Creator in; Remember now thy Creator,
now, in the Days of thy Youth. And so I should come now to the Conclusion I
thought to speak to; but I pass that by for the present, and come from
Explication to the Application, but in two Uses.

The first shall be of Reproof to all such as forget God now in their Youth: O
what a Common Sin is this, especially amongst Young Ones! A Sin (I think) that
never was so common as now; it is a Complaint every where, that the Youth of
the Nation is generally Corrupted and Debauched; and it may appear by the Bills
you put up full of Complaints of their States: Pray for an Undutiful Child that
despises his Parents Counsel, says one; Pray for a Sabbath-breaking Child, says
another; Pray for a Child that Dishonours God by Cursing, and Swearing, and
Lying, says a third; and so many more: And truly Parents may very much thank
themselves for this. It very much proceeds from want of Good Government, by
timely Instruction and Correction; and the want of this at home, together with
Evil Examples abroad, has so leavened the Youth of this Day, and stained them
with such vicious Tinctures, that God is not in all their Thoughts. Nay, they
cannot endure the Name of God, unless it be to Curse or Swear by it: And is not
this for a Lamentation? It is such a Sin, as would you be persuaded seriously
to consider of it, you would be ashamed of; for it is the most unreasonable
thing in the World to forget God: It is such a Sin, as if God would help you to
lay it to Heart, you would be ashamed of it. See how God Disputed the Case with
Israel, Jer. 2.2. What Iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they have
gone far from me, and walked after Vanities, and becomr Vain, neither say they,
where is the Lord? As if God should say, tell me what have you against me? What
Evil have I done? As Christ says, Many Good Works have I done, for which of
them do you Stone me? What have you to lay to my Charge? Have I been a Barren
Wilderness, or a Land of Darkness? If so, you have some occasion to Revolt and
Forget me; but if not, why say ye, We will come no more at thee? Jer. 2.31.

O what a shame is it that any one should forget God, that never did him hurt,
but good, all the Days of his Life. Pray Consider that first Question in your
Catechism, Who made you? You once were not; and that which once was not, could
not make it self; as Nothing has no Existence, so it can have no Operation:
Nothing cannot be a Creator to every one of you. You derive your Beings from
God, It is he that made us, and not we our selves, Psalm. 100.3. therefore you
are called the Offspring of God; Acts 17.28. In him we live, move, and have our
Being, for we are his Offspring. Now what a shame is it that a Creature that is
made by God should forget his Maker? God complains of this, Isa. 51.13. They
forgot the Lord their Maker; and should he be forgotten that gave us our Being?

Honor thy Father and thy Mother; it is a Law written in Nature; they deserve
the highest Respect and Reverence, because they were the Instruments of our
Being. Now God is much more the Author of our Being than he that Begat us, or
than she that Brought us forth: Thou art he, says David, that took me out of
the Womb; thou art my God from my Mother's Belly. Parents are but the Second
Causes of our Being; God is the First Cause, and all Second Causes depend upon
the First, in their Being and Operation; therefore Man is nothing in our
Production, if compared with God; and shall this God be forgotten, and sinned
against? He calls Heaven and Earth to witness against such Rebels, Isa. 1.2.
Hear, O Heaven, and give Ear, O Earth, for the Lord has said, I have nourished
and brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me. Heaven and Earth
will cry out against you, if he that made us be not remembered and owned by us.

Secondly, Consider what a Price God has put into your Hands for the good of
your Souls. He has not only made you, but he has made Seasons of Grace for
you: Seasons for the getting the Knowledge of God in Christ: Seasons for
getting an Interest in Christ: He has given you his Sabbaths, his Word, his
Ordinances, a Powerful Means and Ministry: Nay, many Young Ones have felt
somewhat of the Power of these things; God has been at Work with them betimes,
their Hearts have been touched, the Spirit of God has wrought in them some
Convictions of Sin, and of their lost undone State. O what a Price has God put
into your Hands; and how can you answer the neglect of it? What says Solomon?
Prove. 17.16. Wherefore is there a Price put into the Hand of a Fool to get
Wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? He that has a Price put into his Hands
to get Wisdom, and has no Desire in his Heart to it, that Man is a Fool: God
says so, He is a Fool: And as he is so now in the Judgment of others, so he
will be so one Day in his own. It will be a Sword in his Heart to consider, I
might have had God for my God, but I forgot him. I might have had an Interest
in the blessed Redeemer, but I neglected it. I might have been Saved, but I let
slip all these Opportunities that God put into my Hands. I have now woefully
destroyed a Precious Soul by my Impenitent continuance in my Cursed Lusts,
against the Calls and Counsels of God.

It is an awakening Passage, Eccles. 8.6. Because to every Purpose there is
Time and Judgment, therefore the Misery of Man is Great upon him. Therefore;
Wherefore? Why, because he has not Judgment to discern the fittest
Opportunity for every Purpose. Many Young Ones, O how do they purpose that they
will seek God hereafter? How do they purpose to mind their Salvation? One
purposes a New Life, and a Better Course; and God has given every one of you
time for this, but they want Wisdom to know the Time; and so the Opportunity is
lost and gone, and they are miserable for ever; Because to every Purpose there
is Time and Judgment, therefore the Misery of Man is great. Sirs, Consider it.
Young Ones, how will your fruitless Repentance begin; when your Opportunities
are past and gone, then you will see your Folly: At his Latter End he shall be
a Fool- He was a Fool at first, but he shall see it at last; at his Latter End,
he shall be convinced of his Folly.

Thirdly, Young Ones, you that now forget God, and slight Religion, and indulge
to your Lusts; let me tell you, you are a Judgmen to the Nation, a Judgment and
a Plague to the Land; I have formerly said it to you, and I say it again, the
Youth of a Nation are always a great Good or a great Mischief to the Nation;
they are either the Hope or the Plague of the Land. When Young Ones are
Serious, and mind God and their Souls, when the Word of God is Precious to
them, to Awaken and Convert them to Season their Hearts with Wisdom, to Know
and Remember God, to Seek after Christ, to Honor Religion, by a Sober and Holy
Conversation; such a Race of Youth are a Blessing in any Age, they are a
Blessing of God to a Land.

But when the Youth of a Nation cast off Religion, cast off all Duty to God and
Man, and all Sobriety and Virtue, and grow Proud, Profligate, Profane, tainted
with all manner of Wickedness, even to Atheism it self, What shall we say then?
Then I say, this is a sad sign of some Judgment of God coming upon the Land;
and indeed we have many Young Ones in this Day, such Monsters in Wickedness as
has not been known in any Age; such Young Swearers that can scarce speak
plain; Young Sabbath Breakers, Young Blasphemers; Young Atheists; never any Age
produced the like; and for accompanying with Harlots, and all manner of
Uncleanness, that is become a Fashion: Therefore I tell you, and I tell you
from the Word of the Lord; and I beg you would Consider it; there is some sore
Judgment of God near at hand; I tell you the truth, it is near, and hastens
greatly; a Day of Trouble and Distress, a a Day of Wasting and Desolation;
therefore, my Brethren, I speak it with an Aching Heart, England is now big with
such a Brood as will Eat out our Bowels; the Children will Destroy the Mother;
therefore Pray hearken to a word of Exhortation, and not from me, but from the
Lord; it is the Exhortation in the Text, O Remember your Creator now in the
Days of your Youth! Now, if ever; now, or never; now, in the Days of your
Youth. As ever you would have Good Times, as ever you would have God own this
Nation, as ever you would have the Gospel continued in the midst of you, O
Remember your Creator!

First, Remember how he Created you in his own Image; every one of you was made
in the Image of God; every one; though the Moral Image of God is blotted out by
the Fall, that Image that consisted in Righteousness and Holiness, that is
lost; yet there is a Natural Image of God which is seated in the Intellective
and Elective Powers of the Soul; and this every one of you has; this Image
every one brings into the World with him; it cannot be lost; it shall be
carried to Heaven and Life, and to Hell too: It will be the Comfort of Saints
in Heaven, and the Torment of Sinners in Hell, to lie there with this Image of
God, there their Mind, Understanding, Memory, to Consider and Remember how they
Sinned against this God in their Lives. Now why has God stamped every one with
his Image, but to make him capable of Knowing God, and Choosing God, and Loving
God, and Closing with God, and Desiring God, and Serving God, and Enjoying
Communion with God? This is the End why he put his Natural Image into every
Soul; otherwise Man might have Served God as Brute Creatures do; but he could
never have known him, never have had Communion with him: Now shall we bear this
Image of God, and shall we not labor to know the Lord?

Secondly, Remember him so as to make it the Chief Business of your Lives to
seek him, and to Seek him while he may be found. It is the Counsel of the Holy
Ghost, Seek the Lord while he may be found. When is that? He tells you, Prove.
8.17. They that seek me early shall find me. Now he seeks God early, that makes
it his first Work; therefore says our Lord, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and
the Righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added to you, Mat.
6.33. Seek the Kingdom of God as the End, and his Righteousness as the Means;
for Grace is the way to Glory, Holiness to Happiness. Without Righteousness
there is no Heaven to be had; but with it comes both Heaven and Earth too; for
Godliness has the Promise of both Lives, both that which is now, and that
which is to come: But this Kingdom must be first sought; First seek the Kingdom
of God; first, before every thing; and first, above any thing else.

Our Interest in God is lost by the Fall; it may be recovered, and there is
nothing so useful to be sought and secured as that. Is not the Life more than
Meat, and the Body than Raiment? Says Christ: So say, is not Heaven more than
Earth? Is not God better than the VVorldi, and Spiritual Blessings better than
Temporal? O therefore, let not the Lean Kine devour the Fat; nor the things of
the World shut God and Christ out of our Hearts and Thoughts. The Spiritual
Blessings are the best, therefore God Promises them first. He will give Grace
and Glory, Psalm. 84.11. There be Spiritual Blessings; and he will withhold no
good thing from them that walk uprightly; there follow Temporals. God suits his
Mercies to our Necessity; therefore he gives them first that we need most.

This should direct our Duties, and teach us what to Beg, and what to Seek.
Seek God in the the first place, God in Christ; and and if Spiritual Mercies be
secured, Temporal Mercies, so far as is for your good, shall never be denied:
Therefore let it be your Work to seek God before all, above all, and more than
all; for he is all in all: But be sure to seek him in Christ, or I tell you,
you will never find him, nor find acceptance with him. Since the Fall, God is
not to be found, but only by a Mediator; He that finds me, says Christ,
finds Life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord, Prove. 8.33.

O get an Interest in Christ; of all things, Young Ones, get an Interest in
Christ, a hearty Closing with Christ, a Saving Faith in Christ; this is the
right way of Remembering your Creator. Remember him so as to Obey him, and Live
to him; that is the Sense of the Apostle's Counsel, 1 Pet. 4.19. Commit your
Souls to him in well-doing, as to a faithful Creator; it must be in well-doing.
He has promised Eternal Life to them who seek him by Patient continuance in
well-doing, Romans 2.7. And therefore let me add this, as you must Remember him
first, so you must Remember him to the Last: Pray take that, and I will have
done: As you must remember God first, so you must remember him to the last: You
must begin with God, and you must end with him: O take heed of beginning in the
Spirit, and ending in the Flesh.

You Read in the 20th of Matthew, that the Laborers came to Work in the
Vineyard at very different Hours: Some came Early in the Morning; some at the
Third Hour; some at the Sixth; some at the Ninth Hour; and some at the
Eleventh: Some came in Earlier, and some Later; they did not all come in in the
Morning. Ay, but they all tarried till the Evening; they all Labored till the
Evening.

It is the Wise Man's Counsel, and O that God would help you to take it! In
the Morning Sow thy Seed, and in the Evening hold not back thine Hand, Eccles.
11.6. My Brethren, God must have the Duty of the whole Day of your Life: Christ
says so, I must work the Work of him that sent me while it is Day. Christ never
spent one Hour of his Day Idly. The Lord Pity Young Ones; How do they Idle
away their Time? God must have the Duty of the whole Day; for as we are here in
the Text called to seek him Early, so we are commanded to seek him continually.
1 Chronicles. 28.7. God is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the Ending; therefore
as we are to begin with him first, so we are to hold on with him to the last:
For he that indures to the end shall be saved: Be thou faithful to the Death,
and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.

Now I might urge this Duty upon you, which is so great by many Arguments.

From what God is to us; our Creator.

From the Command laid upon thee to Remember him as such.

From what he deserves of us; For of him, and through him, and to him, are all
things; therefore Glory should be to him for ever, Romans 11.32.

But I shall urge but this one Motive, and I have done. The Present Time is
only thine; thou have a great Work to do, a God to remember, a Christ to seek,
Sin to kill, Grace to get, a Heaven to mind, a Hell to avoid, a Soul to save, a
strict Day of Judgment to pass through; O what work have we to do! And all the
Time we have to do it in is but Now: The Present Season is only thine, thy Days
are here limited and bounded in the Text to a Present now; Now in the Days of
thy Youth. What Fools are Young Ones now to say, by the Grace of God I intend
to Repent hereafter, and I will seek after God hereafter. I am too Young now,
when God says, Remember thy Creator now in the Days of thy Youth?

You little think how soon Death may come; it does not always give warning;
what warning had the Rich Man? Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required
of thee; when he cries out, I have Goods laid up for many Years. What warning
had Job's Children, that were all taken away in an Hour? O Sirs! Death has
several passages to your strong Holds, that you cannot find out: He does not
lay long Siege to all: There is no saying to Death when it comes, there is one
Older than I, take him; there is one was Gray when I was but a Child, let him
go first. No, Sirs, you must know that Sin has altered the Course of Nature;
the Son Dies before the Father, and the Daughter before the Grandmother.

I say therefore, the Present Time is only yours; yesterday can never be
recalled, and to Morrow may never be enjoyed: The Present Time is only yours.
Young Ones Die as well the Old: Blossoms are liable to Nipping in the Spring,
as well as full Grown Fruit to Rotting in Autumn. Thou that art Young and
Strong; thou art not sure of another Year, no, nor of another Day: O therefore
who would hazard his precious Soul upon such uncertainties! Opportunity ended
returns no more: There is hope of a Tree if it be cut down, (says Job) that it
will sprout again; but Man lies down, and rises not till the Heavens be no
more.

Sirs, Pray remember we have but one Arrow of Life to hit the Mark with, and if
we shoot at Random we loose all; therefore we had need be good Archers. O what
will you do, Young Ones, what will you do, if your Day be ended before your
work be finished, if your Paradise be laid waste before the Tree of Life be
planted in it! O therefore that you would be persuaded to hearken to God here
in the Text, To Remember thy Creator now in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Days draw nigh, wherein thou shall say I have no
pleasure in them!

THE YOUTH's Best Choice. II. DISCOURSE.
Eccles. xii. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, in which thou shall say, I have no
Pleasure in them.


THere are two great Concerns which lie upon all our Hands, which ought to be
seriously thought of by us, and duly attended; the one is, A Wise Improving
this present Life, and the other is, A careful providing for a better; two
Things which none can be too Diligent about; and he that is truly Faithful in
one, will in some Measure be Conscious in both: And both these are pointed at
in the Text. For he that in the Days of his Youth Remembers his Creator as he
ought, does at once rightly improve the present Life, and wisely provide for
that to come, and so unites in his Practice those Duties that God has joined
together in the Precept, Remember thy Creator now in the Days of thy Youth, etc.

In which Words you have the Call and Command of God to a very Important Duty;
wherein we may observe,

First, The Act or Duty it self, to Remember.

Secondly, The Object to be Remembered, Thy Creator.

Thirdly, The Season wherein this Duty is to be put in Practice, now. But least
you should think that this now takes in the whole time of the Present Life,
therefore he does exclude the latter Part of Life, and limits this now to the
former Part; Remember thy Creator now in the Days of Youth.

I did the last Year, as some of you may remember, upon this Occasion, speak
from these Words. I then only opened them to you, and showed the Comprehensive
Sense of them, without making any Observation from them. I told you, that this
remembering our Creator points to a Fivefold Duty.

First, To a right Knowledge of God; and he cannot be rightly known, but in and
by Christ; we cannot else know the Way of doing it; for he is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life: And therefore the right Remembering our Creator, includes
in it a Saving Knowledge of God in Christ.

Secondly, This Remembering includes believing; we cannot be said to remember
God in the Sense of the Text, if we do not depend upon him, and trust in him;
therefore David expresses his Faith in God, by remembering of him, Psalm 20.7.
Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will remember the Name of
the Lord our God: That is, others trust in Creatures, but our trust shall be in
God.

Thirdly, Remembering implies Repenting; Forgetfulness and Impenitency always go
together; Sinning is called in Scripture, a Forgetting God, and Repentance is a
calling Sin to Remembrance, with a true Sense of the Evil of it, and Sorrow for
it, as done against God; and therefore where God is forgotten, and out of our
Remembrance, there can be no Repentance.

Fourthly, Remembering our Creator, carries in it Love and Respect. Though an
Object be every way Amiable, and made up of Delights, yet it can never be
remembered with pleasure, when it has no room in our Respect. God's Design and
End in requiring to be remembered by us, is, that he may be loved by us; and his
bespeaking a Place in our Thoughts, is, that he may have a Room in our Hearts.
The highest Act of Honor the Creature can do to God, is to trust him, and love
him. A Remembrance of God, without suitable Respect, cannot answer the Call in
the Text, because it is but passant and transcient: For when any other Object
possesses our Affections, God is soon forgotten and forsaken. What we love, we
love to think on, as what we slight, we soon forget. As it is said of Jeshurun,
he forgot God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation.

Fifthly, This Remembering of God includes obedience to his Will. Obedience is
nothing else but Knowledge, digested into Affection and Action. Hence is that
Counsel of David to his Son Solomon, Know thou the God of thy Fathers, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind. As there can be no Obedience,
where God is not known, so that Knowledge of God stands for nothing, that is
not fruitful in Obedience: Mark that Counsel of Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.11. Beware that
thou forget not the Lord thy God: How is that? The next Words tell you, in not
keeping his Commandments. Disobedience is a forgetting God; so that that which
in the Text is called a Remembering our Creator, is in the last Chapter of this
Book, ver. 13. expressed, by fearing God, and keeping his Commandments. If the
Authority of God be cast off, and we make not his Word the Rule of our Lives,
he is as much forgotten in a Scripture Sense, as if he were utterly shut out of
our Thoughts: So says David, I have remembered thy Name, O Lord, and have kept
thy Word. So that you see this Remembering is a very Comprehensive Term.

Then the Object to be Remembered was opened to you, (thy Creators) for in the
Original it is in the Plural Number; and so it points to Father, Son, and
Spirit. It is not said Remember thy God, but, Remember thy Creator. God is not
every one's God, but he is every one's Creator; fallen Creatures, they be his
Creatures still, as much as ever; and this Remembering him as thy Creator, is
that that gives thee a Claim to him as thy God.

And then in the last place I opened to you the Season of this Duty, now; not
now as intending any time of Life, but now in the Days of thy Youth. I insisted
largely upon these things, in the opening of them to you, and improved them by
a Particular Application: And this is the sum of what I spoke last Year upon
these Words.

I now come to give you some Observations from them; one is this.

That Youth is naturally very prone to forget God; this is plainly implied: For
what need else of this Memento in the Text, Remember now thy Creator in the
Days of thy Youth.

Another might be this; that the true and best Improvement of Youthful Days, is
to devote them to God, to mind Religion betimes.

But I shall not speak to any of these; my Design, at present, is to speak to
the Words as they lie in the Original.

Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Choice: The Word that we render
Youth, here the Days of thy Youth, is from (...) to Elect, to Choose; and
accordingly Montanus renders the Word; Remember now thy Creator in the Days of
thy Choice.

Now this admits of a double Sense. Either,

Thy Choice Days, or thy Choosing Days.

First, The Days of Youth they are your Choice Days, the Prime of your Time,
the Flower of your Age. As the Spring is the choice time of the Year, so is
Youth the choice time of Life; Nature is then most brisk, and active, and full
of vigor, and the Spirits quick and lively, the Wit sharp, the Affections
strong, the Memory retentive; and therefore there is no time to mind Religion
like this choice time of Youth.

O where now are those Isaacs that meditate whilst they are young? Where are
those Jacobs that seek for the Blessing betimes? Where are those Children that
ask their Parents as they under the Law did? What mean the Sabbaths and the
Ordinances of the Lord, that we may also keep them? Where are the Children
amongst you that sing Hosannah's to Christ, as they did in the Days of his
Flesh? These are the Young Men's Looking Glasses; and because we are led by
Example more than by Precept, therefore the Holy Ghost has set before you these
Presidents in Scripture, that you may imitate and copy them out; these are
choice Paterns, and if you make Conscience to follow them in your Choice Days,
you will show your selves to be a Chosen Generation, Children that God will
delight to own. But,

Secondly, (For I will pass that too) the Days of Youth, they are your Choosing
Days; as they are Choice Days, so the Days of your Choice. Choosing, What is
that? Why it is a deliberate Act of the Soul, it is done upon Consideration and
Debate; when a Man upon a Judgment rightly informed and Affections thereby
engaged, does cleave to God, and the Ways of God, that is Election and Choice.

The Observation then that I shall lay down from the Sense of the Words, is
this, that it is the great Concernment and Duty of Young Ones, to make God the
Object of their First Choice, to begin with God in their First Setting Out in
the World.

We never enter into God's Service aright, till we enter upon it by Choice, for
God will have it so: Choose you this Day whom you will Serve, either the true
God, or Idols: Not as if it were at their own liberty to serve which they
pleased: No, but to convince them of the Folly of a bad Choice, and to direct
them to a right Choice.

But for the clearing of the Doctrine, I will show you,

First, What it is to choose God.

Secondly, I will give you the Reasons of the Concernedness of the Duty.

And so apply it.

First, What is it to choose God? It implies Five Things.

First, A due Consideration of the Object, its Nature, Worth, and Excellency;
till things are duly weighed in the Balance of a true Judgment, we can never
make a right Choice; and here the business sticks with Young Ones. In this
first Work we cannot persuade them to consider, they will not weigh things, but
they will act according to the inclination of their Lusts; therefore the
Apostle advises us to resolve upon trial, 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, and
hold fast that which is good: A Man will never hold fast that which is Good,
until he first prove and try it.

Indeed the things which are usually opposed to Religion, are such poor paltry
Vanities, that they are not worthy to be set in competition with God, or to
come into a serious Debate: How easy is it to resolve which is fittest to be
pleased, God, or the Flesh? Whether the Transitory Pleasures of Sin should be
preferred to the Life and Salvation of an Immortal Soul. A Serious
Consideration on these Things, would soon determine the Matter on God's side.

Secondly, This Choosing of God, implies Esteem and Preference; for Election and
Choice is the preferring one thing before another. Our Choice of all Objects is
according to our Esteem of them: As far as we judge a thing needless, so far we
count it worthless. Let a Man have but slight Thoughts of God, and his Duties
shall be as short as his Thoughts are slight: Mean Apprehensions are ever
attended with listless Devotions. It is the Soul that highly esteems God, that
chooses and seeks him. What said Caleb and Joshua when they returned from spying
out the Land of Canaan, and had tasted the sweet Fruits of it? O, say they, it
is a good Land, let us go up and take it at once: But the other Spies that
undervalued it, laid aside the thoughts of Possessing, and are for facing about
to Egypt.

Though God and Christ are the best Good, yet there are many Competitors that
stand as Rivals with them in the Soul; and therefore your Choice can never be
right, unless these Rivals be trampled under foot. It is said of the Wise
Merchant, that when he had found a Pearl of great Price, he went and Sold all
that he had, and bought it, Mat. 13.46. First, he shows his Esteem of it, as a
Pearl of great Price, and then he parts with all to purchase it. What a high
Esteem had Paul of Christ? The Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord, Phil. 3.8. There is his Value of him; and see how it drew his Heart after
him; I count all things but Loss -- that I may Win Christ. It is not enough to
approve of God and his Ways simply, but we must approve of them comparatively;
not only as good in themselves, but as better than all other good whatever. We
shall never choose God before all, till we come to Esteem him above all.

Thirdly, This choosing of God, implies a voluntary Inclination and Desire; a
Man is said to choose those things which he Likes and Loves, and which his Soul
Inclines to. So that he is carried after them, not by the Force of any External
Principle, but by his own Propension and Inclination, and this supposes Love;
for Desires are the Natural Issues of Love.

The Soul can never mount upward, if the Affections tend downward; and
therefore when the Holy Ghost would give an advance to the Life of God in the
Soul, he begins first with the Affections; Set your Affections on things above;
and then, as Desires always spring from Love, so they are drawn forth by a
Sense of Want; for what we Love, and have not, that becomes a Want; and Sense
of Want will quicken Appetite, and set Desires on Work; now these Desires must
be fed and satisfied, and that none can do, but God; therefore it is God that
he chooses.

Fourthly, This choosing implies a firm Purpose, and a fixed Resolution, of
adhering to our choice. We never choose till we bring our Minds and Wills to a
firm Purpose; there may be many good Thoughts and Wishes in the Soul, but still
till we are resolved for God, we do not choose him. When the Heart is Peremptory
and Fixed for God, that will come to something; when the Soul says, I see I am
an undone Creature, I am convinced of my State, and the Necessity of my Case; I
must have God, I must secure an Interest in Christ, I must be Born again, I
must mind the saving of an Immortal Soul, this will come to somewhat; and a
Profession of Religion (let me tell you) signifies very little till it comes to
this. Who is this that has engaged his Heart to Approach to me, says God, Jer.
30.21. It is Resolution that ingages the Heart for God, and makes our choice of
him firm and unalterable; especially if it be deliberate and entire.

First, It must be deliberate from a Sense and Conscience of our Duty and
Interest. Resolves taken up upon Sudden Surprises or Present Heats, rarely
produce any good Effect: This is often the Case of you Young Professors, that
are like an Early Spring, all Blossoms, but no Fruit; or like a Vapor Exhaled
by the Warmth of the Sun, that rises no higher than the middle Region, where it
is Condensed, and drops down again: This is that very thing that makes so many
Apostates from God and his Ways; they take up a Profession of Religion too soon
before the Word of God has taken Root in the Heart. Indeed a Soul that chooses
God aright, can never Profess him too soon, the sooner the better; but he that
makes a Profession of God, before he makes a choice of God, before the Word is
rooted in the Heart, or any thing of the Power of Religion is felt within, such
a one takes up a Profession too soon. It is said of the Seed Sown in stony
Places, Mat. 43. Forthwith it sprung up. Above ground too soon; it grows
upward, but not downward; all Blade, but no Root: So says Christ, Verse 21. Yet
has he not Root in himself: And what follows? He dureth but for a while. A
Mushroom Christian, the Birth of a Night, and the Abode of a Day. Such begin
too soon to hold out with God long: This has caused many Scoffers at Religion
to take up that Envious Proverb, A young Saint, and an old Devil: whereas if
they had said, A young Hypocrite, and an old Apostate, it had been a Truth too
too often Experienced. Flashy Affections, that have no Principles to maintain
them within, come to nothing; they are like Fire in Green Wood, that burns no
longer than it is blown; or like Water hanged over a Quick Flame, that is soon
Hot, but when it is taken off again, is as soon Cold; nay, Colder than it was
before; because the Natural Spirits are evaporated. How nimbly does the
Windmill Work when it blows a Brisk gale, but the Wind no sooner ceases, but
the Mill stands: So sudden and immature Resolutions come to nothing; they must
be managed with Judgment and Deliberation: David's Practice is an excellent
Pattern, Psalm 119.59. I considered my ways, and turned my Feet to thy
Testimonies: David speaks like a Man under a Dilemma, as having two ways before
him; there is the Way of Sin, and Lust, and Carnal Delight; this the Flesh
presents, and it seems an easy and a pleasant Way: Ay, but it leads to
Destruction. Then there is the Way of God's Commandments: This the Word
presents, it is Narrow, it is Troublesome, but it leads to Life, and that makes
amends for all. Now when we stand still, and debate upon the Choice, which of
these is the better Way, and consider the Loss and the Gain of either Side; and
the final Issue of the one Way, and the other, and thereupon resolve to take in
with the Ways of God, as promoting our truest Interest and Felicity, this is a
deliberate Resolution: And this was the Course of that Prodigal Son, when he
came to himself, Luke 15. v. 17. he first bethinks himself, falls into a
serious Debate of his Case, How many Hired Servants of my Father's have Bread
enough, and I perish with hunger? What shall I do? I will arise and go to my
Father, and say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
Servants: Thus he debates the case with himself, and thereupon takes up this
resolve, well, I will arise, and go to my Father; there is his deliberate
Resolution.

Secondly, Our Resolution must be entire; that is, without boggling at any of
God's Commands, and without the reserve of any one Sin or Lust; for no Man can
serve two Masters; the Commands of Christ and Satan are absolutely
inconsistent; Obedience to the one is downright Rebellion against the other; we
must not capitulate with Christ, and think that strictness in some Duties will
excuse our Indulgence to any Lust; the great standing Law of Heaven is, Thou
shall love the Lord with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength, and him only shall thou serve. The Work of the Christian Calling is
such, as that it cannot be done without this; we have many Enemies to oppose,
many Sins to conquer, many Lusts to mortify, many Duties to perform; therefore
our Resolution must be entire; and that is a Fourth Thing.

Fifthly, This Choosing in the Text implies a complacency and delight in the
Object of our choice; though Election be an Act of the Will, yet it is
quickened by the Motions of the Affections: As where the Will is bent against
Sin, there is always a hatred of it included; so wherever it fixes upon God,
it is attended with pleasure and delight. When David had chosen God for his
Portion, he expresses a delight in his choice, Psalm 16. v. 6. The lines are
fallen to me in pleasant places, yea, I have a goodly heritage: This is the
Language of a Soul affected with its own Felicity, and the pleasure it takes in
an All-sufficient Good: So it was in his choosing the Precepts of God, says he,
I have chosen thy Precepts, Psalm 119.173. and in the next Verse, Thy Law is my
Delight: A Man loves what he chooses; and where there is Love in the Choice,
there will be Pleasure in the Service; for to love there is nothing grievous.
Thus you see what this choosing God does imply and carry in the Nature of it,
and that is the First Thing.

Secondly, Let me give you the Reasons, why it is the Duty of Young Ones thus
to choose God. Why,

One great Reason is, because God commands it, that is the First. Pray mind
that of the Apostle, 2 Epistle John, v. 4. I rejoiced greatly that I found of
thy Children walking in the Truth, as we have received a Commandment from the
Father: Pray mind, these were a Ladies Children, to teach us, there are none
too great to be good; these Children were found walking in the Truth; not
taking a step or two, making it a Business by the by, as your Genteels, and
great Persons use to do; but they persisted in it, they were steady in the Ways
of God, and that in their Childhood, against all the Tide and Stream of
Youthful Lusts. Now this was that God had commanded. Mark ye, though they were
Children, yet God commands this of them, I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy
Children walking in the Truth, even as we have received a Commandment from the
Father: But where do we find this Command, that Youth should devote themselves
to God? You have it in the Text, Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy
Youth: And there is a Command older than that, Psalm 78.5, 6, 7. He established
a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he commanded our
Fathers, that they should make them known to their Children: (What for?) That
they might set their hope in God, and not forget the Works of God, but keep his
Commandments. Nay, our Lord Jesus Christ strictly enjoins it, Matt. 6.33. Seek
ye first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof. First, here does
not only not a Pre-eminence first above all, but it notes a Priority first
before all.

It is very Observable, that our Savior in that Prayer he gave to his
Disciples, which you call the Lord's Prayer, he gives but one Petition for
Temporal Things, and Five for Spiritual; and that for Temporals is neither the
First nor the Last. Not the First, for Hallowed be thy Name is before it. Nor
is it the Last, for Deliver us from Evil comes after it; to teach us that we
must begin and end with God. In Mat. 21.28. The Command of the Father to his
Son, is, Go Work to Day in my Vineyard: The command of God brooks no Delays,
the Promises of God have Respect to the Future, but the Command looks to the
Present; To Day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. Why did God
under the Law require for himself the first Sheaf of the Harvest, the first
ripe Fruits, the Firstlings of the Herd and Flock, but to teach us, that our
first Affections, our first Strength, our first Desires, and first Choice, and
first Service, should be Devoted to God? For it is the command of God, and that
is the great Reason and Rule of all Obedience; that is one.

Another Reason is this, the Nature of your Extract and Original requires this.
Pray where had you your Beings? Young Ones, how came you into the World? Who
made you? The Text tells you who this is in the very Notion God is mentioned in
thy Creator. There is a Concatenation of Reasons, for the Creatures Owning and
Choosing the Service of God, included in this Notion of a Creator.

First, He made us, and not we our selves, Psalm 100.3. The Prophet Isaiah
says, He spreads forth the Earth, he gives Breath to the People upon it, and
Spirit to them that Walk therein, Isaiah 42.5. So Elihu says, Job 33.4. The
Spirit of God has made me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me Life;
and is it not Reason that he that made us should b owned by us?

The Name of Father and Mother bespeaks all Duty and Honor from you Children.
If Children could begin their Duty in the Cradle, and continue it a Hundred
Years, it could never Pay what Parents Deserve for all their Sorrow, Care,
Pains, and Cost. Therefore Solomon is much in Pressing this Argument upon
Children, Prove. 23.22. Obey thy Father that Begat thee. Mark, that Begat thee;
he gave thee thy Being; and Despise not thy Mother that brought thee Forth. We
are ever bound to Honor and Obey them for what they have done for us. These
Rational Beings do require it; which they have been the Means to Derive to us,
and to Nourish and Nurse up. This is highly Deserved at our Hands; yea, though
they grow Old and Impotent, and can serve us no longer. O what then does God
deserve from us, who is much more the Author of our Being than our Father that
Begat us, or than our Mother that Bare us? God is the First Cause, Parents are
but the Second Causes of Generation; and the Second Cause depends upon the
First, and cannot act without it: Therefore it is said of God, In him we Live,
and Move, and have our Being. Therefore Man is nothing in our Production, if
compared with God; and is it not Reason then, that he made us, should be owned
and Honored by us; that he that is our Creator, should be our Ruler?

We Own our Service where we Receive our Existence; we are Debtors to God every
one of us. We Owe him our selves, all we are, and all we have; for we are not
our own, we are the Lord's Propriety, at his Disposal, he has the absolute
Dominion over us, as giving Being to us. It is the Apostle's Argument, Whether
we Live, or Die, we are the Lord's, de jure, and it should be so, de facto;
therefore we ought to Live to him, Romans 14.7, 8. This Glory is the White at
which we should aim Living and ^^ying: He is the Center in which all the whole
Circumstances of our Life should meet, for he made us, therefore Remember thy
Creator.

Secondly, He made us after his own Image, and that is a Peculiar Privilege of
Creation beyond what other Creatures enjoy. There is the Print of God's Hand
upon all his Creatures; but there are none bear his Image but Angels and Men;
and this you are Stamped with in the very Womb. Not one of you but have the
Image of God upon you, the Youngest as well as the Oldest.

Though indeed the Moral Image of God which consists in Righteousness and
Holiness, that is Blotted out and Lost by the Fall, we have Sinned it away; yet
there is the Natural Image of God, and that remains in all of you; for what is
Natural Light, Knowledge, Understanding? What is Skill to Discern, and Wisdom
to Choose? What are all the Intellective and Elective Powers of the Soul, but
the Image of God in Man? And what is this Image for, but in order to Recover
that which is Lost? It is to Capacitate us to Know God, to Seek him, to Choose
him, to Live to him here, that so we may for ever Enjoy him; and if we do not
make this our chief Work, we are made in Vain, and Degenerate into Brutes,
being wholly acted by Sense, and the Design of this Image is Lost; for by
partaking of his Likeness, we become bound to his Laws.

Thirdly, That Power that created us at First, does create us every Day: You
are made of God every Day; for Preservation is a Continued Creation. As he
gives Life, so he holds our Souls in Life; if God withdraw from us but a Moment
we shall Die; Thou take away their Breath, and they Die, and return to their
Dust. And do we receive our Preservation and Support from him, and shall we not
pay Respect to him? This violates the very Law of Nature, and fills Heaven and
Earth with Wonder; therefore God does Summons Heaven and Earth to hear his
Complaint against such Rebels, Isa. 1.2. Hear, O Heaven, and give Ear, O Earth,
says God. But why does he Summons these?

Why, First, To Rebuke and Shame the Stupidity of his People, that the
Senceless Creatures were more like to hear God speak than they.

Secondly, To show that these Creatures by which God had done them much good,
might well bear Witness on his behalf against their Ingratitude.

Thirdly, To Convince them, how Stupendous a thing it was, that God Complains
of against them; even such as the Senceless Creatures might stand amazed to
hear, were they capable of that Sense.

And what is the Complaint that God makes here? It is Twofold.

The one is Horrid Ingratitude.

The other is Transcendent Brutishness.

First, Horrid Ingratitude. Hear, O Heavens, and give Ear, O Earth. What must
they hear? Why what God has to say against this People? The Lord has said, I
have nourished and brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me. For
any of us Parents to bring forth and breed up Children, and after all our
Trouble, Cost, and Care, when they are come to Years of Knowledge, not to own
us: Nay, when they are grown to be Men, to turn to be Rebels, to violate such
Bonds, and break such strong Ties, Heaven and Earth may well cry out against
them. Why, this is my Case, says God; I made these Children, I maintained them,
I brought them up at my Cost, and yet after all they will not Know me, they
will not Own me. Instead of Choosing me, they turn their Back upon me, and turn
Rebels against me; they have not a bit of Bread to Eat, but as I feed them, nor
a Rag to Wear, but as I cloth them. It is my Wool and my Flax, yet I am
forgotten, and the very Law of Nature broken. Thus God Complains of their base
Ingratitude.

Secondly, He Complains of their Transcendent Brutishness, which was such, that
it outdid the most Brutish amongst Brutes. The Ox and the Ass are reckoned
amongst the Dullest and most Stupid Creatures; yet, says God, they are worse
than these; for the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib, but
Israel does not know me: My People does not consider. These Beasts as Stupid as
they are, yet they after their Kind own them that Feed them, and are ready at
all Times to submit to and serve them; yet, says God, they will not own me:
Nay, says God, they will not so much as consider what I have done for them,
that thereby they might be brought to own and serve me. My People does not
consider.

Fourthly, He that made us, can unmake us; he that gave us our Being, can turn
us into nothing; he that created us, can destroy us; he who breathed thy Soul
into thy Body, can take it away, and throw it into Hell. And this is the very
Argument our Lord Christ makes use of, Mat. 10.28. Fear him who is able to cast
Body and Soul into Hell. All these Arguments do result from the Relation we
stand in to God as he is our Creator.

He made us.

He made us after his own Image.

He makes us continually, by preserving us.

And he that made us can destroy us, and will you forget your Maker? This will
provoke him, when they that are made by him seek not after him. None says,
Where is God my Maker? Job 35. v. 10. All Worship, and Respect, and Obedience,
is a just due to God as your Maker: You had your Being from God, therefore you
should always seek after God. It is natural for every thing to make to the
place of its Original: Solomon shows it you in diverse Instances; so does the
Sun, It arises, and goes down, and hastneth to the place whence it arose,
Eccles. 1. v. 5. So does the Wind, It whirls about continually, and returns
again to its circuits, v. 6. So does the Rivers, Unto the place from whence
they came, thither they do return again, v. 7. And should not Man that is made
by God, and comes from God, seek after God, and take up his rest in God? Nature
teaches this.

A Circle is the most perfect Figure, because it ends where it began; the last
point meets in the first from whence it came; it is the Perfection of the
Rational Creature, that had its Being from God, to seek after him, and
terminate it self in him; that is the second Reason.

Thirdly, To choose God betimes, as it is a Duty of great concernment, so it is
a Duty of great advantage, and benefit. Religion, however it is mistaken in the
World, is the most advantageous course any Man can take; it affords the
greatest Promises, the richest Comforts, and the surest Rewards: And therefore
the Holy Ghost tells us, That Godliness is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy
4.8. and where lies the profit? It tells you in the next Words; It has the
promise of the Life that now is, that includes all good here; and of the Life
that is to come, that includes all good hereafter. But to be a little
particular in showing you the advantages of Religion.

First, If you have chosen God, he is yours for ever; for he becomes yours by
your own choice, and you may lay claim to him as yours, and may say as Thomas
did, My Lord, and my God: Or with David, This God is our God, for ever and
ever, Psalm 48. v. 14. And is not this a great advantage and benefit?

Nay, you have not only a Propriety in God, but you have the special Presence
of God: However it may be as to that Presence of God that is Arbitrary, yet you
have always his Presence in a Fourfold Sense.

The Presence of his Mercy, to pardon your Sins.

The Presence of his Power, to support your Persons.

The Presence of his Omniscience, to know your Wants.

And the Presence of his Goodness, to supply them.

He is your God, your own God, as David calls him: God, even our own God, shall
bless us. A Man can never be happy that has nothing of his own; and a Man can
call nothing his own but God. All things else may be lost, but he that has made
sure of God, his Right can never be invaded, nor his Propriety lost: Mary has
chosen that good part, which shall never be taken from her: And is not this a
Benefit?

Secondly, Is it not a great Benefit to have the Heart fixed and steadfast in the
Ways of God? The Cause of all Halting in Religion, is the Want of a Choice and
Purpose resolutely set: The Apostle says, James 1.8. A Double-minded Man is
Unstable in all his Ways. (...) A Two-Soul'd Man, one that has a Heart and a
Heart, one for this way, another for that; one for God, and another for the
World: Such a one must needs be unstable, and of an inconstant Soul; being as
ready to depart from God, as to close with him. But he that owns God, and his
Ways by choice, will suit his Conversation to his Election. If he be sincere in
his choice of God, that will make him faithful in all his carriage to God: And
therefore Joshua, when he would engage the People to continue faithful with
God, he draws them on to a choice, and then lays that upon their Conscience to
bind them, Joshua 24.22. Ye are witnesses against your selves, that ye have
chosen the Lord, to serve him; and they said, we are witnesses. It greatly
strengthens a Bond, when a Man freely binds himself.

Thirdly, This resolute choice of God is of great advantage in carrying on the
Work of the Heavenly Calling with the more ease and delight; because a choice
is nothing else but an inclination of the Soul guided by Judgment, strengthened
by Resolution, and actuated by Love. Now as Judgment justifies our choice, and
Resolution makes it entire, so Love makes it easy and sweet; and so our
delight in obeying God, answers to the sincerity of our choosing of him.

Fourthly, This choosing God gives great peace and comfort in the Ways of God;
this is as natural as for the Fire to produce Heat: The Fruit of Righteousness
is Peace: As Sin causes a Sting in the Conscience, and a Wound in the Soul, so
every good Action done in Sincerity, has the approbation of the Conscience,
and that gives peace, and the witness of the Spirit, that brings joy and
comfort: This is intended in that of the Apostle, Romans 14.7. The Kingdom of God
is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy, in the Holy Ghost. Here is a double
Benefit mentioned, Peace and Joy: There is a difference between them.

Peace is a tranquillity of Mind springing from the rectitude of our Actions.

Joy is from the Impression of the comforting Spirit.

Peace is an acquittance from Conscience, but Joy in the Holy Ghost is an
acquittance from God himself, who is our Supreme Judge, is the beginning of
that Endless Joy that he has prepared for them that love him.

Fifthly, This intitles you to a future and a fuller reward; for in choosing
God, you choose him for the future, as well as for the present; in choosing the
ways of God, you choose all that is intailed upon them, and that is Life and
Blessedness: So says Wisdom, Whosoever finds me, finds Life. The Word sets
before every one of us Life and Death, as Moses did to that People of old,
Deuteronomy. 30.15. Now many choose Death rather than Life; for they choose to please
their Lusts, and to gratify their carnal Appetite, and therein they choose
Death; as Christ says, All they that hate me, love Death: But he that chooses
God, and the Ways of God, chooses Life, and he shall have it; he chooses Endless
Felicity in another World, and he shall never be disappointed. O the benefit of
choosing God and his Ways! That is a Third Thing.

Fourthly, The Choosing God and his Ways in our Youth, is the only Means to
Prevent or Cure the many Mischiefs that flow from our Neglect of it. Days of
Youth are Days of Folly; now the Way to correct the Follies of Youth, is to be
Wise toward God. Childhood and Youth are Vanity. Now the Way to Cure this
Vanity, is to be Serious and Earnest about Eternity. Youth is most apt to be
carried away by the Power of Lust; hence is that Counsel of the Apostle, Flee
Youthful Lusts; and the proper Way to flee from them, is to flee to God in
Christ for Help and Strength against them.

Youth has a great Advantage against Sin, had they but Wisdom to Improve this
now in the Text. Now Sin is but Budding, and therefore may the easier be Nipt;
now Corruptions are but Twigs, and therefore may sooner be Lopt off; now Lust
is but Conceiving, and therefore may more easily be Stifled in the Birth. A
green Wound is soon Cured, but if it be let alone long it may turn to a
Gangreen that may prove Incurable. O my Brethren, there is no Age so fit, so
suitable to the Nature of Religion, as Youth is.

Religion is the Christian Race; now who Chooses an old Man to run a Race? It is
called a Wrestling, and who will call an old Man into the Ring that is ready to
have his Heels tript up by his own Age? It is called a Warfare, and under the
Law the Aged were Discharged from War, to show that it is the proper Work of
Youth. Religion is a Calling, a High, a Holy, a Heavenly Calling. Now Youth is
the fittest Season for Choosing any Calling; and therefore the Text bids us to
Choose the Heavenly Calling, by Choosing God in the Days of our Choice.

The Choosing of worldly Things first shuts God out of our Thoughts, and Sensual
Objects quickly draw the Heart from God; therefore you should Choose God first;
that is the Fourth Thing.

Fifthly, (To name no more) No Man knows how soon his Day of Grace may be past,
therefore he ought to Choose God betimes. The Seasons of your Closing with God
are Arbitrary. Salvation is not to be had when you will, but when God will; and
God's Will is that you should seek after it now in your Youth. God has his set
Time of finding; Seek the Lord while he may be found, Isa. 55.6. And let me
tell you, if God's Time be once past, though you seek him you will never find
him; They shall seek me Early, but they shall not find me, Prove. 1.28. I say
this is the very thing, that most perish upon their slighting of God's Time.
Esau he would have had the Blessing, but alas he came too late, he missed the
Season, Heb. 12.6. The Foolish Virgins would fain have entered in, but when they
should have entered, their Oil was to Get; and when they would have entered, the
Door was Shut: You should therefore Choose God betimes, because you know not how
soon the Day of Grace may be past. These are the Reasons of the Point.

And now I come to the Application, and I shall make but two Uses of it.

One by Way of Trial: And,

The other by Way of Counsel.

First, By Way of Trial; you have heard, Young Ones, what your Duty is; to
begin with God in the first Place, and make him the Object of your Choice. Now
the Question I would ask you, is, what have you done in this Matter? You that
are in your Youth, and Prime of your Days, what have you done in this Matter?
Now is your choosing time, pray what Choice have you made? It is a needful
Question, God help you to answer it in your own Hearts. One Chooses this Employ,
another that; one Chooses to go to Sea, another Chooses to tarry on Shore; one
Chooses this Calling, another Chooses that; but have you Chosen God to be your
God? Have you ever made that Choice? It was David's Question to the Egyptian, 1 Samuel 30.14. To whom belongest thou? To whom belongest thou, Young Ones, to whom
do you belong? Pray, do you belong to God? Why, you will say, how may I know
this? It cannot be known a Priori, as we say, by God's Choosing of you, that is
an Imminent Act, and Imminent Acts cannot give Evidence, they Prove nothing;
therefore it must be known a Posteriori, by some Subsequent Act of our own.

There are two Ways of being the Lord's People, but there is but one Way of
knowing it; we are made his both by his Act and our own; by his Electing of us,
and by our Electing of him. Now we cannot know that we are God's by his Act, by
his Choosing of us; but we may know it by our Act, by our Choosing of him. This
is the Question that I would put to you; have you seriously Chosen God to be
your God? Did you ever make this Choice? This must be before any one can lay a
true Claim to him. God will never be yours (let me tell you) without your own
Choice. Now have you ever Chosen God? I do not mean at a Present Pinch; it may
be under the Checks of Conscience, or in some Present Distress, many will take
God to be their God, but this Choice seldom comes to any thing, it lasts but
till the Storm is over, and the Distress removed; but have you ever chose God
in the Sense Described? Have you Chosen him by a Deliberate Act of the Will
Guided by Judgment, and with full Purpose of Heart to cleave to God? How shall
I know this, you will say? Briefly, there are diverse Ways by which it may be
known; I will name but Two or Three. It may be known,

First, By a Self-dedication and devoting of your selves to be the Lord's.
Whenever the Soul truly Chooses God for his God, it is always accompanied with a
Self-dedication to God. So it is said of those Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8.5. They
gave themselves to the Lord. Now what can you say to this? Have you ever given
up your selves to be the Lord's, resolving to live in an Entire Submission to
his Will: Have you ever made a Solemn Covenant between God and your own Souls;
that God shall be your God, and that you, through his Grace, will be his? Why,
if so, then you have Chosen God, and he is your God.

Secondly, It may be known by your Behavior in Reference to Sin. When you are
Tempted to any Sin, either by Satan, or by your own Lusts, what do you do? Do
you give Way to it, or do you run to Christ for Strength against it? Do you
Comply with it, or do you Resist it? Do you Countenance or Curb it? Is it Loved
or Hated? This is no hard Case to Determine, every Child can tell what he
Loves, and what he Hates. No one that Lives in the Love of any known Sin, can
say that ever he has Chosen God; mind it, any one Lust indulged, will
certainly confute this claim: For where Sin is Loved, there it Reigns, and
where Sin Reigns, God is Disowned: And can any one Disown God, and yet say he
has Chosen God? It cannot be.

Thirdly, It may be known by your Obedience: He that Chooses God for his chief
Good, Chooses him for his only Lord, and that necessarily inferrs Obedience to
him in all things. So says the Apostle, His Servants ye are whom ye obey, Romans
6.16. Many make their Boast of God, and Claim a Propriety in him, but whom do
you obey? Pray mind that; does the Flesh bear sway? Does Pride reign? Do
youthful Lusts and Vanities command the Heart? Why then I tell you, God was
never the Object of your Choice; you may Profess him, and Talk of God, but you
have never Chosen God for your God. It is not Profession, but Affection and
Action that must warrant our Title to God.

David, Psalm 119.94. tells God, I am thine, Lord, I am thine. Ay, but how does
he prove it? Why, says he, I have sought thy Precepts. Pray mind, he does not
only say, I have kept thy Precepts, I have done them, but I have sought them:
Now to seek them is much more than barely to do them. It implies Four Things.

First, An earnest Desire to know them; and that is a great Evidence of an
upright Heart, and a sincere Love to God, to be Inquisitive into the Will of
God.

Secondly, It implies an Affection and Respect; no Man seeks what he does not
Love: I have Respect (says David) to all thy Commandments.

Thirdly, It implies a constant Endeavor to Practice them; for the end of
seeking is keeping; we seek to know his Will, that we may do it; and therefore
seeking and keeping are put together. Psalm 119.2. Blessed are they that keep
his Testimonies, and that seek him with the whole Heart.

Fourthly, It implies earnest Desires after higher Measures of Grace, for the
bettering of our Obedience; this is seeking. Now such a seeking is a sure
Evidence of your choosing of God. O therefore that I could prevail with Young
Ones to come to the Trial in this Matter, whether ever you have really chosen
God or no! And I tell you why I urge it; for Three Reasons.

First, Because it is about the most concerning Case in the World; as it is the
greatest Duty in the World to seek after God, so it is the greatest Privilege
in the World to know my Interest in God; therefore it is a Matter worth
Inquiring into. What if all the World were thine? If God be not thine, you are
undone; and will you not know whether he be yours or no?

Secondly, I urge it because of the Treachery and Deceitfulness of your Hearts;
The Heart is Deceitful above all things; (the Prophet says so) in Young Ones
especially, and in nothing more than in this Matter. How fondly and
presumptuously do many Boast of their Propriety in God, when alas they have no
manner of Interest in him? It was the very Case of Laodicea, She thought her
self Rich, Increased in Goods, and that she stood in need of nothing, when at
the same time she needed all things, and was Wretched and Miserable.

The Apostle says, If any Man think himself Something, when he is Nothing, he
deceives himself; and the Reason why many are thus Deceived, is because they
trust to their own flattering Opinion, and are not sensible what a cheating
Impostor they carry in their own Bosoms. Pride and Self-love will never believe
any thing against Self, and so it takes that for granted, which ought to be
proved; and should we not Try in this Matter?

Thirdly, A well-grounded Evidence of our Interest in God, is that which will
comfort us when nothing else in the World can; that is, in a dying Hour; then
is the time when all other Comforts will certainly fail, when a Man looks upon
himself as Launching into another World, and begins to consider in Earnest what
shall become of his Precious Soul; how terrifying must such Thoughts be to him
that has no Evidence of his Interest in God? Nothing but this can support the
Soul at such a time. It is this your choosing God that will Enable you to
Triumph over Death, and the Grave, to say with the Apostle, O Death, where is
thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? It is true, natural Fears may be
strong, and the Thoughts of Dissolution may shake us, but a well-grounded
Evidence of our Interest in God will notwithstanding carry us through all.

What would one give when he lies upon a Dying Bed, for one good ground of Hope
that God is his? Why now is the time to bring this Matter to a good Issue: Now
is your time; and therefore it is highly Necessary you should put this Matter
upon Trial, whether God be yours or no. So much for that Use.

The next Use shall be by Way of Counsel and Exhortation, and I would speak to
it in two Branches.

First, To such of you, Young Ones, that have never yet chosen God; that have
never remembered God in the Days of your Choice.

And then to them that have done so.

First, To those Young Ones that never as yet have chosen God for theirs, but
have lived without God in the World to this Day; I would say to you as Elihu
said, Job 34.4. Let us choose to our selves Judgment, that we may know what is
good. To choose Judgment, is to choose judiciously, with mature deliberation;
that is the way to know what is good. The reason why so many put Darkness for
Light, and Light for Darkness, Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter, it is
for want of choosing in Judgment, and so knowing what they choose. Now my Message
to you this Day is, to discharge this Duty; you Young Ones, God has sent me
this Day to speak to you; you that have yet seen but the Third Hour of the Day,
I am sent this Day to you, you are called in the Name of the God that made you,
and put Breath into your Nostrils; in the Name of the Lord Christ, who shed his
Blood to redeem you from Sin and Hell: In his Name I now speak, this Call is
from him, and the Business you are called to, is to be so kind to your own
Souls, as to take God in Christ from this Day for your God; remember to choose
God now in your choosing Days. When thou chusest a Calling, by which to maintain
thy self; when thou chusest a Wife, with whom to spend thy Days, O then be sure
above all choosing, choose God to be thy God.

I might multiply Motives to press this Duty upon you: Take a few.

First, Your giving your selves to God, it is but paying a Debt, a just Debt;
what Paul says of Philemon, God may say much more to us, Thou owe to me even
thy own self: For whence came you? Where had you your selves, but from him, the
Origin of all Being? Therefore it is but Justice to let God have his own. God
gave you your selves, but let me tell you, he did not give you a Propriety in
your selves; that is a Right God cannot part with; therefore you are not your
own, nor can you be: God gave you a Life, he gave you a Soul, he gave you
Understanding, he gave you a Will, he gave you a Conscience, he gave you
Affections, he gave you all things, but for what intent? Not to establish a
Dominion in your own Persons, but only a Stewardship, and a course of Service;
you are not Lords of your own Lives, but Keepers of them for God; therefore
says the Apostle, If we live, we are to live to the Lord, for no Man lives to
himself.

Secondly, Consider how freely God offers himself to be yours; the Arms of his
Mercy they are opened to embrace you, and he is ready to forgive and forget all
that is past, whatever thy Sins are, or have been: He calls Heaven and Earth to
record, that if you miscarry, the blame is not in him; you have his Oath, that
he takes no Pleasure in the Death of a Sinner; and therefore he calls so
earnestly, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? Now pray, what answer can you
make, if such Tenders of God, and such Bowels of Love, should be ungratefully
slighted?

Thirdly, Consider the Design of Christ: The great Design of Christ, in what he
has done, and what he is doing; he has stood in your stead to bear the Wrath
of God, which you and I must else have born for ever.

Suppose you heard Christ saying to you, Soul, why (think thou) did I take
up thy Nature? Why was guilt charged upon me? Why was I numbered amongst the
Transgressors? Why was I made a Man of Sorrows? Why was my Hands nailed, my
Side pierced, my Head crowned with Thorns? Why was my dearest Blood poured out?
What can thou conceive should move me to undergo the bitter, the accursed
Death of the Cross, if not to save thee from thy Sins, and bring thee to God?
And have thou no need of a Christ now, and of his Righteousness? Why, says he,
I am ready at thy Call, speak and tell me what thou want? I am now in
Heaven, at my Father's Right Hand ready to relieve thee; ask what thou will, I
will present thy Prayers to my Father, perfumed with my Righteousness, and they
shall all be granted. O what Encouragement should this be to come to Christ! Go
thy way, Young One, take thy Life in thy Hand, as once Esther did; present thy
Petition, and say with her, If I find favor in thine Eyes, let my Life be
given at my request: Let my Soul live by a Saving Interest in God.

Fourthly, Consider what Joy thy choosing of, and closing with God betimes, will
cause in Heaven: I tell you, there is not the Youngest, the Meanest of you, but
you may help to fill all the Angels in Heaven with Joy. How is that? Why, take
God for your God, and it will be so. O how these Noble Creatures triumph to see
the least increase of Christ's Kingdom! If there be but one Lamb, one Young One
in all this Assembly added to the Flock of Christ this Day, all the Angels in
Heaven will rejoice, Ay, all the Angels in Heaven; nay, it will be the Day of
the very Gladness of Christ's Heart; For as the Bridegroom rejoices over his
Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee, Isa. 62.5.

Fifthly, Consider how uncertain the measure of thy Life is; thou may think
to live many Years, and yet may die soon: How many have you gone after to
the Grave, that came after you into the World? Job says, (speaking of the
Sinner) The number of his Months are cut off in the midst, Job 21.21. It is not
only a Description of Death, but of Early Death; an immature Death is the
cutting off our Months in the midst; this is that David deprecates, Take me not
away in the midst of my Days: As our Times are in God's Hand, in regard of the
event of them, so they are in regard of the length of them; either God may not
give thee time to grow old, or not a heart to repent when thou art old: When so
many offers of Grace are refused, and so many motions of the Spirit resisted by
thee, I tell thee thy heart is in great danger of being for ever hardened.

How many Young Ones are now awake, and that for ever, in Endless Flames, that
would never open their Eyes to see their danger till they came thither?

That is an aweful Word, Psalm 58.9. Before your Pots can feel the Thorns, he
shall take them away, as with a Whirlwind, both living, and in his Wrath.

[Before your Pots can feel the Thorns:] That is, before you have any real
Sense of your danger. To what shall I compare the Miseries of Young Ones, that
are taken away so often in the midst of all their Pleasure, before ever they
thought of Death? It is a thing sad, beyond comparison, beyond all expression:
Have you then, Young Ones, no pity for your Souls? Or do you resolve not to
prepare for the Trial, till the Assizes come, and the Judge sits on the Bench?

If we had a certain knowledge from Heaven, that this was the last Sermon we
should ever hear, that this was the Last Call to Remember our Creator that God
would ever allow us, that we should be in another World before another Day
comes about, with how many Tears should we bewail our Folly of neglecting God?
And how should we rend the Heaven with Cries, that God would own us, and help
us to own him; and that he would reprieve us a little longer, that we might
make sure of an Interest in him, before we go hence, and be no more? And why
should we not do so now, seeing we know not the day nor hour when the Son of
Man will come?

The Lord awaken Young Ones (for none else can awaken them) and persuade them
to seek after God betimes: O that you would be persuaded to this! He is the
most Eligible Object in the World; they that have chosen him will tell you so,
they have found him so; you will never have cause to repent of your Choice; you
may have cause to repent of other Choices. None ever made a carnal Choice, but
he repented first or last; either here, with a godly Sorrow, whilst Matters
were capable of retrieving; or in Eternal Misery, where there is Repentance
without returning: But who ever repented of choosing God? Name one that ever
did: Job once cursed the Day of his Birth, but who ever cursed the Day of his
New Birth? Who ever repented of his closing with Christ, or of his being
sanctified and made like God?

When Death comes, then the Cry begins amongst Carnal Sinners; How have I hated
Instruction! How have I forgotten God, and my Eternal Interest! How have I
regarded Lying Vanities, to the forsaking of my own Mercies! O this Flattering
World! How has it deceived and undone me! This will be your cry when you come
to a Sick Bed. Now did you ever hear any one say, I have chosen God, but God
has deceived me? I have ventured my Soul upon the Lord Christ for Pardon, for
Righteousness, and Christ has deceived me? I have chosen the Way of Holiness,
and that has deceived and misled me? Did you ever hear such a Complaint? No,
nor never shall.

Arise then, Young Ones; in the Name of the Lord, I say to thee, arise, and
shake your selves from the Dust and Vanities of Youth, betake your selves out
of hand to God in Christ, make Religion your Business, whatever you do, for the
Lord's sake; this will make you a Blessing in your Generation.

Truly, let me tell you, the Days we live in, calls aloud upon you Youth, in
this Matter; we are in declining times, sad times, for Religion it loses ground
apace in this Age; and if God do not stir up the Young Generation to keep up
Religion, I tell you it will be quite lost in the next. O therefore, that you
would resolve to devote your selves heartily and betimes to the Lord! Never
think it too soon to seek him, nor too long to serve him: You will not count a
whole Eternity too long for your own Happiness, do not therefore count your
whole Life too much for God's Service. I had thought to have laid down some
Directions for your guidance and help in this great Duty of choosing God, I will
but name Five or Six.

First, Labor for a deep Sense of your Natural State; this furthers the Work.
No Man comes to Christ till he is weary and heavy laden; and that no one is, or
can be, till a Sense of Sin, and of his Natural State, makes him so.

Secondly, Another should have been this: Whenever the Spirit of the Lord
strives with you, carry it becomingly to him, especially in Two Things:

Labor to know his Striving Seasons: And,

Labor to cherish all his Motions. Then,

Thirdly, I would have said, Do not consult Flesh and Blood on the one hand,
nor give ear to the Suggestions of Satan on the other, for he will always draw
you from God.

Fourthly, Do not put off this Work of choosing God from time to time, but
resolve to set upon it now without any more de ay. And,

Fifthly, Besure shun the Conversation of such as Deride and Scoff at serious
Godliness, and such as deny all Revealed Religion; it will be the Undoing of
your Souls else: And then I would have said,

Lastly, Beg the renewing Grace of God to carry on all. Fear and Shame may
conceal a Sinner, Morality may varnish him, but it is only renewing Grace can
change him, and bring him to choose God for his God.

And then I would have spoken to the Second Branch of the Exhortation; that is,
to such of you as have chosen God in your Early Days. I am persuaded I speak to
many such this Day; many Young Ones, who have chosen God in their choosing Time.
Why,

First, Bless God: O bless him, magnify his Grace, who has counseled and
inclined your Hearts to this! When David had chosen God for his Portion, he
presently cries out, I will bless the Lord, who has given me Counsel, Psalm.
16.7. O Sirs! What a blessed Thing is it to be an early Convert, to be an early
Christian? It is not only Matter of Comfort to you, but I tell you, it is a
Comfort to your poor Ministers. How do they Rejoice when they can beget one
Soul to Christ? What says Paul to the Philippians, to whom God had blessed his
Ministry, in their Conversion, Ye are our Crown, and our Joy, Phil. 4.1. And
again to them, 1 These. 2.20. Ye are our Glory, and our Joy; we bless God that
blesses us to bring in any one of you to Christ.

O that every Young One in this Place were of this Number! You are our Comfort
that God has some to keep up Religion when we are Dead and Gone.

You are a Comfort likewise to your Godly Parents, that can in you see the
Return of many Prayers, and that they can now Die with Comfort, because they
leave you their Children, to Walk in the Steps of your Fathers, and to Honor
God when they are gone to Heaven. O it is a blessed Sight to see Young Ones
Walk with God! Therefore bless God for inclining your Hearts to this, whilst
you have a Day to Live.

Secondly, Let it be your Care to renew your Choice of God every Day; renew
your choice of God daily, and also the Dedication of your selves unto God: Our
first Dedication is not enough, though it may be Sincere; therefore it must be
Improved by repeated Acts: We should be often renewing our Choice of the Lord,
and should think it not enough to be the Lord's, but we should labor to be
more the Lord's; for let me tell you, though God cannot be more ours, yet we
may be more his; and one Excellent Way to be so, is by choosing God, and
dedicating our selves to God.

Lastly, Live as they that have chosen God for their God; your claim is high,
let your carriage be answerable. In short, if you have indeed chosen God, and
have given up your selves to him, make it appear, let it be known, prove it by
all Acts proper to such a Privilege. How is that? By daily putting off the Old
Man, and putting on the New; by Dying more to Sin, and Living more to
Righteousness, giving up your selves to the Conduct and Leadings of the Spirit,
to be guided by him in all his Motions, making the Word of God the whole Rule
of your Lives, laboring in all things to Walk worthy of God, who has called
you to his Kingdom and Glory; and in so doing you will have a sure evidence,
that you have obeyed this Call of God in the Text, Remember now thy Creator in
the Days of thy Choice.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 18. for some, read something. p. 9. l. 16. r. slighty. p. 21. l.
23. f. ruin, r. mind. p. 32. l. 20. r. when Christ touched. p. 34. l. 16. r.
not known. p. 62. l. 21. r. so say I.


