A Looking-Glass FOR GEORGE FOX THE QUAKER, And other QUAKERS; Wherein they may
see themselves to be Right Devils.

In ANSWER to George Fox his Book, CALLED, Something in Answer to Lodowick
Muggletons Book, which he calls The QVAKERS Neck broken.

Wherein is set forth the Ignorance and blindness of the Quakers Doctrine of
Christ within them; and that they cannot, nor does not know the true meaning of
the Scriptures, neither have they the Gift of Interpretation of Scripture.

As will appear in those several Heads set down in the next Page following.

Written by Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two last Prophets and Witnesses unto
the High and Mighty God, the Man Christ Jesus in Glory.

Printed in the Year 1667.

THE CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. Of a Catalogue of damned Quakers. Chap. 2. Shows the ignorance and
foolishness of George Fox. Chap. 3 How the Quaker people are altogether
ignorant of Heavenly Secrets, so become the greatest despisers of them. Chap.
4. A discovery of the Quakers blindness which cannot discern whether a man that
preaches the Gospel ought to have his Commission from Christ without him, or
from a Christ within him. Chap. 5. Shows how ignorant and dark the Quakers
people are in the knowledge of the right devil, and of the serpents seed. Chap.
6. How the soul of man is mortal, and does die, yet Fox thinks it impossible to
prove by Scripture. Chap 7. How it was no lie to accuse the Quakers of sin and
blasphemy. Chap. 8. The right devil proved. Chap. 9. How the Quakers are
mistaken in the flesh and bone of Christ. Chap. 10. How God has made the
Witnesses of the Spirit Judge in his stead. Chap. 11. Shows that the body of
Christ's flesh and bone is distinct of it self, and not in the Quakers bodies,
neither are they members of his body. Chap. 12. Shows by Scripture how Christ
dwells in his Saints, and how it may be said they are flesh of his fl sh, and
bone of his bone. Chap. 13. How Fox is proved a devil, because he cannot give a
reason that he is no reprobate. Chap. 14. An Explanation how George Fox and
other Quakers, may be said to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Chap.
15. A further Interpretation concerning the Judgment Seat of Christ. Chap. 16.
How the Sentence and Curse has subdued those Witchcraft-fits in the Quakers.
Chap. 17. How spirits cannot assume what shapes they please, neither can there
appear any spirit without a body. Chap. 18. How the true God is no bigger than
the compass of a man, and no spirit without a body, as the Quakers does vainly
imagine. Chap 19. How the Quakers may see themselves to be right devils. Chap
20. How the Quakers are more Antichristian in their doctrine, than the Pope.
Chap. 21. How the body of Christ's flesh and bone is distinct from the Quakers
bodies. Chap. 22. That which killed the righteous and just, it was the spirit
of reason the devil in man that always did it. Chap. 23. A difference between
reasonable and unreasonable men, and a further discovery that reason is the
devil. Chap. 24. How the soul of Christ died, and the ignorance of the Quakers
discovered in the death of their own souls. Chap. 25. It is proved that Christ
the only God is not in this world at all, in his person or essence. Chap. 26.
How men cannot worship God in spirit and truth without bodies, and how
Muggleton never was in the spirit of Solomon, nor never shall be. Chap. 27. A
great stir the Prophet Muggleton has to keep the Quakers spirits out of
Christ. Chap. 28. How Fox justifies the Magistrates persecuting of me in
Darbyshire. Chap. 29. How the Curse of Muggleton shall remain upon Fox to
eternity. Chap. 30. How the Curse and Sentence of Muggleton shall be over, and
upon the spirits of the Quakers to eternity. Chap. 31. How the Law written in
the Quakers herats, is that Christ they could have spoken in had they never
seen letter of Scripture, nor man that professes it. Chap. 32. How their
confidence will fail them in the day of trouble. Chap. 33. How Fox shall see no
other God or Judge, but that Sentence Reeve and Muggleton has passed upon him.
Chap. 34. A reproof the Quakers for rejoicing in my sufferings, and being sorry
the Magistrates did not punish me more than imprisonment. Chap. 35. How it does
belong unto mortal men that are chosen of God to interpret Scripture, and not
unto Christ himself. Chap. 36. How every true Prophet and Minister of Christ,
has power to open the Book of Conscience. In the last place I shall say
something as to the Quakers Principle and Practice.
A Looking-Glass for George Fox the Quaker, etc.
CHAP. I.
GEorge Fox, I saw a Pamphlet of yours, Entitled, Something in Answer to
Lodowick Muggletons Book, which he calls The Quakers Neck broken.

You said well in that you said, something in Answer to that Book of the
Quakers Neck broken, for it is a very little something indeed; it is so little
a something, that wise men will hardly discern any thing in it as a direct
Answer: but how comes it to pass that you make no mention of your own damnation
in your Answer; you know John Reeve and my self gave you the Sentence of
Damnation a matter of fourteen years ago; when we were prisoners in Old
Bridewel, there was you, Edward Borroughs, and Francis Howgel, you three were
counted the Chief Speakers of the Quakers at that time, and you three were the
first Speakers of the Quakers that were damned by us the Witnesses of the
Spirit, but since that there has fallen a many more of your brethren under
this Sentence; but you have been Fox-like, as is your name, so is your nature,
you have lain still, and kept your damnation to your self from the knowledge of
others, because you would not be upon public Record as a damned Devil, and yet
a Speaker of the Quakers.

Also you read of your name in that Book, you say you have answered something,
but you take no notice of your self, but take other folks parts; and if your
brethren William Smith, Samuel Hooton, Edward Bourn, Richard Farnsworth, had
not written to me, there would have been no occasion for the Fox to come out of
his hole, and now the Fox is come out, he will be caught and made manifest to
Generations to come, who pretended to be a means of salvation to others, and
yet he himself a castaway, a reprobate, a son of the Devil, one that shall be
recorded amongst the damned Crew to the worlds end, and I am sure your
Damnation is written in the Tables of Heaven, even as the Law of Moses was
written in the Tables of Stone, that is, these men were written the seed of the
Serpent in Heaven in the Reprobate Angel his nature, before he deceived Evah;
for you Speakers of the Quakers does act forth the Serpent Angel his nature,
thinking your selves wiser than God, as he did; he thought if he had been God,
he could have made all those glorious Creatures above the stars of nothing;
even so be you Quakers here in mortality, you teach your disciples to believe
that God made this vast Earth and Waters of nothing, witness that Thomas Tailor
Speaker of the Quakers, in his Letters to me, which I have given Answer to, and
joined it to the Book called The Quakers Neck broken; and you Fox and others of
your Speakers does the same, for you say you were in Christ before the world
was, here you are quite mistaken, for you were in the Reprobate Angel his seed
and nature, who is called a Serpent, and in this Serpent Angel you and others
were in before the world was, and so you and others were recorded in the Table
of Heaven for the Reprobate seed, and to be damned to eternity.

And as I know from whence you came, even from the Serpent aforesaid, and that
you were in him before the world was, so likewise you shall be recorded for
damned devils here while the world is, as long as time does last, therefore I
shall set you down as follows, you being one of the grand Devils, you shall
be first:

George Fox, Edward Borroughs, Francis Howgel, Edward Bourn, William Smith,
Samuel Hooton, Richard Farnsworth, Thomas Tailor, John Parrat, Richard
Whitpane, John Harwood, Richard Huborthorn, Fox the younger, and that great
lubbardly fellow spoken of in The Quakers Neck broken, these were generally
all, or most of them Speakers of the Quakers, and exercised the Ministerial
preaching without a Commission from God, and not only so, but they have been
the greatest fighters against a personal God in Heaven above the stars of any,
and have sinned against the Holy Spirit that sent us, and so have procured the
Sentence of eternal Damnation upon them, and this Record is true, and it shall
be recorded in the hearts of the Saints to the worlds end.

Now I shall give you an Answer to what is needful in George Fox his Book, if
there be any thing in it that is not sufficiently Answered already in The
Quakers Neck broken, I am willing to do it for the sakes of some that desire
it, because I hear the Quakers are very brag of this Book George Fox has writ
against me, so they were when Richard Farnsworth printed his Rage and Malice
against me, but did he prosper afterward when I had printed an Answer to it?
For that printed Pamphlet was the occasion of The Quakers Neck broken being
printed; and does George Fox think to prosper now he has manifested himself
what he is? and his great wisdom which some thought he had, will be found but
mere foolishness.

But to the matter in hand. The first Accusation that I am accused with, is as
follows, That I say in The Quakers Neck broken, that the Quakers will not
bestow a penny in any Writings but their own, let it cost them never so much
pains the writing, and charge in printing.

This George Fox says is a lie, known to the Printers and Stationers, and
Booksellers at London: and George Fox has called me a Lier seven times for
this one lie, as he calls it, yet I shall make it appear I told no lie in those
words, to say the Quakers will not bestow a penny in any Writings but their
own, let them cost ever so much pains the writing, and charge the printing.

CHAP. II. Lodowick Muggleton's Answer.
FIrst, I would have the Reader to mind the ignorance and foolishness of this
George Fox, he undertakes to answer some things in my Book called The Quakers
Neck broken, and the first thing he begins to answer is the last thing in my
Book, for it is the last page of my Book, and it is a point of the least
concernment to a man's eternal happiness of any in that Book, but George Fox
has made it of the greatest concernment of all the rest; therefore he begins
with that first, and sets it in the Forefront of his Pamphlet, to show his
Masterpiece; for he has set the Cart before the horse, for he begins at the
latter end of the Book and so goes backwards toward the beginning, and charges
me with a lying spirit seven times in this one thing, as if this was the most
heinous sin of all other sins, that to say the Quakers would not bestow a penny
upon any Writings but their own, this is counted a sevenfold worse sin, than
any other sin whatsoever: Let the Reader but mind these things aforesaid, and
what I shall say in answer to George Fox his printed Pamphlet.

First, George Fox has gone on like an unwise, simple, foolish man, no ways in
order, but confused, to begin at the latter end of a Book, and end at the
beginning, and catch a bit here, and snap at a bit in another place, and wrong
the words, and write some part of a sentence that serves his turn, and leaves
the other part out that would make against him, or clear the matter, this he
leaves out. Now I do commend William Smith and Richard Farnsworth, though they
are damned Devils, yet they went orderly to work, they named my words right as
they were set down, and they rayled against me in order, and so went on from
point to point in order: but you George Fox, your Answer is confused, for the
aforesaid Quakers had a great deal more wisdom in their Writings against me
than you have. Because I speak of order, you Quakers may think I mean good
order, and so the aforesaid men were good men, [no] but they went in the method
and order of Reason the Devil; in the wisdom of Reason did they write to me,
and I was well pleased with it, because I knew well enough how to answer Reason
the Devil in his best and orderliest wisdom he has, as is now extant in The
Quakers Neck broken; but you, if you have not attained that wisdom of Reason
the aforesaid Quakers your brethren have attained, for you that are the old Fox
is become more ignorant and foolish in spiritual matters than the aforesaid
that are younger.

And as for that saying of mine, that you make the greatest sin of all, in that
I belie the Quakers, to say they will not bestow a penny in any Writings but
their own, that saying of mine is very true; for my meaning was, the Quakers
would not bestow a penny upon any of my Writings, though they cost never so
much labor the writing, and charge the printing; and so the following words
does clear my meaning; but George Fox has caught at that word of mine [of any
other Writings but their own] here was a word out of joint, and that the Fox
was glad of; for if I had made a distinction between my Writings and others, as
my meaning was, and as my words following did imply, then the Fox would have
had no hole to have crept out at, nor to have called me a Liar seven times for
one: but as for the Quakers not bestowing a penny upon any Writings, though
they cost ever so much pains the writing, and cost the printing, that is very
true; for I do not know any Quaker, that is an absolute Quaker, that ever did
buy any: Also it is credibly reported to me by some that have been Quakers, but
fallen from them, that several of the Quakers have given a charge to others of
their acquaintance that had a mind to buy, to see what was in them, the rumor
was so great; but the Quakers charged those that had a mind to buy, not to buy
any, not to bestow a penny on them, except it were to burn them, saying that if
they had any of my Writings they would burn them, and these were Qakers that
said this; so that this proves my sayings to be true, both by experience and
witness. But George Fox has got the Printers, and Stationers, and Booksellers
in London to prove me a Liar, as if the Quakers had been great Customers to the
Booksellers: I suppose Jacob Behmont's Books were the chief Books that the
Quakers bought, for there is the Principle or Foundation of their Religion; for
they cannot go beyond that, but there they build, this I know by William Smiths
Lettters to me: And you George Fox are far below William Smith in the knowledge
of Jacob Behmonts Writings; and as for what Books else that you Quakers have
bestowed money upon since you were Quakers, I think the Stationers will neither
justify, neither can you show none of any value: but it is not much matter
whether you did or did not, I am sure that saying of mine is true, that you
will not bestow a penny upon my Writings, though they cost much pains the
writing, and much charge the printing: this you Fox does not deny, so that part
of my words are true by your own acknowledgement, so that it is but half a Lie
that you charge me with, in case the words be taken in your sense, yet you
charge this half Lie to be seven Lies. So much for that.

2. L. Muggleton says, It is a vain thing to talk of any Heavenly Secrets to
Quakers, for they will not bestow a penny of them.

George Fox calls this a Lie also, and says, Heavenly Secrets are esteemed of
by them, scornfully called Quakers, and says that Muggletons Heavenly Secrets
are money worth, and may be bought with a price, and complains against me,
because some of the Believers of this Commission would not lend George Fox a
Book of ten shillings price, to peruse, to rayl against, and says the Quakers,
as I call them, are free with their Books to give them to any one to read: but
says, It is a hard thing to get any of my Books; and says, that I would not
let them be brought forth unto light, left my Deeds, Curses, and Lies, as he
calls them, should be made manifest; for the Quakers, says he, in the divine
light, power, and spirit of Christ Jesus do comprehend thy spirit and scoffs,
at the divine light of Christ Jesus within.

CHAP. III.
Answer. THis I do know, it is a vain thing to talk of any Heavenly Secrets to
Quakers, neither do the Quakers esteem of Heavenly Secrets at all, but does
altogether despise and hate them; for what need the Quakers and I contest so
one against the other? or why should I have cursed so many Quakers as I have?
If the Quakers had esteemed Heavenly Secrets, then should we the Witnesses of
the Spirit never have been so contrary to them, as now we are; for the Quakers
have despised Heavenly Secrets more than any other Sect whatsoever. Is not this
a Heavenly Secret to declare what the true God is in his Form and Nature; Also
this is a Heavenly Secret to show what the Right Devil is in his Form and
Nature. It is a Heavenly Secret to know the place of Hell, and the manner of
Torment. It is a Heavenly Seeret to know the Residence of Heaven, and the
Assurance to possess the Joys thereof to eternity. It is a Heavenly Secret to
know really that the Soul or Life of Christ did dye, and that a man's own soul
or spirit must, and does dye. It is also a Heavenly Secret to know the persons
and nature of Angels. These all are great Heavenly Secrets, with many more
Heavenly Secrets declared in our Writings, which depends upon these
aforesaid; but the Quakers despises every one of these Heavenly Secrets; so
that you Quakers cannot esteem of any Heavenly Secrets; so that I know it is a
vain thing to talk of Heavenly Secrets to Quakers. For I will appeal to the
greatest enemies I have of another Opinion that differs from the Quakers, that
if all their Writings which they have all writ ever since they were Quakers, if
they were brought together, there is not one Heavenly Secret in them all; nay,
if it were possible, that all the Quakers speakings were bound in a bundle
together, I know there would not be one Heavenly Secret, or true Principle to
be found amongst them all: they are worse as to that than Sodom was, for there
was one righteous person found in those two Cities, and but one, even righteous
Lot; but let our Writings and Speakings be put in a balance, and yours in
another, and let mine enemies judge, though I know people will be more angry at
my Heavenly Secrets I have written, than they will of those Heavenly Secrets
you Quakers esteem of; for those Heavenly Secrets the Quakers do esteem of,
they are so groundless, that a man can discern no heavenliness in them at all.
And as for those Books my disciples, as you call them, would not lend you, I
will give the Fox a reason for it. The reason is, I did desire those that had
those Books, who believed the matter contained in them, I would not have them
lend them to Quakers; for one Thomas Barnet formerly a Quaker, but afterward
believed these Writings, and he bought one bound together, and he out of love
to Thomas Tailor Quaker, this said Thomas Barnet did lend him his Book,
thinking he might receive it as he did; but this Thomas Tailor despised it, and
not only so, but did abuse the Book very basely by writing upon the Margent,
which thing procured Thomas Tailors Curse; so others of our friends have lent
Books to Priests, and they have abused them in like manner, so that I was not
willing that friends should lend Books to Quakers or others, only The Quakers
Neck broken I was always free they should be lent to Quakers or others: but it
was a Book all bound together, where the Heavenly Secrets are declared, that
you sent your friend to borrow, and because the Believers would not lend them,
you upbraid me, as if I were unwilling my Curses and Lies, as you call them,
should be brought to light. But if you Quakers would have made my Curses and
Lies, as you call them, manifest, and that you Quakers could comprehend me, you
should have bought one of them, and have made it your Church-Bible, and taken
your Text out of it every time you meet, your Hearers would have edified more
by your reading a Chapter in that when you meet together, than by all the
Speakings that ever they heard in their lives, it would have cost you but ten
shillings; you might have had it out of the Church Stock, and have let it to
have been public to all Quakers and others to see, and so you might have made
me manifest indeed; but if you should do so, what would become of you Speakers
of the Quakers? then your light within, and your Christ within you, would come
to nothing, and so you would cheat the people no longer with your ninny-nonies
and senseless words, to stand prattling every week, of words over and over forty
times together, The word of the Lord, and Hearken to the light within you, or
The light within you. Cannot you when the people meet, speak these words forty
times over and so dismiss them, then they would understand what you mean; but
you deliver a great deal of nonsense over and over again, so when the people
are dismissed, they go away with their hearts full of nonsense, and by the next
week they will be emptied again; and these are the Heavenly Secrets the Quakers
feed the people with.

3. Muggleton, thou say thou have a Commission from without thee to preach.

Here Fox has belied my words, and left out some part; for these are my words,
I do say that I have a Commission from God without me to preach: this I own to
be true.

Here Fox says, I have manifested darkness: and, says he, is there any
Commission from God, but the understanding of it is given to man by the divine
light within?

CHAP. IV. ANSWER.
THis Fox calls every thing darkness, though it be as clear a light as the Sun
at noonday; for who ever shall read the following words in that Book, may
clearly see that the light of Christ within a man is not a sufficient
Commission to authorize a man to be a Preacher of the Gospel, though a man may
have understanding in him to do it, yet for want of Authority from a God
without him, he will be punished for going to preach before he is sent: This
may be experienced by all men in temporals, we see a Petty-Constable and other
Officers more inferior, dares not execute their office upon any man, if it be
but to whip beggars, not without a Commission from some person, one or more
without him; and so it is in all places both high and low upon the face of this
earth. It is not the understanding within that will authorize men to supply
such and such places, but it must be Authority without a man; for many men that
are in great and honorable places, have less wisdom and understanding to manage
their places than other men, yet he that has a Commission from others without
him, will commend him that has a better understanding within than himself; yet
you Quakers will undertake to be Preachers of the Gospel without a Commission
from God without you, or without a Commission from Man without you: And because
I durst not preach without a Commission from God without me, and not by the
light of Christ within me, though I had the light of Christ within me more than
any Quaker in the world has at this day, before I had a Commission from God
without me; and if God without me had not forced me to take this Commission
upon me, I had remained quiet and still, and had let Quakers and all other
Opinions in Religion alone; for I was of Jonas his mind, willing to sit still
and be quiet, for I minded no bodies happiness but my own: for I was willing to
go to Tarshish to sit down in quiet, but I was forced by the Lord God to go to
Nineveh, amongst all Opinions of Religion, that I might be envied, hated, and
persecuted of Quakers, and all other Opinions whatsoever; and this I have found
true by experience, and all this came upon me from a Commission of the true God
without me, and this you Quakers calls manifested darkness.

The Apostle might truly say when it pleased the Father to reveal his Son in
him, he preached him; but what is this to Fox the Quaker? The Father has not
revealed the Son in him; for Fox does not know what the Son is: but the Apostle
that had the Son revealed in him, had a Commission from that Son without him:
For sure you Quakers will not be so wicked as to say that Paul received his
Commission to preach within him, when he breathed out threatenings against the
Church of Christ, and went with Letters and Commission from the Highpriests to
persecute those that believed in Jesus that was put to death, and risen again,
and ascended up to Heaven.

Now this Jesus met Saul in the way as he went to persecute the Saints, and
said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Saul answeed, Lord, who art thou?
The Answer was, I am Jesus of Nazareth. Will you Fox the Quaker say that this
Jesus was within Paul, when he spoke these words, or without him? Sure you will
not be so wicked to say Jesus was within Paul, what ever you think: and if you
grant that Jesus was without him, then Paul received his Commission to preach
from Jesus Christ the only Wise God without him: For this same Jesus said to
Paul, Thou art a chosen Vessel, and thou shall bear, or preach, my Name before
the Gentiles.

Now I ask, did Paul receive his Commission to preach the Gospel of Jesus
Christ to the Gentiles, from Jesus Christ without him, or from Christ within
him? Again, who was that which spoke to Paul, when he said, My grace is
sufficient? Was it not Jesus Christ? Was this Christ within Paul then? Was he
not without Paul in that same flesh and bone he suffered death in? This flesh
and bone was spiritual after it rise again, but still it kept it self an entire
body to its self: And are you Quakers so void of sense as to believe that the
body of Christ is in you, and so reveals things to you? So you may see that the
Apostle Paul received his Commission to preach from a Christ without him, and
not from a Christ within him: And I received my Commission from Christ without
me, and not from Christ within me. And Fox the Quaker says, I have manifested
my darkness: But this power I have received from the person of Christ without
me, will be too hard for all the Quakers Christ within them in the world.

4. Muggleton, Thou say the Right Devil became flesh, and the Soul is
mortal; and thou speak of thy knowledge of the Lord, and the Scriptures.

Fox his words. Where do the Scriptures say that the Right Devil became flesh,
and the Soul is mortal? for God breathed into man the breath of life, through
which he became a living Soul, and this breath of life by which man became a
living Soul, is this mortal? is this thy knowledge? Make this good by Scripture.

CHAP. V. ANSWER.
I Have proved these two things abundantly by Scripture in my other Writings,
in The Mortality of the Soul, and The Divine Looking-Glass, and in The
Interpretation of the Eleventh of the Revelation, and in The Interpretation of
the whole Book of the Revelation; these several Books written by us the
Witnesses of the Spirit, has clearly opened those two points as much as any
one thing whatsoever: but I perceive this Fox has seen none of our Books, not
as to read them, but this book only of the Quakers Neck broken, which makes
him so ignorant of the Scriptures, and of what we have written; also its proves
my words true, that the Quakers will not bestow a penny in any of my Writings,
but their own. But because some may see this Answer to Fox, that has not seen
the other books aforementioned, I shall prove by the Scriptures again that the
Right Devil became flesh, and the Soul of man to be mortal.

First, I shall prove the Devil became flesh. Let the Reader mind the
Interpretation of Scripture. In the first Epistle of John chap. 3. verse 8. it
is thus written, He that commits sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins
from the beginning. Mark these words, The Devil sins from the beginning: I
think there is no man so wickedly ignorant to say that Adam was this Devil that
sinned from the beginning, for Adam was never called a Devil not throughout the
Scriptures; for Adam is called the Father of Christ, and there is none will
dare to say the Devil was the Father of Christ; which I shall open more clear
hereafter: but then of necessity there must be some other Devil in the
beginning which all men are ignorant of in these our days, but this Commission
of the Spirit only. Now this Devil that commits sin from the beginning,
must needs be that Serpent that was called A Tree of knowledge of good and
evil, this I declare was the Devil: now this Devil became flesh, and after he
became flesh, then the devil committed sin, and this was in the beginning of
the world; for the faith of the Scriptures goes no further than the beginning
of the Creation of Adam. Now mind the twelfth verse, that proves that Cain was
the first devil in flesh. John exhorting the Believers that they should love
one another, which Commandment was from the beginning, not as Cain, who was of
that wicked one, and slew his brother. Here it is clear that Cain was none of
Adams son; for Adam was never counted a wicked one by any that writ Scripture,
so that Cains father was the devil, that is, he was that Serpent Angel that
deceived Eve, and Cain was the devil manifest in flesh; and that act of murder
which Cain did when he slew his brother Abel, is that sin which the devil
committed from the beginning; for what the devil did before he became flesh,
was not counted by Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles to be sin; for sin was not
imputed to spiritual bodies, but to natural bodies only: for spiritual bodies
are either to receive the fruit of happiness, or the punishment of what they do
in the natural body of flesh.

Again, that I may give the Reader a further proof of this, mind the Scripture
says there are two Seeds, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent,
now God has put emnity between these two Seeds: now I would fain know of Fox
from whence this Seed of the Serpent came. If he shall say, it came from Adam,
as most Quakers do, they blaspheme against God that made Adam in his own image
and likeness, both spirit and body, only Adam was earthly, and God was
heavenly; but Adam had but one Seed in his Creation, but as men are generated
they come to have two Seeds in them; so that this Seed of the Serpent must
needs be from the fallen Angel that deceived Eve, who was called A Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil; and this Seed of the Serpent that should be at
enmity with the Seed of the Woman, it is the devil in flesh; for God owns the
Seed of the Woman to be his own Seed, so that Cain was the devil became flesh,
blood, and bone: and that seed of Reason in Cain being now become mortal, which
was immortal before Eve ate of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, it comes
to commit sin from the beginning, and to generate and bring forth millions of
devils of his own seed and nature, and so the enmity of the two Seeds continues
from generation to generation to the worlds end.

For we read in Scripture that Cain is the Father of all wicked men and women,
and that wicked men and women are his children, as the Reader may see in
Matthew how the devil tempted Christ, that devil that tempted Christ was a man,
yet called a Devil, as you may see Deuteronomy the sixth, and the sixteenth
verse, that the Jews that tempted God are called Devils: and when Christ
answered the devil, and said, It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God, but him only shall thou serve: so that rebellious men are called the
Devil that tempt God. And where was there ever given any Law to any other devil
but to man, to serve the Lord his God? So that it may be clear to the Seed of
Faith that man is a devil, and that there is no other devil that can, or does
tempt God, but man.

Again, it is clear that men are the children of the devil: now they cannot be
children of the devil, except they be of his seed begotten of him, and this is
clear by Scripture, as may be read, John 8. verse 44. Christ says to the Jews
that were men, who said they were Abraham's children, and said they were Gods
children; but Christ says these men were the devils children: Ye are, says
he, of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father you will do, he was
a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him; when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a Liar,
and the father of it. Now mind, there never was no liar, nor murderer but man,
and Cain being the first murderer and liar from the beginning; for when Cain
killed Abel, and lied unto God, and said, Am I my brothers keeper? this was the
first murder and lie the devil Cain committed upon earth after the devil became
flesh; therefore called by the Spirit of Revelation of Faith, A murderer and a
liar from the beginning; for then the devil in flesh began to murder and lie,
and so this sin has run in the line of all his posterity from generation to
generation, so that the Reader may see that men are the children of the devil,
and that the devil their father was a man, even Cain. This is the true meaning
of the Scriptures, and from this Cain did Feorge Fox come, and this Cain is his
father, this I know for a certain truth.

And to stop the mouth of that Objection which Quakers and all others do make,
in that Adam knew his wife Eve, and she conceived and bare Cain, and said, I
have gotten a man from the Lord: To this I say, she was with child by the
Angel before: but after Adam and she were put forth of the Garden, that was
from the presence of God, then it is said, Adam knew his wife, and she
conceived and bare Cain, and she said he had received a man from the Lord, and
yet that Cain was none of Adams begetting; for we never read in Scripture that
ever Adam begot Cain, neither is Adam called Cains father; but she was with
child by that Serpent Angel before Adam knew her, but he was but a cloak to
cover her sin; as many adulterous women have been with child by other men that
were not their husbands, yet their husbands have been a cloak to cover their
shame, and the child has been counted her husbands, which was nothing so.
This many can experience if they would, and that many of the Quakers too, when
they were Ranters, if not since; so that Cain was none of Adams begetting,
though he knew his wife Eve.

But some may say, Why did not Moses tell us these things? To that I say, it
was not made known to him, nor to no other till now, but to the Witnesses of
the Spirit only. The condition of Eve was much like the condition of Mary the
Virgin, she was espoused to Joseph before she was with child by the Holy
Ghost; but Joseph never knew her before, nor after she was with child by the
Holy Ghost, till that Child Jesus was born; therefore Jesus is called Emanuel,
that is God with us; that is, God was born of a Virgin. Also Mary is said to
conceive with child by the Holy Ghost, yet if Joseph had known Mary his
espoused wife in the interim of her Conception by the Holy Ghost, it is like
that Mary would have said that she had received her Child Jesus from Joseph
her husband, for she could not tell which got it, if such a thing should have
been: but it was otherwise ordered with her than it was with Eve; for Adam knew
Eve as soon as the Angel had entered into her womb, and then Adam knew his wife
after they were put forth from the presence of God; so that Eva did not know
which she was with child by, the Serpent Angel, or her husband Adam; so that
she might well say, she had received a man from the Lord: but if Eve had not
enticed her husband to know her, that was, eating of the forbidden fruit, she
would have brought forth according to the time of life that very same devil
Cain, flesh, blood, and bone, as she did, if Adam had never known her in that
time; even as the Virgin Mary did the blessed Jesus, the God and Savior of the
Seed of Adam, with flesh, blood, and bone; So that the Reader may see clearly
that Adam was not Cains father, neither did he beget him, for Cain was the
devil became flesh; and this is the Right devil, and you Fox the Quaker are one
of his sons begotten by him.

But to make it more clear that Adam was not Cains father: He could not be
Cains father, and Christ's father also. Now we find by the Scriptures that
Christ does own Adam to be his father, and the Scriptures does own Cain to be
the Right Devil, and the father of all other devils, as I have showed before,
and that Adam is called the Father of Christ, read Luke the third, to the last
verse in the Genealogy, Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth,
which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God: So that God was Adams
Father as he was God, and Adam was Christ's Father as he was Man; therefore
calls himself The Son of Man.

What do you Quakers think the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil was, and that
Serpent that beguiled Eve? Do you look upon it to be some Apple Tree, and the
Serpent to be an ugly Snake? and so this Snake crept up the Tree, and got an
Apple in his mouth, and the Woman took the Apple out of the Snakes mouth, and
so ate of it, and gave her husband to eat, and so brought themselves into this
misery, and all mankind? Do you teach your Hearers this? What is it you teach,
that your Hearers are so ignorant of the knowledge of the true God, and the
right Devil, and of the Scriptures? This is the Faith that other religious men
do believe concerning the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and of the
Serpent: but you Quakers carries it in an Allegory, so that nothing can be made
of it, neither one way nor other. But all Professors of the Scriptures do own
that the Tree of Life was Christ, and I suppose you Quakers do so too.

If you grant that the Tree of Life was Christ, then this Tree of Life could
speak: Now if the Tree of Life did speak, why should not the Tree of Knowledge
of good and evil speak also? If Christ the Tree of Life, because he gave life
to every thing in Creation, so why pray not the Angel be called A Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil? or a Serpent which brought death and misery upon
the whole Creation?

And we read that the Serpent spoke wise words, who said to the woman, They
should become as Gods knowing good and evil: did ever any Snake we call
Serpents, speak such a language? Surely no. I marvel people are so unwilling to
believe that the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil should be an Angel, and yet
speak such God-like wisdom, and has brought such woeful misery upon all the
earth! and very many men and women do eat of the same forbidden fruit now, as
Adam and Eve did then.

And as the Tree was pleasant to the eye, and good to make one wise, is it not
so now with lustful men and women? does not their fancy to one another seem
pleasant to the eye? and acting together has been pleasant to the taste: this
makes many to know good and evil by woeful experience, for this sweetness of sin
is but for a season; for I have known many in my days that have eaten of the
forbidden fruit, men and women both, that have wasted their estates, which was
good and comfortable to them; but now the want is evil to them: they have
spoiled their bodies with excess of lust, they have made their good healthful
bodies rotten with the Pox, so that their good healthful bodies are become evil
and loathsome to their friends; and that which is worst of all, the eating of
this forbidden fruit, they have lost the peace of Conscience, which was very
good, and in stead thereof they have had an evil Conscience, as King Saul,
Cain, and Judas had, always tormenting of them with fear, horror, and the
torments of hell, and thus men and women have known good and evil, by eating of
the forbidden fruit of lust.

This many Ranters were guilty of to my knowledge, neither is your Quakers
people free; for I know of those that have fallen to the Quakers, thinking to
find ease there, but they will find the Quakers Principle but a broken Reed.
These things concerning the Tree of Life, and Tree of Knowledge of good and
evil, are opened more at large in The Interpretation of the Eleventh of the
Revelation, so I shall conclude this point.

2. I am to make good by Scripture that the Soul of man is mortal. This is one
of the easiest points that is to prove by Scripture and experience. These are
the words that George Fox does ground the Immortality of the Soul upon, as
follows. Says he, For God breathed into man the breath of life, through
which he became a living Soul. And then George Fox asks, Is this breath of
life by which man became a living Soul, mortal? And says, Is this thy
knowledge? as if it were impossible for me to answer, or to make good by
Scripture.

CHAP. VI. ANSWER.
THis point has been proved by Scripture in all our other Writings as
aforesaid, and that Book of the Mortality of the Soul, the chief subject it
treats upon is to prove the Soul mortal; but all these things will do Fox no
good, nor convince him of his ignorance in this point. Fox had hard luck that
he could see none of these Writings, for nothing might have better informed him
in these things, but the Book of The Quakers Neck broken only, that makes Fox
so ignorant of all things, for that Book does but name the Heads of these
things, but in the other Writings aforesaid they are more largely expounded.
But to give a little further answer to this point here.

First, I shall prove that breath of Life God breathed into Adam to be mortal,
and does die. Let the Reader mind. I do acknowledge that Breath of Life God
breathed into Adam which made him become a living Soul, it was immortal when it
came from God, but it was breathed into an earthen vessel; Adam being of the
earth, he was earthly, and so capable to be overcome by temptation from a
heavenly body, viz. the Serpent Angel: now Christ being the Lord from heaven,
therefore he was not capable to be overcome by the temptations of earthly
bodies, viz. the Serpent Angel his seed in mortality.

Mind also, this Breath of Life which God breathed into Adam, wherein he
became a living Soul, it was immortal so long as he stood in obedience to God,
and no death could have touched him: but this I must tell the Reader, Adam
could have had no other heaven than this world, he being made of this earth, he
should never have gone higher to the place where God is, the holy Angels, and
all spiritual Bodies are, there Adam should not have come.

But this I say, Adam should have been freed from all sickness, diseases, and
death, and should have lived a Paradisical life of peace upon this earth for
ever, if he had kept that state he was created in. I confess this was a state
that I was always desirous to get into, and I did endeavor much after it, but
could not attain unto it; but when the Revelation of Faith did arise in me, the
Spirit of Faith, which I call the Spirit of Christ, or God, showed me what the
state of Adam was in the state of innocence, and the Paradisical heaven here
upon this earth: but when the Spirit showed me the Form of God, Angels, and
other Creatures in a Celestial state in the Celestial Heavens in all glory, I
thought then that this earthly Paradise, though it had been for ever, very
inferior and below that which I am sure I shall possess.

But to the matter in hand. I shall make it appear that Adams Soul did die,
though it was the breath of God made it live, yet by disobeying the command of
God, this Life must die, as in Genesis 2. and verse 17. For in the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die: Is not this plain that Adams Soul did die,
notwithstanding the breath of Life God breathed into him? this became mortal,
and did die If you Fox shall say the soul departed from the body, and the body
died, this is the opinion of most people, but it is an ignorant dark opinion,
contrary to Sense, Reason, or Faith; for if the Soul slip out of the body, or
depart from it, that cannot be said to die, but to part one from another for a
season; besides the body is a dead lump fit for no use without a soul. Also the
Scripture says, The soul that sins shall die: The Scriptures does not say, the
soul shall slip out of the body that sins, but shall die: it is that which sins
that must die; And did you Fox ever know a body commit sin without a soul? if
you did not, methinks you might be convinced of your ignorance, and teach the
people no more that lie.

Where do you read in Scripture, that ever any bodies were condemned to die? We
read in Scripture in many places of souls that shall die, and souls that shall
be cut off from the land of the living, but never of bodies.

Again, it is said, that Christ poured out his soul unto death: Will you Fox be
so wicked to say that Christ did not die? He poured out his soul unto death:
Death took Christ's soul into it self, that is, death swallowed up his soul. It
is not said he gave his body for a Ransom for sin, but he gave his soul a
Ransom for sin: How should any man be saved from eternal death, if Christ's soul
did not die?

But I know the Quakers look for no benefit from the blood of Christ, all their
happiness it must come from the Law written in their hearts, that they call the
light of Christ in them; for they know no other Christ neither within them, nor
without them. For this I say they that cannot believe that their own souls
shall die, cannot believe that the soul of Christ did die, and so they can
receive no benefit by the death of Christ.

The Reader may see the innocence in the Quakers Writings. Fox says, He does
believe in Christ that suffered, rose again, and ascended; and yet Christ's soul
did not die, according to the Quakers faith: for if they do acknowledge that
Christ's soul did die, they must needs acknowledge their own souls must the
also. And if Fox had believed the one, he would have believed the other, and
never have put me to this trouble to answer that difficult point, as Fox
thinks, to prove from Scripture that the soul of man is mortal; if there were
no Scripture at all, experience would prove that every day we see it with our
eyes.

Also I would ask Fox, or any other, where the soul of Lazarus was those four
days his body was in the grave? I believe Fox will say it was in heaven. To
this I say, that Lazarus his soul was in the grave where his body was; his soul
was dead, else Christ did not raise him from the dead if his soul were not
dead. Mind, if his soul departed out of his body, as most people imagine, and
went to Heaven or hell, then I say Christ would have called to Heaven for his
soul to come down, and go into the body again: if it should be so, then Christ
did not raise the dead, but brought two friends together that were separated
one from the other.

This is the Quakers Faith, and many others besides, but the Faith of Gods
Elect does steadfastly believe that Lazarus his soul was dead, and there in the
grave, and that by the power of Christ's words and groans they entered in to that
dead soul in the grave, and made it quick and live again.

Here you see, Fox, that the soul of Adam the first man did die; And also you
may see that the soul of Christ did die, and that Lazarus his soul was dead,
and all men's souls else since that are dead, because they were mortal. This the
Scriptures prove as much or more than any one thing whatsoever, and this is my
knowledge of Scripture.

And are you, George Fox, convinced yet that your soul must die? For die you
must, even two deaths, a death mortal, and a death eternal: for you that count
it a Lie to say the soul is mortal, and must die, you shall taste of two
deaths, but I shall taste but of one: this I know to be true, and you shall
find my words to be true also.

5. Muggleton, Thou say thou accusest no man of sin, yet, says Fox, in a
few lines after, thou accusest the Quakers of sin and blasphemy.

CHAP. VII. ANSWER.
YOu told a Lie, to say I accuse the Quakers of sin and blasphemy a few lines
after; for I do accuse the Quakers of sin and blasphemy against the Holy Ghost
a few lines before. I said, I accuse no man of sin, but because you began to
write against me backwards, you began at the last side of my Book, and so
answered this backward. I shall bear with that Lie, and look upon it as no
heinous crime in you: but if you had found such a mistake in me, you would have
triumphed as if it had been the greatest sin in me to tell such a Lie: you
would have thought it worse than the sin against the Holy Ghost, which you
Quakers do commit.

But who ever reads that Book may see that I have said nothing but truth, in
what I have written of the Quakers.

6. Page 5. Fox says, The Scriptures speak of the wicked one, and wicked men,
but where, says he, does the Scriptures speak of a right devil?

CHAP. VIII. ANSWER.
Does the Scriptures speak of a wrong Devil? there must needs be either a right
devil, or a wrong devil, else the Scriptures would never have spoken so much of
a devil, if there had been no devil at all: For you Fox neither declares what
the right devil is, nor what the wrong devil is; so that no man can tell where,
nor what the devil is.

It seems Fox the Quaker thinks it a hard thing to prove by the Scriptures a
right devil: Do you not read in Scripture that Cain is called a devil, who was
a murderer and a liar from the beginning? and the devil was those Pharisees
that disputed with Christ, the devil was their father, Christ said. And was not
Cain their father a right devil? Is there any sin committed, but it is the
devil commits it? As John says, He that commits sin is of the devil; and if
he that commits sin be of the devil, then his father that begat him must needs
be a right devil. Was not Judas that betrayed his Lord, was not he a right
devil? Sure if he had not been a right devil, he would never have done that
wickedness: And you George Fox, had not you been a right devil, you would never
have blasphemed against the Holy Spirit that sent me, as you have; but you
being ignorant who was your father, even Cain, you know not what your self is:
and that you are the son of a right devil, and so in process of time you your
self are become a right devil, and you shall be recorded so by the Commission
of the Spirit of Truth to the worlds end.

7. Page 7. Fox says, The Quakers do not deny Christ's flesh and bones, who
remain in the Heavens until the Restitution of all things.

CHAP. IX. ANSWER.
HEre people may see the confusion of the Quakers Principles, who say Christ is
in them, and yet Fox says the Quakers own the flesh of Christ that suffered.

Here Fox says, The Quakers does not deny Christ's flesh and bones, who remain
in the Heavens until the restitution of all things. But this the Reader may
mind, that the Quakers do not believe that Christ's flesh and bone is now in the
Heavens, though Fox does not deny it, because the Scriptures are so full to
prove the same. For if the Quakers should really believe it, their Principle of
Christ within them would quickly fail and vanish: for I never knew none that
would avouch that Christ's flesh and bone was in them, neither will any of the
Quakers avouch that they do believe Christ to be a person now in Heaven above
the stars in that same flesh and bone he suffered death in; if they should do
so, how then would all the Quakers do to get Christ within them? there could
but one Quaker get Christ in him at a time, and when Christ comes out of one,
he must go into another.

But the Quakers Christ is nothing else but an Allegory, and so Fox shows in
his following words; For, says he, we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone: so that flesh and bone of Christ that was reserved in the Heavens, which
Fox does not deny in the words before, but in the latter words, the Quakers
flesh and bones are become Christ's flesh and bone; so that Christ has no flesh
and bone of his own, but what flesh and bone Christ has of the Quakers. But I
shall speak of this more in another page; but the Reader may a little see Fox
his Allegorical Juggle.

8. Page 6. Fox calls me a lying spirit, because I cursed some Quakers for the
sin against the Holy Ghost, and says, Christ said, Bless, and curse not, who
is the Chief Judge.

CHAP. X. ANSWER.
I Do acknowledge that Christ is Chief Judge both of quick and dead: but Christ
has chosen me to be chief Judge in his stead here upon earth in spiritual
matters, and I had my Authority from Christ the only God without me, and not
from Christ within me, and by this Authority from Christ without me, who is now
in Heaven above the stars, in that same flesh and bone he suffered death in,
only that flesh and bone is spiritualized and glorified, have I power over you
Quakers, and that light of Christ within you also, and look what Judgment I
have given upon you Quakers and others, it will surely come to pass upon you;
neither can you, nor your Christ within you, deliver you from it.

And as for that saying of Christ who said to his disciples, Bless, and curse
not, this will not deliver you Quakers at all from what I have said. But for
the Readers satisfaction I shall open those words of Christ more plain
hereafter.

9. Page 7. Fox is very angry with me, because I say that Cain was not begotten
of Adam, but was begotten by the Reprobate Angel; but I have sufficiently
opened and proved this thing by the Scripture before, so I shall say no more of
it here.

10. Page 10. Fox after he has railed at me, because I say the Quakers Christ
has never a body; and Fox knowing it to be true, thought he should bring
himself into a praemunire, if he should deny Christ's body without him, the
Scriptures being so clear for it, Fox does confess Christ has a body, for,
says he, that which descended, ascended; And, says he, the Quakers are of his
body: and as the Scriptures says, A body have thou prepared.

CHAP. XI. ANSWER.
HEre Fox shows himself a mere Juggler, for he confesses Christ has a body,
but never confesses that this body of Christ is at a distance from the Quakers,
neither does Fox acknowledge that Christ's body is in a distinct place by
himself; for, says he, that which descended, ascended: And, says he, the
Quakers are of his body, as the Scriptures says, A body have thou prepared me.

Mind: Fox does not say, that which descended was a body, nor that which
ascended neither; for Fox his meaning is mystical, and so he thinks the
Quakers are flesh of Christ's flesh, and bone of Christ's bone, of Christ's
mystical body as they conceive; so Fox owns Christ to have a mystical body, and
so the Quakers comes, as they say, to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh; and so that body which was prepared for Christ, the Quakers believe
their flesh and bones is that body which the Spirit of Christ does dwell in,
and that is that body the Scriptures says is prepared.

So that the Quakers do deny that Christ has a body of flesh and bone distinct
of his own, at a distance from them; for if they should acknowledge, as I said
in The Quakers Neck broken, that Christ has the same flesh and bone that
suffered, still distinct of himself, though glorified flesh and bone, yet it is
a distinct thing of it self, even the person of a man, and cannot, nor is not
within any man whatsoever; I say, if the Quakers should own this indeed, their
Principle of Christ within them would vanish like smoke.

For this flesh and bone of Christ his own person, was that body prepared for
the Godhead life to dwell in, as the Prophet speaks, and that which the
Apostle says, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in Christ: And this
flesh and bone of Christ was that body prepared for the Godhead to dwell in.

Now will any man be so senseless to think this body of Christ to be within a
man? for he that can get Christ's body of flesh and bone into him, he will get
the fullness of the Godhead also into him; so that he that can do this will be
a God, and not a man: so that I have told no lie, but truth, when I said the
Quakers Christ has never a body, for which Fox is very angry with me, and
calls me Liar.

Yet let the Reader but mind Fox his words, when he does seem to own a body of
Christ, his words are so dubious, and so dark, that none but the Spirit of
Truth could find out the cheat of these Quakers: what could any man that has
not the true knowledge of the true God, and the right Devil, and the knowledge
of the Scriptures, say to these things, this Allegorical Cheat and Deceit, it
being so coucht under the words of the Scriptures? For this is to be minded by
the Reader, that the Quakers never gives no Interpretation of Scriptures,
neither in writings nor speakings. This Fox has spoken of several places of
Scripture to prove me a Liar, but has given the Interpretation of none.

Only he has named the words, and rayled against me, and so he has left the
Scriptures, and the Apostles words, and me together, to dispute out the Quakers
Principle of Christ within them. And because Fox has not opened those
Scriptures he quotes to prove Christ within, and that the Quakers are of
Christ's body, I shall unfold those places of Scriptures which the Quakers
ground upon.

Col. 1.27. It is thus written, To whom God would make known what is the riches
of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the
hope of glory. This is one of the Quakers chief Scriptures to prove Christ
within them. So Romans 8. and 10. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because
of sin. So 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith,
approve your selves how that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates. So
Galatians 2. and 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
me and gave himself for me.

These are the chiefest places of Scripture the Quakers have to prove that
Christ is in them. Let the Reader mind the Interpretation as follows, and
you may see that the Quakers are mistaken both in the thing it self, and in the
person and persons to whom these words were spoken. First, the person that
spoke these words, it was Paul who had a Commission to preach Christ unto the
Gentiles, and this Commission to preach Christ was from Christ without him, as
I showed before: and the persons he directs these speeches or words unto, they
were to such men and women that did seem to receive Paul's doctrine, and
doubtless many of them did truly believe that Christ which suffered, rise
again, and was ascended up to Heaven, according to the preaching of Paul and
the rest of the Apostles, was the Christ the Savior of the world; and that this
Christ was without them in his person, though by faith Christ may be said to
dwell, or be in a man.

Also Paul and these Believers he preached unto, did believe the blood of
Christ which was poured out unto death, that the believing of this would purge
their consciences from dead works, to serve the living God; for Paul expresses
as much in the same verse: For, says he, I live by the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. So that it may be clear to those
that have any true faith in them, that Paul and the rest of the Believers had
Christ in them no otherwise than by faith in the Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension of that Christ without them, and so Christ dwells in true Believers
hearts by faith, according to that saying, Ephesians. 3.20. that Christ may dwell in
your hearts by faith; And so when men have true faith in Christ's Death,
Resurrection and Ascension without them, they may be said to have Christ in
them the hope of glory; for the faith of Christ, or faith in Christ without
them, gives hope to the mind that they shall behold that glory Christ without
them is in; and so by faith a man comes to know that he is no reprobate.

For a man that has true faith in Christ without him, may be said to know that
Christ is in him, and that he is no reprobate: And this is that great Mystery,
Christ in you the hope of glory; for it is a great Mystery to understand God
manifest in flesh, and to become very man in one single person, even the Man
Christ Jesus, and he to die, rise again, and ascend from whence he came; this
is a great Mystery indeed, and few can comprehend it, but Faith does see it,
and understand it, and where ever it is truly believed, that man may be said to
have Christ in him the hope of glory, and to know that he is no reprobate,
because the Seed of Faith, which is Christ's Seed, is in him, and that Seed acts
it self forth to lay hold of that person of Christ without him, and so gives
assurance of everlasting life in a man, and so Christ may be said to be in a
man.

For the Seed is counted sometimes for the thing it self, so that if a man does
not really know in himself that he has the Seed of Christ in him, and that is
known by actual believing him that is sent, that man is a reprobate to himself,
and has not the hope of glory in him, and so Christ is not in his heart by
faith. This is the true Interpretation of those Scriptures, and of the Apostles
mind.

CHAP. XII.
2. I Shall open the Quakers Cheat concerning their bodies being flesh of
Christ's flesh, and bone of his bone, and those Scriptures interpreted they
ground that Conceit upon. First, Romans 12. and 5. Paul says, So we being many,
are one body in Christ. So 1 Cor. 12.12. For as the body is one, and has many
members of that one body, so also is Christ. So Ephesians. 5.30. For we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone. So Col. 1.21. And you that were
sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled in the body of his flesh, through death. These be the chief places
of Scriptures the Quakers do prove themselves to be flesh of Christ's flesh, and
bone of his bone: and for want of explaining these words, making no
distinction, they cheat many ignorant people of the peace of their minds, and
of the knowledge of the true body of Christ without them.

Let the Reader but mind the words of Paul before, and they may easily see
that Paul's mind was quite contrary to the Quakers; for the Apostle speaks of
Believers being Christ's body, and members of Christ's body, no otherwise than he
did of Christ's being within the Saints, as I said before, that is, by the union
the Saints have with Christ by faith in the true Preachers of the Gospel, they
come to be members of Christ's body, and so called the body of Christ the Head,
as you may see, Romans 12.5. and 1 Cor. 12.12. and Ephesians. 5.30. and Col. 1.21.
These places all prove that the Saints being true Believers are counted the
members and body of Christ, in respect of that union they have with Christ by
faith in his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, knowing that Christ's body
lives for ever, and that his blood has redeemed their souls from eternal
death, and knowing he is ascended to possess a personal glory, and to prepare
Mansions of personal glory for his Saints, and those that are truly united to
him by faith, may be said by Paul to be members of Christ's body, and to be
Christ's body: but this body is but by the union of faith in Christ, and by the
way of comparison; for this body has never a head, but the whole Body and
Person of Christ without the Saints, is the Head of this Body; so that if
Christ had never a body of his own, but the Saints bodies, as the Quakers do
vainly imagine, he would be but a sad Christ. And because you may see that the
Apostle did mean no otherwise than I have said; For, says he, in Romans 12.4, 5.
as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office;
so, says he, we being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one
of another.

So that all true Believers, though some be Prophets, Apostles, or any other
gifts of the Spirit that any man has, it is given for the good of others, who
are members of the same faith with him, and so all that are partakers of the
same faith with him, if they be ever so many, they all make up but one body of
Christ, even as all the members of a man's body makes up but one body.

But all this while these members that makes up one body, what will this body
signify without a head? Now those natural members that makes up a natural
body, what will this body signify if it has never a head? So it is with true
Believers, if there were never a Head of this Body of Faith without men, even
Christ Jesus, where then should the motions and acts of Faith in a man repair
to have union and communion with their Head Christ Jesus? Must they go into
themselves to find Christ their Head there? Surely no: but the motions and
acts of Faith that does arise from the Seed of Faith, which is the Seed of
Christ in every true Believer, whereby he comes to have union with Christ their
Head, and so he is made a member of Christ; and so all the Believers that have
been from the beginning, and shall truly believe, to the latter end of the
world, they make up but one body of Christ, and this body is called Christ's
Body, but by virtue of union of Faith, and not by Christ's being essentially in
men, as the Quakers do vainly imagine. The Apostle sufficiently clears this
thing in those places aforementioned, so that I need speak no more of it here.

But I shall give the Reader to understand the difference between that body,
that is called a body by union, and that body that is so in it self. As for
example: A woman is said to be flesh of her husbands flesh, and bone of his
bone, as Adam said concerning Eve his wife; So Ephesians. 5.31. For this cause shall
a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they
two shall be one flesh. Here the Reader may see that a man and his wife are
made one flesh, by virtue of union and institution: now they are not really one
flesh, but they are made one flesh by union and institution, as aforesaid; for
when a man lies with a harlot, he makes himself a member of a harlot, by that
union, and so the harlot is made one flesh with this man. Now this man is none
of her flesh, nor she his not really so; for some men do abhor it should be so,
yet by union with a harlot many times men come to be flesh of her flesh, and so
are become diseased with her disease, even with the Pox, so that these are
become double flesh of one another flesh by that union they had with each
other; these things I have known by Ranters and others.

Now mind the distinction: a child that a man begets of his wife, is more
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, than his wife is: why? because the
child is indeed flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, because children
came out of the man's loins, as the twelve Patriarchs came forth of Jacobs
loins: now these were really flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone naturally
so, and not by union, as a man and his wife that were two, are by union made
one flesh.

So likewise the Scriptures speaks of two sorts of bodies, as that in 1 Cor.
15.44. there is a natural body, and a spiritual body; a celestial body, and a
terrestrial body: now these bodies cannot go one into another, but mortal
bodies may be made spiritual bodies, and spiritual bodies may be made mortal
bodies by the power of the Creator, as it were by the Serpent Angel, he was a
spiritual body when he deceived Eve, but when he was made mortal, he was called
Cursed Cain: So the Lord from heaven was a spiritual body before he
over-shadowed the Virgin Mary, but afterward this spirit al body was a pure
mortal body, and that mortal body was caned A Blessed Jesus. This is the great
Mystery to the world! and this Jesus is that God that prepared a pure mortal
body for himself, that he might be capable to be put to death in this body, to
redeem the lost Seed of Adam: And this is that body I say is not in the
Quakers, neither are the Quakers of Christ's body by union, nor flesh of his
flesh, nor bone of his bone not by union, and those Believers were the Apostle
writ unto; for the Apostle was chosen of Christ without him, and had a
Commission to preach Christ to others, and those that did believe his
Commission were one in faith with him, and so they by faith might know that
Christ was in them, except they were reprobates; that is, except they were
unbelieving: for if they had faith in the true Christ which he had taught them,
then Christ did dwell in their hearts by faith, and they should know by faith
in themselves that they were not reprobates; and by the union they should have
with Christ by faith, they should become members of Christ, yea, they should be
counted flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; This is the true meaning of
the Scriptures.

But the Speakers of the Quakers have no Commission from Christ to preach, as
the Apostles had, neither have the Believers of the Quakers any true faith in
Christ's person, or body, without them, and so the Speakers and Hearers are both
in the state of reprobation, neither does Christ dwell in their hearts by
faith; for true faith they have none, but the faith of devils: And that which
they call the Light of Christ in them, is nothing else but the Light of the Law
written in their hearts, for true faith in Christ's person they have none; so
they call the Light of the Law in them, the Light of Christ, because the Law
convinces them of sin.

Now this Law written in the Quakers hearts, is the light of Christ's Creation,
and this light of the Law that Christ has written in the heart of man, it is
written in the heart of every devil, and so in the heart of the Speakers of the
Quakers, and they teach their disciples to harken to the light within them, and
says Christ is in them; but this is no saving light, neither is Christ within
them, neither are the Quakers members of Christ's body, nor bone of his bone,
nor flesh of his flesh; for they have no faith in his person without them, so
that Fox his Cheat and Deceit is made manifest by the Scriptures being
interpreted.

11. Page 11. Fox is very angry with me for saying, Reason is the Devil, and
yet, says he, thou give a reason for what thou do: and because I give a
reason of my doings, therefore, says he, I am judged out of my own mouth to be
the Devil, Reason.

CHAP. XIII. ANSWER.
HEre Fox the Quaker has showed himself an ignorant devil, that cannot give a
reason of the hope that is in him, but for fear he should be counted a devil,
takes up other men's words, and the Scriptures must give a reason for Fox, how
that he is no reprobate, because the Scriptures says to Believers in that
time, Know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? And be ready
to render a reason of the hope within you: But Fox himself has no knowledge
but that he is a reprobate, but I perfectly know that Fox is a reprobate, and I
can give a reason why he should, and will be damned to eternity, though Fox can
give no reason for it. What would Fox have done if he had not had other men's
words to prove Christ within, and to give a reason of the hope they had in
Christ? for Fox has no interest in the Scriptures. But I shall open this point
something more hereafter, where he speaks of Reason, in the 19th page of his
Pamphlet.

12. Page 11. And Muggleton says, he rejoices in his Cursings, and them that
he does Curse and Sentence, shall never see any other God, or Judge.

But, says Fox, how now Muggleton, art thou become God, and Judge? Must not
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to have their sentence and
reward from him, whether they have done good or evil?

CHAP. XIV. ANSWER.
DO you Fox, and the Speakers of the Quakers, indeed believe that you shall
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive the reward of deeds done
in your bodies, whether good or evil? If you do, I shall say this unto you,
that when you do appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, John Reeve and my
self shall be there also, and look what Sentence and Judgment we have given
upon you and others here upon earth, the same Sentence will Christ give when
you appear before his Judgment Seat; and look what blasphemy against the Holy
Spirit you have committed in this natural body you now have, you shall have the
punishment of that blasphemy against the Holy Ghost that sent us, punished in
that spiritual dark body you shall have, when Christ does raise you again, and
then you shall know that you did appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
when you appeared to resist the Holy Ghost in us the Witnesses of the Spirit;
and look what Judgment and Sentence we the Witnesses of the Spirit have given
you here in this world, the same Judgment and Sentence shall be upon you in
the world to come, even to eternity. And when you Fox appeared before us, to
resist the Holy Ghost in us, then did you appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and look what Judgment I have given you and others, it may be said to
be the Judgment and Sentence of Christ, and that you appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ.

As it is in all Courts of natural Justice, when men are condemned by the Judge
for the breach of the Law, does not such an one appear before the Judgment Seat
of the King? What are all Courts of Justice, but the Judgment Seat of the King?
and whosoever is justified or condemned by the Judges of these Courts, they may
be said to be justified, or acquitted; or judged, or condemned before the
Judgment Seat of the King.

In like manner it is with the Judgment Seat of Christ, Christ is the chief
Judge and King of Heaven and Earth, yet he has given power to his Prophets,
Apostles, and Witnesses of the Spirit, to be Ambassadors and Judges in his
stead, as it is with Earthly Kings, so that who ever appears before the true
Ambassadors of Christ, they do appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and
look what Judgment the Ambassadors, who are Judges, do give upon a man; if
justified, then Christ justifies; if condemned, then condemned, and there is no
appealing to any other; So that you Fox, you have appeared before the
Judgment Seat of Christ already, and have received your Judgment and Sentence
already, but the execution of it is not yet come: and when you appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ as you mean, and I shall be there also, and look
what Sentence I have passed upon you and others here, the same shall I pass
upon you. When Christ which is my Life, does appear, then shall I appear with
him in glory, and shall sit upon a Throne of glory, and shall judge you wicked
despisers of a personal God, with the same Sentence of eternal Damnation, as I
did when I was here in mortality; and then shall you Fox know to your endless
misery, that God gave power to a mortal man like your self, to give Judgment
and Sentence of eternal Damnation upon you, though you despise and scorn that a
mortal man should give Sentence upon you Speakers of the Quakers and others,
but you shall find the Sentence of a mortal man as really true upon you, as if
the Immortal God himself had passed it upon you. But the Reader may find this
more largely opened in The Quakers Neck broken.

But to make it appear more plain to the Reader, that the Judgment Seat of
Christ is in this world, as well as hereafter, and that all Prophets, Apostles,
and true Messengers and Ministers of Christ, if they be chosen by him, they are
Judges; and those that do appear before them, or any of them, they may be said
to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and look what Judgment Christ's
Judges, which he has chosen and given them a Commission, does give Sentence
either of Justification or Condemnation, they received this Sentence before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, because these Judges are chosen by him, as it is with
other Judges in the temporal, as aforesaid.

This I shall make more appear by Scripture, as Mat. 19.29. where Christ says
to his twelve Apostles, You, says he, shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel. Now let the Reader mind: These twelve Apostles
had the Keys of Heaven and Hell given them here, and they had power to remit
sins, and to retain men's sins, that is, they had power to forgive sins, and
power to retain sins; that is, they had power to justify that man or woman
that believed their doctrine, and they had power to condemn those that
despised, and did not believe their doctrine: now these people so justified and
condemned by these Apostles and true Preachers, they did appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, for they were appointed Judges in his stead; and that
the Reader may understand how these Apostles should judge the twelve Tribes of
Israel, I declare unto you thus.

That these Twelve had their Commission from Christ to preach the Gospel of
Christ, unto the twelve Tribes of Israel, though many Gentiles believed also,
yet Paul was chiefly sent unto the Gentiles, and chosen of Christ to preach him
unto the Gentiles; but the other twelve Apostles their Message was chiefly to
preach Christ unto the twelve Tribes of Israel, which were the Jews in their
time, and as many of those Jews as did believe in these twelve Apostles
Doctrine, concerning Christ's Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and other
things belonging thereunto, which they preached, I say the Apostles had power
to give Sentence of Blessedness upon those which did truly believe their
Doctrine, and that their sins were forgiven them, and so they came to be
justified in their own consciences, justified before God, and so had peace with
God.

So on the contrary, those that did not believe the Apostles Message, but
rather despised it, spoke evil of it, and persecuted it, calling it Blasphemy,
Heresy, Deceit, and Lies, which many of those Jews did, the Apostles had power
to pronounce and condemn those unbelieving Jews who despised and spoke evil of
the Doctrine of Christ: Also they had power to retain their sins, so that God
should never forgive them, so that they should never be forgiven in the
conscience, nor forgiven of God: So that these twelve Apostles does judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel here in this world; some they have judged eternally
happy, because they believed their report; others they judged eternally damned
for their unbelief and despisings, as aforesaid; so that the Apostles did judge
the Twelve Tribes of Israel in their time, as aforesaid; and this Judgment of
theirs is the Judgment Seat of Christ, and these twelve Tribes were before the
Judgment Seat of Christ so long as the Apostles Commission lasted, which was a
matter of three hundred and fifty years after Christ's death; So that these
twelve Apostles may be said to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel here in this
life, by their Doctrine of Christ.

Also it may be said that the twelve Tribes of Israel did appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, for many of them were justified by faith in Christ,
and many were condemned by unbelief in Christ, so that every one had the
Sentence in themselves by the Apostles judging, whether happy or unhappy; and
for this faithful service the twelve Apostles have done in this life, in
judging according to their Commission, they shall sit upon twelve Thrones of
Glory in the Resurrection, and shall give the same Judgment upon the twelve
Tribes there, as they did here: that is, they will justify the same Sentence
of Salvation and Damnation upon the twelve Tribes of Israel, as they gave here
in mortality; they will justify the same before Christ their King, when they
do sit upon twelve Thrones of immortal Glory, and many that believed them here,
shall see them in that glory; and many that were condemned here, shall see in
their own consciences that their Sentence was true, even as the Rich man did
that was in hell.

CHAP. XV.
SO likewise Moses and the Prophets were Judges, and did judge those that
believed their Report, to be happy; and those which did not, unhappy; as you
may see John 5.25. In that Chapter the Jews do upbraid Christ, as if he did
accuse the Jews worthy of condemnation, for not believing in him; But, says
Christ, do not you think that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one,
says he, that accuses you, even Moses in whom you trust; for, says he, had
you believed Moses, you would have believed me, for he wrote of me. The meaning
is this, That seeing their Fathers did not believe Moses, neither obeyed they
him, but murmured against him, and tempted God at the Waters of Meribah, and at
several other times, whereby their carcases fell in the wilderness, by their
provoking the Lord to anger, in murmuring against Moses and Aaron; and these
Jews in Christ's time being the children of those that tempted God, when they
tempted Moses, they being devils that tempted Moses, yet he being dead, these
their children put their trust in his Writings, and condemns their own Fathers,
saying, Had we lived and seen those things, and great wonders our Fathers saw
Moses and the Prophets did, we would never have murmured against Moses, nor
have persecuted the Prophets, as our Fathers did: But when the greatest wonder
of all that ever God did for the satisfaction of man's mind, was done upon
earth, that is, God manifest in flesh; the God and Savior of the world become
very man, so that men might talk with God in flesh, as a man talks with his
friend.

Even that Prophet that should be raised up like unto Moses, whom Moses advised
the Generations to come to hear him, and all the Prophets foretold of him, yet
when he was come, these Jews did not believe him no more than their Fathers did
believe Moses, but they tempted him as their Fathers tempted Moses: Neither did
Christ accuse, nor judge these Jews, nor their Fathers for unbelief, but leaves
them to Moses in whom they trusted; so that Moses and the Prophets shall be the
Judges of all those that put their trust in their Writings; and who ever did,
or does truly believe their Writings concerning Christ to come, or truly
believe when he was come, they are all justified, and shall be saved by the
Writings of Moses and the Prophets.

So on the contrary, all those Jews that read Moses Writings, and the Prophets,
and professed obedience unto them, yet did not truly believe them, but rather
despised and persecuted those that foretold of a Christ the Savior; and the
children of those Jews persecuted the Savior himself: these, I say, are all to
be accused and judged by Moses and the Prophets, for they made a profession of
their Writings, but understood, nor believed nothing of them; so these Jews
have appeared before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and they will have no other
Accuser or Judge but Moses, in whose Letter men put their trust: So that Moses
will be always speaking in the conscience, as the blood of Abel did in Cains
conscience, fear and horror: And this is the Judgment Seat of Christ that
these men aforesaid shall, and has appeared before; for Moses and the Prophets
were Judges in Christ's stead.

So that all Commissionated men whom God has chosen to reveal the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven to mankind, they are all Judges, and are in Christ's
stead, and what Judgment they give in spiritual matters, Christ does own as
his own Judgment; so that who ever is judged by any of these Judges, they may
be said to be judged, whether it be the Sentence of Justification, or Sentence
of Condemnation, to eternity; and that they received this Sentence before the
Judgment Seat of Christ.

Also these Judges shall all sit upon Thrones of Immortal Glory, in the
Celestial Heavens, being faithful here upon earth, as Moses was in his house,
that was in his Commission of the Law, and the Apostles in the Gospel, and we
the Witnesses of the Spirit, according to the tenor of our Commission have been
faithful also; so that Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, and we the Witnesses
of the Spirit, shall sit upon Thrones of Glory as Judges in the presence of
Christ, our God, our King, and our Redeemer in the highest Heavens. So much
concerning the Judgment Seat of Christ.

13. The same page Muggleton says, Because he has passed Sentence upon the
Quakers, they shall never grow to have more experience in Visions, and
Revelations, but shall wither.

Here, says Fox, are more of Muggleton's Lies, for, says he, the truth
spreads, yea and will spread over the whole world more and more.

CHAP. XVI. ANSWER.
I Do know and affirm, that those Speakers of the Quakers, and others whom I
have passed the Sentence of eternal Damnation upon, that they have not, nor do
grow in any Experience nor Revelation since the Sentence of damnation was
passed on them, as experience does plainly manifest, and many will witness unto
it. And as for Fox himself, what Experience and new Revelation of Scripture
have you had since you were damned a matter of fourteen years ago? Have you
published any other things but what you did at the first? no not so much as you
did at the first; for then it was your Principle of Zeal to fall into
Witchcraft-fits, supposing it was the Spirit of Christ that moved you to foam
at the mouth, and sigh, and groan, and swell with spiritual Witchcraft, and
howl and groan as if hell were like to burst in you; and perhaps a while after
your spirit would break forth into a many non-sensical words, as if the devil
had broke forth out of hell: was not this your practice? and were not these the
most eminent Quakers counted amongst you, who had those Witchcraft-fits? for
the Quakers revelation does arise in them only when the Witchcraft-fit is upon
them; nay, I have known some that have followed the Quakers, desiring to be of
them, and earnestly desiring in their Meetings to have those Fits as other
Quakers had; for they thought such persons who had those Witchcraft-fits to be
much in the favor of God, and that those Fits had been wrought by the Spirit of
Christ, and that he had revealed great things unto them; and because the
parties aforesaid could not produce those Fits in themselves, as they saw
others have, notwithstanding their melancholy life, their framing their outward
aparrel, and observing every motion in the mind, according to the Quakers
doctrine, they left no stone unturned, nor no endeavor neglected in the Quakers
way, that they might attain those Witchcraft-fits, but could not attain them do
what they could: They got the Quakers language of Thee and Thou, but could not
attain the Fits; neither would some of those Quakers own one of these persons
because she had not such Fits as they had, so she was forced to leave them. And
the cause why these persons aforesaid could have no such Fits, it was because
they had talked with me before they fell to the Quakers Principles, so that no
Witchcraft-Fit could be produced in them, though their endeavors were great.

Also I have drove the Witchcraft-power out of Quakers that have been strongly
possessed, so that they have never had Fit more. And as for you, Fox, have you
ever had any Witchcraft-fit since you were damned? did you ever fall into a
swoon, and lie as one dumb? and has the spirit of Reason the devil, which you
call the Light of Christ in you? I ask, has he revealed any mysteries of the
Scriptures in the time of your Fit, since you were damned fourteen years ago?
Is your revelation of Reason to be seen in writing, yea or nay?

Again, has Samuel Hooton, William Smith, Edward Bourn, Richard Farnsworth,
and many others that were damned of late years, have they had any
Witchcraft-fits since? or any new revelation? if they have, let them be brought
forth to the light. Do you George Fox know any Quaker that I have passed the
Sentence upon, that can produce a Witchcraft-fit afterward? If no Fit can be
produced as formerly, then I say no true revelation nor experience can arise in
the Quake^s hearts: Nay, this Sentence it puts a stop to the revelation of
Reason also, else why should Quakers fall so, as you do, from your first
Principle? for you are not like the people you were sixteen years ago, there
were few Quakers then but they had Witchcraft-fits, but now of late I do not
hear of any Quaker that has any Fits, no not so much as to buzz or hum before
the Fit comes. But if you Fox does know any of you Quakers that have any of
those Witchcraft-fits as formerly, bring them to me, or let me hear of it, and
I shall cast out that devil which caused those Fits, so that they shall never
have more, but shall be sensible and in their right mind. So Fox, you shall
find my words to be truth, and no lie, that the Quakers after the Sentence is
past upon them, shall never grow to have more experience in Visions and
Revelations, but shall wither. Do not you, Fox, find this to be true? if you
do not, others will witness unto it to be truth.

But you say, The truth spreads: I know the truth spreads, but not the Quakers
Witchcraft-fits which produced Visions, Apparitions, and Revelations which the
Quakers thought had been produced by the Spirit of Christ, but they were
produced by the spirit of Reason the Devil, in themselves; and these Fits,
Visions, Apparitions, and Revelations in the Quakers are greatly withered away
of late by that Sentence I have passed upon the Speakers of the Quakers, and
others of that opinion, so that those Fits of theirs makes most people ashamed
to own them, which formerly people thought them the most knowingst that was
possessed with a Witchcraft-fit; so that it is plain and clear, and many that
were lovers of the Quakers way of Worship that can, and will witness that their
experience in Visions and Revelation are withered, and come to nothing.

But Fox thinks because a many ignorant people comes to hear the Quakers speak
their ninny-nonies over and over again, therefore the Truth, as he calls it,
spreads, but when it was at the best, it was but a lie that spreads; indeed a
lie will spread very fast, but truth spreads very slowly; for truth was ten
years in the world, and there was not much above forty persons that owned it,
but the Quakers at that time had many thousands that were Quakers, as was
expressed by those five damned Quakers in Eastcheap, mentioned in that Book
called The Quakers Neck broken.

14. Page 14. Muggleton says, He could never find any Quaker that would own
God to be a person in form of a man, which shows the Quakers darkness.

Here, says Fox, Muggleton has showed his ignorance of the Scriptures; for,
says he, the Scriptures says, That God is a Spirit: And Christ says, that a
Spirit has not flesh and bone as I have. And, says Fox, God fills heaven and
earth; and herein, says he, thou have showed thy ignorance and darkness.

CHAP. XVII. ANSWER.
TO this I shall make it appear to the Reader, that my words are truth, and
that Fox has showed his ignorance and darkness, both of Gods filling Heaven
and earth, and that Fox nor the Quakers does not believe that Christ has flesh
and bone of his own distinct of himself, and that this flesh and bone of Christ
is now in heaven above the stars.

Let the Reader mind the words of Christ: His disciples supposed they had seen
a Spirit, these disciples were ignorant at that time as most people, thinking
that Spirits might walk without bodies, or that Spirits might assume bodies,
and appear to men: this ignorant opinion was in the disciples of Christ before
they were endued with power from on high, and this is the general opinion of
all men, but those that have a Commission from God; for if God had never chosen
Prophets and Apostles, and Witnesses, to enlighten the understanding of people,
all people in the world would have believed so; therefore it was that Prophets
caused Kings to put to death all Witches and Wizards that dealt with familiar
spirits, as Samuel did, and King Saul, out of Israel; but all the Nations of
the earth besides did practice Witchcraft, and dealing with familiar spirits,
and did believe that spirits might, and did walk without bodies, and could
assume what shapes they please. The same opinion is now all the world over, and
in the Quakers also; and the disciples of Christ at that time had a smatch of
the Heathen opinion in them, which made them through their ignorance to suppose
they had seen a Spirit without a body to walk before them: but Christ willing
to convince them of that vain and lying opinion says to his disciples, Feel
me, and handle me, for a Spirit has not flesh and bone as I have; as if he
should say, No Spirit can appear without a body, for a Spirit without a body is
a mere shadow presented to your fantasy through your ignorance, as if Christ
should say, do not believe that Spirits can walk without bodies, there is no
such thing, it is but a mere shadow you suppose to be a Spirit, but come to me,
and feel me, and handle me, for a shadow as you take or think to be a Spirit,
has not flesh and bone, nor is of no substance as I am. This was after Christ
was risen from the dead, and before the Apostles had received power from on
high, so that the Reader may see that Christ had flesh and bone after he was
risen from the dead: now I would fain know of the Quakers what became of this
flesh and bone of Christ, where it went, or where it is now? Sure you Quakers
will not say this flesh and bone of Christ is within you, neither will you
acknowledge that the flesh and bone which is the body of Christ risen from the
dead, to be now in Heaven above the stars distinct of himself: for that body of
Christ which was felt and handled by his disciples, was that body that was
prepared for the Godhead Life to dwell in, and to suffer, and when that body
of Christ ascended to Heaven, the Godhead Spirit ascended with it also.

So that there is but one God, and one body of God, so that Christ is God
embodyed with flesh and bone in all things like unto man, sin excepted, as the
Scriptures says; so that Christ cannot be in the Quakers, neither in his body
nor his spirit; neither are they members of his body not by union of faith as
true Believers are; for then Christ has never a body, neither within them, nor
without them; for if they should believe that Christ has a body distinct of
his own, at such a distance and residence above the stars, then I say the
Quakers Principle of Christ within them would vanish like smoke indeed, as it
does with many true Believers that were of the Quakers faith, before they came
to know the true God, and the right devil: but the Quakers are in black, pitchy
darkness, so that it is a vain thing to talk to them of Heavenly Mysteries, as
the Mystery of the true God, and the mystery of the right devil, and how they
became flesh; for the Quakers have got, as they imagine, God and devil, hell
and Heaven, Resurrection, and all within them, so they cannot tell where to
find any God without them, but an Infinite Spirit without a body; also their
devil is a bodiless spirit, they know not from whence he came, notwithstanding
he is in them.

CHAP. XVIII.
ALso Fox says, God fills heaven and earth. Here he repeats Scripture words,
but never gives any Interpretation: he has repeated many words of the
Prophets, Apostles, and the words of Christ, he has named their words to prove
me a liar, but he gives no interpretation, no not one Text that he has brought
against me: I do think he never did interpret any Scripture words in his life.
I marvel how the people called Quakers are satisfied with their bibble-babble,
that never tells what the sense of such words of Scripture are as they so much
talk of, but I cannot expect no other from Quakers, for they are all alike.

So William Smith, Samuel Hooton, Richard Farnsworth, they named many places of
Scriptures, which were other men's words, against me, as Fox does, but never did
interpret any. But Fox, do you conceive that God is so big a bulk, that he
fills heaven and earth with his bigness? how comes it to pass then that the
Quakers bodies and others are so empty? for if God be so big to fill Heaven and
Earth, me thinks the Quakers bodies are but little vessels in comparison of
Heaven and Earth, they are great vessels, and does certainly hold God, and yet
many vast places in the earth where God is not at all, and I know many Quakers
and others that God is not in them at all, how is it then that God fills heaven
and earth? Oh this blind Fox! it is the nature of Foxes to be cunning and
subtle, but this Fox is ignorant and simple to repeat Scripture words and give
no distinction, that is the cause of such gross errors concerning God and
devil; for Fox takes God to be an Infinite Spirit without a body, and this
Spirit without a body fills heaven and earth without distinction, and so Fox
his devil is a bodiless Spirit, so that he can give no distinction what the
devil is, though I know he is one himself: but for the Readers sake I shall
interpret a little how God may be said to fill heaven and earth, as thus: God
is a single person in form of a man, a spiritual person, and no bigger in
compass than a man, and he was so from eternity, even of the same stature as
the first Adam was, therefore said to be made ni the image and likeness of God.
Also Christ is said to be the express image of his Fathers person; the meaning
is this, that Christ was the express Image of God the Father, as he was God in
Immortality and Glory; and as Christ was in mortality and shame he was the
express image of his Father Adam, for the Scriptures calls Adam his Father, and
David is called Christ's Father as he was man; so that Christ being God and man,
so that God is of no bigger bulk or bigness, nor never was, than the compass of
a man, and the first Adam was of the same bigness for compass of person as God
was that made him, and the second Adam Christ, which was God and man, was of
the same compass when upon earth, as the first Adam in the beginning of the
world was, the Scriptures are full to prove this. But it would be too tedious
to speak of them in this place, neither was it my intention to speak of this
point now, only that the Reader may see the darkness of the Quakers, to think
God so big a bulk to fill heaven and earth, and give no distinction how.

This being a groundwork to know what God is in himself, so it may easily be
understood how God fills heaven and earth: he fills heaven and earth by his
wisdom and power, in that he created all things by the power of his word: also
by the power of his word he has planted a Law in every creature according to
its kind, he has by the power of his word written his Law in the holy Angels,
and all other celestial creatures in heaven, and every creature in heaven in
their kind obeys his Law written in their natures by the power of his word, so
that all the creatures in heaven obey him, and sets forth the praise, wisdom,
power, and glory of their Creator, their God, and King, so that heaven is
filled with his glory.

Likewise God has written by his wisdom and power of Creation, a Law in every
creature here upon earth, he has written by the power of his word a Law in
man's heart who is the Image of himself, whom God made lord of all other
creatures; he by the power of his word has placed a Law in the beasts of the
fields, in the fowls of the air, in all sensible creatures has he planted a
Law, and they all obey him in their kind, and sets forth his glory.

Yea, he has by the power of his word placed a secret Law in the Vegetables,
as Trees, Plants, Herbs, and all things of that kind, nay, by the power of his
word he has put a Law in the Sun and Moon, to run their course in their season
appointed.

Also he has placed by the power of his word a Law in the Stars, and Planets,
and in all the Host of Heaven on this side the Firmament; nay, he has set the
Law of bounds to the Sea, and great Waters; all these things, and a thousand
times more has he done by his wisdom and power, and all these things which he
has made by the power of his word here below upon this earth, they declare his
handy-works, and does show forth the wisdom, power, and glory of God their
Creator, every thing in its kind shows forth the glory of God, and so God has
filled the earth with his wisdom, power, and glory, in that he has placed a
Law in every thing according to his pleasure, to set forth his praise here on
earth

And in this sense God may be said to fill the heaven and earth, and yet his
person but the bigness of a man as aforesaid; and he may be called the Great
God, in respect of his great power, but not in respect of his person; for a
King may be called a great King in respect of his great power; as
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon was of great power, as in Daniel 4.20. He was as
a Tree which reached up to heaven. So likewise his dominion is said to reach to
the ends of the earth, as in verse 22. So that it was the greatness of his
power that reached up to heaven, and to the end of the earth, that is, as far
in the earth as his Power, Decrees, and Laws would reach, yet the person of
this great King was no bigger in stature and compass than another man.

So it is with God, though his power, wisdom, and glory fills heaven and earth,
in that he has given Laws, and placed Bounds to all his Creation, as I said
before, yet he himself is no bigger in bulk, nor in compass than a man, as the
Scriptures does in many places prove, and as I have said before; and in this
sense the Scriptures does mean that God fills heaven and earth.

But Fox and the Quakers looks upon God to be so big in his Essence and Spirit
without any body, that he fills heaven and earth, the Air, and all things else
with his great big Spirit without a body, this is the Quakers God, and Christ;
so they can get God in to them, as they think, and then when they part out of
the body they now have, then their spirits goes into God again, so that the
Quakers God and their Spirits does so whip into one another, so that no body
can tell where to find either of them.

This is the Quakers Principle, and their imaginary God and Christ, and this is
that Spirit they call the Spirit of Christ in them; this is that Christ they
are members of, and bone of this Spirits bone, and flesh of this Spirits flesh;
for they abhor such a God that is a person, and can be confined to one place of
residence, but they must have a great infinite Spirit who fills all places, and
all things, which cannot be known nor understood what he is, such a God as this
must the Quakers have, that their spirits may slip into him, when death does
approach; for Quakers thinks their souls cannot die, they look upon that to
come from God, therefore immortal; so they think to slip out of those bodies
they have, and so creep into that infinite Spirit again from whence they came,
as they suppose, for they are of Solomon's opinion, the body to the dust and the
spirit returns to God that gave it; but Solomon was ignorant in this point,
though he was a wise Man in things of nature, and you Quakers will find your
thoughts and conceit in this thing frustrated, and that your souls shall die,
neither shall your souls slip out of your bodies, neither shall it go into God
again, as you do vainly imagine; but as your souls does die a natural death
here, even in the sight of others, so many of you shall die an eternal death
hereafter, in your own bodies; so that God shall be no hiding place for you,
but he will say, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity; for you have been the
greatest despisers and blasphemers against a personal God, and them whom I
sent, of any.

CHAP. XIX.
AGain it will be necessary to give Fox the Quaker a little to understand the
bigness of the right Devil. Fox may remember that I have showed before that
Cain was the first Devil in flesh, and the right Devil, and that the spirit of
the Devil is not body less, as the Quakers does vainly imagine; and this Cain
the first and right Devil was a Man, and of the same stature and bigness as the
Serpent Angel was who beguiled Eva, who was Cains Father.

For Adam was none of his Father, as I have said before, but I perceive that
Fox and other Quakers are unacquainted with the right Devil; so that they
wonderfully strange at my words, to call the Devil a right Devil, they never
heard the Devil called a right Devil before.

I have received Letters from Quakers before, desiring to have it proved by
Scripture, but I perceive the Quakers are unacquainted with the right Devil,
and altogether ignorant of the wrong Devil; for they know neither right Devil
nor wrong Devil: but if Fox the Quaker will but follow my advice, he shall see
a right devil; let George Fox but take a Looking-glass and look into it, and he
shall see his own face, and then he will see a right devil, and he need go no
further to see the right devil, and all other Quakers that are ignorant of the
right devil, let them look into a glass and there they may see themselves to be
right devils, and not wrong devils.

15. The same page Muggelton says, that Christ has a distinct body of flesh
and bone of his own.

To this Fox says, Is Christ distinct from his Saints? then how come they,
says Fox, to be of his flesh and bone?

CHAP. XX. ANSWER.
HEre people may see Fox has manifested his deceit, and how he carries the
Principle of the Quakers in an Allegory to deceive the people; for their Christ
they so much talk of, is a mere Allegory; For says Fox in another place of his
Pamphlet, we own the Son of God, and his flesh, and bone, and blood, who was
Crucified, and laid in the grave and rose again, and sits at the right hand of
God.

Here Fox seems to own Christ's Body without him, but it is in a mystery; for
he does not believe that God has any right hand or left hand either; for
infinite spirits has no hands, there is no need of spirits without bodies to
have hands: but the Reader may plainly see that Fox has a mystical meaning, or
else he grossly contradicts himself:

For, says Fox, is Christ distinct from his Saints, then how came they to be
of his flesh and bone? so that Fox his words here are quite contrary to his
words before; so that it may be clear to those that are not stark blind, that
the Quakers do not believe that Christ's flesh and bone is now in Heaven above
the Star without them; for, says Fox, can Christ be distinct from the Saints?

So that Fox looks upon the Quakers bodies to be members of Christ's body of
flesh and bone, and so all the Quakers bodies which they count members, they
make up but one body of Christ, and Christ's Spirit in them they count the head,
and the Quakers flesh and bone to be Christ's body of flesh and bone; so that
Christ can not be distinct of himself, nor have flesh and bone distinct both in
body and spirit.

This is the Quakers imaginary Christ, which is the absolute spirit of
Antichrist, and this spirit of Antichrist it does reign more in the Quakers
people, then in any people whatsoever. Here people may see what the Quakers
Christ within them is, a mere allegory, a spirit without a body, and their
flesh and bone of their bodies they count Christ's body, and so when their souls
slips out of their bodies, and goes into God, as they imagine, their bodies
goes to the Earth, and so Christ's body goes to the Earth, and his spirit that
is in them, goes into Gods vast spirit that takes all things into its self;
And according to Squire Pennington's saying unto John Reeve, but it was when he
was upon the Ranting Principle, but since that he is turned Quaker; for the
Quakers principle is but the Ranters refined into a more civil kind of life.

For the Ranters were so grossly rude in their lives, that spoiled their high
language, and made people weary of them; but the Quakers that were upon the
Rant are the best able to maintain the Quakers principle of Christ within them,
than any other Quakers that were not upon the Rant, as William Smith, and
Squire Pennington, and others as I know: so that people may plainly see that
the Quakers are led and guided by the spirit of Antichrist, that will not allow
Christ's body of flesh and bone to be distinct from his Saints, but would have
the Quakers bodies to be Christ's flesh and bone; This is that spirit of
Antichrist that denied Christ come in the flesh, as John in his Epistle says;
for who ever denies Christ come in the flesh, and that flesh he is come in to
be distinct of it self from all other flesh, and from all other Creatures both
in Heaven and in Earth, I say is the spirit of Antichrist, which I am sure the
Quakers are, and do more than the Pope, so that the spirit of Antichrist reigns
in the Quakers people more than in the Pope, and his people; the Pope indeed is
more superstitious than the Quakers, but the Quakers are for more
Antichristian than the Pope in their doctrine.

16. Page 15. Muggelton says, this body of Christ is the only God.

This Fox calls darkness, and says God is a Spirit, and God is in Christ, who
prepared Christ a body: there cannot be, says he, Christ without God; and,
says Fox, the Quakers do know Christ in the flesh, and says he feels me.

CHAP. XXI. ANSWER.
THat is as true a saying of mine, as ever was spoken with tongue, that the
body of Christ is the only God, and they are reprobates who dares denit, yet
this devil Fox the Quaker calls it darkness, and says, God is a Spirit, and
God is in Christ: what ignorance of God does this Fox manifest? if God be in
Christ and that body of Christ was Gods body which was prepared for the spirit
of God to be in, then must Christ's body needs be the only God.

For if God was in Christ, and Fox says there cannot be Christ without God,
than that body of Christ had the Spirit of God in that body; then I say Christ's
body must needs be the only God, for God and Christ, says Fox, cannot be one
without the other, then I say where Christ's body is, there is Gods body.

For if the spirit of Christ, and the spirit of God be all one spirit, as I
think no man dares deny, then I say, if the spirit of Christ and the spirit of
God be all one spirit, then I say one body was prepared for this one spirit,
even the body of Christ his own flesh and bone, so that this body of Christ and
the spirit of God is in that body, so that body of Christ being God and Man,
that body may be called, and is the only God, and who ever prays to any
other God, he prays to a God of his own imagination, as all your Quakers do;
yet Fox calls this darkness to say Christ's person, body, and spirit is the
only God; yet he says God and Christ cannot be one without the other; but he
will not acknowledge Christ's body of flesh and bone to be so honored, as to be
called the body of the only God: how confused is this Fox in distinction
concerning God and Christ, they must be both one, and they must not be both
one; one of them must have a body prepared, but the other must be a spirit
without a body; this is the Quakers confused nonsense.

But I know Fox his juggle; he means, as I said before, that the Quakers bodies
are Christ's body, and so Christ's Spirit and Gods Spirit being all one, the
spirit of Christ is in the Quakers bodies, whom he calls Saints, and the Saints
bodies are called by the Quakers the body of Christ, that is prepared for the
spirit of Christ and God, which is all one, to be in.

And this is the Christ the Quakers own to have within them, this is the
Quakers mystery of iniquity to shufle off the belief of the body of Christ
without them distinct from them, even at such a distance as Heaven and Earth,
for his body of flesh and bone is in Heaven above the Stars, but the Quakers
bodies are hereon Earth, and must rot in the Earth; but Christ's body does live
for ever and ever: So that the Quakers bodies are neither members of Christ's
body, nor the body it self, which is prepared for the spirit of Christ, the
spirit of the only wise God, to dwell in; for in Christ's own body of flesh and
bone did the fullness of the Godhead dwell bodyly in him, that is, all the
fullness and spiritual substance, and essence, and being of the Godhead spirit
dwelt in Christ's body of flesh and bone when he was upon Earth, and in no man's
body else; and this body who had the fullness of the Godhead in it, I call the
Godhead Spirit, and that body together the only God, and this body and spirit
of Christ is both distinct from the Quakers bodies, and all men's bodies else.

So that the Quakers Christ within them is a mere imaginary Christ, which the
spirit of reason the devil, the Antichristian spirit has produced in them,
and not the true Christ; So that the Quakers knows no other Christ in the
flesh but that Christ within them, and their bodies is this imaginary Christ's
body; this is the Quakers Christ spirit and body they so much talk of, this I
know to be true, for as I said before, and in the neck of the Quakers broken,
that is the Quakers should own that body of Christ, flesh and bone without
them, at such a distance as above the Stars, to be the only God; then I say
the Quakers principle of Christ within them would vanish like smoke.

And for this cause have I passed the sentence of eternal damnation upon so
many Quakers for denying that flesh and bone of Christ without them to be the
only God; for the Quakers are the greatest fighters against a personal God
without them distinct of himself, of any that profess the Scriptures.

Here Fox says he feels me: that saying of Fox, is true I know you do feel me,
and you shall feel me to eternity, and so shall more of you Quakers feel that
sentence of eternal damnation that I have passed upon you; so that your Christ
within you cannot, nor God without you will not, deliver you from that sentence
and curse I have passed upon you; it will, and shall be written and engraven
upon, and in your hearts of stone, even as the Law that Moses gave was written
in Tables of stone to signify the Law written in the seed and nature of reason
in the reprobate Angel before his fall, from whom all men received that seed of
reason, and so the Law written in it.

So that as you feel the motions of that Law written in your hearts, your
thoughts accusing and excusing, showing the Law written in your hearts, so
shall that sentence I have passed upon you be printed in your memory, always
judging and accusing of you for your blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and
despising the messengers of the holy Spirit, and you shall remember you were
told so by a true Prophet:

So that you shall feel me indeed to your endless misery; and if you do not
find this to be true as I have said, then let the same evil I have judged upon
you, let it be upon me, or if God will not own what I have said unto you
despising Quakers, or if I judge thus without a commission and authority from
the true God, let God judge me with the same judgment I have judged you and
others with: this is as much as can be said by man.

17. Page 19. Muggleton says, the devil so much spoken of in Scripture, is
nothing but the spirit of reason in man that killed the righteous; also it was
the spirit of reason the devil that killed the Just.

Here Fox blames my judgment, and pleads for Reason, as if all reasonable men
had says from those words of Paul, who desired to be delivred from
unreasonable men; For, says Paul, all men have not faith; so that Fox looks
upon the devil to be nothing else but unreasonableness.

CHAP. XXII. ANSWER.
HEre Fox shows his ignorance and darkness both of the devil, and of the
meaning of the Scriptures, and of the Apostles words; the want of distinction,
and the want of the gift of interpretation, is the cause the Quakers are so
ignorant of every true Principle of Faith. For the speakers are the worst of
all men in that, for they never gives meanings of Scripture, nor interprets any.

Look into all the Quakers writings, and they give no meanings, nor
interpretations of any; for no interpretation can be given but there must be a
meaning, as there was by Philip to the Eunuch, but the Quaker names the
Scripture words that are for his purpose, and though there be three places
against that he names to prove to the contrary, the Quaker will give no
meanings nor distinctions, but say, it is the flesh that asks questions: and
this is the cause the Quakers are so unable to dispute, or to answer questions,
or interpret Scripture, indeed I cannot see how they should, their foundation
is so sandy, one puff of wind from a true Messenger or Minister of Christ will
blow down all the Quakers building; For they have none of the true Cornerstone
to build upon, nor that Rock which is Christ without them, but a sandy
foundation of a Christ within them.

Yet because I would not have the Reader unsatisfied that the spirit of Reason
in man is the devil, and that it was the spirit of Reason in man that always
killed the righteous, and the Spirit of Reason that killed the Just, I shall
prove it by Scripture, and shall explain those words of Paul, who desired to be
delivered from unreasonable men, for all men have not faith.

I know it is a vain thing to interpret Scriptures to Quakers, or to give
meanings of Prophets, or Apostles to Quakers; but for the sake of others that
shall read this Epistle, I shall open this point, and prove by Scripture that
the spirit of reason in man is the devil.

First, it was the spirit of Reason in Cain that killed righteous Abel, for
Cain reasoned in himself, why should God accept of Abel and his offering, and
not of him and his offering: he reasoned in himself why should God send fire
from Heaven to testify his acceptance of Abels offering, and send no fire from
Heaven to consume his offering: Also Cain reasoned in himself, I am the
firstborn, and lo God has had respect unto the younger, what reason is there
that God should respect the younger and reject the elder? Likewise Cain
reasoned in himself, that he would kill Abel, then thought he, God will accept
of me, there being none to offer up sacrifice unto him, but himself; so these
reasonings and such like passed through Cains soul before he was resolved to
kill righteous Abel; but this reasoning being too strong for Cain, it made him
resolve to kill his brother when he had an opportunity, which a while after he
had an opportunity, when he met Abel in the field, he talked with him and slew
him. And this spirit of reason in Cain was the first devil in man that killed
righteous Abel, and this was the spirit of reason in Cain, and not any
unreasonableness in him.

For he thought he had reason to kill Abel, seeing God had dealt so by him to
accept the younger, and reject the elder. Also the like case was with Jacob,
and Esau, because Jacob had got the blessing from Esau, he reasoned in himself
to kill his brother Jacob; so he reasoned in himself how he might do this
murder, and not incur his Father Isaac's displeasure, so he reasoned in himself
how he might have opportunity to do it, and not to be discovered that he did
it, and this reasoning in Esau took place in his soul, and gave a resolution to
put it into execution to kill Jacob, because he was blessed, and Esau was not
blessed with that blessed promise that the righteous Seed should come of him, as
his brother Jacob was.

For this is to be minded by the Reader, that the person that is accepted of
God, of that person the righteous Seed must, and does come of; and look what
person is rejected of God, of that person must, and does come the reprobate and
cursed Seed, as it was in Cain and Esau also; Esau would have put his reasoning
of his mind in practice, had not Rebecca his Mother by her revelation of Faith
sent Jacob away out of Esaus reach; but Esaus resolution remained in his mind
still, and waited for an opportunity: now was not this reason in Esau the
devil? for if Esau had had no reason to kill Jacob, he would never have
resolved to do such wickedness, but Esau thought he had good reason to kill
Jacob, who had stolen away the blessing from him, whose birthright he thought in
reason it was, so he thought it was but reason to kill his brother who had done
him that injury or wrong: was not this the spirit of reason the devil in Esau,
that would have killed his brother Jacob of whom the righteous Seed came of?

Again, were not those reasonable men that talked with Christ, to whom Christ
said, Why reason you in your selves, saying, you have Abraham for your Father,
says Christ, God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham, so
those Pharisees and Saducees that came to the baptism of John, Mat. 4. were
they not wise rational men, and endued with a high measure of reason? did not
they ask a reasonable question whether John was the Christ or no? yet John
calls them a generation of vipers: and Christ calls those wise rational men he
talked with, Serpents, Devils, yea, and that the devil was their Father; yet
these were wise, prudent men, endued with a great measure of reason: they were
no distracted men, nor possessed with any witchcraft-fits, as you Quakers are,
but were sober, sensible men, and would ask a reasonable question, and required
a reasonable answer, yet this spirit of reason in these wise and prudent men,
it was but the devil reason in them.

For John calls them a generation of vipers, and Christ calls them Serpents,
Devils, and that they were the devils children, yet these were wise men, endued
with reason, and it was that wisdom of reason in them, that would have intrapt
Christ in his words that they might have had some reason to have put him to
death; for Reason propounds questions to catch him in his words, that they
might have had some reason to put him to death, therefore Reason laid many
snares to catch him.

So they reasoned amongst themselves, if we let this man alone, the Romans will
take away our place and nation, so when they had accomplished their desires by
their reason, and brought him before the High Priest and Council of the Jews,
the Council some of them reasoned that it was fit Christ should die for
blasphemy, in that he made himself the Son of God; others reasoned again that
he ought not to die by their Law, not being justly accused.

So when he came into Pilates custody, what reasoning had Pilate in his spirit?
his reason told him it was better to whip Christ, than to kill him; and Pilates
wifes dream put him exceedingly to reason how he might deliver Christ, but the
reason of the Highpriests and Elders and those that were below them, their
reason was too strong for Pilate, and Pilate thought it more reason to obey
Caesar then his wifes dream, or the reasoning of his own heart.

So that his reason was, he thought better to keep the favor of Caesar, and the
honor of this world than the peace of his conscience and favor with God; so
his reason and their reason together delivered up the Just One to be crucified
by reasonable men, for the Centurion and those that guarded him were reasonable
men also, and thought it but reason to obey their Rulers command in this, as
well as other things: so that it may be clear to those that are truly
enlightened, that the spirit of reason in man is the devil, and that the spirit
of reason did kill the righteous in the beginning, and the spirit of reason did
kill the Just person, even Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XXIII.
AGain, it may be clear that the spirit of reason in man is the devil, as may
plainly appear by those Chief-priests and Elders of the Jews, as in Mat. 21 23.
these Chief-priests and Elders would know of Christ by what authority he did
those things? but Christ's answer was, Is the Baptism of John from Heaven, or
of men? and these Chief-priests and Elders of the Jews reasoned in themselves,
if they should say from Heaven; then their reason told them they fought against
God; and if they should say, John Baptist had his commission from men to
baptize with water, then their reason told them that the people would stone
them:

So they reasoned in themselves it was better to say, they could not tell,
which was a lie against the light of their own conscience. Here the Reader may
see that the spirit of reason in man is the devil; for these Chief-priests and
Elders were wise, prudent men, endued with a great measure of reason, else they
would not have bin chosen Governors and Expounders of the Law and Prophets to
the people of the Jews; yet these reasonable men were devils, even those who
Christ called Serpents, Devils; and John Baptist called a generation of vipers.

So that it may be clear to those that are enlightened, that the reason in man
is the devil, and not only a devil, but a damned devil; for it was the spirit
of reason in man that always blasphemed and fought against God, and persecuted
and killed the Just and the righteous, because God would not accept of the
devil reasons worship, as he did of the Just and innocent worship of the spirit
of Faith: and as for that saying of Paul, who desired to be delivered from
unreasonable men, for all men have not faith, I am of Paul's mind in that, for I
have had experience in a measure of the bad dealings of unreasonable men as
Paul had: but I shall show the cause and why Paul calls them unreasonable men,
it was because the rude multitude, or some envious men upon the report of other
envious people, would beat and abuse Paul without any authority from the
Rulers, or without the command of some officer, as is clear in the Acts
concerning Demetrius and the Goddess Diana: how were some of Paul's friends
beaten by unreasonable men, and Paul himself would have bin served so and
worse, had he not bin rescued by the Town-Clark's speech; which speech of his
showed that the people did that which was not lawful by their Law, therefore
unreasonable, and were in danger to be called to account by the Judges of their
Law, as Deputies and such, and to be punished as offenders of the Law for their
unreasonable practice, to beat and kill men uncondemned by the Law, as you may
see Acts the 19.18. and so in Acts 23.

How Paul had like to have bin killed by unreasonable men, forty of them had
bound themselves in an oath, neither to eat nor drink till they had killed
Paul; yet by the power of the Centurion who had a commission from the
Magistrates to keep the peace, would not suffer these men to do such
unreasonable deeds to kill a man, and not condemned by the Law of reason; for
all Laws are made by the reason of man to govern people by.

So in other places in the Acts you may read how Paul was abused by
unreasonable men, so that Paul had cause, and all Saints else, to desire to be
delivered from unreasonable men; for all men have not says; Paul knowing that
those men that have faith dares not persecute men for consciences, though he
has reason so to do, much less to persecute men for conscience against Law and
reason, as the rude multitude does, and envious men does, having not Law of
their side, but are punished as evil doers by the law of reason for doing
things contrary to the Law, therefore called unreasonable men.

And in this sense Paul desired to be delivered from unreasonable men, for he
knew men that had faith in their hearts would not persecute nor abuse him, nor
kill him, though he should give them cause. This I my self knows by
experience to be true, for I have fallen sometimes into the hands of
unreasonable men, for I have bin pulled out of the house by head and shoulders,
and beaten with their fists, and knocked down in the garden, and when they were
afraid to do me more mischief in another bodies house, they consulted to lay
in wait in all the Alleys to catch me as I came out, that they might do me some
further mischief, and no body know who did it: they thought to break my bones,
if not kill me, but they were somewhat prevented, for we passed through a man's
garden a private way, so that the layers in wait could not catch us until we
came in the fields, but when they heard we were past the corners of the Alleys
which were four, they run, and the boys run to see the men run, that the dust
and gravel did fly about with the sound of their feet, to overtake us; so two
of the men of the most desperatest of them overtook us in the fields, and they
both smote upon my head and neck with their fists a while, and then run to John
Reeve, and struck up his feet, and he fell upon the gravel which made his hands
bleed, so he lay upon the ground, and people came thick about us to know what
was the matter; but the woman came in whose house I was pulled out of, and she
knew these two men that pursued us in the fields, so they left off, and slank
away, lest she should have had the Law of them for abusing us in her house:
There was about a hundred of them in her house and garden when they pulled me
out, these were unreasonable men, such as Paul met withal which he desired to
be delivered from. Several times has John Reeve and my self been in danger to
be abused and spoiled by unreasonable men, and it was upon the same account, as
Paul was.

For he was served so for declaring Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, and that
he was a messenger to declare it; and we for declaring Christ Jesus to be the
only God, and our selves to be commissionated from him, to bless the Seed of
Faith, and curse despisiing spirits to eternity.

So that I am not unacquainted, nor ignorant of Paul's words; For it has been
always my desire ever since to be delivered from the rude multitude, who does
not go by the Law of reason, but does act as bruit-beasts, who have no reason
in them, therefore called unreasonable men. This is a true distinction and
interpretation what the devil is, even the spirit of reason in man, and how
reason always killed the just and righteous Seed of Faith, and what the Apostle
meant when he desired to be delivered from unreasonable men, and who may be
said to be unreasonable men. Much more might be said in this point, but I
suppose there is enough written to satisfy and inform any man that has true
light of faith in him, or has but moderate reason.

Only this may be minded by the Reader, that the Scriptures never called
distracted men, nor madmen, nor fools; nor distempered brained men are never
called Devils, though these men are possessed with Devils; that is, with
distempers of nature, these are Devils that are produced through accidents of
nature, through some extraordinary grief, fright, or losses, and such like,
has broke the brain, and so the seat of reason is quite out of order, and
makes them more strong then when their reason was in order, and so come to be
possessed with devils; these devils are produced by accidents in nature, as I
said before.

So not those devils the Scriptures speak of: we never read that any Prophet,
Apostle, or Christ himself did ever condemn or judge such persons, but rather
pitied them, and healed them, and cast those devils out, as may be read in
Scripture, nay the civil Magistrate does not regard what a madman says, whose
reason is out of order; therefore it may be clear that the most wise, prudent
men, who have the greatest measure of reason in them, are those Devils the
Scriptures calls devils, therefore more fit to be politicians both in Church
and State, neither could unwise man in reason govern this world as it is at
this day.

So that it may be clear to those that are enlightened, that the spirit of
reason in man is the devil that killed the righteous and the Just, for Cain was
a high pitch of reason when he killed righteous Abel, for Cain had the fullness
of the reprobat Angels spirit of reason, it dwelt in Cain bodily, and Esau had
much reason, and Judas, and that devil that tempted Christ was a man, and had a
great measure of the wisdom of reason in him; and those Chief-priests and
Elders that Christ called Serpents, Devils, that tempted him, were endued with
a great measure of reason; they were wise, sensible, sober, learned men, yet
devils, and the spirit of reason in them was the devil that tempted Christ, and
persecuted him, and killed him that was the just One, even the Savior of the
world, of the elect Seed, so that the spirit of reason in man is the devil the
Scriptures condemn, which commits murder for conscience sake, or other ways,
and is that devil that is to be damned to eternity, etc. so that the Devil so
much spoken of in Scripture, and condemned by Christ, it was sensible, wise,
prudent men, endued with a high pitch of reason, and not unreasonable men, nor
mad, frantic, distracted men, as people do vainly imagine, as Fox and most of
the Quakers do.

18. Muggleton says, it was the Godhead life that suffered death.

Fox calls this darkness also; For, says he, Christ he suffered in the flesh;
but he did not die as he was God.

CHAP. XXIV. ANSWER.
HEre Fox has discovered his Allegorical Cheat, as I have made appear before;
For, says he in the fourteenth particular of this Book, the Quakers owns the
Son of God who was crucified, and laid in the grave, and rose again, and sits
at the right hand of God, yet Fox says, the Godhead life did not die. Here Fox
has manifested his great ignorance of life that died; also he has cut himself
off from having any part or portion in the death of Christ, for God and Christ
is all one undividual, or undivided Essence, Person, and Substance, so that
when Christ died, God died; and when Christ's blood, or soul was poured out unto
death, the soul of God was poured out unto death also, Christ being God and Man.

For no man can truly say Christ was God and Man, except he were God as well as
Man; for if there be another God besides Christ, or above Christ, then Christ
is not God as well as man, as people do vainly imagine. Now we read that Christ
poured out his soul unto death, and will any dare to say that the soul of
Christ was not the soul of God? it is high blasphemy to affirm the contrary;
besides it cuts a man off from all benefit of the death of Christ, for no blood
but the blood of a God can speak peace to the soul of man, therefore it is the
blood of Christ speaks better things than the blood of Abel, because Abel was
but a faithful man.

But Christ was God as well as man, yet this Godhead life did die, and
quickened again by its own power, which Abels life could not do, being but a
man. But what should I talk to Quakers of these things, for they do not believe
that any souls die, no not their own, they all slip away, and leave the body to
suffer; so Fox says Christ suffered in the flesh, but his soul did not die,
but slipped out of his body; for he does not own that Christ's soul died, neither
as he was God, nor as he was man. But this is opened more large concerning the
Godhead life dying, in The Interpretation of the whole Book of the Revelation.

But what think you, Fox, did Cain kill the soul or life of Abel, or no? or did
he only drive his soul or spirit out of his body? Surely if Cain had not
killed Abels soul, his blood would never hay cried for vengeance in Gods ears,
and in his own conscience as it did, if his life had not been killed.

What do you think, Fox, that Judas did by his soul when he hanged himself? did
he only hang the body that his soul might slip away, and leave his body to
suffer? What, do you think the sufferings that all Quakers of late, and others
have undergone in imprisonment and banishment, some have died by reason of
those sufferings, but you Quakers do believe it was nothing but their bodies
that suffered, their souls suffered nothing, they slipped out of their bodies,
and went some where, you know not where.

So your persecutors did you no great hurt, only turned your souls out of your
bodies before the time, as a Landlord does a bad Tenant, turns him out of his
house for not paying his Rent, he never kills him: So the Quakers souls are
never killed, they are only separated from the body, so that there is no great
harm done by the persecutors, they do but only separate soul and body one from
the other, they do not kill life in the Quakers, for life cannot die; the body
indeed may suffer, but life cannot die.

This is Fox the Quakers faith, and all Quakers else that I have talked with,
and were not the Quakers blinded and hardened, they would be ashamed to own such
a Principle; for all true Believers are ashamed of the Quakers faith in this
point, nay, men that are mere moral men that have no light but the dictates of
nature, do know by experience, that the spirit and soul of man does die, for
nothing can be capable of pain but life, nor nothing can be capable to die but
life, yet these blind Quakers cannot believe that life can die, as aforesaid.

19. Page 21. Muggleton says, God the King of Heaven is not in this world at
all.

Fox calls this Lies also; For, says he, thou do confess that Christ is God;
and John says, he was in the world, but the world knew him not. Also Fox
says, the true Prophet says he fills heaven and earth: but, says Fox, the
false prophet says God the King of Heaven is not in this world at all.

CHAP. XXV. ANSWER.
THat saying of mine is truth, That God the King of Heaven is not in this world
at all, not in his Person and Essence, or Substance, as is clearly opened in
The Neck of the Quakers broken, which whosoever does read that Book may see
every one of those sayings of mine more clearly opened than in this Treatise;
yet George Fox calls them all lies, and darkness, and such like, though what I
have written in that Book is as true as any Writings of the Prophets or
Apostles, and are of as great Authority, and will prove as true in the end as
theirs.

But to give the Reader a little light to see the gross darkness of this Fox
and his subtilty: Fox brings the words of John, and says, Christ was in the
world, but the world knew him not. Mind! Did I ever deny in all my Writings
that Christ never was in the world? I always in all my Writings justified more
than any man living, that Christ the only God was in this world in the state
of mortality, which the Apostles did witness unto; therefore it is that John
says, Christ was in the world, but the world knew him not, which does imply
that Christ was not in the world in his person at that time when John writ
those words; if he had, John would have said, Christ is now in the world, but
the world knows him not.

So that it is clear to those that know the Scriptures, that Christ the only
God was not in this world at all in the Apostles time: he was in the world
before he suffered death, and the world knew him not; but after he was ascended
he has not been in this world never since, and this John and the rest of the
Apostles knew very well, and they preached this Christ that was in the world,
but the world knew him not, therefore they persecuted him, and slew him, and
would slay him again if he were in this world now, so John knew well enough,
therefore he testified that Christ was in the world in his own person, but the
wicked world put him to death, because they knew him not; but he is not in the
world now, for he is ascended: for John knew if Christ had been in the world in
his person at that time, they would have done unto him as they did before; and
because Christ was not in the world in his person in the Apostles time,
therefore the world persecuted them, and put them to death for witnessing that
Christ was in the world, and they with wicked hands had slain the Lord of Life,
even Christ Jesus, the only God, the King of Heaven.

So that John and I am both of one mind, and of one faith, that though Christ
the only God and King of Heaven, was in this world before he suffered death,
this John the Apostle and I both do believe and know, but since Christ rose
from the dead and ascended up to heaven, John and I do believe and know, that
Christ the only God and King of heaven is not in this world at all in his
person and essence, yet Fox calls this Lies: But the Reader may see if he has
any light, who it is that lies, Fox or I.

Also he says, The true Prophet says, God the King of Heaven fills heaven and
earth; but, says he, the false prophet says, God the King of Heaven is not in
this world at all.

It is a small thing to be called a false prophet by the Seed of the Serpent,
especially by a damned devil; for I know Fox would have said so by those
prophets he calls true, had he lived in that time, and this John and Christ he
so much talks of, would have been counted all false: a false Christ, a false
Witness, what will any Quaker believe that to be a Christ, a Savior that comes
in likeness of man, nay, is a man, sin excepted? No, no, we will have a Christ
that is a Spirit, that may creep into our spirits when he will, and whip out
again when we commit sin, and displease his Spirit, such a Christ we own that
has never a body of his own, but is all Spirit, that fills every Quakers body
with his Spirit, and heaven and earth also. What, will you persuade us to
believe that Christ is a man, Christ is God, and admits of no form, so thou
John art a false witness, to persuade us to believe in a man to be Christ, or
God the Savior of the world; this I know would Fox and the rest of the Quakers
have said by those he calls now true prophets they being dead, and by Christ
and the Apostles, as he does by me.

For when they were alive on earth as I am now, they were counted by the seed
of the Serpent, such as Fox is, Blasphemers, Deceivers, Liers, and such like,
but now who so zealous for the dead letter of the Prophets, and Apostles, as
the seed of the Serpent are, but when they were alive, they were hated and
persecuted for speaking that which the seed of the Serpent does now honor; so
is it with me now I am alive, I am hated and persecuted by the seed of the
Serpent, as well by Quakers as others, for my doctrine and commission now while
I am alive; but when I am dead many of the seed of the Serpent in the next
generation shall have respect unto my Writings, and shall say, had we lived in
those days that Fox and other Quakers lived in, we would never have blasphemed
and spoken evil of so pure a truth as Fox the Quaker has done, to incur
eternal damnation upon our own heads, as Fox the Quaker their father has done:
these things will come to pass, as it has done in the other two Commissions,
namely the Law and the Gospel.

Page 22. Muggleton says, the Quakers hearken to the light within, but they
despise the body and person of Christ without them, and so they are Antichrist.

20. To this Fox says, Here are more Lies of the false prophet; for, says he,
Christ that died at Jerusalem his person we own without us, who is manifest
within us, the light of Christ Jesus, by which we have seen of his glory, and
speak in his person. And Fox says, Solomon's Books in the Bible are good
Scripture, though Muggleton says they be not Scripture, he being not in the
spirit of Solomon that gave them forth.

CHAP. XXVI. ANSWER.
HEre Fox has showed his Allegorical Juggle, who dares not deny the person of
Christ without them, not in plain terms, because the Scriptures are so full to
prove Christ a person, and it is the Faith of all Christendom, as we call it;
but any man that has any true light in him, may see that Fox is a mere Juggler
to deceive the simple and ignorant, whose doctrine makes the people more dark
in their minds, than they were by nature.

For, says Fox, we Quakers own the person of Christ without us, who is
manifest within us. There is such a great stir with Gods Messengers to part
Christ's person or body from the Quakers, and their bodies from him, that
Christ's body might stand single of it self, and the Quakers bodies might stand
single of themselves, at a distance from Christ's body; but the Quakers will
either get into Christ's body, or else Christ must get into the Quakers bodies,
so that no man can tell how to part them one from another, but I know death
will part them: And Christ will say to Fox and other Quakers, Depart from me
you workers of iniquity, you pretended that you were my Saints, and that I was
in you, and you in me, but I know you not; neither did I send you to preach,
for I never was in you by my Spirit to assist you in your preaching; you should
have let preaching and praying in my name alone, for you have done more hurt
than good, in that your doctrine has blinded the eyes of many people, and have
led them as sheep to the slaughter, and has caused many to suffer extremely in
this life, even to the loss of their natural life, besides the punishment
hereafter.

For you should have hearkened to my chosen Witnesses and Prophets, who can
declare the true Christ God and man in one single person, in the form of a man,
with the right devil, his form and nature; but your non-knowledge of the right
devil is the cause of your gross darkness in the knowledge of the true Christ.

What are you Quakers the better for your Christ within you? he yields you no
true peace: and what are you the better for being in Christ? for the true
Christ denies you, and will not be in you by his Spirit, neither will he suffer
you to be in him, because you and a great part of you Quakers are of the
reprobate Seed, which have no part nor portion in the true Christ; for you are,
and the Quakers people, but the devil transformed into the likeness of an Angel
of light, because you are something more precise in your life as to outward
appearance, but your preciseness is very much broken and withered of late
years; your darkness and ignorance is discovered by the light of this
Commission of the Spirit; for you are not like the people you were formerly,
neither does your Witchcraft-fits catch any now as it did heretofore. Your
Witchcraft-fits can hardly be produced now of late not in any, I marvel how you
Quakers can have Christ's person manifest in you, and how you can speak in his
person!

Let the Reader mind the Quakers Cheat, they own Christ's person without them,
yet this person of Christ without them is manifest within them. See the deceit
of this Fox! I have read of Christ manifest in his Saints and Apostles, by his
Spirit or Seed of Faith, but I never read that Christ's person, flesh and bone
was ever manifest within any man, that was always without man, and will be
without man for ever, distinct of himself.

Also Fox says, the Quakers speak in Christ's person. Here is another
Allegorical speech without any distinction: I have heard that an Ambassador
has represented the person of a King, and his speech by virtue of a Commission
from the King is in the Kings stead, but the Ambassador is not in the Kings
person, though he represents the Kings person, the Kings person is at a great
distance from his Messenger.

So it is with Christ's Ambassadors, as Paul says, We are Ambassadors in
Christ's stead, beseeching you to be reconciled unto Christ by our doctrine. Now
Paul's person, and Christ's person were at a great distance one from the other;
for Christ's person was in heaven above the stars, and Paul's person was here
upon earth, so that Paul did not speak in the person of Christ, that being at
such a distance, as I said before; but Paul and the rest of the Apostles by
virtue of their Commission given from Christ, were Ambassadors of him, and so
stood in Christ's stead, but Christ's person was far enough off from them, as a
Kings person is far off when his Ambassador is in a strange Land, who
represents the Kings person, as aforesaid.

But the Quakers they will get into Christ's person, and speak there, or else
they will get Christ's person into them, and so Christ must speak there in their
persons, so as I said before, the Quakers will not be separated from Christ,
nor suffer him to separate himself from them, though I know they never were in
union together, neither was Christ ever in them that I have damned, nor never
will be, neither were they ever in Christ, nor never shall be.

Neither does Fox own indeed that person of Christ of flesh and bone that died
at Jerusalem, to be now living in heaven above the stars, but Fox and the
Quakers Christ they so much talk of, is a mere Allegory without substance, a
Christ that may be blown away with the word of a true Prophets mouth, as I said
in The Neck of the Quakers broken.

Also Fox says, Solomon's Books are good Scripture, though I say they are not,
being not in the spirit of Solomon that gave them forth.

Here I perceive that Fox and the Quakers are got into Solomon's spirit, just as
they did get into Christ's person. I see Fox can get into spirits as he does
into persons: but I perceive Fox is got into Solomon's spirit, and he blames me
because I am not in Solomon's spirit: I do seriously confess that I am not in
Solomon's spirit, and I am glad I never was in his spirit; for who ever is in
Solomon's spirit, does not know the true God, nor the right devil, for Solomon
knew neither of them, though he was a wise man in things of nature, but
ignorant of spiritual and heavenly wisdom; for Solomon's wisdom has the
Groundwork of much lust of the flesh and idolatry; for the Ranters practice
was grounded upon Solomon's practice, who knew so many women, so the Ranters
thought they might have the same liberty, seeing wise Solomon's Writings were
owned for Scripture-record; thus they continued many of them in their practice
of lust, till many of them were weary of it, as Solomon was when he was old,
and then they left off that practice, and turned Quakers, and so fell to be the
greatest idolaters of any, as Solomon did to his Heathenish-Wives, drew his
heart away from the worship of Moses, to worship idols.

So is it with those Ranters that are turned Quakers, they are become absolute
Heathen idolaters, for when they, were Puritanes, so called, they were zealous
for the letter of the Scriptures, and did practice a good life as near as they
could to the letter, but after they fell to the practice of lust, being
encouraged by Solomon's writings, they left that legal Worship and civil
practice the Law tied them unto, and followed Solomon's practice of lust.

And now they being turned Quakers, are fallen to heathen idolatry, that is to
say, the Quakers they worship an unknown God, a Spirit without a body; they
adore a Christ within them, and never minds a body of Christ without them at a
distance; they believe their own spirits to be immortal, and cannot die; they
believe their spirits go to God, or into God again, according to Solomon's
words; they believe Gods Spirit being an infinite Being without a body, and
that this infinite bodiless Spirit takes all things into it self, and so their
spirits being immortal, they go into God when they die; they will not
acknowledge that life or soul does die, but departs out of the body they know
not where, notwithstanding the Scriptures are so full to prove the soul that
sins shall die, and experience shows it does die.

So that the Quakers are become the greatest spiritual idolaters of any, and
the greatest fighters against a personal God of any; for as Solomon did fall to
worship the heathen women's visible Images, or Idols, so do the Quakers worship
invisible Idols, as a Spirit without a body, and that their own spirits may
subsist without bodies, and that spirits may be capable of happiness or misery
without bodies, this is the Heathen Philosophers opinion, they brought into the
world that Principle of the Immortality of the Soul, and that Spirits might go
to happiness or misery without bodies.

And the Quakers has got the Heathen Principle to a hair, therefore become
Heathen Idolaters, as Solomon was; for the Scriptures declares another thing.
Where does the Scriptures say that God is an Infinite Spirit without a body?
The Scripture says, God is infinite, and so he is. Also the Scripture says,
God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth: but it is not
said, God is a Spirit without a body: for this I say that if a man may worship
God in spirit and truth in this natural body, as the disciples of Christ did in
their natural bodies, and as I my self do in my natural body, then of necessity
it will follow that God has a spiritual body, whereby I may worship him, else
I shall worship I know not what, as you Quakers do.

And because Gods body is a spiritual body, therefore Christ said when on
earth, God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth; he knowing
that body of his that was then a pure natural body, should by his death and
rising again, be made a spiritual body, and then all true Believers should
worship him in spirit and truth here in this natural body; and so true
Believers have worshipped Christ the only God in spirit and truth in the
Apostles Commission, and so do we now worship God in spirit and truth; for
there can be no worshipping God in spirit and truth without a true Preacher
sent of God, as the Apostles, John Reeve, and my self were: and in this sense
God may be said to be a Spirit, because he is a spiritual body, and not a
bodiless spirit, as you Quakers do vainly imagine; else why may not God be
worshipped in spirit and truth without a body, as well as God to be a Spirit
without a body? You Quakers do not do well, in that you do not turn your souls
out of your bodies, they being as you conceive immortal, me thinks you might
sometimes let your immortal souls slip out of your bodies, and go into that
Infinite Spirit without a body, and worship in spirit and truth, and then come
into those bodies again; for I see you have by your own words got into Christ's
person, and you have got into Solomon's spirit, and why can you not get your
immortal souls into Gods Infinite Spirit without a body?

By this the Reader may see that the Quakers Principle is built upon the
Heathen Philosophers, and not upon the faith of the Prophets and Apostles who
writ the Scriptures, for Heathen men were the first broachers of the
Immortality of the Soul, and of God being an Infinite Spirit without a body,
and so the greatest Idolaters; for those that writ the Scriptures never
intended any such thing, but altogether the contrary: but the Quakers do cleave
to the Heathen principles, as God being a Spirit without a body, and the
Immortality of the Soul, and so they become with the Heathen the greatest
spiritual Idolaters of any people under the Sun; for I am quite out of Solomon's
spirit indeed, and am glad I never was in it.

21. Page 27. Muggleton thou condemnest our Christ and light: and Muggleton
says, the Quakers think to have eternal life in the Scriptures.

But, says Fox, our eternal life is in Christ before Scriptures were. And Fox
says page 29. thou exaltest thy self above Christ, for he is a man, and says,
the man Christ Jesus will bruise me to pieces, which is manifest in his people,
meaning the Quakers.

CHAP. XXVII. ANSWER.
AS for my words, they are more largely opened in The Quakers Neck broken; Also
this saying of Fox, that the Quakers had eternal life in Christ before
Scriptures were, to this I say, How comes it to pass that Christ has turned
George Fox Quaker, and many more of them out of him now the world is? Nay,
Christ has turned them over to be judged and condemned by me to eternal
damnation: certainly if Fox had eternal life in Christ before Scriptures were,
Christ would have revealed it unto me now the Scriptures are in the world; for
the Scriptures are given into my hands, and I find by the Scriptures that
George Fox and many other Quakers were never in Christ at all, neither before
Scriptures were, nor now the Scriptures are in being.

But I find in the Book of the Scriptures, that George Fox and other Quakers
were in the Serpent that beguiled Eve, and had eternal death in their seed
before Scripture were, but it was not visibly known till now; for this I
certainly know that you, Fox, and many more of you came out of the Serpents
loins, which was Cains father, and you being the children of Cain, may be said
to be in the Serpent-devil before the Scriptures were: and as sure as Cain the
father of all the damned shall die an eternal death, so I am certain that you
George Fox, with many other of your Quakers people shall be eternally damned,
deliver your selves from it if you can.

2. Fox says page 29. That thou exaltest thy self above Christ, for he is a
man: and says, the man Christ Jesus will bruise me to pieces, which is
manifest in his people, meaning the Quakers.

I cannot get Fox the Quaker and the man Christ Jesus to part, for wheresoever
Fox does own Christ Jesus to be a man, then presently this manhood of Christ
gets into the Quakers bodies, and so Christ is manifest in them. Now I would
very fain have Christ's manhood by it self, and the Quakers by themselves, but
Fox will by no means part with Christ that he might be spoken with alone, but
Christ being so much manifest in the Quakers bodies, so that no Quaker can
find any Christ to be a man, but what is manifest in their bodies.

And this Christ that is manifest in them, I suppose is he that will bruise me
in pieces, but that man Christ Jesus that I believe in, has given me power to
condemn and judge that man Christ Jesus that is manifest in the Quakers people,
for I know that Christ Jesus that is manifest in them is nothing else but the
seed of Reason the devil that is manifest in them; for I know they have no
faith in the true Christ, but the motions of reason working in their minds,
taking occasion by the Law written in their hearts, it does cleanse them from
the outward pollutions of the world, and from the breach of some outward Laws,
and this is that Christ they so much talk of within them, and this is that man
Christ Jesus manifest within them. This is a true description of the Quakers
Christ manifest within them.

CHAP. XXVIII.
THese are the most considerable things for the Reader to take notice of in
George Fox his Book, so that the Reader may mind the Answer and the
Interpretation I have given to those Scriptures which Fox the Quaker brings
against me; but he leaves the words of the Scriptures more dark to the Reader
than they were in themselves, but I have given the Interpretation of those
Scripture words which Fox could not do, and what I have written in this
Treatise is for the most part left out in The Neck of the Quakers broken,
because in that Book all these things in which Fox does rail and revile at me
in, as he calls it, An Answer to the Neck of the Quakers broken; but that Book
of mine does explain the Quakers Principle more plain and clear than this
Treatise does; for he that would have read that Book and Fox his Answer to it,
would have seen all those things which Fox does allege against me, more fully
answered than he or any other Quaker could have questioned, so that had it not
been for the sake of others, and for the Ages to come, there need not have been
any further discoveries of the Antichristian spirit of the Quakers concerning
their Christ within them, but that Book; As also there is some things in this
Treatise for the Information of the Reader, which was never printed before.

There is many other sayings in Fox his Pamphlet which does rail and revile,
both against my Commission of the Spirit, and that Sentence I have passed upon
many of the Quakers people: As first, Fox says, He believes that my Sentence
will return back upon my self, as in page 6. 2. Fox says, That those I have
cursed are clear over my spirit, as in page 12. 3. Fox says, Had the Quakers
nevar seen letter of Scripture, or any man, yet, says he, the Quakers could
have spoken in the power, and spirit, and in the divine light of Christ, had he
never seen letter of Scripture, nor man, as in page 18. 4. Fox gives glory to
his God and Christ within him, who has, as he says, set him and other Quakers
above that Curse and Sentence I have passed upon them, as in page 20. 5. Fox
blames me for saying God has made me Judge of the Quakers spiritual estate,
and yet, says he, thou owns thy self to be but a mortal man. Oh how Fox
despises that a mortal man should be the Quakers Judge of their immortal
souls, as they imagine! for, says Fox, the spiritual man judges all things,
as in page 21. 6. Fox blames me for saying that the spirit of reason in man is
the devil; and Fox seems to justify the Magistrates that persecuted me,
because I say they were reasonable men. And Fox further blames me for fleeing
from the devils malice, yet he judges that if those Magistrates devils had
inflicted more corporal punishment upon me than Imprisonment, it had been but
reason the devil still; for, says Fox, thou can no say it was
unreasonableness in them, according to thy own saying, as in Page 23. 7. Fox
calls me a laying spirit, because I say it does not belong to Christ now being
in Heaven, to interpret Scripture. For, says Fox, does not the Scripture say
all shall be taught of God, and that he opens, and no man shuts? and does not
John say, no man was found worthy to open the Book but the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, and was not Christ anointed to preach? as in page 24.

CHAP. XXIX. ANSWER.
FIrst, as for that sentence that I have passed upon the Quakers people and
others, it is irrevocable, and will be as sure upon you as if God had said it
with his own mouth; for as I said in that book, we are as true Ambassadors of
Christ, as Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles were; and if they were sent of God
we are sent of God; and if there were any power in their Sentence and Judgment
to those people in their time, so sure will the Sentence and Judgment of us
the Witnesses of the Spirit be upon you; and as many of the Quakers people as
has, or shall fall under it: Neither shall that curse I have passed upon you
despising Quakers, return upon my self no more then the curse of Moses which
opened the ground to swallow up wicked rebellous men alive, for desiring the
Priests office; So will it be with you Fox the Quaker, in that you have rebelled
against the Messengers of Christ, and strove for to be a Minister of Christ,
when as he never chose nor sent you, yet you will proudly contend with those
that God has chosen, anointed, and sealed to declare the highest mysteries
that ever was declared by man, yet you look upon your self to be better able to
preach the Gospel then we, you who knows not the true God, nor what the devil
is, nor that your soul must die, nor any one true principle of Faith, yet you
are taken by the people to be a man of knowledge, and so you encourage your
self to be a Minister of Christ, and yet knows not what the true Christ is, nor
where he is, and do you think that Hell shall not open its mouth and swallow
you up alive? Yea, I say it will, and you shall not escape, for I know and see
it will be so, and you shall find my words to be true to your eternal pain and
shame, as Corah, Dathan and Abiram did by Moses.

2. Fox says, those I have cursed are clear over my spirit.

CHAP. XXX. ANSWER.
IT is a mavelous thing that damned men should be over his spirit that has a
commission from God, to condemn despisers of the Holy Ghost; it is as if a
prisoner that is condemned by the Judge for his breach of the Law, should have
that curse he pronounced upon the man over his own head: By Fox his conceit the
man is in a better case then the Judge, for the man may as truly say that the
sentence and curse the Judge has passed upon him is clear over the Judges
spirit; as if the condemned man were in a better condition then the Judge, yet
the one goes to be hanged, according to the Judges sentence, and the Judge
goes to his Palace; So is it with you George Fox, and many other of you
Quakers, you must go to the damnation of eternal death, according to my
sentence, and I shall enter into everlasting life that condemned you, so that
you shall never clear your selves from that curse I have passed upon you, but
it shall be over your spirits and upon your spirits to eternity.

3. Fox says, had the Quakers never seen letter of Scriptures, or any man,
yet, says he, the Quakers could have spoken in the power, and spirit, and in
the Divine light of Christ.

CHAP. XXXI. ANSWER.
HEre Fox shows plainly that the Quakers light of Christ within them is
nothing else but the Law written in their hearts, their thoughts accusing and
excusing, as the Heathen have, the Apostle speaks of, and no divine faith of
Christ at all. Mind! the Scripture says, by faith we know the world was made,
and by faith Abraham offered up his son Isaac, and faith is the evidence of
things not seen: and the Apostles preached the word of faith, and this I say,
no heavenly, spiritual, or divine light can be truly understood but by faith.

And this I say further, that the letter of the Scriptures were spoken by the
word of Faith, and by faithful men; for there is no writings under Heaven that
are the ground of Faith, nor does give satisfaction to the mind of man, as to
his eternal salvation, as the letter of the Scripture does, if understood and
believed by man; how could man have known the creation of the world, and how
God appeared to Noah before and after the Flood? or whether there were any
Flood or no, but by faith? Or how can any man know that God appeared to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and gave them to prophecy so many hundred years
before of God becomeing flesh, and that he should save men from sin by his
death, even as many as should believe in his name, with great and mighty things
that has been done by the power of faith, which the letter of the Scriptures
does relate which no man could comprehend nor know but those that have faith in
the letter of the Scriptures; yet Fox the Quaker he could have spoken in the
power and spirit of the Divine light of Christ, though the Quakers had never
seen letter of Scripture nor man. Here the Reader may plainly see that the
Quakers Christ within them, is no other but the Law written in their hearts, as
the Heathen had as aforesaid; their thoughts accusing and excusing, this is
that Christ within them they so much talk of, and this is that power and
spirit, and divine light of Christ the Quakers could have spoken in, had they
never seen letter of Scripture, nor man; this is the same the Heathen had in
them, and this I say had the Quakers never seen letter of Scripture, nor man
that professed the letter of the Scripture, I say the Quakers would have talked
nor spoke no more of a Christ within them, then cursed Cain and his posterity
did, or the old world that was drowned, or Sodom.

These wicked people never saw no letter of Scripture, nor man, that had faith
not as they knew, yet they had the same Christ within them as the Quakers have
by the Law written in their hearts, and might have spoken in the power and
spirit of the divine light of Christ as the Quakers do, had they seen the
letter of the Scripture and men that believes them, as the Quakers do. So that
it may be clear to those that have the true light of Faith, and of the
interpretation of the letter of the Scripture, that the Quakers principle of
the light of Christ within them, is no other but the light of the Law written
in their hearts, as the Heathen had before any Scriptures were written, and by
this Law are they judged in themselves; and this is their Christ within them,
and this is that power and spirit, and divine light of Christ they could have
spoken in, had they never seen letter of Scripture, nor man that professes
Scripture, and that they do speak now they have seen letter of Scripture, and
men that profess it, and believe it, I say is the very same, for the Quakers
have no more faith in the true Christ, then if they had never seen letter of
Scripture, nor any man that believes them, what they have is mere traditional,
even the faith of devils; for the Law written in their hearts is the only and
alone Christ the Quakers have to save them, and this Christ is indeed within
them, and will never go out of them, but torment them to eternity.

4. Fox gives glory to his God and Christ within him, who has as he says, set
him and other Quakers above that curse and sentence I have passed upon them.

CHAP. XXXII. ANSWER.
YOur glory to your God and Christ within you will fail you in the day of
trouble, neither will, nor can deliver you from that curse and sentence I have
passed upon you, and others of your brethren; neither will you ever be set
above it, but shall be kept under it to eternity: flatter your self as much as
you can, you shall not be delivered, neither by your Christ within you, nor by
the true Christ without you, this I know.

5. Fox blames me for saying God has made me Judge of the Quakers spiritual
estate, and yet, says he, thou ownest thy self but a mortal man; For, says
Fox, the spiritual man judges all things.

CHAP. XXXIII. ANSWER.
Did you Fox ever see any man condemned to die, either natural death, or
eternal death by a spiritual man without a body? are not all men condemned both
natural and spiritual by mortal men like themselves? Was not Moses a mortal
man, did not he condemn and judge many to die? he said but the word, and it was
done: and did not Eliah call for fire from Heaven and destroy two Captains and
their fifties? with many other strange things he did whereby many were judged
by him and killed, yet he was but a mortal man and subject to infirmity as
mortal men are, as the Scripture says. Again was not Peter a mortal men, and
was put to death himself, yet he judged Ananias and Saphirah his wife to death,
yet a mortal man; so is it with every true Prophet and Messenger of Christ, he
has power to set life and death before men, and power to judge and condemn
those that rebel against his commission, and to justify those that yield
obedience unto it; yet all Gods Messengers they were mortal men, now these
mortal men had great power being commissionated of God, and they all acted
according to the tenor of their commission, and some of them destroyed life
presently.

And I am sure if you Fox had lived in Moses time, you would have been consumed
by him in the gainsaying of Corah, for you would have rebelled against Moses
and Aaron, as you do now against John Reeve and me: but because my Commission
is not to consume you immediately by a natural destruction, you proudly vaunt
your self against the Commission of the Spirit, thinking you and your Christ
within you shall be able to encounter with me and my Christ without me: but I
must judge according to my Commission of the Spirit, and not as Moses and the
Apostles did, to destroy the natural life immediately, but our commission is
with relation to the spiritual estate of men and women after death, and
accordingly we judge, yet but mortal men, and must die our selves; this power
has God given unto me, and by virtue of this am I made Judge of the Quakers
spiritual and eternal estate, what will become of many of you after death.

And as for that saying, The spiritual man judges all things, this is to be
minded, that every true Messenger and Minister of Christ may be called a
spiritual man, and he is so, because he teaches such doctrine that does
comfort the spirits of some, and torment the spirits of others, in that it
divides between the joints and the marrow: Also those that truly believe, may
be called spiritual men, and can judge the spirits of unbelievers, because they
know by faith in the doctrine of the true God, that others that have not the
same faith cannot have that peace as they have; for they know by experience in
themselves when they were unbelievers, they were without God in the world, and
so were not able to judge who were happy, and who were not; but being justified
by faith in the true God, they have peace with God, and so can discern and
judge the spirits of others, by what they were themselves who were some time in
darkness, but now in the light of heaven; and who ever has this true faith in
the doctrine of the true God, may be said to be a spiritual man, and able to
judge all things that is naught in himself, and all the unbelief and despisings
of others.

And so he judges all things by his faith in the true God, and in the
Messenger God has sent, yet Minister and People are but mortal men, and must
die, yet called by the Seed of Faith the spiritual man that judges all things,
and is judged of no man.

Therefore you Fox shall never have any spiritual man to judge you to eternal
damnation, but me that am but a mortal man, neither shall you see any other God
or Judge, but that sentence that I have given upon you in this life, do you see
if you can get over it.

6. Fox blames me for saying the spirit of reason in man is the devil, and
seems to justify the Magistrates that persecuted me, because I say they were
reasonable men. And further he blames me, because I fled from the devils
malice; yet Fox judges that if those Magistrates had inflicted more punishment
than Imprisonment upon me, it had bin but reason the devil still; for, says
he, thou can not say it was unreasonableness in them, according to thy own
saying.

CHAP. XXXIV. ANSWER.
TO this I do confess, that those Magistrates that persecuted me in
Darby-shire, and did imprison me in Darby Goal, they were reasonable men, and
no unreasonableness was found in them; for unreasonable men are not fit to be
Mayors, Aldermen, and Constables of Corporation-Towns; and did you ever know
unreasonable, or distracted men, to be Ministers of a Parish? Nay, they were
all reasonable men that were my enemies, and their reason would have led them
to have punished me with a greater corporal punishment than Imprisonment, if
the Law could have done it.

Nay, because they were reasonable men, they could not go beyond their own Law,
for their malice would have reached unto death, had the Law of the Land reached
unto it.

And that would have pleased you Quakers very well, for I know some at that
time were sorry I escaped so well, and so soon out of prison: and I find by
the writings of Richard Farnsworth and yours also, that you are sorry in your
hearts that I escaped without any further punishment, as whipping, and the
like; and this I say further, had reason the devil acted in the Magistrates and
the Priest so far in punishment upon me, as would have satisfied the desire of
you Quakers, and their own malice, yet it had been but reason the devil still,
and it would have been but the malice of the devil executed, and the desire of
the devil satisfied.

So that I do justify that my persecutors were reasonable men, and did nothing
unto me but what reason the devil led them unto, and I do expect no other
favor from reasonable men than what their Law will bear them out in: But this
I must tell you, that when reasonable men do judge rightly between man and man
in things temporal, this is highly esteemed of by me, and warrantable in the
sight of God; but for reasonable men to meddle with the consciences of men that
breaks no temporal Law, this is altogether condemned by me, and of God also.
But Farnsworth and Fox the Quakers reviles against me, because I fled away from
the devils malice. Indeed the first time I was in Darby-shire I did go to
Backwel, but I did not know there was any await laid for me till afterward: but
however, I should have been glad if I could have fled away from the devils
malice this second time also; but I have opened this more large in ^he Neck of
the Quakers broken.

And as for those Magistrates devils that persecuted me, I knew it was reason
the devil in them: also I knew they were urged on by the Priest of the Parish,
for the Priest did ride upon the Mayors spirit he being but low in reason, and
ignorant of the law of reason, therefore it was that I passed the Sentence of
eternal damnation upon none of my enemies in that matter, but upon the Priest
only. His name is John Cupp, I have named him here, because he is bound in that
bundle of Tares amongst the damned sort, so that the Age to come may see him
recorded amongst the damned, as Cain and Judas are in the Scriptures, by good
and righteous men.

But I see by the writings of you Quakers, that your hearts are sorry that the
Powers of the Nation does nor punish me more, yet this I shall tell you, that I
have more enemies against me than any Quakers whatsoever; for you Quakers need
suffer nothing by the Powers of the Nation for your doctrine, for they and you
are all one in that: but you out of a voluntary will, will worship and
sacrifice your selves in meetings, contrary to the Law made by the Powers of
the Nation, when as you have no Authority from God for any such practice, you
having no true Ministry no more than the Nation, so you bring persecution upon
your own heads through a voluntary, groundless suffering for Christ, when as
Christ owns not your meetings, nor the Powers of the Nation owns them not.

Why should you suffer so much for a Lie? I know you will take me for your
enemy to speak thus; yet this I say, I always loved the persecuted better than
I did the persecuter; for though men suffer for a Lie, yet I thought it was in
the innocence of the mind, and I always had compassion upon the afflicted for
conscience sake, as I have known some that have lost their lives for conscience
sake, which I have been sorry for, though I know they suffered for a mere Lie,
as all you Quakers do; for there is none of you does suffer for truth, yet I
say whoever does persecute you for conscience in meeting and worshipping an
unknown God, as you Quakers do, yet I say those men that do persecute you
willingly, they will be every man of them damned to eternity; for that which
knows the true God, and the true Worship, will never persecute any.

Though we know their worship to be false, but men that are false worshippers
themselves, will persecute both the false worshippers and the true; this I do
know by experience, in that men have persecuted me only for going upon the
account of a Prophet, but glad would they have been if they could have caught
me under any Law the Powers of the nation had made, but they could not;
therefore the Judge said to my Accusers, that Bill of Accusation it did not
belong to the Law, so the Judge could not determine no Sentence upon me;
likewise the Judge cleared me himself in his own Chamber, likewise I justified
the same things I was accused of to the Judges face. The Judge was hot at
first, he not knowing I was the man, said to my friend that was with me, it was
not fit such a man as I should live. With that I asked the Judge why he said
so? Do not you read in the writing what you are accused of? I said, I read what
I am accused of, but what is it say you, that I am not fit to live? Why, says
the Judge, are you the man? I said Yes. So the Judge took the Paper out of my
hand, and read the Articles of my Accusation: what say you to this, says he?
So one by one he asked me: so I answered him to every one distinct of it self;
so when the Judge had heard my answer, he said it was well, and freed me from
going to Darby Goal any more.

But this is that I would have the Reader mind, that if I had been taken in a
Meeting, as the Quakers are, then the Judge would have had the Law on his side;
and all other things I was accused of, as blasphemy, and how I had power to
damn and to save, and that I was one of the two Witnesses spoken of in the
Revelation, and that their believing the Scriptures now they were damned by me,
would do them no good; these, with such like things, were given in against me,
I say all things would have been swallowed up in one meeting, and the Judge
would have took up that Law, and would have given Judgment and Sentence upon
me, as he did to Baptists and Quakers in my sight, only for meeting contrary
to the Act.

Therefore if you Quakers would forbear meeting, you need not suffer for your
faith at all, and if you would be ruled by me, or take my advise not to meet at
all, for I am sorry that many innocent, harmless people should waste their
estates, suffer Imprisonment, and impoverish their health, and suffer
banishment, and so bring their lives to an end before their time, for that
which is not truth.

For you do but imitate other men's Commission and practice, so that you are
traditional people as all other Churches are; for if you do not meet contrary
to the Law, you need not suffer the loss of a groat for your Faith, nor your
Christ within you; for the Powers of the Nation are of your mind as to your
doctrine, the Pope will agree with you as to that, but all the strife amongst
you is about Discipline, this I am very sensible of.

Therefore I never rejoiced, nor desired the sufferings of the Quakers for
their meetings, though I knew they suffered for a Lie, yet I always pitied
them when they were imprisoned and banished for meeting, though I know they
rejoiced at my Imprisonment, and were sorry there was not worse punishment
inflicted upon me; the truth of this is clear by the writings of Richard
Farnsworth and George Fox, and other Quakers that I know, who justified the
Magistrates in what they did unto me, and thinks the Magistrates might have
punished me worse if they would; but I know they would not have spared me so
much as they do the Quaker, had they had the Law on their side as they have
against the Quakers. But no more of that here

7. Fox calls me a lying spirit because I say it does not belong to Christ now
being in heaven, to interpret Scripture; Yet, says Fox, does not the Scripture
say all shall be taught of God? and that he opens, and no man shuts? And does
not John say, No man was found worthy to open the Book but the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah? And was not Christ anointed to preach?

CHAP. XXXV. ANSWER.
HEre the Reader may see the ignorance of Fox the Quaker, and all the rest of
them, of the true meaning of the Scriptures; also I shall make it appear to
those that have any true light in them, that the interpretation of Scripture
does not belong unto Christ now, nor never did, but it belongs only unto such
men as he sends, and has given them the gift, as thus:

First, Moses was a man, and did not he interpret unto his brethren the
Israelites in Egypt, the sayings of God unto him concerning their deliverance
out of that bondage? Did not Moses and Aaron interpret, and show signs and
wonders in Egypt of those things God had revealed and made known unto them? Was
not these men that did this?

2. Was not Joseph a man, that did interpret his own dreams, and the dreams of
Pharaohs Butler and Baker, and Pharaohs own dream? Will you, Fox, say it was
God that did interpret Pharaohs dream? was it not Joseph a man like himself,
therefore promoted to great honor?

3. Was not Daniel a man, that did interpret the King of Babylons dreams? Did
God interpret the Kings dreams, or Daniel that was a man? did not those Kings
of Babylon promote Daniel to honor, in that the Spirit of the Holy Gods had
given a man such wisdom and understanding to interpret Dreams, Visions, and
hard Sentences? all this was done by a mortal man, and not by God himself.

4. Was not the Prophets mortal men, and not God? yet they did interpret to the
Kings of Israel and Judah, the council of the God of Israel what he would do if
they would not forsake their idolatry, and turn unto the worship of the Law of
Moses, he would make them desolate? yet these Prophets were but men, and not
God. Though Eliah did call for fire from heaven, and destroyed two Captains and
their fifties, and fire to burn up the Sacrifice in the sight of the people,
and destroyed four hundred of Baals priests, and shut the heavens that it
rained not, yet he was but a man, it was not God himself that the King would,
or did seek after to kill him, it was a man like himself.

Also Jeremiah, when he unfolded and interpreted the Council of God, that other
Prophets had foretold of concerning the destruction of Jerusalem to Zedekiah?
was it God himself that did interpret it to the King, or was it Jeremiah a
mortal man, or no?

So all the Prophets little or much, gave interpretations of the Council of God
concerning Jerusalem, they were all but men, and were not the people of the
Jews bound to believe those men whom God sent, except God would come himself?
Why then does the Prophet Isaiah say, Who has believed our report? or to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed? His meaning is this, whosoever does believe we
that are Prophets sent of God: believe but our report, and you shall know the
true God, the God of Israel, and the strength of his arm, to save and deliver
you from your sins: but except ye believe our report who are men like your
selves, the arm of Gods saving health will never be revealed unto you, for God
will not do it by himself, but by us his Messengers, who are men, will his arm
of salvation be revealed unto, if you believe our report.

5. Was not Philip a man that did interpret that saying in Isaiah the Prophet,
which the Eunuch read Act. 8.32. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and
like a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth. Here Philip
ran to the Charret, and asked the Eunuch, Understand thou what thou read?
as verse 30 mark: Said the Eunuch, How can I, except some man guide me? Here
you may see that the Eunuch did not expect that God himself should interpret
Scripture unto him: but, says he, how shall I know the interpretation of
Scripture, except some man guide me? that is, except some man interpret it to
me, as the words does imply; for Philip opened those sayings unto him which
made the Eunuch to understand, and believe, and be baptized.

Now will you Fox say that Christ himself did interpret this Scripture to the
Eunuch, or did it belong to a mortal man? I think you will not be so grossly
ignorant, to say that Christ himself went into the Eunuchs Charret, and
interpreted those Scriptures to him; Surely if the interpretation of Scripture
had belonged only unto Christ, and not unto man, as Fox does assert, then
Christ must have come from heaven, and have went into the Charret in Philips
stead, because Philip was a man, and interpretation of Scripture does not
belong to man, as Fox the Quaker says.

May not any man that has but the light of sense and reason in his
understanding, see the gross darkness of these Quakers, which pretends to be in
the clearest light of all the seven Churches, but to my knowledge the darkest
of all in point of doctrine.

And as for that saying of Scripture, We shall be all taught of God, it is not
meant that God will teach every particular man and woman himself; do you Fox
believe so? why then do you prattle to the people when you meet, as if you
would interpret the meaning of Scripture, and teach the people the knowledge of
Christ, for you are but a man? why do not you let Christ teach the people
himself, seeing you will have all taught of God, and allow no man to interpret
Scripture, nor teach the people? For if you say Christ does interpret
Scripture, and not Muggleton, because Muggleton is a man, and the
interpretation of Scripture you say belongs to Christ, and not to Muggleton,
for Muggleton is but a man, so Quakers are all taught of God, and not by man.

I marvel why there is so many Men-teachers amongst the Quakers, seeing
teaching knowledge of heavenly things, and the interpretation of Scripture
belongs to God and Christ, and not to man! If I were of your faith, I would
give over teaching and talking of the Scriptures, and leave it to God and
Christ to whom it does, and it would be well for you Speakers of the Quakers,
if you had done so before you took upon you to preach Christ within you; you
have undertook to teach that which you say God will do, and to interpret
Scripture, which you say does belong unto Christ.

But I see all those people that will be taught of God, and have the Scriptures
interpreted unto them by Christ himself, and will not receive the
interpretation from man, I say those people are more ignorant and dark in their
minds, than those that are taught by man.

And I am sure the Quakers people would have known more truth if they had been
taught by man that has a Commission from God, as Reeve and Muggleton has,
than they do by all that God ever taught them in their lives.

And the Interpretation of Scripture we have given, if understood, would have
informed their Judgments more than all the Interpretation of Scripture that
Christ ever did interpret unto the Quakers people since the name of Quakers was
put upon them, yet we are but mortal men, and must die.

But to clear the scruple that may arise in men's minds, because I speak thus,
I shall show in a few words how men may be said to be taught of God, and how
the Interpretation of Scripture may be said to belong unto Christ.

First, when God chooses any one man, or more, to be his chosen Prophet,
Messenger, or Minister, God does furnish such with wisdom, and understanding,
and revelation, to declare the mind of God to the people, what God would have
the people do, and look how many people, or who ever does believe this
Messenger sent of God, they may be said to be taught of God, and are taught of
God.

So likewise he that has the gift of Interpretation of Scripture, as Prophets,
Apostles, and we the Witnesses of the Spirit has, our Interpretation of
Scripture may be said to belong unto Christ, and that it is the true
Interpretation of Christ himself, because we had our Commission from him to
teach the people, and to interpret Scripture to as many as believe us, to their
great peace and satisfaction of their souls: And in this sense people may
truly say they are all taught of God, and that Christ has given the true
interpretation of Scripture by his servants the Prophets, Apostles, and
Witnesses of the Spirit, to our everlasting peace and comfort, yet all this is
declared by men, yea by mortal men, and not by Christ himself, as the Quakers
do vainly imagine.

6. Also Fox says, Christ opens and no man shuts: and says, Does not John
say, No man was found worthy to open the Book, but the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah? And says, Was not Christ anointed to preach?

CHAP. XXXVI. ANSWER.
THis bears the same sense as the other, whatsoever the Prophets, Apostles
and Witnesses of the Spirit does, it may be said Christ does it, as the
Prophets they preached of Balm in Gilead, and of Eye Salve to anoint the
peoples eyes, that they might see what did belong to their peace, and where
they might have salve to heal the wound in conscience, which sin had made in
their souls, this is called the preaching of Christ by his Prophets.

2. The Apostles had power given them by Christ to open the eyes of the blind,
and to give light unto them that were in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
and brought those that believed their doctrine into the light of life eternal.
Also they had the Keys of Heaven and of Hell, to bind sin upon the consciences
of unbelievers never to be forgiven, and to loose the sins of those that did
truly believe their doctrine of Christ; and thus they did open the Book of
conscience in the believer, and no man could shut up that conscience which the
Apostles doctrine opened; neither could any man open that conscience the
Apostles shut up in unbelief: This also is called the preaching of Christ, and
opening and shutting the Book of Conscience by Christ, yet this was done by men
and not by Christ himself; But in regard they did preach the Gospel by virtue
of Authority from Christ, and they were anointed by him to preach the
everlasting Gospel, and had power given them to open the Book of Conscience in
some, whereby they did believe in Christ, and shut the conscience of others up
in unbelief; and thus that saying of the Scripture is fulfilled, that Christ
was anointed to preach the Gospel of glad tidings of salvation; for what his
Messengers does, it is as if he did it himself.

Again, we the Witnesses of the Spirit are anointed and chosen of Christ to
preach the everlasting Gospel, and Christ has given us power to set life and
death before men, and we have power to bind and loose, and to open and shut
the Book of Conscience, and no man can shut that conscience we have opened,
neither can any man open that conscience we have shut up in darkness as to any
spiritual knowledge or true peace: this many can witness on both sides, if they
would, but our other writings does speak more large of this point; so I shall
say no more as to this.

Only this, that this power we the Witnesses of the Spirit have is the power
of Christ, as the Prophets and Apostles power was in their time, therefore said
to be done by Christ himself.

But I know Fox the Quaker is willing to believe that dead Prophets and
Apostles were Messengers of Christ, but he does not believe there is any sent
of Christ not alive, but what is within them, but he shall find that we the
Witnesses of the Spirit were sent of God, and have as great power given us, as
any Prophet or Apostle whatsoever.

And as for that saying of John, Revelation 5. That no man in Heaven, nor in
Earth, nor under the Earth, was able to open the Book, but the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah. This I would have the Reader to mind, for it is a vain thing
to talk to Quakers of interpretation of Scripture by man, that is alive; but
John that spoke these words being dead, the Quakers believe his words, though
they know nothing what he meant, nor what that Book was that none could open
but Christ.

This let the Reader mind, that there is three Books that are to be opened by
Christ, as you may see Rev. 20.20. And the Books were opened, and another book
was opened, which is the Book of Life.

Now to give the Reader to understand these three Books, the first Book is the
Law written in man's heart, this Book are all the Heathen are to be judged by,
when it is opened at the great day of the Lord. The second Book is the
Conscience of people who has heard the preaching of Faith in Christ, yet did
not believe, when this Book is opened they shall be judged at that great day in
themselves, for their unbelief. The third Book is the Book of Life, wherein all
true believers Faith is written, and according to their works of faith they are
judged, and so according to the works of unbelief, are judged, and according to
the works of reason, their thoughts accusing, shall the Heathen be judged
according to what is written.

In these Books shall all people be judged both small and great.

Mind and look what judgment Gods Messengers has given unto men in this life,
the same will Christ give when he does raise them again at the last day, as I
have said before, therefore this Book which no man in Heaven nor in Earth could
open, it was the Book of Life, and none was found worthy to open the Book of
Life but Christ, he being the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. This Book of Life
must needs belong to Christ to open, and to no man else; for he is God the
first and the last, the beginning and the end of all mankind; but what is this
to interpret Scripture? Christ has given that to man: but I have opened these
things more large in the Interpretation of the whole Book of the Revelation.

In the last place I shall say something as to the Quakers principle and
practice: Fox says in the end of his Pamphlet against me, that I am judged
with the Spirit of Truth; and over me, says Fox, is the true and Faithful
witness Christ Jesus the Cornerstone, which will grind me to powder. Further
Fox says, in Christ is his people, meaning the Quakers, that reign over my
head, that can raise and reign over the head of the curser: and Fox says,
Edward Bourn whom thou have cursed and damned, who is far above thee and thy
Father, in him that redeems out of the curse, and destroys thee and thy Father
both.

I do acknowledge that Christ Jesus the Faithful Witness, the Cornerstone,
should grind me to powder if he does not own me to be sent of him; if I do
curse any without a commission from him, or if I should curse any of the true
Christ's people, then let that curse be upon my own head, as Fox says.

Also I was always willing that those people that were ingrafted into Christ by
Faith, should be above me; for there is no people in Christ but such as are
ingrafted into him by faith, which I am sure no Quaker is as in that state,
neither can any man be a member of Christ but by the hearing of Faith, and
faith comes by hearing, how can any preach the word of faith except he be sent?
as I am sure no Quaker never was sent of Christ to preach, therefore no Quakers
people in Christ.

But that Christ the Quakers people are in, I that am a man has power over
some, I have separated their Christ from them one from the other, and has
showed them the true Christ to their great satisfaction, and they have bin glad
they were rid of the Quakers Christ.

Others again has bin condemned by me, both them and their Christ, neither
would I let them and their Christ part one from another, but torment each
other; for this Christ the Quakers has in them, is the Law written in their
hearts, and the Christ the Quaker people are in, is the motions of this Law,
and sometimes they do well, then the Law is quiet in them, and their Christ
gives peace to them; so I knowing this Christ was born with man, and man born
with it, as the Apostle says, being under the Law then free from grace.

But being born again, we are not under the Law but under Grace, but the
Quakers people are under the Law, though not the outward letter, as the people
of the Jews were, yet they are under the Law written in their hearts, as the
Heathen were before any Law was given; and this is the Quakers Christ within
them, and that Christ they are in; so that Christ the only God has chosen me,
and has given me power over the Quakers Christ within them and themselves
also, to keep them together, so that the one shall not part from the other; for
though they shall desire that this Christ within them might part from them, but
it will not, but torment their souls to eternity; This will be Fox the Quakers
portion, and many more Quakers besides, and if you Edward Bourn and others of
the Quakers, whom I have cursed, do get over, or above that curse and sentence
I have passed upon you, let your righteousness be what it will, I say then Cain
shall get above, and over that curse God himself pronounced upon him, and so
shall Judas get above that curse Christ pronounced upon him.

Furthermore; if you Quakers were not wilfully ignorant and blind, you might
see that this commission of the Spirit given to John Reeve and Muggleton has
had great power over the Ranters and Quakers, it has broken the Ranters
principle all to pieces, so that none dares hold up an argument to defend it,
you Quakers also are very much shattered, you are not like the people ye were
16 years ago, this some that had a love for you have seen and confessed.

The Ranters when we came out first sixten years ago, were very high in their
elevations, in seeing of visions, and going forth as Prophets and Prophetesses,
and stripping themselves naked for signs, as you Quakers have done, I can make
it appear in some particulars, that this commission has had great power over
Ranters and Quakers; for the heads of these two were John Robins and John
Taney; Robins was the head of all false Christ's, false Prophets, Prophetesses,
Shakers, and Quakers, and you Quakers are but the spawn of John Robins, and
that Christ you own within you being a false Christ, John Robins was the head
of that principle also; his believers had those witchcraft-fits upon them, as
you Quakers had very strongly at that time, when John Robins was in power; also
John Taney was the head of the Atheistical Ranters, and those Ranters were very
high in their language, and vile in their practice as to oppress one another,
deflower Virgins, commit whoredom with men's wives, and counted all the
wickedness they did to be righteousness, these things and much more did those
people do, and these two heads were in great power when we came first out; and
the first man that was cursed by us after we had power, was John Robins, after
that diverse of his Prophets were cursed, and in two months time after John
Rob'ins power fell, and all his Prophets and Prophetesses fell with him, so he
and they moultered away like dirt, and none durst acknowledge any faith in John
Robins, neither could they attain any Witchcraft-fits any more, so that John
Robins, and his Prophets and people are laid aside as if they had never been.

Afterward it came to pass, that John Taney was damned by us, because he would
not lay down the Priesthood, and his Jerusalem Journey, he had witchcraft-fits
also, and would shut up himself nine days to produce them, but could not after
he was cursed, so after few years he fell, and all his great matters to nothing,
so that not one of his hearers can tell what became of him. Likewise we did
pass Sentence on several of the Ranters Ministers, as of them themselves, so
that they all tumbled down headlong, and could not rise again to this day.

Now do you Fox the Quaker call to mind, and see whether this curse Reeve and
Muggleton has not been over the Quakers people, nor touched them? there has a
many Quakers been cursed by us, but especially of late years by me; have you
your self Edward Borrows, Francis Hougal, you three were the first Quakers John
Reeve damned? have you three had any witchcraft-fits since? have you foamed at
the mouth, and swollen in your belly with the workings of the spirit? and as
you think as if you had the Falling Sickness? have you had any new vision, or
new revelation in those witchcraft-fits since, yea or nay?

I am sure it has great power over you Quakers; and has put a stop to those
witchcraft-fits; for I do not hear of any Quaker of late that has any, though
they were never cursed by me: this curse has run in the line of the heads of
the Quakers, so that it does put a stop to the whole body; so that none of the
members can produce a witchcraft-fit; nay, the Quakers are bereft of all
revelation now, and Messages to the Magistrates; they have left off stripping
themselves naked, and imitating the Prophets of old.

Do you Fox own that practice of Solomon Ecle the Quaker? I perceive by a
passage in your book you do, because Isaiah did so, as a sign to the Jews, but
your Prophet Solomon Ecle went in a more shameless manner, being sent by the
spirit of witchcraft, then Isaiah did that was sent of God; for Ecle went stark
naked, as is reported at Aldermanbury Church, and not only so but he was
shamlesly beshit, so that none could lay hands on him, only the Coachmans whip
gave him a jerk or two: this is he that went with fire upon his head in
Bartholomew-fair, also he sowed his linings upon the peoples Communion Table to
profane it at Aldermary Church; these things were very brief formerly with the
Ranters and Quakers people, they were much for signs, though some of them were
very beasty signs; yet the Ranters and Quakers were well pleased with them,
being moved thereunto by the spirit of witchcraft, to imitate Prophets of old
in a more shameless manner.

As I could tell you some things of the Ranters practice, who would go forth as
signs: there was one his name was Nathaniel, he was the Ranters sign, yet
pretended to be a sign of the Presbyterian Ministry, that as he did stink in
the nostrils of people, so should they; for he went always beshit, so he was
called Shitten Not; he eat his own dung, and stank that none would come nigh
him; nay mistress Cook a Ranter would lie with him in the fields and make cakes
of his dung for him to eat, and he did eat his own dung; but whether she did
eat any with him, I cannot tell; but it was said she did: now this sign goes
beyond the Quaker Solomon Ecle. Also this mistress Cook she went to Westminster
Church to show the Minister a sign, she stripped her self stark naked, and went
into the Church; so some threw a cloak over her to cover her nakedness, and she
was committed to Bride-well, and there she was clothed all in white linen like
the Queen of Heaven; these were Ranting signs now for you Quakers to imitate;
many such things were acted by that sort of people; as that John Thomas who
danced naked before Sir Richard Brown as he went to the Church, and being
committed by him, was extremely whipped, and when he had suffered, and was out
of prison poisoned himself, Richard Rusel the Quakers wife can witness the
truth of his nakedness before Sir Richard Brown, for she went on one side, and
another woman on the other, they were both imprisoned with him; many more of
those Ranters came to a sad end, for most of them fell to nothing after their
head John Taney did fall, and their principle does stink in the nostrils of all
civil people, even as he did that was the true sign to that sort of people, for
he stank in the nostrils of all that came near him, he could hot endure
himself, nay he killed himself with the wire of a candlestick, thrust it into
his belly, and so died: do you George Fox approve of such shitten shameless
Prophets, and stinking signs as these? how much difference is there in Solomon
Ecle his sign being a Quaker, then in the Ranters? are not you Quakers almost
ashamed of your Prophets signs? these things has bin pretty common amongst
Quakers heretofore, when the spirit of witchcraft reigned in them; but now the
power of witchcraft-fits is subdued by Reeve and Muggletons commission, neither
shall you Quakers whom I have cursed get above, nor over that curse I have
passed upon you, for it shall be upon your persons and over the heads of your
souls to eternity, and none shall deliver you from it.

Thus much in answer to George Fox his printed Pamphlet.

By Lodwick Muggleton.
Here follows the Copy of a LETTER sent to SARAH COPPIN, Quaker.
Sarah Coppin,
YOu may remember about fourteen years ago, in the year 1653. that you did seem
to receive John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton as Messengers and Prophets of the
Lord, or as Witnesses of the Spirit; and further you did show much kindness
unto us upon that account, for there could be no other inducement in us at that
time to invite any to show kindness unto us, but that doctrine declared by us
concerning the true God, as our writings did declare, which you did seem to
own. Also you may remember your great zeal you had for us when we were
prisoners in Old-Bridewel, your zeal carried you out so far for us to deliver a
Writing of ours unto Oliver Cromwell, who was then chosen Lord Protector; this
you did your self in zeal and love to this Commssiion of the Spirit, as we the
Witnesses of the Spirit thought, and I suppose your self did think what you did
in that kind, it was in sincerity of heart also, and we took it so, and had a
love for you as to your eternal happiness; but your faith was not truly
grounded, neither upon the doctrine of the true God, nor the Commission of the
Spirit, as it is manifest since. Also you may remember one Joan Bishop a maid,
that was the occasion of bringing you acquainted with us; and that you had been
very religiously given before you met with us, even so much that you were
almost distracted about your salvation, in that none of the Preachers of the
Nation could show you the way to rest for your soul, they having no true rest
themselves; yet you may remember your receiving us upon that account as
Prophets of the Lord, who had put down John Taney, John Robins, and many others
that went as prophets and prophetesses, and pretended great revelations and
visions from the Lord, and yet knew not what God is: these all have been
brought down by us the Witnesses of the Spirit, these things you know in part.

Also your acquaintance with us, it cured you of that distracted condition you
were in before you knew us, and you were clothed in your right mind, and was
able to give a sensible Answer to any that did oppose you: but I know you
cannot do so now you are turned to the Quakers, though you are become a Speaker
amongst them. I know your pride, and ambition of your heart that loves to be
esteemed of people: what, a Woman-preacher! you think this to be a great glory
to you, but the greatest shame that possible may be will be the effects of it;
for it is not your many senseless speeches without form or order produced by a
witchcraft spirit within you, which you call the light of Christ; I say this
you have gloried in will be your endless shame, for your latter end will be
worse than your beginning, for you are become an absolute Apostate, who has
back-slided and fallen from the truth, and turned to the Quakers, the most
Antichristian Principle of all the seven Churches, and the greatest fighters
against a personal God without man, of any, so that you are an absolute
Apostate, and impossible to be renewed by repentance; for you are fallen from
truth to a lie, for you are as some were in the Apostles time, as Heb. 3 6. who
were enlightened, and had tasted of the good word of God, and the powers of the
life to come, that is, they were enlightened by the Commission of the Gospel
committed to them to preach, they tasted that good word of God, even the
doctrine of Christ, which was life and salvation to them that truly believed:
But seeming believers tasted of this good word of God which the Apostles
preached and rejoiced in it for a season, as Herod did; and as for the powers
of the life to come, they had peace in their minds and hope of eternal life by
the Apostles doctrine, so long as they stood by faith, but when they fell away
from that faith they once professed, they could not be renewed again by
repentance, so that all that light and word of God they tasted of, and peace,
and hope, which is the powers of the life to come, it all withered and dyed
within them, so that they were not sensible of the light of heaven, nor any
goodness of Gods word they preached, nor any peace, or hope they ever found by
owning the Apostles doctrine; so it is with you as it was with those apostates
that did fall away from the Apostles Commission after they had made a
profession to own and believe it, and had received many refreshments in their
minds, and had tasted of the Joys of Heaven, but in that they did fall from it
to some other opinion, as to the worship of the Law, as the Galatians did who
were bewitched, as Paul says, so that their latter end was worse than their
beginning. For before a man join with truth, though he does not believe it for
the present, yet it is possible he may be renewed in his mind, and come
afterward to believe and be saved; but if any shall profess truth, and rejoice
in it for a season, and afterward fall away, it is impossible for such an one
to be renewed by repentance, as aforesaid; And this is your condition, for you
rejoiced in this Commission of the Spirit for a season, and did many good acts
for us, which did manifest that you had a love for this Declaration of John
Reeve and my self, and yet afterward to fall away from the belief of it, and
not only so, but to speak evil of us the Witnesses of the Spirit, In that you
said you knew John Reeve, and Lodowick Muggleton very well, and that we were
the greatest Deceivers that ever was, and that as soon as ever you met with
Truth, meaning the Quakers, then you forsook us; these, with such like words,
and more than I mention here, did you say, which is clear to me that you are
not only fallen from grace, but you have trampled the blood of the Covenant
under foot, and counted it an unholy thing, even that whereby you should have
been sanctified by faith; had you held out to the end, you should have been
saved by this Commission of the Spirit; for there is no salvation under heaven
to be found in these days, but in the belief of this Commission of the Spirit
given of God to John Reeve and my self: for our Commission is as true as the
Apostles Commission was at that time, and we as true Prophets as they were
Apostles; so that whoever shall make a profession of this, and fall away
afterward, and speak evil of that they once owned, I say they trample the
blood of the Covenant under foot now, as they did in the Apostles time, and do
count that an unholy thing that should have given them the assurance of
everlasting life; but it is impossible for such to return to the truth again.
And this I must tell you, a man cannot properly be said to fall away, but when
men and women fall from a Commission; for we see many people fall often from one
profession of Religion to another, as from Baptists to Quakers, and
Independents to Baptists, and Quakers fall from that Principle to others, and
some to Atheism, yet this is not properly a falling away, because there is no
true Prophet or Ministry amongst them all, not in the whole world; so that to
my knowledge many has fallen from one thing to another, and at last have come
to be saved by this Commission of the Spirit, and have had assurance of eternal
life in themselves, notwithstanding their falling from several forms of
worship; but who ever falls from the Commission of God, there can be no return
again, neither can they possibly be saved; therefore thought it convenient to
let you know what will be the effects of your fall. I have been in this
Commission these sixteen years, and I never knew but four persons that did fall
which seemed to own us, your self is one, and a Scotch woman, Alexander Hails
his wife, she fell to the Quakers as soon as we were put in Newgate, for indeed
she was very poor, and we being in prison could not supply her with loaves no
longer, there being but very few that did believe at that time, so she did fall
to the Quakers and forsook us; for I suppose the Quakers had more loaves
amongst them, for they were many; for a loaf of bread was the greatest religion
she had in her, for she was for John Robins his people so long as he could
maintain them with the stock he got from them, but when that was spent, she did
fall from him and his people also. The third person was Mistress Langley, the
fourth was John Hide Bookseller; these all seemed to own the doctrine of this
Commission of the Spirit, and pleaded much for it, and rejoiced for a season in
it. This Mistress Langley did fall to the Quakers as you have done, but a woeful
effect did follow upon it, even distractedness of brain, a wasting of her
estate, an endeavor to kill her self, a fugitive, and vagabond condition in
this world, besides her damnation hereafter.

Now I have showed you what a dangerous thing it is to fall from commissionated
men to non-commissionated men, and what a dangerous thing it is for men or
women to exercise the offices of preaching without a Commission from God, or
from him whom God sends; therefore I shall say these words as follows, I have
heard of your being a Quaker these many years, so I let you alone as to that,
but of late I hear that you are a Speaker among the Quakers meetings, and that
you knew John Reeve and my self, and did keep company with us, until you met
with Truth, the Quakers principle you call Truth; Also you said we were the
greatest Deceivers that ever was; and you said rather than you would return
again unto us, you would go to the public, and hear the Priests of the Nation;
these things I have weighed and considered, first your revolting and
backsliding from that you once rejoiced in: and seIcondly, in that you have
sinned against the holy Ghost, and have contemptuously spoken evil of the
Commission of the Spirit, in calling it the greatest Deceit that ever was, in
this you have trampled the purest Truth that ever was, under your feet as an
unholy thing, and as a scorn; Therefore for these things aforesaid, in
obedience to my Commission from God, I do pronounce Sarah Coppin Quaker, cursed
and damned both in soul and body from the presence of God, elect men, and
Angels to eternity, and it will be a mavelous thing if you escape a fugitive
and vagabond condition in this life, besides your damnation hereafter; for sins
of this nature has commonly a double curse follow, as it did with Mistress
Langley: I had no hatred in my heart to you at all in this thing, but in
obedience to my Commission I have done this, that you might not go to hell in a
sleep, but that you may know what it is to despise the last Messengers of the
Spirit of God, and that the Age to come may see and read this Letter, and may
fear to do as you have done.

I was informed of some of these things by one John Clark a Tanner, Feb. 14.
1667.
Written by Lodowick Muggleton, one of the two last Prophets and Witnesses of
the Spirit, unto the high and mighty God, the Man Christ Jesus in glory.
Another LETTER sent to RICHARD CHAIR Quaker, as follows.
Richard Chair,
I Am informed by one Francis Newel that you have reported very base lies of me
in the temporal; and not only so, but you have blasphemed against the Holy
Ghost, as most of you Quakers do, and that without a cause, for I do not
remember I ever had any discourse with you, nor no dealings with you, neither
temporal, nor spiritual; neither do I know you if I should see you, and it is
very like you do not know me if you should see me, yet notwithstanding you have
reported that you knew me in Trinity-lane, and that I was a very cruel man to
my servants, and would abuse my Prentices, and further you will not believe but
that I lived in Half Moon Court in Bow-lane, which things are all false; for I
never lived in Half Moon Court in my life, neither was I ever cruel to my
servants; cruelty was always contrary to my natural temper, therefore the
neighbors that lived by me and in my house will say I was one of the patientest
men to my children and servants upon the earth, though none of those neighbors,
nor those that lived in my house, did love my principle, or Religion, nor my
commission they could not abide; neither did any of them believe John Reeve nor
me, yet as to that you accuse me of, they will justify it to be false. I
understand you was prentice with Master Farmer the Smith, I knew your Master
very well, his servants did things for me sometimes, it may be you being his
servant you might do it, and I not know you, but you might know me in that
regard; but I suppose you mistook the man, to say I was cruel to my servants:
it was one Richard Drew one of the seed of the serpent as your self is, that
was cruel to his prentices, he would beat and abuse one boy he had most sadly
to my knowledge, for this Richard Drew lived in my house at that time, when
that boy was abused, and afterward this said Richard Drew lived in Half Moon
Court ever since till the fire in London, and this is about twenty years ago
since he lived in my house, and if this will not stop your lying tongue, nor
convince you of your lies as to that, you may go on with it still, for your
slanders are not the first, nor the greatest that has bin laid upon me by you
Quakers: but knowing my own innocence, I am never moved at such slanders in the
temporal; for if one man tells a lie of me, another man, though he be my
enemy, yet he will justify the truth on my side in things that are moral, for
such things are easily decided and made manifest here in this world, so that I
am not offended with you for your lies and slanders you have reported of me in
these things as aforesaid: but I have a greater charge against you then this,
even the sin again the Holy Ghost, that unpardonable sin, I can bear with any
slanders and lies in the temporal, but with blasphemy against the Holy Spirit
that sent me I cannot, nor shall not bear with it; for it is reported to me by
the party aforesaid, that you Richard Chair has bin very wrath and angry with
me a long time, in so much that you have called me a blasphemer, and the
doctrine declared by me blasphemy, you have called me a Decever, a Lier, these
things you have done several times, with many other wicked envious speeches;
also you have in a scoffing manner asked the party aforesaid, if I did damn
folks apace, and lately you asked the same party how many Muggleton had damned
this week? does not all these things show unto me clearly that you are of the
seed of the Serpent, and of the reprobat seed appointed to be damned, and is it
not great pity that such a blaspheming devil should escape the Sentence of
damnation so long as you have? for you have reigned in your blasphemy against
the Holy Spirit that sent me a great while; but as the saying is, when your sin
is at the height then you must be damned, just as the Judges do with thieves
that have escaped hanging several times, yet the thief continuing still in the
same practice, the Judge says, you had as good hang this man out of the way,
for he will never be better, so the man is hanged; and when he is condemned to
be hanged his sins may be said to be at the full, or at the height, so is it
with you Richard Chair, your sin of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is at the
full, for you have committed that sin very often, so that it is high time to give
the sentence of eternal damnation upon you, for you will never be good; for you
being the seed of the Serpent you cannot bring forth better fruits then
blaspemy, lies, and slanders against the Messenger of the most high God, the
man Christ Jesus in glory.

These things aforesaid considered, by virtue of my commission from God, I do
for these blasphemies against the Holy Ghost I do pronounce Richard Chair
Quaker cursed and damned both in soul and body from the presence of God, elect
men, and Angels, to eternity, and do you now see if you can scoff this
sentence off you again; no it shall cleave as close to you as your skin to your
flesh, and you shall know that the most High has given power unto a mortal man
like your self to give sentence of eternal damnation upon you both body and
soul; and now you may apply your self to George Fox the Quaker, and see if he
or the light within you, can deliver you from what I have said; for when I do
write an answer to Fox his ignorant Pamphlet against me, I shall record you and
he, and others in that answer for a company of damned Quakers; for this
Sentence of yours shall be recorded to remain from generation to generation, so
long as the Sun and Moon indureth.

The Copy of a Letter sent to Richard Chair Quaker, a Smith by trade in
Shoreditch. Sept. the 26. 1667.
Written by Lodwick Muggleton, one of the two last Prophets and Witnesses of
the Spirit unto the high and mighty God the Man Christ Jesus in Glory.
FINIS.

