THE NARRATIVE OF The most terrible and dreadful TEMPEST, HURRICANE, or
EARTHQUAKE in HOLLAND; On Wednesday the 22 of July last, With the particulars
of the Damages, how it overthrew and be^^ down Vast ^umbers of Ste^ple^, Mills
and Houses destroyed many Men and Children, cast away abundance of Ships ^n
^eve^al places, almost utterly ruined the City of Vtrecht, Where the Churches
following are Demolished; The famous Dome, or Cathedral of that pla^^* The
Spire of St. Jamses. Burr Kirk. St. Peter's Church, and St. Nicholas Church* And
other Wonderful Devastations; So that it is judged by Sobe^ Men, the Dutch have
hereby s^stained no less Damage, tha^ London, by the Dreadful F^r^ in Sixty
Six.

P^inted First at Amsterdam, by Order of the States, and Transl^^^ and
pub^ished in English, for General Satisfaction, from the Dutch Co(...)

To which is Added, a Letter from Kent, Whereby it appears that t^^ Remains of
this st^ange Storm p^oce^d^ng into England, did Ex^^aordin^^^ hurt the same
Night in Rumney Marsh, and there ab^u^s.

Cambridge, Printed by S. G. for John Ratcliff of Bost^^ 1674

THE NARRATIVE of the Late DREADFVL STORM in HOLLAND.
ON Wednesday the twenty second of Ju^ last (old style) being a day set apart
by Orde^ of our Superiors to be observed as a Fast for Imploring a bl^ssing
from Heaven, on the Forces o^ this State, under the Conduct of his Highness the
Prince of Orange, the weather was all day very ho^ and sultry, and continued
fair and clear till about seven of the Clock in the Evening: when there
a^^eared at this City of Amsterdam, to Windward, from ^^d very black thick
Cloud. Which being furiously (...) ought on by the Wind, suddenly filled the
whole ^emisphere with a terrible Darkness, which was in^ntly supplied by more
dreadful Flashes of Light^ng, that continued for some time without Intermis^n,
and made the whole Heavens seem as if they ^d been in a Flame: in the mean time
it thundered ^st horribly, and haild excessively, several of the ^nes that fell,
being (as it is credibly reported, and ^th been here attested before the
Magistrates) (...) that extraordinary, and almost incredible bigness ^at they
weighed above a quarter (some say almost ^f) a pound a piece. but that which
was yet more ^righting and prejudicial was the extreme fury of ^e wind, which
blew with such excess of violence, ^at the like was never before seen or heard
of in ^ese parts. The noise of the Thunder, continual ^^sh^^^s of Lightning
without the least respit, the (...) ^s Hail, and roaring of the wind, most
horrible to hear, coming thus all at once, made the am^ people conlude the Day
of Doom, or final di^^^^ of the World was come wpon them: All that in the
Streets were presently forced to take shel^ some Houses, partly to avoid the
Hail, and p^ for that otherwise they were blown into the (...) halls: wherein
many, especially Children and (...) persons by that means perished, or dashed
again^ Walls, and their breath struck out of their B^ or if they were strong
enough, or in places secu^ avoid those mischiefs, they were knocked on the
(...) by the falls of Houses, Steeples, and Chimneys (...) were woefully
shattered down in all parts, such (...) the violence of the storm, that the
ground i^ (...) seemed to move and tremble as if it had be (...) Earthquake
(which some do still believ it in p^ have been) and this City being generally
bu^ piles, such shakings threw down great ^^umb^ Houses, and blew away others
quite o^ ^^om (...) ^ions; whereby multitudes of people, both Men and Women,
and ^n were miserably destroyed, or sadly named and hurt; and those other that
happened to escape standing, were generally uncovered, their Tiles (...) off,
and their Walls o^ sides broke down, whereby G^^ds to an ^^^a^^e value were
spoiled and damaged. Most part of the Trees ^^me Leagues from hence were p^uck
d up by the Roots, and some ^e very biggest of them) carried above half a Mile
from the place they (...) in, above Thirty Miles are quite blown down, and most
of the other (...) City shattered beyond repair; nor was the mischief less by
water then (...) all the Vessels that lay before the Pales being broke loose,
and a do^^em over-set, thirty Ships turned up side down in a strange manner,
^^ats and small Vessels that were out in the Weilings were cast away ^t part of
their men, of whom, some are ^ffirmed by their surviv ng ^ons, to have been
first k^lled by the violence of the Hailstones, which ^reat, and withal so
sharp, that several persons going to help their ^^r Friend out, when blown into
the Ditches and ready to be drown^ ^eir heads and hands almost battered to
pieces, so that they were for^^t that charitable office to provide for their
own safety. This pr^di^m continued not in its fury here abov^ half an hour, and
yet the da^d losses sustained are fearce to be computed, Water^eugh, I nir^^^s,
(...) and other Villages have been in the same Condition, in some scarce (...)
st nding.

^tretch we have received an account that as this Tempest continued ^e, so it
was more dreadfu and prejudicial, insomuch that it has almost ^^ed that City,
which had not yet well recovered it self from these ^ately susteine^ whi^st in
the hand of an Enemy, the great D^om or ^the^ral of that place, a structu^e
renowned throughout Christen^ the body of the Church was beat down and buried
in its own rub^ ^he Pilla^s near the Ministers Pue, and the seven Crown
Candlesticks ^es Pu^, and the stately Clock-work are all beaten to pieces but
the ^elf remains whole; the ancient and stately Spire of St. Jameses ^as
likew^^^ ^hrown down, but providence ordered it so that it fell ^^e b^^^ ^n the
houses, which must otherwise have beaten down ^m, a^ (...) many of the
Inhabitants. The Burr Kirk is beaten in on both sides and half the Roof of it.
The Spire of St. Nicholas (...) blown away, and the Tower that stood by Agnus
Cloister also b^^^^ Magdalen Church and the Duke house, are demolisht, so like
(...) Towers of St. Peter's Church, and the body of the Church ruined.

A Schute lying full of Turf in the Gralt was beaten all to pieces, (...) the
Toll-steek port, another Turf Ship destroyed in the same manner (...) nine
Corn-mills on the Will, there is but three left standing, the Mill (...)
Griest-Streigh blown up from the ground, so are the Mills without t^^ strick
port; several Passengers were blown some into the Water, and s^ to the Air as
they were traveling thither, and several W^ggons that ca^ P^ssengers from
Arnhenime were by violence of the Wind overturn most of the people very much
hurt, and five k^lled. The St. Martins (...) is destroyed, and some poor people
Killed in it, and in short, ^^at City (...) so eminently that there s sca^ce a
House but has received and retains considerable m^^k^ of this Tempests
violence. It is reported to arise (...) B^^ssels, w^erei^ did much hurt, and
thence passed into North-Hollan^ Causing great Devastations in all its Progress.

We every mo^ent receive fresh tyding of further damages from a and t^ough it
be certain that very many persons have perished herein, y^ perfect account of
them as yet brought in to assertain the number; Nor (...) to^^l of the d^mages
su^tained be computed, for as it is Horror whilst ^tinued was in ^xpressible, so
the mischief done thereby is conceived t^ valuable.

POSTSCRIPT.
(...) the Translation of this Dutch Account, we have received Certain
^ormation that on the very same Wednesday n^ght, there happened a ^^y unusual
Tempest, or Storm, in Rumney Marsh, in the County ^t, and parts adjacent; It
began there ab^ut ten of the c^o^k, ^^h such fury that ^ff^ighted the People, f
ari^g all their Houses (...) have fallen on their hea^s; and in^eed it ^i^ very
co^siderable ^es there, both to Houses and Cattle; and contin^ed for above ^^r,
with that violence, that the Eldest M^n liv^^g thereabouts, heard the like: And
some prejudic^ we are told of a^ Se^ ^n our Co^sts ^^me time, which is
co^clud^d to be part of the r^^a^^s of the be^ ^entioned Hurricane: But the
same having s^ent it^ gre^test ^ury, here somewhat more gentle then it had
been in Holland.

FINIS.

