THE Believers happy Change BY DYING As it was Recommended in a SERMON
Preached, on the Occasion of the DEATH of Capt. Thomas Daniel Esquire. Who was
interred the day before, November 17th 1683.

By the Reverend Mr. Joshua (Mondey) late Pastor of the Church of Christ at
Portsmouth in New England, now gone to Rest.

Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one
walking in his Uprightness. BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen,
1697.

The Heads of a SERMON Preached upon the Occasion of the Death of Capt. Thomas
Daniel, Esqr. Who was Interred on the 17th. of November, 1683. Being Satturday,
and this was Preached the next Day.
Daniel XII. 13. But go thou thy way until the end be, for thou shall rest, and
Stand in thy Lot at the End of Days.
A Prudent Physician observes the State of his Patient's Body, and Administers
accordingly, Purgatives, Cordials, etc. as his Condition may require.

The Scripture is the Christian's Apothecaries Shop where he may go and take
freely (if he buy, it is without money and without Price, as* Isa. 55. 1.) what
his Occasions call for. If a man needs Reproof, Correction, Doctrine,
Instruction, etc. all these are there to be had. 2 Timothy 3. 16. If Cordials,
they are ready, Romans 15. 4. David experienced the Lords Statutes to be his
Songs in the House of his Pilgrimage. Psalm. 119. 54. And tells us that he had
fainted unless he had believed to see the Goodness of the Lord. (Psalm. 27. 14.)
of which the Scripture gives an account.

The last Lord's Day we were called upon in the word (and that in compliance
with such awful Dispensations of Divine Providence as were then among us) to
mourn and weep, but withal to weep as though we wept not; since which time we
have been under such Dispensations as call for an Ocean of Tears, so that there
is less danger of exceeding; our great care is (or should be) lest through
insensibleness of Gods hand we be found short of our Duty.

We were yesterday at the opening of a Grave, wherein no small part of the
remaining Glory of* this Province is covered up.

Death, and Graves, and Funeral Discourses are of late grown common among us,
though such Graves (I confess) are not common.

Since the coming in of this last Month, how many Witnesses has the Lord
renewed against us? how many Deaths in this little place? Let me without
offense allude to a Text in 2 Samuel 2. 30. where the loss of David's side is
reckoned up and worded thus [ Nineteen men and Asahel] And why not twenty men?
Because Asahel was a man of singular Worth, and therefore deserved to be named
singly, and hence not reckoned in the number of the vulgar, but set by himself.
Among our selves I may say, we have lost within the time prefixed precisely the
like number, and let it be thus worded [ Nineteen men and Daniel] A person that
deserved to be distinctly mentioned, let him stand alone, it being very
difficult to find an equal to set by him. It was part of Isreal's Blessing. (
Numb. 23 9.) to dwell alone, and not be reckoned among the Nations. A Daniel he
was indeed, Daniel signifies Judgment of God, or Judgment from God, and we may
say so of him two ways, either,

He was a man of Judgment, which was given him by God from whom all Wisdom,
Prudence and Judgment comes, and he had a large measure of it, was a man of
great Judgment, Meekness and Moderation also, prudent and patient, as all that
knew him know.

Again, Judgment of God, as a man the taking away of whom is a great Judgment
from God upon us, for so is the removal of the Prudent and Counselor, etc.
accounted ( Isa. 3. 1-3.) A man whose loss especially at such a time we shall
have occasion many a Day hence to bewail, a useful person removed (I fear in
Judgment to us) from the Evil to come. Thus God takes away such of whom the
World is not worthy, and leaves such among us that are not worthy of a place in
the World.

I remember some of his dying words* I have (said he) especially of late times
made it my Business to secure mine Interest in Christ, and have made such
progress therein, that I can hopefully lean upon him for pardon and life, and
am willing to dye. So lived, so died this pious, righteous, prudent, patient,
amiable person. I neither need nor dare flatter in the case. To flatter a man
is to speak more good of him than he deserves, a Crime not so easily committed
upon so worthy a Subject. We may and must speak of persons and things as they
be, and of him we may truly say as David said of Abner, 2. Sam. 3. 38, 39. Know
you not that there is a Prince and great man fallen this Day in Israel, and I
am this day weak, etc. A Text which I had some thoughts of making the Subject
of my present Discourse, had I not been for some cogent reasons diverted;
however take these four notes from the words, very suitable to our present
Concerns, which I shall but name, and come to my Text.

1. Men of Prudence and Conduct, are great men; yea, Princes in a Place. So is
Abner called, and so was our Daniel. 2. Whatever persons be in themselves, or
whatever the Concernment of the place is in them, yet Death will make them
fall. This great man and Prince (says David) is fallen. Wise men dye as well
as fools. Psa. 49. 10. Neither piety nor prudence, nor usefulness can keep men
from falling. Princes and Counselors, the Studs and Stays of a Place must
fall. 3. The Fall of such persons is a weakening to the Survivers. His Fall
made David weak. 4. The Death of such Worthies ought to be noted: Hence know
you not, supposing they did, and could not but know, and that it was their Duty
to know.
The Application and Improvement of these Notes, I leave to the serious hearer,
and the Intelgent Regarder of the Operation of Gods Hand, who will readily
understand the seasonableness and suitableness of such Truths.

But to come to my Text.

This verse is the close of the Prophecy of Daniel one of the Children of the
Captivity, and a man of great Integrity and Intimacy with God, whom the Lord
preserved in Babylon, and (though a Captive) made use of as an eminent Instrument
in his Hand for the Service of the Church, and for that end advanced him unto
great Dignity, made him a chief Ruler, and kept him in his place for the good
of his poor people, though he had many Enemies, that out of envy and malice
watched for his halting* And besides that, the Lord was pleased to be very
familiar with him, and acquaint him with much of his mind and will concerning
both his present and future Dispensations in his Providence, both to the Church
and the World, as is to be seen at large in his Prophecy.

Not to go any further back than this Chapter* here is in the Beginning of it a
Revelation of a Time of great Trouble coming upon his people such as had not
been since they were a Nation ( v. 1.) with other things that Daniel greatly
desired a plainer discovery of, and further satisfaction about, as not fully
understanding what was said, and therefore enquired, v. 8. but received that
Answer v. 9. that the words were Sealed till the Time of the End, and therefore
willed him to go his way, and adds that many should be tried, and that the wise
should understand, etc. and annexes something (though darkly too) concerning the
Time of the end. v. 10, 11, 12. about which he had enquired. ( v. 8.)

The words read are an Encouragement and Cordial referring to his own
particular Case, there should be such and such dismal Changes and Troubles in
the World, and upon the Jews, but as for his part it should be well with him,
he should go to Rest, and at the End of Days should rise and stand up to take
his Lot.

The People of God that have a prospect of Evil to come, are very much
concerned there about, and so was he, but God gave him this word of
Consolation, which is of use to all other in like Condition.

But thou] i. e. Thou Daniel, as v. 9. unto whom this speech was directed.

Go thy way] Satisfy thy self with what I have told thee, cease to be over
inquisitive about the premises, set thy heart at rest, speak no more to me,
concerning this matter.

Until the End] i. e. until thy End, which is quickly coming, or which thou
have but a little way to; go about thy Business till thou come to the end of
thy Business, be not over solicitous about those future events, nor
distractingly thoughtful about what shall fall out. Think of thine end to which
thou art going, and there shall be an end of all Trouble with thee.

Thou shall rest] Sometimes God gives his Eminent Servants a particular
Exemption from future Trouble, though they live in the Time of it, they shall not
share in it; he finds Chambers of Providence to hide them in (Isa. 26. 20.) we
hear concerning Noah, Daniel and Job what shall be their personal Lot in
troublesome Times; though they shall Save neither Son nor Daughter, yet
themselves shall escape. Ezekiel. 14. 14, 16. But this seems not to be the meaning
here, rather it refers to the end of his life, that he should rest in the Grave
which is given in Scripture as the common place of certain Rest to all the
Saints. See Rev. 14. 13. with Isa. 57. 2. so Job calls the Grave a resting
place. Job 3. 17, 18. and probably Daniel was now near the end of his life,
drawing on toward the Evening of his Day, ready to be put into the Bed of his
Grave, there to take his Rest.

Shall stand up] shall rise again, or come up out of thy Grave. Death is a
falling, and therefore the Resurrection is a standing up again, or a recovering
after that fall.

In thy Lott] i. e. in that place and condition which God has appointed for
thee. Thou shall have thine Inheritance or Portion in another World, called a
Lot, because the Land of Canaan an eminent Type of Heaven was laid out by Lot
to the people; hence a possession there was called a Lot, in allusion to which
the Lord minds Daniel of a Lot laid out to, and reserved for him there, which
he should stand up in, or come to the possession of.

At the End of Dayes] That is, at the end of the World, when Time shall be no
more; then an Eternity of Happiness shall be thy Lot or Portion.

As if he had said, Oh! Daniel, thou have heard from me a Prediction of
Impending Calamity, I have somewhat darkly discovered it, and thou art very
thoughtful thereabout, but go thy way, content thy self with what has been told
thee, thy Time is hastening to a period, and then for thy part thou shall go to
rest, and in the season of it stand up to take thy Lot among the Righteous,
and let that be enough to thee.

DOCTRINE; It should quiet and satisfy the People of God when Evil Days are
coming, that he can take them away to rest, and cause them to stand up again at
the End of Time in their Lot.
The taking away of pious ones is the bringing them to rest till the End of
Time when they shall stand up in their Lot.

There be four Propositions in the Doctrine.

1. God can and sometimes does take away his precious Ones by Death, when Evil
is coming. 2. When the Saints are taken hence, they go to Rest. 3. All so
removed and laid to Rest, shall Stand up again at the End of Days. 4. Each
shall stand up in that Lot which is appointed for them.
Proposition 1. God takes away some of his People when Evil Days are coming.

This was the case in the Text, unparalled Evil was coming, v. 1. and now go
thy way Daniel. Isa. 57. 1, 2. is a plain Confirmation thereof. Scripture
Instances abound for the proof of it: Methuselah dyed just before the Flood.
Josiah was to go to his Grave in peace before the threatened Calamities came. 2 Chronicles 34. 28. Hezekiah was to have Peace and Truth in his Days, and the
Judgments spoken of not to come till he was gone. Isa. 39. 6, 7, 8.

Daily Examples also confirm it.

The Reasons are,

1. From the great love of God to his Children to call them home before Trouble
comes. A tender Father and Mother will do so by their Children; call them in
when the night is drawing on, or when a Storm is rising. 2. From the Saints
themselves, whom the Lord may find ripe, and so house them before a Storm,
their work may be finished, and so he calls them off, to give them their
Reward. 3. For warning to the wicked, and as a means to awaken them, if ought
may prevail, or else to leave them without excuse. 4. On the account of the
Godly that do Survive, who are concerned in the removal of them that go, and 1.
For their further Exercise and Trial of their Faith and Patience; and a great
Trial it must needs be to be deprived of such Helps. 2. To necessitate them to
Live by Faith; when he takes away such Props that they leaned on. When Chariots
and Horsemen, Studs and Pillars are removed, it is time then to look to, and
lean upon the Lord.
5. From God himself, who hereby discovers his Sovereignty in taking and
leaving when he pleases. His Wisdom in having other ways to carry on his work
than we can think of. His Power in raising up other Instruments when he
pleases.
Or that he may appear so much the more clearly and gloriously with his own Arm
and Power when Instruments (that often eclipse his Glory) are taken away.

Prop. 2. When Godly Ones go, they go to Rest.

For proof see Isa. 57. 1, 2. Rev. 14. 13. Hence Death is called a falling
asleep; so did Stophen just before the heat, or at the beginning of that great
Persecution. ( Acts 7. ult.)

Quest. What Rest do they go to?

Answ. 1. A Rest from Labor. This Life is a laborious Life, especially to the
Godly; many others sin, and play and sleep away their time, but they labor and
strive, and run, and fight, and wrestle; all which are very laborious
Employments. Rev. 14. 13.

2. A Rest from Sin; there is no man lives and sins not; but when the Saints
dye, they cease from Sin.

3. A Rest from the Temptations of Satan. There is no Serpent in that Paradise
whither the Spirits of Just men go at Death.

4. A Rest from Oppression by, or any vexation from evil men. Job 3. 17, 18, 19.

5. A Rest from all Suffering and Sorrow from within, without, themselves, or
others, they shall have no more Pain, Grief, etc. All Tears shall be wiped away.

6. To make up all that can be thought on that good is; it is a Rest in Christ
and with Christ, and that is best of all, yea all that is best or good.

Quest. Why do the Saints then Rest?

Answ. Because they Labored and Toyled while here, were faithful at their
labor while they lived, and therefore go to rest when they dye. And it is a
righteous thing with God to give the laboring and troubled ones Rest at that
Day, 2 These. 1. 6, 7. Our lifetime is the Day wherein we are to work, there is
no work, device or labor in the Grave, Eccl. 9. 10. which though it be a
Judgment to the wicked, who slept away their laboring Time, that they shall
then have no more Opportunity to work, yet it is a comfort to the Godly
Laborers that they shall have no more need or occasion to work, but shall go
to their Rest, and cease from all work.

Prop. 3. After their going away to Rest, they shall stand up again at the Last
Day.

There needs no more to be said toward the Confirmation of this Assertion, save
the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which is one of the main Articles of our
Faith, and that without which all our Faith and Hope would be vain, as not
reaching any further than this life, and so leaving us most miserable. 1 Cor.
15. 17, 18, 19.

Christ told Martha, her Brother should rise aagain, and she owned it. This was
Paul's hope. (Act. 24. 15.) and Jobs Comfort. Job 19. 25. The Scripture is full
of this Truth.

The ground of it is, partly from their Union to Christ their Head, who dyed
and rose again, and so shall they by virtue of his Resurrection. Partly that
they may receive their Reward according to their works.

Prop. 4. When they stand up, each shall stand in his Lot.

1. There shall be a Lot Laid out to each of them; a peculiar place and
station provided for every one: All the Saints both great and small, not only a
general State of Glory for all, but each shall have his own Lot, Mansion,
Crown. 2. He shall stand, abide or continue therein. The Lot is that State of
Glory peculiar to every Believer. Indeed there shall be degrees, some greater,
some lesser, though every Vessel shall be filled. Some shall have Five Cities,
others two, every one answerable to the Measure of free Grace bestowed on him,
and the Degrees of its acting in him, each shall be rewarded both for kind and
measure according to his works.
And the Reason is from the Righteousness of God, who will therefore (as
Justice obliges) render to every one what is his own, or due. Indeed not unto
Believers on Christ for the sake of their works upon the account of their own
merit properly, but for the sake of the Works and Merits of Christ only, yet
still according to their works: Not for your sakes, but for mine own Name sake.

Uses of the First Proposition.
If God does use to take away some of his Eminent Ones, or bid them go away
before Evil Days.

Use 1. Then it is an ill Omen, and should be accounted matter of great
awakening and solemn Consideration to see good men removed. If prudent and
useful, especially if pious men be taken away, when meek and merciful ones are
removed, it looks as if there were Evil at hand, which God is willing to Save
them from. Noah's housing in the Ark, and Lot's entering into Zoar carried an
ill face to the Old World and Sodom. Especially if the removal of such be not
Laid to heart, their removal is signal, and not laying to heart Causal also of
approaching Evil.

Use 2. Learn hence also that however the Death of any may prove to the
Survivers, it is always in mercy to the Godly. As all other Troubles, so Death
is theirs; let it come when and how it will. It is an effect of his Kindness to
them, and in pursuance of his Care for them. Gods way often is to take away the
best first, and lay them up safe out of harms way, and leave the rest, either
to mend or grow worse; and if they grow worse, so to ripen them unto ruin, for
not growing better under such awakening Providence as the removal of the good.

Use 3. Then we should not be inordinately careful or solicitous, for fear of
Trouble before hand; do not distract thy self about what may be hereafter; yea,
though it seems to be near, even at the very door: For, besides that fixedness
without fear of evil Tidings is attainable, and ought to be labored after, as
a fruit of Faith. Psa. 112. 7, 8. and besides that many times evils feared do
not come at all. I say besides both these, this may comfort us against
approaching Trouble, that it may be we may be gone into the Grave before it
comes: Who can tell how soon God may say to him, Go thy way Daniel, go to thy
Rest out of the reach of that Trouble thou fear, before it comes to such an
height as to work thee any considerable Damage. A prudent foresight of evil,
and guarding or preparing against it is good, and a Duty, but distracting
thoughtfulness is always sinful, and often needless, because possibly thou may
not live to see it.

If thou art a good, faithful and diligent Servant, the Lord may accept of thy
good will, and call thee off before the pinch comes. A good Master will do so
by a good Servant that is diligent, and willing to do what he is able; he will
call him by name, and take him off when he sees the heat of the day a coming,
or some pinch at hand that will be too hard for him, he will favor him, and
lay the burden upon others. So did the Lord here say to Daniel, Go thy way,
give over, thou have done well, go lie down and take thy Rest.

Uses of the Second Proposition
Do the Saints go to Rest when they Dye?

Use 1. Then see what cause we have to bless God for Jesus Christ, who has
made one of the worst things in the Curse, viz. Death, to be matter of comfort
unto all his, as it brings them to ease, quiet and rest. That dreadful thing
Death, the King of Terrors shall be to them their Sleep and Rest.

Use 2. Then Death is not so dreadful to the People of God as it is represented
and supposed usually to be. If it be their Rest, or that which gives them a
Passage or Entrance into Rest, it is a very pleasant, sweet, desirable and
comfortable thing.

It Is true, Death is indispensibly the Lot of all, and made so by Divine
Appointment; ( Heb. 9. 27.) and it is to Nature very irksome, and unto sinning
Nature terrible and affrighting, but to them that are in Christ, and so have
their sins pardoned, etc the Sting of Death removed, it should not be so. And
to prevent its being so, the Lord is pleased to find out the most sweet,
pleasant and alluring Metaphors to set forth the Nature of it by, not only to
take away the Terror of it, but to render it delightsome and desirable to them;
and among many other, these two of Rest and Sleep which are not only harmless
things, but very desirable and attractive too; how does the laboring and
traveling man long for the setting of the Sun, and end of his Journey that he
may rest, the sick and pained man to whom wearisome days and nights are
appointed; what would he give for a nights sleep? Oh that I could sleep! Oh
that I could take my Rest! that I could get a little sleep* Then why should a
true Believer be scared at Death; there is no matter of Affrightment in going
to rest. And that is one thing the Lord is aiming at, in making the World a
weary World to his people, that they may be willing to leave it, long to be out
of it, desirous of the Grave, that they may go to Rest therein.

Use 3. Then be not over much troubled at the removal of any of our pious
Friends whom God has taken away by Death, they are but gone to Rest, and why
should that grieve us? When persons are sick or diseased and weak, one of the
principal things we are solicitors about in their behalf is that they may take
their Rest, when their eyes have been long held waking, O how do we wish for
them that they might take their Rest, we make all quiet and still, suffer no
noise nor any disturbance that might hinder them of their Rest; and if we can
see them take their Rest, we hope they shall do well. So when night comes we
get our Children to bed, and if they be once asleep we are pleased, and think
all is well with them. And why are we not as well satisfied and contented about
our Friends that Die in the Lord; they do Sleep in Jesus, and so shall do well,
they have been toyling in the world, and are tired with the labor of it, and
are now gone to Sleep, why should we begrudge them their Rest?

Indeed for our own loss of them we should grieve and for Gods displeasure that
may appear in the stroke we should mourn, and for our sins that have made God
angry, we should cry bitterly; but for them that are gone to Rest, see that we
weep as though we wept not.

The Grave is called an House and Bed, and it is so sanctified by the Death of
Christ, that it is a good house, a good bed, both soft and warm, a comfortable
bed, a place of quiet and repose, a place of Security and Secrecy; hence Job
speaks of Gods hiding him in the Grave. Job 14. 13. a man in the Grave is
hidden from the strife of Tongues, hidden from the rage and malice of evil men,
and out of the reach of all that devise mischief against him; he is there freed
from all Trouble and Molestation whatsoever: There the Servant is free from his
Master, and they hear not the cry of the Oppressor? Job 3. 13, 17, 18, 19. They
that are lodged in the Grave, are lodged in an house, where they are safe from
fear, are not disturbed by all the noise and lumber in the World, though the
Earth quake, and the Sea roar they are not moved, though the Mountains be cast
into the midst of the Sea, they are not affected with it; the sound of the
Trumpet and Alarms of Wars do not affright them. There is no aching head, sick
stomach, pained Bowels, spending, weakening Cough to break their Rest; no Evil
Tidings can make their ears Tingle, or hearts Tremble; Diseases, Pains,
Business, Cares, Fears, would not let them rest here, but none of these things
shall molest them there; nothing shall awaken them till the Last Trumpet
sounds, when they shall arise to receive that Incorruptible Crown that fades
not away* reserved in the Heavens for them. Then let not us disturb our selves
about them, be at rest concerning them, there let them rest quiet till the
Morning of the Resurrection, in which they shall rise to the full Enjoyment of
that Christ in whose Bosom they are now sleeping. If they be quiet in their
Beds, let us be quiet also about them, if they be at Rest, labor we to compose
our selves unto free submission to Sovereign Disposal; yea, and comfort our
selves in this, that however it may fare with us or others, yet such and such
of ours are well and at rest, gotten quite out of harms way, that no evil shall
come near their dwelling however, they are safe, enjoying quiet rest, till the
Pit be dug for the wicked. Psalm. 94. 13. Such of our Friends are out of the
Gunshot of the malice and rage of men and Devils.

Rather let us so believe and live, so work and labor while here, that when we
dye we may rest with them, than spend our time in inordinately grieving for
them who are at rest.

Use 4. Let this serve also to comfort and quiet us against all the labor,
toil and travel that God has appointed to us in this World. Work willingly,
labor cheerfully, bear our Cross which God lays on us without repining or
reluctance, it is but for a little while, Rest is a coming.

It comforts the Hireling while he is bearing the heat and burden of the day,
that it is but for a Day, and when he has accomplished his Day, there is a
Recompense and Rest ready for him, when he has ended his work, he shall have
his Reward, and go to his Rest. And as the Rest of a laboring man is sweet,
when it comes, so the fore thoughts of it should be sweet while he is at work;
be sure it should be so with all the Godly. It should make every good man's work
go off hand with the more content and comfort: I shall rest anon and the harder
my work, the sweeter my Rest.

The Parents of Noah, when he was born, by a Spirit of Prophecy (no doubt Genesis
5. 29.) called him Noah; promising themselves Rest by him under all their Toil,
etc. Jesus Christ is the true Noah* from whom all true Rest comes; he has by
his lying in the Grave made it a place of Rest; and this should be thought on,
together with that Everlasting Rest that Death leads to; and with this should
we comfort our selves and one another.

And as this Consideration should comfort us while we live, so it is suitable
to make us willing to dye; yea, to long for Death as much as ever a tired
Traveller or weary Labourer did for his bed*

Alas! for all that lothness to dye which is to be found in us, either we are
not weary of the world but have too much content and rest in it. Or we do not
look upon the Grave as a place of Rest.

Or we do not consider the sweetness of that Rest; or we are not well assured
that it is a Rest for us; or else [ Go thy way and go to Rest] would be a sweet
word to us.

This should make us Love Death, be fond of it embrace it as a very welcome
Messenger sent to poor weary Creatures to put them to Bed. We read of some who
out of their extreme misery have been seeking Death, courting the Grave,
hunting for a passage into the Grave; but how much more earnest and intense
should we be, if beside the Troubles here to drive us, we had the hope of Rest
to allure us.

Uses of the Third Proposition.
After they have rested shall they stand up?

Use 1. Then Death is not an Annihilation, it is a Dissolution, but does not
annihilate, it returns men to Dust, but not to nothing.

Use 2. This serves to magnify the power of God that can make a dead person
stand up again, not only one that has been four days, but more than so many
thousand years dead, to appear again. And the Consideration of the power of God
in the work of Resurrection should strengthen our Faith with reference to all
other difficult cases whether bodily or spiritual, personal or relative, that
our selves in particular, or the Church in general may meet with, however
discouraging and afflictive; if the Lord can make the Body after its
Dissolution and resolution into its principles to arise and stand up again,
then he can do so by the Soul also which is sunk, and low and discouraged, is
ready to say that he is shut up, and shall come out no more, is become like the
dry bones in the valley, the Lord can make him stand up. In like manner can he
do by his own work, Religion, the Cause and Interest of Christ and his people;
it may sem to run low, and Israel may be brought very low, but the Lord can
revive his work, and people; He can raise up the Tabernacle of David that is
fallen: He can build up the walls of Jerusalem. Jesus Christ is the
Resurrection and the Life, both to Zion in general, and to all the true Sons
and Daughters thereof; and will certainly give a Resurrection to his fallen
Cause and Work, and cause it to stand up.

Use 3. Hence also, Pious Friends though gone away are not lost; as they are
not annihilated, so as not to be, so neither are they lost so as not to be
found. As to this world, so they are lost never to be seen here any more in
that Capacity as formerly: the place that has known them, shall know them no
more, they shall no more have a Portion in ought that is done under the Sun;
but really they are not lost, they shall all be found and stand up: Not one
Grain shall be lost; all the Dead both small and great shall make their
personal appearance; and especially none of Christ's Beloved Ones shall be lost.

We think it no great matter to take leave of our Friends at Bedtime, yea to
look on them and see them unclothe themselves and go to bed, lie down to rest,
we can cheerfully bid them good night, expecting to see them upon their legs
again, standing up next morning. It Is want of Faith that we do not treat our
dying friends accordingly; take leave of them cheerfully, wishing them a good
nights rest, expecting to see them in the Morning of the Resurrection. (as
Psalm. 49. 14.) when the Righteous shall stand up, and be uppermost too, have
dominion over all their Enemies that despised and trampled upon them in this
World.

Use 4. See a vast difference between a pious Saint, a precious Daniel in his
Condition then, and that of a wicked man, an ungodly one. The Godly shall
stand, the wicked are not so, they shall not stand in Judgment. ( Psalm. 1.)
they shall rise only to fall, to fall utterly and eternally. The Believer only
shall be accounted worthy to stand when the Son of Man shall come; but others
shall be thought worthy to fall, yea shall be cast down into utter Destruction.

Uses of the Fourth Proposition.
Shall each stand in his Lot?

Use 1. Hence there is a peculiar Lot appointed to each after the
Resurrection. Every one shall have his own lot, reward and portion; every one
that is written up among the Living shall stand up unto a Lot, and to that
which is his own lot, not another man's. Many now that profess Religion, do but
trim themselves with borrowed Feathers, adorn themselves with a Form of
Godliness without the power of it, and so get the name and repute which belongs
to Godly men indeed, being by charity so accounted, but then it shall be
otherwise; every man shall have his own lot, shall be rewarded according to his
works. Not only great Daniel, but every one of Christ's little ones shall each
have his Lot and share of Glory.

Use 2. See hence what ought to be our great care while here, viz. after a good
Lot then, and our standing therein. E're long we must go into the Grave, where
there is no work or device, nothing more to be done, save only to receive and
take possession of our lot answerable to the life we have led while here. To
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling is therefore our business now,
and then our Lot will be answerable. Be sound in the way that may lead us to
the getting a good lot then; we would not then be gathered with Sinners and
bloody or worldly men. (Psalm* 26) then do not cast in our Lot with them now,
which we may be tempted to, as Prove. 1. 14. it is no great matter what we get
or lose here, so we may have a good lot there. Here is a great deal of ado
among us at this day about our Lots and Lands, what a scuffle is there about a
little Earth? here is arresting, pleading, impleading, fending and proving; one
pleading his right, and another his, one claiming and another endeavoring to
invalidate his claim; and about this how buisy are men! But be not over
solicitous here, know that there is a far greater Question in hand, viz. What
shall be my Lot and where shall it lie in the other World; and how shall I get
a good Title to a good Lot there, and how shall I maintain it, and secure my
right against all that would dispossess me? Oh! let this be the main business
with us. Alas, the best Lot that any man has in this world is Cabul, a dirty
place, and it will cost more to keep it than its worth, considering what
striving and contending there is about it: but if thou get a Lot there, God is
the maintainer of it; it was purchased for thee, and given to thee by Christ,
and also reserved and kept for thee, that God who has given it thee is obliged
to make good and to warrant his Deed of Gift against all Claimers whatsoever.
No Writ of Ejection shall ever dispossess thee. And it is a Lot lying in a
pleasant place, and a goodly Heritage. It is the Lot of the Righteous upon
which the Rod of the Wicked shall not always rest: A lot which God has cast
for thee, which Christ is gone before as thy Forerunner, Agent, Advocate, to
take possession of for thee, and in thy name and stead, if thou be a believer
on him, kept for thee, and thou kept for it and to it, by the mighty power of
God through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5. Thy Lot there is the
Inheritance among the Saints in Light, Abraham's Bosom, the Masters Joy, an
Incorruptible Crown, a Kingdom prepared, etc. Then let not worldly Possessions,
Enjoyments, Profits, Pleasures, Buisiness take up that time, and those thoughts
that should be employed about things of an higher Import and Concernment. We
may conclude our Discourse with this one practical Question.

Q. What shall I do that when called away, or commanded to go away, I may be
sure to rest till the end of Days, and then stand up in an Happy Lot? Or how
shall I so live that I may go to rest when I go away from hence?

A. It is a great Question, and that which nearly concerns us all.

In general, I would say it is for the Lords faithful ones, his Daniels, or
beloved ones, this Rest remains for the People of God, and that for those that
are really not only nominally so. It is the Righteous man, who when he dies
enters into his Bed, and Rests in his Grave, (Isa. 57. 1, 2.) The Securing to
thy self that thou art one of these will secure the other.

More particularly take these three Directions.

1. If thou would go to Rest when thou dyest, See that a State of Sin which
is a State of Nature be made a Restless state to thee: See that thou be not
able to rest in Sin, or in any thing in this World; see that nothing under the
Sun quiet or give thee rest.

Those whom God brings to rest when they dye, are such as were distested while
alive, driven out of all false Rests that Sinners take up-withal in the World.
Some rest in one thing, some in another. Some cannot rest unless they Sin or
have done some mischief: Some rejoice in Iniquity, some rest in the Abundance
of the World, fill their Barns and Bags, and then go to rest; some get a
Profession of Godliness, a Name to live, they hear, read, pray, etc and therein
they rest, their Privileges, their own Righteousness is the Rest of many. But
the Lords way to give Rest is first by disquieting and disresting them in till
he brings them out of all other things, that so he may bring them to the true
Rest. Sin shall give thee no Rest, no nor the World, nor any thing therein. If
the Lord intend to bring thee to rest, an Unregenerate Estate shall be an
unquiet State to thee, thou shall find no rest to the Sole of thy foot, while
in it, no rest till got into the Ark, the only place of Rest If ever God give
thee Rest, Sin shall be a mere Slavery and Bondage to thee, worse than Egyptian
Bondage, under which he will make thee to groan and sigh and cry till he bring
thee out. He will make indwelling Sin, out-breaking Sin, Original Sin, actual
Sin, a burden to thee too heavy for thee to bear, if ever he give thee Rest.
This know, that one of the next Mercies to Christ, and a Preparatory Mercy in
order to the giving of Christ and Rest in him, is to disrest in Sin, and for
want of Christ; nor will he ever bring any to Rest but in this way. And thou
must be so disquieted about Sin, that all the World cannot quiet thee, neither
pleasures, profits, honors, company, business; no nor thy Duties, Prayers,
Tears, own Righteousness, and c. shall be able to give thee Rest.

2. Being thus weary, laboring and restless, Come to Christ at his Call, and
his Promise is, that he will give thee Rest (Mat. 11. 28.) Oh! make that thy
business (as our Daniel whose Death we are bewailing, said he had done) to
secure an Interest in Christ, and there is Rest. Faith in Christ will give thee
true Rest. Faith stablishes and fixes the Heart. Psalm. 112. Faith in his
Power, Promise, Will. And be sure thou make Christ not only the Refuge, but the
Rest of thy Soul, which no Hypocrite does or can do; say of him and to him, I
have none but thee: he whose heart can say, None but Christ, none but Christ,
shall have him and in him Rest here, and with him everlasting Rest hereafter
Make use of all Bereavements, disquietments, troubles here to make thee hie
away to Christ for Rest. The poor Dove found nothing but Water all over the
face of the Earth, and could not be quiet till gotten to the Ark, where Noah
was ready to put forth his hand and pull her in. This World has always been,
though at some times more than other, it is a troubled Sea, there is nothing
but instable Water; uncertain comforts, certain disquietments; let this Serve
to make Christ Precious, with whom is certain Rest.

And the reason why those that get into Christ shall rest is because he takes
away Sin the only cause of disrest, Sin the sting of Death, and then Death
cannot separate from the Love of Christ, and where that is must needs be Rest.
He that has seen Christ and in him obtained Salvation from Sin, he may depart
in peace, and shall go to Rest.

3. Then follow Jesus Christ Universally, Laboriously in all the ways of
New-Obedience; and that will carry thee to Rest. Those only that followed the
Lord fully entered into Rest, and had a Lot in Canaan, and they were only two
of the Congregation, Numb 14 24 with 32. 12. If you would Rest when you dye,
work hard for Christ while you live. The Rest of a Laboring man is sweet; then
labor with all your might, and that will both secure your Rest and make it
Sweet. And indeed it is a buisy World in which we are, here is a great deal of
work, much business to be done for Christ, none need stand still for want of
work, and none shall rest but those that did work. Lazy, idle, slothful Sinners
shall never go to rest: Idleness tends to disrest, but all regular labor and
motion leads to rest.

And the nearer we come to our end the more vigorously let us move toward our
rest. Its observed of natural Motions the nearer the Center the Swifter, so let
it be with Christians. Are there any of us Aged and Gray Headed, do we see the
Time of our Dissolution drawing nigh, are the Shadows of the Evening stretched
out upon us, then let us lift up our feet, put on, mend our pace, the Grave is
in view, we walk and work in the sight of our Resting place, and that should
quicken us. It is the last day of the Week with many of us, and toward the
evening of that also, and then comes the Sabbath, the Rest, the constant,
eternal rest of laboring Believers, those who have been working, their Works
follow them and yield them Rest. And if the Lord help us now to believe, and
that with such a Faith as works by Love, we not only shall, but already do
enter into Rest. Heb. 4. 3. Troubles in the World we shall have, but peace and
rest in Christ. Sin disturbs, flesh makes us groan, bodily diseases afflict us,
toil and travel in the World tire us, evil Tidings make us afraid, and fears of
worse disquiet us, but still this Rest remains sure. And know that there is a
voice of Christ in every trouble, loss, bereavement, is that we come to him for
Rest, he is Father, Mother, Wife, and he is the only Husband in whose House we
shall find Rest. Oh! let all the Sorrowful, bereaved ones that are ready to say
with him (Jer. 45. ^.) Woe is me, I faint and find no Rest; I say, let all such
hear Christ saying, Come to me and take my Yoke on you and walk with, and work
for me, and you shall find Rest. Hearken to this Invitation unto Rest, which
Faith leads to the beginning of, Obedience helps to a progress in, and Death
will bring to the full Accomplishment of. And let us follow them who through
Faith and Patience do inherit the Promises: and for our Imitation, let me
Commend to you some of the Excellencies found in this Daniel of whom the Text
speaks, and there were not none of them wanting in our Daniel, whose Death we
are lamenting.

He is noted for a man of Great Wisdom and Prudence, (Chap. 1.) The Fear of God
is the beginning of Wisdom, and the Lord has directed all that want Wisdom to
ask it.

He was a man of a Tender Conscience, afraid of desileing himself with the
Portion of the Kings meat. Oh! get and keep a Tender Conscience, especially in
dangerous, tempting and defiling times; a Tender Conscience, especially where
there is an enlightened understanding, and sound Judgment, is a choice Mercy.

Again, He was a man not given to Appetite, but one whose Moderation was
eminently obvious, he could content himself with Pulse and Water, when he might
have had Wine and flesh.

A man much in Prayer, especially in Secret Prayer, from which Duty three Times
a day, the Kings Edict, and Danger of being devoured by Lions could not deterr
him, yea was conversant also in Fasting and Prayer. A man of Prayer, hence
mentioned as such an one. Ezekiel. 14. 14. Never more need of Prayer than in our
days: Pray always, Pray fervently; and in evil Times we should pray more
frequently and fervently than at other Times He is no Christian that does not
Pray, he cannot be miserable what ever befalls him that can and does Pray.

He was a Thankful man, as well as a Praying man. See Chap 2. and 7.

A very Humble, self-denying man; still gave God the Glory of ought that was
done by him: Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy Name be the Praise, say
they, Psalm 115. 1. So he Chap. 2. 28, 30. God reveals Secrets, and it is not
for my Wisdom, etc. above others.

He was not lifted up by his great Advancement, so as to forget his God,
himself, or his business; one of the first or best of those few that was not
the worse for Worldly greatness or advancement, lost nothing of his Religion by
his preferment.

An Exact and Circumspect walker; much afraid and shy of Sin, and so punctual
and prudent in his Carriage, as that they could find nothing against him, save
in the matter of his God, though he was maliciously and curiously watch't; he
was a man that had obtained an Answer to that Prayer, Lord, lead me in a plain
path because of mine observers. And indeed his being so much in Communion with
God helped him to be so harmless and blameless, like one of the Sons of God
among men, though in the midst of a Crooked and Perverse Generation.

He was much concerned for the Church of God; so was good Nehemiah also. And
note, the best men have always been most Solicitous for Sion; its a good
Character of a good man that is full of thoughts for, Inquiries after the State
of, and much in Prayer in the behalf of Gods Church and People: one that has
imbark't his All with the Church of God, joys their joy, feels their Trouble,
weeps their Tears, can heartily mourn when Sion mourns, cannot drink Wine in
Bowls and not be grieved for the Affliction of Joseph; can take up his Lot
with the Church though in a low and sorrowful Condition, and desires no other joy
than to be made glad with the gladness of Gods Heritage; this is like Daniel:
though Daniel himself was in Prosperity, in great plenty, Credit and Reputation
so that he wanted nothing, yet Sion lay at his heart; his Prayers and tears,
and fastings, were for Jerusalem. And this is always indispensibly, but at
some Times more eminently the Duty of every Christian: we should prefer
Jerusalems Joy before all our Joy, and mourn when Sion mourns, what ever matter
of rejoicing we may have in our selves, As it fairs with Sion, should it fair
with us.

If we thus live lives of Faith and Obedience, we shall keep our selves in the
Love of God, and have the Peace. of God to keep us. Troubles are come and will
come, but we shall be under the special Care of God even in worst Times; and it
will not be long ere the Lord will say to every Sincere Soul that has followed
him in the Regeneration, that has known him, and loved him, and made it his
business to Serve him, and to abound in the work of the Lord; Go thy way, go
to Rest, thou have labored long enough, done and suffered so much as I had
appointed for thee, now go take thy Rest, enter into the bed of thy Grave,
which I have Sweetened and Sanctified for thee, there take thy quiet Repose,
till the end of Days, and then thou shall arise again and stand up in thy Lot
to receive that Crown of Life which Christ the Righteous Judge shall give at
that Day, to all that Love his Appearing.

In the mean Time let all Sincere Souls, Comfort themselves and one another
with these Words.

FINIS.

