SIGILUM: GVB: ET: SOCIET: DE: MATTACHVSETS: BAY: IN: NOVA: ANGLIA
COME OVER AND HELP US

woodcut

BY The GOVERNOR and General COURT Of the COLONY of the Massachusetts Bay, In
New England.
IT having been a thing too Sensible and Obvious to escape the Observation of
all who are not wholly Strangers in our Israel; that this poor Land has
labored under a long Series of Afflictions and Calamities, whereby we have
suffered successively in our precious and pleasant Things, and have seen the
Anger of the righteous God against us, expressed in Characters, which ought to
be as Terrible as they must needs be visible unto us; it having also, both by
the Testimonies of those, that after the most humble and exact Enquiries into
the Mind of God, have discovered the same unto us, and by their own General and
Repeated Confessions, become undeniable; That a Corruption of Manners attended
with Inexcusable Degeneracies and Apostasies, found in too many of this People,
is the cause of that Controversy, which the God of our Fathers has, for many
years been maintaining with us: It being likewise at this day, such a
Probation-time with all New England as this Country has never before seen from
the first Foundation of it, and the Judgments of that Holy God, who has beheld
how incorrigible we have hitherto been under all His Dispensations, now
arriving to such an Extremity, That the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees,
and we are in imminent danger of perishing, if a speedy REFORMATION of our
Provoking Evils prevent it not (...) THIS COURT have therefore thought it
needful to praeface their other Endeavors for the Public Welfare, with a very
solemn Admonition unto this whole People, that they every where give
Demonstrations of a thorough Repentance, without which we have little reason to
hope for any good success in our Affairs.

Wherefore it is Ordered, that the Laws of this Colony against Vice, and all
sorts of Debauchery and Profaneness (which Laws have too much lost their edg by
the late Interruption of the Government) be now faithfully and Vigorously put
in Execution; Particularly the Laws against Blasphemy, Cursing, Profane
Swearing, Lying, Unlawful Gaming, Sabbath breaking, Idleness, Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, and all the Enticements, and Nurseries of such Impieties. Together
with all other the wholesome Laws and Orders agreeable to the present
Circumstances of the Country; by the Execution whereof, we may approve our
selves a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

And as all Persons are hereby warned to avoid those Vices which these Laws are
designed for the Prevention and Chastisement of (the Lovers of, and Pleaders
for, such Iniquities, being among the principal Troublers of their Country) So
all inferior Officers are enjoined to perform their Duty in finding and
bringing out Offenders against the aforesaid Laws, and withal to give notice to
such Offenders that they must expect the Justice of an Exemplary Punishment.

And that no attempt toward Reformation, may want that Assistance which all
good men will be willing to give thereunto, it is hoped that the Ministers of
God will to the public Reading of this Proclamation, adjoyn their own fervent
Labors, not only for the Rebukeing and Suppressing of those Provoking Evils,
which are marked for common Hatred: but also to witness against the more
Spiritual Sins, which fall not so much under the cognizance of Humane Laws,
namely, such as Unbelief, Worldliness, Heresy, Pride, Wrath, Strife, Envy, and
the Neglect of communion with God, in both Natural and Instituted Worship, and
the Contempt of the everlasting Gospel, with a shameful want of due
Family-Instruction, which are the Roots of Bitterness in the midst of us.

Moreover, after the Example of Pious Rulers commended in Sacred Writ; the
Churches every where are hereby advised to give utmost Encouragement unto the
Faithful and Watchful Pastors of their Souls; to seek (where they lack) a full
Settlement and Enjoyment of such Officers, as the Lord Jesus Christ has
appointed for their Edification; to reflect seriously and frequently on their
Covenants, to sharpen their Discipline against those that walk disorderly; and
immediately to compose their Differences and Contentions (if such there be)
whereby any of them may be distempered and enfeebled, that so they may become
Terrible as an Army with Banners.

Furthermore it is Expected that the several Towns within this Jurisdiction do
speedily furnish themselves with all fit means for the good Education of Youth,
and take special care to avoid Factions and Quarrels in their other Town
Affairs; and all Plantations are strictly forbidden to continue without the
Advantages of having the Word of God constantly preached unto them, or without a
Sincere and Active Industry, to obtain the Presence of the Lord Christ in all
His blessed Ordinances.

And Finally, this whole People are hereby advertised, that if these Essays
for an universal Reformation, shall be obstructed (as those in the days of the
Reforming Josiah were) by Men's being settled on their Lees, and hating to be
Reformed, they can reasonably look for no other issue than this, that the
jealous God will punish them yet seven times more for their iniquities: But,
that if the God of Heaven shall grant unto them the Grace to Remember whence
they are fallen, and Repent and do the first Works, it will give a greater
Prospect of Prosperity, than can arise from the best Counsels, and biggest
Armies.

The Work of Reformation thus endeavored, is now recommended unto the blessing
of the Almighty, with whom alone it is, to Recover a Backsliding people;
persuading our selves, that the Event thereof would be Salvation nigh unto us,
and Glory dwelling in our Land.

March 13. 1689/1690. Isaac Addington Secr.


