Antichrist in Spirit unmasked: OR, Quakerism a great Delusion.

Being an Answer to a Pamphlet lately published and dispersed in and about
Deptford in Kent, entitled, The Christianity of the People commonly called
QUAKERS.

Which they say is asserted against the unjust Charge of their being no
Christians, upon several Questions relating to those Matters wherein their
Christian Belief is questioned.

By which Pamphlet they would persuade the World that the QUAKERS are
Christians.

In which ANSWER you have their Deceit detected, their pretended Faith
examined, and proved a Counterfeit.

And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light. 2 Cor.
11. 14. If that Light that is in them be Darkness, how great is that Darkness?
Mat. 6. 23. They are of those that rebel against the Light, they know not the
Ways thereof, nor abide in the Paths thereof. Job 24. 13. And for this cause
shall God send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie. 2 Thessalonians.
2. 11. By Edw. Pay, a Servant of Christ.

London, Printed in the Year, 1692.

A Commendatory Epistle to the READER.
Impartial Reader,
THOU art here presented with an Examination of the pretended Faith professed
by the Quakers, lately published and dispersed in Deptford. It appeared to the
World with a fair Aspect, and the Ignorant and Easy were ready to take their
Words, that they so believed: But the Author, to unfold their Riddles, has
made use of their own Construing Books, to get at their Meanings; and it fully
appears to be nothing so believed by them, as pretended in their Pamphlet. We
believe neither Ambition, Self-Interest or Prejudice, moved the Author to this
Work; but purely, the Honor of God, Defense of Truth, and Good of Souls. We
also hope and believe, that he has been careful truly to cite the Quakers own
Authors; and we believe, if any Error therein be, as to Page or the like, it
may be justly imputed as an oversight. Reader, thou art foretold by our Lord,
That in the last Days many false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many. And
the Apostle informs of some, that with feigned Words, and fair Speeches, shall
deceive the Hearts of the Simple: And of others, That shall privily bring in
damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, etc. and that many
shall follow their pernicious Ways, etc. So that, as was said in another Case,
we may say in this, Is there not a Cause? The Holy Scriptures, which this
Generation of Men contemn and vilify, as will appear in this Discourse, go very
nigh to us; we always having had, and hope ever shall have a venerable esteem
for them.

And thus we commend the ensuing Discourse to the Judgment of the unbiassed
Reader, hoping Error may be detected, and the Truth preserved from Seducers,
who would introduce their corrupt Notions in the room thereof: And we shall
rest with these Desires, true Friends to all that love Truth and Peace,

Hen. Loader. William Allcot.


Quakerism a great Delusion.
THE Substance of their pretended Faith may be reduced into these six general
Heads.

I. In the first and last Articles professed, they say, they believe, according
to holy Scripture-Testimony, in the Trinity, or those three Divine Witnesses
that bear Record in Heaven, etc. and that they believe and own the holy
Scriptures, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, and to be
given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain all matters of Doctrine and
Testimony, etc. necessary to be believed and practiced in order to Salvation
and Peace with God, etc.

II. They say their Belief is, that in the Unity of the God head there is
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, being those three Divine Witnesses that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit, and that these three are
one, etc.

III. They profess to believe the Divinity and Humanity of Christ, the Eternal
Son of God, etc. and that he is the one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, etc.

IV. They profess to believe and expect Remission of Sins, Justification,
Redemption and Salvation, through the Sufferings, Death and Blood of Christ,
and not by their own Works, Righteousness or Merits -- this is professed in
their third and fourth Articles specified in their Pamphlet.

V. They profess to believe and own the Divine Offices of Christ, as King,
Priest and Prophet, over his own Church and People.

VI. They evade and deny Baptism in Water, and the Supper of the Lord
instituted in Bread and Wine, to be now in force, as standing Ordinances in the
Church of Christ.

They say nothing of those two great Articles of the Christian Faith, the
Resurrection of the Bodies from the Graves of the Earth, and the eternal
Judgment; tho they are not ignorant that their Faith has been questioned
herein.

Before I proceed to examine their pretended Faith professed in their Pamphlet,
I shall take notice of its Title; it is called, The Christianity of the People
commonly called Quakers; and could we take them at their words, their
Profession looks like good and Orthodox. But as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 11.
13. there were deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ; using feigned words and fair Speeches, was the old way of deceiving the
Hearts of the simple. As our Enemies at Sea, either to defend themselves from
our Stroke, or to draw us into their Snare, will put up the English Flag: So
the Quakers see it necessary upon this occasion, to make a very plausible
Profession. The gilded Pill is not so irksome to the Palate; but if we are
cautions in taking Money, and if a Piece be fair and large, yet if the Metal be
suspicious, we bring it to the Touchstone.

1. Christianity is a very high, holy and honorable Profession, which has
caused many to lay claim to it without a just Title, who will needs have the
Name, tho strangers to the Nature of Christianity: many have no better a Title
to this Name, than their being born in a Nation called a Christian Nation.
Others depend upon Morality alone, and bless God they are not so bad as some
other Men. Christianity is to lay hold upon Christ by a true and Evangelical
Faith, in his Death, Sufferings and Merits, for Redemption and Justification;
to believe him in all his Offices, and obey him in all his Ordinances.
Christians are Disciples or Scholars of Christ. Acts 11. 26. The Disciples were
first called Christians at Antioch. A true Gospel-Profession, from a real and
Evangelical Faith, attended with a pious Life; for Morality is included where
there is true Christianity.

2. Quakerism, with respect to the Name, is not derived from a Person so
called, but from a Gesture used much amongst them formerly in their Meetings,
as was manifest by what was alleged against them by the Westmoreland
Petitioners, viz. That their Practice did exceedingly savor of Saucery,
because of the Swellings, Quakings, Roarings and Foamings that were amongst
them at their Meetings. And in the Quakers Answer to this Petition, they deny
not swelling, foaming and quaking: See their Book, p. 35. But they deny Saucery
and Blasphemy: They justify quaking and trembling, as being used by the Saints
of old, Heb. 12. 21. Jer. 33. 9. Acts 9. 6. Ezekiel. 12. 18. These Texts are urged
by Ja. Nailor, p. 16, 17. of his Book called, The Power and Glory of the Lord
shining out of the North: He takes pains to prove their Name, and justify their
Practice; for, says he, search the Scriptures, and holy Men of God do witness
Quaking and Trembling: This is true, and the same may be said of wicked Men and
Devils, Acts 24. 25. James 2. 19. and Luke 9. 39. we read of him that was
possessed, that he foamed, when the Diabolical Spirit did tear him. I shall say
no more of their Name, it is of their own procuring and defending, tho no
discriminating Character of Christianity or Saintship.

2dly; As to their Profession, for ought that ever I could gather from their
own Tongues or Pens, is a Labyrinth of Confusion, or a great heap of
Contradictions, tending to the Subversion both of the Foundation and Fabric of
Christianity; being a Compound of Heresies, having Affinity with the Sadduces,
as Mr. Brown notes, in the discovery of the Leaven of the Sadduces hid among
the Quakers, p. 5. which Sect was divided into two Branches, Epicures and
Stoics; these encountered St. Paul, Acts 17. 18. calling him Spermologus,
which our Translation renders a Babbler, because he preached Jesus and the
Resurrection; and with the Heresy of Hymeneus and Philetus, 1 Timothy 2. 18. who
said, the Resurrection was past already; and had overthrown the Faith of some:
and they have Affinity with the Gnostics, who say, that Christ did not take
Flesh really, but in a Figure; so have the Quakers said, as will appear. See
Readiness Errand to Damascus; compare Epiphanius, Here Is. 26. And they have
Affinity with Seleucus, a great Heretic, who denied the Humanity of Christ,
and Water Baptism; he lived in the time of Theodosius Magnus. See August. lib.
de Here Is. Both which Errors are maintained by the Quakers, repugnant to the
holy Scriptures Testimony.

Again, They have Affinity with the Papists in their Master-veins of Popery:
for as the Papists do introduce all their vain Conceits by this Maxim, That the
Church cannot err: So the Quakers usher in their Dreams, that they are perfect,
and so cannot err. And as the Papists make the Writings of their General
Councils equal with the Scriptures, so do the Quakers their lying Pamphlets;
nay, prefer them above the Scriptures, as will appear. And they have Affinity
with the Muggletonians, who utter their execrable Imprecations, Curses and
Sentences against their Opposites. And I must leave them in this Deluge of
Errors and Heresy, and proceed to examine their Pamplet in its respective parts.

1. In the first Head, being part of the first and last Articles professed in
their Pamphlet, they profess to believe holy Scripture-Testimony, and that the
holy Scriptures, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, do
contain all matters of Doctrine and Testimony necessary to be believed and
practiced in order to Salvation and Peace with God; and that they desire to
live in the Faith, Knowledge and Practice of them, etc. in all things
appertaining to Life and Godliness. Holy Scripture being given by Divine
Inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine, Correction, Instruction, that the Man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good Work; able to make
the Man of God wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus.

Indeed there is a present occasion for this plausible-Profession; for the
Promoters of it have now set up a Meeting in Deptford, a place where their
corrupt Notions have had but little footing; and it is also a place where the
Word of God has for many Years been faithfully and powerfully preached; so
that except they appear in Sheeps Clothing, they cannot draw Disciples after
them. It is said of the Oracles of the Heathens, that they were made to look
with two Faces, that they may the better effect their Deceits. It is not easy
to conceive the many Meanings and Reserves that lie couched in this Paragraph.
But not to trace them into all their equivocal Reserves, I conceive the best
way to understand the Quakers Sentiments about the Scriptures, is to have
recourse to their own Construing Books.

And I shall begin with Humphrey Smith, a forward Asserter of Quakerism: see
his Book called, A true and everlasting Rule, p. 29. he affirms in the Face
of Men and Devils, That there are no other Rules, Ways or Means by which Men
shall ever come to walk with God, but by that which is manifest of God in him;
and that it is sufficient to guide in all the Ways of God without Scripture, or
any other outward Rule. Does not this tend to make null what is before
professed? If that in Humphrey Smith be a sure Guide, and his Book be a true
and everlasting Rule, how then are the Scriptures necessary? and wherein are
they profitable for Doctrine, Instruction, etc. since all things necessary may
be taught without them?

See also James Nailor's Answer to the Jews, p. 4, 22, 25. It Is Blasphemy for
any to say the Letter is the Word of God, it is the Devil that contends for the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, etc. Here you have the Sentence of one of
their great Prophets passed against the Scriptures.

George Whitehead being asked, Whether they esteem their Speakings to be of as
great Authority as any Chapter in the Bible? He affirms, in his Apology, p. 49.
That which is spoken by the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as
the Scripture, yea, and greater. What can appear more clear, than that the
Quakers Inspirations are of as great, if not greater, (But why do I mince it?)
ay, and greater Authority than the Scriptures? Let us add to this James
Parnell's Testimony, Shield of the Truth, p. 19. he also that says, The Letter
is the Rule and Guide of the People of God, is without, feeding upon Husks, and
is ignorant of the true Light, etc. By this Man's Verdict, the Scriptures are
condemned as Husks, or a false Light. Could either Papist, or Atheist, more
plainly oppose the Holy Scriptures? But since we want no Evidence to detect
these Impostors, let us add a few more from their own Pens; see James Naylor's
Light of Christ, p. 19. God is at liberty to speak to his People by the
Scriptures, if he please; and where they are given by Inspiration, does so; and
he is also at liberty to speak by any other created thing, as to Balaam by his
Ass. I think I do not wrong them, if I infer from hence, that the Sons of Men
may as well expect Teachings and Rebukes from an Ass, as from the Scriptures,
one has as much Authority essentially in it self as the other; one has in it
self as much Authority to guide, teach and instruct the Sons of Men, as the
other; neither can teach Men, except God immediately inspire them. You see by
this, how these divinely-inspired Men esteem the Scriptures of Truth. See the
joint Consent of two of their chief Guides, Fox and Hubberthorne, Truth's
Defense, p. 101. they say, The Scriptures are no standing Rule, and that it is
dangerous for the ignorant People to read them. Surely if they had bin brought
up at St. Omers, they could not more positively have denied the Scriptures. I
hope the Reader will remember how these chief Guides amongst the Quakers, agree
with the Account in the Pamphlet, see page 29. of Mr. Hicks's Dialogue; One
Thomas Holbrow, a great Zealot among the Quakers, as appeared by the Journey he
took to deliver a Message to one James Nobs, which he said was immediately
delivered to him from the Lord: But it so unhappily fell out, that James Nobs
was forty Miles off when the said Holbrow came to the Meeting; so that either
the God that sent Holbrow did not know Nobs, or else at least was ignorant that
he was gone from Home at that time, for he delivered the Message to a wrong
Person. This I have had testified to me as a Truth by several in those Parts.
And in p. 27. Dial. But this is not what I intend, for afterward Tho. Holbrow
having some Reasonings with James Nobs and his Wife, the said Nobs urging many
Scriptures against Holbrow; the said Holbrow replied, What do thou tell me of
Scriptures, which are no better to me than an old Almanac? It is like, when
Humphrey Smith's True and Everlasting Rule came in date, the Scriptures became
no better than an old Almanac. The brevity of this short Discourse, will not
admit me to draw the proper Inferences that would naturally flow from these
Premises. These are the Men that in their Pamphlet profess so high an Esteem
for Holy Scriptures. See James Pernell's Book, Christ Exalted, p. 4. Christ is
the Word, the Scripture is not; Christ is the Light, the Scripture is not; he
is the Ruler, Guide, Teacher and Judge, the Scripture is not. And thus he goes
on, like a Cloud carried with the Wind. It is like, from the Title of his Book,
he concludes from these Expressions, to exalt Christ; when indeed he casts the
greatest contempt upon him; Christ says, If any Man love me, he will keep my
Word. What are the written Words of Christ, but Scripture? But more of this
hereafter.

Dialog. 1. p. 24, 25. Christian, is it then ingenuous and honest for you to
deny the Scriptures to be a Rule to others, tho at the same time, but by
misinterpreting it, you make it a Rule to your selves? Are you not ashamed of
this Deceit and self-condemning Partiality?

Quaker, Thou mistakest us, we own not the Scriptures to be our Rule; and
whereas thou have said many things to render us guilty of condemning this in
others, whilst we our selves seemingly allow it to be so, which is but thy own
Imagination; for when we make use of Scripture, it is only to quiet and stop
their Clamours that plead for it as their Rule; but for us, had the Scriptures
never been, we could have known what is therein contained. I hope the Reader by
this may perceive the Reason why the Quakers talk so much of Scripture in their
Paper; observe, We own not the Scripture; we seemingly allow it; but our End in
this, is only to stop their Clamours that plead for it as their Rule. You see
here the condescending Spirits of these Men, that they should allow the
Scriptures to others, ay, and make use of them to please others, and yet not
own them as a Rule themselves; but their End is to stop clamorous Tongues. But
here is their great disadvantage, the old Birds will not be caught with this
Chaff, their seeming Allowances will not pass for Christian Principles; When
the Mask is taken off, as Westfield said concerning Christ, you are not able to
bear what we have to hold forth concerning him; should we deliver what we hold
concerning Jesus Christ, we should be stoned in the Streets. Westfield a
Quaker, Dialog. p. 74, 75. And indeed should they hold forth in their Teaching
what has dropped from the Pens and Mouths of their chief Guides at some times,
they would draw but few in their right Minds into their clouded Delusions.

But observe what is before said; As for us, had the Scriptures never been, we
could have known what is therein contained: This I have also heard from their
own Mouths. Then I desire the Quakers to resolve me in these two Questions; it
is said, John 21. 25. And there are also many other things that Jesus did, the
which if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the World it
self could not contain the Books, etc. Again, it is said, John 8. 6, -8. when
the Woman taken in Adultery was brought to Christ, that he stooped down, and
wrote with his Finger on the ground, etc. Now let the Quakers resolve me by
their immediate Inspirations, what those things were that Jesus did that are
not written, and what were the Contents of that Writing on the Ground? or else
let their proud Boastings of immediate Inspiration, be condemned to perpetual
silence, and Shame cover their Faces. And waiting for their Resolve herein, I
proceed to examine the Suffrage of great George Fox, who thinks he does the
business effectually; see his Difference of Ministers, page 1. he discants upon
John 1. 1. Thus John did not say, the Declaration was the Word, but says in
his Declaration, the Word was God; and he that says the Letter is the Word, is
a Deceiver, and errs. The Argument lies here; because Christ is called the
Word, the Scriptures must not be so called. John said, the Word was God; then
the Scriptures cannot be the Word, except they be God also. It seems by the
Quakers Logic, they are Deceivers and err; that call the Scriptures the Word
of God, the Reason is, because Christ is so called. Why then let us see 1 Cor.
10. 4. Israel in the Wilderness drank of that spiritual Rock that followed
them; and that Rock was Christ: But are there not other Rocks properly so
called? A Rock is a hard congealed heap of Stone. John 10. 1. God is called an
Husbandman; but are not Men that plow and till the Ground properly so called?
Christ is called a Vine, a Door, and a Shepherd; but are there not other Vines,
Doors and Shepherds in a proper sense? Sure the Quakers will grant there are,
Christ is called the Light of the World, and yet Mat. 5. 14. he tells his
Disciples, they were the Lights of the World. We own Christ to be called the
Word of God, and yet the Scripture is so called in a true and proper sense.
Christ is the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 8. 6. Ephesians. 4. 5. But
he has more words than one, Mat. 4. 4. a Scripture from Deuteronomy. 8. 3. to oppose
the Devil's, Assault; Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every Word that
proceeds out of the Mouth of God. Prove. 30. 5. Every Word of God is pure.
Jer. 23. 36. the Complaint is, The false Prophets had perverted the Words of
the Living God. A great Evil, and too common in this day. But would the Quakers
have the Word always to intend Christ? Mark 4. 19. The Cares of this World, and
the Deceitfulness of Riches, and the Lusts of other things entering in, choke
the Word. Will the Quakers say, these things entering in, choked Christ? Surely
no. By all this the judicious Reader will see the Endeavors that have been
used by the Quakers to explode the holy Scriptures, not only to rob them of
their Nature, Use, Power and Efficacy, but also of their very Name. But let all
Christians learn to prize them, and carefully improve them, and be thankful to
Divine Providence, by which they have been preserved through all Times, and
against all Tyrants. Psalm. 19. 7, 8. David sets forth the worth of them: The
Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; the Testimony of the Lord is
sure, making wise the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
Heart: the Commandments of the Lord are pure, enlightening the Eyes. 2 Timothy 3.
15, 16. They are able to make wise to Salvation. Soul, thou need not fear
miscarrying, if thou make* the holy Scriptures the Rule of thy Faith, and
Guide of thy Life. This short Treatise will not admit me to enlarge: I shall
leave this short Scheme, by which the Reader may judge what an Esteem the
Quakers have for holy Scriptures they so much pretend to in their Pamphlet.

The Names they give the holy Scriptures. Scriptures no standing Rule, it is
dangerous for the ignorant to read them. No better than an old Almanac,
neither Rule, Guide, Light nor Teacher. A dead carnal Letter. They are Precepts
and Traditions of Men. Paper, Iak and Writing. The Letter without, Swine
feeding on Husks. Obedience to Scriptures is the Harlot's Child. You may as
well expect God to teach or rebuke by any other Creature as the Scripture, as
he did Balaam by his Ass. The Names they give their own lying Pamphlets. A true
and everlasting Rule. The Royal Law and Covenant of God. Love to the Lost. News
out of the North, written from the Mouth of God. The pure Language of the
Spirit. A Salutation to the Seed of God. The Lip of Truth. The Spirit of Truth.
A Trumpet from the Lord, sounding out of Zion. A true Prophecy of the mighty
Day of the Lord. The Word of the Lord, and a Word from the Lord, p. 13. of the
Mighty Day of the Lord.

Blusn O Heavens, and tremble O Earth, at the Pride and Ignorance of these
Impostors!

I shall add but two or three Passages more concerning their Contempt of the
Scriptures: see Tho. Lawson, Untaught Teacher, p. 6, 7, 8. The Scriptures are
not a Rule whereby Men may know the Will of Christ. And in Page 2, and 3. of
the same Book, he denies that the Ministers of Christ, endowed with the Spirit
of Christ, ought to minister or preach from Scripture. Add to this what is said
in Cloud of Witnesses, a Book of theirs, p. 1, 3, 4. But the Priests of
England, the blind Guides -- they do teach the People, and say, Hearken to the
Word of the Lord, as it is in such a Chapter and Verse. Now is it not a sign
that the Quakers are untaught Teachers indeed: but let the Word of God be true,
and these Men Liars. Did not our Lord make use of the Scriptures in teaching,
Mat. 21. 42. says Christ, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The Stone that
was set at naught by you Builders? and Mat. 22. 29. Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures. Surely they will not deny Christ to have the Spirit; and he proves
the Resurrection of the Dead by Scripture, Exodus 3. 6. Surely Peter had the
Spirit, yet he proves Christ to be the great Prophet, Acts 3. 22. from Deuteronomy.
18. 15. And will they deny Philip to be endowed with the Holy Ghost? Acts 8.
35. he preaches Jesus to the Eunuch from Isa. 53. And Acts 17. 2, 11. Paul
reasoned and preached out of the Scriptures, and the Bereans searched the
Scriptures, to try whether Paul's Doctrine was true or not. The Reader may see
from hence, with what an open Face these deluded Impostors will assert apparent
Falsehoods. From all this it appears, the Quakers are great Enemies to, and
Contemners of holy Scriptures, and that what they say in their Pamphlet is a
great Falsehood.

II. I proceed to examine the other part of their first Article professed in
their Paper.

Article. Our Belief is, That in the Unity of the Godhead, there is Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, being those three Divine Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit.

This Profession looks like good and Orthodox Christianity; but yet when it
comes to be weighed, it will be found wanting. I shall only examine what Heaven
this is the Quakers intend: not in the glorious Heavens above, beyond the
Clouds and starry Heavens, no by no means; it is ridiculous to speak of an
imagined God beyond the Stars: it is the Heaven within thee where these three
Divine Witnesses are: you will hear their severe Rebukes by and by, if you will
have any other Heaven to be meant as their Residence. See James Parnell's Book,
Satan's Design discovered, p. 19, 25. he affirms, They that confess not
Christ to be come in their Flesh, are the Antichrist; and also affirms, That
by preaching of Christ in Heaven, the Devil gets his Work done on Earth. Pray,
what is fairly to be inferred from hence? why the Heaven they intend is no
where else, but within their Mortal Corrupt Bodies; or else Christ is not one
of those three Divine Witnesses they speak of in the Paper: for they will allow
of no other Christ, but what is in every Man. And see further, Tho. Lawson in
his Book against William Jeffery, calls him, Thou Image-maker, thou Cockatrice,
hatching Eggs, Vulters Eye, etc. because William Jeffery had said, that Christ
was ascended into Heaven with that Body that was raised from the Dead. And they
intend no other Heaven than what is within them, and thus they must be
understood in their Pamphlet: for see Lawson's Book, p. 9, and 19. they say
that they have eternal Life now really in Possession. But would you have it
more plain, that the Quakers Heaven is within them, take a Testimony out of
Edward Burrough's Works, Page 9, 149. a chief Guide among them, therefore you
may take his word for it: We say, he that was slain upon the Cross, is the very
Christ of God, and the very Christ of God is in us.

Tho Lucock being asked several times before many Witnesses, where that Heaven
was that Christ did ascend into, and now was in? he answered, clapping his
Hands upon his Breast, Within me, Within me. I shall not trouble you much more
in discovering to you the Quakers Heaven, and what they intend by it. G. Fox in
his Great Mystery, p. 16. writes thus; Thou art deceived, who says, Christ is
distinct from the Saints. Can any Man eat the Flesh of Christ, if his Flesh be
not in them? Can you call him Christ in Man, if the Man be not there? George
Whitehead, Dip. Plong. Christ without us is not Scripture Language; but the
Anthropomorphites, and Muggletonians, and Socinians, says he, tell us of a
Personal Christ, and that the Man Jesus our Lord has a place in Heaven remote
from the Earth.

Let this serve to satisfy the impartial Reader, that the Quakers believe the
Heaven they intend, to be within them: and they are but Heretics that believe
in a Christ in any other Heaven remote, or at a distance from them; for it is
plain, that they deny Christ to be a distinct Person without them. And in like
manner all the three Divine Witnesses they speak of, that bear Record in
Heaven, are within them also; for the Light within them is really and
completely Christ, and Christ is God: But this will further appear under the
next Head. But let all Christians believe that Jesus Christ is at the
Right Hand of the Father in the glorious Heavens above. However the Quakers do
endeavor with their false Glosses to abuse the World, and bethrone Christ. We
own and believe those Scriptures in their true and proper sense: 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates? 1 Cor. 6. 19. Ye
are the Temples of God; and Christ in you the Hope of Glory, etc. And it is
also true, that the Saints are said to be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man
be in Christ, he is, or let him be, a new Creature. And he that dwells in
Love, dwells in God, and he in him. How often does Paul speak of the Faithful
in Christ Jesus; and he also speaks of some that were in Christ before him. Now
the Quakers, if they are not stark blind, may see in what sense Christ is said
to dwell in the Saints; that is, by the Gifts and Graces of his holy Spirit,
Ephesians. 2. 22. the Saints are the Habitation of God through the Spirit. For if
any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. These Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, Christ promised, John 16. 7. I go to my Father, and he will send
the Comforter, this Spirit of Truth, to guide into all Truth; which was
accordingly poured upon the Apostles and Disciples, Acts 2. at large. And Acts
19. 2. Paul asks those Disciples at Ephesus, whether they had received the Holy
Ghost since they believed? that is, this Comforter that Christ had promised,
that when he went to the Father he would send, Acts 5. 32. and give to them
that obey him; albeit the personal Ascension of Christ is fully witnessed to.
And to put this out of doubt, read Luke 24. 49, 50, 51. And behold, I send the
Promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, till ye
be endowed with Power from on high; and then go and prosecute the Commission I
have committed to you: And he led them out as far as Bethany, and he lift up
his Hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass, that while he blessed them,
he was parted from them, and carried up into Heaven. Compare Act. 1. 9. He was
taken up, and a Cloud received him out of their sight; And while they looked
steadfastly toward Heaven, as he (that is, Jesus) went up, behold, two Men
stood by them in white Apparel, which were two Angels, ver. 10. which also
said, Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come, in like manner as you
have seen him go into Heaven. Ay, says George Whitehead, in like manner, but
every Like is not the same: Pitiful shift! Thus you plainly see the Certainty
of Christ's Ascension, and that the Holy Ghost's Descension, Acts 2. 3, 4. and
ver. 38. promised to the penitent believing obedient Soul. But Act. 3. 20, 21.
He shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: Whom the
Heavens must receive, till the times of Restitution of all things, which God
has spoken by the Mouth of all his holy Prophets since the World began. Now
this Restitution is not yet, tho the Spirit was come. See Acts 7. 55. But he
(that is, Stephen) being full of the Holy Ghost, (mark that) looked steadfastly
up into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the Right Hand
of God: ver. 56. and there he says, I see the Son of Man standing at the
Righthand of God. Observe, Stephen was full of the Holy Ghost, or of the Spirit
of Christ, when he had this glorious sight of Christ in the Heavens at the
Right Hand of God, and in the Glory of the Father. Now it is the Faith of
Christians, that Christ shall come in this glorious Body the second time from
Heaven, Phil. 3. 20, 21. We, says Paul, look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ; not for a greater Fullness of the Spirit, as the Quakers dream; for what
greater Fullness could Paul expect, if the Quakers Notion were true, if Heaven
and the whole Trinity were in him before? But, says Paul, we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile Bodies, and make them
like his glorious Body. Yea, says Christ, you shall see the Son of Man come in
Power and great Glory, and every Eye shall see him, etc. Mat. 24. 26. It is
more than probable, that Christ pointed at this Generation of Impostors, the
Quakers, who say, Behold, he is in the secret Chambers, ay, within thee, not at
a distance from thee. Believe them not, says Christ, for my second coming
shall be visible as the Lightning, or the Sun that rises in the East, and
shines to the West; every Eye shall see me, etc. Let this serve to construe
what they intend in their Paper, when they speak of three Divine Witnesses
bearing Record in Heaven; it is the Heaven within they intend.

III. I proceed to the third Head collected out of their Pamphlet, as proposed
to be examined; and that is, they profess to own the Divinity and Humanity of
Christ. I shall therefore proceed to examine their Belief herein; and still I
know no better way, than to make use of their own Construing Books, as the
surest way not to wrong them: for by comparing this professed Faith with the
Writings of some of their chief Guides, by that you will see whether they
believe as they say, or whether it be not only a gloss to deceive the Hearts of
the Simple.

And in examining this Point of Faith professed by them, I shall begin with
their greatly admired George Fox, in his Great Mystery, etc. p. 71. he says,
Christ's Nature is not Humane, which is Earthly, for that is the first Adam.
But this looks too barefaced, not the Conclusion drawn from some prepared
Premises. See immediately before; Where does the Scripture speak of Humane? now
we do not deny that Christ, according to the Flesh, was of Abraham, but deny
the word Human to be Scripture Phrase. He would by this shift persuade the
World, that he does not deny that Christ's Body is constituted of Human Nature,
being of Abraham; but he will not allow the word Humane. Why then do they, in
their Pamphlet, speak of the Humanity of Christ? But one may discern, without
Spectacles, that his End is to deny Christ's Body of Flesh. But one would have
thought that great George, who pretends to translate the Greek into English, in
his Book called, The Mystery of the Great Whore, should now have found as much
as Humane in the Greek, though not in the English, it being several times used
in the Epistles, which in the Latin is more Hominum Humanorum, after the manner
of Humane; and Christ's Human Nature is no more than his Man's Nature, Smiths's
Primmer, p. 9. Sword of the Lord, p. 24. They that are false Ministers, preach
Christ without; your Carnal Christ is utterly denied by the Light. What can be
meant here, but the fleshly Body of Christ, or his Humanity? this is denied by
the Light; that in their sense is the same to say, That the Divinity denies the
Humanity of Christ; most horrid Confusion! But would you have it in plainer
Terms from their own Pens, then see Pennington's Questions, an eminent Quaker,
p. 33. who speaks with an Infallible Spirit; This we certainly know, and can
never call the bodily Garment, Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the
Body, etc. They own that there was such a Man as Jesus, who was the Son of
Mary, and that God was in him: But this is no more than what they say of
themselves; but the Man Christ he calls here, the bodily Garment, and says,
they can never call that Christ: So that if this be not fully to deny the
Humanity of Christ, I know not what is. But see what is asserted in Mr. Hicks's
Dialogue, page 44, 45. When Mr. Hicks has professed his Faith in the Humanity
of Christ, namely, That he was the Word made Flesh, and God manifest in the
Flesh, called also Immanuel, or God with us, not the mere Godhead of the Son,
nor the mere Manhood, but God and Man united in one Person, that is the Christ.
To which one Stephen Crisp, a leading Quaker, answered, Then I know the
Beginning and Date of thy Christ. Mr. Hicks asked him, Whether he considered
what he said? He answered, I say again, I know the Beginning and Date of thy
Christ. I query whether the plain meaning be not, I know the Beginning and
Date, i. e. The End of thy Christ? And whether this be not a total denying of
the Divinity, as well as the Humanity of Christ? Now what is this, but another
Christ and Gospel than that which Paul preached Gal. 1. 8, 9. which he
pronounces accursed? Another Passage, page 45. of Dialogue, etc. Richard
Stubs, a Quaker, asking Elizabeth Weatherby, How she expected to be saved? She
answered, By that Jesus who was born of the Virgin, and died at Jerusalem.
Stubs told her, That was the false Christ, and an Antichrist. Horrid Blasphemy
against the Son of God! But see what George Fox says in his Mystery, page 206.
If there be any other Christ but he that was crucified within, he is a false
Christ, or the false Christ; and he that has not this Christ that was
crucified within, is a Reprobate. And page 207. he says, God's Christ is not
distinct from the Saints. I think, here is a barefaced piece of Blasphemy, and
downright denying the Lord Christ. What, was that the false Christ that died
at Jerusalem, without the Gates of Jerusalem? Ay, says George Fox, if there be
any other Christ than he that was crucified within, he is the false Christ. By
being crucified within, is meant within that Man the Son of Mary; not the Man
that was crucified was Christ, he was but the outward Garment; that is, he that
was born of the Virgin, that lived in the World, in Fastings, Weakness and
Temptations, Hunger, Thirst and Weariness; that was in an Agony, and sweat
great Drops or Clods of Blood; that was crowned with Thorns, and crucified upon
the Cross without the Gates of Jerusalem; that was in all Points tempted like
as we are, yet without Sin. This they will not allow to be the true Christ, or
God's Christ. Is not this plain denying of the Lord that bought them? Surely
their gross Blindness, and thick Darkness, is to be lamented, and that
especially since they labor to keep a Christian Mask over their Antichristian
Face. One Wolrich a Quaker, in his Declaration to the Baptists, page 13. says,
That Christ was never seen with any carnal Eyes, nor his Voice heard with any
carnal Ears. No, were not the Eyes of the Multitude fastened upon him? Did not
the Jews that crucified him, see him? Yes, they cannot be ignorant hereof. But
the meaning is, that was not the Christ that the Jews saw and crucified, that
was but the outward Garment, the true Christ was crucified within that Vail.
Thus the Humanity of Christ is fully denied, that Man was no more Christ, on
their account, than George Fox. And, Readiness Errand to Damascus, page 9. they
say, That Christ has no Body but his Church. But I shall refer you to Mr.
Grantham's Book, Christianismus Primitivus, Book 4. Treatise 11. where you have
an Account of a Conference betwixt Thomas Granthan and John Whitehead* a
Quaker, about Christ having a Body of Flesh and Bones; which John Whitehead
denied him to have, and deridingly asked Tho. Grantham, What a one that Body
was, and how big? To which Mr. Grantham replied, Such a one as mine, or any
other Man's, Sin and Corruption only excepted. Now John Whitehead falls to
using that Craft, without which Quakerism would soon be extinguished. Well,
Thomas, says he, I will satisfy thee, if I can: I say, Christ's Flesh was such
as Tho. Grantham' s Flesh, all Corruption excepted. One would have thought J.
W. had fairly owned the Humanity of Christ here: But Tho. Grantham being
suspicious, asks him one honest Question more, Do thou not mean, by all
Corruption excepted, my whole Body, and the Flesh of all Men? But now, instead
of answering this Question. J. W. cursed T. G. in these words, Thou whited
Wall, God shall smite thee; the Plagues, and Curses, and Vengeance of God is
thy Portion. To which Thomas Grantham replied, I am taught of God, not to
render Railing for Railing, etc. So that J. W. if he could, would have had his
counterfeit Coin have passed muster, in his meaning, which appeared to be this,
Christ had a Body like another Man, all the Body and Flesh of another Man
excepted; then Christ must have no Human Body at all; so that this was politic
Priestcraft indeed.

From all that has been said, what can be more clear, than that these People
really deny the Humanity of Christ, the Lord that bought them? I shall conclude
this Head, with an Instance or two more: Several Queries being put to Edward
Buroughs, (a Man famous amongst the Quakers) whose Works are a large Folio;
the famous Epithets, and honorable commendatory Epistles that are prefixed
before his Works, by Whitehead, Fox, and others, would even daunt a modest Pen
to transcribe. The Queries are said to be propounded to Buroughs, by one
Philip Bennet; they are no less than twenty, which you have repeated, with
their Answers, in the Book aforesaid, from page 29, to 34. at large, which will
be too tedious to transcribe: I shall give you two or three, with their
Answers, and by that you may guess at the rest.

Query 3. Whether did the Man Christ really and indeed suffer in his own
Person, for that End, and after the same manner as he did upon the Cross at
Jerusalem, before that time, or since that time?

Quaker's Answer; Here, thou full of all subtilty, have manifested thy Poison
and Enmity; but thou art seen with the Light, and with it condemned for ever:
Christ Jesus, in his own Person, does, and ever did, suffer by thee, and such
as thou art: After the same manner, thou blind Pharisee and Blasphemer, would
thou have Christ have more Ends in Suffering than one. Buroughs, Ibid. p. 30.

You see here what a railing Answer this renowned Father gives: Let the Reader
judge whether the Answer has not more like Poison and Blasphemy in it, than the
Question. But the Design of the Question is not to be born, and a direct Answer
must not be given, for they believe not the Sufferings in that outward Garment,
as they call it, upon the Cross, to be the one Offering, or alone Sacrifice,
nor any more available, as is easily made appear, than the Sufferings in his
Saints; yet, Heb. 10. 10, 14. the Body of Jesus is said to be offered once for
all; and it is called the Offering of one Sacrifice. But this they cannot
endure to hear of, but conclude Christ to be crucified in them, as well as in
that Man at Jerusalem; as appears in his Answer to the 2d Query, that being too
large to transcribe, take the Conclusion of it thus; Thou Antichrist, which
look at Christ's Death at Jerusalem alone; so let all they that are thy
Congregation, see what they hold up that follow thee. Edw. Buroughs, p. 30.

Query 4. Was not that Death which the Man Christ suffered once, and but once
upon the Cross at Jerusalem, so satisfactory for all the Sins of the Elect, as
that the Justice of God did not, does not require any suffering or working upon
that account, either from Sinners or Saints?

Quaker Here thou Jesuit art pleading for a Christ afar off thee; that Christ
that died at Jerusalem did not satisfy for thee, who art an Enemy to him, and
art under the Woe, etc. And after spending many Lines in uttering the like
invective Stuff, he concludes, Let all People see whether thou be not a blind
ignorant Sot. Ibid. p. 30, 31.

It seems it is Jesuitical to plead for him to be the Christ that died at
Jerusalem, on the Quaker's account; it is not to be suffered by Edw. Buroughs,
for the Querist to plead for a Christ afar off. It is too large to repeat the
blasphemous self-contradictions Railings included in this Answer.

Query 5. Whether you be reconciled to God by any other Obedience, than that
very Obedience which Christ performed in his own Person? or by any Sufferings
or Death, than that which Christ suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem?

Quaker. Silence Flesh; would thou, who art an Enemy to God, know how we are
reconciled to God, and by what Obedience? Own the Light in thy Conscience, and
be obedient to that, then thou shall know by what Obedience we are reconciled
to God; for yet thou know no Obedience, but art an Enemy to the Cross of
Christ, and in the Mystery of Iniquity, and in the dark Power of the Man of
Sin: What have thou to do to talk of Obedience? thou art blind, and in the
broad way that leads to Death* p. 32.

It is not worth while to give you a Repetition of his Bedlam-like Answers to
these twenty serious Questions; take a Breviat of his profound, sober and
convincing Answers (you have them at large in Burroughs*s Works, from page 29,
to 34.) as follows.

Thou Reprobate, and Child of Darkness, the Light condemns thee and thy
Generation eternally: We witness thee to be in the Sorcery and Witchcraft: thou
art Darkness it self, thou Dragon; thy Queries are conjured in the Black Art,
out of the Bottomless Pit, thou Diviner; we witness thee to be the Beast which
wars with the Lamb; thou Antichrist, which look at Christ's Death at
Jerusalem alone; thou art seen with the Light, and with it condemned, thou
blind Pharisee and Blasphemer: Thou Jesuit, art thou pleading for a Christ afar
off thee? Thou art under the Woe, and from that Woe thou shall never he. Let all
People see whether thou be not a blind ignorant Sot; here thou reply thy
sottish Queries concerning the Body of Jesus, as the Devil did about the Body
of Moses; thou disobedient One, upon whom God will render Vengeance in flaming
Fire; thou art accursed, thou Beast, to whom the Plagues of God are due, upon
whom the Wrath of God must be accomplished; thou art shut out from God for
ever, thou blind Hypocrite; and much more to the same purpose. But let this
suffice to show you the immediate Inspirations of these perfect Men: And after
he has uttered these railing, cursing and condemning Answers, he concludes
thus; Blessed be the Lord that has discovered thee! so thy Queries are
answered in the Eternal Life and Light of God, and Judgment is given upon thee
and them, which thou shall eternally witness. Thy Queries are answered
lovingly, and plainly, and in the Scripture Language and Terms; and with the
Eternal Light and Life of God, set thee in thy own Place, which thou shall
eternally witness. Ibid. p. 34.

This famous Piece had its birth into the World in the Year 1672. But was there
ever such a Bundle of Blasphemy, Cursings and Damnings, (uttered upon no
Provocation) from the vilest Heathen, or from Muggleton himself? and that which
is worst of all, he entitles this to the Eternal Life and Light of God. Could
the Devil himself have been more vile and prodigiously arrogant, to take upon
him to determine a Man's endless Condition? Let all that are, or would be
Christians, say with Jacob, Genesis 49. 6. O my Soul, come not thou into their
Secrets; unto their Assembly, my Honor, be not thou united. Let this serve for
confutation of their pretending to own the Humanity of Christ; and let all
Christians believe in that Jesus that was crucified without the Gates of
Jerusalem, that died, was buried, and rose again. Luke 24. 39. says Christ, It
is I my self; Behold my Hands and my Feet; handle and see, for a Spirit has
not Flesh and Bones, as you see me have. This I say is the Christ of God, as
Peter testifies, Acts 2. 36. Therefore let all the House of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made the same Jesus whom ye crucified, both Lord and
Christ. I pass this, and leave what has been said, and the Opinion of the
Quakers about the Humanity of Christ, to impartial Consideration.

But lest any should suppose the Quakers do not own such blasphemous,
condemning and railing Answers, as Edw. Buroughs gave to the twenty Questions
before hinted at, some of which being about the Person or Humanity of Christ,
and Place of his Residence; you have Mr. Penn warranting this Answer from God,
and by the sense of the Eternal Spirit; for he declares, It was the Portion,
and only fit Answer to be given to those trapanning Questions: and, says he,
had Edw. Buroughs gone into a familiar opening unto his vulterous unclean
serpertine Eye, all the deep Things of the Spirit of God, and Mysteries of Holy
Kingdom, who was in that nature that crucified the Lord of them, Edw. Buroughs
had brought the Wrath of the Eternal God upon himself, instead of the Priest.
Will. Penn's Reas. against Railing, p. 164.

IV. They profess in their Pamphlet, That they believe and expect Salvation and
Justification by the Righteousness and Merits of Christ, and not by their own
Righteousness or Works; and that they believe Remission of Sins, and Redemption
through the Death, Sufferings and Bloodshed of Christ.

This they make a plenary profession of, in their Answer to their third and
fourth Questions propounded. I must now examine whether they believe what they
have here so plausibly professed: And there are three things to be enquired
into, which together with the circumstances and Concomitants, will unfold their
meaning in what they have here professed.

1. What do the Quakers intend by the Death and Blood of Christ? They do not
believe in that Blood that was shed upon the Cross; for Robert Ruckhill, a
Quaker, says, in his Paper sent to Tho. Grantham, That the Blood of Christ, or
Blood of Sprinkling, never mortal Eye beheld. And in page 11. of the same
Paper, he condemns all Professors that know no other Blood of Sprinkling than
that which the Jews saw. So that the Blood that our dear Lord shed upon the
Cross, they do not intend; for, John 19. 34. the Soldier pierced his Side, and
Water and Blood came out of his Wounds, in the piercing of his Hands and Feet;
this the Soldiers and his Crucifiers saw. But this is not the Blood intended;
see Tho. Lawson's Book, page 18. I suppose they will not deny him to be a
thorow-paced Quaker; he says, The offering of Christ's Body to be broken, and
his Blood to be shed, avails not, so as through Faith therein to set free from
Sin; but Blood in a Mystery, and a Body in a Mystery, which we know not what it
is, says Lawson. But (says Pennington's Questions, page 33.) this we
certainly know, and can never call the bodily Garment, Christ; That is, in
plain English, that Body of Flesh that they can never call Christ. Pennington
in another Page of the same Book, asks, Can outward Blood cleanse the
Conscience? we witness the same Christ that ever was, now manifest in the
Flesh. This Isaac Pennington was an approved Quaker.

Now if this be not the Mystery of Iniquity, I know not what may be called so;
and it this be not to bring in those damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. prophesied of by Peter, what is? for the Blood shed
upon the Cross, is not available, say they. Now why should these Impostors talk
of the Blood of Christ, and labor to persuade the World that they expect
Justification, Redemption and Salvation, and the blessed Effects of his
Suffering and Dying, even Salvation? See Pennington's Questions, page 25. Can
outward Blood cleanse the Conscience? can outward Water wash the Soul clean?
What plainer denial can there be of the Efficacy of the Blood of Christ shed on
the Cross? E. Burrough's Trumpet, etc. p. 17. All the Presbyterians and
Independants, with their feeding upon the Report of a thing done many hundred
Years ago. Thus they deridingly speak of such as believe in the Death and
Sufferings of Christ upon the Cross. I shall conclude this Confutation of their
pretended Profession of Faith in the Blood of Christ.

Now if the Quakers will assign some other Blood of Christ, besides the Blood
of the Man Christ Jesus crucified on the Cross, that is of this redeeming
Nature and Efficacy, then I shall be inclined to turn Quaker, and not before.
But let Christians believe in Christ's Death and Bloodshed upon the Cross, for
Justification, Sanctification and Redemption, and let the Word of God be true,
and these Men Liars, Romans 3. 25. Rev. 1. 5. It was this Christ Jesus that was
crucified upon the Cross, that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own
Blood. Heb. 9. 14. Col. 1. 14. We have Redemption through his Blood. Heb. 13.
12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he may sanctify the People with his own Blood,
suffered without the Gate, etc. See Romans 5. 9, 10. Col. 1. 20. Let us believe
that Christ's Blood shed upon the Cross, was to reconcile us to God: Let us for
ever admire God for this unspeakable Gift of his Son to die for us, that he by
the Grace of God should taste Death for every Man, Heb. 2. 9.

Again; Let us believe, love and obey so dear a Lord, that so freely gave his
Body to be broken, pierced and mangled in that shameful manner, to redeem,
sanctify and justify such that lay hold upon him: Let the Love of Christ
constrain us to be followers of God as dear Children, and walk in Love as
Christ has loved us.

2. Under this fourth Head they pretend to believe and expect Justification and
Remission of Sins by the Righteousness and Merits of Christ, and Redemption by
him.

I shall now examine, whether they do believe and expect Justification, and
Remission of Sins by the Righteousness and Merits of Christ?

Now if you will believe their Writings, you will see this their Profession to
be but a painted and deceitful Flourish: for Justification and Remission of
Sins by the Righteousness of another, is not by them believed.

See Edw Burrough's Works in Answer to the 14th Query, p. 33. God does not
accept any where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer
every Demand of Justice. This, were there no other Instance, confutes their
plausible pretense to Justification and Remission by the Righteousness and
Merits of Christ. But see Will. Pen's Sandy Foundat. p. 25, etc. Justification
is not from the Imputation of another's Righteousness, but from the actual
performing and keeping God's righteous Statutes. How is there Remission and
Justification by the Merits of Christ, according to their Profession in their
Pamphlet, when it must be by the perfect and exact Performance of the Law of
God in the Creature? Lawson's Book, p. 18. affirms, That the offering of
Christ's Body to be broken, and his Blood to be shed, avails not, so as through
Faith therein to set free from Sin. What is this but a plain denying Remission
of Sins by the Blood of Christ? And seeing we have Instances enough, or too many,
why should we spare them? Will. Pen speaks out: See Apolog. p. 148.
Justification by the Righteousness of another, or which Christ fulfilled for us
in his own Person wholly without us, we boldly affirm to be a Doctrine of
Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which does now deluge the World.
See also Mr. Pen's Sandy Foundation, p. 25, -- 30. It is a great Abomination to
say, God should condemn and punish his Innocent Son, that he having satisfied
for our Sins, we may be justified by the Imputation of his perfect
Righteousness. O why should this horrible thing be contended for by Christians!
O, and why should the Quakers be such grand Deluders, as so plainly pretend to
believe it, and say he died for your Sins, and rose again for your
Justification! when, ibid. p. 16. Mr. Pen says, That the Consequences of such
a Doctrine is both irreligious and irrational. And why should they believe
Justification by Christ's Righteousness, since Tho. Lucock affimed, That he was
as perfect without Sin as God is; and blames others because they say with the
Apostle, In many things we offend all? and this Doctrine of Perfection, that
is, a Sinless living, is the known Doctrine of the Quakers.

But let not Christians say they are without Sin, lest they deceive themselves,
as the Quakers do, 1 John 1. 8. And let us believe that the Lord laid upon
Christ our Redeemer the Iniquities of us all, Isa. 53. 6. And as by one Man's
Disobedience many were made Sinners; so by the Obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous, Romans 5. 18.

3. They profess to believe Redemption and Salvation by Christ.

Let us examine what they intend by Redemption: First, Not Redemption of their
Bodies from the Graves of the Earth, for this is positively denied by them; tho
all Christians own it as a great Article of the Christian Faith.

Secondly, Then what is to be redeemed and saved, not the Soul; for George Fox
says that is part of God, without Beginning or End; surely then it needs no
Redemption: and God did not send his Son to redeem himself. Take the natural
sense of what is expressed, Great Mystery, p. 29, and p. 90. See further what
George Keith says, Christ came to save that which was lost, and that which was
lost is still in Man's Heart, and there it must be sought, for it remains still
in the House; that is, Man's Heart; this is the thing to be sought for; this
Christ came to seek and to save: and all his Ministers preached People to this,
the Lost in Man, that it may be found; a lost God, a lost Christ, this was the
sum and substance of their Doctrine. G. Keith, Immediate. Inspirat. p 75, 76.
May we not think G. K. to be inspired by the Prince of Darkness? or that he had
lost the very Light of Nature, to talk of a lost God, and a lost Christ to be
sought and saved? O were ever God and Christ in a lost Condition! But poor Man
was, and we believe he came to seek and save Sinners, who had lost the Image
and Favor of God. You may see more to this purpose, Fox's Great Mystery, p.
100. at large.

Neither do they believe any other Salvation than what they are in the
Enjoyment of already: see Lawson's Book, p. 9, -- 19. see two Passages in
Nailor's Book, Love to the Lost, p. 47, 48, 30. There is a Seed to which the
Promise of Redemption is, which Seed is that which only wants Redemption, p.
30. he says, Christ is the Election and Elect Seed. Fox's Great Mystery, p.
224. tells us, The Seed to which the Promise is, is that which has been laden
as a Cart with Sheaves by Sinners, which Seed is the hope Christ.

The natural Consequence of this Doctrine is, that Christ came to redeem
Christ, a lost God, and a lost Christ, as before said. Might not the Heavens
blush, and the Earth tremble at such blasphemous Absurdities! But I shall not
in this short Discourse trace them in their gross Contradictions of Truth, and
each other, about the Light within, the Seed, Christ, and the Word. But let
this suffice to confute and unmask their pretended Belief aforesaid.

V. They profess to own and believe the Divine Offices of Christ in his Church,
that he is both King, Priest and Prophet to, and over his Church and People.

I shall proceed to examine the Truth of this Profession, which if it were
true, were very comprehensive of a great part of the Christian Religion. But
what has been made appear already, shows us, that by no means their word must
be taken.

First; How do they believe the Kingly Office of Christ, are they not mistaken?
Let us examine some Appellations that they have taken from Christ and given to
Geo. Fox senior. See a Book entitled, Tyranny and Hypocrisy detected, p. 18,
19. Sol. Eckles celebrates Geo. Fox thus, Blessed be the Man that came out of
the North; blessed be the Womb that bear him, and the Breasts that gave him
Suck: and ibid. p. 19. a Letter written by Josias Coal, a Quaker, from
Barbados to G. Fox, 21 day, 12th Month, 1658. Dear George Fox, who art the
Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached through us thy Children, even
to the Isles afar off, to the begetting of many again to a lively hope; for
which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed; whose Being and Habitation
is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou rulest and governest in
Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the Increase
thereof is without end.

Now what is more apparent than that by these Appellations, the Scepter is
wrested out of Christ's Hands, and given to G. Fox? Now this Letter was not
judged by the infallible Spirit of the inspired Elders to be a transported
Flash of a misguided Zeal: For G. Fox and his Peers ordered it to be recorded
amongst things worthy to be registered, tho the Contents of it would make a
modest Heathen blush and tremble. Take the Contents particularly.

1. He does expressly ascribe to him a Kingdom; Thy Kingdom, etc. and thou
rulest and governest. Now he that rules and governs in his own Kingdom, must of
necessity be an actual King.

2. He describes to us the Subjects of this Kingdom, who, next to himself, are
Josiah Coal, and the Elders or Peers, whom he calls, us thy Children; and
remotely, those to whom the Life of G. Fox has reached through the Elders, to
the begetting them again to a lively hope, and they are many, therefore he
calls him the Father of many Nations.

3. He tells us what kind of Power and Authority it is in which this King rules
and governs, and that is, in the Power of the Highest, a Spiritual and Divine
Power, not like that of the Kingdoms of Men.

4. We have here the Stability of this Kingdom; 'Thy Kingdom is established in
Peace.

5. The Extent of this Kingdom; The Increase thereof is without End, it is a
boundless Kingdom.

6. The Excellency of this King is such, and his Happiness so great, that, Not
only the present Age, but Generations to come shall call him Blessed.

So that here you see G. F. fully invested and throned in Christ's Kingly
Office; and why should the Quakers be angry, as they have been, for calling G.
Fox the King of the Quakers, since he is as really so on their account, as
Christ is the King of Christians. I suppose all Christians conclude, Isa. 9. 6,
7. where several of these Terms are included, to be spoken of Christ, as the
Prince of Peace; Of the increase of his Government and Peace, there shall be no
End, etc. Luke 1. 32, 33. and he shall reign over the House of Jacob for ever,
and of his Kingdom there shall be no End. Luke 11. 27. Blessed be the Womb that
bare thee (G. Fox) and the Breasts that gave thee suck. And Isa. 9. 6.
Everlasting Father, or Father of the Ages to come. Heb. 2. 13. Behold, I, and
the Children which God have given me. Mich. 5. 4. And he shall stand, and feed,
or rule in the strength of the Lord, etc. He shall be great to the ends of the
Earth. Now one would have thought, that such Expressions as these, out of which
Coal and Eckels had theirs, might have intended Christ: But you see these
divinely-inspired Men, by virtue of their immediate Revelations, apply them to
George Fox, with blasphemous Confidence enough.

But it may be they will say, That the Scriptures mentioned, point at Christ as
the Figure or Type, and G. Fox as the Substance; for they say, in Readiness Errand
to Damascus, p. 6, 7. That Christ in the Flesh was a Figure. And where-(...)
Paul says, 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ;
and, that the Father has committed all Judgment to the Son. But read p. 6, 7.
Readiness Errand to Damascus, and George Fox takes the Name to himself, saying, He
is the Eternal Judge of Quick and Dead.

But it may be it is the Christ in George Fox, that has this Regal or Kingly
Power. But why then was it not so expressed, P. 44, 45. Tyranny and Hypocrisy
detected, says Rebekah Trevers, a great Prophetess amongst them, If she had a
Motion from the Lord, as she believed, yet if George Fox did not own it to be
so, she would deny it. So that George Fox is not only a King of the Quakers,
but also of the Light or Christ in them, for those believed Motions must give
way to the Motions of George Fox. Spirit of the Hat, page 27. you have this
saying of King George repeated, Friends, although I have not told it you, I do
now declare it, I have power to bind and loose whom I please, etc. Ay, and well
he may, since he has deprived Christ of his Kingly Office. Now who can imagine
that these Men can believe the Kingly Office of Christ, who thus strip him of
his Regal Power? But it may be the Quakers will say, It is not George Fox, but
the Light, or Christ within him, that assumes this Kingly Power.

Well, and if the same Light and Christ be in another, must the Christ in
George Fox rule or reign over the same Christ in another? for, it seems, the
Light, or Christ's Motions in Rebekah Trevers must be denied and rejected, if
the Light or Christ in G. Fox opposes it; so that then Christ reigns as King
over Christ. But who G. Fox left to sway this Scepter I know not, except it was
G. Fox junior, who in his Book, page 53, 54, 55. you may observe him speaking
thus; I will make you know, that I the Light, which lights every Man that
comes into the World, that all through me should believe, am the true Eternal
God which created all things, that by me, the Light, all things are upheld, and
that there is not another besides me can save; and I will purge out all your
Iniquities, and forgive all your Trespasses; and I will change your Natures,
and I will make you new Creatures, if you will hearken to me, and obey me the
Light in you. What I have here written is the words of the Father, who is one
with Christ the Son, gave me to write, in which words the true Christ is
renewed, and a Testimony given of him, and no other. But this is more than
enough of this Blasphemy against the Son of God. So that it appears to every
seeing Eye, that the Quakers do not own the Kingly Office of Christ that died
at Jerusalem, no more, no nor so much neither as the Kingly Office of George
Fox; for the Laws of Christ are made null by him, and the Ordinances of King
Jesus contemned and rejected by him, as being more powerful and infallible, as
may further appear anon.

2. I shall examine how they own Christ's Priestly Office, which upon diligent
search will appear nothing so as professed by them, but a mere flourish to
delude the Ignorant and Easy. And that the Quakers deny the Priestly, Mediatory
or Advocatory Office of Christ, will appear for these Reasons.

1. They deny the Person or Humanity of Christ, as has been before showed;
then they cannot own Christ's Priestly Office, for 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. Now if Christ has no Body
but his Church, as when occasion calls for it, I shall show: But let what has
been beforesaid suffice at present; then I argue thus:

Arg. If Christ had a Body that was broken for the Church; then he had a Body
besides the Church: but he had a Body broken for the Church. Ergo.

The Major is out of doubt, or else he gave his Church to be broken for his
Church, which is absurd.

The Minor is proved from Mat. 26. 26. Luke 22. 19. where Christ says of his
Body, that it was broken for them. Now if the Quakers say, Christ was never
seen with any carnal Eye, and that he has no Body but his Church, it will
appear they deny the Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus.

2. They deny the Place where Christ our High Priest is entered, which is the
Heavens, the Holy of Holies, according to Heb. 4. 14. Seeing then that we have
a great High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let
us hold fast our Profession. But see what the Quakers say, Smith's Primmer, p.
8, 9. They that are false Ministers, preach Christ without, and bid People
believe in him as he is in Heaven above: but they that are true, preach Christ
within. It seems by the Quakers, it is false Doctrine to teach People as Paul
taught the Hebrews, namely, that their Mediator is in Heaven, that their
High Priest is there.

They that are false Ministers preach Christ without; your Carnal Christ is
utterly denied by the Light; your* imagined God beyond the Stars. But none can
witness this whose Eye is outward, looking at a Redeemer afar off, etc. Smith's
Primmer, p. 9. Sword of the Lord, p. 24. Shield of Truth, p. 30. But there has
been enough of this before. They deny any other Heaven than what is within
them, as has manifestly appeared.

Arg. Those that deny Christ to be entered into the glorious Heavens above, deny
the Priestly Office of Christ: But the Quakers deny Christ to be entered into
the glorious Heavens above. Ergo, they deny the Priestly Office of Christ.

The Minor has been before proved; namely, that the Quakers deny Christ to be
in the glorious Heavens above.

The Major is evident from Scripture, Heb. 4. 14. Seeing then that we have a
great High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. Heb.
8. 1. We have such an High Priest, who is set on the Right Hand of the Throne
of the Majesty in the Heavens. Burrough's Works, p. 127. They that deny Christ
to be the Light in every Man, are Antichrists.

Smith's Primmer, p. 8, 9. The false Ministers preach Christ in Heaven, says
Smith the Quaker, and the true preach Christ within, and these have no more
Fellowship together than the East and West. So that there is just so much
difference betwixt the Doctrine of the Apostles and Quakers, as there is
between East and West.

3. They deny the Blood of the Sacrifice, Christ our High Priest offered upon
the Cross. This I have before proved, and showed the scornful Contempt they
have cast upon it at large. And much more might be said if need were; what else
means their dropping such words as these? Says Edw. Billing, The Mystery of
Iniquity lies in the Blood of Christ. And say they, Do look at Christ's Death
afar off? What will that Blood avail? did ever see any of it, that carnal
Blood! Can outward Blood cleanse? if thou had a great deal of it, would it do
thee any good? How apparently do they scorn that Blood of Christ shed upon the
Cross? But it is most evident they deny Christ's Priestly Office.

4. The Quakers cannot believe the Priestly or Mediatory Office of Christ,
because they have no need of a Mediator. For if they are as perfect without Sin
as God is, says Leucock, and are come to the end of Faith, as says Lawson's
Book, p. 10. And if Burrough's Works, p. 33. say true, That God does not accept
any, where there is any failing, or who does not fulfill the Law, and answer
every Demand of Justice: and this they say they do, and are perfect; then what
need have they of the Mediatory Office of Christ? It is certain Christians own
a Perfection, according to Genesis 17. 1. to be sincere; and as our Savior says,
Be ye perfect. Secondly, We believe a Perfection through the Merits and
Intercession of Christ, Philip. 3. 12. Not as tho I were already perfect. For
if we say we have no Sin, we should deceive our selves, as the Quakers do. But
1 John 2. 1. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous: In and through him the Saints expected Perfection.

But Christians also expect complete Perfection when they come to Glory, on the
other side of the Grave; even when Mortality is swallowed up of Life.

But the Quakers believe they have the Kingdom of Christ, and are in the
glorious Possession of it already. But that they are not, I prove thus.

Arg. Those that are in the Possession of that Kingdom, neither marry nor are
given in Marriage, etc. But the Quakers do marry, and are given in Marriage:
Ergo, the Quakers are not in the Possession of that Kingdom.

The Minor is self-evident; that they do marry, etc.

The Major is proved from our Lord's words. But let what has been said suffice
to make it appear, that the Quakers deny the Priestly Office of Christ.

3dly, I shall proceed to examine how they own his Prophetic Office, which
they say, yes verily we believe and own, etc. Now how can it be, since they
have so plainly denied Christ's Human Body? as has been showed. And Deuteronomy. 18.
15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee,
of thy Brethren, like unto me, (i. e. a Man) unto him shall ye hearken: he
shall be according as you desired of the Lord in Horeb, v. 16. You were afraid
of God's speaking to you; he shall raise you up a Prophet, a Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, of your Brethren, like to me; you shall not be terrified with the
immediate Voice of God, Exodus 20. 19. Now this is Christ, whom Peter shows and
declares, Acts 3. 22. Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say
unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every Soul that will not hear that
Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People. This is he that God the
Father from Heaven testified of, Mat. 17. 5. saying, This is my beloved Son,
hear ye him: This is he that was crucified and put to Death on the Cross; and
that rose from the Dead in his Body of Flesh and Bones, Luke 24. 39. This is he
that told Mary, Joh. 20. 19. I go to my Father, and to your Father; and to my
God, and your God: The Disciples did not expect this Christ to come into them.
But, as I promised before my Death and Passion, so I will send you the
Comforter. This is he that declares he has all Power both in Heaven and in
Earth, and that gives his Commission to his Disciples, Mat. 28. 19. injoyning
them to teach and publish all his Commands; and he says, He that hears you,
hears me; and he that hears me, hears him that sent me, etc. This is the
Person denied by the Quakers to be this great Prophet, as has been showed.

2. They deny the Method used by this Prophet; namely, preaching from the
Scriptures, which he frequently did: Mat. 21. 42. says he, Did ye never read
in the Scriptures, The Stone that was set at naught by you Builders, the same
is become the Head of the Corner? Mat. 22. 29. Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures. John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, etc. What was more frequent,
than for Christ to preach from the Scriptures, and to convince his Opposers by
them? But the Quakers deny this Method; for says Lawson's Book, p. 14. The
Scriptures are not a Touchstone to try Spirits withal. And p. 15. he says,
The written Law does not convince Men of Sin. And in his Book called, The
untaught Teacher, p. 2, 3. he denies that the Ministers of Christ endowed with
the Spirit, ought to minister or preach from the Scriptures.

O blind Stupidity! Do they deny the Apostles to be Christ's Ministers endowed
with the Spirit? And did not they preach from the Scriptures, Acts 3. 22. Peter
proves Christ to be this Prophet from Deuteronomy. 18. 15. And Acts 8. 26, etc. did
not Philip preach Jesus to the Eunuch out of the Prophet Isaiah? Acts 18. 28.
Apollos mightily convinced the Jews of the Truth of Jesus being the Christ, out
of the Scriptures. Acts 17. 11. the Bereans searched the Scriptures to prove
Paul's Doctrine; and Paul advises Timothy to study rightly to divide the Word.
Surely these were Ministers endowed with the Spirit.

But, 3. As the Quakers do not own the Person, nor Method used and appointed by
Christ the great Prophet; so they disown the Doctrine taught by him and his
Apostles, and like not those Directions given for Doctrine: for say they, 'All
things are to be taught and 'learned by and from the Light within; all they
direct to is that. No, see Zech. 7. 2, 3, -- 7. Sherezer and Regem-melech were
sent by the Children of Israel to enquire of the Priests and Prophets, Whether
they should weep in the fifth Month, separating themselves as they had done
many Years before. Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker; but the Lord
speaks by the Prophet, saying, Should you not hear the words which the Lord
has cried by the former Prophets? etc.

John Baptist, who was a burning and shining Light, sent two Disciples to
Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come, or look do we for another? Turn to
the Light within, says the Quaker. But says Christ, Go, and tell John the
things ye have both seen and heard, etc. Such outward Means were returned by
Christ, the true Prophet and Light of the World, for John's Satisfaction, Luke
7. 19, 22.

Luke 3. 10, -- 14. The People came to Jesus, saying, What shall we do? Also
the Publicans, saying, What shall we do? And the Soldiers said, What shall we
do? Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker. But says Jesus, who had
another Spirit; He that has two Coats, let him impart one to him that has
none: Exact no more, etc. Do Violence to none, Accuse no Man falsely, Be
content with your Wages. Mat. 19. 16, -- 21. a certain young Man came to
Christ, saying, What good thing shall I do that I may inherit Eternal Life?
Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker: But says Christ, Keep the
Commandments, and sell what thou have, and give to the Poor, and thou shall
have Treasure in Heaven, etc.

Joh. 6. 28, 29. the Jews demanded of Christ, saying, What shall we do that we
may work the Work of God? Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker. But says
Christ, this is the Work of God, That ye believe in his Son, that is, in me
that talk with you, that came into the World to die for you. Lord, what will thou have me to do? says Saul; Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker.
Acts 9. 6. says the Lord Christ, Go into the City, and it shall be told thee.
Acts 22. 10-16. Arise, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told thee, of
all things that are appointed for thee to do: And that not by a Light within,
for Ananias was to instruct him into the Will of Christ the great Prophet. So
Acts 2. 37, 38. The poor Jews, pricked in the Heart, cried out, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? Turn to the Light within, says the Quaker. But
says Peter, one that had the Holy Ghost, Repent, and be baptized, for the
Remission of Sins, etc. I might weary you with showing how the Quakers oppose
the Teachings of Christ's Prophetic Office.

And that the Quakers deny the Prophetic Office of Christ, it appears by their
denying his Gospel Ordinances; and this brings me to the Sixth Head, as I
observe in their Pamphlet.

VI. and Last.

In which they would insinuate to the World, That they believe, and are fully
persuaded, that Baptism which is essential to Salvation, or Christianity, or
the Laver, without which none can be true Christians, or saved, is the inward
or spiritual washing of Regeneration by the Word of Life. This is the saving
Baptism into Christ and his Church, which produces the answer of a good
Conscience toward God, of which the outward was a Figure, 1 Pet. 3. 21. This
is that one Baptism of Christ, by one Spirit, into that one Body whereof Christ
is Head. And then, that they may not appear with open Face, but under a Mask,
in striking at Christ's Ordinance, but still with the same Design, they alter
the stroke seemingly, and go on; As for Dipping, or Sprinkling Infants or young
Children, we find no Precept or Precedent in Holy Scripture for the practice
thereof; and therefore we cannot think our not believing it, essential or
necessary to Salvation, or making Christians, a sufficient Argument to prove us
no Christians, unless it can be proved that none are saved without it, and that
all are saved that have it, etc.

The scope and medium of this Article, is to make null and abolish the sacred
Ordinance of Water Baptism: And as to what they say, that their not believing
Sprinkling or Dipping of young Children to be essential to Salvation, or making
Christians, can be no sufficient Argument to prove them no Christians. No
certainly, I believe that no Advocate for that Cause could do it from those
Premises.

I shall proceed to examine their Sentiments touching that Sacred Ordinance of
Water Baptism; and it appears that they deny those two great Ordinances
instituted by our Lord and great Prophet, namely, Baptism in Water, and the
Supper administered in Bread and Wine; then one good Argument, amongst many, may
be drawn from thence to prove the Quakers no Christians. Let us therefore have
recourse to their Construing Books, and see what they say.

Pernell's Shield of the Truth, p. 11. The Baptism. we own, is the Baptism of
Christ with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, but we deny all other. See p. 12.
Here the Quakers fully deny Water Baptism. See also James Naylor's Salutation
to the Seed of God, p. 33, 34. where he slights and denies Baptism in Water,
calling it a carnal thing. But Edw. Buroughs, with open Face, and great
Confidence, testifies against Christ's Ordinances being now in force; I do
affirm, says he, that Circumcision is as much in force as Water Baptism; and
the Pafchal Lamb, as the Bread and Wine; for the continuing of them would have
been a Judaizing of the Evangelical Worship: To assert their continuance, would
be as much as in such lies to pluck up the Gospel, or Spiritual Worship, by the
Roots. Hence that Appellation, Ordinances of Christ, I do renounce as
unscriptural and unevangelical, and can testify, from the same Spirit by which
Paul renounced Circumcision, that they are to be rejected. Burroughs's Works,
page 108, 109. Here is a compound of Ignorance and Confidence with a witness;
because Christ put an end to Circumcision and other Ceremonies of the Law, as
Paul teaches; therefore by the Spirit of Delusion, and gross Ignorance in the
Quakers, E. B. will renounce and put an end to Christ's Ordinances. Surely
these Men have learned to put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness; for
what can be a more effectual way to pluck up Gospel Worship by the Roots, than
to make null and renounce Gospel Ordinances? But the wickedness of this deluded
Man lies chiefly in patronizing his notorious Falsehoods to the same Spirit that
Paul had, which was the Spirit of Christ: What is this but blaspheming the Holy
Spirit? See Pernell's Shield of the Truth, p. 12. where he calls Water Baptism,
A formal Invention and Imitation of Men, and so a mere Delusion. Smith the
Quaker's Primmer, page 39. Thy Baptism, Bread and Wine, rose from the Pope's
Invention.

I shall only bring in the Verdict of Robert Ruckhill; see Mr. Grantham's
Christianismus Primitivus, Book 4. Treat. 11. See how Ruckhill condemns the
Baptized Churches, for keeping the Ordinances of Christ as they were delivered
to the Saints, etc.

O ungrateful Men, says he, unworthy, till you repent and loath your selves,
the Name of Christians; has the afflicted persecuted Church been. banished
into the Wilderness for many hundred Years; and now at her return, when she is
expecting a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, both Inward and
Outward, which her great Afflictions have wrought for her; will you now, I say,
allow her no better Ornaments, but these very same she wore 1600 Years ago?
which also for many hundred Years have been revelled in, and filthily polluted
by that nasty Whore of Babylon. Poor Bride, must she now put on those old
Clothes and rotten Rags again? etc. Will you deny this beautiful Bride, the
Lamb's Wife, that Privilege your own Wives will scorn to be denied by you? O
how weak are your Hearts, says the Lord God.

To which great and swelling words of Vanity, Mr. Grantham gives a full and
pathetical Answer.

But from all this you may observe, that as Ananias and Sapphirah agreed to lie
against the Holy Ghost, so these against the Ordinances of Christ. But the
misery of it is, although their Design is the Death of the Object, yet as the
Testimonies of the two Elders against Susannah, and the false Witnesses against
Christ, they cannot agree in their Testimony against the Gospel Ordinances.

For says Smith's Primmer, p. 39. Thy Baptism, Bread and Wine, rose from the
Pope's Inventions. So says Higgins's Warning, p. 5. But Ruckhill says, They
were the Churches Ornaments 1600 Years ago. This he plainly confesses; Now
either the former, or the latter of these inspired Men, with all their
Infallibility, are infallibly Liars; for if they were the Churches Ornaments
1600 Years ago, as Ruckhill confesses, then they were not invented by the
Pope, as Smith and Higgins pretend, there being no Pope of that Antiquity. So
that I must leave you to clear your selves if you can tell how.

I proceed to examine R. Ruckhill's great and empty flourish, and swelling
words of Vanity.

1. Here R. Ruckhill pretends much skill in the time of the Churches going
into, and returning out of the Wilderness: But I suppose, were he asked, What
this Wilderness is, and the exact Time when the Church went in and came out of
it? he would give but a bewildered Answer.

2. It appears from hence, as I have before showed, that the Quakers believe
the Eternal weight of Glory, both inward and outward, is to be received by the
Church at her return out of the Wilderness, and enjoyed here on this side the
Grave in this mortal State.

3. Here R. Ruckhill is forced to confess, that the Ordinances of Christ were
the Churches Ornaments 1600 Years ago; but now they are a great dishonor and
deformity to her, therefore he disdainfully calls them old rotten Rags; as
though 1600 Years were time enough to rot all the Ordinances of Christ, and
wear them out to Rags.

4. He disdains these Ordinances, because the Whore of Babylon has revelled in
them, and polluted them.

But for all R. Ruckhill's skill in the Churches Apparel, there were also other
Ornaments, as the Belief of the Scriptures, Faith, Holiness, Love, Charity and
Patience, Mercy, etc. Now have not all these been corrupted and abused by the
Whore of Babylon? and counterfeit Ordinances, counterfeit Scriptures,
counterfeit and feigned Faith, Holiness, Love, Charity, Patience and Mercy, set
up in the room thereof? does it therefore follow, that all these Virtues must
be thrown away, because the Whore has polluted them? No surely, the Quakers
will not say so, nor account Prayer, Preaching, etc. old rotten Rags, because
the Whore has revelled in them.

Was the Ark of God ever the worse for remaining some time in the House of
Dagon? Israel were sometimes a long space without the true Law, true Worship,
and true God, being involved in Idolatry and Darkness, yet both Asah and
Hezekiah were for returning to the true God, and true Worship, when that
Darkness was dispersed, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. 2 Chronicles. 30. 5. Even so now the Lord
having dispersed that Fog of Popish Darkness; may not R. Ruckhill's Lamentation
be taken up against the Quakers and others? O ungrateful Men, has God
dispersed these Clouds of Popish Darkness, and discovered his Laws and
Ordinances in their Primitive Purity, and will you now reject and contemn them
as old rotten Rags, and rebel against the Light? But R. Ruckhill would now by
all means have the Church to have a new Coat, her old Ornaments being worn to
Rags. And R. Ruckhill must needs have the Church to have new Ordinances, as
often as Men's Wives have new Clothes, or else she must go naked.

But, says Robert Ruckhill, in the forementioned Discourse, We do not deny
Baptism, or any other Ordinance, when the Spirit of the Lord leads to them.
It Is but fair to conclude, that the Quakers have not the Leadings of the Spirit
of God to guide them into this Gospel-Ordinance. But,

R. Ruckhill would recall this again, saying, It has appeared, that the Spirit
of the Lord leads forward, not backward; upward, not downward, (and then he
presumes to say) else the Spirit may as well lead into Judaism, as into the
Ordinances aforesaid. What profound Ignorance and gross Darkness is here, to
imagine that the Spirit of Christ, promised, John 14. 26. and 16. 31. to guide
into all Truth, and to bring to remembrance the Doctrine Christ had taught,
might as well lead them into Judaism, which Christ had and came to abolish, by
R. Ruckhill's Argument? When Ananias is sent to Paul, compare Acts 9. 17, 18.
Act. 22. 16 that he may receive his sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost,
he said, And now why tarriest thou? Arise and be Baptized. Might not Paul have
said, I am filled with the Holy Ghost already, What, must I go back to the
Shadow, to such a carnal thing as Water Baptism? But Paul had the Spirit of
God, and not of the Quakers, and therefore he readily submitted to this Holy
Ordinance, and stands not to confer with Flesh and Blood. See also Acts 10.
from 44, to 48. While Peter was preaching the Gospel to Cornelius, and those
with him, the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the Word; and they heard
them speak with Tongues, and magnified God. Then answered Peter, Can any forbid
Water, that these should not be baptized who have received the Holy Ghost as
well as we? etc. Doubtless had R. Ruckhill, or any of the Quakers been there,
had there been any such a Creature in those Days, they would have forbid Water,
and told Peter, he was mistaken; Hold, Peter, they have the Substance, the
Baptism of the Spirit, will thou lead them back to the Letter, to the carnal
Thing of Water Baptism? If G. Fox had been there with his Book, The Great
Mystery, page 65. he would out of that have proved to Peter, that Paul told of
the Spirit's Baptism, and brought the Saints off from Things that are seen; and
Water is seen, and its Baptism; from that Text 2 Cor. 4. 18. Would any Man in
his Senses have drawn such an Inference? But it is a lamentable thing, that
these Men care not for the Scriptures, except it be to abuse them. But to
return, Verse. 48. Peter being of another mind, having another Spirit than the
Quakers, Commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. From whence I
groundedly conclude, That the highest Seize, or greatest Measures of the
Holy Spirit, do not exempt or excuse Men from, but fit them for
Gospel Ordinances. But I have showed you before, it is the Baptism of the
Spirit, and no other, that they will allow.

This is that they contend for in their Pamphlet; they say, The Baptism of
Water was put an End to at Christ's Death; and then that of the Spirit
succeeds, of which that of Water was a Type. This is their common Opinion.

To which I answer, That it was Water Baptism that Christ gave in Commission to
his Disciples to Administer, after he was risen from the Dead, Mat. 28. Mark 16.

First; They were not to administer that of Sufferings; his Disciples nor
Apostles were not to persecute, nor lay Sufferings upon others.

Secondly; If they say that the Apostles were to baptize with the Spirit, as
some of them want no Ignorance or Confidence to affirm.

First; I demand, Whether the Administration of that were not peculiar to
Christ, Mat. 3* 11. He, meaning Christ, shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost,
and with Fire?

Secondly; Whether that if the Command, Mat. 28. 18. Mark 16. 16. be to command
the Apostles to baptize with the Holy Ghost, and Fire? If it were, I demand
when and where they obeyed it?

Thirdly; Whether we may not groundedly believe, That the baptizing Men and
Women in Water, in the Name of Christ, which the Apostles did, was not in
obedience to some Commission from the Lord so to do?

Fourthly; Let the Quakers show when and where the Lord gave them command so to
do, if this of Matthew. 28. and Mark 16. was not it?

Fifthly; If Peter had not Authority from the Lord to baptize with Water, Acts
10. latter end, I demand whether you do not conclude he finned in so doing? for
he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord; see Deuteronomy. 18. 20. But
the Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my Name, that I have not
commanded, that Prophet shall die, says the Lord. I wish this were seriously
weighed by all that counterfeit Christ's Ordinances.

Sixthly; That whereas it is alleged that Baptism may be done, or left undone,
that it is a thing indifferent: Then I demand, whether it was not as great a
Sin in Peter, Acts 10. 48. to command them to be baptized, as it was in those,
1 Timothy 4. 2, 3. who command to abstain from Meats, and forbid to marry, which
are things left at liberty? For to command to do what God has left at liberty,
to do or not to do, is equally a Sin to the same extent, with forbidding what
God has left to Men's liberty: Therefore I would have none to count the
Ordinances of Christ Things indifferent. Let what has been said be considered.
But the Apostles in pursuance of the aforesaid Commission, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20.
Mark 16. 16. did preach and baptize with Water; that being the only Baptism
they were to administer. That of Sufferings by Persecution being from the Devil
and wicked Men; that of the Spirit being peculiar from Christ, and that of
Water by his Apostles and Disciples. And thus according to the Commission of
their Lord, you find them administering, Acts 2. 38. and reaching; Repent and be
baptized for Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost. Acts 8. 12. When they believed Philip, preaching the things concerning
the Kingdom of God, and Name of Jesus, they were baptized both Men and Women.
Ver. 36, 37. says the Eunuch, See, here is Water, what does hinder me to be
baptized? Philip answered, If thou believe with all thy Heart, it is lawful for
thee; as most truly read. And they went down into, and came up out of the
Water, etc. Acts 10. 47, 48. And he commanded them. to be baptized in the Name
of the Lord; and none could forbid Water, tho they were baptized with the
Spirit before. So that although the pouring forth of the extraordinary Gifts of
the Spirit are comparatively called a Baptism; and the Greatness and
Over-whelmings of Christ's Sufferings are so called comparatively: Yet there is
but one Baptism in a full and proper sense, and that is that of Water, in which
the penitent Believer is buried, Coloss. 2. 12. Romans 6. 4. And whatever the
Quakers pretend, Ephesians. 4. 5. Christ is that one Lord; and to believe in him,
his Offices and Doctrine, is this one Faith, and to be baptized in Water is the
one Baptism; and how ridiculously they abuse that Text in their Pamphlet, 1
Pet. 3. 21. In ver. 21. he speaks of God's Patience in waiting upon the old
World while the Ark was a preparing, wherein eight Persons were saved by Water:
The like Figure where unto, even Baptism, does also now save us; not the
putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, that is, not the end of Water Baptism,
to cleanse the Filth from the outward Man, as were the many Washings under the
Law; but it is the answer of a good Conscience toward God; in showing your
Obedience to his Law, as it is said, Luke 7. 30. The Pharisees and Lawyers
rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, in not being baptized of him;
and so contracted Guilt to their Consciences. And their saying, Water Baptism
was a Figure of the Spiritual, is an apparent Falsehood, the Text under debate
has no such meaning: But thus, as eight Persons believed in the Lord's
preaching, by the Ark's building, when the old World was threatened, they got
into this Ark, when the unbelieving World mocked at it; the Water bears up the
Ark, and those in it, and saves them whilst the others were destroyed.

So the Threats of perishing eternally are pronounced in the Gospel against
Sinners. Now the penitent Believer puts on Christ by Water Baptism, Gal. 3. 27.
which is the initiating and ingrafting Ordinance; and I demand of the Quakers,
if they can, to prove where Water Baptism is called a Figure of the Spiritual;
and also to show me from the Scriptures where any were commanded to observe the
Figure, when at the same time they enjoy the Substance. But Paul, and
Cornclius, and others had the Spiritual Baptism, and yet were commanded to be
baptized with Water.

Another impertinency in their Pamphlet is, they say, they cannot believe
dipping or sprinkling Infants, unless it can be proved that none are saved
without it, and all are saved that have it. They seem here most directly to
strike at Infant Baptism; but their design is to root out that sacred Ordinance
of Christ, Believers Baptism: And therefore I demand, whether the Quakers
believe, that all that are baptized with the Spirit, as they count it, tho a
Spirit of Delusion, shall infallibly be saved? if they say they do, then what
is the Reason they own or believe falling away, and going from the Light? and
why do so many turn wet Quakers, and become as vile in their Lives, as they are
in their Principles? But if they do not own an Infallibility of being saved by
that Spirit's Baptism they pretend to, then what is in these words? And to
conclude this Head, I would not have the Quakers pretend to be baptized with
the holy Spirit, till they believe in Christ, and obey his Appointments; for
Acts 5. 32. he gives his holy Spirit to them that obey him. To conclude this,
let all that would be Christ's Disciples, learn of him that has led in the way
of Righteousness, when by Faith and Repentance you have laid hold on Christ, O
delay not to put him on by Baptism! and so you will become visible Members of
his Mystical Body, be Heirs of the Promise of the holy Spirit, and other
blessed Privileges, as a Right to the Lord's Table to sup with him in this
Kingdom of Grace, and dwell with him in Glory hereafter.

2. The Quakers in their Pamphlet, in like manner with Falsehoods and
Impertinencies evade the Supper of the Lord instituted and administered in Bread
and Wine. Say they, The Supper of the Lord we own and tenderly consider in a
twofold sense. First, In the Figure: Secondly, In the Substance. 1. That our
Lord Jesus Christ at his Supper with his Disciples did eat the Passover, which
was for the fulfilling and Consummation of the Feasts under the Law, Luke 22.
and at his Supper he did take and minister the Bread and the Cup to his
Disciples (for there was no Transubstantiation) saying, This do in remembrance
of me; and says the Lord, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup,
ye do show forth the Lord's Death till he come; 1 Cor. 11. After this they did
more clearly know his Coming, and Christ after the Spirit, Jesus Christ in
them, 2 Cor. 13. 5, etc. The Reader may see with what deceivable words these
Impostors go about to evade and make null the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper
administered in Bread and Wine.

But before I come to answer their impertinent Evasions and manifold
Corruptions of the Scriptures, I shall show you that they plainly deny the
Supper of the Lord administered in Bread and Wine, to be now a standing
Ordinance in the Church of Christ, and practicable by Christians.

Let us hear them speak out more plainly before we answer them.

Parnell's Shield of the Truth, p. 13. Feeding upon Husks and Shadows that are
carnal, for the Bread which the World (that is, all that are not Quakers) eat,
is natural and carnal; so also is the (...) which they drink, and there is no
Communion but natural, outward and carnal. Smith's Primmer, p. 39. Thy Bread
and Wine in the Lord's Supper are the Popes Invention. See how bare-fac'dly
they can lie against the Truth. See Nailor's Love to the Lost, p. 56. Which all
know who are come to his Supper, where the Father and Son are come in and sup
with the Creature, which all the Imitators and Observers of Times are ignorant
of, whose Contention is about outsides.

Lastly, Let us have the Testimony of George Fox le-Grand, Great Mystery, etc.
p. 16. says he, Christ has triumphed over the Ordinances, and blotted them out,
and they are not to be touched; and the Saints have Christ in them, who is the
end of outward Forms: and thou art deceived who think to find the Living
amongst the Dead. You see by this how miserably these Men abuse the Scriptures.

Now it appears by all this, that either the Apostles were ignorant about the
nature and manner of Christ's second Coming, or else the Quakers are greatly
deluded in saying, he is come the second time already. But to clear the
Apostles and Primitive Saints from that Ignorance the Quakers cast upon them,
and to make it appear that they did not believe the giving of the Holy Ghost,
Acts 2. to be the second Coming of Christ.

1. Because the Apostles are found in the administering, and the Primitive
Christians in partaking of this Ordinance, after the Holy Spirit that Christ
promised to send, was come, as has been before said of Baptism. This appears
from Acts 2. 42, 46. They continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and Prayer. Acts 20. 7. The Disciples came
together to break Bread.

All Expositors that I know of conclude, this was to celebrate the Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper; see this fully manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2. compared with
Verse 23, to the 29th at large; Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ.

Montanus, an approved Interpreter, reads it thus, Imitatores mei ^stote, sicut
and ego Christi: Be ye Imitators of me, as I am of Christ. Now I praise you,
Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, as I
delivered them unto you. Ver. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which I
delivered unto you. As if he had said, those Ordinances that I praise you for
the keeping of, are the same that I received of the Lord: And this is one, that
the Lord Jesus the same Night in which he was betrayed, took Bread; blessed it,
and brake it, etc.

Now if the Quakers were not stark blind, or wilfully ignorant, would they
conclude that Paul and the Primitive Saints did not know that Christ was come
in Spirit? or, that the Promise of the Holy Ghost was given? So he goes on and
tells them, ver. 26. As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show
forth the Lord*s Death till he come. So that the giving forth of the Spirit was
not the second coming of Christ, as the Quakers dream; for how improper were it
for to celebrate an Ordinance in remembrance of him that was within them, I
leave to the Reader to judge.

2. Christ is not come, because that Kingdom is not come that Christ speaks of;
I will not henceforth drink of the Fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new with
you in my Father's Kingdom; notwithstanding the Quakers do so abuse that Saying
of our Lord. For it is the Duty of the Disciples of Christ to pray for the
coming of that Kingdom; and it is most evident, that the Will of God is not
done upon Earth, as it is in Heaven; for the greatest part of the World live in
Disobedience to the Will of God: neither does Christ now drink of the Fruit of
the Vine with his Disciples, because he is at his Father's Right Hand in the
glorious Heavens: and his Disciples upon Earth are to break and eat Bread, and
drink of the Fruit of the Vine till he come, in remembrance of his broken Body,
and Blood shed for their Redemption and Salvation; in which Christ has
spiritual Communion with them, not personal, which he will have after his
second Coming. And,

3. Paul and the Primitive Christians did not believe the givings forth of the
Spirit, to be the second coming of Christ, because they believed and expected
him to come in a personal, glorious and visible manner; Phil. 3. 20. We look
for the Savior, who shall change our vile Bodies, and make them like his own
glorious Body: that being one thing that will be done at Christ's second
Coming. And Paul and the Christians did look for Christ's second and personal
Coming, because they were told, Acts 1. 11. That the same Jesus should come in
like manner (visible in his Body of Flesh and Bones) as he did ascend, as has
been before proved more largely; and as Christ himself showed his Disciples,
Mat. 24. at large, that his coming should be glorious and visible; Rev. 1. 7.
Long after the Spirit or Comforter was come, faith John, Behold, he comes,
every Eye shall see him; and they that pierced him, shall mourn. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the Voice of
the Archangel, and the Trump of God, etc.

4. If the Quakers will need have this to be true, which no Christians can
allow them, that Christ is come the second time, as the Scriptures have
foretold of him, and as he himself said he would; and from thence they conclude
that Baptism and the Supper of the Lord are at an end; I would know whether all
other Gospel Ordinances are not at an end also, as Preaching, Prayer, Acts of
Mercy and Charity, and the like? And if so, why do the Quakers pretend to
Preach and Pray? for in that Kingdom there is no need to teach any to know the
Lord; no need of Prayer, for then the Saints possess the fullest Enjoyments
they can pray or wish for; they shall hunger no more, and so have no need of
Alms; and in that Kingdom, they neither marry, nor are given in Marriage;
neither can they die any more, Luke 20. 35, 36. But the Quakers pretend to
Preach, and Pray, and give Alms; they Marry, and they Die. See then what horrid
Contradictions and gross Absurdities attend this Spirit of Delusion. And to
what End they bring 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. Rev. 3. 20. Prove. 9. 4, 5. with Joh.
6. I know not, except to abuse the Scriptures, or confute themselves. All
Christians own Christ to be the Bread of Life, and have spiritual Communion
with him in his Ordinances; which spiritual Communion they cannot have,
whatever they pretend, who do not obey Christ in his Ordinances, but flight,
vilify, and contemn the same, as the Quakers do. But those that open when he
knocks, by the Hammer of his Word; those that receive his Word, Ordinances and
Appointments, he will come into them by his Spirit; and having Communion one
with another, as one Bread, so their Fellowship shall be with the Father and
the Son spiritually, and so he has promised to be with his Church in the
participation of his Ordinances to the end of the World? And though we highly
own and honor the Ordinances of Christ; yet as we believe those that reject
and despise them, whatever they pretend, have no spiritual Communion with
Christ: so also those that are not duly fitted and prepared for them, may not
expect any Benefit or Advantage by them.

In the next place, they talk of the Seals of the New Covenant: Which term, in
the plural, I deny; and believe, that the Spirit, or Holy Ghost, those Measures
or Gifts thereof that God bestows upon Christians, is the Seal of their
Acceptance with him; as Ephesians. 1. 13. After ye believed, ye were sealed with
the Holy Spirit of (...). Whoever accounts these Gospel Ordinances the Seals of
the Covenant, are so far mistaken, for they are part of the Covenant it self.
Says Christ, If ye love me, keep my Commandments; and I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that shall abide with you for ever,
even the Spirit of Truth. This Spirit which is promised as a Seal, is upon the
Terms of keeping Christ's Commandments, of which are Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper. Acts 5. 32. He gives this Seal of the Spirit to those that obey him,
duly observing and obeying Christ's Ordinances and Commands, from a real Faith
in his Word and Promises, as well as in his Death, Blood, and Merits; and also
to attend this. Gospel Faith with a pious Life; and so resigning up our selves
to be Christ's, he has promised us the Seal of his Spirit, as an earnest of
our Inheritance, which is hereafter to be enjoyed.

But vainly do the Quakers feed themselves with Wind, in imagining that they
have the Holy Spirit, or Seal of this new Covenant, who rebel against Christ
the Minister of the Covenant, condemn his Blood, despise his Ordinances, etc.
So that from hence it appears, they have nothing to do to take his Covenant
into their Mouths, seeing they hate to be reformed.

And as for their next Impertinency, in talking of one outward Type or Shadow,
being a Type of another outward Type; I am an Advocate for no such Notion,
neither do I believe that Circumcision was a Type of Baptism, but of the
Circumcision of the Heart; nor that the Passover was a Type of the Lord's
Supper, but of Christ the true Paschal Lamb, slain for the Sins of the World.

And now to conclude, Let all Christians admire the Grace of Christ, who gave
his Body to be broken, and his Blood to be shed; and not only so, but in love
to his People, has left this Ordinance of his Supper in his last Will and
Testament, to be celebrated, he before knowing our Frailties, we being subject
to forget his Kindness. Let us therefore observe it, with the rest of his
Ordinances; and blessed is the Servant whom the Lord when he comes shall find
so doing.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE QUAKERS.
SIRS,
You cannot be ignorant, that those two great Articles of the Christian Faith,
( viz.) The Resurrection of the dead Bodies of Men from the Graves of the
Earth, and Eternal Judgment, are believed as two Principles of the Christian
Faith, wherein your Belief has been questioned, and you profess your Belief in
neither of them in your Paper.

But the contrary has been manifested by your own Tongues and Pens; for Tho.
Lawson, and John Slay, both Quakers, gave William Jeffrey a Paper, under their
own Hands, wherein was asserted, That nothing of Man that goes into the Grave,
shall rise again; and one of your Friends with whom I was reasoning upon this
Subject, asked me, If, I were so ignorant as to believe that Bulk (pointing at
my Body) should rise again from the Grave? But upon occasion you will say, You
believe the Resurrection of the Body; pray then, what does your Friend Turner
intend by these Arguments?

1. If the Bodies of Men rise again; then there is a pre-eminence in the Bodies
of Men above the Bodies of Beasts, which is to give Solomon the (...), Eccles.
3. 19. 2. If the Bodies of Men shall rise again, this is to give Job the Lie,
who says, The Eye that sees me, shall see me no more, Job 7. 8. 3. Flesh and
Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, (who can suppose any other, than
that the import of these Arguments is, to deny the Resurrection of the Body?)
see Mr. Hicks's Dialogue, p. 56.

To which I answer, That the Consequence of neither of these Arguments follows
from the Premises: for where Solomon says, that Man has no pre-eminence above
a Beast; he shows in what respect he means, verse. 20. All are of the Dust, and
all turn to Dust again; in this sense all go to one Place, and so Man has no
pre-eminence. But in Point of the Resurrection he has, for a way is devised, 2 Samuel 14. 14. That Man shall not for ever be expelled from God. And a Promise is
made, Hos. 13. 14. I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave; I will
redeem them from Death; for Death and Hell, (or, says your Margin, the Grave)
shall deliver up the dead, etc. Rev. 20. 13. And it is true, the Eye that saw
Job, should see him no more, not in this mortal State. But see Job 19. 25, 26,
27. For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter
day upon the Earth. And although after my Skin, Worms destroy my Body, yet in my
Flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for my self, and not another: Mine Eyes
shall behold him, tho my Reins be consumed within me. What is more manifest
than that Job did believe in the Resurrection? After Worms had destroyed his
Body, yet in his (...) he should see his Redeemer; Where? upon the Earth: when?
at the last, or latter Day.

3. His Argument from 1. Cor. 15. 50. is exploded; the Argument is, Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. To which I answer:

1st, Then let your Friend Tho. Lawson be ashamed of what he says in his Book,
p. 9, and 19. where he affirms himself and Friends to be now in Possession of
the Kingdom of God aforesaid, and to have Eternal Life really in Possession: Do
you believe Tho. Lawson, or any of you now living, are not made of Flesh, Blood
and Bones.

2dly, We own, that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.

First; Under a twofold Acceptance of the Word.

1. Not carnal, sensual and unregenerate Men; for John 3. 3, -- 8. Except a Man
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the
Flesh, is Flesh, etc. Marvel not that I said unto thee Ye must be born again,
(or, from above, says your Margent). The carnal, unregenerate Man is said to
be in the Flesh, and not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be in
that State: So that to be carnally or fleshly-minded is Death, etc. Know you
not such unrighteous ones cannot inherit the Kingdom of God?

2. Neither shall the fleshly Bodies of the Saints inherit the Kingdom of God
till a change has passed upon them, 1 Cor. 15. 50. the following words give
the Apostle's meaning, Neither shall Corruption inherit Incorruption, v. 51.
this Change must be. For ver. 53. this Corruption must put on Incorruption, and
this Mortal must put on Immortality. V. 54. Then will be brought to pass the
saying, Death is swallowed up in Victory. Hosea 13. 14. Moreover, it appears
that Christ rose from the dead, and ascended in his Body of Flesh, Blood and
Bones. Luke 24. 39. he said to his Disciples, Feel me and handle me: a Spirit
bath not Flesh and Bones, as you see me have; and he showed them his Hands and
his Feet, that were nailed to the Cross, etc. Even so will he change our vile
Bodies, and make them like unto his own glorious Body, Phil. 3. 20.

Secondly, But not to enlarge; I could never yet understand by any of your
Writings, that you own any other Resurrection than the new Birth, or
Regeneration. I shall cite two or three of your Authors: Smith's Catechism, p.
29. Quest. But must Men pass through Death, and rise again in this Life, or
whilst in this Body? Answer, Yes; for except he be regenerated and born again,
he cannot enter the Kingdom of God: and therefore he must die to the first
Adam's Flesh, and be quickened and rise again in the second Adam's Spirit; and
so in the Resurrection and Life enter the Kingdom, etc. See James Nailor's
Book, Love to the Lost, p. 3. Whereby, says he, the Heart is freed from
Corruption, and made able to escape the Pollutions of the World, and to run in
the pure ways with delight, which is the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God,
the Resurrection from the Dead. Add to this the Skill that S. Fisher uses to
make null this Article of the Christian Faith, in his Velata qu^dam Revelata:
Thus, But if you will not be admonished, nor persuaded by Moses and the
Prophets within you, neither will ye be persuaded by such of us, who were once
dead in Sin with you, but are now risen to Life by the Power of God, which is
his Light, and in the same sent to speak to you from the Dead. The Text he
seems to allude to, is, Luke 16. 31. but what an horrid Abuse this is to the
words of our Lord, and the Scope and Design of them, the Christian Reader will
easily see. But from what has been said by these your Leaders, and I might
enumerate many more of like import; thus much may be farily concluded, That you
believe no other Resurrection but only Regeneration, or a new Birth. I own that
Regeneration is set forth in Scripture under the terms of a Death, Burial and
Resurrection, according to Romans 6. 2, 3, 4. Col. 3. 1, -- 4. and Col. 2. 12,
13. But does it follow, that because here is a Death to Sin spoken of, and a
being buried with Christ by Baptism, and a rising again to newness of Life;
having put off the old Man, with his Deeds, etc. that therefore we are to
believe no other Death, Burial, or Resurrection? The two former are
self-evident, and within the reach of Sense; it is the third, namely, the
Resurrection of the Body from the Grave of the Earth, that you stumble at and
oppose, even as the Sadduces did, Mat. 22. 23. But ver. 29. Christ gives them
an Answer, saying, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God:
and ver. 31, 32. he proves this Doctrine to them from what God said, Exodus 3. 6.

Secondly; It appears you do not only deny the Resurrection of the Body from
the Grave of the Earth; but the eternal Judgment before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, at the last Day, you concluding it to be past already: Else what does
your Friend Lawson intend in his forementioned Book, page 9, and 19. who
affirms, he has eternal Life in Possession, and is now in the Possession of
the Kingdom? And what else means your Friend Desbury in his Book called, A
Discovery of Man's Return to his first Estate? p. 7. he says, The Judgment is
past already as to us, as having, says he, given an account to God already for
all that we have done, and received the Reward for our Sins, etc. And this may
be if what was said in your Book, called, Readiness Errand to Damascus, were true,
That George Fox was the eternal Judge of Quick and Dead; so that there was no
occasion for you to mention either of these Points of the Christian Faith, for
in your proper sense you believe neither. But I demand why you abuse the World
in your Paper in saying, You believe, hope or expect Redemption, Justification
and Salvation when your Belief is, you have them already, and are in the
Resurrection, and in the eternal Kingdom of God already. I count it improper
for me to say, I expect what I really have; nay, it is not only improper, but
false; and as St. Paul says, Romans 8. 24. That which is seen is not Hope, etc.
Now from all this, tho I could have added many more Instances from their own
Tongues and Pens, had occasion been, I shall lay before the Reader the sad
Consequences of their Unbelief in these two Points of the Christian Faith.

And it tends to eat out and destroy the very Life and Vitals of Christianity.

1. If our Bodies shall not rise from the Grave, then Christ is not risen, 1
Cor. 15. 13. this is clear in the Text; and ver. 16. If the dead rise not, then
is not Christ raised: ver. 20. But now is Christ risen, etc. and so certainly
shall the Resurrection of our Bodies be.

That Christ did arise from the dead, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 5, 6, 7, 8. above five
hundred are Witnesses to this Truth.

2. If the Dead rise not, then Preaching is vain, and Faith is vain, and the
five hundred Witnesses, with the twelve Apostles, are all found false
Witnesses. Revelat. 1. 18. I am he that was dead, and am alive.

3. If the Resurrection of the Dead, or rising again, or standing again, be not
a Truth; (for so the Greek and Latin words signify) then the Prophecies of the
Prophets, and Doctrines of the Apostles are false, Isa. 26. 19. Thy dead Men
shall live, together with my dead Body shall they arise, etc. and the Earth
shall cast out her dead. Dan. 12. 2. Hosea 13. 14. Acts 24. 15. That there
shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and Unjust. Must the Just
be regenerated? Acts 26. 8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible, that
God should raise the Dead? It cannot be meant of Regeneration, or the new Man
rising in the old, as you sometimes say; for that was never thought incredible
by the Sadduces, Epicures or Stoics, nor by the Heathen Philosophers nether,
all did own that God, or the Gods, could make Men better, and turn them from
Vice to Sanctity, etc.

4. If our dead Bodies shall not rise from the Grave, then the Hope of the
Primitive Saints was all vain, null and void. John 11. 24. I know, says
Martha, he shall rise again at the Resurrection at the last Day. Heb. 11. it is
said of those famous Believers, that they all died in the Faith, not having
received the Promise, etc. Phil. 3. 20. We look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ: who shall change our vile Bodies.

I told one of your Friends, J. W. that I looked for Christ's second, personal
and glorious Coming. He told me I may look till my Eyes failed.

5. If the Dead rise not, then the best Saints are the most miserable Men in
the World, 1 Cor. 15, 19, 30, 32. it is but vain to stand in Jeopardy every
hour, or to fight with Beasts, yea, to undergo any Sufferings for Christ, if
the Dead rise not: And know this, it is not the Sufferings, but the Cause for
which, that makes the Martyr. But if the Dead rise not, there is no Cause for
Sufferings at all: but we may eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. The
licentious Atheist is the most happy Man, since no Glory or future Reward in
another World is to be expected.

So that as those Primitive Heretics, 2 Timothy 2. 18. Hymeneus and Pheletus,
who, by saying the Resurrection was past already, had overthrown the Faith of
some; so would you. Christ died and rose again to destroy the Power of the
Grave; but by this Heresy, the Grave must destroy our Bodies for ever: which
God forbid.

Secondly; How can you conclude you are in the glorious Kingdom, and that you
have Eternal Life now really in Possession?

1. For our Lord says, In the Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given
in Marriage, Mat. 22. 30. Luke 20. 35. Now this you do; therefore not in the
Resurrection, nor that Kingdom.

2. In that Kingdom they can die no more: but that you do as other Men; Revel.
21. 4. no more Death, Crying, nor Sorrow, etc. but this you have; therefore,
etc.

3. In that Kingdom no Hungering, or Thirsting: but these you feel and
experience here; therefore not in the Resurrection, nor that Kingdom.

4. No more Sickness nor Pains: but all these you have here. O then fool not
your selves with such false Dreams! but believe Christ will shortly come in
Glory, and every Eye shall see him. And consider what a sad Surprise it will be
to you when the Trumpet sounds, the Graves are opened, and your Bodies raised
to stand in Judgment! But let all faithful Christians say, Come, Lord Jesus,
come quickly.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is preparing for the Press a short, but profitable Discourse, entitled,
The Trial and Condemnation of Whispering Backbiter, designed as a means to
detect the Sin of Detraction; an Evil too common, not only amongst the Profane,
but Professors of this Age.

By E. P.


