THE CONDITIONS FOR NEW-PLANTERS In the Territories of His ROYAL HIGHNESS THE
DUKE OF YORK
THE Purchases are to be made from the Indian Sachims and to be Recorded before
the Governor.

The Purchasers are not to pay for their liberty of purchasing to the Governor.

The Purchasers are to set out a Town, and Inhabit together.

No Purchaser shall at any time contract for himself with any Sachim, without
consent of his ^ssociates: or special Warrant from the Governor?

The Purchasers are free from all manner of Assessments or Rates for five years
after their Town-plot is set out, and when the five years are expired, they
shall only be liable to the public Rates, and Payments according to the
Custom of other Inhabitants both English and Dutch.

All Lands thus Purchased, and possessed shall remain to the Purchasers, and
their Heirs, as free Lands to dispose of as they please.

In all Territories of his ROYAL HIGHNESS, Liberty of Conscience is allowed,
Provided such Liberty is not converted to Licentiousness, or the disturbance of
others, in the exercise of the Protestant Religion.

The several Townships have liberty to make their peculiar Laws, and Deciding
all small Causes within themselves.

The Lands which I intend shall be first Planted, are those upon the West side
of Hudson-River, at, or adjoining to the Sopes, but if any number of men
sufficient for two or three, or more Towns, shall desire to plant upon any
other Lands they shall have all due encouragement proportionable to their
Quality, and undertakings.

Every Township is Obliged to pay their Minister, according to such agreement
as they shall make with him, and no man to refuse his Proportion, the Ministers
being elected by the Major part of the Householders Inhabitants of the Town.

Every Township has the free choice of all their officers both Civil, and
Military, and all men who shall take the Oath of Allegiance to his Majesty, and
are not Servants, or ^ay-labour^^s* but are admitted to enjoy Town-lotts are
esteemed freemen of the Jurisdiction, and cannot forfeit the same without due
process in Law.

R. Nicolls.


