RULES and ORDERS MADE BY THE VICE CHANCELLOR of the University of OXFORD, and
Justices of Peace, for the Good and Safety of the University, City, and County
of OXFORD.
WHEREAS there is a daily increase of the Plague in the City of London, the
Suburbs, and Parts Adjacent; by reason whereof very many Persons have of late,
and daily do withdraw themselves from their respective Habitations; And either
in expectation of Gain, of upon considerations of freindship or Alliance are
received in several Parts of this County, whereby the Infection has been
dispersed into many Towns and Villages thereof to their ruin and
impoverishing: as also the great and apparent danger of the University and City
of Oxford, and the Inhabitants of this County in general, which are yet not
infected: And whereas in probability his Majesty intends to reside and keep
his Court in the City of Oxford for some part of this winter; As also to hold
his Parliament there: We the Vicechancellour of the said University, and
Justices of the Peace of the said County; taking the premises into our serious
consideration, and having in Our view the dreadful effects of negligence in
the present dangerous disease; as we are by the laws of God, of Nature, and
this Realm thereto sufficiently authorized; and also instructed and empowered by
the trust reposed in us by his Sacred Majesty our Sovereign Lord the King, who
desires nothing more than the health and safety of His People; and in pursuance
of those great Ends of Public good, which are ever to be preferred before any
private interest: have thought fit to Order and Publish; and do hereby order
and publish, as follows.

I. That no Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper Victualer or private Person whatsoever
living in this County shall harbor, lodge or entertain in any of their Houses,
any Person or Persons that come from London, or any other Place whatsoever,
unless such Person or Persons shall bring with him, or them an authentic
Certificate (to be allowed by he chief Magistrate of towns corporate, or the
Minister and Constables of Villages respectively) that they came not from any
infected place or house; and in case of such Certificate, shall receive them
for a night only, and not otherwise: upon pain that every Innkeeper, Alehouse
keeper, or Victualler, doing contrary to the premises, be suppressed from
farther entertaining, or victualing: and their houses to be shut up with the
Inhabitants therein, and also with the Persons they so entertain, until they
shall be opened again by public authority; and likewise upon pain to be taken
and dealt with, as enemies to the public safety. II. That no other person or
persons, living within this County, shall entertain any of their Friends,
Kindred, Children, or other person or persons, without such Certificate as
aforsaid, to be allowed as aforesaid, under pain that their Houses be shut up;
and the person or persons they shall entertain with them, and their Families
therein, not to be opened again, but by consent and allowance of the two next
Justices of the Peace to the said House: And further, to be proceeded against
as disturbers of the Peace and Safety of this County. III. That in case any
person or persons that is are so to be shut up as aforesaid, shall refuse
obstinately to submit, or shall resist the Officers in doing their office to
that purpose, such person or persons shall be, by the Officers, compelled to
keep in the said House by force; and in case of recovery or escape from
Infection, shall be carried o the Goal, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprize, until they be released by public Order. IV. That no person or
persons whatsoever, shall presume to come to Church, or to any Fair or Market,
or public Meeting whatsoever, forth of any House that is shut up, or known to
be Infected with the Plague, till they have allowance under the Hands and Seals
of two the next Justices of he Peace. And that no person or persons bring any
Wares, Goods or Merchandises, to any Fair or Market, forth of any such Town
Corporate, or Place whatsoever, unless such Person bring a Certificate from the
Major or Chief Officer of such Town Corporate, or the Minister and Constable of
such Place or Village, that the same Wares, Goods or Merchandise, came not from
any Infected House, or from any Infected Person, under the pain of being
proceeded against as an Enemy to the Public Safety. V. That none be permitted,
during the time of Gods Visitation upon this Nation, to keep any Wakes or
Customary Feasts, or public Meetings for any Games or Pastimes whatsoever,
eiher upon Sundays, Holy Days or Fast-days, or any Weekdays: And in case any
Person shall presume to meet at any such Wakes, Feasts or Pastimes, that they
be proceeded against as Rioters and Disturbers of the Peace and Safety of this
County. VI. That no Pedlers, petty Chapmen, Tinkers, Hat-dressers, Fiddlers,
Beggars, or other Vagabonds, be permitted or suffered to pass or wander up and
down this County from place to place; nor none to beg out of their own
Parishes, upon the Penalties that are by the Statutes of the Realm to be
inflicted upon the Constables, and other Officers, that neglect their duty
therein. VII. That no person or persons presume to go to visit or converse with
any person or persons Infected, or Shut up upon suspicion of Infection, or
breach of these Orders, unless such as shall be appointed to attend such
persons as are shut up; upon pain to be shut up themselves, in the Houses of
such persons as they converse withal. VIII. That strict watch and ward be kept
in every Town, Parish, Village and Hamlet within this County, especially upon
Roades, and in Towns and Villages, where Innes, Alehouses and Victualling
houses are, to see these order put in execution, and where occasion shall be or
need requires, that double watch and ward be kept, and the Guardes enforced;
which shall be done at the public Charge of the place where such watch is
kept: and all this upon the utmost pains that the Law can Inflict for non
performance thereof. IX. That no Person or Person be permited to come or
repair to the University or City of Oxford by land or water from London, Henly
upon Thames, Wallingford, or any other Town or place infected, nor to bring
any Wares or Goods therehence during the time of their being visited upon the
pains aforesaid. X. That where any place Town or Village is Infected, and
there needs Warders, Searchers, Buriers, and Keepers to be appointed, the Chief
Magistrate or the next Justice of the Peace to the place Infected, is desired
to appoint such as he shall think fit out of such Persons as shall be nominated
by the Constables of the Parish or Town Infected, or others: and to give them
their Oaths for true and diligent service in their several places they shall
be appointed to, and for the preservation of the public good. XI. Whereas
several persons, having left their places of abode, have secretly intruded and
crept into diverse Towns Corporate and Villages, other places of this County,
and there reside and attempt to settle themselves: All Constables, and
Overseers of the Poor in each Parish, are hereby required to bring within a
Week after the date hereof, to the next Justice of the Peace, in Writing, the
names of such Persons so intruding; and afterward at the end of every Month,
during the time of the present Danger, that they may be proceeded against
according to Law.
And to the End these orders may speedily be made known; and that no person may
pretend ignorance of them: It is ordered, that the same be forthwith printed,
and published the next Market day in the City of Oxford, and in every Market
Town of the said County on their respective next Market days immediately
following the date hereof: and that warrants may be issued forth under the
hands and seals of the Justices of Peace or some of them, to the
High-Constables of the several hundreds within the County: and Chief Officer
of every corporation, requiring them to send printed coppies of them to the
peti-Constables of each Township and Parish in the said County respectively; to
the end they may be put in execution with all speed, care, and diligence.

Given under our hands this 23d. day of August in the 17th year of the reign of
our Sovereign Lord King Charles the second: Annoque Domini 1665.

