Railings and Slanders detected: Or the Folly and Heresies of the QUAKERS
Further Exposed.

Being an Answer to an Invective Libel Written by G. Whitehead, impertinently
called, Antichrist in Flesh unmasked, etc.

Which some of the QUAKERS call An Answer to a Book truly Styled Antichrist in
Spirit unmasked: OR, Quakerism a great Delusion.

In this Brief Discourse you have the Slanderous Outcries of G. Whitehead,
against Edward, Pay, Henry Loader, and William Alcot, Examined, Detected, and
Confuted.

He Seedeth of Ash^s (...) deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his Soul, nor say, Is there not a Lie in my right hand? Esai. 44. 20.
Wh^^st that Heretics speak like the Faithful, they not only mean otherwise
than they say, but clean contrary; and by their Tenets full of Blasphemies they
destroy the Souls of those who with their fair words suck in the Poison of
their foul Opinions. Irenaeus, in his Third Book against Heresies. London,
Printed in the Year, 1692.

Railings and Slanders Detected, or the Folly and Heresies of the Quakers
further Exposed, etc.
IT is well known to all that are but a little acquainted with the Faculties
and Writings of the Quakers, that their usual methods, are to cry out against
all that oppose or detect their corrupt notions; as such that abuse and defame
an Innocent and Religious People: But amongst the many causeless outcries they
have proclaimed in the World, I have not seen one for its magnitude that has
outdone a small parcel of slanderous confused Railleries, that lately was
Midwiv'd into the World, and Fathered by George Whitehead: which if there be a
Wise Man amongst them, it appears strange that it had not been stifled in the
Birth, rather than such an ill shapen Cub should have gone forth into the World
to declare it self Legitimate, and publish it self the true Offspring of a
Quaker. But we must take it as it is, and in the Title Page G. W. says, our
Book is a desaming confused Book. Answer. I suppose a great part of it must
needs be confused, being taken out of your own confused Writings; the
reconciling of which to themselves, is as easy as bringing together the South
and North Poles. 2. He calls it a defaming Book. Answer: It defames no Man's
Person, nor indeed your Principles, any further than your Tongues and Pens did
it first of all; for it Treats of your professed notions, which if false, are
deservedly exposed, nothing being a more destructive evil in our day, than for
falsehood to be carried on in the World with Fame and Applause.

But to come to your Book it self: Could you suppose that any thing was
contained in it to the purpose? I cannot imagine what you could think of it. If
you had said any thing toward reconciling your former Writings with your late
professed Faith, you had done something to the purpose; do you think that any
whose Eyes are in their Heads, will not easily see that your defects in Truth
and Reason are supplied with Slanders and Railings? You tell us, p. 5, 6, 7, 8.
We have showed our envy and bitterness; yea, we appear Envious against your
present Liberty, as Men of Envious, Turbulent, Persecuting Spirits, etc. Why,
what is the matter? why our Book defames the Quakers as a People of a Religious
Society, etc. who have solemly and sincerely declared to the Government, That
they own and believe the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and
desire to live in the Faith, Knowledge, and Practice of them, and that they
believe in the Three Divine Witnesses bearing Record in Heaven, the Father,
Word, and Holy Spirit, and the Divinity and Humanity of Christ, and
Justification by Christ's Works, Righteousness and Merits, and not by their
own: This and much more in their professed Faith, whereunto I referr the
Reader: Now we have gone and published to the World, wherein the Writings of
their chief Guides do directly oppose and contradict this Confession of Faith,
from which G. Whitehead concludes, That by this we would make void one
Condition of their present Liberty, p. 6. As People not fit to be tolerated,
now have their Liberty of Conscience, p. 7. And says G. W. No doubt had these
angry Anabaptists power, we should not enjoy our Liberties, the very Nature and
Tendency of these their bitter lying Invectives, being to bring Persecution
upon us, as a People not to be given any credit unto in our Solemn Profession
before Authority. To all which I Answer, First, We did not know till our Book
was Published, that you had professed this as your Faith before the Parliament.
And secondly, we must the more admire your Presumptuous confidence herein, that
you should so affront the Government; except you had at the same time renounced
your former Writings, that so evidently contradict it.

And whereas you falsely charge us with persecuting Spirits and Envy, it is well
known that our principles, are and ever were that none ought to be persecuted
for their Religious Principles or Notions; no not the Papists themselves, so
long as they live peaceably in subjection to Authority and the Civil
Government: yet had they come and set up a Mass-House at Deptford; and that
they might the more effectually prevail upon the Ignorant, and easilier
proselyte them to their Idolatry and Superstitions, should have published a
Profession of Faith directly contrary to their known Principles, and the
Writings of their Chief Guides. We should in like manner have looked upon our
selves obliged both in Honor to God, and Love to our Neighbors, to have
detected their Deceits. And we freely allow any to examine our published Faith;
and if they can find such plain contradictions as aforesaid, we will be content
to bear the discredit, and not retaliate them with Railings and Slanders, nor
account them envious Persecutors for it: And now I would appeal to the Light in
G. Whitehead, whether he believes that we envy their Liberty, and would
Persecute them had we Power? if he so believes, he is miserably deluded in that
matter; and if he does not so believe, how wilfully does he sin against the
Light in casting these Slanderous Aspersions upon us? What, are we envious
Persecutors, Hypocrites, and possessed with an unclean Spirit and lying Devil,
p. 5, 8, 17. Fie George, are these Thunderbolts fit to be shot at your
Antagonists on all occasions? I own that you have some cause to be displeased
at our putting you upon a work you cannot possibly do; namely, to reconcile
your late Faith with your former Writings: But then you might have called* us
unreasonable Men, or compared us to Pharaoh's Taskmasters; for its a work we
put you upon that is harder than to make Brick without Straw. And indeed G.
Whitehead appears to have no mind to touch it with one of his fingers, it is so
knotty and difficult a piece of work: No, it passes the skill of the ablest
Orator with all his Rhetoric, or George Whitehead with all his pretended skill
in Logic, to do it; and should they go about to do it with their Equivocal
Stuff: they know they shall appear in an evil Case.

Well, but it may be some Advocate for the Quakers may be ready to say, That
although the Quakers first Original and Ancient Authors of that Antiquity as
1648. and since; for I think they do not pretend to any greater Antiquity: See
John Whitehead's small Treatise p. 4. He says, That in the year 1648. God, who
had Compassion on his People, did cause a Branch to spring forth of the Root of
David, which was filled with Virtue for the Covenant of Life, and Peace was
with him, etc. and much more matter of this Blasphemous nature you have in the
Book and Page aforesaid. But who the degenerate Plant of this strange Vine was,
I know not, except James Naylor. And says John Whitehead, In the year 1655. I
being a Branch of this Tree, (viz.) the Branch aforesaid, the Life of this
Root, caused me to Blossom and bring forth Fruit, for the Spirit of the Lord
came upon me. Ibid. But to return: suppose that these Ancient Authors did at
first and since, till very lately, run into gross and abominable Errors about
the Holy Scriptures, denying them to be the Word of God, and Rule of Faith and
Practices: and did deny Christ's being at God's right hand in the Glorious
Heavens beyond the Stars; and did deny the Humanity of Christ, and
Justification by his Works, Righteousness and Merits, etc. yet they may now
have seen their former Errors; and it may be by some means they have been
convinced thereof, so that now they are become good, Orthodox Christians; and
therefore they have published a Christian-like Profession of Faith, etc.
Answer: But then ought they not to have renounced their former Writings that
directly contradict it, and then we should have been heartily glad to hear of
so great and so happy a Reformation in and amongst them?

But now I think upon it, to put them upon renouncing any of their former
Writings or Authors Works, will be a greater affront than the other; and I
shall incurr G. Whitehead's displeasure worse than before; for how can they do
that, since all their Authors Books, be they ever so full of Railings,
Falsities and Blasphemies, yet they entitle them to the Divine Majesty, and his
Eternal Life and Light, given forth from his Mouth, and Sealed by his Spirit,
etc. So that I see not how they can renounce what they have written, but must
look upon all as infallibly true on their account, as the Pope and his Conclave
looks upon their Councils, Edicts, and Decrees; so that as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, they are never to be altered or renounced.

Then lastly, which way could the Quakers expect to escape, being defamed or
discredited? why it is like they did suppose that the Honorable Assembly in
Parliament had matters of greater moment in hand, than to compare their former
Writings with their new Faith.

So that if we had not concerned our selves to peep into their Writings, and
compare them with their newly professed Faith, and published this to the World;
namely, That the Quakers former Writings and their late Profession of Faith,
are as really alike as an Apple is to an Oyster, and agree as directly as Light
and Darkness, it had not been known.

But G. Whitehead says in p. 6. That this Confession of Faith was sincerely
owned and consented to as one condition of their present Liberty. Well then we
hope you in plainness speak your Faith therein; for if you did dissemble your
Principles to obtain your Liberty, it was but a bad way to get at it: But we
hope better things.

Now would the Quakers but clear themselves in these their First and Primitive
Errors and corrupt principles in point of Faith, we should be heartily glad to
hear thereof.

First, That they would never more deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God,
and Rule ^f Faith and Life; which they have done.

^^^^^ly, That they would never more am^^ the Scriptures to be of no use in
order to the true Knowledge of God. This they have formerly done.

Thirdly, That they would no longer hold it to be a sin, Ay, the sin of
Idolatry and Breach of the Second Commandment, to take the Practices of the
Saints Recorded, Commanded, or Approved, etc. in the Scriptures for our
Examples and Rules: This you have done. Fourthly, That they would never more
affirm, That whatever is commanded in Scripture is no Duty to us, except we
receive the Command by immediate Inspiration as the Prophets and Apostles did.

Fifthly, That they would never more deny the Resurrection of the Bodies of Men
from the Graves of the Earth, as they have done.

Sixthly, That they would never more deny the Body of Christ of Flesh and Bones
to be raised from the Grave, and to be now in the Glorious Heavens above,
beyond the Stars. This they have also done.

Seventhly, That they would never more deny Gospel Ordinances, as Baptism in
Water and the Lord's Supper, Administered in Bread and Wine; which the Quakers
do both despise and contemn?

Eighthly, That they would forever renounce this pernicious Tenet, of believing
that no Blessedness is to be enjoyed by the Saints after Death, the Body never
being to be raised to any further Blessedness, no more than (...) enjoyed a
thousand years before they (...); and that the Soul is part of God, came (...)
from God, and shall return into God again, being part of his Essence.

Ninthly, That they would never more deny Justification by Christ's Works,
Righteousness and Merits; and for time to come, never call it a Doctrine of
Devils, as they have formerly done.

Tenthly, that they would never say and affirm that the Light within is Christ
and God, as they have too commonly done.

And finally, that they would leave off their Billings-gate Complements, and
learn to treat their Antagonists more moderately and mildly; for evil
Communications will corrupt all their good Manners, if they have any: And
waiting for this Reformation in them, I shall now proceed to examine G. W's
long Story, and loud Outcries about the Westmorland Petitioners; which is my
next Work.

About the Story of the Westmorland Petitioners, G. W. spends several pages in
cavelling with what I say, Antichrist in Spirit, etc. page 78. namely, That
Quake^^^^ is not derived from a Person, but from ^ Gesture used much amongst
the Quakers, formerly in 'their Meetings, as was manifest by what was alleged
against them by the Westmorland Petitioners; who alleged that their practice
did exceedingly savor of Sorcery, because of the Swellings, Quakings, Roarings
and Foamings that were amongst them in their Meetings. I also cite the Quakers
Answer to this Petition, p. 35. where they deny not Swelling, Foaming, and
Quaking: But they deny Sorcery and Blasphemy; they justify their Quaking and
Trembling, as being used by the Saints of old, etc. James Naylor, p. 16, and
17. of his Book, The Power and Glory of the Lord, etc. urges many Scriptures
to prove their Name, by justifying this practice, saying, That holy Men of God
do witness Quaking and Trembling, etc. Now what is this but a plain granting
all that I bring the Instance for? I say the same may be said of wicked Men and
Devils: But this is therefore no discriminating Character of Christianity or
Saintship: For Acts 24. 25. wicked Felix did tremble: And James 2. 19. It is
said, the Devil believes and trembles: And Luke 9. 39. we read of him that was
possessed that he foamed, etc. But G. W. asks whether we were Eye or
Ear-witnesses of these Gestures. He answers in the Negative, No. But how can G.
W. tell but we have seen such Gestures amongst them? for my own part I have
seen them quake and foam at the Mouth: Besides several that have been Eye and
Earwitnesses of (...). But, says G. W. You had this from the Westmorland
Petitioners: And what were they but a Company of envious, persecuting Priests
and Magistrates. Answer, no doubt but this is the best Language you can afford
any that give the clearest Demonstrations of your corrupt Notions and
deceivable Gestures.

Then observe what a long run G. W. takes after his own shadow, and then falls
a fighting with Men of Straw of his own setting up: Says he, We deny your
Story of Swellings and Foamings, as charged upon us, or our Meetings in
Westmorland, etc. Answer, then you do not deny Quaking, Trembling and Roaring;
so that there remains as much and more undenied, as the Instance is brought
for, as any may see in Antichrist in Spirit, p. 78. Again you say your Meetings
in Westmorland are clear of it. I ask George Whitehead, do I say that you and
your Meetings in Westmorland did use to swell and foam? Is there any such thing
said or asserted, that you swelled and fo^med there? Suppose you formerly used
to q^^^^, tremble, roar, swell and foam at the (...)-Mouth in London, or
elsewhere, the Westmorland Petitioners may say true, for ought we say in our
Book, or for any thing you have said yet. But I challenge you to deny if you
dare that such Gestures were used amongst you formerly.

Again I shall follow G. Whitehead a little further in this his impertinent,
long run, which he makes a material part of the Bundle of Stuff in his
slanderous Libel: Says he, p. 13. Set Case any have been disordered through
some natural Infirmity, Distemper, Swouning or Falling Sickness: What does this
affect us or our Meetings on a religious Account; it may be some of your own
People's Case?

Answer, It is strange to me, that G. W. an old Stickler for Quakerism, should
think to put off the Matter of Fact with such an Equivocal Gloss. Do you think
that such natural or transient Infirmities, that are insident to Men, were the
occasion of the Westmorland Petition, and other Charges of the same Nature, or
of what I and many others have seen? Surely if you think so, no body else will.

And how impertinent is your next Supposition? Say you, suppose it should be
made appear that diverse Anabaptists, after they have been dipped and received
into Church Fellowship, have run mad or distracted, and others guilty of great
Enormities, how would this affect either your Church-profession or Societies?
p. 14. Answer, you speak here to none of us, the Name Anabaptists we never
owned, procured, or defended, as you have done your Quaking. And although James
Nailor justified your Quaking and Trembling; yet here in p. 11. say you,
Quakerism is a Nickname in Derision; and James Nailor in the Title Page of his
Book, styles himself one whom Ishmael's Brood calls a Quaker. Pray then what is
G. W. who so frequently calls us Anabaptists? Is not he one of Ishmael's Brood,
according to his own Doctor's Opinion? And since the Name Anabaptists belongs
not to us: First, I answer thus, that if any have submitted to Christ's sacred
Ordinance of Baptism, and are received into Church Fellowship, etc. and after
this shall turn Anabaptists, and provoke God thereby, he may in Justice deprive
them of their Senses, and give them up to enormous Acts. Now since you are not
ignorant that the Name Anabaptists belongs not to us, this might serve for an
Answer to your impertinent Supposition. But suppose some Members of the
baptized Churches, or any other Christian Societies have so done, we believe
God can at his pleasure deprive of Senses and Understanding: And we also
believe that the truest Professors, if they have not a constant care and watch,
may Apostatize, and run into great Inormities. But what is this to your
frequent Gestures of Quaking, Trembling, and foaming in your Meetings formerly?
I confess there may be something in it, if you will say that all that used
those Gestures amongst you were mad and distracted Men and Women: But it is like
you will be cautious of saying so; it having been so frequent amongst you, lest
any should be so maliciously untoward; though it may be very natural, as to
conclude, that Quakerism was first founded, and carried on by mad and
distracted Men and Women; for they quaked, trembled, and foamed at the Mouth,
etc.

Again, I shall take notice of one more of your impertinent Suppositions, after
mentioning Mark 9. 20, 25, 26. and Luke 9. 39, 42, 43. About the Man that was
brought to Christ who was possessed, and the Spirit tore him and he fell on the
ground, and wallowed foaming, etc. now suppose, says G. W. That in any Meeting
of the People called Quakers, such Apparitions or gestures has been, he will
not own it to have been frequent, no but in any particular person, that some
unclean Spirit has so torn or disordered her or him; (now observe the
Inference) we may charitably believe it has been because Jesus Christ has come
in Spirit and Power amongst them, to rebuke and cast out such unclean Spirits
and to deliver them that were infested thereby; when our Friends have been
solemnly met together in Fasting and Prayer in his Name and fear, to wait upon
him, and worship him, etc.

Answer, I would first ask G. W. what Rule or Reason the Quakers can assign for
Fasting? my Question is grounded upon Matthew. 9. 14. Then came to him the
Disciples of John saying, why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy
Disciples fast not? v. 15. Jesus said unto them, can the Children of the
Bride-chamber mourn as long as the Bridegroom is with them? but the days shall
come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, then shall they fast: Now I
ask you by what Rule you observe days of Fasting, since you really believe that
Christ the Bridegroom is really with you, among, and personally in you?
Methinks it is strange that you should talk of Fasting; that is a Duty in
cumbent upon such as believe Christ's Personal Ascension into the glorious
Heavens above, beyond the Stars; so that he being personally taken from them,
though present in Spirit, they are obliged to Prayer and Fasting, and all other
Gospel Ordinances, till his second personal and glorious coming. But what the
Quakers have to do with Ordinances, Prayer, or Fasting, I see not.

2. Neither is there Reason to believe you dare in your Assemblies, in Christ's
Name, rebuke any unclean Spirits, lest you meet with the same Answer and
Repulse as the seven Sons of Sceva did, Acts 19. 14, 15, 16. And the evil
Spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are you? And
the Man in whom the evil Spirit was, leaped on them, and overcame them, etc.

And to conclude my Answer to his long Story, I ask George Whitehead why he had
not denied this Gesture of Quaking and Foaming to Mr. John Faldo, who gives him
Provocation enough to do it. See his Book, Quakerism no Christianity, page 12.
Says he, How generally were their Meetings ( viz. the Quakers,) either silent,
or taken up with sudden and violent Eruptions of dismal Howlings and horrid
Ravings, Persons suddenly taken, as with the Falling Sickness, shaking and
foaming at the Mouth, and some lying flat on the ground as if stark dead? And
says Mr. Faldo, some such things as these I have seen and heard; and that
there are undeniable Testimonies of it, that are so numerous and notorious,
that though now they have almost, if not altogether, left the latter sort of
them, they dare not deny that it was so: And if they dare to challenge this
with an Untruth, I may requite them to keep alive their Remembrance with a good
part of a volume of them. Thus far Mr. Faldo, whose Book is signed and approved
by 21 Ministers of the Independent and Presbyterian Way.

I needed not to have taken this Pains, since these Gestures are fresh in the
Memories of many in this Nation: And George Whitehead has said nothing that
denies the Matter of Fact charged in my Books, p. 6, 7. upon the Quakers: he
denies not Quaking and Trembling, which was all the Instance was brought for;
and then I think for any Service G. W. has done the Cause, he had better have
said nothing.

3. George Whitehead says in p. 16. that I have falsely cited, and grossly
perverted the Quakers Words and Authors, and taken many false things on Credit,
not only the Story from the Westmorland Petitioners; but also out of his
Brother Tho. Hicks, his abominable Forgeries and Lies, in his factious
Dialogues: And in p. 8. He prays his Reader to observe, that much of our Book
against them is taken out of other Books, and Pamphlets of their Adversaries,
long since answered and refuted; and their Authority is utterly denied by us,
as the Westmorland Petitioners, who were envious Persecutors. Tho. Hicks his
abusive Dialogues, who was proved a notorious Forger of Lies. And a malicious
Libel styled, Tyranny and Hypocrisy detected.

Answer. I am inclinable to think G. W. has said some Truth in what has been
repeated; nay, I do in Charity believe it: then I will show you what I believe
he says Truth in.

4. Namely, That the Authority of the Quakers Adversaries Books is utterly
denied by them. I am strongly persuaded G. W. says Truth in this; for they
that can deny the Authority of the Scriptures, being the only Rule of Faith and
Practice, when alleged against them, may well deny the Authority of all Books
wrote against them whatsoever, though the Matter be ever so true.

2. As to the rest asserted by G. W. I will not tell him he lies: But I am well
satisfied he is departed very far from the Truth. And as to that Book, Tyranny
and Hypocrisy detected, It treats chiefly of the Usurping and Lording
Authority that some of the Quakers assumed over others, and of others opposing
and contradicting them, as might be made manifest. And as to what instances I
bring from that Book, as Josias Coal's Letter from Berbaldus to George Fox,
giving him those blasphemous Titles; mentioned, Antichrist in Spirit unmasked,
p. 43. or any other passage from thence, cited by me, let G. W. deny them, as
to Matter of Fact, if he dare.

3. As for Mr. Hicks his Dialogues, that George Whitehead calls Lies and
Forgeries, and the Author a notorious Liar and Forger, etc. It had been much
more to purpose had G. W. showed us what some of those Lies and Forgeries were.
I have, it is true, examined the Quakers Appeal by way of Charge against Tho.
Hicks, wherein they charge him with Lies, and Slanders, and Forgeries, and what
not; and I have perused Mr. Hicks's Answer to their Appeal, where Mr. Hicks
clears himself both of Lies and Forgery. I find his Answer to their Appeal,
subscribed and approved by no less than 22 Persons of Credit, who testify that
they have compared Tho. Hicks his Citations with the Quakers Books, out of
which they were taken, and find them truly cited; then let the Reader judge who
is the Liar, Tho. Hicks, or G. W.

Again G. W. seems to be angry with my Citation out of Mr. Hicks's Dialogue, p.
24, 25. In Antichrist in Spirit, p. 14, 15. As for us, had the Scriptures never
been, we could have known what is therein contained: I have also heard this
from a Quaker my self. But G. W. was not so fair as to mention this, though it
was the ground of my Demand. And let the Reader observe what an apparent
Perversion George Whitehead makes of my Words, and the occasion of them, p. 18,
19. of his Pamphlet, after he has charged us with Forgery. Now pray observe,
says he, what strange Test or Proof your Agent Edw. Pay puts upon us to
evince an immediate Inspiration. G. W. knows this Question was demanded, to
prove what is before mentioned: Namely, that had the Scriptures never been,
they could have known what was therein contained. Now if this be so, then let
the Quakers resolve me what those things were that Jesus did, that are not
written, Joh. 21. 25. or what were the Contents of that writing on the ground,
Joh. 8. 68. Or else let their proud boasting of immediate Inspirations be
condemned to perpetual silence, etc. Says G. W. Hereupon you have passed
unjust Judgment, and falsely charged us with proud boasting; and argued
absurdly against immediate Inspiration, as if none have the Spirit of Christ,
unless they know and can declare all things that it knows.

I answer, It is a strange thing to me, that G. Whitehead does not see that he
condemns himself whilst he is judging another; and it is a lamentable thing
that the Quakers will admit of no distinctions: But it verifies that true
Proverb, that the want of distinctions are the cause of mistakes. Here G. W.
will not admit of a distinction, betwixt immediate Inspirations, and the
mediate or more common Gifts of the Spirit. Now all Christians that I know of,
will admit of this distinction, That it is one thing to be immediately and
extraordinarily endowed and inspired with the Holy Ghost, as the Prophets and
Apostles in their Prophecies and Writings were; and another thing to have such
common and more immediate Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, that are promised by
Christ to them that obey him, as a Seal of their present Acceptance, and future
Inheritance. The use of these more immediate or common Gifts, are to help our
Infirmities, and to bring to remembrance our Lord's revealed Will in his Word:
Things that are secret, and not written; not at all belonging to us, but to the
Lord. But observe G. W's plain perversion of my Words. First, says he, as if
none have the Spirit of Christ, unless they know and can declare all Things it
knows. Do I demand of you to tell me all things that Jesus did, or that the
Holy Spirit knows? You know I do not; and then what an idle Evasion is this?

And because we pretend not to immediate or extraordinary Inspirations;
therefore we come short of being Christ's Ministers or Ambassadors, and have
shut our selves out from any share in the Spirit of Christ, or Divine
Inspiration; and how then will you prove your Call to baptize People in Water.

Answer, Then by G. W's Logic, because we do not pretend to such immediate and
extraordinary Inspirations, as to know what had been contained in the
Scriptures, had they never been written: We fall short of being Christ's
Ministers or Ambassadors, and have shut our selves out from having any share in
the Spirit of Christ, etc. One that has but his Senses, would be inclined to
think that this Consequence is much beside the Truth; and yet if this be not
true, G. W. cannot imagine how we can prove our Call to baptize People in
Water. But to inform him in this Matter, we have a sufficient Call for it, from
the Commission of Christ our great Prophet, who is to be heard in all things,
Matthew. 28. Mark 16. And the frequent Examples of the Apostles, who admonish and
exhort us to be Followers of them as they are of Christ, and to keep the
Ordinances as they were delivered; so that we need not immediate Inspirations
for our Call or Authority herein. But I am persuaded G. W. has made use of
these many nonsensical Quibles to evade resolving the Question. Now let him
resolve me in some of those things that Jesus did, that was not written, and
what was wrote on the ground: And let him or any other Quaker do it, either by
a mediate or immediate Inspiration or Revelation: And if they cannot do it,
then let their proud boastings of immediate Inspirations, Revelations, and
Knowledge in things above what is written, cease for ever, etc. And I shall
still wait for an Answer.

Again, p. 21. Says G. W. To deem them Impostors that say Christ is within
thee or them, is to render the holy Apostles Impostors, who preached Christ
within, the Word nigh in thy heart, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. which therefore was not
separate from them, and only at a distance; yea, and to render themselves also
Impostors, who have confessed the same Truth of Christ within; referring to our
Book, p. 22, 23, 69. Antichrist in Spirit, etc. Which I refer the Reader to.

Answer. Besides the gross Slanders that G. W. casts upon us, it is a
lamentable thing to see how miserably he abuses the Text, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. He
only mentioning that part that he thinks is for his Turn: The Word is nigh in
thy heart, leaving out, In thy Mouth, even the Word of Faith which we preach;
which the Apostle there explains thus, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved, etc. Can any thing be more clearly expressed, ver. 9. Yet
G. W. will not distinguish betwixt the Word of Faith that the Apostles
preached, and the Object of Faith to whom this Word directs; and because we
cannot, neither did the Holy Apostle understand the Word here to be Christ:
Therefore G. W. is so daringly confident, that he charges us with rendering the
holy Apostles Impostors, and our selves also.

I shall spend no more time on this Particular, but leave the impartial Reader
to judge of G. W's gross perversion of this Text. And in p. 22. George
Whitehead charges me with wronging and abusing them about the Titles of their
Books, as if higher than they give the Holy Scriptures; perverting them, by
leaving out the explanatory part of the Titles: And he Instances in H. Smith's
Book, A True and Everlasting Rule, etc. Being the first Part of the Title: But
I leave out the next following; viz. from God discovered; and for this, here is
a loud Outcry of Wrong, Abuse, and Perversion, etc. I ask G. W. does those
Words from God discovered, added to The True and Everlasting Rule, diminish the
height of the Title? You would persuade your Reader to believe so, or else why
do you quarrel at it. The Title was higher than you afford the Scriptures
before; and one would be under a strong Temptation to believe, that Addition
makes it higher and not lower. Now I would seriously ask G. W. when and how God
made this discovery to H. Smith, that the Scriptures are thus useless to guide
in the ways of God; and how can you profess in your Faith, that the Scriptures
are profitable for Doctrine, Instruction, etc. since there is a sufficient Rule
to guide in all the ways of God without them.

Again, says he, we know none among us, that call the Holy Scripture a dead or
carnal Letter: And p. 24. he puts us to prove, that the People called Quakers,
or any Persons continuing in Society with them, do say; Mark that, that the
Holy Scripture is but a dead, carnal Letter; or that we so call the Doctrines
or Testimonies contained in them.

Answer, what may not the Quakers prove or deny at this rate? There are these
Difficulties proposed: First, we must be sure the Persons do at this moment
continue in Society with the Quakers. Secondly, that they do now in the present
Tense, say, The Scriptures are but a dead or carnal Letter; and this is not
enough if this be done: For by Scriptures they do not mean the Writings or
written Words of the Old and New Testament, but Faith, Repentance, Holiness,
etc. p. 22. Though the outward Letter or Writing in it self alone be dead. And,
says G. W. now I leave the Reader to judge whether he does not own the Charge.
And if he will deny that any approved Quaker did ever, whilst so, call the
Scriptures a dead and carnal Letter, let him do it if he dare.

Having followed, G. W. in answering his impertinent and absurd Evasions. I
shall give the Reader a Breviate of the sweet, convincing Language the Quakers
use to treat their Antagonists withal: And first I shall begin with Tho. Lawson
in his Book against William Jefrey: Thou Image-maker, thou Cockatrice hatching
Eggs, Vultures Eye; and this, because William Jefrey said, Christ was ascended
with that Body that God raised him from the dead again. Thou Heathen, because
W. J. said the Will of Christ was made known by the Scriptures, Thou Liar,
Bundle of Lies, thou Esau, selling thy Birthright, a Mute for the Night-birds,
Cormorants, Bitterns, Owls, Ravens, Dragons, wild Beasts, Satyrs, Vultures,
Screich-Owls; and that because W. G. said that the Saints have not the glorious
Kingdom in possession, but by promise: This for Tho. Lawson, the Quaker, in his
Book against W. Jefrey, etc.

I shall again mention Famous Edward Boroughs in his Answer to Mr. Bennet's 20.
Sober Questions, as appears in Boroughs Works in Folio, from p. 29. to 34. a
Breviate thereof take as follows, Thou Reprobate and Child of Darkness, the
Light condemns thee, and thy Generation eternally. We Witness thee to be in the
Sorcery and Witchcraft. Thou art darkness it self, thou Dragon, thy Queries are
conjured in the Black-Art, out of the bottomless Pit; thou Diviner, we Witness
thee to be the Beast that Wars with the Lamb, thou Antichrist that look at
Christ's death at Jerusalem alone: thou art seen with the Light and with it
condemned, thou blind Pharisee and Blasphemer, thou Jesuit, art thou pleading
for a Christ afar off thee, thou art under the Woe, and from that Woe thou
shall never fly: Let all People see whether thou be not a blind ignorant Sot.
Here thou replyest thy sottish Questions concerning the Body of Jesus, as the
Devil did about the Body of Moses: Thou disobedient one upon whom God will
render Vengeance in flaming fire, thou art Accursed, thou Beast to whom the
Plagues of God are due, upon whom the Wrath of God must be accomplished; thou
art shut out from God for ever, thou blind Hypocrite, thou dark sottish Beast,
thou polluted Beast. And much more to this purpose you will find in the Book
and Pages of Edward Boroughs the Quaker aforesaid. Now is it not hard to
believe the Testimony the Quakers give of this Man, namely, that he was a
Faithful Servant and Prophet of the Lord? And yet he thus Sentences a Man to
Woe and Condemnation for ever; and that for asking some sober and serious
Questions.

Take also a Breviate of Mr. Penn's sweet Language to Mr. Faldo, in Answer to
his Book, Quakerism no Christianity. See Mr. Faldo's Reply to Mr. Penn's
Answer, p. 93. Says Mr. Faldo, I shall rake but into one of your Books for the
following good Language, and leave large gleanings of all these lovely Titles
and Eipithets you afford me and my Work. 'Behold you Priest, failable, errable
Priest, scoffing independent Priest, ungodly Priest, busy Priest, cavilling
Priest, over-doing Priest, Antichristian Priest, Mountebank Priest, this
taunting Priest, stingy Priest, mercenary John Faldo, a Quack, a Religious
Bone-setter, the Priests break-neck; the Priest and his Poppit-play Doctrine,
vaunting, strutting John Faldo, insolent Vilifier, ignorance or malice it self,
our malignant Adversary John Faldo, ignorance, malice, and revenge; black as
Hell it self in malice, impious scoffs, impudence, strange impudence, the
impudence of his wickedness, sordid pedantry, he vomits his Scriptures, he
brings no more to purpose than Toby and his Dog, a Doctrine of Devils, a lie, a
lie to be sure, a very lie, devilish falsities, a downright lie, an errant lie,
a wicked lie, the last great lie of his second part of lies, a wicked lie
minted out of Hell. Mr. Penn' s Answer to Mr. Faldo, p. 43. 65. 79. 64. 109.
117. 140. 208, 210. 74. 107. 116. 40. 46. 110. 157. 204. 213. 214. 203. 215.

And much more that follows, being more general Railings and Reflections.

4. Take a Breviate also out of this small bundle of Railery, written by G.
Whitehead against Edward Pay, Henry Loader, and William Alcot, thus sweetly
worded.

The Envy and Bitterness, they are maliciously envious against our present
Liberty; as Men of a turbulent, persecuting Spirit, they have grossly belyed us
in their bitter lying invectives, their envy and bitterness is carnal, blind,
and dark, these envious turbulent Teachers in their rage and railery, Lord
deliver every well-meaning person from you and your Envy, such malicious
Preachers as these Anabaptists, who as persons possessed with a lying unclean
Spirit, are now still foaming out their own shame and malice; their work of
malice and falsehood in their puff'd-up envious Flesh, they have grossly belyed
us, and do charge us with this horrid lie, your shameful lies, you have grossly
belyed us, you have diabolically and foully foamed out your own shame and envy,
as will appear that the foaming unclean Spirit and lying Devil is not cast out
of you, the unclean lying Spirit that possesses you, such gross forgeries,
horrid and abusive forgeries, a gross lie, O blind Guides, self-contradicting
and self-condemning Hypocrites; you are blind Guides, they are gross notorious
old lies; Woe unto you lying Hypocrites.

Antichrist in Flesh, etc* p. 5. 6. 7. 9. 10. 11. 15. 16. 17. 18. 20. 21. etc.
And more such stuff as this; Now does not this make it manifest that the
Quakers are no Changlings. But is it not strange that these people that call
themselves God's Lambs, should act so like raging Bears; and when endeavors
have been used to still their ragings, many times their Answer has been as
Tho. Lawson to Will. Jefery, Do not thou know the Saints shall Judge the
World, they being the Saints, and all they condemn, the World.

Take a Breviate of some of the Quakers Profession of Faith.
The Quakers Profession of Faith.

Q. What Is your Belief concerning the Blessed Trinity as our Term is.

Answer, Our Belief is that in the Unity of the Godhead there is Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, being those 3 Divine Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven; the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and that these three are one according
to Holy Scrip. Testimon.

The Quakers Contradictions of this Faith.

1. Respecting the place where these Divine Witnesses are, or what Heaven they
intend.

2. How it appears that they own the Humanity of Christ.

3. How it can be that they own Justification by Christ, briefly examined.

Smiths Primer p. 9. They that are false Ministers, Preach Christ without, and
bid people Believe in him as he is in Heaven above; Swor'd of the Lord, p. 24
your carnal Christ is utterly denied by the Light, your imagined God beyond the
Stars. J. Pernel's Satan's design discovered. p. 19, 25. says, That by
Preaching Christ in Heaven, the Devil gets his work done on Earth: as, Tho.
Lucock being asked by W. J. where that Heaven was into which Christ Ascended?
He answered, claping his hand on his Breast, saying, within me, within me, so
that the Heaven the Quakers intend, is within them, in their corruptible bodies.

The Quakers Profession of Faith.

Q. Do you believe the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of
God, or that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man?

Answer Yes, we verily believe that Jesus is truly God and Man, according as
the Holy Scriptures testifies of him, God over all, blessed for ever, the true
God and eternalLife, the one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

The Quakers Contradictions of this Faith.

2. How does it appear that the Quakers do believe the Humanity of Christ?

Since John Whitehead Dip. plu. p. 13. Jesus Christ a person without us, is not
Scripture Language, but the Anthropomorphites and Mugletonians. Again, G. W.'s
Appendix to Reason against Railing, p. 21. The Socinian tells us of a personal
Christ; and that the Man Christ Jesus our Lord has in Heaven a place remote
from Earth, a humane Body. But does he believe him to be the eternal God,
whilst he imagines him to be a personal Christ, a humane Body, so limited and
confined to Remoteness, etc.

The Quakers Profession of Faith.

Quest. Do you believe and expect Salvation and Justification by the
Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, or by your own Righteousness or Works?

Answer, By Jesus Christ his righteous Merits and Works and not by our own. God
is not indebted to us for our deservings; but we to him for his Free Grace in
Christ Jesus, whereby we are saved through Faith in him, not of our selves, etc.

The Quakers Contradictions of this Faith.

G. Fox, Great Mystery of the great Whore, p. 71. He says, Christ's Nature is
not humane, which is earthly; for that is the first Adam's, etc. And yet they
profess to believe the Humanity of Christ. See G. Fox's Great Mystery, etc. p.
16. Says he, John Bunyan says, God is distinct from the Saints; and Bunyan is
deceived, who, says he, is distinct from the Saints; and so you are a Company
of pitiful Teachers. See Mr. Haworth's Animadversions upon the quibling Libel
from the Hartford Quakers, styled, A Testimony for the Man Christ Jesus, p. 11.
One William Bates, a Quaker, said more than once, That what Christ took of the
Virgin had now no Being, etc. Sept. 19. 1676. in the hearing of Daniel Doughty,
John Albury, and Stephen Tothil.

Mr. Pen's Justification is not by the Imputation of another Righteousness,
but from the actual performing and keeping God's righteous Laws. Pen's Sandy
Foundation, p. 25. E. Burrough's Works, p. 33. God does not except any, where
there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer to every demand
of Justice. See Mr. Pen' s Serious Apology, p. 148. Justification by the
Righteousness of another; or which Christ fulfilled for us in his own Person,
wholly without us, we boldly affirm to be a Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of
the Sea of Corruption, that does now deluge the World. See again Mr. Pen' s
sandy Foundation, p. 25. 30. It is a great Abomination to say, God should
condemn and punish his innocent Son, that he having satisfied for our Sins, we
may be justified by the Imputation of his perfect Righteousness: O why should
this horrible thing be contended for by Christians! I shall pass this, when I
have only given you one instance more. See Edw. Burrough's Works, p. 32, 33. in
Answer to the 12 Question; it being this, Whether the holy Lives and Works of
the Saints be not excluded from the Act of Justification, from the Guilt of
Sin. Edw. Burrough's Answer, Thou dead Beast! Thou art a Stranger from the Life
of God, and excluded from the holy Life of the Saints, and their Works; Thou
art un-redeemed from thy vain Conversation, and so art not justified nor never
shall be; and by the same that the ^nts are justified, thou art condemned into
the Lake for ever.

I shall now leave the Reader to judge, Whether the Quakers own Writings, and
their late pretended Faith professed, do not directly contradict each other:
About the Three Divine Witnesses in Heaven, the Humanity of Christ; and that
they expect Justification by his Works, Righteousness and Merits, etc. and not
by their own.

The Quakers Profession of Faith in the holy Scriptures.
They say they believe in the Three Divine Witnesses that bare Record in
Heaven, according to Holy Scripture-Testimony.

And in their last Article, they propose the Question thus:

Quest. Do you believe and own the Holy Scriptures contained in the Books of
the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain all
Matters of Doctrine and Testimony, necessary to be believed and practiced in
order to Salvation, and Peace with God?

They answer and say; yes, we do, and by the assistance of Grace and good
Spirit of God. which gives the Understanding of the Mind of God and meaning of
holy Scriptures, we always desire to live in the Faith, Knowledge; and Practice
of them in all things appertaining to Life and Godliness: holy Scriptures being
given by divine Inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine, Correction, and
Instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every
good Work, able to make the Man of God wise to Salvation, through Faith in
Christ Jesus.

The Quakers professed Faith, directly contradicted by their own Writings and
Authors.
Fox and Hubberthorn Truth's Defense, p. 101. They say the Scriptures are no
standing Rule; and that it is dangerous for the ignorant People to read them:
I, and yet profitable for Doctrine and Holy Scriptures too?

G. Whitehead's serious Apology, p. 49. That which was spoken from the Spirit
of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and Chapters are,
and greater.

Pernel's Shield of the Truth, p. 19. He also that says the Letter, that is,
the Scriptures as written, is the Rule and Guide of the people of God, is
without, feeding upon husks, and is ignorant of the true Light.

James Nailor's Light of Christ, p. 19. God is at liberty to speak to his
People by the Scriptures if he please, and where they are given by Inspiration,
does so: And he is also at liberty to speak by any other created thing, as to
Balaam by his Ass. Tho. Lawson, in his untaught Teacher; Read p. 6, 7, 8. The
Scriptures are not a Rule whereby to know the Will of Christ. See also H.
Smith's True and Everlasting Rule from God discovered; for I must remember that
part of the Title; or else G. W. will be offended* and say I wrong him. H. S.
affirms, that there is no other Rule, Way, or Means, by which Men shall ever
come to walk with God, but by that which is manifest of God in him; and that it
is sufficient to guide in all the ways of God without Scripture, or any other
outward Rule. How then are the Scriptures profitable and necessary, as
pretended in your Profession of Faith? See also J. Nailor's Answer to the Jews,
Read p. 4, 22, 25. It is Blasphemy for any to say the Letter is the Word of
God: It is the Devil that contends for the Scriptures to be the Word of God.
See Burrough's Works, p. 62. He that persuades People to let the Scriptures be
the Rule of Faith and Practice, would keep People in Darkness; for who ever
walks by the Rule without them, and teaches Men so to do, would make void the
Covenant of Life and Peace.

And see what my Antagonist says, Dip. Plu. p. 13. and then judge, if the
Scriptures be no Rule; yea, if it be Idolatry to call the Bible a means, as G.
W. expressly says, who also affirms, that Faith grounded on the Scriptures,
is but an empty implicit Faith; and bespeaks such Persons void of the knowledge
of God, and Christ, and Salvation, and to be yet in their Sins; and that such
Men walk by their own Fancies and Imaginations, Christ Ascerded, p. 11.

Now if the Scriptures be a dead, carnal Letter, Ink and Paper, says Pernel*
in Shield of Truth: If they are the Precepts and Traditions of Men, says
Nailor, in his Love to the lost.

And as Helbro^ the Quaker said to James Nobs and his Wife, If they are no
better than an old Aim* Hick's D. p. 29.

If it be dangerous for the Ignorant to read them: If to say an Ass has as
much Authority essentially in himself to teach and rebuke, as the Scriptures:
If to account it blasphemy and diabolical, to call the Scriptures the Word of
God, be not to contemn and vilify them, I am yet to seek what is.

I shall refer the Reader to our Book, Antichrist in Spirit unmasked, where the
rest of the Quakers Articles of Faith, published in their late Pamphlet, are
particularly examined. Now let the Quakers renounce and explode those Writings
and Sayings of their Authors that stand upon Record, that so directly
contradict their new Faith professed by them; and as was said, we shall be glad
of so great and happy a Reformation among them, hoping some means has been
blessed to work this happy change upon them.

In p. 24, 25. G. Whitehead says, we have wronged his Words in Citation and
Construction, about the holy Scriptures and Person of Christ: and likewise
grossly abused, wronged, and mischarged G. For J. Pernel, G. Keith, foully
perverting, and misconstruing their Words. And he says, we have also abused,
vilified, defamed, and wronged W. Smith, H. Smith, J. Nailor, E. Buroughs, J.
Penington, S. Crisp, W. P. and others, Men of better Fame and Repute than our
selves, and more righteous and innocent than their Defamers.

Answer, That forasmuch as G. Whitehead cannot, or at least, has not showed us
wherein we have wronged them as to Matter of Fact, we shall take these to be
some of G. W's empty and swelling words of Vanity, and look upon it as a
presumptuous Blast blown without Proof or Demonstration; and so it needs no
further Answer at present.

Again, I shall take no notice at all of the confused Profession of Faith, that
G. Whitehead makes* in 27, 28, 29, 30. Pages of his Libel; but do think it had
been much more to the present purpose, had he instead thereof, labored to
reconcile their Writings with their late published Faith.

The Conclusion, Wherein I shall take a little Notice of G. Whitehead's
Postscript, G. W. cites Antichrist in Spirit, etc. p. 46. Where I referr the
Reader to Readiness Errand to Damascus, p. 6, 7. Where G. Fox takes the Name of
the eternal Judge of quick and dead to himself, etc.

G. Whitehead says, this is notoriously false in Fact, being, says he, in the
very same Book Readiness Errand, recorded amongst those Matters, falsely charged on
G. F. by his Adversaries the Priests and others, in the County of Lancaster, in
their Petition, p. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. of Readiness Errand, where G. F. opposes and
answers their Objections.

To all which I answer: In the beginning of the Book, Readiness Errand, there is
that part of the Lancaster Petition inserted, p. 4, 5, 6, 7. In which Petition,
G. F. is charged with taking to himself the Name of the eternal Judge of quick
and dead, etc. The Lancaster Petitioners were several Men of Credit and Repute.
Now though G. W. says the charge was false, and G. Fox denies it in that their
Book, etc. What then? Have not I more reason to believe the Affirmative of so
many, than G. Fox's Negative? I know it is a Faculty incident to you to deny
Matters of Fact charged upon you, be they ever so apparently true: And who can
think that a number of Men should agree together in charging G. Fox with a
Falsehood?

Though G. Fox denies their charge in his Book, may not we answer it in your
own Phrase, p. 8 of your Pamphlet, The Authority of the Quakers Books are
utterly denied by us; so that we have grounds to believe the Petitioners say
true?

Why may not G. F. take the Name of Judge of quick and dead to himself, as well
as to approve of those blasphemous Titles given him by Jos. Coal, in his Letter
from Berbadoes, cited in Antichrist in Spirit, p. 43, 44, 45, Dear G. Fox, who
art the Father of many Nations, whose Light has reached through us thy
Children, even to the Isles afar of, to the begetting of many again to a lively
hope, for which Generations to come shall call thee ( G. F) blessed, whose
Being and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou ( G. F.)
rulest and governest in Righteousness, and thy ( G. Fox's) Kingdom is
established in Peace, and the Increase thereof is without end 21 day of the 12
month, 1658. Now if G. Fox could digest and approve of all these. Titles, due
only to Christ himself in the Opinion of all Christians: Why may he not use the
like Modesty, in taking the name of Judge of quick and dead to himself: The
other Titles were approved and ordered to be recorded.

Why may not G. Fox take this Name to himself, as well as to say in one of your
Meetings: Friends, although I have not told it you, I do now declare it, I have
power to bind, and loose whom I please? Now if G. W. has the confidence to
deny these things, a further Test of them and others may be more fully given.

G. Whitehead's next causeless Outcry, is, that I say the Quakers say, that
Christ has no body but his Church, quoting Readiness Errand, p. 9. Which says,
G. W. is notoriously false again: for, said he, it was the Priest's Objection
against L. F. that he professed that Christ had never any body but his Church,
Readiness Errand, p. 2. Which says G. W. was also false, and there recorded
amongst their other false Charges objected.

To which I answer: First, I do not charge the Quakers, with saying that Christ
never had any Body but his Church: They own he had a bodily Garment. But the
Petitioners aforesaid charged the Quakers, with saying that Christ has no Body
but his Church. Now instead of G. Fox's owning Christ to have a Body besides
his Church, or distinct from his Church: He replies, That Christ's Church is
his Body; which I say is but a shuffle; and not denying, but implicitly
granting the Matter of Fact. And why may not G. F. deny Christ to have a
Personal Body, besides or distinct from his Church, as well as G. Whitehead?
Dip. Pl. p. 13. Burrough's Works, p. 150. It is not our wonted course to say,
that Christ has no Body but his Church. But we say the Church is his Body.

Observe they do not usually say so; but it appears they believe so; See ibid
p. 151. 152. To say Christ has two Bodies, one out of the sight of the Saints.
There is so much Wickedness and Ignorance in the Broachers of such a
Particular, that it needs no Answer, etc.

See G. Whitehead's Verdict; and I shall leave this to the Reader's Judgment,
his Apology, p. 33. Them that accuse us, for saying Christ has but one Body,
should produce Scripture that says he has two. And where does the Scripture
say, that Christ's glorified Body in Heaven is of humane Nature? Now the
Quakers own Christ's Church to be his Body; then that is the one Body G. W.
intends. And it is monstrous to say he has two: So that then I do not wrong
the Quakers, in saying that they own Christ to have no Body but his Church. Now
all Christians own Christ's Church to be his Mystical Body; and they also
believe him to have a personal glorious Body distinct from his Church, says
he, Ep. etc. p. 59. refers to Pernel's Shield of Truth, p. 12. Where I. P.
calls Water Baptism a formal Imitation and Invention of Men, etc. G. Whitehead
says James Pernel speaks not this of Water Baptism without distinction.

Answer, However he says so; and then the Charge is owned to be true. To this
agrees Smith's Primer, p. 39. Thy Baptism, Bread and Wine, rose from the Pope's
Invention: And James Nailor's Salutation to the Seed of God, p. 33, 34. calls
Water Baptism a carnal thing. Now let the judicious Reader judge how far I have
been concerned in wronging the Quakers, etc.

To conclude, we will give an Answer to G. Whitehead's impertinent Questions,
though I think they are not worth taking notice of: His Questions are 4; but
his Reasons for asking them vanish in answering the first; viz. Was E. P.
deputed and approved by your Congregation, or any select Assembly of Elders or
Ministers of the Baptized People or Churches, to write or publish his said Book
against the People called Quakers? Or did he do it on his own Authority or Head
with your Approbation only.

Answer, Your pretended Faith being published and dispersed plentifully here,
it did more directly affect this People of the baptized Way; and therefore E.
P. did write and publish the said Book, by the approbation of the Majority of
this Congregation: And so he did not do it on his own Head. Neither did we see
it needful to desire the approbation of others herein, though several have
approved of it since. And it is most ridiculously impertinent for you so often
to speak of defaming you as a People, except you could show a Dispensation to
be universal Dictators, and a License to disperse your confused and pernicious
Stuff without Control. Moreover Edw. Pay has this to say, that although he
does not pretend to Perfection, as some of the Quakers have done; that is, a
living without Sin: Yet when G. W. becomes Master of an Inquisition, Edw. Pay
will give sufficient Testimonies, both of his Life and Doctrine, to the
confutation of his Defamers. And the mean time, he challenges any to charge and
prove against him any thing unbecoming a Man and a Christian, respecting either
Life or Principles, humane Frailties excepted.

And although G. W. infinuates most arrogantly that he had need to be a Man of
singular Piety and eminent Parts, that is sit to discourse with a Quaker in
this Controversy; yet E. P. believes that a Man of as mean Qualifications as
himself can do it: And let this serve for an Answer to your impertinent
Questions.

And now, G. W. I conclude with a Word to thee; and do hereby declare, that I
never had the least prejudice against, or Controversy with any Quaker about
civil things, though I have been intimate with several of them, both at Bristol
when I lived there, and elsewhere; but from your Principles, Liberanos, Domine,
I hope shall ever be my Litany: And I hope all that are, or would be
Christians, will join with me, and say, Amen. And now I have done, except I am
foolishly provoked; which if I am, you may, it is like* have a Quarterly Packet
to keep your Fame in remembrance. This is all from thy Friend,

Edward Pay.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 20. for ^^w read ^^r. p. 24. 1. 7. dele And. 1. 26. for Mat^ read
Mat^. p. 29. 1. 28. for (...) read George.


