TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of all Colleges and
Halls, and others well-willers to Piety and Learning, throughout the Kingdom
of England,
SHOWS
THAT whereas many Persons disaffected to the present form of Government of
the Church of England (established not noly by the Ecclesiastical, but also by
the Common Law of this Realm, and diverse Acts of Parliament,) have of late in
great multitudes Petitioned this Honorable Court against the Orders, honor,
jurisdiction, and means of the Clergy; And have published such their desires
in Print, and Pulpit, and daily seek to advance and propagate the same: To the
great disheartning of all Learning, (if such disignes find favor,) the
grievous scandal of the Reformed Religion as unstable, and the unspeakable
advantage of our Enemies of Rome.

WE therefore (well weighing, that the Seminaries must decay when the Garden
shall be wasted,) in all humility most heartily pray this Honorable Court,
that all the Orders of holy Church, of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which
from the Apostles times till these, have withstood so many Practices, may have
yet hopes to flourish under Your gracious protection. And that by Your
assistance under our most Religious Sovereign the ancient Catholic Faith,
and Discipline, may be defended from all Jnnovations, and novelties: The means
and liberties of the Churches, as well Cathedral, and Collegiat, as Parochial
to them hitherto of right belonging, according to the pious Wills of their
blessed Founders, may be continued and preserved: Many thousand Families which
on them depend secured from ruin: And that our Nation whose Laws already
favors as much as any in the world, the right of the First borne, may ratain
Ecclesiastical promotions, as the Patrimony of younger Children, the prize of
Labor and Study, an incitement of Learning, and a reward of those that can
entitle themselves thereto by honest desert.

And Your Petitioners etc.


