Dr. OATES's ANSWER To COUNT TECKLY's LETTER, Giving Him a True Account of the
Present Horrible Plot.
May it please your Excellency,
THe inexpressible favor you have shown to the Adorer (not only of his
Mohammedan Majesty the Grand Seignior, your self, the Mohammedan Laws, and
Religion, but also of your Excellency's Discenting Principle from your
Christian Master, which is a true Parable with us here in these; Kingdoms) has
filled me with amazement to find a Poet of our Party, to answer the
incomparable Letter you were pleased to honor me withal; For indeed I am not
good at writing or reading, my business is only Plot-vouching; for which (I
thank Mahomet) I am famous all over the World. But at last (rather than be
silent) I have by many importunities, persuaded him that was Author of a Famous
Book, (that I believe your Excellency has heard of) Entitled, a Popish
Successor, etc. to write this Answer, which will inform you the truth; the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth: which is more then ever I swore, or
said in all my life before. In the first place I do from the bottom of my heart
assure you (which is more than I durst say of my swearing in the late Popish
Plot, tho'I had one Prance an Eminent Murderer by Oath; to back me with a well
sworn improbable Murder of a Famous Justice of the Peace) that I have as good
wishes and hearty Prayers for the Mohammedan Cause, as any man breathing in
Christendom, of which I am under color a Member, tho'never Baptized; and have
ventured my Damnation as far as any that puts forth Christian Colors on a
Mohammedan Design, as I shall give your Exellency a true Relation. In the
beginning of my true swearing, (of which every body is sensible) was to the
Earl of Shaftsbury's contrivance, I knowing of the truth of the matter, but was
resolved to make my self Famous, as you are sensible I have. I must needs
acknowledge my self a sincere adorer of Mahomet by my persecuting Oaths against
the true Lovers of the King of England, whether Protestents or Papists; (I mean
not the the True Blew Protestants) for as I told your Excellency before, They
were for the Mohammedan Cause, we have always stood by. Therefore to answer your
Letter without many more Parentheses (though my life does admit of the Devil and
all; who is best acquainted with all my proceedings) (as our Seamen say) from
Stem, to Stearn. I am, and all the Mahomeatan Protestants, under persecution;
for the sham Popish Plot which was to introduce a true Phanatical Conspitacy,
that is also confounded: Therefore we have designed a day of Humiliation, (not
only for the defeat of our Un-Christian Cause here) but so. your Mohammedan
Cause before Vienna, as the Christian Gazets do inform us, whose truth we
strive to confound, by our good wishes, and daily Mohammedan Prayers; and yet we
cannot prevail. At the Christian Thanksgiving for the Discovery of our Horrid
Conspiracy, did we not abuse the Government, and affrons the Clergy, by sending
up perfidious Notes to their Pulpits, wherein we justified (those that rightly
suffered for contriving the death of the King and the Royal Family) to be
absolutely Murdered and yet this does us no good, neither lies it in my power
(for what would it avail me to tell your Excellence a lie) to resist by those
Methods your Excellence requires? for upon the faith of (what shall I say) a
Gentleman, that I am none; a Doctor I never was, and a Christian (my Father
being an Anabaptist) would never make me. But (by Mahomet whom I adore,) I know
nothing of the Black-Bills by me sworn in the No Popish Plot: for instead of
thousands, I never saw one, nor does it lie in my power to tell you what they
are like. Therefore I cannot assist his Majesty, the Grand Seignior, with any
thing of that kind: For by our Prophet Mahomet, they were invisible to me too.
I perceive, now our Cause is in its Wane, 'twill expire like the snuff of a
Candle, having no Sun to renew its light by; unless the Son of Perdition, which
will cast a damned pur-blind Reflection. For the Spanish Pilgrims (as I have
already sworn, I will not tell you a Lie, though I scarce know how to frame my
self to a Truth,) was an Aldersgate Street Contrivance, to carry on our Design;
and a Stratagem to amuse the Rabble; for upon my Mohammedan Faith, there was
never any such thing. Therefore his Majesty, the Turkish Emperor, and my ever
Honored Prince, cannot possibly expect any belief from them. I am extremely
willing to change my Climate, had I but money to bear my Charges: for (being in
the vein of speaking Truth) I was fore'd to pawn some of my Contribution plate
to redeem me from the Tenter-hooks of the Poultry Compters which, an't please
your Excellence is a place, a man cannot get clear of without tearing his
clothes: And indeed mine began to be out at Elbows, for want of a
Plot-allowance. (Nay) my Plot it self I was fore'd to pawn, to Archibald Sparks
Sergeant at Mace belonging to the Shrievedom of London, who has no more Faith
in my Plot, than a Jew has in Christianity: and now I have nothing else to
pawn, unless it be my Soul to the Devil, which I fear he will lend nothing
upon, (being his own already) without a Bribe Therefore I do not find any
possibility of my going to wait on my Grateful Master the G. S. my Janisaries
have left me, having no faith in my swearing, when there is no money stirring
And now the Giant Perjuries of your humble Servant, are dwindled to the
Dwarfish belief of a Loyal Subject; so that I lie exposed to Jack Ketch in his
Office. I must confess I began to be tired with our True Blue Protestant Bums,
(having Bugger'd almost the whole Party over) that I long for those Mohammedan
back-sides, assured me in the Grand Seigniors Masculine Seraglio. But that I
now despair of, unless his Mohammedan Majesty, by a speedy supply of money from
his own Treasury, do redeem me from the Justice of those Christian Princes, I
have (I must needs confess) by my Perjuries abused, and set all honesty in a
flame, which is now like to scorch me to death: except I say, the G. S. and
your self, (who have expressed so much love to me) relieve your Vassal: for by
Mahomet, I adore you before the Crucified Savior you designed to persecute.
For I was just to the True Blew Mohammedan Cause, and will continue steadfast.
For I will Lie for it, Swear for it, go to the Devil, and be Damned for it, if
it will do the Cause any good. If you will send Money to bear the charge of
their Voyage, I do not doubt but to bring the G. S. a hundred thousand True
Mohammedan Protestants, that (since your Letter) I have recommended your
Excellencys respects too. Nay, a great part of them are in the Village of
London; and do talk, and will do as much for the good old Mohammedan Cause, as
ever. Our Prince Mon-Teckly has given us the slip; but Bethel-Teckly is as
vigorous a Cause-monger still as any man, and will be ready upon the least
Summons to head us, with the help of Sir William Waller, who lies ready at a
Bawdy House in Holland, and can easily give us his assistance, as he has
promised; for he was the man that burnt his Savior in Effigy, and therefore is
true to the Mohammedan Cause. But for those Commissions you mention, I confess
by the Mohammedan Faith, I never saw one of them my self. And for the Vessel that
brought me from Spain to Islington in a days time, to tell you the truth, was a
great Lie of mine, because I would be thought a worker of Miracles. The True
Protestant Mahometans (send but money) you shall have them all; but the
Black-Bills, I deny: the Spanish Pilgrims, I know nothing of: the Irish
Ruffins, was a Sham: the French Army was a Dream: Purbeck Invaders, was a trick
to raise the Country: Screwed Guns, and Chewed Bullets were a Jest: but the
Protestant-Flails, and Blunderbusses, were a real Truth, to destroy the King,
and all the Royal Family: and beat out the Brains of all their Loyal Subjects.
And if they will serve you, you may command them, from your Excellencies great
Admirer,

From the Amsterdam Coffee-house. Oats.

FINIS.

