OBJECTIONS against the Paper-Bill Answered.
THAT the making Writing and Printing Paper in England is no New Invention.

The Company have brought it into England as a New Invention;

That it is a Monopoly, and against the Statute of 21 Jac. 1.

The Company by their Bill desire no more than to have liberty for fourteen
years to do what none can do but themselves, France above 100000 l. for Paper.
Now if it be a Monopoly, it is as extensive as the Nation, any of the Subjects
having liberty, if they please, to come in.

If the Trade be left open, it will thrive better, and there are many English
Workmen, well-skilled in making Writing and Printing-Paper.

This indeed they have asserted in their printed Paper, Burnaby about twelve
Years ago, which the Paper-Sellers showed as Paper made by the
Brown-Paper-makers. And notwithstanding a Prohibition of French Paper for at
least twelve Months past, they are as far from making Writing or Printing-Paper
as ever: Insomuch, that to show a Specimen of their Art, they brought a Book
before the House of Commons, printed upon English Paper, well knowing that the
Print covers many of the Defects, they not having one Ream of White-Paper fit
to produce.

The Company will raise the Price of Paper.

There is no Imposition on Paper,

That the Company will inhance the Price of Rags.

The Company have no Clause to empower them to buy Rags,

Nothing therefore is more evident, than that the Design of these
Paper-Sellers, is to destroy the Manufacture; and for that End, they have left
no Stone unturned to effect it. And to discourage all Persons from undertaking
it,

First, They rendered it as a thing Impossible, to make Writing and
Printing-Paper in England, alleging, that neither our Air nor Water was good
enough to make it.

When we convinced the Nation to the contrary, by showing Paper made here, then
they joined with the French Ambassador and his Confederates to ruin the
Manufacture. And how active the said Ambassador was in it, did not only most
plainly appear before the late King James in Council, and at the Court of
King's Bench, where one of the Confederates was convicted, and fined 500 l. but
the Company are also ready to produce some of the said Ambassador's Letters
written to Monsieur Louvois, wherein he gives an account what Progress he made
to ruin the Manufacture, and how many of the Companies Servants he had enticed
away from their Service.

The Company having gone through so many Troubles and Difficuties in
establishing the Manufacture in England, by means of the said Paper-Sellers,
who still oppose the same: The Company humbly hope that this most Honorable
House will not suffer the said Paper-Sellers to give them any further
Interruption in delaying the Passing the said Bill.


