depiction of the arts of wooing and complimenting, with personifications of
love and eloquence THE Mysteries of LOVE and ELOQVENCE The Arts of Wooing and
Complementing
Theater of Courtship. LOVE. ELOQVENCE. LOVES LIBRARY.




THE BEAU's Academy, OR THE Modern and Genteel WAY OF Wooing and Complementing.
After the most Courtly Manner:

In which is drawn to the Life, the Deportment of most accomplished Lovers, the
Mode of their Courtly Entertainments, the Charms of their Persuasive Language,
in their Addresses or more Secret Dispatches.

To which are added Poems, Songs, Letters of Love and others: Proverbs,
Riddles, Jests, Posies, Devices, with variety of Pastimes and Diversions, as
Cross-Purposes, the Lovers Alphabet, etc. Also a Dictionary for making Rhimes,
Four Hundred and Fifty delightful Questions, with their several Answers.

TOGETHER WITH A New Invented Art of Logic: So plain and easy, that the
meanest Capacity may, in a short time, attain to a Perfection of Arguing and
Disputing.

London, Printed for O. B. and Sold by John Sprint, at the Bell in
Little-Britain. 1699.

The Preface
To the Youthful Gentry.
IT has been such an hereditary practice for the Author, to declare to the
Reader the depth of his design, that should I decline this custom, I should not
free my Endeavors from the nice exceptions of the too curious Critics of these
times. When Plays were at their height, Prologues were so in fashion at the
Court, and so desired on the Stage, that without them the Audience could not be
pleased; so that the best Poets were forced to satisfy the greedy expectations
of the multitude, that gaped and yawned for such set and starcht speeches to be
gravely delivered to their Worships by the man in the long cloak with the
colored beard. It is reported of Mr. Fletcher, that though he writ with such a
free and sparkling Genious, that future Ages shall scarce ever parallel, yet
his importunate Commedians would often crowd upon him such impertinences, which
to him seem needless and lame excuses, his Works being so good, his indignation
rendered them as the only bad Lines his modest Thalia was ever humbled with. The
truth is, when an Author has set down well, and so descended to his Readers
capacity, that his Muse is obvious and easy to be understood, what needs there
a Clavis or a Thread where there is no Labyrinth; notwithstanding, we cannot but
be sensible that some Prefaces have so abused the credulous Readers trust, that
they cannot now be too slightly set by, as most of them may; and that not
improperly, be fitly compared to rich capparrison'd Jades, to painted
Inn-posts, to Wenches admirably trickt forth, but pull off their dressings, and
they look like flead Cats. What the Countryman said of the Nightingale, Nox
and praeterea nihil, A great cry and no wool, may be rightly applied to them. I
acknowledge, Courteous Reader, that as I have already in my Epistle to the Coy
Ladies, discourst Jovially and Ironically of Love, as also in my other
Advertisement, treated by way of Introduction, of the right management of
Eloquence and Complements, if I had not still enforced my Intellectuals to
further serious and useful Instructions, for my Readers greater benefit, this
Preface had been like those I have found fault with, superfluous; or at least
to little purpose. And now it will be expected, nor can I do otherwise, then
make an ingenious confession, why I set those subjects of Love and Complements
apart by themselves; I shall give my Reader sufficient reason, that I might not
justle too much matter into this Preface, which I only intend for a Landscape to
the Work, my whole design being included in these two particulars. First, why I
have published this Volume. Secondly, what Profit and Delight an understanding
Reader may expect to drive to himself from his diligent perusal of it.

For the first, to deal plainly with my Contrymen, the several simple
Pamphlets that have treated so surreptitiously of this subject, exacted this
employment from me; as I could not but be highly incensed, to see them so
cheated and baffled by such specious pretenders, but most wretched performers
of what they undertook. I will not vex my Reader with the Names or Titles they
are distinguished or dignified with, I hope by this time all Ingenious Persons
have learnt sufficiently to detest them. For my own part, in these my Studies I
have not so much as taken any other notice of them, then to shun the infection
of their papers; and though some may object that the Green is the same that we
bowl on, such persons, if they make but the least inquisition, shall quickly
find that my Byas is turned another way, my flight is higher, my engagements
are different; for without any vain glory I may confidently attest to the
world, that the contributions of several persons of Honor, as well by their
particular prescriptions, as also by the assistance of their choicest
Manuscripts, built up this Volume. It took its birth from them, to whom with a
most sincere gratitude it does again humbly dedicate it self.

For my second Consideration, what benefit the Peruser of this Book is likely
to acquire to himself, I shall express to him in few words; he has, as I may
rightly call it, a Magazin richly furnished, for his dispatch of any of those
high Concernments, Cupid or Mercury shall at any time instate him in; all
manner of Adresses, Entertainments, and Ceremonies, whether of Salutation, Love
or Court-ship, which are comprehended under those Heads of Wooing and
Complements; from whence as from two Springs, the other lesser streams do
distill, whether of Prose or Verse, serious or Drolling Subjects in Letters, or
otherwise; these contain in them, a grand part of the body of this Work; for
the other Additions of Proverbs, Posies, Characters, Jeasts, Clinches,
Similitudes, etc. as also the Miscelania, of Natural, Amorous, Moral,
Experimental, Paradoxical, Enigmatical, and Jovial Questions with their
Answers, I am confident they will no less enrich the Readers Mind, then
admirably delight his Fancy. As for the several A-la-mode Games and Sports, I
have inserted them with such plain demonstrations, that any person of a
reasonable capacity, may quickly be expert in them; to which purpose I have
invented a Riming Dictionary, consisting of Monasyllables, for the ending of
Verses, applicable for those that are young Practioners in the pleasant Sport
named Crambo: together with another particular Alphabet, entitled, The trial
of Wits, which consists of Epithets, properly fitted for immediate use, on the
sudden occasions of Writing or Discourse, which I have also appropriated to the
other Recreation, so much in fashion, called Substantives and Adjectives. And
that the Ingenious Reader may be assured of my care and industry, to render
this Book worthy of his acceptance, I have also presented him with a complete
Tract of the Art of Logic by way of Question and Answer, so clearly
delineated, that the Judicious Student may in a short time attain to a
competent knowledge of those most necessary ways of Arguing and Disputing, so
much practiced in the Universities.

How advantageous this work will be to all intelligent Persons, will more
easily be instanced, if we rightly consider the incongruity of men's parts, and
look narrowly into their gifts; one speaks well, but writes improperly, another
imploys his pen in excellent sense, but wants good language; another has a
good invention but no method; so that whatsoever some of our Moderns pretend to
their ex tempore inspirations, it cannot but be confessed by all men in their
right minds, that Artificial set Forms may be aiding to them all, not as they
are literally to be applied but as they are additional helps to quicken and
enlighten the Genius. This my assertion will be clearly made good, if we do but
consider the smooth effeminate silken tribe, how some of them demean
themselves, who if they are put to it on sudden alarums or unexpected summons
of their fancies by letters, or otherwise, how are they forced in such
exigents, to have recourse to their Romances, Plays, Manuscripts, and such like
Common place books, they turn down the page, transcribe, and for the present
subsist on such slender notions. How without blushing can I express it, that I
have known a wench of fourteen, with a few Dramatical Drayton and Sidney
Quillets, put to the non plus a Gallant of thirty; I may safely dispose on it,
that I have heard such a Lass defeat a Gentleman of some years standing at the
Inns of Court.

To those that scruple at Complemental Ceremonies and Tenders of Service, I
positively affirm, that such nimble applications, if rightly directed, are most
absolutely useful; and that those which have been adorned with such
qualifications have had such tall advantages over others, as seldom or never to
fall short of their ends; more especially when their good behaviors have been
set off with Eloquence, which though it often carries with it self a false
fire, yet if it be smoothly and discreetly managed, it works wonders, not only
for the present, but future times to admire at. Not to detain the worthy Reader
with any longer suspense of so unquestioned a truth, I shall only desire thee
to take notice, that these my endeavors had a gentle rise, so they still carry
with them a more than ordinary splendour; as they have shuned the common rode of
all former Writers, so that if with Phaeton my muse is sometimes placed in the
Chariot of the Sun, that she soars at the highest and most generous Designs;
she may apologize for her self, that it was not her ambition, but the commands
of several noble Persons, whose importunity from her most serious Studies
diverted her so far, as to make her participate of their recreations, whether
they took the air in the Spring Garden, raced in Hide Park, or expaciated, as
Portugals called it, in New Exchange, or otherwise revelled at their Balls; in
all which Celebrations of pleasures with them, though my Muse was obleiged to
observe some particulars, yet they are such as are civil and modest, such as
need no veil, nor reflect upon any person whatsoever; and I hope so well of
her, that as her Sphere is higher, she has not been deficient in this her
Deportment, so as to stoop to any more inferior Theme, then what might be
worthy of her. Courteous Reader, of late there has been a scarcity of Wit, it
will therefore seem to be more discretion in us, for to husband it as well as
we can; what thou have here, as I have sufficiently intimated, has been
derived from the best hands, such sprightly quick wit, as I can assure thee no
language in so small a page ever afforded better: In a word, thou may rest
satisfied, that the ingenuity that is contained in this Book, is to much for
one single brain to teem with, and therefore wonder not, if in such a Caskanet
thou find so much of invaluable treasure to enrich thy Fancy with; such, but
that it seems too proud an expression from my self, others have been bold to
affirm, that to complete this Volume, they could not imagine what more could be
added or invented. For my own part, worthy Reader, I submit these my best
endeavors to thy impartial and judicious censure, I esteem of thy well poised
Genius, as the only Jacob's staff, with which the height of these conceptions
can be rightly taken; and whatsoever the inconsiderate opinion of some
ridiculous Critics may be, I am confident that as long as Wit, Love, or
Courtship are in fashion, this Book shall live and flourish.

Yours, ever to be commanded, E. P.

To those Cruel Fair ones, that triumph over the distresses of their loyal
Lovers, the Auther wishes more Clemency; and to their afflicted Servants, more
magnanimity and Roman Fortitude.
Bright Stars of Beauty,
Encouraged by your former inexpressible favors, I am at this time emboldned to
prostrate these my Devoirs at your feet: after your Ladyships egress from the
Spring Garden, I was invited by the pleasure of the season, into the solitary
retiredness of an Arbor, where in my Tale-book I intended to insert some
slender Observations of those harmless Transactions and civil Frolicks, that
had past betwixt you and your Servants, whose entertainments you had graced
that evening with the serene influences of your propitious smiles. I had scarce
for the recreation of my Genius, employed my pen to the draught of the first
Character, when of a sudden from a shady Grove, I heard a mournful hollow
sound, which at the first, I imagined to have been occasioned by some fresh
gale of wind, that had only rustled among the trees, till ascertained otherwise
by the iteration of a Heart-tearing groan: I was so far disturbed as to cast my
eye of one side, where I soon discovered a woeful weight; who by his melancholy
posture, and leaning of himself so discontentedly against a tree, as if he
supported it; I could not but with probability of reason at the the first sight
determine, to be some wretched Inamarato, some Lovesick person; such an one
whom the blind God has more fiercely wounded, then the twelve signs of the
Anatomy. A dismal object he was, and so represented to my view, as if his
misfortune had ruined him so at once, as that he could not be rendered more
unfortunate; he looked as if one of your Ladyships had whispered into his ear
that doleful tune of Adieu, or at least that desperate sentence, Miscreant,
thou shall lie alone with thy bed unwarmed a score of frosty Winters. It cannot
be amiss, by your Ladyships fair permissions, to draw the curtain from before
this Love Martyrs picture, to describe him to you, vultu, gestu, and oculis,
just as I then found him suffering his ten Persecutions; his Hat in one place,
with papers of Verses in another, were so fantastically dispersed on the
verdent Grass, that if he pleased, with his Feet he might spurn the wantonness
of his own Muse: for I perceived by the baldness of his crown with scratching,
that he had lately been delivered of Acrosticks and Encomiums, in praise of
some of your Beauties. After the writing of which, for fear of a non
acceptance, he was most pestilently dogged, and as I then found him, in such a
sullen station, yet were not his eyes so set in the hollownesses of his head,
but that I discerned from them such diliberate and heavy motions, as caused me,
had I not been convinced by the former symptoms of his disease, to have
suspected, whether otherwise, according to his education, he were not some
Clown, who having mistaken the Almanac, wept for fair weather. Certain I am
that I saw a most pitiful object, one that I could not but conceive that his
Mistress had frowned on, and he in requital thought for a foil, to show her a
worser face then her own. I protest to your Ladyships, after I had entertained
my most serious thoughts of him, I could not but take him for such an unthrift,
as had spent the best stock of wits in adoration of his Ladies Looking-glass; I
approacht nearer to him; not Imagining but that he would at length have
disimprisoned to his thoughts in some discourse; for indeed after a stricter
surveigh of his presence, he seemed to me as if he endeavored to hew and
fashion out his conceptions to some purpose, though I am confident they proved
as unprofitable to him, as an unfinisht piece of Artifice; what weight he
poised in his Perricranium, I cannot well guess, but thus much I observed, that
sometimes his head hung down to his breast, like the monster boys brother; till
of a sudden he assumed more confirmed imaginations of his Mistresses kindness,
which in an instant placed it again, and fixed it right, as it was before, on
its own Pedestal; his face was scorcht with his Ladies eyes, as if he bin a
three years voyage at the Indies, I am persuaded his very Soul was tanned, for
beauty has the same influence with the sun, it blacks within, as his brighter
beams do burn without. Bless me from Cupid, O Mistress! thought I, give me a
friend and good wine. But to proceed in my description, I vow to your
Ladyships, he has so strictly manacled himself, that his arms seemed
pinnioned, like rabits feet to a spit, crossed like the strings of a book; in
such a posture he showed, as if he had been all contemplation, no action; like
a woeful Jesuit, that had forsaken the world, so as never to rise from before
his Crucifix; one might have taken him for a statue, had not his sighs breathed
from his heaved-up heart, a kind of a living death, which together with sudden
startings caused a paleness sometimes to overcome the otherwise more dusky
color of his face, even so as that same time, to discover that in diebus
illis, his cheeks had entertained some tell-tale blushes, and dimpled smiles.
His afflictions were so merciful to him, that to my better apprehension his
very tears were of a sovereign use, which as they then gusht forth, served to
quench those flames his Mistresses eyes had kindled, which otherwise would have
scorcht him to ashes, and to this purpose I do believe they did distill all the
seasons of the year. I could not but laugh at the clothes he wore, which were
so far from A-la-mode, that I rather conceive he had mistaken one piece for
another; as if he had put on his breeches for his doublet, the buttons whereof,
were most of them off, for at every sigh that came from him, like Poppyheads,
half a dozen of them dropped at a time. At this strange disguise of his habit,
together with the further waggery of the blind God, I could not but cry out,
Fie, when I saw how his garters were tied in the wrong place; about his neck,
as if he had received his Mittimus, and should want no accommodation for his
journey to the Elizian fields, whither certainly his straggling thoughts had
already transported him; for he appeared to me, as if he dreamt waking of some
business that concerned another world. Alas cruel Fair Ones, deprived of your
pity, without my more opportune address, he had been for too much loving, your
most unhappy Victim. When I first begun to break the silence of that place,
where all things were as still as night, he heard me with his eyes, his ears
followed his mind, which I perceived was not then at leisure, as he was at
that time all things but himself; but having now at length recollected so much
strength as to breath a few horse sighs, for as then he wanted other language
to speak his misfortunes, so desperately had this idolatrous Lover fallen sick of
his Goddess. At length after he had bestowed on me an angry nod, for the
strangeness of my intrusion on the privacy of his thoughts, he started forth
into an unusual kind of furious madness, unclasping his arms, which before I
suppose could never have been untwined, he fell to beating and thumping of his
breast. I could not choose at that time, but be merrily conceited, that this
incensed rage of his, might arise from some displeasure he took, that his
Invention could not presently teem with some Anagram, as fruitful as his
Mistresses name. To be brief, I was amazed to think into how many strange
shapes this Passion of Love transforms us, what Owls and Monkies it makes of
us; in truth, the variety of antic tricks he played, together with the vain
apparitions, that questionless at that time peopled his brain, rendered him to
my thinking, the most unfit person that ever I saw for any humane converse: I
assure you, Ladies, so monstrous and fatal to the most eminent Heroes of the
world in all Ages, have the cruelties of your implacable Sex proved. Not to
detain your Ladyships any longer with the description, of this distracted
Lovers Herculian passions, by degrrees after he had a while held his hands,
with a little chafing of his temples, stopping of his ears, tweaking of his
nose, he came again to himself, and then crossing his breast, after a few
lamentable Ay mee's he removed from the tree, into which, till then, I thought
he had been ingrafted. It was now night, whereof he was so sensible, as also of
his late indisposition, that he requested my company with him out of the
Garden. As we walked, I discoursed the strangeness of his distemper, for I durst
not acknowledge his Love to be a disease, least I should have occasioned his
prejudice, so far, as for him to have esteemed it to have been incurable. We
agreed to go to the Tavern, where, after we had lustily quaft the Blood of the
Grape, I presented him with this Book of the Mysteries of Love, which, together
with clapping of warm trenchers to his Belly, so perfecty and speedily
recovered him, that within a few days after I met him in Bloomesbury, with
fresh Roses in his Cheeks, he looked as if his Soul were returned to its right
home again, probatum est. Thus have I given your fair Ladyships a large, but no
Empirical, relation of the cure of this mad Lover, without either casting of
his Urine, or any other Charms on his Mistress, except they are such as are
contained in this Book, the Witchcrafts of Eloquence, and the right Arts of
Wooing; which as I hear, have since taken her Fort in, and that they are now
happily married, I wish them all joy; only I thought fit in this my Epistle, to
give your coy Ladyships notice, what virtue this Volume has, to triumph over
your most Beautiful Disdains; to turn your Frowns into Smiles; your Angers into
Kisses; to repreive those whom you have destined for most bloody Sacrafices; to
metamorphose your Champion Cupid from a Boy to a Man, to give him his eyes
again, peruse this Book, bright Ladies, and commend it to any of your modest
Sex, that are troubled with the Greensickness of Love, they cannot fail of a
Remedy, it is Diana's own Receipt Book. To conclude; I do not desire that either
of the Sexes should take any tyrannous advantages over one another Affections,
neither would I bar them of their Frolicks; but that after the Youths have
played a while at Bo-peep, looked Babies in one another eyes, Hymen in his
saffron robe, has his torch light, may conduct them to their Marriage Beds:
which is the hearty wish, and has been the aim of these endeavors of your
Ladyships

Eternally obliged E. P.

A short Advertisement to the Reader, by way of introduction, for his better
understanding of the Mysteries of Eloquence and Complementing.
HAving already in my Epistle to the Coy Madams treated or rather traversed,
the passion of Love with a serious and light fancy, like Gallen and Donquixot,
mixed together, to please as well the Stoical Student, as the most airy and
fantastical Gallant: I have since thought it no less my duty to discourse of
these two other mysteries, of Eloquence and Complementing. This task I might
have evaded, since none of the former scriblers of Books, in this kind, ever
particularly undertook these Subjects, which I must either impute to their
simplicity or laziness. Courteous Reader, Eloquence is so absolutely necessary,
and pertinent to humane converse, that it cannot but be confessed by all
intelligent persons that in the management and conveyance even of reason it
self, it would be most expedient, that there should be so many Artifices and
Masteries together, with most subtle Conducts; for without them a man cannot so
well attain his ends. Hence it is that the Learned compare Eloquence to the
Chemists Elixar; it contains all qualities in it, yet it should not have one
perceiveable: it is not to be denied, but that this age is that which expects
that men should learn the Rhetoric from their own Genius; or as some
Naturalists writes of the Spider, that she weaves her web out of her own
bowels, or like our Enthusiasts, that pretend to inspirations. It were to be
wished Eloquence could be so attained, rather then that the Schools should so
manacle and fetter it with their old Maxims; but if these so pregnant persons
in their own imaginations did but rightly consider what Eloquence is in its
definition; How that it is a way of speech prevailing over those we have
designed to prevail over: and that it is so Etherial, or rather I cannot tell,
how Divine, that it depends not alone on the single Embroidry of words, but
there must be somewhat more in it; an excellent knowledge of men, deep and
studied acquaintances with their passions: a man must not only know very
perfectly the agitations of his own mind, but be seen and conversant in those
of others; otherwise it wants that which animates and breaths a fire, which
makes it both warm and shine. We say of Logic that it files and keels the
reason of a man, which otherwise had been blunt in the wedge and tongue, which
is the only distinction of a man from a bruit beast. The same may be said of a
person without behavior and good language, that he is but a mere motion, a
most sad spectacle. Indeed this is our misery, that though Eloquence be so
absolutely necessary, yet it is such a thing of it self, that though we make
use of our quickest conceits, we can rather wish for it then describe it in its
perfect Idea; the Grises of it having been so altered from time to time in all
Speeches and public Harrangues, in so much, that it cannot be amiss to
consider how the ancient Orators that lead the people whither they pleased,
were put to it, being forced to wrestle with the disadvantages of single
nature, so as at the last to divide and throw it into several Subjects, by
which they reigned over the minds of men, and did many strange things, the end
of Oratory being to persuade.

Thus having discoursed of Eloquence, I am now to descend to entertain some
thoughts of her fair subservient Handmaid, Complement. Civility is the most
refined Complement; for as Complements themselves do but serve to complete the
Gentry, so where they are thus tendered, they are always in Fashion; ever new,
ever acceptable; and as they entertain a grace in the wearer, so they deserve
an admiration from the beholder. And thus they have in all ages been received
for no less formal, then real accomplishments; and are held as most absolute
ornaments of Gentility. Complements were first intended to distinguish betwixt
the Civil and the Savage; Persons of Honor and Peasants, yea, to appropriate a
title of Prehemincy to such, who exceed others in grounds of Precept of
Morality; such as used not paintick Rhetoric, but expressed themselves
complete without singularity, that could love without flattery, discourse
without affection, that freed Courtly Ceremonies from dissimulation, and made
Virtue their Mistress; that knew what it was to protest in jest, and entertain
Suitors only for their Pastime. All wise people are sufficiently convinced,
that Complements consist not of Conges, Cringes, Salutes, Superficial
Discourses, foolish Repetitions or frivilous Extravagances; these are but the
shadows, which they that use forget the substance: whereas the attraction and
desert of a Complement consists very much in the gracefulness of the presence,
beautified and set forth with a modest and native comeliness; nor do I question
but these three Nations have many such noble and complete Ladies that prefer
the inside before the outside, the kernel before the shell; that make honor
the Lodestone, by which they daily draw near to perfection, their own proper
Center. Certain it is, that though our tongues, hands, and legs be the same, our
Elocution, Action, Gesture, and Posture are not the same; though managed in the
like manner by others, yet are they not always directed to the same ends, as
there are vast differences to be made betwixt Virtue and Vice. I cannot want
instances, the fantastical Amorist is one of those puppies that has them in a
continual practice; he forsooth will complement your very glove, worship and
sweeten every seam of it with the perfume of his discourse; he will take it for
an extraordinary favor but to be the porter of a Ladies Fan, whilst she pins on
her Mask: these kind of complementings among great persons are like chantings
among Beggars; only in use with the Mimicks and Buffons of our times, whose
behaviors deserve more derision then applause. I will not here squirt any more
ink at them, Courteous Reader, in my Preface to the youthful Gentry you shall
find something to this purpose inserted, which I accounted too improper for
this place. To draw to a Conclusion, the Court, and such emiminent places as
Hide Park, the Spring Garden, and the New Exchange, and set Meetings at Balls,
are esteemed the fittest Schools of Ceremony and Complement; where the most
select, as also the newest Fashions are always in request; where if discretion
be not wanting in the Courtier, he will not fail to confirm himself to the mode
and condition of the place that he is to exercise his Genius in. For
Complements do not suit with all places, nor with all sorts of men; it ill
beseems a Mechanic to play the Orator; that urbanity which becomes a Citizen,
would relish of too much curiosity in a Countryman; and that Complement which
gives proper grace to a Courtier, would cause derision if presented by a
Merchant or a Factor. The Statesman requires a graceful and grave posture,
whereas in ordinary affairs of Traffic, it were indiscretion to represent any
such state. Thus I might instance from the Madam to the Chambermaid, but that
I am resolved to trouble the Reader with no further Preadmonitions, the Series
of the ensuing Work will fully inform him in whatsoever other concernments have
been wanting in this Advertisement. Farewell.

THE MYSTERIES OF Love and Eloquence; OR, The Arts of WOOING and COMPLEMENTING,
etc.
The Mode of Hide Park.
MAdam, That free Interest which you have granted me in your Favor, honors me
with a boldness to give you an invitation this fair afternoon, to take the Air
in Hide Park.


Your most humble servant, Sir, I Will assure you, had you not come as you did,
you might perchance have found me there before you, for my Cousin here and I
were taking up a resolution to be jogging that way.


I Will assure you, Madam, your journey will not want its pleasure, beside that
of the season, if the Town news hold true.


I see you came, Sir, with a resolution not to be denied, having brought an
argument so persuasive to Women, as that of Novelty; but pray what is it?


Madam, they say, Sir Charles -- has put off his mourning-weeds, and appears
this day in the Park with a new Coach and Livery: they report he looks with an
amorous Countenance upon the young Lady -- to whom he intends, as they say, to
give to Treatment at the Spring Garden; so that if Businesses be well managed
on her side, it may chance to be a match. But, pray give me leave, I heard
lately that the old Countess -- is dead.


Very true, Madam, I was this morning at a Drapers shop in Paul's Churchyard,
and there came in her Steward to provide Four hundred pounds worth of Mourning.


Does it not bring a very great addition to my Lords Estate?


Doubtless Madam, a very considerable one; for she was always a near and
parcimonious Woman, and indeed was considerable for nothing else, but the
affection she bare him. I could tell you more, Madam, but I defer the rest for
discourse in the Coach.


In the Ring.
Coachman, keep the outside of the Ring, I think, Madam, that way will not be
so dusty. This is the voice of a Gentleman that would show a more then ordinary
care of his Mistress.

Much discourse cannot be expected from that restless motion of Wheels and
Horses, it being only a preparative for treatment talk; neither indeed in that
place of Observation, is more required, then only as occasion serves, to tell
your Lady, That is my Lord such a ones Coach; That Is my Lady such a one; That Is
Squire such a one. And then when opportunity offers it self, to say, Your
humble Servant; my Lord; Your most humble Servant, Madam. For though it be not
so great a sin, yet it is as great a Solecism, as to talk at Church; and they
shall be counted as shallow persons, that can give no account of what they have
seen here, as those that can remember nothing that they have heard spoken to a
Text. This is not without reason, for it being an impossibility for Ladies to
travel, it was thought fit that there should be a public Meeting of all sorts
of Societies and Habits, both Foreign and Domestique, that so those young and
tender Gallants might be spared the labor of going beyond Sea.

In the spaces among the Coaches there walk up and down Objects of Charity, and
Enticements to Liberality.

Beggars, and Fruiterers, who are bold Wenches, and by their own, well knowing
the disposition of other Women, with their Eyes fixed upon the Ladies, and
their Ware held up to the Gentlemen, they cry so as they may easily be heard,
My Lord, Will your Honor have any Civil Oranges!
Madam, Will your Honor buy a Basket of Cherries!
The Gentleman finds himself surpised, but knows not which to give, Oranges or
Cherries; yet at length remembering Oranges. how great whetters of the stomach
they are, and deeply considering the price of Cheesecakes, he resolves upon
Cherries.

Then quoth he, How do you sell your Cherries, good Woman? A Crown a Basket, my
Lord, quoth she; with which word being extremely pleased, he parts cheerfully
with his money (for who would not purchase Honor at any Rate) and then
presents his new bought treasure to his Lady in these words:

Madam, I do here present you with these First Fruits of the Year, which would
have been due from Romona her self, had she not forgot the duty that she owes
your perfections.


The Lady makes a short reply, well knowing the end of his kindness, which was
to stop her mouth.

Whether Cherries are diuretic or no, I will not here dispute; however, the
Coachman presently after has a command given him to wheel off, and the Lady
finds in her self a disposition to walk on foot toward the Brakes: yet she is
not so much tormented, but that she can talk; which is commonly much to this
effect:

Really, Sir, I have not seen so great an appearance of company in the Park all
this Spring before.


Madam, it was the luster of your person drew 'em hither, and doubtless having
now seen you, they will have no cause to repent their coming.


Sir, you have a strong faith to speak so highly of one whom you have known no
otherwise then in the formalities of a Visit? I wish I that know my self
better, knew my self so well as to confirm your Encomiums.


Madam, that lies not on your part to do, for wherefore has Nature granted Man
to excel in the invention of Language, but that she would not so far deprave
the dignity of the Female, which is her own Sex, as to make them the
vainglorious praisers of themselves; and it is retaliation sufficient in you,
to favor us with the acceptance of our Labors. I confess I am fallen upon a
subject that I could dwell upon; I could make a particular harange in the
praise of every part that builds up the noble Frame of your Body, but I am put
to silence by that little Bird which warbles tidings of more concernment to
your ears. Do you not hear the Nightingale Madam?


I do, Sir. And indeed it is the first time I have heard her this Spring. They
say it is lucky to unmarried people to hear her before the Cuckoo.


Doubtless then, Madam, the end that brought her hither, was to bring you that
good fortune.


Sir, It cannot be but that you must have a greater share in her happy
Auguries, who better deserve them.


I should then, Madam, deserve your self, which is the happiest Augury I can
expect. Pardon me, Madam, if you have opened my mouth to utter so great crime;
for indeed I could say, I love you, but that I fear lest you should frown me
into despair for such a high presumption.


Believe it, Sir, my ambition never aspired to such thoughts, as you would fain
put into me; but if you have idly scattered a little respect upon a person no
way meriting, doubtless a few days and another Object wIll soon randezvouze
your Passions another way.


Madam, could any protestation avail to fix my Constancy in your belief, you
should soon command me to seal my prostrate Vows upon the Ground on which you
tread; yet since that cannot be, I only beg this on my knees, That you will
still count me your Servant, whom it shall suffice to be honored with that
Liberty which you have hitherto given, till time shall discover my immutable
Affection, and the profitable Testimonies of my Obedience.


The Gentleman resolves now to strike while the Iron is hot, and to win her
with kindness; for which end he carries her to the Lodge, and throws away forty
or fifty shillings to please her appetite; and to show her that he was not so
much covetous of his Money, as of her Good Will: He breaks up Cheesecakes, cuts
up Tarts, and calls in for Wine and Sugar, as if his Mistress had a Legion in
her belly; though his observance is such that he eats nothing himself, for fear
she should have a desire to any particular plum in his morsel, In drinking, he
sweetens her Affection with a great deal of Sugar with an humble obeisance,
wishing it were Nectar for her sake. She cannot be so unmannerly as not to
drink to him, there being no body else in the room, which he takes for a very
great kindness, and wishes for the capacious throat of the great Giant, that he
might swill up a whole pipe for joy. The Wine inspires him, and produces many
extravagant Vows, and sundry Comments on her Hands, Lips, Eyes, and Forehead;
which beget an host of Comparisons, putting such a scorn and contempt upon the
Sun and Moon, as if they were but mere Candles of Ten in the pound, subject to
be capt by every common Extinguisher. At length, emboldned by a surreptitious
vapor, upon the merits of his Oblation, he craves a kiss, which being granted,
with a high satisfaction he calls to pay. This is the meek spirited Lover. But
that bold Mamaluck Yclep'd, a Hector, courts his Lady more daringly.

Madam, cries he, By Heaven I love you, and then he falls down with a
submissive reverence, and kisses the hem of her Petticoat; then arising up
again, he proceeds, Madam there is no person living bears you a greater respect
then I, or carries more affection for you in his bosom then my self; make trial
of it, Madam, and though you bid me die, I Will do it willingly.

He comes into the Park, like the son of Death, armed with the accouterments of
Mortality, Sword and Pistol? he stands not much upon the nicety of Habit so his
Belt be not out of fashion. He is generally known in the Ring, and every one
salutes him by the name of Tom or Jack such a one, whose kindness he requites
with an Oath, and an Humble Servant: and so having done his Evening Exercise,
he retires to the Lodge, where he spends his money with such a liberality, as
if he bore malice to his fortunes.

The next variety is that of the Horse-Races, the general Terms of which Art,
are expressed in these following Dialogues.
1. Gent. In good faith, Sir, that Horse must have wings that beats me.


2. Sir, your confidence may deceive you, you will ride with a Jocky that has
Horsemanship.


1. Pish, that is but your opinion; I Will tell ye what I say to ye, were it in my
power, I Would lay the World upon my Mare, that she should run with the Devil for
a hundred pieces.


The Gentlemen to the Jocky.
1. How now, what do think Jocky?


2. The crack of the whole Field is against you.


Jocky. Let'm crack and be hanged till their lungs ache.


Gentlemen.
1. What weight?


2. I think he has the Heels.


3. All that you are to do, Jocky, is to get the start.


Jocky. I Will warrant you, if I get within his quarters once, let me alone.


After Starting.
1. Twenty pounds to fifteen.


2. It Is done with you.


3. Forty pounds to thirty.


Lord. Done, done, I Will take the odds.


1. My Lord, I hold as much.


L. Not so, Sir.


1. Forty pounds to twenty.


L. Done, done.


2. You have lost all, my Lord, and 'twere a million.


L. In your imagination, well, who can help it.


2. Crop had the start, and keeps it.


The Loser.
Gentlemen, you have a fine time to triumph, it is not your Odds that makes you
win.


Upon the fatal disaster that befell the Gallants upon May Day last in
Hide-Park.
THe last sad May Day know ye not?
It was a fatal day, God wot,
Which gay new Clothes did all bespot
With mire and dirt.
Much might be said of other days first,
For which that Year ought to be cursed,
That such inhumane Traitors nursed
To do men hurt.
Sad to the Romans was that day
When they from Hannibal ran away,
Losing their gold Rings in the fray,
He did so rout 'em.
Was not dark Monday sad do you think,
When Phoebus looked as black as ink,
'Twas all one whether men did wink
Or stare about 'em.
That day had made your hearts to ache,
If Faux's plot had hap'd to take,
Of which the Crumbs of Comfort make
A large recital.
And that sad day my heart does nettle
When Fire on London Bridge did settle,
And Thames boiled under like a kettle:
Men read at Whitehall.
By the vast Flame: Though at this hour,
I blame not fire, but a great shower,
Which Heaven did on clean linen power,
And Blades a horseback.
For all that are but worth a groat,
On May Day will in fine clothes show't,
Some borrow a Belt, and some a loose coat,
That money in purse lack.
First the clear Sunshine did invite
The Lord, the Lady, and the Knight,
Who all in Satins richly dight,
Did sit in the boot.
The Race-nags followed more then ten,
Upon their backs sat Gentlemen,
They never were so washed as then
From head to foot.
In suits, from France, made a la mode,
Upon their Barbaries they rode;
Oh had their money been bestowed
In pious uses:
It Would have built an Hospital in the Strand,
For Gentlemen that sell their Land,
Or a Poet a week in Sack maintained,
With all his Muses.
To copy out these Fashions then,
For Male and Female Citizen,
The Tailor came, as fine as when
He went to woe,
Next came those pillars of the Nation,
Those polishers of Education,
Hight men oth' Kit, all in the fashion
From top to toe.
Phoebus withdrew his beams to see
Such a deal of bravery,
And scorning thus outvied to be
By low mortality:
He put on's cap, cries bonas noches,
Then pist, and flung it all in the Coaches;
Quoth he, I Will meet with these Cocaloches
For all their great quality:
The Barber, Tailor, and Gentleman eke,
They rid each one a tree to seek;
They were so sad they could not speak,
But sighed at each other.
They looked on the ground with great regret,
They looked on the sky, and cried not yet!
Then for being born, their stockins to wet,
Each curses his mother.
But when their hats began to drip,
Then desperation made them weep,
And so they put on with spur and whip
To London:
But, Oh the saddle of velvet blue,
And stockins of most glorious hew,
They now were not fit for the stall of a Jew:
Some men were undone,
Then came another in a sad case,
With a handful of dirt dashed in his face,
Which he wiped with his band of Flanders lace,
Who could him blame,
His Feather, that so gay of late
Adorned his head, lay now so flat,
You Would think it were crept into his hat
For very shame.
But as they passed quite through the street,
The Alley-women glad to see it,
From stalls and cellars did them greet
With many a flout.
Most patiently they passed along,
They took no notice who did'm wrong:
But I must make an end of my Song.
The candle's out.
The Mode of Balls.
The Dancing Master.
Come stir your selves, Maidens, 'twill bring a fresh color into your cheeks,
rub hard, and let the Ladies see their faces in the boards, you may lose
nothing by it, if you be ready to light 'm out of doors your selves.


And by the Mass that will I do, and make'um such fine dops and curtsies in my
best Wastecoat, that they shall not choose but take notice of me; and Sarah
shall dance a North country Jigg before'um too; I warrant it will please the
Ladies better then all your French whisks and frisks; I had rather see one
freak of jolly Milkmaids, then all the story that will be here to night.


That Is your ignorance, Bess.


Ignorance, I know not what you call ignorance, but I am sure there is one Dance
I have been longing to dance this ten years, and I can get no body to dance it
with me in the way of honesty.


It Is a thousand pities Bess, yet I Will search among my acquaintance, It may be
my chance to do thee a kindness; what Trade do thou love best?


Any trade, any trade, Sir, I Will not confine you; beggars you know must never
be their own choosers.


Well, Bess, I Will do my endeavor, in the mean time fetch the perfumes and fume
every corner, that there may be nothing wanting but our Noble company, to make
the room a perfect paradise.


At the entry of the Ladies, the Master of the Ball thus accosts them one by
one.
Madam, You have afforded me an honor not to be requited, in granting me the
happiness of your company this day.


To another.
Madam, You Are welcome to this poor habitation, though your presence has so far
transported me, that I find my self unfurnished with words to express my
gratitude for this high favor


To another.
Madam, I kiss your fair hands, and beg pardon for the rudeness of the
Invitation which I sent you this morning; But this I can say, you will not find
your self the only sufferer through my unmannerliness.


To another.
Madam, Your most humble servant, it is but just that I should give you a kind
and hearty welcome, since your presence adds so much to my good fortune.


To another.
Madam, This civility has eternally obliged me; I confess there is no
recompense lies in my power, and therefore I shall recommend to you these noble
Ladies, to receive from them the amends, which my unworthiness is incapable to
render you.


To another.
My best wishes come along with you, Madam; really, you have now done
meakindness answerable to your own goodness in honoring me with your presence
before this fair society.


To another.
Madam, I bless my Stars that have bestowed on me the happiness of your fair
company; I assure you, had the Queen of Love her self descended to visit this
my poor habitation, she could not have been more welcome.


To the Music.
Come, why is our Music silent all this while, has it no voice to bid these
fair Ladies welcome.


To a Lady taking her forth to Dance.
Madam, the ambition which I have to wait on you in a Country Dance, emboldens
me to invite you from your seat.


Sir, You have obliged me to obey you, for I am engaged to please this noble
company, though I fear my performance will give them but small satisfaction.


To a Gentleman, desiring him to take out his Lady.
Sir, This Dance requires four, and therefore be pleased to engage a Lady to
your assistance.


The Applause at the end of the Dance.
Lady, You needed not have made any Apology, for doubtless the Cyprian Bowers
never knew so much delight when the Graces themselves danced there.


Sir, I dare not contest with your more fluent Language, and therefore must
submit, though unwillingly, to your commendations.


At their going to dance Country Dances.
Ladies, will you be pleased to dance a Country Dance or two, for it is that
which makes you truly sociable, and us truly happy; being like the Corns of a
Song, where all the parts sing together.


To his Lady, desiring her to name her Dance.
Lady, will you please to call for your own Dance, or will you lay your
commands on me to name it.


An offer to give over.
Ladies, when you please to give your selves rest, command us to leave off; for
you must pardon us, if the desire we have to continue our own happiness make us
unmanerly.


At giving over.
Ladies we must confess that we have too much presumed upon your goodness, and
therefore we shall rather choose to quit our own Felicity, then to make your
Recreation tiresom


Answer.
Believe not, Sir, that we can be tired where the Content we find in the
company gives new refreshment to our Spirits, so that we should be willing
still to be a part of your delight, did not the late hour of the Night, or
rather the early hour of the Morning put a period to our mirth.


Return of Thanks.
Ladies, You see I have brought you into a rude Chamber; I must beg your
pardon, that I can give no entertainment answerable to the pains that you have
taken to honor me, and grace this mean habitation of mine.


Answer.
Sir, There needs no such Apologies, for in earnest, you have so far engaged
us, that I believe, that there is no Lady here but will think her self obliged
to take from hence a happy occasion, to be the publibk relater of your
Nobleness and Civility.


There was now a general cessation of the Feet from labor, only that small
member the Tongue was not a little put to it, to express such Complements as
the Brain continually hammered out for its delivery: Many high Strains are
spoken, many pathetical Sentences are uttered, with all varieties of Congies,
Bows, and Kissing of the Hand that may be. But now in come the Sweetmeats and
Burnt Wine, as the reward of their great pains, which they tipple with great
alacrity, as being all very thirsty. After all this, to give a little more rest
to the Ladies weary limbs, they all take there seats, and a motion is made to go
to Questions and Commands, which is by all unanimously consented to.

Questions and Commands.
The Question was put,

Whether Colatinus were not a cuckold for all that Lucretia stabbed her self?

To which the Lady answered in the Affirmative.

It was demanded,

Whether of the two wrought the most excusable Love-cure upon themselves, Hero
that drowned her self, or Phillis that hanged her self?

It was answered,

Phillis that hanged her self; because it may be the nature of some women to
love hanging so well, that they had rather hang by the neck then not hang at
all.

It was asked,

Whether it were more dangerous for Ladies to dance upon the Ropes, or to dance
upon the Ground?

The Reply was,

To dance upon the Ground, because that sport has been the occasion that
several Ladies have caught many a shrewd fall.

It was demanded,

Why women are many times more quick witted then men?

The Answer was.

Because they eat so much salt.

It was required,

Why the Poets do so much extol Cupid for his shaft, being but a Boy;

Answer was made,

That Venus bid them do it upon her reputation, who knew better what belonged
to a Page then they did.

It was asked,

Why Maiden-heads was so much prized?

It was replied,

Because a man might then be sure there was no danger.

It was asked,

Who was the fittest man to marry a flat nosed woman?

The Reply was made,

One that had a Roman nose.

The Question was put,

Why women used to spit when they heard men speak bawdy?

It was answered,

Because their teeth water.

It was demanded,

What was the humor of those people that dyed for Love?

The Answer was,

That they loved to dye.

It was demanded of a Lady,

Whether she had rather marry a Fool or a Wiseman?

Answer was made,

A Wise man, unless it were such a Fool as would let her do what she listed.

The Question was,

Why women are said to be in subjection to men,

The Answer was,

Because they lie undermost.

The Question was put,

Whether a wise, beautiful, or wealthy woman were to be chosen?

The Reply was drawn from the comparison of a Wallnut;

For they said, Beauty was like the rind, presently peeled off; that a woman's
Wit was quickly cracked; and that therefore Wealth, which was like the kernel,
and brought substance along with it, was to be preferred as best of all.


Their Commands consisted more of Vnluckiness then Wit.
A Lady was commanded to put her busk in a Gentleman's codpiss. Another Lady was
commanded to pull it out, which occasioned some sport, for she laying hold upon
something else, after two or three pulls gave over, excusing her disobedience,
by pretending that the busk was tackt to the Gentleman's belly. Another Lady was
commanded to lead a Gentleman three times about the Room by the nose with her
teeth, which being done, He was commanded to wipe off the wet with the lappet
of her Smock. Another Lady is commanded to tell, how often she opened her
back-gates to let forth the captivated wind of her belly since she came into
the Room. Another Lady is commanded to tell, if she have not a wart, like that
in her face, upon such or such secret part of her body. Another Lady was
commanded to tell, whether she had her maidenhead or no. Another was commanded
to tell, who she loved best in that Room. Another was commanded to tell, how
many times her Husband had enjoyed her.
The Gentlemen were commanded,
One to untie a Ladies garter. Another, to kiss her bare knee. Another, to tell
how many of Aretines postures he had tried. Another, to tell who he lay with
last. Another, to tell how many Mistresses he had, and which he loved best.
Another was commanded to tell how many children he had that he durst not own.
Another was commanded to tell how many times he could lie with a Woman in one
night.
By this time it is very late, and they resolve all to depart, which makes the
Master of the Ball put on all his gravity, with which he thus accosts his
departing guests.
Ladies, Since the time of parting is now unhappily arrived, I am now to give
you thanks for that great kindness which you have showed me; but seeing I want
expressions to perform so great a work, I shall endeavor to supply my defect
of words in deeds, beseeching you to command from me what testimonies you
please of my duty and service upon all occasions.


Reply.
Sir, we cannot in modesty require any such debt from a person who has so much
engaged us by his favors; and so all happiness attend you till our next
meeting.


Pardon me Ladies, I shall wait on you to your Coaches, and then commit you to
the protection of your own goodness, and of these Gentlmen who have the happy
fortune to attend you home.


An address to a Company of Ladies.
A. Ladies, I beseech you that my coming may be no interruption to your
discourse; though it would be no small happiness to me, to partake of your
pleasant entertainments.


B. Sir, our discourses are not of much importance; we meet often among our
selves, and therefore we do willingly quit them, to enjoy your better company.


A. Truly, Ladies, he that is in this company cannot want an Object to
entertain himself; only it is my imperfection, that I have not language enough
at command to express the zeal which I have to honor and serve your
perfections,


B. Sir, we dare not acknowledge any such thing in us, and therefore, if you
please, take some other subject on which to employ your Eloquence; you will
otherwise make us believe that you go about to play upon us.


A. Give me leave to tell ye, Ladies, that if your modesty will not let you
aver so real a truth, yet the respect which I bear to Ladies, commands me not
only to acknowledge, but to be a witness thereof.


B. Sir, we beseech you not to take so difficult a task upon you, before
question be made of what you affirm.


A. It is good to be modest, when we speak in our own commendations, or of the
vices and imperfections of another; but when we speak in the praise of a
friend, we ought not to conceal any thing of the truth.


B. Sir, you place among your commendations, things that we are not guilty of,
rather fancying and imagining such virtues and perfections which may become
your eloquence to exalt, then believing any such in us.


A. Ladies, you would force me to an injurious respect; but it is as impossible
for me, to forget your deserts, as to forget my devotions toward you.


B. Sir, it is your aim to overcome us with the excess of your courtesy: yet
believe it, Sir, that there is not any one of us, that does not think her self
highly honored, if she may bear the title of your most humble servant.


A. Ladies you would make me to despair, in seeking to beat down that honor
which is your due. However, I shall not cease to admire your perfections; being
sorry that I have not merit enough to render my obedience worthy your
acceptance.


To enter into Discourse with a Lady being in Company.
A. Lady, here is a very fine appearance of fair and honorable persons, and
indeed I cannot but esteem my self extremely happy in meeting with them, to
participate of the content that now dwells here; but more particularly in
having the happiness to see and know you, as being a person in whom all
perfections imaginable are so illustrious.


B. Sir, the character which you have given of this Company is very fine; you
could not wish for persons more accomplished, nor find more honest content in
any other converse. But your favor, Sir, is too excessive, to attribute such
great praises to her that does so little merit them, and which in comparison to
others, has no one virtue to render her considerable.


A. Madam, your modesty makes your speak to your own disadvantage, and it may
be permitted to you; but if I should consent to what you say, it would be a
great fault in me; or if I should dissemble a truth which is so apparent to the
eyes of the whole world, I should render my self altogether unworthy to behold
so fair an object, should I not know how to admire the wonders and graces of
your beauty; the luster whereof, your modest expressions are not able to
reclipse. For my part, I cannot conceal how great a sway you bear over my
affections, so that there is nothing in my power, that I do not freely dedicate
to your service.


B. Sir, the more high you are in your expressions, the more am I subject to
abate of the praises which you so liberally bestow upon me; in regard Heaven
has not been so bountiful of its graces toward me. And therefore not judging
my self worthy the favors which you heap upon me, I humbly entreat you, Sir,
to change your discourse.


A. Lady, though at present, you refuse me the honor of serving you, yet I
shall not cease to seek all occasions to make the truth and sincerity of my
words apparent.


An Address, to make known an Affection for his Mistress.
A. Madam, among all the days of my life I must account this the happiest
above all the rest, wherein I had the honor first to know you.


B. Sir, if I did know any thing in my self, worthy your merits, I should
esteem my self obliged to employ it to your honor: But there being in me
nothing but weakness, and imperfection, I do not imagine how the knowledge of
me can any way contribute to your content, much less to your well being.


A. Madam, I see so many perfections; that I find my self obliged to honor
them to the utmost of my power, and to offer you my most humble service.


B. Sir, this is your courtesy and favor, that seek to qualify my defects,
only to show the excellent endowments that nature has bestowed on you.


A. Pardon me, Madam, it is the enchanting force of your worth and virtues,
which oblige me, not only to honor and serve you, but also to seek an
interest in your graces.


B. Sir, all that a Daughter of Honor owes to a Person of Merit, you have
already at your devotion; I respect your qualities, admire your virtues, and
wish you a happiness answerable to the nobleness of your designs.


A. Believe it, Madam, that my desires are good, and that my affection, if your
wishes flow from a sincere intention to oblige me, is the most happy that ever
was in the world.


B. Pardon me, Sir, I have not so piercing an apprehension to understand the
meaning of your intentions; that which I say is upon no other account, only to
give you the honor which is due to you.


It is true, Madam, I do you wrong, to go about, to make you believe, that
which I have never made apparent by any certain proof; However, that shall not
hinder me from telling you, that your perfections have so far incaptivated my
senses and affection, that I have resolved neither to love nor serve any other,
but your self. I therefore only entreat you, to esteem my affection real, and
to perfect your own wishes.


B. Certainly, Sir, I cannot believe that you would set your affection upon a
person so inconsiderable. It suffices me to have the honor to know you, and I
desire that your good fortune may guide you to some person more worthy your
esteem.


A. Madam, I have not so far forgot my self, as to forget your merits and
perfections. My resolution is unfeigned, to serve you to the utmost of my
power, and your refusal diminishes nothing of my affection; only take it for
granted, that I desire to be your servant.


Sir, I am not Mistress of my self, and for that reason cannot accept of your
offer; but if you shall find, that the affection, which you say you bear me, is
well liked of by my Parents, I shall esteem my self, very much honored in your
love, and shall, as far as honor will permit me, do any thing to assure you of
my good will.


Lady, you do infinitely oblige me, for which I return you many thanks; I shall
seek all occasions to obtain the leave of your Parents, in the mean while honor
me with your command, and suffer me to kiss your hand.


Sir I am your very humble Servant.


Addresses of Salutation.
Save you fair Lady, all health and your own wishes be upon you.


All the toys the Gods delight in, wait on you, fairest.


Ans. Sir, I should be ungrateful not to wish you a share in them.


By your leave Lady, may my boldness prove pardonable.


Good morrow to you Sir, to meet you was a happiness that I did not dream of.
But tell me how it is with you?


Well, Sir, at present, and I hope always shall be so, to do you service.


Save you Sir, you are most fortunately met.


Lady, The pleasure of this sweet morning attend you.


On her Face.
You are the beauty without parallel; in your Face all the Graces, and in your
Mind all the Virtues are met: he that looks upon your mild Aspect, were it the
most savage creature, would derive a new Nature from your Beauty.


On her Eyes and Lips.
That Eye was Juno's, those Lips were once the Queen of Loves, that Virgin
Blush was Diana's: Thus, Madam, You have a Donative from every Deity.


On her Beauty.
Apollo has given you his orient Brightness; Venus her curious Shape; Jupiter
his high and stately Forehead; the God of Eloquence his flowing Speech: and all
the Female Deities have showed their Bounties and Beauties on your Face.


On her Hair.
Her Hair is like the Beams that adorn Apollo's head.


Her Locks
Soft as new spun Silk, curling with such a natural wantonness, as if they
strove to delight the Fancy of her that wears them.


Her Forehead
Made a stately prospect, and showed like a fair Castle commanding some goodly
Country.


Her Face
So full of majesty, that Aurora blushes to see a countenance brighter then her
own. Her Face is full of Sunshine.


Her Looks
Have more entertainment then all the vain pomp which the Persians ever taught
the world.


Her Eyes
Dart Lightning through the Air. The Stars borrow new light from your more
radiant Eyes. They are able to grace the Heavens, and beautify the Sky in the
clearest night. They are Natures richest Diamonds set in foils of polisht Ivory.


Her Smiles
Are so graceful and full of comfort, that with them she is able to revive a
dying Lover.


Her Cheeks
Show like Lawn spread upon Roses. Nature painted the color thereof in the
most glorious Tulips. They are slips of Paradise, not to be gathered but
wondered at.


Her Breath
So sweet, that the Arabian Odours seem to borrow their excellency from thence.
It expires more sweet Odours then issued from the palm trees in Paradise.


Her Lips
Are like the full ripe Cherry, which when they open, discover a treasury
greater then that of the Indian Ivory.


Her Chin
Shows Ilke a piece of pure and polisht Crystal, which the God of Love
delights to uphold with his soft hand.


Her Tongue
Is tipped with such a fire and powerful art, as might tame the most rebellious
spirit.


Her Brow
Is Cupids Bow, most sweetly bent, to shoot his Darts against every heart.


Her Neck
Of such a whiteness as exceeds the unsull'd Snow.


Her Words
Invade the weakened senses, and overcome the heart.


Her Voice
So charming, that it has power to do more then ever Spirits or Orpheus did;
should the holy Churchmen use it, it would tie up the nightly, without the
addition of more exorcism.


Her Arms
Are fit to embrace a King.


Her Hands
Soft and smooth, the violet Veins whereof run along like Mines of Turkoeses.


Her Breasts
Are two mountains of pure Snow, from the two Fountains whereof, Cupid himself
sucks Nectar.


Briefly, in the Abstract of her Self.
She comprehends whatsoever can be imagined, or wished for in the Idea of a
Woman; She is so heavenly a piece, that when Nature had wrought her, she lost
her needle, like one that never hoped to work again any so fair and lively a
creature.


An Address of Courtship to his Mistress.
Lady, My vital breath runs coldly through my veins, I am sick for your Love,
dearest Lady; neither is there any thing, but your own heart, can heal me:
believe me also, fairest of Women, there is nothing beneath the Moon, but your
frown, can grieve me.


Sir, Methinks this is a strange fit.


Lady, Count not my love light, because it is sudden; for By Cupids Bow, I
swear, I never knew true Love till now.


Sir, I entreat you not to wrong your self, and me; your love is violent, and
soon will have a period; for that is the most perfect love, which loves for
ever.


Such love is mine, believe me, divinest Beauty, for although men use to lie,
yet do I speak truth; and therefore, Madam, give me sentence either of life, or
of a speedy death; can you affect so mean a person?


Truly Sir, I should deny my thoughts, to give you an absolute denial, yet must
I not turn disloyal to former Promises, and therefore let this suffice, I
cannot wrong my friend.


Then here my love must end, and in your presence thus for love I die.


Nay, hold Sir, these are soul killing passions, I had rather wrong my friend,
then that you should wrong your self


Love me dear soul, or else my death is but delayed; my Vow is fixed in Heaven,
and no fear shall move me: for my life is a death, that tortures me, unless you
love me.


Give me then but a little respite, and I will resolve you.


Alas, Madam, my heart denies it; my blood is violent, now or else never love
me. Love me, and both Art and Nature at large shall strive to be profuse in
ravishing thy sense. I will entice Dalliance from thee with my smiles, and I
will steal away thy heart with my chaste kisses,


Well, Sir, I am yours then from all the world; your wit and your person have
entranced my soul.


I kiss thee, Dearest, for that breath; and know that thou have now joined thy
self to one whose life rests only in thy sight.


To discourse concerning the noise of a Match.
Sir, I am very glad to meet with you, were it for no other reason, but to give
you joy.


Sir, Your company is always a thing most acceptable to me, and your wishes
cannot be other then very fortunate; yet, if you please, pray let me understand
why you wish me so much felicity, there being nothing new that I know of in my
condition.


Sir, You dissemble that which is well known to many, and which has been told
me some few days since.


Pray Sir, do the favor to tell me what it is, for I can neither think nor
imagine.


Sir, They say that you intend to marry in this Town.


Truly, Sir, it is the first news that I have heard of any such thing.


I can assure you, Sir, those that told me, believe that they know very well;
and they take upon them to report many particulars.


Pray Sir, be pleased to tell me, to whom, and what are the good Conditions of
this Marriage; perchance the person and the advantages may be such, that I may
speedily advise with my self; and as speedily resolve.


Why should you do so, Sir? Would you marry out of your Country, far from your
friends, and distant from all conveniences; obliging your self to quit the
sweet presence of your kindred, or else to bring a strange Woman among them,
which of what House or Quality soever she be, either will her self be despised,
or bring envy upon you.


Sir, You have not answered my question, but instead thereof have made a kind
of sophistical digression.


I shall therefore come now more close to the matter; the young Lady is the
daughter of M.N. to whom her Mother left a very fair Estate, besides a very
fair Portion which her father intends to bestow upon her.


Sir, You have told me so much that you make my mouth water; I know her Father
well, he is a Gentleman of worth and honor; the young Lady is Fair, Wise, and
Rich, which are three good qualities: And truly I do not so much mislike her,
but that if I thought I had so much interest in her Affections, as that I
should be master of them for asking, I would run the hazard of sending one
packet.


Surely, Sir, you must know something, I am told that you do not speak the
truth, dissemble the matter as well as you can.


Believe it, Sir, nothing to any such purpose has been so much as mentioned by
me. Those that report this, are persons that take all occasions to babble, and
urge the least appearances of a thing for certainties: and certainly this
rumor comes from my frequenting often the places thereabouts, or because that
now and then I go to see her Father.


Sir, That may be very likely; but it is very incredible but that there must be
something in it: you know there is no smoke but there is some fire.


Truly, Sir, I do not wonder at all at it; for we must give the world leave to
talk.


But do you believe you should do well to engage your self in a business of
such importance, on which, not only your fortune, but the content of your
Parents depends.


Be confident, Sir, that I was never counted a rash person, yet I have such an
assurance in the paternal care and wisdom of my friends, that if any advantage
did present it self in my behalf, they would not stick to quit some part of
their content for my good.


Sir, You have fully satisfied me, and if there be any thing begun already, I
wish you all happiness and content.


Several Addresses of perfect Courtship.
Lady, Who are inspired with all the praises that the world can bestow upon
your sex, I am come to offer you my service, which you may at present only call
obedient, hoping that your better knowledge thereof will style it faithful.


Truly, Sir, I think that fame is more favorable to me then truth, seeing that
all that which is published concerning me proves so false; and therefore you
have reason to present me your feigned service, in obedience to my feigned
merits.


Madam, You wrong your Beauty, which being so great, can work no other designs
in men, but those of truly honoring you.


Sir, This confirms my former opinion, for seeing my self without Beauty, of
which you cannot be ignorant, I must necessarily be unprovided of all those
Services that depend thereon.


Madam, I fear I should sin against the truth, should I put my self to the
trouble to make you see them; it is a thing so visible of it self, that by
endeavoring to demonstrate it by words, I should presume to assist your
judgment.


Sir, I find that you are easily able to overcome my Rhetoric, but not my
Belief.


Madam, I am confident to gain this advantage by showing the proofs of my
Obedience, that men will condemn your misbelief, to authorize my true sayings.


Sir, Such kind of words as these, are usual in this age, which promise always
a great deal of Service, but performs little but outward Complement.


Madam, it is very ordinary to swear the same words, but a thing very
extraordinary to make them afterward appear to be truth: But that which may
assure you that I do not walk the common path, is, That I know your Beauty to
be such, as is only to be served by knowledge, not by imtation; which makes my
Design glorious, and my Enterprise noble, that waits on such an Object.


Sir, I know not how you can call this an Enterprise, since your Design is more
easy then courageous; and a noble Enterprise has always difficulties that
opose it.


Madam, My resolution to serve you is so magnanimous, that there can no ill
fortune attend upon it; for if you do make the end happy, it will be always an
honor to my courage, to have, and to pretend to your accomplished Graces.


Sir, Since you do establish your content upon unhappiness, your hopes, cannot
deceive you much; for if it do deceive you, it will be in making you happy.


Madam, I can easily count it an honor to serve you, as being obliged by your
merit, and my obedience.


Sir, I shall never counsel a generous soul to stop at such Designs, since his
resolution is so low, that infallibly both the Design must fail, and Repentance
ensue.


Madam, That which animates me more to do you service, is this, That I shall
receive this honor from the Enteprize, that there is no small difficulty in
performing it, with that perfection, as it requires.


Sir, If you do give such proofs, as you offer, of service, you shall be
acknowledged through the whole Empire of Love.


Madam, Since I have the courage to pretend to the merit of your fair Graces, I
shall have a care to keep my self constant; and certainly it behooves me, there
being so strict a watch over me.


The Departure.
Adieu dear Beauty; it behooves me to be banished from you, that I may dispose
my Soul to esteem you the more; one way, by the loss of your presence, another
way, by recollecting the thoughts of past happiness.


Truly Sir, you have very great reason to make use of your Fancy, when you
would praise me; for Fancy and Thoughts will forge imagenary Merits, where your
Eyes and Judgment will find the contrary.


Madam, You do very well make use of a new custom, I believe you would persuade
your self to speak false, that you might have an advantage over one, that
breath nothing but the truth; is it possible that such a vanity should make you
offend that which I honor, and that which you possess. Truly Madam, you will
gain nothing by it, but the pleasure of fine words.


Sir, Call them rather true, and then you will speak truth your self.


You continue, Madam, acquiring new glories to your persuasions, by maintaining
Paradoxes against your Beauty, which will be always perfect in it self, though
not in your opinion.


Sir, If I am perfect, I do know my self; perfection being the knowledge of
ones self: since therefore I do know my self, I may be permitted to style my
self very poor in Merits. But you would persuade the contrary, to exercise your
parts, knowing that it is a greater honor to vanquish the Truth, then to
sustain it.


Madam, The design which I have to serve you, may give you testimony sufficient
of that power which you have to dispose of me; In one moment I saw you enjoying
a thousand wonders, and in a moment I was sensible of a thousand torments of
Love; and being capable of nothing but Admiration, methought that this Beauty
was in the world for no other end, but deserve, and for me to be obedient to. I
see no reason, Fairest, that the belief which I have taken with the clearest
judgment that I have of your Beauty, should be swallowed up by your
misbelieving opinions.


Sir, They say, that contrariety does animate persons the more; and therefore I
shall be silent, that I may hinder these unjust Praises; perhaps you will have
pity on my feeble resistance, and will be weary of conquering so easily.


Madam, It Is rather my self that ought to keep silent, being so lately in an
astonishment; but as for you; Madam, it would be a sin against your fair lips,
whose words are Oracles.


Then pray, Sir, why do you not believe that which I say, for all Oracles are
truth?


But why will you, Madam, by persuasion hinder the belief which I have taken
with sight and judgment. For I will believe your Beauty against all your
unbelief and undervaluings: and also continue the Service which I have sworn
you, against any thing that shall hinder it. My Attempt also has promised my
Design, that future Ages shall admire your Merit and my Servitude; and record
us as the most faithful Lovers in Cupid's Dominions.


I fear, Sir, that time will alter this opinion.


Madam, Time can do nothing against that which Love has ordained; he is the
master of Fortune, and an enemy to change. But wherefore this superfluity of
speech? It is better to believe by the force of Words, then by the force of
Persuasion; and therefore at this time, it is more necessary for me, to demand
of you Remedies for this remove, the apprehension whereof makes me endure this
present pain.


Sir, It behooves you to forget your Design, and you will avoid the Pain that
will follow, and also the Repentance.


No, Madam, I will keep the memory of my Design eternally, and shall always see
painted before me the glory of my Enterprise. Adieu great Beauty, you shall
never cast your eyes downward, but you shall perceive, lying at your feet, him
that admires you; nor ever elevate your Thoughts to your deserts, but you shall
remember your conquest. Adieu Fairest, for now I leave the Sun, and go to seek
out Night and Sorrows cell.


The Return.
I come, Madam, to receive as much content from your cheerful Countenance, as
the loss of it has yielded me sorrow. I know the Good will now be as great as
the Evil, since they proceed both from the same cause.


Sir, I do believe that you do receive the one, as well as you have suffered
the other: but I beseech you, Sir, to tell me from whence that pain proceeds,
which you say you do endure; for as to my self, I do believe, that the pleasure
of Thinking, is greater then that of Seeing.


Madam, It is permitted me to think, but experiment forbids me believe that
opinion; for I receive from my Imaginations only a good imagination; on the
contrary the sight cannot err.


But it is said, Sir, that the presence only contents the Eyes, which are
Mortal; but that absence exercises the Soul, which is Divine; and therefore if
that did any way afflict you, you might easily avoid it.


It was some good Genius, Madam, that took me yesterday from your eyes, that I
might the better value the happiness of their luster, and avoid the extremity
of that pain which the loss of them made me endure; causing in me such an
impatience to return to you, that every hour I staid from you seemed an age.


Sir, That which is foreseen is easily avoided. Now you perceive whence the
evil that you speak of proceeds, yet the little occasion that you had to fear
it, makes you find it out willingly; therefore blame your own desires, which
have procured you this evil, and do not complain on Destiny, which is always
just.


Madam, My Will is not the cause; for then I should fly my self, and come back
to you: but Love, to abuse me the more, gave me the Desire, and hindered the
Effect. Though I believe it to be one of his Destinies, for it behooves a true
passion to overcome the violence of all opposition by a diligent constancy.


Demand of Assurance.
Fairest, It is now time that I should require from you some Assurances of your
friendship, because I cannot grant you that authority which you have over my
Affections, but by the service which I am willing to render to your power: The
proof whereof depends upon opportunity, and the opportunity occasion upon your
commands: swear to me therefore, by your fair Eyes, that you love that which
they have subdued, that I may boast my ruin to be a mark as well of my glory,
as of your puissance.


Do you think, Sir, that that which is ruined by the Eyes, can be beloved by
the Heart?


Dear Lady, why should you not affect that love which you your self have
created? Would you cause it to be born and dye at the same instant? that would
be the action of an inconstant soul.


It is you, Sir, that run the hazard of being called by that name; for if love
proceed from merit, you will soon find some one more worthy your Affection
then my self.


Madam, I shall never seek the means to find any more signal worth then that
which you possess; it is permitted to those who are less worthy to have such
jealousies, but not to you whose Beauty has such a supereminence above all
others in the world. No Madam, take counsel of your own worth, and it will show
the fair Election which I have made, how impossible it is to be changed; the
design coming from the judgment of our Soul, which being Divine, cannot err.


But, Sir, they say that love is very subject to knowledge, of which you being
so well provided, it is to be feared, that you may make use of those agreeable
diversities, that Love does every day present to unfaithful Lovers.


Madam, May he banish me from his Empire, if I have any other Will, then what
is agreeable to his. He sees that I am yours, so his Power and my Will are
agreed; my Designs concur with his Commands.


Sir, I believe that Love himself could not know how to force you to love.


He scared, Madam, lest he should be made himself a slave; He has no force
able to resist your puissance, unless it be your own: therefore since you have
this Glory entire to your self, to have vanquished all the world, there remains
nothing now, but that you should vanquish your self.


Sir, I cannot do any thing else but vanquish, having neither Will nor Thought,
which does not render obedience to that duty, which I have taken to be the
perfect guide of my life.


Madam, You oppose your Designs to my Prayers, to the end, this refusal may
redouble my passion, and cause me to persist more eagerly in the pursuit of
your tempting Graces: yet it suffices that the pain and difficulties of the
acquest, will remain the glory of my conquest.


If it be your Difficulties, Sir, that can create your Glory, why do you
complain?


Madam, I do not repine at the pain, but at your unkindness that will not
acknowledge it; but if that be not so, I do conjure your fair Lips to produce
some assurance of your friendship.


Will Sir, then I do promise your servitude, to acknowledge it for the price of
your constancy; and believe this, that as my true passion does only oblige me,
so there is no adjuration shall have power over me.


Madam, I wish that I could transform my whole will into words, to render you
sufficient thanks for this favorable promise; but since I am not born capable
of such a happiness, I will only say this, That he to whom your Favors are so
liberally extended, shall pass the rest of his days in your Service.


The Trial.
Madam, If the opportunities of serving you were as ordinary, as those of
speaking to you, I had rendered you as many Services, as I have spoken Words. I
dare not confirm them always with the same testimonies; and since I am so
little capable of persuasion, I fear I shall discover my Ignorance and not my
Servitude.


Sir, I am of opinion that the custom of Persuasion is only used there, where
Truth is wanting: and therefore seeing you have always protested the Truth, you
ought not to make use of it, else you will make your Oaths and my Credit as
indifferent, as your Words and Assurance would be.


The cunning of a Discourse shall never do me such an ill office, as to make me
believe an untruth; for I am ignorant of the custom and invention thereof,
which shall cause me not to seek out such an Enterprise, to the end, that being
warranted from the disturbance which I find between the resolution and the
event, I should not give you for an assurance, that the whole world, seeing so
noble a Design as mine, will judge that I owe an eternal perseverance to it.


Be advised, Sir, to conform your mind to your words, for time will give us
always opportunities to distinguish between those that are feigned, and those
that are true. Truly I must make this promise in answer to your promises, that
if I do not find them true, you will repent to have so vainly lost them; for I
shall always reserve to my self this power, either to reject or accept of what
you tender me,


Why should your belief take any ill impression of your servant? I do call love
and your beauty to witness, that I should always preserve my self the same.


Well Sir, I shall content my self at present with your drift, notwithstanding
I shall expect better assurances.


Madam, Be confident that you shall draw as much fidelity from your conquest,
as I expect glory and happiness from my subjection.


But I desire to know if your Promises shall be as faithfully performed, as
your Oaths.


Much more, Madam, for I can give you but weak words, which my ignorance
furnishes me withal: whereby you work effects worthy a glorious death.


Will you then die for me, Sir?


No, Madam, for that which would be a death to others, would be a life to me,
provided it came from your hand.


Live then, Sir, and take heed that your repentance do not kill you.


It Is well, Madam, I shall live your Servant, and live long through the worth
of my preserver.


Full Satisfaction.
Madam,

The day wherein I had the happiness to present my Soul and my Affections to
you, and then you made an entire conquest of all that was within me, I had also
a thousand jealousies of misfortune: for the fairest conquests are always
crossed, and my small merit did not permit me the honor of your friendship.
But since that you and my good fortune have deceived my apprehension, therefore
by how much the more extraordinary the Affection is which you have testified to
me, so much the more carefully shall I keep the Obligation which I have to
serve you.


Not me, Sir, I never could in the least pretend to your Favor, that is a
happiness which, I swear to you, my Desire does rather enjoy then my Hope; and
there is reason for it, seeing you the possessor of so many rich Qualities.


I see, Madam, that I shall possess nothing hereafter, since I must take all
from my self to bestow it upon her, for whom I could willingly suffer my self
to be robbed of all.


Sir, When I shall enjoy that happiness, the gift will be much greater then all
I can yet call my own.


Teach me, Madam, how I may swear, and you shall see what use I will make of
it, to assure you, that I am wholly yours; and that that which Love gives you
now, can never be taken from you but by death.


Sir, Be confident that I shall diligently seek all opportunities to deserve
you; and receive these words for the most infallible, that ever Faith it self
swore.


Madam, I shall live always at your devotion.


And I, Sir, living to you, shall live to my self.


Then, Lady, let us tie our souls together with this kiss. And now this
enterprise having given me so much joy as to think of it, I will go sacrifice
my silence to your judgment.


An Amorous Complement.
Lady, Wounded by your beauty, I will acknowledge it a mercy if you kill me
not; yet rather murder me then vulnerate still your creature, unless you mean
to heal what you have hurt; giving me a remedy from the same instrument
wherewith you pierced me; your Eye having shot lightning into my breast, has
power with a smile to fetch out the consuming fire, and yet leave my heart
enflamed.


Sir, Although, where I am not guilty of offense, I might justly deny to
descend to a satisfaction; yet rather then I would be counted a murderer, I
would study to preserve so sweet a Model as your self; and since you desire
that my Eye which has enflamed you, should by the virtue of a gracious Smile
make you happy in your fire: It shall shine as you would have it, disclaim that
Beam that displayes it self upon another Object.


The Discourse of a Gentleman bringing his Friend into Company.
Gentlemen, Knowing that you were here, I am come to have the honor to see
you, and to kiss your hands; and moreover on the confidence of your favor, I
have taken the boldness to bring this Gentleman along with me, being a person
that deserves much respect.


The Company.
Sir, It is a singular contentment to us to see you; you and your friend shall
be always welcome; our devotion is dedicated wholly to your service: But as for
these Ladies we cannot so dispose of them, it lies on your part and his to
insinuate your selves into their favor.


The Stranger Replies.
Gentlemen, I durst not have so far presumed thus to thrust my self into your
company, being altogether unknown to you, if this Gentleman, who is my friend,
had not put me under the shelter of his favor; the honor which you show me
for his sake obliges me infinitely: and as for these Ladies, their excellent
beauty and affability seem to promise me this happiness, that at least my
presence shall not displease them; and that if they will permit me the favor
to see them, perhaps hereafter by my services, I shall gain some other interest
in their Affection.


The Ladies.
Sir, We should show our selves as much unprovided of Judgment, as we esteem
our selves to be of Beauty, if we should not regard your worth, of which your
friend and ours gives so good a testimony, and which your behavior and
language discovers sufficiently of it self. You need not doubt, Sir, but that
you are looked upon with a good Eye by every one of us, and that we altogether
desire to give you that honor which is due to you.


To them the Stranger.
Ladies, You oblige me with so much civility and respect, that I shall bear you
an eternal gratitude; this is my unhappiness, that I have not an opportunity to
render you that service which may equal your deserts: yet shall I not cease to
offer it to you, beseeching you to receive it with as good a will, as I offer
it unfeignedly to you.


The Ladies.
Sir, You exceed in your courtesy, we are satisfied enough with the honor of
your presence, and with the contentment which we receive from your acceptable
company.


The Stranger.
Perhaps, Ladies, you do not esteem my service worthy your deserts; yet for all
that, I shall not omit any opportunity to testify how much I honor and esteem
you.


Another Gentleman.
Sir, We are going to play, will you please to make one, or do you like it
better to entertain the Ladies?


The Stranger.
Sir, I am very well here, and though I have to do with the stronger party, yet
I shall try my fortune among the Ladies.


The Ladies.
Sir, You will have a hard task to be a gainer here.


The Stranger.
Ladies, I care not for any loss, so I may gain a part in your good affections.


A Lady.
Sir, I believe you will have small content in our slender entertainment.


The Stranger.
Ladies, Had I no other happiness but that of seeing you, there is enough to
ravish all my senses, so much do I see there of Beauties and Graces; neither do
I believe that Paris ever saw more perfection in the three Goddesses.


To him one of the company answers.
Sir, If you had an apple of Gold to bribe them withal, you would persuade
them sooner to your opinion.


The Stranger.
But besides this, Ladies, I doubt not but that the excellency of your minds is
correspondent to the beauty of your Faces; and that there are not more Charms
in your Words, then there are Wonders in your Thoughts, which makes me prefer
the happiness of being in your company, before any other.


The Ladies.
Sir, If we did not know our selves very well, you would make us presume very
high of our selves; but we only believe that you put your Eloquence into a full
career to pass away the time.


The Stranger.
Ladies, Your modesty shall not make me to forget my duty, which is to admire
and publish your perfections, and to honor them with all my power; yet if my
unhappiness shall be such, that you shall not think me a person worthy such a
task, it will be my comfort that I have met with such pleasing enemies.


To offer Service and to begin a Friendship
G. Sir, The reputation of your virtue and courtesy has made me desire the
honor of your knowledge and familiarity, so that not finding any other
opportunity to insinuate my self, I have taken the boldness to come and find
you, to offer you my humble service, and assure you of the sincerity of my
affection.


Sir, I thank you most kindly for the pains that you have taken to come and
see me, though I know nothing in me that can merit the honor which you have
done me. Yet if there be any thing which may make me worthy your friendship and
affection, assure your self that I do offer it you with a very good will.
Beseeching you that for a trial thereof, you would honor me with your
commands, and my obedience shall testify my affection.


Sir, You ought not to debase those good qualities which are in you, the worth
thereof is too well known, and I do not esteem the obligation less for the
honor which you do me, in receiving me so courteously in the number of your
friends, only I fear that I shall not have means enough to acknowledge them
according to their true esteem.


Sir, I shall receive full satisfaction from your good will, with the which I
find my self highly honored; and therefore I shall study to preserve it by my
humble service, and shall honor my self in coming to see you.


Sir, There shall be no man more welcome to me, I shall earnestly attend your
coming, in the confidence whereof I kiss your hands.


Sir, I remain your most humble servant.


To make an Acquaintance
Sir, I count it a singular happiness to have met with this acceptable company,
since it has been a means to bring me into your acquaintance.


Sir, If the good fortune that brought us together into this place did put also
into my hands the means to make my acquaintance profitable, since your favor
esteems it acceptable, I should think my self happy in a double manner; but I
beseech you, Sir, let not my good will suffer for want of opportunity.


Sir, Your worth obliges me to make a great esteem of your acquaintance, and to
desire your friendship; and indeed it was my intention to offer you my most
humble service; but, Sir, you have doubly obliged me, preventing me by the
offer of your good affection, for which I give you my most cordial thanks, and
beseech you to accept reciprocally of mine.


Sir, I accept the offer which you are pleased to make me, but on condition
that I may merit them by all means possible.


Sir, You would oblige me further then my power is able to acknowledge; it
shall be sufficient for me to have the honor of your good will, and the
liberty of coming sometimes to receive your commands.


Sir, I say nothing how far my duty does oblige me, I beseech you to believe
that the affection which I have to put in practice, is sincere, and shall
appear upon the first occasion. Notwithstanding, there is nothing which I shall
more desire, then the honor of waiting on you at your own House.


Sir, You shall ever be most welcome.


A Visit.
Sir,

Ever since I have had the honor to be acquainted with you, you have obliged
me with so many favors, that I know not how to enter into any worthy
acknowledgement. I have taken the boldness to give you a Visit, that I might
give you more ample thanks, and assure you of the continuance of my devotion to
your service.


Sir, I do not believe it in my power to give you respect enough for so much
worth; but assure your self that it shall be no fault of my good will. You
infinitely oblige me, in giving me the honor of this visit. Sir, you are more
then welcome.


Sir, You oblige me with courtesy, and every day bestow new favors on me; I
fear that in the end you will oblige me to become ungrateful, not being able to
requite the honor which you do me. But now tell me, Sir, how have you done
since I had last the honor to see you.


Very well, Sir, at your service; pray how have you done?


I have not been very well, but this shall not hinder me from serving those
that do me the honor to have any kindness for me.


To request a Courtesy.
Sir, The good affection which you have always testified toward me, has made
me take the boldness to request a Courtesy of you, That you would be pleased
to give me your advice, and lend me your assistance in an affair of moment; it
would add to your former obligations, and I shall be always obliged
particularly to acknowledge it.


Sir, The affection which I bear you is sincere, and as for that little proof
which you have seen thereof, it is but a small pattern of that which I desire
to perform on your behalf. Assure your self that in this which you demand, and
upon all other occasions, you shall find me always disposed to serve you.


Sir, You double the obligations which you have laid upon me by your readiness
and freeness; it will never be in the power either of my words or actions to
make a full acknowledgement: Yet if you please, honor me with some of your
commands, that I may be enterprizing some action of duty and gratitude.


To give thanks for a Courtesy received.
Sir, That good affection which you have made appear toward me, commands me to
give you thanks for the honor and favor which you were pleased to do me, you
have obliged me more then any man in the world.


Sir, I do cordially love my friends, and do not willingly refuse them any
thing which is in my power; take what I do in good part, and believe that I
would do more for you.


Sir, I have not merited this favor; it behooves me to seek all opportunities
to make you a full acknowledgement.


Sir, Your thanks have surpassed the service which I have done you; I would not
put you to purchase so dearly the favor of your friends: I can assure you, Sir,
there is nothing in my power which is not at your commands.


Sir, I cannot doubt of your affection, and be confident that I shall ever
acknowledge it. I am, Sir, your as much obliged as affectionate Servant.


To invite a Friend to Dinner.
Sir, Since you are so well met, I beseech you Sir, to go home and dine with me.


Sir, I give you many thanks; it suffices me to have had the honor to see you,
and to understand your good health.


Sir, I entreat you that I may have the honor to entertain you a little
longer, which may be conveniently done for a dining while, if you please to
have the patience to stay.


Sir, If in so doing I could do you any service, or that my Presence were
capable of giving you any content, I should not be difficultly entreated; but I
am afraid of giving you so much trouble.


Pardon me, Sir, your company is very acceptable, and obliges me very much.


Sir, I have some business which I must dispatch, and there fore I beseech you
to excuse me.


Sir, I would not be a hinderance to you, but I am sorry not to have the
happiness to enjoy you a longer time.


Sir, I am as much troubled that I cannot accept of the honor which you would
bestow upon me, yet I must confess my self to have a very great obligation.


Sir, I hope another time will be more convenient.


Sir, I shall be always ready to obey you


Another form of Invitation.
Sir, Since I have the good fortune to meet you, oblige me so far as to take a
small Dinner with me.


Sir, Were it in my power to do you service, I would willingly accompany you,
but my presence will be both inconvenient and troublesome.


I bseech you, Sir, use not these excuses, your company cannot but be very
acceptable; but perhaps you suspect your being ill treated.


Pardon me, Sir, I know there is all good entertainment in your house, and that
you may not think that I have any such apprehension, I shall do whatsoever you
please to command me.


Sir, You shall be very welcome, and you oblige me exceedingly.


Before Dinner.
Sir, Be pleased to seat your self there, that is the place which is appointed
for you.


Sir, I shall be obedient, it is better to be uncivil, then troublesome.


After Dinner.
Sir, You will excuse your bad entertainment, otherwise we must oblige our
selves to make you a better.


Sir, Your entertainment has been very good, there has been no fault, there
is no need of excuses.


At least you may assure your self to have been looked upon with a respect, and
to have been cordially received. I wish I could testify my affection to you in
a thing that were more worthy of you.


Sir, I have had so many testimonies of your favor that I am ashamed that I
have not bin able to give you better acknowledgements, which I shall be ready
to do, when you are pleased to honor me with your commands. At present I
humbly thank you for my entertainment and kiss your hands.


Sir, I recommend my self to your good thoughts.


To take leave of his Friends Wife.
Madam, The favor which I have received from your husband, obliges me to you
both; I cannot at present give you sufficient thanks, but I beseech you to
believe that my apprehension of them is such, that I shall give my self no
repose, till I have found an occasion to revenge my self. Your most humble
servant, Madam.


To take leave of a Lady with whom you are familiar.
Madam, among the favors that I have received in this town I esteem the honor
of your acquaintance the chiefest; But as much as I estem'd my self happy in
the content which I received in your sweet company and conversation, so much do
I now find my self unfortunate by reason of the necessity of my departure. If I
thought my self worthy of your memory, I would beseech you to bear me always in
your thoughts. For I do assure you, that nothing shall take from my mind
th'Idea of your perfections, to which I have vowed so much service and respect,
and which I shall always cherish in my memory. Neither will there be any
greater glory which I can boast of, then to style my self your most obedient
Servant; under which notion I give you this farewell, recommending my self to
your fair virtues and affections.


A Private Intercourse between the Trunk-breech'd Page and the waiting
Gentlewoman in her Ladies Chamber.
Come Mrs. Katharine, now my Master and my Lady are gone forth, you and I in
their absence had best stay and exercise one another.


How mean you Page?


Why I Will teach you, if you will vouchsafe to learn.


How prithee now?


Let me beg your Lip.


I cannot spare it by any means.


I warrant you scorn me now, because I want hair upon my upper-lip; yet I can
tell you, I have kissed Ladies ere now, and have been sent for to their Chambers.


That Is a good one, you sent for!


Yes, and have been trusted with their secrets too; such pretty little things
as we are, can play at hoop all hid under a Fardingale; prithee how long have
thou been a Waiting Woman?


Not above a month yet.


I thought so, you are so ignorant: I warrant you have your maidenhead still.


I do hope so.


Oh fie upon it, away with it for shame, chaffer it with the Coachman for the
credit of your profession; it is finable among Lasses of your rank.


Good Mr. Page, how long have you been skilled in these affairs.


E're since I was in Breeches; I vow you will find your honesty very troublesome.


How can that be?


Why, when you have truckt away your maidenhead, you have a lawful excuse to
put off Gamesters, by telling them you have not what they look for: besides the
benefit of being impudent as occasion serves; it is a thing very necessary for a
Waiting-creature, and we Pages can instruct you in it, if you will be tractable.


Sure thou art wild.


So wild, that if you will lead me the chase I Will follow you.


Mock-Complements, or Drolling-Complements.
A Complement between a Gentleman and a Gentlewoman before a Riband-Shop in the
Exchange.
MAdam, y' are welcome to this Paradise of Toys: be pleased to choose what you
like, and I shall sacrifice to your beauty upon the Altar of this Stall, what
gold you shall think fit to command from my pockets.


Sir, You enrich me with your gifts; I Will assure you Sir; I do as freely accept
of your kindness, as you do liberally bestow them: for we Ladies of this Town,
seldom have any mercy upon a Country-gentlemans pocket, when we meet with an
opportunity to empty it.


Madam, Your nimble eye wherewith you do epsy the faults of garb and habit,
emboldens me to crave your judgment concerning the cut of my Breeches, the
choice of my Fancies, and the fling of my Legs.


Sir, For your clothes, were not your Breeches a little too long, they were
Jeer-proof against all the Ladies either in Hide-Park or Spring-Garden. You
walk with such a Barbary prance and stately step, that your feet are like
load-stones, drawing the eyes of all persons on you.


Madam, I wish the Gods would transform me into this Fan, that I am now about
to give you, that I might be always puffing into your mouth the breath of my
affections; or this piece of Ribband, that I might always hang about you in two
tassels, the one at your breast, the other at your breech.


Sir, I never fancied flesh-colors knots, nor am I about to build Cities, that
you should proffer me your hide to measure the compass of the walls; If I were
your favors, Sir, merit, that I should like Dido, use something else for that
work; rather choosing you for my Aeneas, to help me to people it.


A Horse Courser courting a Parsons Widow.
Lady, The great affections that I bear you, and the great desire I have to be
luckie in Horseflesh, spur me on to accost you with an humble request, that I
may be your Servant.


Sir, Your proper person and eloquent language would accuse me of ingratitude,
should my obstinacy to your reasonable demands be any hindrance to your
fortunate Markets.


An Apprentice and a young Lady at a Boarding-School.
Lady, Seeing the painted cloth of your Virtues hang out at the window, and
Fame standing at the door with a trumpet in her hand, I could not choose, out of
a natural inclination which I have to Sights and Puppet-playes, but step in to
behold the monstrousness of our Beauties; and now, Madam, having seen you, I
admire you more then the Hairy-Gentlewoman.


Sir, Your kindness proceeds more from your goodness then my desert; but you
must give me leave to think you complement, since you have compared me to a
person whose incomparable qualities are as much above mine, as Paul's is above
St. Gregory's.


Lady, If you will be pleased to take a Cheesecake, and a bottle of Beer, as the
earnest of my affection, I shall think my self honored with waiting on you to
the next Alehouse.


Sir, I shall not refuse the proffer of your kindness, for the short Commons
our Mistress allows us, makes us very willing to embrace such invitations.


At the Cake-house.
Madam, Let me beg a kiss from you, that I may drink to you in that liquor
which I most love, the Nectar of your lips.


Your servant, Sir, now give me leave to pledge you in that liquor which I most
love, which is a cup of bottle Ale, for I am very dry.


Madam, These Cheesecakes were made to eat, I would you could feed on them with
that eagerness, that I could feed on the perfections of your face; there is in
them sweetness, tenderness, and pleasantness, the emblems of your
qualifications.


Sir, I know not how to recompense these favors, so that I am troubled that I
must be now more in your debt, before I have gratified your first kindnesses;
for I must desire you to give me leave to go forth to make water.


At Parting.
Empress of my soul, God give you good night, many thanks to you for your sweet
company.


I must return the same acknowledgments to you again, Sir, who have this night
both filled my heart with your Love, and my belly with good Cheesecakes.


A Passado Complement between a Gentleman and a Lady, meeting in two several
Coaches in the Highway going to Hide-Park.
Your most humble servant, Madam, I bless the opportunity that now gives me
leave to tell you how much I honor you, since you are the only Lady that ride
triumphant in the Coach-box of my heart.


Sir, I do not know how I have merited so great a favor, I wish it were a
sufficient recompense to let you understand, that you are the only person that
hold the Reins of my affection.


Madam, Be pleased to honor me with your commands, and I shall diet my self
like a Race-horse, that I may be swift to obey them.


Sir, My commands are only, that you would accept of my love, which I bestow
upon you with the same freeness that you ever gave your Mistress bottle Wine
and Tarts.


Oh Dear, Madam your most humble servant, drive on Coachman.


Between a Gentleman and a Sempstress.
Lady, The neat cut of your Bands which I do now and then send for by my
Footboy, has brought me to visit the maker of those comely ornaments of my
neck.


Sir, Were it not for speaing against my Trade and Profit, I would say that
your good face needs no band.


Then the Gentleman lolling over the Counter thus proceds.
Truly Mistress, I do not wonder that your pretty fingers do stitch up so many
neat ornaments, seeing that you are that very picture of ornament it self, and
doubtless your Trade must be very innocent for you deal all in white.


Sir, Your good opinion does much oblige me; yet I entreat the favor of you to
believe, that there is as much deceit in our Trade, as in any occupation about
London.


Lady, You may perceive by my behavior and my garb, that I am a person wholly
made up of complements, so that the greatest complement that I can give you, is
my self. And as a testimony of this I should be glad to give you a treatment at
the Sebastian over against Southampton-house, not daring to doubt, but that you
are, as fame speaks most of your calling, of a courteous and yielding nature.


Sir, Your great estate would argue me of folly, should I deny you any thing
that may obtain your custom.


Between a Journeyman-Haberdasher of small Wares, and a Ladies Chambermaid.
Fair Creature,

For whose sake Cupid became a Weaver; that he might twist into thee all his
mothers graces, grant me the favor to accost thy coral lip, that I may show
thee how my Master kisses my Mistress.


Sir, Though our Butler has bin teaching me something of this nature already,
yet I shall be glad to take better example from your more exquisite
accomplishments.


Lady, I have here brought you four pair of blew Shoestrings to signify the
knots wherewith you have tied my heart; as also a Love-hood, to remember you of
the love I bear you; and a pair of trimmed Gloves, that when your fingers are
imprisoned in them, you may think upon the captivity into which you have
brought my soul. It Is true, I rather chose to steal then buy them, partly
having the advantage of my Masters Shop, and partly knowing how much young
people do delight in stolen contents.


Sir, Though I that am a Chambermaid, an exact Trimmer of Gloves, have
deserved these, and greater favors then these; yet if you will bring me when
you come hither next Sunday a set of Lemon color and silver Knots, I shall
the^ think it my part to study the satisfaction of your desires; but it must be
upon good conditions.


Lady of my constant affections, impose what conditions you please, the
strictest of them will not be too heavy for him that desires to bear the
burden of your love.


Briefly thus Sir, You must let me have young Pease by latter end of March,
ripe Cherries by May Day; in clothes none of my quality must go finer then I.
'Twill be your gain, for I shall sit in the Shop and invite custom.


Mistress Prudentia, You may think I lie now, but let me never stir more if I
do; in reality I love you; and as for these conditions, if I do not follow
them, then cut my throat, and throw me into the House of office; what can a man
say more?


Well Sir, go to, I Will tell you more next Sunday; but be sure you remember my
Knots.


Between a Gentleman Usher, and a Waiting Gentlewoman.
Bright pearl in Natures eye, I have made a journey from my looking-glass
hither, that I may present you my exiguous devoires.


Sir, Your exquisite knowledge in the service of Ladies emboldens me to desire
a favor of your hands, that you would be pleased, the maids being all busy in
washing, to help me to comb my head.


Lady, The softness of your Hair betrays the softness of your disposition, and
indeed how should it be otherwise, it having been so long sleek'd with the
smoothing-iron of a mild and gentle education.


Sir, As one shoulder of mutton drives down another, so the readiness wherewith
you have done me one courtesy makes me to request another from you, that when
my Lady is engaged abroad in company, you would be pleased to carry a
Complement from me to a Sweetheart of mine, a Barber in Fleet Street; I can
assure you, that for my sake, he will give you a cast of his Office for nothing
at any time.


Lady, You have ripped up an old sore in my heart, which has been wounded long
ago by your Beauty; for it was now my intention to have ingrafted my self into
your affection.


Oh, Sir, I dare not presume upon a man that goes before my Lady; beside, that
your Periwig and the smallness of the Calf of your Leg, would cause the Hickup
in my Fancy should you urge your request any further, and therefore I implore
you to desist.


Between a Lawyers Clerk and his Masters Daughter.
Most celestial beam of Beauty, I have received you into my heart, which like a
burning-glass contracting the heat of your rays, is now all on fire, not to be
quenched but by the moistening julip of your affection.


Kind Robin, I have long thought thee to be what now I find thee, a Phoenix
among men, which thou provest, by going about to die in thy flames: but heaven
forbid, I will first make water in a basin, and give it thee wherein to bathe
thy burning breast, before I will be deprived of thy service.


How willingly Mrs. Mary, should I receive such a stream into my bosom. But, Oh
your Father; he is the shoe that wrings us both by the foot; methinks I hear him
saying already, Out ye poor conditioned slut; what, marry your Fathers Clerk?


Come Robin, Clerk me no Clerks, I love thee; and if my father do compel me to
marry another, yet Robin, thou know there are private corners in London.


Mrs. Mary, I bow with all reverence to your manifold favors. But what do you
think of a little horse-play in the time.


Robin, I acknowledge thy civility, and shall not refuse any occasion to
gratify thy reasonable request; for I love tumbling dearly.


Between the Country Bumkin and his Mistress going to a Fair.
Well overtaken my dear Katie, I no sooner heard that thou were gone to the
Fair, but I came a swinging pace after thee; for in troth Katie I love thee
above all things, as a man may say, in the versal world. Alas, Katie, thy love
has gored me to the very heart, so that I shall be always as sick as a Horse
till thou have cured me with the plaster of thy love.


Nay Richard, As bad as I love thee, I do not love thee so Ill, but that I Will
kiss my lips into a consumption to save thy life.


Ita, say thou me so Kate, God a mercy for that girl, by the mass, and that
word shall cost me the best fairing in the Pedlers pack. Come hold by my
skirts, and let us make all the haste we can Kate.


O Dear, Richard, how you sweat! here take my hand kercher to wipe your face.
But Richard, must not I wear a gold Ring like my Dame, when I am married


I Kate, and a posie in it too, which shall be this, Richard and Kate shall
live without hate. 'Twas my own invention, and judge you now Kate, if I be not
a brave blade to lead a Hen to water.


Truly Richard did I not take you for a very pretty fellow, you should not be
so much in my books as you are; I know more then one or two that would kiss my
back side to have half those favors from me that you have received. Heaven
bless us, how the Fair's crowded already.


In the Fair.
Come Kate, follow close, unhook my dublet, take fast hold on my Wasteband,
shoulders make room for your Mistress. Thom, do do, Thom Kate where are ye,
what do ye like at that Stall.


Oh Richard, I Will tell thee what thou shall give me; A silver Bodkin to scratch
my head at Church withal, and a silver Thimble to make thy Wedding Shirt.


What thou will Kate, my fobb buttons and unbuttons at thy command. Uds boars
Kate, why do think I will not please my Sweetheart, Yes faith, and I Will give
thee a Bottle of white Wine and Sugar too at the George, before we go home.


At the Inn.
Come Kate, give me thy Suger-candy first. Here Is to thee with heart and good
will. And now caper Dick for joy; Katie's thine, Katie's thine, boy. I have
purchased her with a silver Bodkin, and a Thimble, and she is now my Tenant in
Tail: come Girl, give me thy hand once more, and strike me good luck.


Here Richard, here is to thee. I Will warrant thee a merry grigg how ere the
world go.


Come say away Girl;


Hey down a down a derry down,
Hey down a down a derry do?
My Love she is as brown as a Nut,
My Love's a very pretty little Slut;
She has a dimple in her chin,
And I am he that did her win.

Nay it is true Kate, and I Will lay our pie-bald Mare against any Horse in the
Town, that thou have as pretty a smelling brow as any Lass in the Country.


Ay, but Richard will you think so hereafter? Will you not when you have me
throw stools at my head; and cry, Would my eyes had been beat out of my head
with a cricket-ball, the day before I saw thee.


Kate, My Infections are greater toward thee in so. But if I should chance to
call louder then ordinary, why, it is but saying hold your tongue Dick, here is
piece of bag-budding for you: I and my mouth is stopped presently.


Richard, thou do well to tell me some of thy humors; But art thou not
terrible mad when thou art drunk, and quarrelsome withal?


No Kate, as quiet as any Lambkin: All that I shall do is only this, that when
I come home, I may snore an hour or two perhaps with my head in thy lap; then I
start up and cry, Hoh Kate, what is a clock? and so go to bed.


Well Richard, my left eye itches, which puts me in mind of going home, for I Am
afraid my Dame will thrash my bones for staying so long.


Between the Coachman and the Kitchin-maid.
Fair Goddess of the pottage pot, how done you do tzip morning?


In truth George, I find my self very hot.


Oh, I am glad that you begin to feel the heat which you make me suffer.


Why, what hurt have I done you? have I scratched you, or pricked you with any
of my loose pins, or have I trod upon your corns? Truly Bess, you are in the
right on it, for the nails of your allurements have scratched my mind, the pins
of your features have pricked me; and the foot of your disdain has trod upon
the toes of my perseverance; and besides all this, you have struck me to the
heart.


With what good George.


With the miracles of your beauty.


Alas that cannot be, for I am blacker then the Crock in the Chimney.


Truly Bess, if thou art a Chimney Crock, thou ought not to be used in any
place, but in the Chimneys of the Gods, where there is no fire made but that of
Love. Oh that I were some Celestial Kettle that I might hang always over thee,
that I might be never separated from thee!


George, You will never leave your jeers, but it is no matter, I have a back
broad enough to bear'em. Truly Bess, I speak nothing but the truth; measure me
according to the greatness of my affections, not by the smallness of my
deserts; and though I am but a poor Coachman, scorn me not, for I can tell you
of Goddesses themselves, that have affected mortal men, perhaps meaner then my
self.


The Picture of the Poets Mistress.
Gentleman, step in and see the beginning; here is a Lady worth your seeing, She
was born like Minerva, for she has been breeding like mites in old cheese, in
the heads of several Poets for this thousand years. Who have at length produced
her to out-miracle the Hairy Gentlewoman; being quite contrary to her, for hair
she has none, her head being covered with an Aurora colored silk, which hangs
dis-shevel'd about her shoulders; instead of curls it is tied in nooses, such
as they catch Jacks withal, with which she recreates her self in fishing for
Gudgeons. Her forehead is a Tower planted all about with Cupids artillery; The
whole structure of her head resembles a stately Palace; Her nose is the Throne
where Jupiter himself sits under the Arches of her brows, which are not brows
but two rainbows, to signify the watery temper of their eyes; Instead of her
eyes she has two burning Torches in each hole, and here by the way, the Poets
tell a story, how that Cupid about a hundred years ago singed his wings in the
flames thereof, and falling into one of the corners, was almost drowned in the
Rhume; Her lips are two Altars of red Coral, continually reeking with the
incense that comes from her mouth; Her teeth are not made of bone like those of
other Women, but of the tears of true lovers congealed into pearl; Her Neck is
nothing but a cloud, out of which you may see a Sun break forth to enlighten
the two Orbs of her breast; though indeed they are not so properly to be termed
Orbs, as Mountains, resembling the two hillocks that are upon Mount Parnassus;
these overlook her belly, which is not a belly, but rather a plain, large and
smooth, like that near Salisbury. Further I might go, but the Painter being not
willing to draw more, makes me as abruptly to break off with my Pen, as he did
with his Pencil.

Many Books have been written of sundry, and several Arts and Sciences, so that
even the scabby invention of Shorthand has not wanted Printed Instructions
for the attaining thereof. Yet strange it is to tell, that there never was yet
any Book published concerning the Art of Vshering Ladies; doubtless it would
have sold well, and might aptly have been called, The Gentleman Usher in Print.
Therefore that this generation of Men may no longer live like Jews, depending
wholly upon Tradition; it was thought requisite to set them down some few
Precepts, not doubting but that some or other of them, in their lazy hours,
may build greater works upon this small Foundation.

The Choice of a Gentleman Usher.
He ought to be indifferently tall, that is, being measured with a Carpenters
Rule, seven foot, three inches, and a quarter. He ought to have haunted Dancing
Scools with more zeal then the old Women have that go to St. Antlins; He ought
diligently to have studied over Melchior Swashbucklerus, de holdendo hattum in
hando, and Cuffius Candus of the Ornaments of Nations; he ought to be a
diligent Observer of Fashions, and an espyer of faults in the garb and
housekeeping of other Ladies, that he may be able to furnish his own Lady now
and then with discourse. Lastly, he must have a good head of hair, and handsome
feet without corns.

How he must be fitted for Service.
Having been bespoken, and received earnest, he must desire a weeks time to fit
himself for her Ladyships service. The first two days he must walk in iron
Boots, and an iron Breast and Back-piece, such as children wear that have the
rickets, to bring his body into an upright and perfect posture. After that he
must drink Scurvygrass-Ale to reform his complexion. He must then furnish
himself with all the Books of Complementing, and be sure to get enough to
enable him to show his wit the first night before the Waiting Gentlewoman at
the Stewards Table. His motion must be with such a Clock-work formality, as if
he were only made to strike the Quarter-Bell upon Bow-Steeple. This must be
practiced every morning in his Looking-glass, and he must not suffer himself to
eat until he find he has profited something.

His Behavior in the House.
He must be affable to his fellow servants, especially the Waiting-Gentlewoman
and the Cook; to the one for his breakfast, to the other for a kiss or two now
and then, and that she may speak well of him to her Lady; when he goes before
his Lady he must walk as circumspectly as a Milk-maid with a pail upon her
head, crying ever and anon, by your leave Gentlemen. He ought in company to
value himself according to the degree of his Lady, wherein he must have a care
not to lose the least atome of her dignity. His pockets must not be greasy,
because he may have occasion to carry his Ladies Hoods and Scarfs in them. He
ought not to cast any affection upon his Masters daughter, for the Butler
having more wit then himself, made sure of her before he could make his
approaches.

His Dressings.
He must not be long in dressing himself, because of walking the Rounds of his
morning Visits. The heels of his Shoes ought to be long and very slender, that
he may tread with the more grace, and make the less noise. His clothes ought to
be put on with so much accurateness, as if he were to dress himself every day
for his life, or if the world would perish, were there a wrinkle in his Band;
white Gloves he must not want, for they like white staves in other employments,
are the badges of his preferment. In his Hair he must be as nice as the ancient
Greeks, and good reason that he should make much of it while he has it, it
being uncertain how long a man in his place may keep it.

The Diseases incident to Gentlemen Vshers, and their Cures.
The first is, when his hair does utterly abandon his head, leaving his ears
open to all reproaches, finding the wages of their nourishment as small as the
recompense of his service.

The Cure of this, is by way of humble Petition to the Gentlewoman, to afford
him her Combings, and some few spare Locks, to hide the nakedness which she
laid bare.

The other is the dwindling away of the calves of his legs; This happens from
his being overtoyl'd; for being to divide himself between the Lady and her
Woman, they never leave sucking him, till they have made him so transparent
that you may see his very thoughts. For the cure of this disease, he must go to
the Hosier instead of the Apothecary. If the Gentlewoman will take the pains to
nurse him, his body may perhaps return again to his soul, otherwise he dies
like a Silkworm, having spun out himself to pleasure others.

To his Mistress.
O Thou the dear inflamer of my eyes,
Life of my soul, and hearts eternal prize!
How delectable is thy love, how pure,
How apt to vanish, able to allure
A frozen soul; and with thy sacred fires,
To affect dull spirits with extreme desires.
How do thy joys, though in their greatest dearth,
Transcend the proudest pleasures of the earth?
Thou art a perfect Symetry, a rare Connection
Of many perfects, to make one perfection
Of Heavenly Music; where all parts do meet,
In one sweet strain to make one perfect sweet:
Glorious Extraction, where each several feature
Divine comprised, to so Divine a Creature;
Give me thy heart, and for that gift of thine,
Lest thou should rent a heart, I Will give thee mine.
Song.
MIstake me not,
I am as cold as hot;
For though mine eyes betrays thy heart over night,
Ere morn, ere morn, ere morning all is right.
Sometimes I burn,
And then do I return;
There Is nothing so unconstant as my mind:
I change, I change, I change even as the wind.
Perhaps in jest
I said, I loved thee best;
But 'twas no more, then what was long before
I vowed, I vowed, I vowed to twenty more.
Then prithee see,
I give no heart to thee,
For when I never could keep my own one day,
What hope, what hope, what hope had thou to stay.
Plurality in Love.
HE whose active thoughts disdain
to be captive to one foe,
And would break his single chain,
or else more would undergo;
Let him learn the art of me
By new bondage to be free.
What tyrannick Mistress dare,
to one Beauty, Love confine?
Who unbounded as the air,
all may court, but none decline;
Why should we the Heart deny
As many Objects as the Eye?
Wheresoever I turn or move,
a new Passion does detain me;
Those kind Beauties that do love,
or those proud ones that disdain me:
This frown melts, and that frown burns me,
This to tears, that to ashes turns me.
Soft fresh Virgins not full blown,
with their youthful sweetness take me;
Sober Matrons that have known
long since what these prove, awake me:
Here staid Coldness I admire,
There the lively active Fire.
She that does by skill dispense
every favor she bestows,
Or the harmless innocence,
which nor Court nor City knows;
Both alike my Soul inflame,
That wild Beauty and this tame.
She that wisely can adorn
nature, with the wealth of arts;
Or whose rural sweets do scorn
borrowed helps to take a heart:
The vain care of that is my pleasure,
Poverty of this my treasure.
Both the Wanton and the Coy,
me with equal pleasures move;
She whom I by force enjoy,
Or who forces me to love:
This because she will not confess,
That not hide her happiness.
She whose loosely flowing hair,
scattered like the beams oth' morn;
Playing with the sportive air,
hides the sweets it does adorn:
Captive in that net restrains me,
In those golden-fetters chains me.
Nor does she with powers less bright,
my divided heart invade;
Whose soft tresses spread like night,
over her shoulders a black shade:
For the starlight of her eyes,
Brighter shines through those dark skies.
Black, or fair, or tall, or low,
I alike with all can sport;
The bold sprightly Thais woe,
or the frozen Vestal Court:
Every Beauty takes my mind,
Tied to all, to none confined.
A description of his Mistress.
SO looks the Virgin Rose,
which cherished by the genial truth;
Her crimson Beauties does disclose,
as does the ruby portals of her mouth.
Which when she does unfold,
Two bright transparent rows
Of pearl ye may behold;
From between which a breath of Amber flows.
A more then Tyrean purple does o'respread
Her lips, which softer are
Then the Swans down, and smoother far:
The costly juice that dwells
In Oriental shells,
To them looks pale, they are so purely red.
Fair Cheeks that look like blushing roses placed
In purest Ivory,
Or Coral, within snow enchas'd;
The Glories of the Spring
Grow pale, and languishing
For envy, so out-shin'd by them to be.
Sweetly triumphing Eyes,
That in two Crystal prisons do contain,
Death in affrown's disguise,
How gladly would I die to be by those eyes slain.
Delightful cruelty
Of those all charming Eyes,
That have on one designed to try
With what a pleasing empire they can tyrannize.
The Melancholy Lover.
HIther I come delightful groves
To spend my sighs, and make my moan,
To whose still shades it best behooves
To make my plaints and sorrows known,
And these gentle trees invite,
To pity my disconsolate plight.
It Is rigorous love that does torment
This disturbed heart of mine;
But of a Creature so Divine,
That I ought not to repent
To have loved, though unlov'd again,
The sole author of my pain.
Is bright Sylvia gentle bowrs,
To your gloomy walks unknown?
Who loves to spend the harmless hours
Among silent groves alone;
Hnd can with her presence bright
To the darkest shades give light.
Sylvia has about her charms
Nations able to subdue;
And can conquer with those arms
More then mightiest Kings can do:
But I that am her chiefest aim.
Am destined to the greatest flame.
I die Sylvia, when I behold
Those eyes that set on fire my heart;
Yet I (for love is uncontrolled)
Greedy, and fond of my own smart:
And captive to my misery,
Love to behold those Stars, and die.
To his Mistress falsely accusing him.
WRong me no more
In thy complaint,
Blamed for inconstancy:
I vowed to adore
The fairest Saint,
Not changed while thou were she;
But if another thee outshine
The inconstancy is only thine.
To be by such
Blind Fools admired,
Gives thee but small esteem;
By whom as much
Thou Would be desired;
Did thou less beauteous seem;
Sure why they love they know not well,
Who why they should not, cannot tell.
Women are by
themselves betrayed,
And to their short joys cruel?
Who foolishly
themselves persuade,
Flames can outlast their fuel.
None (though Platonic their pretense)
With reason love unless by sense.
And he by whose
command to thee,
I did my heart resign;
now bids me choose
a Deity
Diviner far then thine,
No power from love can beauty sever,
I Am still loves subject, thine was never.
The fairest she
whom none surpass,
To love has only right:
and such to me
thy beauty was
till one I found more bright:
But were as impious to adore
thee now, as not to have don't before.
Nor is it just
by Rules of Love,
Thou should deny to quit
a heart that must
another prove
even in thy right to it;
Must not thy subjects captives be
To her who triumphs over thee?
Cease then in vain
to blot my name
With forged Apostasy;
thine is that stain,
who dare to claim
what others ask of thee:
Of Lovers they are only true
Who pay their hearts where they are due.
To his false Mistress.
CElio remains disconsolate,
forsaken of his cruel Lover;
Who not ashamed to violate
Her faith, does for her false heart discover.
Often do I her hard heart bemoan,
Inveigh on her unconstant mind,
Often blame my self for doting on
a thing more sickle then the wind.
Sometimes unhappy men he deemed,
her absence might have quenched his flame.
But now more and fair then e're she seemed,
his flames increase through her disdain;
Now naught is left me but despair,
My adverse fate brought me to see
Things distant most admired are,
enjoyment breeds satiety.
I go to see the fair unkind,
whom her new Lovers arms immure;
Me she vouchsas'd not once to mind
in her inconstancy secure.
Was It not enough, Phillis said I,
that thy deceitful charming wiles
Should cheat my fond credulity,
that thou seekst others to beguile.
If amidst these thy new delights
Thou hapst no time to think on me,
Think how awakn'd conscience frights;
Think Phillis on thy perjury.
Longer to grieve I see it is vain,
Longer my troubled thoughts to vex;
Phillis triumph in her disdain,
Phillis the falsest of her sex.
Resolution to Love.
I Wonder what the Grave and Wise
Think of all us that love;
Whether our pretty fooleries
Their mirth or anger move:
They understand not breath that words do want,
Our sights to them are unsignificant.
One of them saw me the other day
Touch thy dear hand, which I admire;
My soul was melting straight away,
And dropped before the fire:
This silly Wiseman, who pretends to know,
Asked why I looked so pale and trembled to.
Another from my Mistress door
Saw me with watery eyes to come;
Nor could the hidden cause explore,
But thought some smoke was in the room:
Such ignorance from unwounded learning came,
He knew tears made by smoke, but not by flame.
If learned in other things you be,
And have in Love no skill;
For God sake keep your arts from me
For I Will be ignorant still:
Study or actions others may embrace,
My Love's my business, and my Book's her face.
These are but trifles I confess,
Which me weak mortal move;
Nor is your busy seriousness
Less trifling then my love:
The wisest King, who from his sacred breast
Pronounced all vanity, chose it for the best.
Tyranny in Love.
BLind Cupid lay thy Bow aside,
Thou do know its use;
For Love thy Tyranny does show,
Thy kindness is abuse.
Thou who were called a Pretty Boy,
Art thought a Skeleton:
For thou like death do still destroy,
When thou do strike at one.
Each vulgar hand can do as much;
Then Heavenly skill we see
When we behold two Arrows touch
Two marks that distant be.
Love always looks for joy again,
If e're thou woundst man's heart,
Pierce by the way his Rib; and then
He Will kiss, not curse thy dart.
Against Love.
NOw fie on love it ill befits,
Or Man or Woman know it;
Love was not meant for people in their wits,
And they that fondly show it
Betray their too much feathered brains,
And shall have Bedlam only for their pains.
To Love is to distract my sleep.
And waking, to wear fetters;
To Love is but to go to School to weep:
I Will leave it for my betters:
If single love be such a curse,
To marry is to make it ten times worse.
The Maidenhead.
THou worst estate even of the sex that is worst,
Therefore by nature made at first
To Attend the weakness of our birth;
Slight outward Curtain to the nuptial Bed,
Thou cause to buildings not yet finished:
Who like the Center of the Earth
Do heaviest things attract to thee,
Though thou a point imaginary be.
A thing God thought for mankind so unfit,
That his first blessing mind it;
Cold frozen nurse of fiercest fires,
Who like the parched plains of Africa sand,
(A sterel and a wild unlovely Land)
Art always scorcht with hot desires,
Yet barren quite did thou not bring
Monsters and Serpents forth thy self to sting.
Thou that bewitchest men, while thou do dwell
Like a close Conjurer in his Cell;
And fear the days discovering eye
No wonder it is at all that thou should be
Such tedious and unpleasant company,
Who liv'st so melancholily;
Thou thing of subtle slippery kind,
Which Women lose and yet no man can find.
Although I think thou never found wilt be,
Yet I Am resolved to search for thee,
To search it self rewards the pains;
So though the Chymick his great secret miss;
(For neither it in art nor nature is)
yet things well worth his toil he gans,
and does his charge and labor pay,
With good unsought experiments by the way.
Say what thou will, chastity is no more
to thee, then a Porter to the door;
in vain to honor they pretend,
Who guard themselves with Ramparts and with Walls;
Them only fame the truly valiant calls,
who can an open breach defend:
of thy quick loss can be no doubt,
Within so hated, and so loved without.
A Fond Design.
IN vain fair Cloris you design
To be cruel, to be kind;
For we know with all yours arts,
You never hold but willing hearts:
Men are too wise grown to expire,
With broken staves and painted fire.
2.
And if among a thousand Swains.
Some one of Love or Fate complains;
And all the Stars in Heaven defy,
With Clora's lips, or Celia's eye:
It Is not their Love, the youth would choose
But the glory to refuse.
3.
Then wisely make your price of those,
Want wit or courage to oppose;
But tempt not me that can discover
What will redeem the fondest Lover:
And fly the least, lest it appear,
Your power is measured by our fear.
4.
So the rude wave securely shocks
The yielding Bark, but the stiff Rocks
If it attempt, how soon in vain,
Broke and dissolved it fills the main;
It foams and roars, but we deride,
Alike its weakness and its pride.
On his Mistress Singing.
I Have been in Heaven I think,
For I heard an Angel sing
Notes, my thirsty ears did drink;
Never any earthly thing
Sung so true, so sweet, so clear,
I was then in Heaven not here.
2.
But the blessed feel no change,
So I may mislike the place,
But mine eyes would think it strange
Should it be no Angels face;
Powers above it seems design
Me still mortal, her Divine.
3.
Till I tread the Milky way,
And I lose my senses quite;
All I wish is that I may
Hear that voice, and see that sight:
Then in types and outward show,
I shall have a Heaven below.
Parting.
But that I knew before we met,
the hour would come that we must part;
and so had fortified my heart,
I hardly could escape the net,
My passions for my reason set.
But why should reason hope to win
a victory, that is so unkind,
and so unwelcome to my mind?
To yield is neither shame nor sin,
Besieged without, betrayed within.
And though that night be never so long,
in it they either sleep or wake;
and either way enjoyments take
In dreams or visions, which belong,
Those to the old, these to the young.
But friends never part to speak aright.
for whose but going is not gone;
Friends like the Sun must still move on,
And when they seem most out of sight,
Their absence makes at most but night.
I Am old when going, gone it is night,
my parting then shall be a dream,
and last tell the auspicious beam
Of our next meeting gives new light;
And the best vision that is your sight.
Not to be Altered.
CAn so much beauty over a mind;
o'resway'd by Tyranny,
As new afflicting ways to find
a doubtless faith to try;
And all examples to outdo,
To scorn, and make me jealous too.
Alas, she knows my fires are too too great!
and though she be
stone-ice to me,
Her thaw to others cannot quench my heat.
2.
That Law that with such force over ran
the armies of my heart;
When not one thought I could out-man,
that durst once take my part:
For by assault she did invade,
No composition to be made;
Then since that all must yield as well as I,
to stand in aw
of Victors Law,
There Is no prescribing in captivity.
3.
That love, which loves for common ends,
is but self loving love;
But nobler conversation tends
soul mysteries to prove:
And since love is a passive thing,
It multiplies by suffering,
Then though she throw life to the waining Moon
On him her shine
The dark part mine,
Yet I must love her still when all is done.
Loves Martyr.
HOw long shall I a Martyr be,
To love and Woman's cruelty?
Or why does sullen fate confine
My heart to thee, that is not mine?
Had I ever loved as others do,
But only for an hour or two;
Then there had store of reason been,
Why I should suffer for my sin.
But Love thou know with what a flame,
I have adored my Mistress name;
How I never offered other fires,
But such as rose from chaste desires,
Nor have I e're prosan'd thy shine
With an inconstant fickle mind;
Yet you combining with my fate
Have forced my Love, and her to hate.
O Love, if her supremacy,
Have not a greater power then thee;
For pitties sake then once be kind,
And throw a Dart to change her mind:
Thy Deity we shall suspect,
If our reward must be neglect:
Then make her love, or let me be
Inspired with scorn, and well as she.
Protestation of Love.
DEar soul, who has encaptiv'd so my heart;
Vouchsafe to bear these lines which I impart;
I dare not bless my self to call thee mine,
Yet I, if I am any thing, am thine.
The Poles shall move to teach me e're I start,
And when I change my Love, I Will change my heart;
Nay, if I wax but cold in my desire,
Think Heaven has motion left, and heat the fire,
Much more I could, but many words have made,
That often suspected, which men would persuade;
Take therefore all in this, I love so true,
That I will never love none else but you.
The Golden Age.
WHen from each Thought a seed did spring,
And every Look a plant did bring,
And every Breath a flower;
The Earth unplough'd did yield her crop,
And honey from the Oak did drop,
The Fountains did run milk:
The Thistle did the Lilly bear,
And every Bramble Roses wear,
And every Worm made Silk.
The very Shrub did Balsom sweat,
And Nectar melt the Rock with heat,
And Earth did drink her fill:
Then she no hurtful weed did know,
Nor barren Fern, nor Mandrake low,
Nor Mineral to kill.
The Male and Female used to join,
And into all delight did coin,
That pure simplicity:
Then Feature did to Form advance,
And Youth called Beauty forth to dance,
And every Grace was by.
It was a time of no distrust,
So much of Love had naught of Lust,
None feared a jealous eye.
The Language melted in the ear,
Yet all without a blush might hear;
They lived with open vow.
Each touch and kiss was so well placed,
They were as sweet as they were chaste.
FRom the fair Lavanion shore,
I your Markets come to store;
Muse not at me that so far dwell,
And hither bring my Wares to sell.
Such is the sacred hunger of gold,
Then come to my pack where I cry,
What do you lack, what do you buy?
For here it is to be sold.
You, whose birth and breeding base,
Are ranked into a noble race;
And whose Parents heretofore,
Neither Arms nor Scutchons bore:
Such is the sacred hunger of gold,
Then come to my pack, where I cry,
What do you lack, what do you buy?
For here is Honors to be sold.
Madam, for your wrinkled face,
Here Is complexion it to grace;
Which, if your earnest be but small,
It takes away the virtue all:
But if your palms be well anointed with gold,
Then shall you seem like a Queen of fifteen,
Though you be threescore years old.
On the perfections of his Mistress.
HER locks are streams of liquid amber,
Curtains fit for beauties chamber;
Of which slender golden sleave,
Love his wanton nets did weave.
Her forehead, that is beauties sphere.
A thousand graces moving there.
Venus triumphs on her brow,
That comely arch of silver snow.
The Savages that worship the Sunrise,
Would hate their god, if they beheld her eyes;
All heavenly beauties join themselves in one,
To show their glory in her eye alone:
Which when it turns it is celestial ball,
A thousand sweet Stars rise, a thousand fall.
Her nose is beauties splendid port,
Where Zephyrus delights to sport.
Her breath is such, whose native smell
All Indian odours does excel;
If all the pleasures were distilled
Of every Flower in every Field,
And all that Hybla's hives do yield,
Were into one broad mazer filled
If thereto added all the Gums
And Spice that from Panchaia comes;
The Odours that Hydaspes lends,
And Phoenix proves before she ends;
If all the Air that Flora drew,
Or Spirit that Zephyrus ever blew
Were put therein, and all the Dew
That ever rosy morning knew;
Yet all diffused could not compare
With her breath, delicious air.
The melting rubies on her lip,
Are of such power to hold, as on one day
Cupid flew thirsty by, and stoopt to sip,
And fasten there, could never get away.
Have you seen Carnation grow,
Fresh blushing through new flakes of snow?
Have you seen with more delight,
A red Rose growing through a white?
Have you seen the pretty gleam
That the Strawberry leaves in cream?
Or morning blushes when day breaks?
Such is the tincture of her cheeks.
Her silver neck is whiter far
Then Towers of polisht Ivory are,
And now behold her double breast,
Of Venus Babe the wanton nest,
Like Pommels round of marble clear,
Where azure veins well mixed appear;
With dearest top of porphiry,
Betwixt which two a way does lie;
A way more worthy beauties fame
Then that which bears the Milky name;
That leads unto the joyous field,
Which does unspotted Lillies yield;
But Lillies such, whose native smell,
All Indian Odours does excel.
Her hands would make a Tiger meek,
So soft, so delicate, and sleek;
That we from hence might justly prove,
Nature wore Lillies for a Glove.
Where whiteness does for ever sit,
Nature her self enameld it,
Wherewith a strange compact does lie,
Warm snow, moist pearl, soft ivory.
There fall those Saphir colored brooks,
Which conduit-like with curious crooks,
Sweet Islands make in that sweet Land;
As for the fingers of that hand,
(The bloody shafts of Cupids war)
With Amethyst they headed are.
Her Chastity.
HEr cool thoughts feel no hot desires,
Serving not Venus flames, but Vesta's fires:
In wanton dalliance such, as until death,
Never smelt any but her Husbands breath.
Jupiter would court her, did he know a shape
Would tempt her chastity, unto a Rape;
Who when her lawful sports she does begin,
Still blushing, thinks her own kisses sin.
On her Beauty.
WHen that my Mistress looks my sight does grace,
She seems to sway an Empire in her face;
Nature her self, did her own self admire,
As often as she were pleased to attire
Her in her native luster, and confess,
Her dressing was her chiefest comeliness:
Where every limb takes like a face,
Built with that comely and majestic grace;
One accent, from whose lips the blood more warms
Then all Medea's exorcisms and charms.
He that since Nature her great work began,
She made to be the mirror of a man:
That when she meant to form some matchless limb,
Still for a pattern took some part from him;
And jealous of her coming, brake the mould.
In his proportion, done the best she could,
If she discourse, her lip such accents breaks,
As love turned air, breaths from him as he speaks.
She makes Jove invent a new disguise,
Inspite of Juno's watchful jealousy:
Whose every part does also reinvite
The coldest most decayed appetite:
And shall be Nurse, as mighty Juno swears,
To the next bright hair'd Cupid that she bears.
On a fair and richly attired Lady at a Mask.
IN one Heaven many Stars, but never yet
In one Star many Heavens, till now, were met;
Her Orient cheeks and lips exceeded his,
That leapt into the water for a kiss
Of his own shadow; and despising many,
Died ere he could enjoy the love of any.
Had wild Hippolitus this beauty seen,
Pierced with his Darts, he had enamored been.
The wealth she wore about her, seemed to hide
Not to adorn her native beauties pride.
Though there bright pearls from Erythrean Shore,
With silver Ganges, and Hydaspes store;
And cheerful Emralds, gathered from the green
Arabian Rocks, were in full splendour seen;
Pale Onyx, Jaspers of a various dye,
And Diamonds darkened by her brighter eye;
The Saphirs blew, by her more azure veins,
Hung not to boast, but to confess their stains;
The blushing Rubies seemed to lose their dye,
When her more ruby lips were moving by;
It seemed so well became her all she wore,
She had not robbed at all the creatures store:
But had been Natures self there to have showed
What she on creatures could or had bestowed.
And Jupiter would revel in her bower,
Were he to spend another golden shower.
Song.
CElia, thy sweet Angels face
May be called a heavenly place;
The whiteness of the starry way,
Nature did on thy forehead lay?
But thine eyes have brightness won,
Not from the Stars but from the Sun.
The blushing of the morn,
In thy Rosy cheeks is worn;
The Music of the Heavenly Spheres,
In thy soul winning voice appears:
Happy were I, had I like Atlas, grace
So fair a Heaven with mine arms to embrace.
The Queen of Fairies.
COme follow, follow me,
You Fairy Elves that be;
Which Circle on the Green,
Come follow me your Queen:
Hand in hand, let us dance a round,
For this place is Fairy ground.
When Mortals are at rest,
And snorting in their nest;
Unheard and unespy'd
Through Key-holes we do glide:
Over Tables, Stools and Shelves,
We trip it with our Fairy Elves.
And if the House be foul,
Or Platter, Dish, or Bowl;
Up stairs we nimbly creep,
And find the sluts asleep:
There we pinch their arms and thighs
None escapes nor none espies.
But if the house be swept,
And from uncleanness kept;
We praise the Houshold-maid:
And surely she is paid:
For we do use before we go,
To drop a Tester in her Shoe.
Upon a Mushrom's head,
Our table we do spread;
A Corn of Rye, or Wheat,
Is Manchet which we eat:
Pearly drops of dew we drink,
In Acorn Cups filled to the brink.
The brains of Nightingales,
The unctious dew of Snailes,
Between two Nut-shels stewed,
Is meat that is easily chewed;
And the beards of little Mice
Do make a feast of wondrous price.
On tops of dewie grass,
So nimbly do we pass,
The young and tender stalk,
Never bends when we do walk:
Yet in the morning may be seen,
Where we the night before have been.
The Grasshopper and Fly,
Serve for our minstrelsie;
Grace said, we dance a while,
And so the time beguile:
And when the Moon does hide her head,
The Gloe-worm lights us home to bed.
Cupid Contemned.
Cupid thou art a sluggish Boy,
and do neglect thy calling;
Thy Bow and Arrows are a toy
thy monarchy is falling.
Unless thou do recall thy self,
and take thy tools about thee;
Thou will be scorned by every Elf,
and all the world will flout thee.
Rouse up thy spirit like a God,
and play the Archer finely;
Let none escape thy Shaft or Rod,
against thee have spoke unkindly.
So may thou chance to plague that heart,
That cruelly has made me smart.
Bootless Complaint.
THough bootless I must needs complain,
my faults are so extreme:
I loved and was beloved again,
yet all was but a dream,
For as that love was quickly got,
so was it quickly gone;
I Will love no more a flame so hot,
I Will rather let't alone.
The Departure.
WE must not love as others do,
With sighs and tears as we were two;
Though with this outward form we part,
We find each other in our heart.
What search has found a being, where
I am not, if that thou be there?
True love has wings, and will as soon,
Survey the World, as Sun or Moon;
And every where our triumph keep:
Our absence which makes others weep,
Shows it thereby a power is given
To love on Earth, as they in Heaven.
To a Laedy in Prison.
LOok out bright eyes, and clear the air,
even in shadows you are fair;
Caged beauty is like fire,
that breaks out clearer still, and higher:
Though the body be confined,
and soft Love a prisoner bound;
Yet the beauty of your mind,
neither check nor chain has found.
Look out nobly then, and dare
Even the fetters that you wear.
To Sorrow.
Sorrow why do thou seek to tempt
my quiet soul, to misery and woe;
My constant thoughts from thine assaults exempt
Inured to fortunes crosses long ago:
Go seek out some who does affect thy pain,
If none thou find'st, return to me again.
When elder years witness my race as run,
and hoary locks my hollow temples fill;
When I shall sit and say, the world is done;
sorrow return, and satisfy thy will:
Till then, go seek out some who affects thy pain,
If none thou find'st, return to me again.
Constancy resolved.
COme constant hearts that so prevail,
That every passion puts in hail;
My innocence shall dare as far,
To bid the Tyrant open war:
If warmed with pride he kindle fires,
We Will drown them in our chaste desires,
If he assail with Dart and Bow,
We Will hide them in the hills of snow:
So shall his heart plagued, mourn, and die,
While we smile at his memory;
And keep our hearts, our eyes, and ears,
Free from vain sighs, sad groans, and tears.
Lose no time.
LOse no time, nor youth, but be
Kind to men, as they to thee;
The fair Lillies that now grow
In thy cheeks, and purely show:
The Cherry and the Rose that blow,
If too long they hang and waste,
Winter comes that all will blast:
Thou art ripe, full ripe for Men,
In thy sweets be gathered then.
Song.
NOt Roses couched within a lilly bed,
are those commixtures that depaint thy face;
Nor yet the white that silver Hyems head,
mixed with the dewy mornings purple grace:
but thou, whose face
my senses captive led,
Whom I erst fondly deemed of heavenly race;
Have from my guiltless blood which thou have shed,
And envious paleness, got thy white and red.
Song.
REad in the Roses the sad story,
Of my hard fate, and your own glory;
In the white you may discover
The paleness of a fainting Lover:
In the red, the flames still feeding
On my heart, with fresh wounds bleeding.
The white will tell you how I languish,
And the red express my anguish;
The frown that on your brows recided,
Have the Roses thus divided:
O let your smiles but clear the weather,
And then they both shall grow together.
Dying to Live.
YOung Thirsis laid in Phillis lap,
and gazing on her eye;
Tyought life too mean for such good hap,
and fain the Lad would die.
When Phillis who the force did prove
of Love, as well as he,
Cried to him, Stay a while my Love,
and I will die with thee.
So did these happy Lovers die,
but with so little pain,
That both to life immediately
returned, to die again.
Who his Mistress is.
WIll you know my Mistress face?
it is a Garden full of Roses
When the Spring in every place:
white and blushing red discloses;
It Is a Paradise, where all
That attempt the fruit, must fall.
2.
Will you know her forehead fair,
it is heavenly living Sphere;
Under which the veins like air,
all Celestial blew appear:
But those burning Suns, her Eyes,
He that dares live under, dies.
3.
Will you know her body now,
it is a tall ship under sail;
From the rudder to the prow,
nothing but Imperial:
But that foolish man that stears,
Fills his Compass by his fears.
4.
Shall I now her mind declare,
it is a body armed for war;
Marching in proportion fair:
till the Lover hopes too far:
Then her eyes give fire, and all
Within level, helpless fall,
In praise of Fools.
FOols they are the only nation,
Worth men's envy, or admiration
Free from love and sorrow taking,
Themselves and others merry making.
O, who would not be!
He, He, He.
All they speak or do, is sterling,
your Fool he is your great man's darling;
And your Ladies sport and pleasure,
tongue and babble are his treasure.
Even his face begetth laughter,
and he speaks truth free from slaughter;
He Is the grace of every feast,
And sometimes is the chiefest guest;
Has his Trencher and his Stool;
When Wit waits upon the Fool.
O! who would not be?
He, He, He.
The Impolitick Beauty.
CLoris I wish, that envy were
As just, as pity does appear
Unto thy state; whereby I might
Rob others, to give thee more delight:
But your too free, though lovely charms,
In others glory breeds your harms.
But since you so admit,
So many rivals to your wit;
Unthriftily you throw away
The pleasures of your beauties sway.
Which loosely scattered so on many,
Securely fastens not on any.
And then your beauty does discover,
Many that gaze, but never a Lover;
And your so greedy hands destroy,
What you would your self enjoy.
So Princes by Ambition thirsty grown,
In chase of many Kingdoms, lose their own.
YOU must suppose it to be Easter Holy Days: for now Sisly and Dol, Kate and
Peggie, Moll and Nan are marching to Westminster, with a Lease of Apprentices
before them; who go rowing themselves along with their right Arms to make more
haste, and now and then with a greasy Muckender wipe away the dripping that
bastes their foreheads. At the door they meet a crowd of Wapping Seamen,
Southwark Broom-men, the Inhabitants of the Bank-side, and a Butcher or two
pricked in among them; there a while they stand gaping for the Master of the
Show, staring upon the Suburbs of their delight, just as they view the painted
Cloth before they go in to the Puppet-play: by and by they hear the Keys, which
rejoices their hearts like the sound of the Pancake-bell; for now the Man of
comfort peeps over the spikes, and beholding such a learned auditory, opens the
Gates of Paradise, and by that time they are half got into the first Chapel
(for time is then very precious) he lifts up his voice among the Tombs, and
begins his lurry in manner and form following:

HEre lies Will. de Valence,
a right good Earl of Pembroke;
And this is his monument which you see,
I Will swear upon a Book:
He was High Marshal of England,
when Harry the Third did reign:
But this you may take upon my word,
that he will never be so again.
Here the Lord Edward Talbot lies,
the Town of Shrewsbury's Earl,
together with his Countess fair,
that was a delicate Girl.
The next to him there lies one
Sir Richard Peck shall, hight;
Of whom we always first do say,
he was a Hampshire Knight.
And now to tell the more of him,
there lies under this stone
His two Wives, and his Daughters four,
of whom I knew not one.
Sir Bernard Brockhurst there does lie,
Lord Chamberlain to Queen Ann:
Queen Ann was Richard the Second's Queen,
and he was King of Englan.
Sir Francis Hollis, the Lady Frances,
the same was Suffolks Duchess,
Two children of Edward the Third
lie here in Deaths cold clutches.
This is King Edward the Third's brother,
of whom our Records tell
Nothing of note, nor say they whether,
he be in Heaven or Hell.
This same was John of Eldeston;
he was no Costermonger,
But Cornwals Earl. And here is one died
'cause she could live no longer.
The Lady Mohum Duchess of York,
and Duke of York's Wife also;
But Death resolving to cuckold the Duke,
made her lie with him here below.
The Lady Ann Ross, but note thee well
that she in childbed died.
The Lady Marquess of Winchester
lies buried by her side.
Now think your penny well spent good folks,
and that ye are not beguiled;
Within this Cup does lie the heart
of a French Ambassadors Child:
Nor can I tell how came to pass,
on purpose or by chance;
The bowels they lie underneath,
the body is in France.
There Is Oxford's Countess, and there also
the Lady Burley, her Mother;
And there her Daughter, a Countess too,
lie close one by another.
These once were bonny Dames, and though
there were no Coaches then,
Yet could they jog their tails themselves,
or had them jogged by men.
But woe is me, these Highborn sinners,
that strutted once so stoutly;
Are now laid low, and cause they cannot;
Their statues pray devoutly.
This is the Duchess of Somerset,
by name the Lady Ann;
Edward the Sixth her Lord protected,
and he carried himself like a man.
In this fair Monument which you see,
adorned with so many Pillars,
Does lie the Countess of Buckingham,
and her Husband, Sir George Villars.
This old Sir George was Grandfather,
the Countess she was Granny
To the great Duke of Buckingham,
who often fox'd King Jammy.
Sir Robert Eatam a Scotch Knight,
this man was Secretary,
And scribled Complements for two Queens;
Queen Ann, and eke Queen Mary.
This was the Countess of Lenox,
I clep'd the Lady Marget
King James' Grandmother, but yet
against death she had no Target.
This was Queen Mary, Queen of Scots,
whom Buchanan does bespatter,
She lost her head at Fothringham,
whatever was the matter.
The Mother of our Seventh Henry,
this is, that lies hard by;
She was the Countess wot ye well,
of Richmond and of Darby.
Harry the Seventh himself lies here,
with his fair Queen beside him;
He was the Founder of this Chapel,
Oh! may no ill betide him?
Therefore his Monument's in brass,
you will say that very much is.
The Duke of Richmond and Lenox
there lies with his Duchess;
And here they stand upright in a Press,
with bodies made of wax;
With a Globe and a Wand in either hand,
and their Robes upon their backs.
Here lies the Duke of Buckingham,
and the Duchess his Wife:
Whom Felton stabbed at Portsmouth Town,
and so he lost his life.
Two Children of King James these are,
which Death keeps very chary;
Sophia in the Cradle lies,
and this is the Lady Mary.
And this is Queen Elizabeth,
How the Spaniards did infest her?
Here she lies buried with Queen Mary,
and now she agrees with her Sister.
To another Chapel now come we,
the people follow and chat;
This is the Lady Cottington,
and the people cry, Who Is that?
This is the Lady Frances Sidney,
The Countess of Sussex is she.
And this the Lord Dudley Carleton is,
and then they look up and see.
Sir Thomas Bromley lies here,
Death would not him reprieve;
With his four Sons, and Daughters four,
yet I heard no body grieve.
The next is Sir John Tullerton,
and this is his Lady I trow,
And this is Sir John Duckering
with his fine Bedfellow.
That Is Earl of Bridgewater in the middle,
who makes no use of his bladder;
Although his Countess lies so near him,
and so we go up a ladder.
King Edward the First, that gallant blade,
lies underneath this stone;
And this is the Chair which he did bring,
a good while ago from Scone.
In this same Chair till now of late,
our Kings and Queens were crowned;
Under this Chair, another stone
does lie upon the ground.
On that same stone did Jacob sleep,
instead of a down Pillow;
And after that, 'twas hither brought
by some good honest Fellow.
Richard the Second he lies here,
and his first Queen, Queen Ann.
Edward the Third lies here hard by,
I, there was a gallant man:
For this was his two-handed Sword,
a Blade both true and trusty;
The French men's blood was never wiped off,
which makes it look so rusty.
He lies here again with his Queen Philip,
A Dutch Woman by Record;
But that is all one, for now alas!
his Blade's not so long as his Sword.
King Edward the Confessor lies
within this Monument fine;
I Am sure, quoth one, a worser Tomb
must serve both me and mine.
Harry the Fifth lies there. And there
does lie Queen Elenore;
To our first Edward she was Wife,
which is more then ye knew before.
Henry the Third lies there entombed,
he was Herb John in Pottage;
Little he did, but still reigned on,
although his Sons were at age.
Fifty six years he reigned King,
ere he the Crown would lay by;
Only we praise him, 'cause he was
last Builder of this Abbey.
Here Thomas Cecil lies: Who Is that?
why, it is the Earl of Exeter.
And this his Countess is to die
how it perplexed her. Life's sweet.

Here Henry Carry, Lord Hunsdon rests,
what a noise a makes with his name?
He was Lord Chamberlain unto
Queen Elizabeth of great fame.
And here one William Colchester
lies of a certainty,
An Abbot he was of Westminster,
and he that says no, does lie. Plain dealing's a Jewel.

This is the Bishop of Durham,
by Death here laid in Fetters;
Henry the Seventh loved him well,
and made him write his Letters.
Sir Thomas Ruthat, what of him?
poor Gentleman not a word;
Only they buried him here. But now
behold that man with a Sword.
Humphrey de Boliun, who though he were
not born with me in the same Town;
Yet I can tell, he was Earl of Essex,
of Hereford, and Northampton;
He was High Constable of England,
as History well expresses.
But now pretty Maids be of good cheer,
we are going up to the Presses.
And now the Presses open stand,
and ye see them all arow:
But more is never said of these,
than what is said below.
Henry the Seventh and his fair Queen,
Edward the First and his Queen;
Henry the Fifth here stands upright,
and his fair Queen, was this Queen.
The noble Prince, Prince Henry,
King James's eldest Son; He does not run atilt.

King James, Queen Ann, Queen Elizabeth,
and so this Chappel's done.
Now down the stairs come we again,
the man goes first with a staff;
Perchance one tumbles down two steps,
and then the people laugh,
This is the great Sir Francis Vere,
That so the Spaniards curri'd;
Four Colonels support his Arms,
and here his Body's buried.
That statue against the wall with one eye,
is Major General Norrice; He had two eyes, if he could have kept them.

He beat the Spaniards cruelly,
as is affirmed in Stories.
His six Sons there hard by him stand,
each one was a Commander;
To show he could his Lady serve
as well as the Hollander.
And there does Sir John Hollis rest,
who was the Major General
To Sir John Norrice, that brave blade,
and so they go to Dinner all.
For now the Show is at an end,
all things are done and said;
The Citizen pays for his Wife,
The Prentice for the Maid.
The Hector's Farewell.
GOod people all, I pray give ear,
my words concern ye much,
I will relate a Hector's life,
pray God ye be not such.
There was a Gallant in the Town,
a brave and jolly Sporter,
There was no Lady in the Land,
but he knew how to court her.
His person comely was, and tall,
more comely have been few men;
Which made him well beloved of men;
but more beloved of women.
Besides all this I can you tell,
that he was well endowed
With many graces of the mind,
Which Heaven on him bestowed.
He was as liberal as the Sun,
his Gold he freely spent;
Whether it were his own Estate,
or that it were him lent.
For valor, he a Lion was,
I say a Lion bold;
For he did fear no living man
that Sword in hand did hold.
And when that he with glittring blade
did e're assail his foes;
Full well I trow they did not miss
their belly full of blows.
A Frenchman once assaulted him,
and told him that he ly'd.;
For which with Quart-pot he him flew,
And so the French man died.
Three Danes, six Germans, and five Swedes
met him in Lane of Drury;
Who cause they took of him the Wall,
did kill them in his fury.
Upon his body I have heard,
full many a scar he bore,
His skin did look like Satin pinckt,
with gashes many a score,
Oh had he lost that noble blood
For Countries liberty!
Where could all England then have found
so brave a man as he?
But woe is me these virtues great,
were all eclipsed with vice;
Just so the Sun that now shines bright,
Is darkened in a trice.
For he did swagger, drink, and game,
indeed, what would he not?
His Psalter, and his Catechize
he utterly forgot.
But he is gone, and we will let
no more of him be said;
They say it is naught to reveal
The vices of the dead.
Beside we have some cause to think,
that he may escape tormenting;
For the old Nurse that wach'd with him,
did say he died repenting.
The Second Part.
FArewell three Kings, where I have spent
full many an idle hour;
Where often I won, but never did lose
if it were within my power.
Where the raw Gallants I did choose,
like any Ragamuffin:
But now I Am sick and cannot play,
who will trust me for a Coffin.
Farewell my dearest Piccadilly,
Notorious for great Dinners;
Oh, what a Tennis Court was there!
alas! too good for sinners.
Farewell Spring-garden, where I used
to piss before the Ladies;
Poor Souls! who will be their Hector now
to get 'em pretty Babies?
Farewell the glory of Hide-Park,
which was to me so dear;
Now since I cannot enjoy it more,
would I were buried there.
Farewell tormenting Creditors,
whose scores did so perplex me;
Well! Death I see for something's good,
for now you will cease to vex me.
Farewell true brethren of the Sword,
all Martial men and stout;
Farewell dear Drawer at the Fleece,
I cannot leave thee out.
My time draws on, I now must go
from this beloved light;
Remember me to pretty Sue,
and so dear friends good night.
With that, on Pillow low he laid
his pale and drooping head:
And straight e're* Cat could lick her ear,
poor Hector he was dead.
Now God bless all that will be blessed,
God bless the Inns of Courts;
And God bless Davenants Opera,
which is the sport of sports.
On the Death of Jo. W.
WHen rich men die, whose purses swell
with silver and with gold;
They straight shall have a Monument,
their memories to uphold.
Yet all that men can say of them,
they lived so unknown;
Is but to write upon their Tombs,
here lies such a one.
When Joseph, who died poor,
(though Simon was his Porter)
Shall die as if he never had been,
and want his worths reporter.
Full many a Can he often drank,
In Fleet Street in the Cellar;
Yet he must unremembred dye,
like some base Fortune Tellers.
He made the Ballad of the Turk,
and sung it in the street;
And shall he dye, and no man heed it?
no friends, it is not meet.
He lived in Garret high,
as high as any Steeple;
And shall he dye? alas poor Jo!
unknown unto the People.
He had no Curtains to his Bed,
yet still paid for his quart,
While Coin did last; and shall he dye?
And no man lay't to heart.
He loved his Dog, Icleped Trou,
his Dog he loved Pie;
Shall Tobit live for his Dogs sake?
and Jo neglected, dye.
He hated all the Female sex,
who knows his private gradge;
And must he therefore dye forgot?
I leave the World to judge.
Each Term he asked his Father Blessing,
most gravely and demurely,
Who then did give him Shillings Ten;
and must he dye obscurely?
No Jo, I Will bid peace to thy bones,
Though they were sick and crazie,
And must be quite made new again,
Before that Heaven can raise thee.
And since thou art gone, and there is none,
who knows where to find thee;
I Will fix this truth upon thy name,
Thou did leave Wit behind thee.
Wit that shall make thy name to last,
when Tarletons Jests are rotten;
And George a Green, and Mother Bunch,
shall all be quite forgotten.
Now if you ask where Jo is gone,
you think I cannot tell;
Oh he is blessed! for he was poor,
and could not go to Hell.
But for his Father rich in Bags,
the Devil ought to have him;
That took no care of such a Son,
till 'twas too late to save him.
The Song of the Caps.
THe Wit has long beholding bin
Unto the Cap, to keep it in;
Let now the Wit fly out amain
With Praise, to quit the Cap again;
The Cap that owes the highest part,
Obtained that place by due desert.
For any Cap what e're it be,
Is still the sign of some Degree.
The Cap does stand, each man does show,
Above a Crown; but Kings below.
The Cap is nearer Heaven than we,
A greater sign of Majesty;
When off the Cap we chance to take,
Both Head and Feet obeisance make.
For any Cap, etc.
The Monmouth Cap, the Saylors Thrum,
And that wherein the Saylors come.
The Physic, Law, the Cap Divine,
The same that crowns the Muses nine.
The Cap that Fools do countenance,
The goodly Cap of Maintenance.
And any Cap, etc.
The sickly Cap, both plain and wrought,
The Fudling Cap, however brought.
The Quilted, Furred, the Velvet, Satin,
For which so many Pates learn Latin.
The Crewel Cap, the Fustean Pate,
The Periwig, a Cap of late.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Soldiers that the Monmouth wear,
On Castle tops their Ensigns rear.
The Saylors with their Thrum do stand
On higher place than all the Land.
The Tradesman Cap aloft is born,
By vantage of (some say) his horn.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Physics Cap to dust may bring,
Without control the greatest King.
The Lawyers Cap has heavenly might,
To make a crooked Cause stand right:
Which being round and endless, knows
To make as endless any Cause.
Thus any Cap, etc.
Both East and West, and North, and South,
Where e're the Gospel finds a mouth,
The Cap divine does thither look;
The Square-like Scholars and their Book:
The rest are round, but this is square;
To show that they more stable are.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Motley man a Cap does wear,
That makes him fellow for a Peer;
And its no slender part of wit,
To act the fool where great men sit:
But Oh the Cap of London town!
I wis it is like the Giants crown.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The sick man's Cap not wrought with silk,
Is like repentance white as milk.
When Hats in Church drop off in haste.
This Cap never leaves the head uncaste.
The sick man's Cap if wrought, can tell,
Though he be ill, his state is well.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Fudling Cap, God Bacchus might,
Turns night to day and day to night;
Yet spendors it prefers to more,
By seeing double all their store.
The Fur'd and Quilted Cap of age,
Can make a moldy Proverb sage.
Thus any Cap, etc.
Though Fustean Caps be slender wear,
The head is of no better gear.
The Crowel Cap is knit like Hose,
For them whose zeal takes cold in the nose
Whose purity does judge it meet,
To cloth alike both head and feet.
This Cap would fain, but cannot be,
The only Cap of no degree.
The Satin and the Velvet hive,
Unto a Bishopric does drive;
Nay when a file of Caps you are seen in,
The Square Cap this, and then a Linen.
This treble may raise some hope,
If fortune smile to be a Pope.
Thus any Cap, etc.
The Periwing, Oh that declares!
The rise of flesh the loss of hairs,
And none but Graduates can proceed
In sin so far, till this they need.
Before the Prince none covered are,
But those that to themselves go bare.
This Cap of all the Caps that be,
Is now the sign of high degree.
The Jolly Ale-Drinker.
I Cannot eat but little meat,
my stomach is not good;
But sure I think, that I can drink
with him that wears a hood:
Though I go bare, take ye no care,
I nothing am a cold,
I stuff my skin, so full within,
with jolly good Ale and old.
Back and sides go bare, go bare,
both foot and hand go cold;
But Belly, God send thee good Ale enough,
whether it be new or old.
I love no Roast, but a nut-brown Tossed,
and a Crab laid in the fire;
A little bread, shall serve my stead,
for much I not desire.
No frost or snow, no wind I trow,
can hurt me if I would;
I am so wrapped, and thoroughly lapt
with jolly good Ale and old.
Back and sides, etc.
And Tib my Wife, that as her life
loves good Ale to seek;
Full often drinks she, till you may see
the tears run down her cheek.
Then does she trowl to me the Bowl,
even as a Mault-worm should;
And says, Sweetheart, I took my part
of this jolly good Ale, and old.
Back and sides etc.
Now let them drink, till they nod and wink,
even as good Fellows should do;
They shall not miss, to have the bliss,
good Ale does bring men to.
And all poor Souls, that have scowr'd Bowls,
or have them luftily trowl'd;
God save the lives of them and their Wives,
whether they be young or old.
Back and sides go bare, etc.
The Shepherd's Song in praise of his God Pan, who prefers him before the Sun.
THou that art called the bright Hiperion,
Were thou more strong then Spanish Gerion,
That had three heads upon one man;
Compare not with our great God Pan.
They call thee Son of bright Latona,
But girt thee in thy torred Zona;
Sweat, baste, and broil, as best thou can,
Thou art not like our Dripping Pan,
What cares he for the great God Neptune;
With all the broth that he is kept in;
Vulcan or Jove he scorns to bow to,
To Hermes, or The Infernal Pluto.
Then thou that art the Heavens bright Eye,
Or burn, or scorch, or boil, or fry:
Be thou a God, or be thou Man,
Thou art not like our Frying Pan.
They call thee Phoebus, God of Day,
Years, Months, Weeks, Hours, of March and May:
Bring up thy Army in the Van,
We Will meet thee with our Pudding Pan.
Thy self in thy bright Chariot settle,
With Skillet armed, brass Pot, or Kettle;
With Jug, black Pot, with Glass or Can,
No talking to our Warming Pan.
Thou have thy beams thy brows to deck,
Thou have thy Daphne at thy beck:
Pan has his horns, Syrinx and Phillis;
And I his Swain, my Amarillis.
Song on Women.
TRust not a Woman when she cries,
For she will pump water from her eyes
With a were finger; and in faster showers,
Then April when he rains down Flowers.
As out of Wormwood Bees suck honey;
As from poor Clients Lawyers firk money;
As Parseley from a roasted Coney:
So though the day be never to sunny.
If Wives will have it rain down, then it drives;
The calmest Husbands make the most stormy Wives.
On an Excellent Race-Horse.
COme Muses all that dwell nigh the Fountain,
made by the winged Horses heel;
Which firk'd with his Rider over each Mountain,
let me your gallopping raptures feel.
I do not sing of Fleas, nor Frogs,
Nor of the well-mouth'd Hunting-dogs;
Let me be just, all praises must
Be given to well-breathed Jilian Thrust.
2.
Young Constable and Kil-deer's famous,
the Cap, the Mouse, the Noddy gray,
With nimble Pegabrigg, you cannot shame us,
With Spaniard nor with Spinola;
Hill climing white Rose praised does not lack,
Handsome Dunbar, and yellow Jack:
But if I be just, all praises must
Be given to well-breath Jilian Thrust.
3.
Sure spurred Sloven, true running Robin
of young Shaver, I do not say less;
Strawbery, Soam, and let Spider pop in,
fine Brackley, and brave running Bess,
Victorious too was Herring Shotten,
And Spin in's arse is not forgotten.
But if I be just, all honor must
Be given unto Jilian Thrust.
4.
Now Gentleman all I pray you hark yet,
to winning Makarel, fine mouthed Freak;
Bay Tarral that won the Cup at New Market;
thundering Tempest, Black-dragon eke;
Precious Sweet-lips, I do not lose,
Nor Toby with his golden Shoes:
But if I be just, all honor must
Be given to well-breath Jilian Thrust.
The Clown's Description of his Mistress.
Happy am I in Mop's love,
that ever I bespoke her;
Whose hair's as fine as any hemp,
and colored like red oker.
Whose hammer-head and beetle-brows*
will never me deceive;
If I have any Nail to drive,
or any Block to cleave.
Those eye-holes, if thy eyes were out,
would serve as well for Sawcers;
But thy plump cheeks puffed up do hang
like to a pair of Dossers.
And from this Limbeck the rare Juice,
continually that flows:
Left thou should lose one drop of it,
thou have a Bottle-nose.
Thy chaps do water, I protest,
as they were greased with tallow;
Thy scattering teeth enameled are,
with blew, and black, and yellow:
When thou do talk, I do admire,
thy stumbling and thy trips;
Thou art no great blab of thy tongue,
but a little of thy lips.
The rubies, and the carbuncles,
on thy face shine most Star-like;
But oh! thy spicy fragrant breath,
smells like a bed of Garlike.
Thy comely breasts to me appear
like Mole-hills newly raised;
Which for their mountainous extent,
are highly to be praised.
Her sides be long, her belly lank;
of her legs what should I say?
But that she feels well in the flank,
her feet themselves display.
The Watch-mens Song.
SIng and rejoice, the day is gone,
and the wholesome night appears,
In which the Constable on throne
of trusty Bench, does with his peers
The comely Watchmen, sound of health,
sleep for the good ot'h Commonwealth.
It Is his office to do so,
being bound to keep the peace,
And in quiet sleep you know,
mortal jars and lewd brauls cease.
A Constable may then for's health,
Sleep for the good ot'h Commonwealth.
Unless with nobler thoughts inspired,
to the Tavern he resort;
Wherewith sack his senses fired,
he raigns as Fairy King in Court:
Drinking many a lusty health,
Then sleep for the good ot'h Commonwealth.
With a comely Girl, whom late
he had taken in his watch;
Often he steals out of the Gate,
her at the old sport to match:
Though it may impair his health,
He sleeps for the good ot'h Commonwealth.
Who then can Constables deny,
to be persons brave and witty;
Snce they only are the eye,
the glory, the delight o'th City:
That with Staff and Lanthorn light:
A like-black Pluto Princes of the night.
The Jovial Companion.
COme let us drink, the time invites,
Winter and cold weather;
For to pass away long nights,
and to keep our wits together:
Better far thna Cards or Dice,
Or Jack's balls, that quaint delights,
Made up with fan and feather.
Of great actions on the Seas,
we will never be jealous;
Give us liquor that will please,
and 'twill make us braver fellows,
Then the flout Venetian Fleet,
When the Turk and they do meet,
Within their Dardanello's.
Mahomet was not Divine,
but a simple Wigeon;
To forbid the use of Wine,
unto those of his Religion;
Falling sickness was his shame,
And his Tomb shall have the same,
For all is whispring Pigeon.
Therefore water we will desclaim;
mankinds adversary;
Once it caused the worlds whole fame
in the deluge to miscarry.
Nay this enemy of joy,
Seeks with envy to destroy,
And murder good Canary.
Valentien that famous Town,
stood the French men's wonder;
Water it employed to drown,
so to force their Troops asunder:
Turain cast a helpless look,
Whilst the crafty Spaniard took
La Ferto, and his plunder,
See thee Squibs, and hear the Bells
the fifth day of November;
The Preacher a sad Story tells,
and with horror does remember,
How some Dry-brain'd Traitor wrought
Arts, that might have ruin brought.
To King, and every member.
He that drinks has no such thoughts,
black and void of reason;
We take care to fill our vaults
with Wine for every season:
And with many a cheerful cup
We blow one another up,
And that is our only treason.
A New Ballad of St. George for England, and the Dragon.
WHY should we boast of Arthur and his Knights,
Knowing how many men have performed fights
Or why should we speak of Sir Lancelor du Lake,
Or Sir Tristram du Leon, that fought for Ladies sake:
Read old Stories, and there you shall see,
How St. George, St. George did make the Dragon flee;
St. George he was for England, St. Denis was for France,
Sing Honey soit qui maly pense.
To speak of the Monarchs, it were too long to tell;
And likewise of the Romans, how far they did excel;
Hannibal and Scipio they many a field did fight;
Orlando Furioso he was a valiant Knight;
Romulus and Rhemus were those that Rome did build,
But St. George, St. George the Dragon he has killed.
St. George, etc.
Jephtha and Gideon they led their men to fight,
The Gibeonites and Ammonites they put them all to flight;
Hercules's labor was in the Vale of Bass,
And Sampson slew a thousand with the Jaw bone of an Ass;
And when that he was blind, pulled the temple to the ground;
But St. George, St. George the Dragon did confound.
St. George, etc.
Valentine and Orson they came of Pippin's blood;
Alphred and Aldrecus they were brave Knights and good;
The four Sons of Ammon that fought with Charlemain,
Sir Hugh de Bordeaux, and Godfrey de Bolaigne;
These were all French Knights, the Pagans did convert;
But St. George, St. George pulled forth the Dragons heart.
St. George, etc.
Henry the Fifth he conquered all France;
He quarttered their Arms his honor to advance;
He razed their walls, and pulled their Cities down;
And garnished his head with a double treble Crown;
He thumped the French, and after home he came;
But St. George, St. George he made the Dragon tame.
St George, etc.
St. David you know, Joves Leeks and tosted Cheese;
And Jason was the man brought home the Golden Fleece;
St. Patrick you know he was St. Georges Boy,
Seven years he kept his Horse, and then stole him away;
For which knavish act, a Slave he does remain;
But St. George, St. George the Dragon he has slain.
St. George, etc.
Tamberlain the Emperor in Iron Cage did crown,
With his bloody Flags displayed before the Town;
Scanderbag magnanimous Mahomets Bashaw did dread;
Whose Victorious bones were worn when he was dead;
His Bedlerbegs, his Corn-like drags, George Castriote was he called
But St. George, St. George the Dragon he has mauld.
St. George, etc.
Ottoman the Tarter, Cham of Persia's race,
The great Mogul, with chests so full of all his Cloves and Mace;
The Grecian youth, Bucephalus he manly did bestride;
But those with all their Worthies nine, S. George did them deride;
Gustavus Adolphus was Sweedlands warlike King;
But St. George, St. George pulled forth the Dragons sting.
St. George, etc.
Poldraggon and Cadwallader of British blood do boast;
Though John of Gaunt, his foes did daunt, St. George shall rule the roast,
Agamemnon, and Cleomedon, and Macedon did feats,
But compared to our Champion, they were but merely cheats;
Brave Malta Knights, in Turkish fights their brandish Swords
out drew,
But St. George met the Dragon, and ran him through and through.
St. George, etc.
Bidia the Amazon Potius overthrew;
As fierce as either Vandal, Goth, Saracen, or Jew;
The potent Holophernes, as he lay in his bed, down thunder,
In came wise Judith, and subtly stole his head;
Brave Cyclops stout, with Jove he fought, although he showered
But St. George killed the Dragon, was not that a wonder;
St. George, etc.
Mark Anthony, I Will warrant you, played feats with Egypts Queen;
Sir Eglamone that valiant Knight, the like was never seen;
Grim Gorgons might, was known in fight;
Old Bevis most men frighted;
The Myrmidons and Prester John, why were not those men knighted?
Brave Spinola took in Breda, Nassau did it recover:
But St. George St. George he turned the Dragon over and over.
St. George he was for England, St. Denis was for France,
Sing Honey soit qui mal y pense.
New Song.
In Defiance of Drinking-sack
WHat a Devil ail our Poets all,
For drink, for drink thus always to call?
And nothing goes down but drink,
Friends, whether are your stomachs flown?
That you the noble food disown,
That better deserves your ink.
Food! I there is a substantial word,
And it beget a substantial turd,
That breeds grass for Cows and Sheep:
The Countrey-bumpkin he comes for it,
And at night it rides in a Charret,
When all men are asleep.
Alas! for drink, it is not worth your meeter,
Drink makes Piss, and piss makes Salt-peeter,
That kills and blows up the people.
You may drink Clarret, and have the gout,
I Will eat, and drink little, and go without,
And laugh at the drunken Cripple.
Let Lady's the Exchanges range,
The Shambles shall be my Exchange,
Which I count a noble place:
What do I care for pins or points,
Let me behold the solid joints,
That keep up humane race.
The noble Sirloins there does lie,
A Joint well known to satisfy,
Though you feed never so fiercely:
And there you may see the glorious Buttocks
Of many a Cow, and many a fat Ox;
Oh how they taste with Parseley;
The Brisket must not be forgot,
'Its meat for a Prince, while it is hot,
If Cabbage do attend it;
Though if the Turnips be of Hackney,
I will not covet any Sack nigh,
To inspire me to commend it.
Nor must we pass the Leg of Mutton,
It Is a noble Dish for any Glutton,
Although he ruled an Empire:
Whether a Sea of Anchovies sauce,
Like Delos Isle, do it embrace,
or served with Capers and Sampire.
Your Venson Pasty, if well soakt,
If not, I wish the Cook were choakt,
What say you to such meat?
Capons refused, to let it go down,
It wisdom gives to the man o'th Gown,
Who will feed on it till he sweat.
Who will not commend the high-soaring Larks,
Or a Pidgeon-pye, worth three or four Marks,
With Rabbets all buttered about?
The Woodcock, Partridge, and the Teal,
The Pheasant and Turkey, which the Commonweal
could never be without.
There be your Hashes, and Fricasses
Which are contemned by none but Asses,
And mushroms no meat for Carters;
With a thousand more so long to recount,
'Twould make my Song for to surmount
The three great Books of Martyrs
Nor would I now advise any man,
For to extol the glass or can,
Least he receive the foil;
Should we compare them with pot or kettle,
Or ^dle, or skimmer of as good mettle,
Or grid-iron fit to broil;
Or with the spit much used at court,
Which Vulcan found out, heaven bless him for it,
As sing the learned Atticks:
And for the Jack, there is no watch,
Was ever able for to match
The Turn-spit Mathematics.
Nor let the men that drink Paris Wine,
Or Sack, which I take to be more Divine,
Plead wit, or inspirations;
Meat has a more large prerogative,
For by it all Professions live,
And it multiplies the Nations.
The man that drinks all his life,
What can he do unto his wife?
Poor soul she lives in quiet?
But such a restless quiet it is,
That never ends, till she does kiss
The man that eats good diet.
The crafty Politician,
Who with his acts does all he can,
The Cellar doors to shut;
Must have his boiled, his baked, his roast,
Nor will he spare for any cost,
To cram his lawless gut.
The serious Lawyer, who does firk
Out of his pate full many a quirk,
Refuses all strong liquor;
Yet cause his commons are but short,
A Clients feast does him no hurt,
It will make them talk the quicker.
Peace therefore, Broom, for liquor so fierce,
The Cooks are angry at thy verse,
And ha'sworn the Fiddlers to cripple;
If against next Term they have never a new song,
Which may to the praise of Meat belong,
As well as to that of Tipple.
The OLD GILL.
IF you will be still,
Then tell you I will,
Of a lovely old Gill,
Dwelt under a hill:
Her Locks are like sage,
That Is well worn with Age,
And her visage would swage
A stout man's Courage.
Teeth yellow as Box,
Clean out with the Pox;
Her Breath smells like Lox,
Or unwiped Nocks:
She has a devilish grin,
Long hairs on her chin,
To the soul footed Fien,
She is nearly a Kin.
She has a beetle brow,
Deep Furrows enough,
She Is eyed like a Sow,
Flat nosed like a Cow:
Lips swarthy and dun,
A mouth like a Gun,
And her tattle does run,
As swift as the Sun.
On her back stands a Hill,
You may place a Windmill,
And the Farts of her gill,
Will make the sails trill:
Her neck is much like,
The foul swines in the Dike,
Against Crab-lice and Tike,
A blew pin in her pike.
Within this Anno,
There dwells an Hurricano,
And the rise of her Plano,
Vomits smoke like Vulcano:
But a pox of her twist,
It is always bepist,
And the Devil's in his list,
That to her Mill brings grist.
'Ware the dint of her dirt,
She will give you a flirt,
She has always the squirt,
She is loose and ungirt:
Want of wind makes her pant,
Till she fizzle and rant,
And the hole in her gant,
Is as deep as Levant.
Yea deep as any well,
A Furnace or Kell,
A bottomless cell,
Some think it is Hell:
But I have spoken my fill,
Of my Lovely old Gill,
And it is taken so ill,
I Will throw by my Quill.
The PUDDING.
FRom twelve years old, I often have been told
A Pudding it was a delicate bit,
I can remember my Mother has said
what a delight she had to be fed
With a Pudding.
Thirteen being past, I longed for to taste
What Nature or Art could make so sweet,
For many gay Lasses about my age
Perpetually speak on it, that puts me in a rage
For a Pudding.
Now at Fifteen I often have seen
Most Maids to admire it so,
That their humor and pride is to say
O what a delight they have for to play
With a Pudding.
When I am among some Wives that are young,
Who think they shall never give it due praise,
It is sweet, It is good, It is pleasant still
They cry, they think they shall never have their fill
Of a Pudding.
The greater sort of the Town and the Court,
When met, their tongues being tip't with Wine,
How merry and Jocund their Tattles do run
To tell how they ended and how they begun
With a Pudding.
Some ancient Wives, who most of their lives
Have daily tasted of the like food,
Now for want of supplies do swear and grumble,
That still they are able enough, to mumble
A Pudding.
Now, now I find, cat will to kind
Since all my heart and blood is on fire,
I am resolved whatever comes on it
My Fancy no longer shall suffer the want
Of a Pudding.
For I Will to John who says he has one
That Is crammed as close as Cracker or Squib,
Who ever is telling me when we do meet
Of the wishing desires and sweetness they get
In a Pudding.
I thought at first, It never would burst,
It was as hard as grissel or bone,
But by the rouling and trowling about
How kindly and sweetly the Marrow flew out
Of his Pudding.
Well, since I never, was fed with such geer,
Until my John did prove so kind,
I made a request to prepare again
That I might continue in Love with the strain
Of his Pudding.
Then straight he brought, what I little thought
Could ever have been in its former plight,
He rumbl'd and jumbled me ore and ore
Till I found he had almost wasted the store
Of his Pudding.
Then the other mess, I begged hin to dress,
Which by my Assistance was brought to pass.
But by his dullness and moving so slow
I quickly perceived the stuffing grew low
In his Pudding.
Though he grew cold, my Stomach did hold
With vigor to relish the other bit,
But for all he could do, could not furnish again,
For he swore he had left little more than the skin
Of his Pudding.
A Parley, between two WEST-COUNTRIMEN on sight of a WEDDING.
I Tell thee Dick where I have been,
Where I the rarest things have seen;
O things beyond compare!
Such sights again cannot be found
In any place on English ground,
Be it at Wake or Fair.
At Charing Cross, hard by the way
Where we (thou know) do sell our hay,
There is a House with stairs;
And there did I see coming down,
Such Volk as are not in our town,
Vortie at least in pairs,
Amongst the rest one pest'lent fine,
(His beard no bigger though than thine)
Walked on before the rest:
Our Landlord looks like nothing to him
The King (God bless him) 'twould undo him
Should he go still so dressed.
At Course-a-Park without all doubt,
He should have first been taken out
By all the maids in the Town;
Though lusty Roger there had been,
Or little George upon the green,
Or Vincent of the Crown.
But wot you what; the youth was going
To make an end of his woing,
The Parson for him staid,
Yet by his leave (for all his have)
He did not so much wish all past
(Perchance) as did the Maid.
The Maid (and thereby hangs a tale)
For such a Maid no Whitson-Ale
Could ever yet produce:
No grape that is kindly ripe, could be
So round, so plump, so soft as she,
Nor half so full of juice
Her finger was so small, the Ring
Would not stay on which he did bring,
It was too wide a peck:
And to say truth (for out it must)
It looked like the great Collar (just)
About our young Colts neck.
Her feet beneath her petticoat,
Like little mice stole in and out,
As if they feared the light:
But Dick she dances such a way,
No Sun upon an Easter day
Is half so fine a fight.
He would have kissed her once or twice,
But she would not she was so nice,
She woudl not do it in sight;
And then she looked as who would say,
I will do what I list to day;
And you shall do it at night.
Her cheeks so rare a white was on,
No Dazy makes comparison
(Who sees them is undone:)
For streaks of red were mingled there;
Such as are on a Katherine Pear,
The side that is next the Sun.
Her lips were red, and one was thin
Compared to that was next her Chin
(Some Be had stung it newly:)
But (Dick) her Eyes so guard her Face
I durst no more upon them gaze,
Than on the Sun in July.
Her mouth so small when she does speak,
Thou Would swear her teeth her words did break,
That they might passage get;
But she so handled still the matter,
They came as good as ours, or better,
And are not spent a whit.
If wishing should be any sin
The Parson himself had guilty bin.
(She looked that day so purely)
And did the youth so often the feat
At night, as some did in conceit,
It would have spoiled him surely.
Passion, Oh me! how I run on!
There Is that that would be thought upon
(I trow) besides the Bride,
The business of the Kitchin's great,
For it is fit that men should eat;
Nor was it there denied.
Just in the nick the Cook knocked thrice,
And all the Waiters in a trice
His summons did obey,
Each Serving man with dish in hand
Marched boldly up like our Train-band,
Presented and away.
When all the meat was on the Table,
What man of knife or teeth was able
To stay to be entreated?
And this the very reason was
Bofore the Parson could say grace,
The company was seated.
Now hats fly off, and youths carouse;
Healths first go round and then the House;
The Brides came thick and thick;
And when 'twas named another health,
Perhaps he made it hers by stealth;
(And who could help it, Dick?)
O'th sudden up they rise and dance;
Then sit again, and sigh, and glance;
Then dance again and kiss:
Thus several ways the time did pass,
Whilst every woman wished her place,
And every man wished his.
By this time all were stolen aside,
To council and undress the Bride;
But that he must not know:
But 'twas thought he guest her mind,
And did not mean to stay behind
Above an hour or so.
When in he came (Dick) there she lay
Like new-fallen snow melting away,
('It Was time I trow to part)
Kisses were now the only stay,
Which soon she gave, as who should say
God B'w'y'! with all my heart.
But just as Heavens would have to cross it
In came the Bride-maids with the Posset,
The Bridegroom eat in spite;
For had he left the woman to it;
It would have cost two hours to do it,
Which were too much that night.
At length the Candle's out and now,
All that they had not done they do;
What that is, you can tell;
But I believe it was no more,
Than thou and I have done before
With Bridget and with Nell.
The OLD and NEW COURTIER.
WIth an Old Song made by an Old Ancient pate,
Of an old worshipful Gentleman who had a great Estate:
Who kept an Old house at a bountiful rate,
And an Old Porter to relieve the Poor at his Gate,
Like an old Courtier of the Queens.
With an Old Lady whose anger good words asswages,
Who every quarter pays her old Servants their wages,
Who never knew what belongs to Coachmen, Footmen and Pages;
But kept twenty or thirty old Fellows with blew-coats and badges:
Like an Old Courtier, etc.
With an old Study filled full of Learned books,
With an Old Reverend Parson, you may judge him by his looks,
With an old Buttery hatch worn quite off the old hooks,
And an old Kitchen which maintains half a dozen old cooks;
Like an Old, etc.
With an old Hall hung round about with Guns, Pikes and Bows,
With old swords and bucklers, which has born many shrewd blows.
And an old Frysadoe coat to cover his worships trunk hose,
And a Cup of old Sherry to comfort his [Copper Nose;]
Like an Old, etc.
With an old Fashion when Christmas is come
To call in his Neighbors with Bag-pipe and Drum,
And good cheer enough to furnish every old Room,
And old Liquor able to make a cat speak, and a wise man dumb;
Like an Old, etc.
With an old Hunts-man, a Falkonner and a Kennel of Hounds
Which never Hunted, nor Hawked, but in his own Grounds:
Who like an old Wiseman kept himself within his own bounds
And when he died gave every Child a thousand old pounds;
Like an Old, etc.
But to his eldest Son, his house and land he assigned,
Charging him in his Will to keep the same bountiful mind,
To be good to his Servants, and to his Neighbors kind,
But in the ensuing Ditty, you shall hear how he was inclined;
Like a young Courtier of the Kings.
Like a young Gallant newly come to his Land,
That keeps a Brace of Creatures at's own command,
And takes up a thousand pounds upon's own Bond,
And lies drunk in a new Tavern, till he can neither go nor stand;
Like a young Courtier, etc.
With a neat Lady that is fresh and fair,
Who never knew what belonged to good house keeping or care,
But buys several Fans to play with the wanton air,
And seventeen or eighteen dressings of other women's hair;
Like a young, etc.
With a new Hall built where the old one stood,
Wherein is burned neither coal, nor wood,
And a new Shuffle-bord-table where never meat stood,
Hung round with pictures which does the poor little good.
Like a young, etc.
With a new Study stuff't full of Pamphlets and Plays,
With a new Chaplin, that swears faster than he prays,
With a new Buttery Hatch that opens once in four or five days,
With a new French-Cook to make Kickshaws and Toys;
Like a young, etc.
With a new fashion when Christmas is come,
With a journey up to London we must be gone,
And leave no body at home but our new Porter John,
Who relieves the poor with a thump on the back with a stone.
Like a young, etc.
With a Gentleman Usher whose carriage is complete,
With a Footman, a Coachman, a Page to carry meat,
With a waiting Gentlewoman, whose dressing is very neat,
Who when the Master has dined gives the servants little meat;
Like a young, etc.
With a new honor bought with his Fathers old Gold,
That many of his Fathers Old Manors has sold,
And this is the occasion that most men do hold,
That good Housekeeping is now a days grown so cold;
Like a young Courtier of the Kings.
The FRIAR and the MAID.
AS I lay musing all alone
A merry Tale I thought upon;
Now listen a while and I will you tell
Of a Friar that loved a Bonny Lass well.
He came to her when she was going to bed
Desiring to have her Maidenhead;
But she denied his desire,
And said that she did fear Hellfire.
Tush, tush, quoth the Friar, thou need's not doubt.
If thou were in Hell, I could sing thee out:
Why then, quoth the Maid, thou shall have thy request;
The Friar was as glad as a Fox in his nest.
But one thing more I must request.
More than to sing me out of Hellfire,
That is for doing of the thing
An Angel of Money you must me bring.
Tush, tush, quoth the Friar, we two shall agree,
No Money shall part thee and me;
Before thy company I will lack
I Will pawn the Gray-gown off my back.
The maid bethought her on a Wile
How she might this Friar beguile;
When he was gone, the truth to tell,
She hung a Cloth before a Well:
The Friar came, as his bargain was,
With Money unto his bonny Lass;
Good morrow, Fair Maid, good morrow, quoth she;
Here is the Money I promised thee.
She thanked him, and she took the Money;
Now let us go to^t, my own sweet Honey:
Nay, stay a while, some respite make,
If my Master should come, he would us take.
Alas; quoth the Maid, my Master does come;
Alas! quoth the Friar, where shall I run;
Behind you Cloth run thou quoth she,
For there my Master cannot see.
Behind the Cloth the Friar went,
And was in the Well incontinent:
Alas: quoth he I Am in the Well;
No matter quoth she if thou were in hell.
Thou said thou could sing me out of Hell,
I prithee sing thy self out of the Well;
Sing out, quoth she, with all thy might,
Or else you are like to sing there all night.
The Friar sang out with a pitiful sound,
Oh! help me out or I shall be Drowned:
She heard him make such a pitiful moan,
She hope him out, and bid him go home.
Quoth the Friar I never was served so before;
A way, quoth the Wench, come here no more:
The Friar he walked a long the street
As if he had been a new washed Sheep,
Sing hey down a derry; and let us be merry,
And from such sin ever to keep.
TOM a BEDLAM.
FOrth from my sad and darksome Cell,
From the deep abyss of Hell,
Mad Tom is come to view the world again,
To see if he can ease his distempered brain.
Fear and Despair possess my Soul;
Hark how the angry Furies howl!
Pluto laughs, and Proserpine is glad
To see poor naked Tom of bedlam mad.
Through the World I wander Night and Day
To find my troubled Senses,
At last I found old Tine
With his Pentateuch of Tenses.
When he me spies, away he flies,
For Time will stay for no man;
In vain with cries I rend the Skies,
For pity is not common.
Cold and comfortless I lie,
Oh help, O help or else I dye!
Hark I hear Apollo's Team,
The Carman'gins to whistle;
Chaste Diana bends her bow,
And the Bore begins to bristle.
Come Vulcan with tools and with tackles.
And knock off my troublesome Shackles;
Bid Charles ^ake ready his Wain
To fetch my five Senses again.
Last night I heard the Dog-Stark bark,
Mars met Venus in the dark;
Lymping Vulcan heat and Iron bar,
And furiously run at the god of War.
Mars with his weapon laid about,
Lymping Vulcan had the gout,
For his broad Horns hung so in his light
That he could not see to aim aright.
Mercury the nimble Post of heaven
Stayed to see the Quarrel,
Gorrel belly Bacchus giantly bestrid
A Strong-beer barrel:
To me he drank, I did him thank,
But I could drink no Sider;
He drank whole Buts till he burst his guts,
But mine were never the wider.
Poor Tom is very dry,
A little drink for Charity:
Hark! I hear Acteon's hounds,
The Hunts man hoopes and Hallows;
Ringwood, Rockwood, Jowler, Bowman,
All the Chase does follow.
The man in the Moon drinks Clarret,
Eats powdered Beef, Turnep and Carret;
But a Cup of old Maligo Sack
Will fire the Bush at his Back.
Alas poor Scholar, Whither will thou go? OR Strange Alterations which at this
time be, There Is many did think they never should see.
IN a Melancholy Study,
None but my self,
Methought my Muse grew muddy;
After seven years Reading,
And costly breeding,
I felt, but could find no pelf;
Into Learned Rags
I Have rent my Plush and Satin,
And now am fit to beg
In Hebrew, Greek and Latin;
Instead of Aristotle,
Would I had got a Patten.
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Cambridge now I must leave thee,
And follow Fate,
College hopes do deceive me!
I often expected
To have been elected,
But Desert is reprobate.
Masters of Colleges
Have no Common Graces,
And they that have Fellowships
Have but common Places,
And those that Scholars are
They must have handsome faces:
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
I have bowed, I have bended,
And all in hope
One day to be befriended.
I have preached I have printed
What ever, I hinted,
To please our English Pope:
I worshipped toward the East,
But the Sun does not forsake me:
I find that I am falling,
The Northern winds do shake me:
Would I had been upright,
For Bowing now will break me:
At great preferment I aimed,
I looked lately
To live most stately,
And have a Dairy of Bell-ropes milk;
But now alas,
My self I must not flatter,
Bigamy of Steeples
Is a laughing matter;
Each man must have but one;
And Curates will grow fatter.
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Into some Country Village
Now I must go,
Where neither Tithe nor Tillage
The greedy Patron
And parched Matron
Swear to the Church they owe:
Yet if I can preach,
And Pray too on a sudden,
And confute the Pope
At adventure, without studying,
Then ten pounds a year,
Besides a Sunday Pudding.
All the Arts I have skill in,
Divine and Humane,
Yet all is not worth a Shilling.
When the Women hear me,
They do but jeer me,
And say, I am profane:
Once, I remmember,
I preached with a Weaver,
I quoted Austin.
He quoted Dod and Clever;
I nothing got,
He got a Cloak and Bever:
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Ships, Ships, Ships, I discover,
Crossing the Main;
Shall I in, and go over,
Turn Jew or Atheist,
Turk, or Papist,
To Geneva, or Amsterdam?
Bishoprics are void
In Scotland; shall I thither?
Or follow Windebank
And Finch, to see if either
Do want a Priest to shrive them?
O no, it is blustering weather.
Alas poor Scholar, whither will thou go?
Ho, ho, ho, I have hit it,
Peace good man Fool?
Thou have a Trade will fit it;
Draw thy Indenture,
Be bound at adventure
An Apprentice to a Free School,
There thou may command
By William* Lylies Charter;
There thou may whip, strip,
And hang, and draw, and quarter,
And commit to the Red Rod
Both Will and Tom, and Arthur,
I, I, it is thither, thither will I go.
Superscriptions for Letters.
To a Duke.
A Duke first was made by the French Kings, when they had chased the Romans out
of Gallia; bestowing the name of Dux, a little altered to the French Idiom,
upon those to whom they gave the Principal Government over those Provinces
which they had recovered: in process of time they usurped the Inheritance of
their Governments; and made their Feifes which before were revocable at the
Princes pleasure, to be hereditary. So that at length their Titles came to be
so much esteemed as to be thought the next in order to that of a King.

The Title which is most usually applied to a Duke, is that of Grace; and we
address ourselves to him by word of mouth, thus May it please your Grace.

If he be the Kings Son, or of the Royal blood, we write to him thus. To the
most Illustrious Prince Henry, etc. To the most excellent Prince. Or else, To
the most High and Noble.

EArls at the same time, and upon the same account, were created by the French
King, only here seemed the difference to be between them; for the Dukes seemed
to have the Military Power, and the Earls were only made to exercise the Civil
Jurisdiction in the Towns where they were placed. They are now the next in
order to Marquess; by word of mouth we make our Addresses thus, May it please
your Honor. And write to him thus, To the Right Honorable.

A Marquess formerly was the Governor of a Fronteer Town, and inferior to the
Earl of a Province; but superior to the Earl of an Inland Town. In speaking we
thus address our selves to them, May it please your Honor. We write to them
thus, To the Right Honorable.

A Viscount was formerly the Lieutenant to an Earl, so that their Dignity has
continued next to that of an Earl ever since; and indeed between a Viscount and
a Baron or Lord, there is no difference used in making addresses to them. We
speak to them thus, May it please your Honor my Lord. We write thus, To the
Honorable.

A Knight is the next Degree of honor being more peoperly a Military Dignity;
but of late very much confused. They bear the Title of Right Worshipful. We
make our dress thus, May it please your Worship. We write thus, To the Right
Worshipful.

ESquire was formerly but he that bore the Shield and Lance of a Knight before
him. It is now the next Degree of Honor to the Knight; and now so much used by
Gentlemen, that he who styles not himself Esquire, is hardly a Gentleman. He
bears the Title of Worshipful. And we write to him thus, To the Worshipful J.
D. Esquire.

Note here, that the same Titles are appliable to the Wives as to the Husbands;
and though the Daughter of an Earl marry an inferior person, yet she does not
lose her Title, which is, Right Honorable.

In the writing of familiar Epistles, there are sundry varieties, which
ingenuity will easily apply to his occasion.
For example, at the beginning of a Letter these Expressions do very often
offer themselves.

Honored Sir. Dear Sir. Dear Friend. Learned Sir. Madam. Dear Lady. Dearest.
Joy of my Life. My Heart. Fairest. Delight of my Heart.
These Subscriptions also are usual.

To great Persons, Your Graces Your Honors
most faithful and most obedient Servant. Your Excellencies most humbly
devoted Servant Your Worships most faithful Servant.


In familiar Letters thus The admirer of your Virtues. Madam, The Honorer
Adorer Worshipper
Of your Perfection. Of your Virtues.
Your most affectionate Friend and Servant. Your assure Friend. Your most
obedient Servant. Your most obliged Friend and Servant. Your eternally engaged
Servant. Your Creature. Your faithful Servant. Yours for ever. Yours to command
eternally. Yours while I have life. Yours while I have a being. Your faithful,
though contemned Servant.


For Superscription; these Forms may be used. To my much respected Friend. To
my much Honored Friend. For my much Valued Friend. For my much esteemed Friend.
For my approved To the truly Noble To the truly Virtuous To the most
incomparable Lady. To the fair Hands of To the most accomplished To the mirror
of Perfection To the most lovely ornament of Nature.


There is something more to be observed concerning the Dignity of places.

For a Knight being made General of an Army, obtains the title of Your
Excellency, though but a Lord, Knight, or meaner man by birth. A
Lieutenant General, is Right Honorable, A Major General, Right Honorable. A
Colonel is Honorable, and we give him the title of Your Honor. A Captain is
Right worshipful.
From a Son to Father, Your most dutiful, and obedient Son.

From a Daughter, Your loving and obedient Daughter.

From a Husband, Your most affectionate Husband till death.

From a Wife, Your faithful and loving Wife till death.

From a Servant, Your most obedient and faithful Servant.

Forms for the concluding of Letters.
BUt whatsoever happen, I shall be no other then, etc. I shall endeavor with
the best of my care and industry, whenever you desire the proofs of the
obedience of, etc. If it could be persuaded that my absence gave you any
disquiet, or that my presence could afford you any service, you should soon
perceive by my speedy return how much I am, etc. If I am able to do you
service, there wants nothing but that you should command me the employment;
there being nothing which I more desire than to witness my self continually,
etc. There being no man who has a firmer resolution to render you all the
testimonies of a willing service, in the quality of, etc. Let this for the
present satisfy you, till I shall meet with some better opportunity, to show
how much I am, etc. The only happiness that I expect is, that I may be able to
change my words into effects, that I might show you how much I am really, etc.
I shall now free your patience from reading any more, give me leave only to
make this conclusion, that I am and shall be, etc. For every time I reflect
upon your great obligations, I am impatient of an opportunity to show my self;
I cannot pass away the unquiet of my mind by any other way, than by seeking
occasions to testify how much I am, etc. Be pleased to take this for a real
truth from him who has made an Oath to live and die, etc. This is the advice
and friendly Counsel of, etc. And I hope there is nothing shall debar me from
continuing for the time to come, what hitherto I have been, etc. Neither is
there any thing that I would omit whereby I might give you an assurance of
fidelity to your Commands, as protesting to live and die, etc. But I desire to
testify to you rather by words than by discourse, how much I am, etc. Sir, I
beg you to accept this testimony of my gratitude, and my earnest desires to be,
etc. I never reckon up the Catalogue of my friends, but I presently call to
mind how much I am obliged to give you this Subscription, etc. My gratitude is
as necessary as my being, and I can sooner not be, then not be most truly, etc.
For I never think of your favors but it renews the remembrance of my
engagements to be, etc. Though I have a very great press and urgency of
business at present upon me, yet shall my occasions never be so violent, but
that I will have leisure both to be and to tell you, that I am, etc. I shall be
contented to be counted ungrateful when I am less, etc. Sir, if you doubt the
truth of my service, I beseech you to make use of that absolute power which you
have acquired over me, to oblige my endeavors to all manner of proofs, that I
am, etc. Be pleased as yet to take my bare word till I can give you further
testimonies how much I am, etc. Though I am debarred your sight, yet I hope I
am not envied the happiness of giving you notice, how passionately I am, etc. I
will lose my life, rather than my resolution to die, etc. If you knew with what
impatience I expect a reply, charity would oblige you to set at rest the
disquiet mind of, etc. My resolution is to possess my self always, etc. There
is none more interested in your concernments, nor more participates in any
satisfaction of yours, than he that is by reason as well as inclination, etc.
Could my endeavors take effect, or my vows accomplishment, you should not long
reckon me in the number of your unprofitable servants, for I am most assuredly,
etc. Sir, I know your high merits, and the nobleness of your condition has
much increased the number of your servants; yet I will say this, that though
you join them altogether, yet they are not so much as I am, etc. You may easily
know, without being a Prophet, the dear esteem I have for you, and may believe
without any further assurance, that I am, etc. It remains in you to allay the
discontent of my mind, by giving me some employment in your service, which may
witness the passion that I have to maintain the quality of, etc. Which obliges
me in the midst of mine ill fortune to have recourse to prayers, that you would
honor me with your commands, that by my obedience to them you may be forced to
believe, etc. Desiring to make you see rather by effects than words, how much I
am without complement, etc. I shall give you new proofs thereof by the
continuance of my respects, and the title which I desire to bear of, etc. For
though you may have a more powerful, yet you never can have a more constant and
faithful servant, etc. I shall expect the favor that I may not bear the
unprofitable title of, etc. Neither shall I be contented till I have given you
full testimonies thereof, as being, etc. Desiring nothing more then to live and
die, etc. Though I shall not regard that while it is for your interest, as
being one that makes it his public profession to appear in all places, etc.
Only be confident of this, that I am more than any man in the World, etc. For I
shall never be capable of apprehending any thing else, but how to testify my
devotion to be, etc. In which list I am bold to write my self, etc. Among all
my felicities I count it not the meanest, the liberty which you are pleased to
give me of stiling my self, what I most truly am, etc. And find occasions more
and more to testify what I am, and shall ever be, etc. Sir, if you will permit
me to employ my soul thus, you may still enjoy him, who is, etc. I am preparing
to forsake all the affairs of the world to entertain you, and testify how much
I am, etc. You know very well that I am but a rude Courtier, but my words carry
truth with them, while I affirm, that I am from my soul, etc.
To his Mistress recovered from an Ague.
Madam,
YOu may very well admire to receive a Letter from one whom long before this
time you might have imagined to have been dead: a Patient which the Doctors
gave over, and who himself acknowledges no Physic could have cured, but that
of your fair presence; which carried such a sovereignty with it, that my Ague
presently left me, and nature in spite of my disease, took strength to her
self and raised me up in my bed, to make this clear acknowledgment of cure to
your Beauty. Madam, I now find my self rid of that distemper, and am persuaded
I shall sooner for the future, suffer under the violence of a Fever, than of a
shivering Cold. I could not but express my fears to you, with my thanks, hoping
that you will take care to preserve what you have again created. Be pleased to
interest your affection for my safety, and to defend a thing, whom your
goodness has made so dear to you, as to be ever,

Madam, etc.
To his retired Mistress.
Lady,
YOu carry your eyes like one of those that wear a Veil: not a look of yours
but preaches chastity; and you are so confirmed in a general contempt of
mankind, that if Fortune her self should come to present you with a Husband,
you would scarce go out of your Closet to meet him in your Chamber. You speak
of nothing but Religion and Cloisters, and all your entertainment, is discourse
of mortification. Lady, not to dissemble my thoughts to you, I much fear, that
a beginning like yours, so full of restraint, will afterward be followed with
a progress of too much liberty; and instead of the precise demureness that you
pretend, some Servant or other will read a new Heresy in your face. I shall
not at this time send you studied Oaths or Protestations. I know some Moons
must go about before you will acknowledge the error wherein you live. For the
present I shall only desire you to take care of your health, if not for your
own, yet for the common good of those that love you; of which number he desires
to be the first, who presumes to honor himself with the Title of,

Madam, etc.
To his Mistress, being disobliged by her.
LAdy, I did always expect this favor from your ordinary goodness, that I
might promise my self that you would have a little kindness for me; it is true
that I was pre-inform'd of your humor, but I could hardly believe it; or that
you would disoblige those that shall do you service and friendship. I would not
now complain of you, but that I should give you advantage by my silence that I
had not discovered the subtleties of your deceit; which is so malicious, that I
have at once stripped me both of love and hatred: and I am now impatient, till I
have acquainted those that yet profess their service to you, how that of all
the Ladies I ever knew, you are the most unworthy of affection. In the mean
space I beseech you to believe, that those endeavors which you have employed
to disoblige me, have absolutely taken away my will and desire to be,

Lady etc.
To his Mistress, acknowledging the kindness of her Letters.
LAdy, I am no less obliged to you for your Letters then for your
entertainments, and though I have not judgment enough to censure their
goodness, I am not so unfortunate, as not to taste of their sweetness; I must
entreat you to belive me, and not to forbear to make me happy with them: You
know not but that I may be-come a Ciceronian, being instructed by your eloquent
Copies; which if I cannot reach to my self, I will at least show them to those,
that shall render them excellent by their imitation. For certainly, without
flattery, all nature had need put her self into action, to find out your equal.
Lady I I do with all seriousness acknowledge, that it is too great an ambition
for me, either to style my self your Scholar, or your Servant.

To excuse to his Mistress his too easy believing of false Reports,
LAdy, I am impatient till I see you, that I may between your hands abjure all
false opinions. Only be pleased so to dispose your self, that you may accept
of my recantation. By my last letters, you might perceive that I had let in
some false reports had almost poisoned the fair soul of my belief: but as soon
as I received the characters of your hand, and perused the simplicity of that
naked truth, wherewith you may put my suspicion to flight, I soon came to my
self. I was ever confident, whatever false rumor divulged, that a person of
your noble deportment, knew how to preserve your self in the greatest
contagion: and that ye could run no other peril in those adventures, but that
of being importuned. You express in your Letter some weak conjectures
concerning me: I perceive we were both tainted with the same imperfection.
Lady, such jealousies, though they are dangerous if dispersed, yet are the
greatest confirmations of future love. It was no great matter which of us
changed our opinion; It was no great matter which of us changed our opinions
first. The thick breath is now gone off from the clear Crystal of our then
blemished affections. I assure you now, that I have suffered my self to be
persuaded by your Reasons; as for your Objections, they were not worth the
confuting. Lady, you see, how easily I am cured of this ^ickness, being wholly
disposed to believe and obey you; and be to the uttermost of my power,

Lady, etc.
To his Mistress thanking her for the acceptance of his Service.
LAdy, I am now at last in part persuaded, that I have now two the best
fortunes that the earth can afford me; the possession of our virtue, and of
your favor. You may say, this language is very fair, and that my friendship
speaks like love. I have no other answer to return you, but that as you gain
hearts, you have found a way to enter into them, and see what affections they
produce. Let me therefore entreat you to behold the violence of devotion; and
since I do entitle you my Goddess, be pleased to express your self by the
effect of so fair a name, in accepting the heart more than the hand, and
prizing the character of my sincerity above the value of my oblation. Certainly
I should be the most unfortunate among the living, should you be a severe
censurer of my works or words; in both which there is neither power nor
eloquence: but had I the one or the other in a perfect degree, I should never
be able to show you, as I would, the desire that inflames me to serve you, and
to be

Lady your, etc.

To his Mistress, desiring her Picture.
Madam,
I Hope that you will not take amiss the Request that I do now make to you;
that you will please to give me your Picture, knowing that I esteem the
original more than any thing in the world. That fair Body enlivened with so
much sweetness and perfection, I hold in so great a veneration, that I pant
after the shadow thereof. Be pleased therefore to ease my impatience by the
grant of this favor, assuring your self that I shall place it among the
greatest happinesses that could ever befall,

Madam, Your most humble Servant.

The Reply.
Sir,
THe request that you make to me, to give me your Picture, is so obliging, that
I am constrained to give my consent; not at all wondering that you have before
your eyes the Image of a person that admires you so much; Be pleased to believe
this for a truth, in recompense of that favor, which I bestow on you, as also
that I shall ever continue to be,

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

To his Mistress, desiring a Lock of Hair from her.
Madam,
YOu need not wonder at that servitude, to which you have reduced me; it is so
pleasing to me, that I do now request from you new chains, by the gift of a
Bracelet of your Hair, to tell you how much I shall esteem this favor, your
merit or my love are only capable. And as you have the knowledge of my request,
so I shall leave you to think of answering my desires, and also of the passion
which I have to serve you, being more than ever,

Madam, Your most humble and obedient Servant,

The Reply.
Sir,
YOur deserts have wrought so strong a persuasion in me to consent to the favor
which you request of me, that I send it you in this Letter; I shall not impose
on you the silence which you ought to keep in this matter, knowing that your
discretion has prevented my commands. It suffices me to put you in mind, that
as these are no common favors, they require secrecy from those that receive
them. I suppose that you will not forget your self in this particular, while
you remember that I am,

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

To his Mistress, an Acknowledgment for being beloved by her.
SHall I pass over in silence, Fairest, so excessive a happiness? or shall I
publish it, to render it more great? I know my silence will honor it most, but
by making it known, I shall render it more glorious; for in telling it abroad,
I shall eternize the memory thereof. Therefore shall my mouth be always open in
the extolling of your favor, my mind wholly taken up with thoughts of you, and
my soul always admiring its most perfect object, blessing the day of my birth,
for being happy in yours. Your Death shall be my Tomb, desiring no other honor
or glory while I live, but the title of,

Madam, Your most faithful Servant

A Lady to her Servant accusing him of Inconstancy.
Sir,
THey do always tax our sex for being inconstant, but I must now apply that
fault to you, I say to you, whose Oaths did give so great a testimony of your
fidelity, that I durst not doubt them for fear of injuring my self; though the
wind was always the bearer of your love, and not your love, for that you never
had; so that if I blame my self for having believed you, I shall praise my self
hereafter for imitating you though with some trouble, that I was not your
example; for it was most reasonable, that I should have preceded you, as being
your Mistress, though now

Your Servant.

To request a Favor from his Mistress.
Madam,
YOu bestow your favors with so much bounty, that though I am averse to beg
them, yet the freeness of your courtesy leaves me no other shame, then that
which proceeds from my inability of return. I do not use to value the services
which I perform to my friends, but you are pleased to put such a rate upon
them, that I have no other way left, but to vow thus with all respect, to
solicit you as long as I live. Believe me, Madam, you have entertained my
service so nobly, that I stand in fear of a propension to make motions to you,
and to remain still an importunate Beggar, till I have tired you into a
necessity of yielding to my Request, Though I confess, could I but gain the
advantage of being esteemed, and beloved by you, it is the highest flight that
my ambition covets.

To his long absented Mistress.
Madam,
I Cannot but deplore my misfortune, that Cameleon like, I live only on the
Idea; all the support of my frail life having been for this twelve months
only from imagination. I protest Lady, those four Letters which I received
quarter after quarter have with much ado kept me alive; the last you directed
to me, being so short, as if you had confined me to the extremity of so thin a
diet, that your most despised Lovers might in my pitiful Picture, read to
themselves Lectures of consolation. Lady, I know at the best, that absent
persons cannot entertain themselves but by Letters, yet by as woeful experience
I find, that there is but small pleasure to hear thus so far off from one
another, as we do. For my part, I cannot but complain, and I think I have more
cause than any man living; you know the reality of this my expression: believe
me, you have exposed me to such extremities, that I am now resolved to approach
you, and to write no more, but act what I have been accustomed to protest, how
perfectly I can be,

Madam, etc.
To his Mistress upon the death of her Brother.
LAdy, The continuance of your melancholy having touched me so far, as to make
me partake of your grief, wonder not if you receive these undeserved lines from
me, which I hope will wipe away your tears, if you consider him that entreats
you to be pitiful to himself; if not, to his youth. Believe me, Dearest, my
sorrows for your self carry more reason with them, then yours for your deceased
Brother, which can have no other pretense than custom, and your good nature.
Pardon me if I tell you freely, that if you do not decline your grief, I shall
abate of the belief I had of your spirit. I know well that the loss of Friends
must needs touch us, nor would I remove the sense of mourning, but the error;
not the tribute of tears, but the superfluity of them. For though we must give
something to nature, let us not take away all from reason; neither does Nature
so much as Opinion prevail over in these extremes of sorrow. Believe me, Fair
one, sorrow has placed you too near the grave, that should you look in your
glass, you would already conceive your self there: for never did tears deal
more cruelly with any than your self; seeing they have mind at once two of the
fairest things in the world, the clearness of your disposition and beauty.
Judge therefore, whether I have not as much cause to lament with you, as to
write to you. At least I hope you will of your subtle thoughts, to consider a
little of him, who with tears entreats you to consider of your self, as being

Madam, etc.
To her Servant accepting his Service.
SIR, Since you can so well express your affection to one that needs it, I
could not but let you understand how you have prosper'd; with Justice enough
you name your self a Friend, yet in my opinion you might invent some more
significant word, though it were to style your self a Lover; for you have
already given me such real testimonies of your affection, that I dare entertain
you in such a quality. I only wait for a favorable occasion, which may for my
excuse, witness the dear and glorious marks which you gave me of your love and
account of me, and how much I am already,

Sir, etc.
The Answer.
LAdy, I am no longer able to keep my words from letting my heart fall upon
this paper: your Letter having won me to you in such a sort, that I have no
power over my self but what you leave me; the joy I have entertained from your
lines, having not yet restored me to my reason; this may seem strange to you,
but I assure you, I find no other reason to be contented to live, but as you
are still in the world; and I am therefore only bound to preserve my self,
because you are unwilling to lose me. Your lines sweetly invite me to give you
a visit. Fairest, if you will have me to endure your presence, take some more
humane form, and appear not in that fullness of splendour, lest I forget what you
are, and never cease to do you continual acts of reverence; and when I should
speak to you, should overflow with prayers and thanks; conceiving that I may
have fortune from others, but glory from none but you. Let me entreat you
therefore, when I approach your favors, that you would give them out by tale,
and distribute them by measure, that he may not be too far transported beyond
himself, who is,

Lady, etc.
From a Lady consenting to her Servants Requests.
SIR, I must not wish you good without endeavoring to do it, as far as my weak
endeavors will permit me. I have so many affections that I remain unmovable,
so that you may be assured, if you can love your self, that you need not to
doubt of my endearments to you. Sir, though I cannot be regular in observing
complements, I shall never be negligent in necessary duties; and so often think
of you, that you need not to solicit my thoughts. True friendship is always
attended with remembrance, and they that can forget were never truly in love.
When we fix upon a worthy object, we should resemble the Covetous, who have no
less care to conserve, then to heap up treasure. All that for the present I
shall request you is, that you would be more bold to employ me, and think if I
want a memory to accomplish your desires, that I am then on my deathbed. This
is the assurance you may expect from her, who is

Your, etc.

To her Servant, resolving not to Marry.
SIR, I am not yet in the mind to change the blessedness of my Liberty for the
Purgatory of Marriage: you tell me a Wife is the wealth of the mind; you must
except all, all jealousies and dislikes that may happen: Then that she is the
welfare of the heart; it is so when her youth with beauty, her wit with virtue,
have that happy agreement between themselves, so as to command the affections.
But Sir, you are not to learn, they have left most of our sex: It were a sin to
pry further into their imperfections; the terms you write on being so extremely
opposite. But if I am not deceived in my reading, the learned express, that
they weaken the strength, confound the business of our life, empty the purse,
with a thousand other feat qualities, which when I meet you next, you shall be
sure to hear of. Till when, wishing you the continuance of that quiet, wherein
you boast your self to live, I decline this theme of your wiving Letter till
our next visit. I bid you farewell, and rest

Your, etc.

To his Mistress, Sick.
Madam,
THough the most fair envy your beauties, and the most perfect your merits, yet
are they silenced by your charms; nay, sickness it self is rendered captive by
the puissence of your allurements; though if it wound you now, it is but with
the wounds that you have made; and doubtless it has seized on you, hoping that
by possession of your fair body, it may both change its name and nature; so
that it is pardonable, both for its love, and for its subtlety. Neither do I
believe that it is you, but your rigor that it aims to destroy, be you less
cruel, and the disease will assuage; otherwise you will be in danger of your
life. Though doubtless the consideration of destroying so many marvels, will
stop his designs. Death oft-times make use of love against us; so that he will
have a care of your life, as of his keenest weapon wherewith he brings us men
under his command, making us willing to yield to his stroke, as the refuge of
that misery into which your cruelty oft-times throws us. This I know by
experience, as being your Slave.

To his Mistress, despairing of her Favor, though unjustly offended against
her.
Madam,
WHat avails it you to make me feel your Thorns when I have gathered your
Flower. Why do you blame in words, him whom you have honored in effects and
blame him without cause, who cannot praise you but unjustly; Moderate your
severity, seeing that it offends you more then it hurts me. I have protested a
thousand times that I never was faulty, as you thought me; though it was to no
purpose, you believing otherwise. It suffices for my satisfaction, that I know
the truth, and that I have essayed, all the ways in the world to make you
understand it, though in vain. Adieu most fair but yet too cruel, if you leave
me triumphing over the most worthy subject in the world, I leave you vanquished
by a more faithful Lover.

A Letter of Consolation to a Mistress, upon the death of her Servant.
Madam,
I Believe that if you have been the last who have understood the death of your
Servant, that you will be one of the first, and indeed the only person, who
will in your soul celebrate the sad remembrance of him, a much longer time than
any of his Friends: not that his merit does oblige you, for I well know that
all merit loses its esteem in your presence, being so perfect as you are; nor
your Piety, though it be a thing natural to you with your other virtues; but
only his love, and constancy, as being both equally incomparable. Neither do I
believe, that either of these do oblige you at all, for though his love were
very great, that could not be otherwise, seeing you were his object, no more
than his constancy whatever it were; so that to say the truth, I know not what
can urge you to bewail his loss, unless it be the goodness of your
inclinations, being as mild and sweet as you are, fair, and consequently full
of Piety. I should weep my self, for having the least thought to condemn your
tears, yet give me leave to believe, that when you remember that the fires
proceeding from your eyes did help to consume his life, it would make them weep
for sorrow. Now what punishment will you impose upon your Beauty, if there be
nothing in you that has partaken of the millions of pains which he has
endured for your sake: Certainly you ought to suffer Shipwreck in the Sea of
your tears, unless the God of Love have need of you for one of his Altars.
Since you are the only Idol, to whom all mortals will present the sacrifices of
their Servitude. And as for my self, who have undertaken to succeed to the
merits and constancy of your deceased Servant, I will not give assurances in
words, for deeds themselves shall always be my sureties. Dry up your tears,
stop your sighs. I summon you to this duty, in the behalf of Reason it self,
knowing that his Commands are to be obeyed. Madam, when I first put Pen to
Paper, I had a design to comfort you, but knowing the greatness of your
resolution against all sorts of accidents, I changed my intention, to assure
you of the love and servitude that I have vowed to you, under the title of,

Madam, Your most humble Servant.

Letters.
SIR,
I Know it is to no purpose to dispute of Civilities with you, who live in the
light of the world, and are so well stored with the best words to express them.
I know too well that the excellency that dwells in you, begets at the same time
desires to preserve, as well as to acquire your favor. I have but one grief,
that I have not Soul enough to judge of those perfections that dwell in you,
which though I can never attain rightly to conceive, yet I am confident, no man
can honor them more, so that should you call me your Idolater, you could not
strain a word that could so rightly, as that, express my respects toward you.
Sir, Complements are very rare with me, and therefore I request you to believe
me, when I say, that they must be very strong cords and dangerous commandments
that shall remove me from your service; I know I can never deserve such violent
proofs of my obedience: it shall suffice me that I doubt not of your love, as
being,

Sir, Your most devoted Servant.

To his Absent Friend.
SIR,
IF I thought Fortune could be so much our Friend, I should request her to make
us inseparable, that I might be no more obliged thus to write; since the
entertainments that distant friends do give and take by Letters, is but a
picture of those between persons presents: for to say the truth, a Letter is
but a Copy of that, which makes us more curious of the original; a Glass that
shadows to us stronger desires to enjoy the person that is absent. The very
lines I receive from you, carrying with them the effects of joy to hear from
you, and of a passion to be more near you that I might not still be forced to
write that to you, which I would willingly protest; and find occasions more and
more to testify what I am, and ever shall be.

To his Friend complaining of Neglect.
SIR,
THE Friendship which you have promised me, and the service which you have
protested to me, force me now to demand the reason of your silence. I question
not but that you will want no excuse to plead for your self: But I entreat you
to believe, that unless they be very lawful, I shall not cease to complain of
you. You do well to lay the fault sometimes upon your urgent occasions,
sometimes upon the indisposition of your body: but all this is no satisfaction
to me. Confess but your fault, crave pardon, and you shall have it presently
granted. This is the way to preserve eternally the friendship of

Your most humble Servant.

The Answer.
SIR,
YOu do me so great a favor in complaining of me, that I am constrained to
give you thanks, instead of taking the least offense at you. This is not
because I want excuses to authorize my silence, but the interest that you have
in me, which makes me to condemn my self, resolving hence forward, that you
shall rather complain of my importunity then of my sloathfulness. Which is the
protestation of

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

Return of Thanks.
SIR,
I Protest that you have obliged me with a Favor, and that so perfectly, that
I must be your Debtor all the days of my life. I wish that an opportunity
would offer it self for you, to employ me in your service, that I might
testify to you, that since your favors are so extremely high, there is no
extremity which I would not undergo to requite them. This is no complemental
discourse, my heart dictates to my Pen all that which I write to you, assuring
you once more, that I will long bear in vain the title of

Your most humble Servant.

The Answer.
SIR,
I must complain of the excess of your civilities and courtesies, since our
interest consists in a reciprocal friendship. You thank me for courtesies
received from me, as if I were not obliged to do them, accustom not your self
to such kind of Phrase, and believe that the Language of Complements is unknown
to friends. I am in the number of them, and moreover,

Your most humble Servant.

To desire a Courtesy.
SIR, The fame of your generosity, has given me the boldness to require a
favor from you, to disintangle me from a business, the success whereof depends
much upon your authority. It Is true, that I never had the honor to be
acquainted with you. But though this be my particular unhappiness, I hope that
you will not make any excuse to refuse me the Courtesy which I desire from you,
not doubting but that in some other matter I may have the honor to make my
self known to you, rather by my services then by my name, since your descent
obliges me to remain,

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

The Answer.
SIR,
I have done all what you required of me, with a great deal of satisfaction,
and little trouble. Prepare your self to impose commands upon me, that you may
not let the passion which I have to serve you lie idle, and you shall discern
by my obedience, that I take delight in nothing more, then in making my self
appear in all places.

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

On the same Subject.
SIR,
ALthough I am the most unprofitable of all your Friends, yet am I none of the
least willing to serve you, and from thence I take the liberty to desire you;
to give me a meeting. All that I can say for the first acknowledgement of this
favor, is, that I shall eternally remember this favor; and that if I cannot
meet with any opportunity to requite so great a kindness, I shall bear my
sorrow for it to my grave, together with the title of,

Your most loyal Servant.

The Answer.
SIR,
WHen you desire any service from me, I entreat you to consider whether it be
in my power to perform it: that I may be more bold to encounter the blame which
my unhappiness obliges you to lay upon me. You shall command, when you please
other proofs of my willingness to serve you, desiring nothing more then the
title of,

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

To congratulate the good Fortune of his Friend.
SIR,
IF you know how acceptable the news of your good fortune is to me, you would
not doubt, but that the joy which surprises me for the same, is equal to yours.
Truly I cannot add any thing to it: since it proceeds from the friendship which
I have vowed to you, which is not common since your merit is the object. I
would tell you more, if the excess of my joy would give me liberty. It fuffices
me to assure you, that my content cannot equal the passion which I have to
serve you, as being,

Sir, Your most humble Servant.

The Answer.
SIR,
I Did always believe that you were of so generous a spirit, that you
participate in my concernments; But I persuade my self at the same instant of
time, that you doubt not of my willingness to serve you, that I may in some
measure merit the effects of your noble disposition. This I am urged to, not
being able further to requite the continual proofs, which you give me of your
good will toward me. I entreat you to esteem this for an undeniable truth, as
being from my heart and soul.

Sir, Your most faithful Servant.

To his Accomplished Friend.
SIR, If I have hope to be known to after ages, it must be by the honor of
your acquaintance; Your reputation at this time, being so just and so general,
that it is become a verity wherein the Wise agree with the Vulgar. Pardon me
Sir, if I presume thus to prevent your command, by this early showing you my
ready inclination to obey them: But I am content that you should give it what
name you please, provided you judge well of the effects of my duty, and do me
the honor to believe that I am,

Your, etc.

To his Learned Friend.
SIR, All the riches both of Nature and Art dwell in you, and are of such
force, that I acknowledge my inclinations to serve you, carry with them
immortal reason; your discourse being so grave, and soild that they cannot be
sufficiently listened to, for the edification of men that have seen four ages.
And for your Letters, in what style soever you write them, They are always
pleasing, if not, most admirably profitable; as if your Spirit had been
employed from your youth, in persuading of Princes, or instructing of
Ambassadors. When your Lines are serious, they strain not; when familiar, they
are without neglect: like beauties that appear in all fashions, yet allure,
whether neatly dressed, or carelessly plain. Pardon me Sir, if I lay open my naked
soul before you in this simplicity of my acknowledegments, you having so
absolutely purchased both my thoughts and affections, that I must need
ingenuously confess, that I have nothing left, but to assure you Sir how much I
am,

Your etc.

To his Friend at Court.
SIR,
YOU seem to have so perfumed your self with the sweetness of the Court, that
you cannot admit of the profaneness of a Village. Such a rudeness is the errand
this Letter carries with it; but be pleased to accept of it, as you know the
height of my ambition is bounded in such rural presents; neither should I dare
to presume thus, were I not persuaded that you allow me this liberty, which
otherwise I should never take. But I am confident you delight to gratify me,
and to do me the same good that I wish to you. If you desire to know the cause
of such extraordinary boldness in me, I beseech you to believe there is no
other, then the great affection I have to serve you, and to be,

Sir, etc.
To his Friend, upon the renewing of their Correspondence.
SIR, To be separated from a man so dear to me as your self I do believe I
could not live in the fortunate Islands, and having till I embrace you no other
way of traffic but by Letters, I am extremely angry with my self, that you
have prevented me in returning our old correspondence. Though I must
acknowledge there is some justice in it, for since you were the first that
broke it, 'twas fit you should be the first to reestablish it: I write thus of
the honor of your favor; assuring you notwithstanding that I could no way
deserve it. Therefore Sir, give me leave to beg your pardon for my neglect, if
I were guilty, which I shall never be in any thing that concerns you: and to
make it more clear to you, I never ceased to honor you; but only not to
express it, was like a secret fire not quenched but covered, which became the
more violent when it had less liberty to appear; Wherefore Sir, be confident,
that I shall make you see upon all occasions, for what is just that I will
never be less then I am

Your, etc.

A Familar Return of Thanks.
SIR,
THis negligence of my style be pleased to esteem one of the marks of
friendship between us. Gratitude is one of a poor man's virtues. This is the
best Rhetoric you could expect in so few Lines; and so I would renounce the
world, and all its promises, if a mortal could do so, to express my self but
truly thankful to you for your exquisite favors. The expedition of this
messenger would permit me no further at this time, but only to set my hand to
this protestation, that I love you exceedingly, that I honor you, and am as
much as any man can be in the world,

Your, etc.

To his Friend, inviting him into the Country.
SIR, I will not send you studied complements, I know you are born in a Country
of good words; I am here among Thorns and Thistles, among people that are
naturally affected with dullness, and dream in the best company, such as can
give no other reason for their silence, but that they are entreated not to
speak; in so much, that you may walk our Village, and hear nothing but
whistling; and which is a miracle, our Coridons are here arrived to such a
height of wilful ignorance, as if they held their Lands by no other Tenure, but
that of never speaking to the purpose. I should be quite out of heart, if I had
not your promise to rely on, that you will suddenly give me a visit, to
witness what I am like to suffer this long vacation, except I enjoy your
company; I wait for you as for a blessing, and if you come not hither next
week, I proclaim to you, that I am no longer,

Your, etc.

To his sick Friend.
SIR, The news of your sickness has so altered my health, that I may count my
self a sharer in your misfortunes. Really it has so much grieved me, that the
sorrow which I sustain, is more then the fever which you endure. Do you
therefore take courage, if you will that I should be in good health. You know
how much I am interested in your concernments. In a word, I assure you, that if
you do not quit your bed, I shall be forced to betake my self to mine. These
are the absolute protests of,

Sir, Your, etc.

A Letter of Resolution.
WHY thus in Cynthia's sports do you delight,
And take from Loves all their due and right;
Yield brightest, and his sweetest pleasures try,
Whose fires in funeral flames can only die.
May I not live, if all things plead not sin;
I wonder what strange fear does keep thee in.
Though with Diana thou do seem to vie,
Trust me, thy face does give thy words the lie;
More fit for Venus thou then her wilt prove,
There Is no Religion, sweet, but that of Love.
Were the Gods kind, and to my love agreed,
With eyes unwilling thou these Lines should read.
When shall I thee embrace intranc't, and lie
Languishing wrapped in Loves sweet ecstasy.
If Arts will not avail, then Arms I Will move,
And so my longing bosom force thy love,
Yet us Loves warfare better will become
Soft breathings best please love, not the fierce Drum;
If that thou will I can more gentle be,
Lay shame aside, and yield thy self to me:
Either thy self into my arms resign,
Or I must fall, for I have vowed thee mine.
To his Mistress, desiring Enjoyment.
TEll me cruel fair one, why,
When I ask you still deny;
You thereby unkind do prove,
Both to Nature and to Love;
Nature when she gave that eye,
That hand, that lip, that majesty:
Surely then she did not mean,
Here riches should be only seen,
And not enjoyed; were not each sense
A Sharer of your excellence?
She Would wrong her self, and so destroy
Mankind by making you so coy.
Oh then yield, and let me find
That you are thankful if not kind;
Cupid in your bosoms snow,
Losing his Shaft, unbent his Bow;
And wooed his Mother, since he shot
So long and wounded not.
Your eyes henceforth might be his Darts,
With which he slew so many hearts,
She did; but with all gave you skill
To heal again, as well as kill;
She gave your eyes power to inflame
A breath with all to cool the same;
You are just to use that breath,
To be a Sentencer of death;
Nay, you are impious, if you are
Less merciful then you are fair:
And by denying needs must grant,
That you are proud or ignorant.
Where Women truly know their price,
It Is pride not virtue makes them nice.
Let us Lucinda henceforth twine
With close embraces. Let us join
Lip unto lip, and reap the pleasure
Of true Lovers without measure;
Till our Loves are by wonder grown
From two bodies into one.
Yield Lucinda thy consent,
That from our true and just content;
Others may a perfect rule obtain
How they should love, how be beloved again.
Thus she striveth to indite,
That can love but cannot write.
In every Line, here may thou understand,
That Love has signed and sealed with his hand.
These cannot blush although thou do refuse them;
Nor will reply, however you shall use them.
O modesty! did thou not me restrain?
How would I chide thee in this angry vain?
Pardon me dear if I offend in this,
With such delays my love impatient is.
I needs must write till time my faith approve,
And then I Will cease but never cease to love.
Tears, thou know well my heart cannot abide;
How I am angry when I least do chide:
Too well thou know what my creation made me;
And nature too well taught thee to invade me.
Thou know too well, how, what and when, and where,
To write, to speak, to sue, and to forbear;
By signs, by sighs, by motions, and by tears,
When vows should serve, when oaths, when smiles, when prayers.
If any natural blemish blot my face,
Thou do protest it gives my beauty grace;
And that attire I Am used most to wear,
That Is the most excellent of all you swear.
Or if I wake, or sleep, or stand, or lie,
I must resemble some one Deity.
But Sweet Diana what strange fears have I,
That am confirmed how men can swear and lie?
As with an ague I do shiver still,
Since to this paper first I set my quill.
What blots so e're thou see, my tears did make;
And yet these tears do weight of words partake.
If I do err, you know our sex is weak,
Fear proves a fault when Maids are forced to speak.
Could I my soul into thy breast convey,
It might like purity to thine display.
I should not then come short of any trick,
Which makes thee prettily appear love sick;
But all my thoughts are innocent and meek,
As the chaste blushes on my Virgin cheek:
For till this blush, I never did espy
The nakedness of an immodesty.
Disguise not love, but give thy self to me,
I cannot write, but I could die for thee,
A Letter from a Lady with Child.
WHen thou do see my Letter, do thou know
Whether it is my right hands Character or no?
Why should I write, I feel a present fear,
That I must write more then a Maid should dare.
Oh! should I make it to my mother known,
Needs must it make m'asham'd what thou have done.
No outward symptom shows my grief, yet I,
Wretched, past help of any medecin lie.
Think but how weak I am, when I scarce these
Can write, or turn me in my bed with ease;
How I do fear lest that my Nurse should spy
One Letter interchangeing coloque.
Then hastily I leave my words half framed,
My Letter straight is in my bosom crammed;
The name of Marriage with shame abash't,
My pale wan cheeks with glowing blushes quash't.
Fond man what glory have thou won,
Or praise, a Virgin thus to have undone?
As once an Apple did Atlanta seize,
Thou Art now become a new Hippomanes.
O be not angry quiver-bearing Maid,
That I Am loves patiently by youth betrayed;
It Is now too late, let thy rage be exiled,
And spare the Mother of, but for the Child.
He had a face and years too fit for play,
A treacherous face that stole my heart away.
Who whilst I sung for Love is all things mind,
Upon my amorous lips did kisses bind
Both them, and each part else did please him well;
But chiefly when to loves choice sports, he fell;
But whither has my Pen transported me,
Thus to discourse to th'Queen of chastity.
Sweet Sir. You swear by these same breasts of mine
To me, and by thrice three Maids Divine,
You Would celebrate the Himeneal rites,
And in my arms spend all your youthful nights.
This was a Language you were used to say
When we were acting our delicious play;
And when of me your last leave you had took,
You swear an oath upon my lips, your book,
That you would back return with winged speed
To save my name from scandal of the deed;
With patience Sir your coming I attend,
Until you come receive these Lines I send.
A Persuasive Letter to his Mistress.
SWeetest, but read what silent Love has writ
With thy fair eyes, taste but of Loves fine wit,
Be not self willed; for thou art much too fair,
For death to triumph over without an heir;
Thy unused beauty, must be tomb'd with thee,
Which used, lives thy Executour to be;
The Flowers distilled, though they with Winter meet
Lose but their show, their substance still is sweet.
Nature made thee her seal, she meant thereby:
Thou should Print more, not let the Copy die;
What, have thou vowed an aged Maid to die?
Be not a fool; Lovers may swear and lie.
Forswear thy self, thou will be far more wise
To break an oath then lose a Paradise.
For in the midst of all Loves pure protesting,
All Faith, all Oaths, all Vows should be but jesting:
What is so fair that has no little spot;
Come, come thou may be false yet know it not.
I wish to you, what has been wished by others,
For some fair Maids by me would have been Mothers;
Pardon me not, for I confess no error;
Cast not upon these Lines a look of terror,
Nor vainly Lady think your beauty sought
For these instructions are by Loves self wrought;
Venus her self my Pen to this theme led,
And gives thee freely to my longing bed.
I saw thee in my thoughts fair beauteous Dame
When I beheld the eyes of fame
I loved thee, ere I saw thee long ago,
Before my eyes did view that glorious Show.
Imagine not your face does now delight me,
Since seen, that unseen did invite me.
Believe me, for I speak but what is most true,
Too sparingly the world has spoke of you;
Fame that has undertook your worth to blaze,
Played but the envious Huswife in your praise;
It Is I will raise thy name, and set thee forth,
Enjoy thy riches, glorify thy worth;
Nor with vain scribbling longer vex my head
To fancy love, but leap into thy bed.
Best Wishes from a Lady.
Most worthy SIR,
Unto your Noble blood
IT IS no adition to think you good,
For your demeanor bears that equal part
Y' have won the love, not envy of the Court;
Having observed the forms and laws of state;
Gaining men's emulation not their hate.
With such a noble temper you divide
The difference 'twixt formality and pride;
Thus your indifferent actions are as far
From being too common, as too singular.
Whilst in your nature those two Suns arise,
The attributes of beautiful and wise.
Give me now leave, to wish that you may be
As clear from others envy, as you are free
From the desert. But here I must not cease,
May no rude chance invade your blessed peace
To your chaste thoughts, I wish as chaste a mate
Blessed in her dower, in beauty fortunate.
May all the happiness Heaven can confer,
Be acted on your lives fair Theater.
And may I live to see you thus possessed
Of these good wishes, that flow from the best
Of your most entire Servant.

A Letter of Acceptance from his Mistress.
I am not angry, woe can angry be
With him that loves a Mistress? Love is free;
But you have further aim, and seek to do,
What Jove defend, I should consent unto.
I know that too much trust has damaged such
As have believed me in their love too much.
Leda when she never dreamt of God nor Man,
Jove did surprise her, shaped like a Swan.
But you are a Wag, I Am certain by the signs
You make at Table in the meats and wines;
How you can wanton, when your eye advances
It Is brightness against mine, darting sweet glances;
How you can sigh, yet by and by can grace
With an angelick smile, your cunning face?
You are too manifest a Lover. Tush,
At such known sleights I could not choose but blush.
Yet am I not incenst, could thou but be
As loyal, as thou art amorous to me
In the loves just ways; for if thou seekst to climb,
My wished for bed, at the appointed time;
When Saffron Hymen has concluded quite
Such covenants as belong to th'nuptial rite;
I shall inter pret kindly every sign,
And moralize them in my being thine,
Taffy to his Mistress.
MOdest Shentle, when her but see
The great laugh her made on me,
And fine wink that her send
To her, came to see her friend;
Her could not shuse py Cot apove,
But he was entangle in her love;
A hundred ofttimes her was about,
To speak to her, and have her out:
But her peeing a Welsh man porn,
And therefore was thank her would her scorn;
Was fear, put think nothing better,
Then put her love into a Letter;
Hoping her will not ceptions take
Upon her love, for Country sake.
For say her be Wilsh man, what ten
By Cot they all be Shentlemen;
Was descend from Shoves none Line,
Par humane, and par divine;
And from Venus that fair Coddes,
And twenty other shentle Poddies.
Hector stout, and comely Paris,
Arthur, Prute, and King of Fairies,
Was her none Cousin, all a kin,
We have the Powels issue in.
And for ought that her can see,
As cood men as other men pee;
But what of that, Love is a knave,
Was make her do what her would have;
Was compel her to write the rhyme,
That never was write before this time;
And if she will not pity her pain,
As Cot shudge her soul shall never write again.
For Love is like an ague fit,
Was bring poor Welsh-men out of her wit,
Till by her answer her do know,
Whether her do love or no.
Her has not pin in England long,
And con no speak the English tongue,
Put her is her friend and so her will prove;
Pray send her word if her can love.
Superscription for the Drolling-Letters.
TO the most gracious Queen of my Soul. To the most illustrious Princess of my
Heart. To the Countess Dowager of my Affections. To the Lady of my Conceptions.
To the Baroness of My Words and Actions. To the Spring-Garden of all pleasure
and delight. To the Peerles Paragon of Exquisite Formosity. To the chief of my
Heart and Affections. To the Empress of my thoughts. To the Lady, and Mistress
of my thoughts and service. To the Lilly-white-hands of my Angelical Mistress,
These present. To the Complete Mirror of Beauty and Perfection. To the ninth
Wonder of the World. To the most Accomplished Work of Nature, and the
Astonishment of all Eyes. To the Fair Murdress of my Soul To the Rose of pure
Delight. To the Choice Nutmeg of Sweetest Consolation. To the most Flourishing
Bud of Honor. To His Most Sacred Angel, Mistress etc. To Her who is Day
without Night, a Sun full of Shade, a Shade full of Light, Mistress, etc. To
the Atlas of her best Thoughts and Affections, Her Dearly beloved M. L.
Broom-man in SOVTHWARK, These.
Subscriptions.
MAdam, Your Gally, Gally, Gally-Slave, Madam, Your Always burning Salamander.
Madam, Your Continual Martyr. Madam, Your poor Worm, that must of necessity
die, if trod upon by the foot of your disdain. Madam* Your Captive, willingly
fettered in the Chains of your beauty. Madam, The Vassal of your Severest
Frowns. Madam, The Most Loyal Subject to Your Imperial Power.
MOCK LETTERS And Drolling Letters.
A Soldier to his Mistress.
Madam,
I Have now left the bloody Banners of Mars to follow Cupids Ensigns. Though I
must now confess, the latter to be the severer service: for under the one we
only get broken Pates, under the other wonded Hearts. There we have pay and
plunder, here we have neither. But from whence arises all my trouble? it is from
you Madam, who like Jone of Arquez are risen up to terrify me in the midst of
all my conquests. For alas! the assaults of your eyes have so alarmed my
breast, that it is in vain for me to think of reposing by day, or sleeping by
night: Oh! that you would make an end of the War, and come and take me in my
own Quarters. Otherwise I must be compelled to bring my scaling ladders to
force that Lathemhouse of Beauty, which is your fair body, to free my self from
the hourly incursions, that your perfections make upon my soul. But why do I
rage? Deliver it by fair means. By the Nails of Jupiter of you will not delay
to do it, I swear there is no man shall venture his life further to defend you
from the Batteries of lying fame or injurious slander. And more then that, you
shall find me the most faithful Knight that ever smote terrible Giant for fair
Ladies sake,

A Pedagogue to his Mistress.
Most Dear Star,
KNow you not that you are already mounted above the Horizon of Accomplished.
Nihil verius est. There is nothing more true. And being thus the Miracle of
your Perfections, and the perfection of your Miracles, with a soft violence ye
have wounded my bleeding soul. Foemineo teneri tribuuntur. The Feminine gender
is very troublesome; But O Damsel! as fair as you are cruel, and as cruel as
you are fair, do not resemble that treacherous Emperor Nero, who took pleasure
to see the City of Rome on fire. O! do not from the turret of your merits, with
delight, behold not only the Suburbs, but even the City of my Heart to burn,
with all the Churches in it, that I have dedicated to your honor. For I can
assure you more fair then Venus, then Venus of Cyprus, as the Grammar has it,
Creta, Brittannia, Cyprus, Great Britain and Cyprus; that whatever Oration or
Sillogism, poor, miserable, and passive, I can make by way of special
demonstration is only to show and acknowledge how much I am your superlative
servant, per omnes casus, in all cases.

A Cockney to his Mistress
My Dear Peggie,
I Have here sent thee these Lines writ with my tears, and a little blacking
that our Maid rubs my Fathers Shoes with, that I may unload a whole Cart-load
of grief into the Warehouse of thy bosom. Truly Peggie, I think I shall die,
for I can neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor wake. Nothing that my Mother
can buy, either in Cheap Side or Newgate-Market will go down with me; yet, you
know my motheris as pretty a Huswife as any in the Town. She seeing me look as
pale as the Linen in Moor-fields, and moping in the Chimney corner, (...) the
Maid fetch me a Cap, and asked me if I would ha^ (...) Sugar sops. But I cried
no, I Would have Peggie, wi^ (...) she jeered me, saying, What are you lovesick
Tom? (...) I cried, and made a noise like a Cat upon the Tiles. But let all the
world say what they will, I will pout and be sick, and my Father and Mother
shall lose their eldest Son, but I Will have Peggie, that I will. I beseech thee
not to omit any occasion of writting to me, that since I cannot kiss thy hand,
I may kiss the Letters that thy hand did write. The Bearer hereof is our
Cook-maid, one that pitties my condition, and is very trusty: I have therefore
engaged her to call and see thee every time she goes to Market. My Mothers
Rings are all close locked up, else I would steal one to send it thee: however,
I entreat thee to accept of the good will for the deed, and to take in good
part the endeavors of thy most faithful Servant.

Postscript
As I was going to seal, my Father came in, taken suddenly and desperately ill.
The Physicians were sent for, and by their whispering, assure me that he cannot
live; as soon as he is dead I shall not fail to visit thee, and make sure work
between us.



A Seaman to his delight in Wapping.
Kind if not unkind Susan.
HAving read in a Ballad, how that a Woman is compared to a Ship, it made me to
conceive no small reason, for a Sea-mutual love between us. Since it is most
certain that a Seaman cannot be without a Ship, nor a Ship without a Seaman,
do not therefore shipwreck my good intentions in their first Voyage to thee.
Alas! for thou have no reason to despise me, because my Clothes are besmeared
with Pitch and Tar, knowing that I shall stick the faster to thee. I must
confess I have cast Anchor in the Harbor of thy Love, do not cut the Cable of
my Affections, lest I am adrift into a Sea of misery; and where the Waves of
despair increased by the North Wind of thy disdain, shall dash out my brains
against the Rocks of Misfortune. ^lownce, I am in already, neither is it in my
power to help ^lf. O Susan, Susan, Susan! receive my floating soul into (...)
boat of thy heart, that thy poor Richard may not die, (...) recompense thee the
Preserver of his life.

A Hector to his Mistress.
Most Illustrious Queen of Beauty,
BY the heard of Achilles my affections groan for you; Your perfections have
trapand me: For when I had the honor to smell your odoriferous breath, me
thought it pleased me better then the sent of the best Spanish Tobacco. And
when I kissed your vermillion lips, I sucked Canary from them. Now Lady, your
Sack and Tobacco are the two strings to the bow of a man's life; Oh, thou that
art the third string to the bow of my life! bind thy self about my waste, that
I may be thy Oak, and thou my Ivy; or else that I may bear thee up and down the
Town like the Fellow that carries his Brother in his belly. Destroy not him
that both can and will destroy millions for thy sake. But be my Aqua Coelestis,
my Castle of strong water, to defend from the Batteries of misfortune, the
drooping spirits of thy dejected Slave.

A Lawyer to his Young Mistress.
Madam,
THis Indenture made the thirteenth day of April, in the year, One thousand six
hundred fifty six, Witnesses, that I John a Styles of Long Acre in the County
of Bedford, Gent. am a person of credit and reputation. Hoping therefore that
you are in good health, as I am at the writing hereof. These are to certify
you that I am sick at the very heart for love of you. The Judge thinks me mad,
for when I should plead, I fall a courting of him, telling him he is the Star
of my affections, and that unless he will marry me, I shall be undone. My
Clients also leave me, for while I peruse their papers, they hearing me sigh so
cruelly, begin to despair of their Cause, and go away in discontent, without
giving their fees. But all this, my pretty Darling, may be helped by thee.
Deigne therefore to bargain, sell, and to farm let, that fair Tenement of
Beauty, which is thy self, unto him, that cares not what he gives for the
purchase; together wiih the hands, legs, arms, fingers, toes, hair, eyes head,
thighs, belly, water courses, easements, commodities, and appurtenances
whatsoever, to the foresaid Tenement belonging, That I may have, hold, occupy,
and enjoy them for the term of years wherein thou shall live; at the expiring
thereof fully to be complete and ended. And I on the other part do promise and
grant, to, and with thee my foresaid pretty Darling, to be thy old Fool, thy
doting Fool, and to give thee all that I have for a Jointure. And further, that
thou shall live in the Country, and cuckold me all the Term-time, and come up
every year after Easter to buy thee Pins, Gloves and Ribbands, and a new Gown.
In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal the Day and Year first
above-written.

A Passionate Love Letter.
LOve having taken your Beauties for Arms, had long since laid siege to my
Liberty, which was retreated within the Fort of my Reason, when without putting
himself to the trouble of a Scalado, he is fled into my Eyes, and is by that
way entered into my Heart, as a Robber breaks into a house through the windows.
The sufferings I am in through his means are very violent, but being at length
appeased, he has sworn to me that the remedy lay in your power; and that all I
had to do, was to write to you of it: But seeing me a Secretary very ill
furnished with the necessaries of my profession, he took a Quill out of his own
wing, and made me a pen with the point of his dart; he has given me paper made
of his old Headbands by a celestial paper-maker; he took the coals of my heart
which was half burnt, and having beaten them to powder, he mingled them with my
tears, and thereof has furnished me with ink, with which I have written to
you; and for to dry the writing, he cast the ashes of those coals upon it. He
gave me waxout of his torch to seal it, and cut off a little piece of the
string of his bow for me to bind withal. And now ^air Lady consider, if
having assisted me thus far so favorably, he may not with as little
difficulty, furnish me with all his arrows for to wound you, and make you sick
of the same disease, as he is, who terms himself,

Your Slave.

The Mountebank's Letter to the Chyrurgeons.
Gentlemen,
HAving had continual and daily experience in several parts for many years
together, in the cure of the French Disease, with as good success as mine own
heart could wish; and now at length desiring to show my self a profitable
member of this Commonwealth and City wherein I abide, I could not choose but
write to you, by way of advice, seeing so many errors among you, tending all to
the destruction of the Patient. In the first place, I counsel thee O man or
woman, who ere thou art, that do profess the cure of Venereal Distempers, to
avoid that common fault among all the Professors thereof, which is
Coveteousness. For if a young man or a young woman has by chance got a Clap,
and is willing to give all he has, rather then to endure the disease long,
will thou be so base and sordid, to make his or her earnest desire to be the
cause of thy exaction. Assure thy self that money got by such exaction, will be
a worm to consume that part of thy Estate which thou have honestly got. In the
next place, be not too inquisitive of any Patient who he is, and where he
dwells; for if he have not a mind to tell thee, what have thou to do to enquire
any thing concerning him? Thirdly, judge not rashly of him, as who should say,
you have been lying with a Wench; for you cannot but know that there are many
ways of getting Claps beside that one; as by drinking with the party, lying in
a hot bed with him, sitting upon a close-stool after him; as also by lifting,
riding, or any other manner of straining. Then let every Patient receive his
cure with all privacy. And lastly, do not flatter me daily with any patient
whatsoever. This is the part which ye have to act upon the Theater of this
world, which, if thou do not justly perform, consider, I say, consider, that
you must make your exits into Stoves and Sweating-tubs, much hotter then those
with which you ever afflicted your patients withal, being on earth. Heaven
direct your course, that you may be neither Cheaters, Imposters, nor Cozeners,
as most are who profess the cure of Venereal Distempers; but that ye may be in
this, as well as in all your other actions, faithful and honest; which is the
daily wish of

Your Friend and Servant.

A Broom-man in Kent-street, to a young Lay of quality, whom he fell in Love
withal, beholding her in a Belcony.
Madam,
AND by that word you may know I am no zuch Clown as you may take me for, in
good sooth law now, your fair face has wounded me to the very heart, so that I
would give all the old Shoes in my Sack to enjoy the happiness of your sweet
company. I know that Ladies love variety, so that I am bold to think it would
be no small recreation to you, when you have been glutted with the company of
your silk and satin Gallants, to converse two or three hours with a tatterd
Broom-man. I have heard in some Ballads, how the Gods did condescend to come
upon the earth, and dine with poor people; much less therefore should you being
but a mortal Lady, disdain to eat a piece of bread and cheese, now and then,
with a sorry Broom-man. There is a Proverb that tells the Gentlemen, that Jone
is as good as my Lady in the dark: and why should there not be another Proverb
to tell the Gentlewomen, That Tom is as good as my Lord in the dark. I do not
want examples to tell you, how that the Queen of Fairies married a Tinker, and
of several Ladies that have married their Gentlemen Ushers, others their
Fathers Grooms, and others their Butlers. Now I believe my self not inferior
to any of those. As for what you, as a Woman, can expect from a man, I know my
self sufficiently able, of which I have sent you a Certificate, signed with the
Marks of most of the pretty Lasses in this street; neither do I doubt of the
continuance thereof, unless your hard heart do consume my marrow with grief and
anguish of mind; do not therefore kill me, who though I am but a Broom-man.
dare swear my self as faithful a Servant to you, as any man in England,
Scotland, France or Ireland. Pray send me word by this Bearer, for I stay
within in great perplexity, and cannot stir abroad with my Ware till I hear
your Answer.

The Ladies Answer
Gentle Broom-man,
I Understand the great affection which thou have signified to me in thy
Letter. For which I give thee ten millions of thanks. Truly thy eloquent
expression, and pat examples have begot so great an affection toward thee, that
the smoke of all the Shoes thou have in thy Warehouse, were they on fire, is
not able to smother the flames which thou have kindled in my heart. I shall not
come to thee in my Coach, lest it should draw out all the Wenches in the street
to stare upon our private affections. But if thou will make haste home from
crying thy Ware about the streets, I shall not fail to meet thee at the
Wool-sack in Kent-street, by six a clock to morrow night, were I doubt not but
that I shall be able to give thee sufficient testimonies of my humility, and
affable nature. In the mean time, I have sent thee a Flanders-lace Band, and a
Diamond Ring, to wear for my sake. Wash thy feet, and put some sweet powder in
thy hair, and be confident in so doing, thou will render thy self most
acceptable to thy

Endeared Friend and Servant.

A Country Parson to a rich Farmers Daughter in the same Village.
Kind Mistress Dorothy,
THE Parson of this Parish does send thee greeting in these Lines. For verily
last Sunday as I was preaching, thou did dart from thy eyes the love of thy
amiable features into my breast. So that even as a Woman with Child longs for
the corner of an Apple-tart, or a piece of raw Mutton, so do I thirst after
thee; and even as a Virgin that eats Chalk, and drinks Vinegar, looks pale,
and loses her stomach, so do I look pale with languishing for thee, and my
belly is shrunk up for want of food; for I have not eaten above half a surloin
of Beef, forty tithe Eggs, thirty black Puddings, and five great brown
Apple-pies, since Sunday last, that your Father took me home to dinner, which
is now almost a week. I shall put it to thy choice, whether thou will be
courted in public or in private; for I have made five delicate Sermons upon
the most amorous place in all the Canticles, wherewithal to allure thee into
my embraces. If thou do consent, then will I go to thy mother, and as the
child desires the maid to spread him some bread and butter for his afternoons
Luncheon, so will I desire her to give thee unto me that I may spread my my
self upon thee. If she replyeth, Yea, Then will I speak to her in the words of
Saint Bernard, saying, I thank you heartily good Mother. But if she say unto
me, Nay, then as Saint Cyprian has it very well: I shall be ready to hang my
self. Be thou therefore my preserver, and my intercessour, that neither thou
may want a Husband, nor the Parish a Minister, nor thy Mother a Man to
devour her bag puddings.

A Letter of Smiles from a young conceited Scrivener to his beloved Mistress,
Mistress D. C. Spinster.
Madam,
I No sooner saw you, but the tinder of my affection began to take fire. For
your beauty was to me like the herb Larix, cool in the water, but hot in my
stomach. So that as Pharaoh did long to know his dream, so did I long to know
what would become of me, as to your good liking of me. Be not therefore a
beauty without compassion, which is like a Mandrake apple, comely in show; but
poisonful in taste. But woe is me, for I find that my words have wrought no
more impression on your heart then an arrow on a rock of Adamant. So that I may
say of you, that as in the greenest Grass is the greatest Serpent, in the
clearest Water the ugliest Toad; so is your fair Body lined with a cruel Soul.
Alas, you have no mercy on my captivity, so that I am like the Spaniel that
gnaws his chain, but sooner spoils his teeth then procures liberty. But as a
Bladder is to a learning Swimmer, so is Hope to me; which makes me apt to
believe, that as there is no Iron but will be softened with the fire, so there
is no Heart how hard so ever, that will not be soft-by continual prayers. I
confess my expression is but like a picture drawn with a coal, wanting these
lively colors, which a more skilful Pen might give it. However consider, that
the Sun disdains not to shine upon the smallest Worm. Reconcile your self to
the humblest of your Vassals, and do not through your Marble-hearted-cruelty
utterly overwhelm him with Sence-distracting grief, like a Current that breaks
the Dams, and with a vigorous impetuousness drowns the Fields.

A Country Bumpkin to his Mistress.
Sweet honey Jone,
I Have here sent thee a thing, such a one as the Gentlefolks call a Love
Letter: 'twas indicted by my self after I had drank two or three good draughts
of Ale, but 'twas writ in a Roman joyning-hand by the Schoolmaster and Clerk
of our Parish, to whom I gave six pence for his pains. Truly Jone, my parents
never brought me up to speak finely as my Landlords Son does, but this I can
say in downright terms, I love thee. Marry Jone, many time and often have I
fetched home thy Cows, when no body knew who did it. Marry Jone, thou know I
always played a thy side at stool ball, and when thou did win the Garland in
the Whitson-holidayes, marry Jone, I was sure to be drunk that night for joy.
Marry Jone, cry I still, but when will thou marry, Jone? I know thou do love
Will. the Tailor, who, it is true, is a very quiver man, and foots it most
fetuously; but I can tell thee Jone, I think I shall be a better man then he
shortly, for I am learning of a Fiddler to play of the Kit; so that if thou will
not yield the sooner, I will ravish thee ere long with my music. It Is true I
never yet gave thee a Token, but I have here sent thee a piece of silver
Ribband; I bought it in the Exchange, where all the folks houted at me, but
thought I, hout and be hanged and you will, for I will buy a Knot for my love.
I assure thee Jone, 'twill make a better show then a Gilt Bay-leaf, and for
this year be the finest sight in all our Church. But what will thou give me for
this Jone? alas, I ask nothing but thy self; come Jone thou shall give me thy
self, come prithee Jone give me thy self. What a happy day would that be, that
to see us with our best Clothes on at Church, and the Parson saying, I Tom,
take thee Jone, and by the mass I would take thee, and hug thee, and lug thee
too, and hey then away to the Alehouse, and hey for the Musitioners, and the
Canaries, and the Sillabubs, and the Shoulder a Mutton and gravie, with a hey
down derry and a diddle diddle dee. Thus having no more to say, I rest in
assurance of thy good will, thine

honestly, truly and blewly,

FINIS.
Posies for RINGS.
THou were not handsome, wise, but rich,
'Twas that which did my eyes bewitch.
What God has joined, let no man put asunder.
Divinely knit by God are we,
Late one, now two, the pledge you see,
We strangely met, and so do many;
But now as true as ever any.
As we began, so let us continue.
My Beloved is mine, and I am his.
True blew will never stain.
No money shall buy my --.
No horns good Wife.
Against thou go, I will provide another.
Let him never take a Wife,
That will not love her as his life.
In loving thee, I love my self.
A heart content
Cannot repent.
I do not repent,
That I gave my consent.
No gift can show,
The love I ow.
What the eye saw, the heart has chosen.
More faithful then fortunate.
I Will ring thy thumb,
Then clap thy bum.
Hab nab; yet happy be lucky.
Love me little, but love me long.
It Is a good Mare, that never trips
Love him that gave thee this Ring of gold;
It Is he must kiss thee when the art old.
Now I know more
Then I knew before.
I longed to lose, and now have lost;
I am contented, farewell frost.
This Circle, though but small about,
The Devil, jealousy, shall keep out.
If I think my Wife is fair,
What need other people care.
Now do I find,
Why men are kind.
It Is in vain for to resist,
Women will do what they list.
This Ring as a token I give to thee,
That thou no tokens do change for me.
One begs enough, never fear,
To a small closet door my Dear.
Sarah, I do love thee so,
Cause thou did not say me No.
My deares^ Betty,
Is good and pretty.
I did then commit no folly,
When I married my sweet Molly.
Dorothy this Ring is thine,
And now thy bouncing body's mine.
It Is fit men should not be alone,
Which made Tom to marry Jone.
Peg, if thou art a Peg for me,
Then I will have a Peg for thee.
Su is bonny, blithe, and brown,
This Ring has made her now my own.
Katie, I chose with hair so red,
For the fine tricks she plays abed.
Nan with her curled locks I spied,
And would never be denied.
Prances is a name that is common
But H. W. made me a woman.
Tabitha's a name that sounds not ill,
She was bid rise, but I bid mine lie still.
Vrsula her name sounds rough,
I warrant she will give thee enough.
Dorcas she made coats for Children.
But we will make Children to wear coats.
Like Phyllis there is none,
She truly loves her Choridon.
Leonoras fair, well bred;
Yet I had her Maidenhead.
Ellen, all men commend thy eyes;
Only I commend thy thighs.
I have a John as true as steel,
I do believe, because I feel.
Robert, thou art a man of mettle,
Thy string is sweet, yet does it nettle.
My Henry is a rousing blade,
I lay not long by him a maid.
My William with his wisp,
He loves me well, although I lisp.
I love James for Scotlands sake,
Where so many bellies ache.
I love the name that conquered France,
Which made me yield to Edwards Lance.
Thomas is fit a Cuckold to be,
For he will not believe unless he see.
I love Abraham above any,
Because he was the father of many.

PROVERBS.
The Text.

HE that has a Woman by the waste, has a wet Eel by the tail.

Comment.

For Women hate delays as much as they abominate debility.

Women's actions are like their wombs, not to be fathomed.

And therefore he that deals with them ought to be a man of a deep reach.

Love though he be blind can smell.

This is the reason, that a man that runs passionately after a woman, is said
to have his nose in her tail, and is called a smell-smock.

Nothing venture, nothing have.
Yet he that ventures too far loses all.
Now the question will be in these two Proverbs, Whether it be better for a man
to lose nothing, though he get nothing, and so to keep his pate whole, or to
lose that which he has gotten, and to have nothing left him but a skin full of
holes.

The gentle Ewe is sucked by many Lambs.

And so is a kind woman butted at by many Rams.

Love and Knowledge live not together.

That is to say, they live asunder.

They love too much who die for love.

For as Aristotle says, Every excess destroys; and therefore he is a fool what
will do so, seeing a man has so little thanks for his labor.

A fat Wife never loved a faint Husband.

And there is good reason for it, the Devil ought to have his due.

Love me and love my dog.

To this Proverb are the Ladies beholding for all the verses made upon their
Beagles.

He that loves another better then himself, starves in a Cooks shop.

And ought to be buried under the Gallows.

Every one is not merry that dances.

Neither does every one dance that is merry.

It Is a trouble to ride, and death to go on foot.

What a devilish lazy fellow was he that invented this Proverb.

He incurs no danger, that comes not where it is.

That Is very certain.

He that goes far, gains much.

That Is a lie, witness Thom. Coriat.

When a man is dead, his Friends forsake him.

That Is because he forsakes his Friends.

Blows makes love decay.

And therefore he that beats his Wife, is sure to be a Cuckold.

Rome was not built in a day.

That every body knows, but can any man tell us how many days 'twas a building.

Love makes men marry, money makes them angry.

That Is when they cannot get their wives portions.

He that cannot pay let him pray.

With all my heart, if he can meet with those that will say, Amen to his
requests.

Nothing but money is money worth.

Very true, for here is knavery in all Trades.

Claw an Ass by the breech and he will bewray your fingers.

One good turn requires another.

He that believes a woman, and leads an Ass, will never be in quiet.

Then he that believes this Proverb, is an Ass that will do either.

He has enough that is pleased.

But can any body tell when he has enough to please him.

A man may well call till his heart ache, if no body will hear him.

Right Roger, your Sow's good Mutton.

One Barber trims another.

It Is very kindly done of them

He that means to pay gives good security.

Because he intends his security shall pay.

A man may lead his Horse to water, but he cannot make him drink unless he list.

Otherwise he would infringe the liberty of the Subject.

He must needs go whom the Devil drives.

For the Divel's a notable whipster.

Fast bind, fast find.

This Proverb caused the invention of the Italian Padlocks.

There Is many a one sings that is full sorry.

This Proverb is verified by those that sing upon the Gallows.

He Is sure of a Cat that has her skin.

Would I were as sure of an hundred pound.

A man may easily find a stick to beat a Dog.

Gentlemen, I hope you know the meaning of this Proverb without expounding it,
if you do not, you shall never understand it for me.

A Dog will endure no companion in the Kitchen.

For Dogs are like Usurers, they love to eat by themselves.

A fat Kitchen makes a lean Testament.

Very likely, for a man cannot eat his Cake, and have his Cake.

The Lady kisses her man for his masters sake.

Neither do I see how his master can be angry, it is one part of his duty to man
his Mistress.

He that spends beyond his ability,
May hang himself with great agility.
For he is lighter then he was by many a pound.

Every truth is not to be told.

And therefore Scogan 's wife, when her husband as'kd her whether he where a
Cuckold or no, denied to tell him.

He that begins a matter untowardly, ends it ill-favouredly.

This Proverb concerns Courters of Mistresses and getters of Maidenheads.

The Devil is known by his Claws.

How can that be, when some Authors affirm he has no Claws.

An ill wife that grows not worse, is not the worst of wives.

A bad excuse is better then none at all.

Women weep and sicken when they list.

But let the Cock crow, and you shall presently perceive change of weather. On
my word it is time to stand to your tacklings friends when the ship leaks.

The Wife that bites her lips and treads askue,
Is to her Husband, or her self, untrue.
Gentlemen, forewarned forearm'd. These are signs easy enough to be seen, take
notice of them

A Woman and a melon are both alike.

For till they are broke up, no body knows what is in them.

It Is no great matter though a woman drown her self.

For there are fleshpots enough in Egypt.

A gadding hen and a gadding wife will be soon lost.

But here is the mischief on it, that the gadding wife knows the way home, and
the hen does not.

He that loses his wife and six pence loses by the money.

Let him that can find the six pence take the wife for his pains.

A man of straw is worth a woman of gold.

Nay, here I Will be sworn, the Proverb-monger was out. For a whole Seraglio of
such Concubines would do a man no harm.

Fall back, fall edge.

Some thing I would say to this Proverb, but I cannot tell what, and therefore
I care not what becomes on it.

Farewell frost.

So said the Maid, and then she sighed.

Every day is not Sunday.

No, for then people would be weary of going to Church.

Every woman has her wanton fit.

I, and will have it in spite of the Devil.

A gazing, gadding maid seldom proves a good huswise.

It Is much they should not prosper when they look so well about them.

He is a fool that loses flesh for bones.

That is to say, he is a fool that refuses a fine plump Girl for a lean one.

Let him that fears the wagging of feathers fear to go among wild fowl.

But now a days a man may walk among the wild fowl, and ever fear their
feathers,

Such as the tree, such is the fruit.

That Is not always so, for there is many proper women have hobgoblins to their
Children.

Many a little makes a mickle, Light gains makes heavy purses.

Ha! well said, old true Penny.

Fine feathers make fine birds,

As you may see in Hide Park.

He repents too late that repents at the gallows.

Therefore he had as good let it alone.

He Is an ill cook that licks not his own fingers.

Doubtless the light of Nature has taught every man this Proverb.

A sack full of holes can hold no corn.

Even so there be some women that cannot hold their water.

A little rain allays a very great wind.

So said a mad fellow when he bepist his wives farting hole.

The longest days have evenings.

Who can help it, Ladies!

A low man can fell a tall oak.

If a tall oak, much more a tall woman; therefore maidens despise not little
men.

Too much scartching hurts the skin.

But say the women there is a difference between scratching and rubbing.

Of idleness comes no goodness.

For that is the reason so many maids have the green sickness.

Good at meat, good at work.

Therefore it is the best way always to eat stoutly in the company of wonen.

Grass grows not in hot ovens.

He that made this Proverb, was bound sure to speak truth for a wager.

Ill weeds grow apace.

That Is always the answer of an old woman, when you tell her she has a proper
maid to her daughter.

Good clothes hide much deformity.

What rare men Tailors are.

Men may meet, but not mountains.

Therefore you see when Mahomet bid the Hill come to him it would not stir,
'twas so lazy.

He that wants shame shall never win credit.

How is that great virtue impudence here abused?

He that is ashamed to eat, is ashamed to live.

If a man could live as long as he could eat, I make no question but that he
might easily be persuaded to lose his shame, and put in sureties for the
eternity of his stomach.

As shamefac't as a sow that slaps up a sillabub,

Those are your Whitson-Holiday sows, that swill up whole milk-pails in the
field, till you may follow them home by the leakage of their tap-holes.

He never goes out of his way that goes to a good house.

This was a maxim observed by Tailor the Water-Poet in his long vacation
voyages.

He that cannot fight let him run.

It Is a notable piece of Matchavilian policy.

A fools bolt is soon shot.

That made the Gentlewoman shit in the Exchange.

A gentle shepherd makes the wolf shite wool.

It Is a very fine way to be eased of the trouble of sheep-shearing

Good words cost nothing.

Unless it be Dedications and Love Verses, for some men do pay for them.

Better may a man's foot slip then his tongue trip.

Commonly the tripping of the tongue and the slipping of the foot happen both
together. Now if a man be late abroad, it is better that his tongue should trip
then his foot slip, for he may chance to fall in the street, and have a coach
go over him.

Some men may better steal a horse then others look on.

For it is fit that he that took least pains should have least profit.

When thieves fall out true men come by their own.

For as Philip the great King of Macedon well said, Concord upholdeth all
societies: Therefore it is high time for thieves to be hanged, when they cannot
agree among themselves.

A liquorish huswife seldom makes thick pottage.

For she puts all her Oatmeal in Caudles.

Hungry dogs love dirty puddings.

There Is many a man has lost his Nose by verifying this Proverb.

He Will make you believe a Hare lays eggs.

See Browns vulgar Errors.

It Is an ill wind blows no body good.
After meat comes mustard.
For their teeth watered so much after the meat, that it was impossible their
eyes should water after the mustard.

He that holds a drying pan by the tail may turn it which way he lists.

See more of this in Alexius his secrets, or in Aristotle's book of the diet of
the Phisolophers, cap. 6. of the manner of making pancakes.

Better no pies, then pies made with scabby hands.

Wink and all is well, for what the eye sees not, the heart never rues.

He that is born to be hanged shall never be drowned.

Well fare him that is born to be hanged say I, for he goes to heaven in a
string, when he that is drowned goes to hell in a ferry-boat.

A wary father has a prodigal son.

He is to be commended for not letting his fathers estate lie fallow; for if he
will not sow again after his great harvest, his son must.

A man cannot make a cheverel purse of a sow's ear.

Ye cannot tell what a man may do, there are very notable projectors living now
adays.

Like will to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier.

Gentlemen, ye need not wonder how the Collier and the Devil came to be
familiar, for he is fain to keep in with that trade, that he may buy his
provision at the best hand, against he goes to to set up his Pie corner calling.


MISCELANIA.
Fancy awakened: Natural, Amorous, Moral, Experimental, Paradoxical,
Enigmatical Jesting, and Jovial Questions, with their several Answers and
Solutions.
Davus es huc venias mox eris Oedipus alter. Q. Why did Apelles paint Cupid
with these words, Springtime and Winter?

A. By those two seasons, he represented the prosperities and adversities that
wait on Lovers.

Q, Why do lovers blush on the bridal night?

A. Out of natural shamefastness of what they are about to do.

Q. What is the difference betwixt an honest and dishonest woman?

A. A word.

Q. Why do whores paint?

A. That they may have some color for there Venery.

Q. What differences a woman from a man?

A. Meum and tuum.

Q. Why do they use to paint Cupid bare-headed?

A. To signify, that betwixt true lovers, there should be nothing covered or
concealed

Q. What is the greatest wonder in a little circuit?

A. The face of a man.

Q. What said the Squire when he found his man Harry in bed with his own
Curtizan?

A. Well done Harry, after me is manners.

Q. What if there had not ben been an Act against building?

A. That they would have built from the So Ho to Branford.

Q. What did the old Booksellers Dedication Horse cost him that he use to
ride on up and down the country?

A. Go look.

Q. What are the attendants on love?

A. Pleasure, travel, sweet, bitter, war, peace, life, and death.

Q. What are the joys of love?

A. Plays, sweet sleeps, soft beds, ravishing music, rich perfumes, delicious
wines, costly banquets, wanton refreshing, and such other soft and ravishing
contentments.

Q. Why do the Poets bestow arrows on Cupid?

A. To Signify how desperately love wounds.

Q. Why are the lips moveable?

A. For the forming of the voice and words

Q. How many veins are there in the body of a man!

A. As many as there are days in a year.

Q. Why do some stammer and some lisp?

A. By reason of the shrinking of the sinnews which are corrupted by phlegm.

Q. Why are we colder after dinner then before?

A. Because that the natural heat retireth to the stomach to further digesture.

Q. What Lady was that, which daunced best at the Ball in Lincolns-inn-fields?

A. She, whose foot slipping fell on her back.

Q. What reply was made to him that said, He did not use to give the wall to
every Cockscomb?

A. But I do Sir, and so gave him the wall.

Q. What is an ordinary Fencer?

A. For flesh and blood he is like other men, but sure nature meant him for a
Stock fish.

Q. Where is reputation measured by the acre?

A. In the country.

Q. What are the outward signs of the body, to judge of the inward disposition
of the mind?

A. A head sharp, and high crowned imports an ill affected mind, tallness of
stature, dullness of wit, little eyes, a large conscience, great ears, kin to
Midas an ass, spacious breasted, long lined, smooth brows without sorrow,
liberality; a beautiful face denotes the best complexion, soft flesh to be the
most apt and wise to conceive, and so etc.

Q. Who was famous for his memory?

A. Seneca, who writes of himself, that he was able to recite two thousand
names after they had been once read to him.

Q. What will never be out of fashion?

A. The getting of Bastards.

Q. When is a Cuckolds Almanac out of date?

A, Its perpetual.

Q. Why do some men love wenches better then their wives?

A. Because stolen pleasures seem sweetest:

Q. Why are women smoother then men?

A- Because they have the help of nature to expel those superfluities that
remain in men.

Q. What Is that which is too hard for one to keep, enough for two, and too much
for three to keep?

Sol. A Secret.

Q. What people are those that have but one day and one night all the year.

Sol. Those that live under the Pole Artick, for to them the sun never rises
in the Horizon 24 degrees, nor comes under; so they have six signs above, and
six signs beneath it.

Q. What is that which goes the swiftest of all moving things, and is the most
apprehensive of all living things, yet we cannot perceive his instant moving.

Sol. The Sun, which according to the astrological conjecture, runs two hundred
seven and twenty thousand miles in one hour.

Q. How is kissing used?

A. Only as a Prologue to the play.

Q. How does a man look after the recreations of a bridal night?

A. Like the picture of ill luck.

Q. Who invented the first lie of the great Giant?

A. Charles Brandon Stone-cutter in Phoenix Alley, near Long-acre, into whom his
next neighbor John Tailor the Water-Poet breathed his fictitious spirit.

Q. Why is Cupid pictured flying?

A. Because when he is sufficiently routed, he can stand no longer to it.

Q. Why are Tobacco-shops and Bawdy-houses coincidents?

A. Because smoke is not without fire.

Q. What is a Pyrate?

A. He is called a Traitor, because he fortifies a castle against the King.

Q. What answer did the Lawyer return to him that asked him, whether his long
discourse was not troublesome to him?

A. No indeed Sir, said he, my mind was on another matter.

Q. How might Naylers female be rightly named Mary Magdalene?

A. As she was a grievous sin.

Q. To whom may a man best commit a secret?

A. To a common liar, for he shall not be believed though he tells truth.

Q. What is that which of running, becomes staid; of soft, becomes hard; of
weak; becomes strong; of that which is infinite, becomes but one.

Sol. Ice.

Qu. Wherefore is it that Bastard children are often more ingenious then the
Legitimate.

A. Because, as they are got secretly, and by stealth, so the act is performed
with a more forced affection.

Q. Why are those that have their hair of one color, and their beards of
another, for the most part, accounted dangerous persons?

A. because it denotes in them an inequality of their humors and complexions,
which makes them naturally variable.

Q. Why is every creature sad after copulation?

A. In consideration of the unhandsomness of the act.

Q. Whether do the Gallants go to Hide Park to hear the Cuckoo or the
Nightingal?

A. Both.

Q. Why did Adam take the apple from Eve?

A. Because she bit it first, and said it was good.

Q. Why do Exchange-men so seldom speak truth?

A. Because it is not A la mode.

Q. What said the Horse-courser to the Justice, when he said, If he were not
hanged, he would be hanged for him?

A. He desired his Worship when the time came, that he would not be out of the
way.

Q. What said the fellow to the Chandler that had a whole groze of Candles
stolen from him.

Q. Take not your loss so to heart friend; there is no question but that they
will be brought to light

Q. Why are they called Quakers?

A. Because they tremble at their own opinions.

Q. What is a precise Sister?

A. She is one that will not let her child read the Hornbook, if a
Christ-cross row be in it.

Q. What are Chamber-maids like unto?

A. Lotteries, you may draw twenty, before you shall have one good one.

Q. What is the mystery of greatness?

A. To keep inferiors ignorant.

Q. What was that which little Jeffry's the Queens dwarfs mothers health was
drunk out of?

A. Queen Mabs thimble, an akorn.

Q. What city is that which is founded in the water, compassed with water, and
has no other walls but the seas?

A. Venice, which has continued uninterrupted since the first building 1152.
years.

Q. What little fish is that in the sea, which is the greatest wonder for its
strength?

Sol. A Remora, which is a fish that is not above a foot long, yet by fastening
on a ship, will stay it under sail against wind and tide.

Q. Why do some men's hair curle?

A. It is caused by the hot and dry temperatures of the persons.

Q. Why do gelded animals grow more fat then others?

A. Because they do not lose their better humors in following the females.

Q. Why are little men more prompt, subtle, and Chollerick then great?

A. Because their virtue, and natural vigor, together with the forces of the
spirits are more united in them, then in the great.

Q. What are those swellings and pimples that are usually in the face?

A. They are no other then an enunciation of crude, indigested humors, which
proceed from the moisture of the head.

Q. What reply made the young wife to him, that because she had married an old
man, said, that sometimes an old horse would travel as long a journey as a
young one?

A. I, said she, and withal fetching a great sigh, and stroking down her Belly;
but not in this rode, Sir.

Q. Why should a man choose a little wife?

A. Because too much of one thing is good for nothing.

Q. Why is sweet mistress so usual a complement?

A. Because shitten comes shites is the beginning of love.

Q. What answer did the wench return to him (being barefoot) that asked her,
whether or no she wore her ever days stockings?

A. Yes Sir, said she, and I have a pair of breeches to them of the same, which
has a hole in it, into which you may if you please thrust your nose.

Q. What shift did he make for to pay for his pint of Sack that he called for
at the King's Head in Fleet Street?

A. He thrust his stuff cloak into his codpiss, and running by the Bar cried,
stop thief, one had stolen his cloak out of the room.

Q. What said the Lady to the Gentleman that often used that protestation,
That he would pawn his soul on it?

A. She desired him to bring another pawn, for she greatly feared that was
forfeit already.

Q. What is a whore-master?

A. He is one whose ordinary sport is cock-fighting, which he uses himself so
long too, that at last he grows better acquainted with Cornelius then Tacitus.

Q. What did one compare tall men unto?

A. To garrets, which have nothing but lumber in them.

Q. What creatures of all others live the longest?

A. Man, a heart, the phoenix; when as other creatures lives, compared with
theirs, are but short: the hare lives but ten years, the cat as many, the goat
eight, the ass thirty, the sheep ten, the dog twenty, the bull fifteen, the ox
because he is gelded, twenty, the sow and peacock twenty, the horse thirty, the
dove eight, the partridge five and twenty.

Q. First my mother brought me forth, then I the daughter bring forth my mother
again?

Sol. It Is water, which is first ice, and then melts again and brings forth
water.

Q. Who are those that see many things afar off, but little near at hand.

Sol.. Old folks, who are blind in the present tense, but quick sighted in the
preterperfect tense.

Q. Why is Cupid painted a Child?

A. To signify the youthfulness that should attend a lover, as also, that for
the toy and knack of his light affections, he will lose the accomplishment of
his weightiest fortunes.

Q. Why do lovers look so pale and lean?

A. As the passions of their minds inwardly consume them.

Q. Why do lovers delight in amorous histories?

A. In respect of the conformity of their passion to the subject

Q. Why does one gape when another gapes?

A. There is no other reason to be given but a sympathy of imagination when
another man gapes.

Q. How is it that women go so unwillingly to bed, and rise the next day so
lusty?

A. From the perfection they receive from the man, in that they then know they
are women indeed.

Q. what made the Water-Poet believe he was a cuckold?

A. As it is reported he looked through the window.

Q. when may a lover fall out with his Mistress?

A. When he has learnt the trick to fall in with her again.

Q. when will Plays be in request?

A. When Tom Randals Muses Look-glass may be acted.

Q. what may be said of a common whore?

A. Non redolet sed olet.

Q. what is an excellent receipt to keep a woman honest?

A. For her to be always cross legged.

Q. What is the latter part of the word jealousy?

A. Lousy.

Q. What said a Gentleman to the Ladies, amongst whom, one of them let a fart?

A. Ladies, I know it is for your ease, I beseech you let it go round, and when
it shall come to my turn, I will use my best endeavor to try what I can do.

Q. How did the late King serve one that was importunate to be knighted?

A. After he had kneeled, he bid him rise, and tell himself what he would be,
and so he dismissed him.

Q. what said she to her husband, that named all the cuckolds in the town?

A. Truly husband you are such another man.

Q. What may be said of a young fellow that is in love with a whore?

A. That he is fallen asleep in the chimney corner, and is very likely to nod
into the fire.

Q. What are the three first members formed in the womb?

A. The heart, the brain, and the liver, which are the three first members of
life.

Q. Why have women thicker bloods then men?

A. By reason of the coldness of their nature which does thicken and congeal
their blood.

Q. What creature is that which bites with his tongue?

A. The Flatterer:

Q. What do the ancients hold for one of the greatest wonders of the world?

A. The Pyramids of Egypt.

Q. When I lived I fed the living, now I am dead I hear the living, and with
swift speed walk over the living?

Sol. A Ship made of an Oak, which growing, feeds Hogs, now bears men, and
swims over fishes.

Q. Why do we see our breaths in the winter, but not in the summer?

A. Because in the summer the exterior air is more subtle and hot, and our
breaths spread with such an attenuation, that they cannot be perceived; whereas
in the winter, the air being more thick, and gross, and cold; it keeps it self
more close, and unites it self in its issuing, to resist the coldness of the
air, which is its contrary.

Q. Why is a whores trade opposite to all others?

A. Because she sets up without credit, and too much custom breaks her.

Q. What is a mere scholar?

A. An intelligible ass.

Q. What is the reason that Luke turned Preacher.

A. Because he was not suffered to write news any longer.

Q. Why is the language of a scold most moving?

A. Because no man in his wits will tarry to hear her.

Q. What subject is the least worthy of a man's thoughts?

A. The constancy of a woman.

Qu. What is the suddenest and most successful way of address to a widow?

A. To tell her that you come to plough her up, that she must lie fallow no
longer.

Q. When does the voice change in men?

A. At fourteen, when they begin to feel their concupisence.

Q. Why is the heart placed in the midst of the body?

A. To impart life to the other parts.

A. How are Hermophrodites begotten?

A. By reason of the diversity of cells in the womb.

A. Why are curled haired men sooner gray then others?

A. Because their heat consumes the moist humors, which in Eunuchs and others,
is the cause of gray hairs.

Q. Whose cock whose dog, whose servant may be kept at the Cheapest rate?

A. The Millers cock, the Butchers dog, and the Innkeepers servant.

Q. what is that, which having taken we have lost, and having not taken we have
kept still?

Sol. A louse

Q. When a man dies, which is the last part of him that dies, and which of a
woman?

A. To answer merrily, the heart is the last part of a man, and the tongue of a
woman.

Q. what is a flatterer?

A. He is the shadow of a fool.

Q. What said the Barbers wife to her husband, when he would have went out of
the bed to have fetched an instrument, which he told her he would use for to put
her to less pain in the losing of her Maidenhead?

A. Sweet Husband said she, Lie down again, there is no such need, my fathers
man has taken such an order with me three months since, that you may spare
that labor.

Q. What said the Usurer to the impudent fellow, that coming into his room
where he was in Pye-Corner, without any ceremony, drunk up his single pot of
beer? Sir, said he, you are, as like the fellow that was taken the other day in
Smithfield, and committed to Newgate for stealing of a horse, as ever I saw man.

A. The fellow replied, Say you so Master Usurer, I knew him very well, he made
no more of stealing a horse then I do of eating this black pudding; and so he
snatched the Usurers dinner and left him.

Q. What Almanac maker writes truest this year?

A. He that tells fewest lies.

Q. What game do men love best?

A. My Ladies-hole.

Q. What sport does women like best?

A. Push pin.

Q. If a man calls his wife Whore, what follows by consequence?

A. That he is a Cuckold.

Q. Why are women most jealous?

A. Because they love with less discretion then men.

Q. Why do some ladies breasts leap, and as it were dance when they talk with
their lovers?

A. From the neighborhood of the heart, from whence all the vital spirits
proceed, which on such joyful occasions retire to the breasts.

Q. Why do lovers so kiss the eyes of their mistresses?

A. Because they would if they could, through those windows discern what is in
the heart, or else in gratitude, as the eyes were the first beginners of their
love.

Q. What said the Tyler to his man when he fell through the rafters of the
house?

A. He liked a fellow that went through with his work.

Q. What said the captain when his leg was shot off, and they cried for a
Chyrurgion?

A. No Chyrurgion says he, a Carpenter, a Carpenter.

Q. What said one that perceived a fellow in Bedlam more distracted then the
rest, Sir were you ever married?

A. Married quoth he, looking stedfasty upon him, I was never yet so mad.

Q. Why is a prisoner the best fencer?

A. Because he always lies at a close ward.

Q. Why does marriage free a man from all cares?

A. Because the woman takes all upon her.

Q. Why did Nailor stand in the Pillory?

A. For being Antichrist.

Q. How is an Hypocrite defined;

A. He is one that for the most part is full of oral subtle ty and mental
impiety.

Q. What is that which produces tears without sorrow, takes his journey to
heaven, but dies by the way, is begot by another, yet that other is not begot
without it?

Sol. Smoke.

Q. What two dissillables are those that divide the world?

A. Meum et tuum.

Q. What is the wisest of all other things?

A. Time, which finds out, and alters all other things

Q. Why is Ben. Johnsons Chair at Robert Wilsons Tipling-house in the Strand?

A. To signify that Poets in these hard times, though they should invoke the
nine Muses, may still want nine pence to purchase a pint of Canary.

Q. what is the profitablest sign, that one that has a handsome wife, can hang
at his door?

A. A pair of Horns, for then he shall be sure never to want custom.

Q. Why are there so few of the sect of the Adamites?

A. Because people are ashamed to show all.

Q. What replied the Vintner to the Gentleman after he had drawn him good wine,
and he said it had a whiff with it?

A. So had his --

Q. what is an Host?

A. He is one that is none of his own, for he neither eats, drinks nor thinks,
but at other men's charges.

Q. What is a Tinker?

A. He is a moveable, for he has no certain abiding.

Q. Whither does S. A. go when he dies?

A. Alas, he does not know himself.

Q. What said the fellow that had lost one of his ears for his former fact, and
was for another crime condemned to lose the other?

A. What a pox, said he, am I bound to find ears for every Sessions.

Q. What answer did the Tailors boy give to him, that when he presented him
with his masters Bill, said, that he was not running away?

A. That though he were not running away, his master was.

Q. What part is last formed in the womb?

A. The eye, the interpretation of the mind, which as it is last formed, so it
is the first which loses its motion in death.

Q. Why do men become bald?

A. Because with their declining with age, their natural humidity consumes in
them, although they may otherwise abound with corrupt excrements.

Q. Why have gelded men shrill voices?

A. The abundance of their humidity fills up the artery and makes it strait, so
that the breath proceeding from a narrow passage, causes the voice to be sharp.

Q. Why do the Anabaptists hate churches?

A. Because they are used to preach in tubs.

Q. What said Pope Urban the eighth to an English Gentleman that kissed his toe?

A. Sir, I hope you have not traveled thus far, to report when you return to
your own country, that you have seen Antichrist; alas Sir, I must deal plainly
with you, I am no other then what you see me, a frail old man, ready to drop
into my grave.

Q. What if the bed should speak what it knows?

A. It would put some persons strangely to the blush.

Qu. why may an Hypocritical Puritan be said to be a bastard?

A. Because he will not allow of Our Father.

Q. what is the nickname of Mistress M. T?

A. Mistress Moll Cutpurse.

Q. What become of the Turk that daunced on the ropes, and stood on his head
with his heels upright on an exceeding high pole?

A. He was so near to Paradise that Mahomet only put out his hand, took hold
of his great toe, and pulled him in,

Q. What kind of thing is a New England brother?

A. He is one that fled thither for conscience sake, and left his wife and
children behind him for the Parish to keep.

Q. When policy trips up a man's heels, what is it called?

A. Dexterity.

Q. Why is it probable that Eve studied Astronomy?

A. Because her sex have ever since been used to lie on their backs.

Q. what may an importunate Dun be compared unto?

A. A man's shadow.

Q. What answer was given to him, that dissuaded one from marrying of a wife,
because she was no wiser?

A. I desire said he, my wife should have no more wit; then to be able to
distinguish my bed from another man's.

Q. What trick did a scholar that was a lewd rogue, use after he had often
sent to his father, and could get no money from him?

A. He sent a letter to his father, to certify him that he was dead, and
desired him to send him up money, to defray the charges of his funeral.

Q. Why do not whores conceive?

A. They have been ploughed so much, that they can of necessity yield no crop,

Q. Why do we sleep better on the right side then on the left?

A. Because the lungs do then lie more remote, and cover the heart, which is on
that side under the pap.

qu. Which is the seat of the memory?

A. The hindermost part of the brain.

qu. Why are women said to be the weaker vessels?

A. Because there are so many of them crakt.

qu. Why do Lawyers wear such short gowns?

A. Because the vacations are so long.

qu. what was that in the Exchange that the Millener sent the Lady word that
she had left behind her, and she sent him word back, that he might take it for
his trouble of sending after her?

A. A --

qu. Wherefore is it that the Echo reports more clearly to our hearing, the
last syllable than the first?

A. Because the first are broken by the last, or that we are too near, or that
we speak the last in measure longer then the Echo gives us the first, and so
we cannot so well understand them.

qu. What is that which knows not it self to speak, understands not a word,
yet conceals not, but repeats the voice of him that speaks?

A. The Echo.

qu. How long did the learned guess that the world would last?

A. Six thousand years: two thousand years before the Law, two thousand years
under the Law, and two thousand years under the Gospel.

qu. From whence proceed tears?

A. Out of the brains most thin and liquid excrements.

qu. Of all fishes in the sea, which is the swiftest?

A. A Dolphin.

qu. what thing is that which is neither fire, nor moon, nor star, yet it
shines only in the night?

Sol. A Gloeworm.

qu. Why are so many whores gone beyond sea?

A. To find out those Hectors that they missed in England.

qu. What Is, the news from the Paris-garden?

A. That there is no inferior Officer left to carry guts to the Bears.

qu. What may be said of the furred Giant in the last Lord Mayors show?

A. That when he stood on his tip-toes, he was higher then the Pageants by the
head and shoulders.

Q. What said the gentleman to the thief, when he was wak't by chance, and
heard him breaking in?

A. My friend it is your best course to tarry till an hour or two hence for I
am now awake.

Q. What said the Farrier to the Emperick, when he would have given him money
for a drench for his horse?

A. Sir, we of one profession should not take money of one another.

Q. what answer did the poor scholar give to the beggar, that said that he had
a license to beg?

A. That lice he might have, but sense he had none, to beg of a poor scholar.

Q. what said the gentleman to his wife, when she desired him to give her a
flap of the coney?

A. How wife, before all this company.

B. what is a creditor?

A. A fellow that torments a man for his good conditions, he is one of
Deucalions sons, begotten of a stone.

Q. what is a Bawd like?

A. A Medlar, for she is never ripe till she is rotten.

Q. what is the reason that the outlandish woman is so hairy?

A. Because she is so seldom trimmed.

Q. why should not a married wan be called ass in his wives presence?

A. Because ox is more proper.

Q. At what season does the patient husband love the scold his wife best?

A. When she is speechless.

Q. why are there so many whores and so few bawds?

A. Because they want stock, though they have impudence enough to set up for
themselves.

Q. why are short and dim sighted people more given to love then others?

A. Because they discern not the unhandsom features and imperfectness of women
so well as those that can see.

Q. what is the meaning of the word Marriage?

A. Marry at age.

Q. what saying pleases a foolish Solicitor best?

A. Currat lex, ignoramus.

Q. why did the ancients paint on the borders of Cupids robe, Life and Death?

A. Because true love lasts not only for life, but after death also.

Q. why have some stinking breaths?

A. From the evil fumes that arise from the stomach.

Q. why is the heart first engendered and dead last.

A. Because it is the original of life, and without it other parts cannot live.

Q wherefore is it that we are most ticklish under the soles of the feet, and
under the armpits?

A. Because the skins of those parts are more strecht and more delicate.

A. what is the swiftest thing in the world?

A. One would imagine the sun, because in a day he compaseth the whole circuit
of the earth, but a thought is swifter then the sun, for that it travelleth the
whole world in a moment.

Q. where is the center or middlemost part of the earth?

A. Some Geographers write at Delphos.

Qu. Why do husbands for the most part seek wives, and not wives husbands?

A. Because the man is still seeking of his rib, which he lost, when it was
taken out of his side to form woman.

Q. What is an hyporcritical Puritan?

A. A diseased piece of Apocrypha, which bound to the Bible, corrupts the whole
text.

Q What is a man's reason compared unto?

A. In matters of faith, to fire; in the first degree of his assent, flame;
next smoke, and then nothing.

Q. Why is it dangerous to marry a widow?

A. Because she has cast her rider.

Q. Now Marriot is dead, who is the greatest eater?

A. One that is living.

Q. What said the boy to the Cuckold, when he asked him why he stared him so in
the face?

A. Truly Gaffer quoth the boy, for no hurt, but because every body said that
you had horns on your forehead, I looked, and indeed Gaffer I could see none.

Q. What said the wench to the genleman, that hit her a clap on the breech,
and cried, I marry, here is a plump one indeed?

A. Truly, said she, if you should blow as much wind in there, as I have blown
out, you would say it were plump to some purpose.

Q. What was said to the dwarf?

A. That he should still carry some sweet thing in his hand to smell to, whose
nose is levelled to every man's tale that he follows.

Q. What is said to be the beautifullest thing in the world?

A. The Sun, but to a blind man that cannot discern his glory, we may conclude
virtue.

Q. What creature of all others sheds tears at his death?

A. The Heart.

Q. How many miles is the earth in circuit?

A. It is uncertain to define it, yet the learned and Astrologians are of
opinion, that it is four times 5400. miles, howsoever in respect of the
heavens, they conclude it to be but a point, and that every star in the eighth
Sphere is esteemed bigger then the whole circumference thereof; where if the
body of the earth should be placed in the like splendour, it would hardly appear.

Q. Why does the stomach digest?

A. Because of the heat of the parts adjoining to the liver and the heart.

Q. Why does nature produce moystures?

A. Through the evil disposition of the matter, and the influence of some ill
constellation, not being able to bring forth what she intended, she brings
forth that which she can.

Q. When does the voice change in women?

A. At twelve years of age, when their breasts begin to grow.

Q. What is the dolefullest Latin that a lover can speak?

A. Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabile herbis.

Q. What was old Chaucers Saw?

A. Lord be merciful unto us, Fools or Knaves will else undo us.

Q. What place is the worst to learn French in?

A. The Low Countries.

Q. what is the best Rhetoric a man can use?

A. To speak to the purpose.

Q. what Rhetoric is most graceful in a woman?

A. A beautiful face.

Q. what companion should a man be most private withal?

A. A handsome Wench.

Q. Why did Phil. Porter dye?

A. Because he could live no longer.

Q. How do the English love the Spaniards?

A. Not so well as they do their silver mines.

Q. When should the longest grace be said?

A. When their is cold meat on the table

Q. When will Saint James's Fair up again?

A. When the Sutlers wives are not so subject to lie down.

Q. Why do ladies always eat the kernels but leave the stones.

A. Because to their best apprehensions they are to be kept for another use.

Q. Why is love compared to a maze?

A. Because when a man is once got in, he can never get out.

Q. Why are women more silent in love then men?

A. Because they are ashamed to talk of an unhansom business that is already
past.

Q. What is the benefit of sneezing?

A. To purge the expulsive power and virtue of the sight.

Q. Why are all the senses in the head?

A. Because the brain is there, on which all the senses do depend.

Q. How should a man behave himself to a coy Lady?

A. As if he were in the field, to charge her home.

Q. Why is wit compared to brush-wood, and judgment to tinder?

A. Because one gives the greatest flame, and the other yields the durablest
heat; but both meeting together make the best fire

Q. Why is a soldier so good an antiquary?

A. Because he has kept the old fashion, when the first bed was the ground.

Q. Why may Aretin be accounted an expert artillery man?

A. Because he gave directions for the postures.

Q. When does the world end with an old man?

A. When he begins to dote on a young wench.

Q. what replied the fellow when one bid him hold his horse?

A. He said, it was but one man's work, he might do it himself.

Q. What is reported of the Executioner?

A. That if he do not mend his Manners, he is likely to trust his life to the
mercy of one of his own trade.

Q. What said one to a Lady that had so many patches on?

A. That she could not well laugh for fear of showing of two faces.

Q. What is a bawd?

A. She is a charcoal that has been burnt her self, and therefore is able to
kindle a whole copper.

Q. How did Master Not of the Inns of Court love a citizens wife?

A. Like any thing.

Q. what is the most lascivious part of a woman?

A. Her rolling eye.

Q. what said the Vintner of Southwark, when the Parson killed his wife in the
Percullis?

A. By and by, anan, anan Sir, I come, I come Sir, by and by,

Q. Why is love painted with flowers in one hand, and a fish in another?

A. To show that without any contestation he governs both by sea and land;

Q. why is marriage compared to a sea voyage?

Qu. Because if people have not the greater, and the better fortune, They are
very likely to be cast away.

Q. which is most jealous, the man or the woman?

A. The woman, though men have most cause, you know why.

Q. Why are some left handed?

A. Because in some persons the heart sends not heat to that side?

Q. Why can women endure thin clothing in the winter better then men?

A. Because being naturally cold they feel cold the less

Q. what creature is that which brings forth at eace, nourishes her young,
and goes with young again?

Sol. A hare.

Q. what is that which being first water assumes the form of a stone, and still
retains it?

A. Crystal congealed by frost.

Q. which is the quickest of the senses?

A. The eye.

Q. why is it better to marry a widow then a maid?

A. Causa patet

Q. What may be said of a covetous rich man?

A. That he freezes before the fire.

Q. What reply did one of the Tylers make to the other, when he said, You do
your work too slightly.

A. Brother, said he, we must work at one time as we intend to have work at
another.

Q. what was the reply to one that gave him this complement, Sir, I wish that
every hair of my head were a groom to do you service?

A. He replied, Sir, I wish that every blast from my back side were a cannon
bullet ready charged to batter down your enemies.

Q. A cowardly Captain asked a Soldier whether he knew him or no?

A. The Soldier replied, I should have known you if you had shown me your back,
for that I have seen often; but I never saw your face before.

Q. When will the Vintner at Aldersgate pull off the Mourning from his sign?

A. When Wine is at the old price.

Q. A fearful bashful Countrey-fellow was asked, whether he would go to bed to
his bride?

A. No quoth he, I Will go to Bed to my mother, that I will.

Q. Whence is it that those people that wash in the winter in warm water feel
more cold then those that wash in cold water?

A. Because that the warm water opens the pores, and gives an entrance to the
cold; whereas cold water on the contrary, shuts the pores, for cold is
restringent.

Q. wherefore is it that the Hycup, especially if it be not very violent,
cease in holding the breath; or else if we are suddenly frighted, or
afflicted with some opinionate unhappiness, or else with the taking of vinegar?

A. Because the Hycup proceeds of a sudden difficulty in breathing, and that in
holding our breath, it must be of necessity, that we shall a little after
respire by course; also we being made attentive to that we are fearful of,
makes us hold our breath, and sometimes with a profound sigh fetched from the
stomach, it hinders the cause of the Hycup.

Q. Can you in few words give an illustration or description of the body?

A. Yes, the body is the dwelling of the soul, the eyes are the windows of the
soul, the brows the portals of the mind, the ears the interpreters of sounds,
the lips the leaves of the mouth, the hands the workmen of the body, the heart
thereceptacle of life, the lungs the bellows of the air, the stomac the orderer
of meat, the bones the strengthners, and the legs the colums of the body

Q. What seed is that which joyneth all the countries of the world together?

A. Hempseed, of which is made sails for ships that transmit them far and near.

Q. What art is that which makes use of the wildest things in the world?

A. Physic.

Q. What was the Welsh-mans meaning, when he said, He had the law in hur own
hand?

A. He was burnt in the hand.

Q. One said painters were cunning fellows, the other asked why?

A. Because said he, they are sure to find a color for whatsoever they do.

Q. One said to a sturdy beggar, friend, it is a custom amongst those of your
trade, if a man does not give you, to rail at him?

A. The beggar answered, thinking to get something of him, Ah master, I am none
of those. Say you so, says the gentleman, I will try you for once; and so away
he went, but never unbuttoned his fob.

Q. One boasted himself to be a wit, saying, That the world spoke him to be all
wit?

A. One that stood by, and knew him very well, Is it possible that you are
taken to be a wit, or to be all wit, I only took you to be a wittal

Qu. What is a mere common Lawyer?

A. He is a foil to make a discreet one look the fairer.

Q. what is a Bragadocia welsh-man?

A. He is one that has the abilities of his mind in potentia, but not in actu.

Q. why do some of our Lay Preachers hold forth so long?

A. Because their ware being course, they can afford the larger measure.

Q. what is cast beauty like?

A. A pair of bellows, whose breath is cold, yet makes others burn.

Q. Who has more pleasure on the bridal night, the man or the woman?

A. The woman, who though she rises like blushing Aurora, yet such a tel-tail
lightsomness, cheerfulness and mirth appears in her face, as discovers the
chaste and pleasant content she received from her bridegroom.

Q. What is the highest respect, an honest wife can tender her husband?

A. To expose her self to his embraces, to make him lord of her body, and
commander of her thoughts.

Q. Why does a drunkard think that all things turn round about him?

A. Because the spirits that serve the sight are mingled with the vapors of the
drink; which with too much heat, cause the eye to be continually moving.

Q. Why do gentlemen so powder their Periwigs?

A. Because all their own hair comes off.

Q. How did the gentleman requite his blind bears courtesy?

A. She burnt him, and the fire shovel burnt her.

Q. Why do Apprentises wear no cuffs?

A. Because they cannot abide to were those that are of their masters giving.

Q. Why cannot the Spaniards so properly now as formerly, for their keeping of
forts, be compared to crab-lice?

A. Because the English have of late so put them to the shrug, that they are
always upon remove.

Q. Why does Cupid, of a blind archer, shoot so well?

A. Because for the most part he hits the mark.

Q. Why is wealth better then wit?

A. Because few Poets have had the fortune to be chosen Aldermen.

Q. What said the fellow to the sleeping watchman, when he stole away his
lanthorn?

A. Good night.

Q. What is the worst argument a Vintner can use against the late act for the
prizes of wine?

A. To draw bad wine.

Qu. What said the Welsh-man, that by his reading saved his life, when after
they had burnt him in the hand, they bid him cry, God save the King?

A. Nay, quoth he, rather God bless my father and mother, for if they had not
brought me up to reading, I might have been hanged for all the King.

Q. To one that excepted that another had saluted his Mistress?

A. This answer was given, that as he had kissed her before, he might if he
pleased kiss her behind.

Q. what is the greatest traveller next to a man?

A. A louse, because he always bears him company.

Q. what is a fellow of a house?

A, He is one that speaks swords, and fights ergo's.

Q. What is that which makes no difference betwixt a wise man and a fool?

A. Sleep.

Q. wherefore are the morning studies best?

A. Because the spirits are more free after their repose, and the brain and
organs of the body are discharged of the fumes and vapor that arise from the
nourishment, the digestion being finished.

Q. wherefore in winter do we smell perfumes less then in summer?

A. Because that the cold thickens the air.

Q. what stone is that which neither yields to the fire, nor the hammer?

A. The Adamant, which is only dissolved by Goats blood.

Q. How is the taste best discerned?

A. By the veins which spread though the tongue and pallat, to distinguish of
every relish.

Q. A gentleman hawked in a farmers ground, for which the farmer being much
incensed, gave him base words, which provoked the gentleman so highly that he
spit in his face; at which the farmer being amazed, asked him, what was his
reason for the affront.

A. The gentleman answered, what would you be at, I could do no more then give
you warning, I hawked before I spet.

Q. To one that said that lead was the basest metal of all metal?

A. One replied, Sir it is so, but yet it is the stoutest, for the Glasier will
tell you that it keeps more quarrels asunder, then any other metal in the
world,

Q what answer was made to him by the Judge who fearing the cause would go
against him, desired a longer day of hearing?

A. The Judge answered, that he should have one, it should be on Saint
Barnabies day next.

Q. what reply was made to her that had never a Child, yet she thankt God that
she had a husband of very good parts?

A. It is true, replied one of the neighbors, I acknowledge him to be a man of
good parts, but yet he cannot multiply.

Q. Why do women take those for asses that are too importunate?

A. As they are sensible of their own imperfections, they admire men should
descend so below their understandings to be so simply sensual.

Q. What things are Chiefly in opposition to true love?

A. Shame and fear.

Q. Why is love painted naked?

A. To show that all the acts and deeds of love ought to be open, such as are
free from treachery or dissimulation.

Q. wherefore is it that by the rubbing of our eyes, we cease to sneeze?

A. Because that this rubbing excites heat in the eyes, near which we make the
sneezing, and that being a stranger heat, nevertheless a more strong, extincts
the other heat which caused the sneezing.

Q. Wherefore is it that in summer we drink more, and in winter we eat more?

A. Because as the summer dries our bodies, so we are forced to moisten them,
and in the winter, the cold predominating on the exterior and natural heat,
inforces it self, and gathered all into the interior, whereby we eat and digest
our meat the better.

Q. what creatures of all others, as Naturalists write, are the worst that the
earth nourishes?

A. Of beasts, tigers: of men, adulterers and flatterers.

Q. from whence proceeds jealousy?

A. From envy and love. Envy to see him whom a Mistress loves, to love another;
out of love, as she is fearful to lose him who is her best beloved.

Q. why is a Drunkard a good Philosopher?

A. Because that he thinks the world goes round.

Q. what said Sir Benjamin Ruddiard of Master P?

A. That he was too high for this world, and too low for the world to come.

Q. what is the least part of the body, yet darkens the whole body?

A. The eyelid, the hair whereof, neither waxes more nor grows longer.

qu. why are the Italians said to be so jealous?

A. Because they keep all under lock and key.

qu. what is the name of that fish, which of all others, pleases women best?

A. Plase.

qu. why are Taylers of such esteem?

A. Because they are men of great reckoning.

qu. How did a gentleman of late requite him that gave him the horns?

A. He bit off a convenient piece of his nose, as they were together in a
coach, over against the Half Moon Tavern in the Strand.

qu. what death would a Dutch man soonest choose?

A. To be drowned in a barrel of English beer.

qu. what said the gentleman to him that wrangled with him at cards and called
him knave?

A. Sir, said he, you are a court card, that is neither king nor queen.

qu. What reply made the Lock-Smiths wife to her husband, when he would ntver
let her be quiet, but according to his jealous custom, preached to her a sermon
out of his trade, of what bars bolts, and locks belonged to the chastity of an
honest wife?

A. What a coil is here, quoth she, with your bars, your bolts and your locks;
you are a little too conceited of your trade, when there is never a Tapster nor
Ostler that I know, but has as good a key to open it as any Lock-Smith of you
all.

qu. what is good manners in a Chambermaid?

A. To exercise her patience behind the hangings, whilst her Mistress is busy
with a gentleman in the same room.

qu. what said the French madam to her husband, when she went to bed to her
Lodger in the next room?

A. Husband, I went only to the Chamber Pot.

qu. what if dreams and wishes had been all true?

A. There had not been since Popery, one Nun to make a maid of.

qu. How do you define a Sergeant

A. He is for the most part the spawn of a decayed Shopkeeper, a hangman and he
are twins, only a hangman is his eldest brother.

qu. what is an Almanac maker?

A. He is a tenant by custom to the Planets, of whom he holds the twelve signs
by lease parol, to which he pays yearly rent.

qu. which at all times is the best bedfellow?

A. Sleep.

qu. why are women at all seasons more prone to love then other creatures?

A. Because they are naturally more soft and ticklish,

qu. whether is the man or woman more constant in love?

A. The man, as he is of a more firm body and spirit.

qu. Why did Paris see the Goddess naked, when he was appointed to give his
judgment about the ball?

A. Because many have handsome faces, that if they were stripped of their
clothes, have such nasty deformity on their bodies, that a Beadle of the wand
would sooner lose his place then approach them with a clean whip.

qu. why did the admired Painter Xerxes figure Cupid in a green robe?

A. Not only to express the youthfulness of love, but also to moralize what the
color green signifies, which is Hope.

qu. How may carnal copulation be civilly defined?

A. It is a mutual action of male and female with convenient instruments,
ordained and deputed for generation, to maintain and multiply the species and
kind of every creature.

qu. why is that saying, That the falling out of lovers is the beginning of
love?

A. Because love is like a flame that increases with every blast.

qu, what kind of people are those, that being as beasts themselves, set upon
beasts, carry beasts in their hands, have beasts running about them, and all to
pursue and kill beasts?

Sol. Unlearned Hunts-men.

qu. wherefore is the world round?

A. To signify that it, nor all in it can fill the heart of man, which is
triangular.

qu. what are the benefits of good sents and perfumes?

A. To purify the brain, refine the wit, and awaken the fancy.

qu. Is lying of any ancient standing?

A. Yes, but not as the atheistical writer antedates, and before Adam.

Q. why is immoderate venery hurtful?

A. Because it destroys the sight, spends the spirits, dries up the radical
moisture, which is instanced by the naturalists in the Sparrows, which by
reason of their often coupling, live but three years.

Q. Whence comes it that those that are born deaf are also dumb?

A. There is a certain tie or conjunction of the nerves which stretch to the
ears, and from the tongue, the which being indisposed from the birth, it must
of necessity be, that those two faculties should be equally affected; only it
is confessed, that certain sicknesses may make one deaf, without being dumb;
and on the contrary, one may be made dumb without being deaf, because it may so
fall out, that one branch of the nerve may be offended without hurting the
other.

Q. Why do lovers sit up with one another whole nights?

A. Because they cannot go to bed together.

Q. May a lover die with too much loving?

A. Yes, as it is in the Song, for the space of half an hour, but no longer.

Q. Why is Cupid pictured blind?

A. Because he uses in the dark to play at blind-man-buff.

Q. why do the Dutch eat so much butter?

A, Because they have there fish so cheap.

Q. what said the Gardener to his wife when she came to see him hanged?

A. Get you to work you whore, weed, weed for bread for your children, is this
a time for you to see shows.

Q. What think you of the wife, that said the Tailor her husband, was not fit
for her?

A. She had a mind to measure with a yard of her own choosing.

Q. What said one of a marriage that was made betwixt a widow of a vast
fortune, and a Gentleman of a great house that had no estate

A. That the marriage was like a black pudding, one brought blood, and the
other brought suet and oatmeal.

Q. What may a porter of the city gates becompared unto?

A. Cerberus, that would not let the wandering ghosts pass without a sop.

Q. Why should a fair woman's neck be awry?

A. Then it stands as if she looked for a kiss.

Q. what is a Mountebank?

A. He is one that if he can but come by the names of diseases, to stuff his
Bill with, he has a sufficient stock to set up withal.

Q. what Officer keeps his Oath most strictly to the City?

A. A Sergeant, for he swears to be a true Varlet to the city, and he continues
so to his dying day.

Q. what trick will the Vintners use after walnuts are out of season, to keep
up their price of sack?

A. Cunning knaves need no Brokers.

Q. whether is the water or the earth bigger?

A. The water is bigger then the earth, the air is bigger then the water, and
the fire bigger then the air.

Q. How many bones are there in the body of a man?

A. In the Head 49. in the Breast 67. in the Hands 61. in the Feet 60. the
vulgar opinion is, that there is in all 284.

Q. How may one distinguish of the height of things?

A. The Sea is higher then the Earth, the Air is higher then the Sea, the Fire
then the Air, and the Poles above them.

Q. why does a chaste woman love him exceedingly that had her virginity?

A. Because of her shamefac'tness, as also out of an esteem of him to whom she
entrusted her credit.

Q. what herb of all others most present the form of a man;

A. A mandrake.

Q. what birds of all others are the most perfect heralds of the Spring?

A. The Swallow and the Cuckoo.

Q. At what time do women's breasts begin first to increase?

A. At fourteen.

Q. what is conjectured of him that made the song of the Bulls feather!

A. That there is one about the the town, that can pretend more reason to sing
it, better then himself.

Q. why did a Pulpit cuffer about London, cry out so for bows and arrows, bows
and arrows?

A. Because, according to the Proverb, a fools bolt is soon shot.

Q. why do some women blush so?

A. Because that little modesty they have, is contracted in their faces.

Q. Why do young whores turn old bawds?

A. It is with them as it is with other trades, after they have served out
their times, they set up for themselves.

Q. What is a whore?

A. She is one that pricks betimes, for her stock is a white thorn, which cut
and grafted on, she becomes a medlar.

Q. One asked Ben. Johnson what reparation he would tender to his honor for
spitting in his face?

A. He answered, if he pleased, he would tread it out again.

Q. What said the wench that was brought before the Judge about a rape, when he
asked her, whether the fellow offered any violence, or the like?

A. Yes, said she, and please your worship, he bound my hands, and would have
tied my legs together, but I thank my own industry, I kept them asunder.

Q. A country Painter painting of a small Parish Church, and writing false
Orthography, one asked him, that overlookt his work, why he spelt so false?

A. Alas Sir, says the Painter, you must understand that this is a poor
Village, and they will be loath to go to the charges of true English.

Q. What were those two stars that the seaman cried out for in the storm, as
only desirous to see, before he was cast away?

A. The star in Cheap Side, and the star in Coleman-street.

Q. What said he that saw a fellow in a very cold morning on the gallows in his
shirt?

A. That he was afraid he would catch his death.

Q. What may a covetous Lawyer be compared unto?

A. He Is one whose fingers have itcht for a bribe, ever since his first
practicing of Court-hand.

Q. What is a mere Pettifogger?

A. He is one of Sampsons Foxes, he sets men more shamefully together by the
ears then pillories.

Q. Why do lovers shed their hair so fast?

A. Because with them it is for the most part the fall of the leaf.

Q. Is it lawful for a lover to make use of any other Lady then his own?

A. The law of Nations permits no such custom, nor will it serve his turn,
though she be never so like, to say, that he mistook her for his own Mistress.

Q. What is love?

A. It Is a passion without reason, order, or stability, it is the whirle-pool of
man's liberty, a disease that will make one as sleepy as a cat.

Q. What is the female sex without the male?

A. Imperfect.

Q. when will A. B. make another song in praise of Sack?

A. Ask the Fiddlers.

Q. What said the Soldier when his Captain demanded of him, why he bought his
Colors at his shop, and why he fancied them still above any other.

A. Oh Sir, said he, I have all the reason of the world to fancy them; for
these your Colors saved my life, I followed them when you run away from
Basing-house.

Q. What said the Carrier to the Thieves when he saw they would rob him.

A. Friends, make a conscience, let me share, I desire to drive the same trade
with you, to have something of my own.

Q. Why did Mrs. H. make her Husband a Wastecoat of her Willow colored
Stuff-petticoat?

A. As she might otherwise have parted with her smock; and you know what the
Proverb sings, Near is my Petticoat, but nigher is my smock.

Q. One asked another what Shakespears Works were worth bound up together; the
other replied, not worth a farthing; not worth a farthing, said he that was to
buy them, why so?

A. The other answered, that his Plays were worth money, but he never heard
that his Works were worth any thing.

Q. Why is a Puritan a Non-resident.

A. Because he never keeps near his Text.

Q. What is the best way of dealing with a seemingly zealous Lay brother?

A. Not to trust him, for then he can never deceive you.

Q. Why cannot the Devil take tobacco through the nose?

A. Because Saint Dunstan seared it with a pair of tongs.

Q. What may the Law be most fitly compared unto?

A. To a thicket of Brambles, into which by tempest the poor sheep being driven
from the Plains for refuge, are there fleeced.

Q. Why may not Machivel be reputed as honest as some modern Politicians?

A. Because he made no use of the hypocritical veil of a religious profession,
to rough-cast his knavery withal.

qu. What kind of people are those, that sleep not with their own faces?

A. Women that paint.

qu. What is that, which being contained in it self, yet from it thousands do
daily grow and issue?

Sol. An egg, from whence are produced fowls, fishes, birds, and serpents.

qu. What breaks the shell at the coming forth of the chicken?

A. The defect of nourishment, which at the end of the time is wasted in the
shell, which the chicken wanting, exposes it self, and so breaks it.

qu. What is that which is milk in his dam, or fire, of a mingled seed, brought
forth by others, and produces not his like?

Sol. A mule begotten betwixt a horse and an ass.

qu. Why have those that lie on their backs so many dreams and visions?

A. Because the humors are disturbed, and upwards where the fantasy is.

qu. Why is it unwholesome to lie on ones back?

A. Because it disposes a man to the Incubus, or night mare, which is a
passage of the heart, when a man thinks himself to be strangled in his bed,
and somewhat lies heavy on his stomach which he would throw off, it also
causes with the over heating and oppression of the reins, an efusion in the
night, which weakens the back.

qu. what pays Venus more custom then all the world besides?

A. The bed.

qu. what is a Sexton?

A. He is one, that of all Proverbs cannot abide to hear that of, We live by
the quick, and not by the dead.

qu. why are boats compared to females.

A. because every one enters into them.

qu. what said she to him that found her at it behind the door in a Tavern?

A. At this time, Sir, I cannot pleasure you, keep this secret from my husband,
and I will disclose as great a one to you, when it lies in my power.

qu. what said the Cuckold to him that he found a bed with his wife?

A. Sirrah, for this once I forgive you, but look to it, the next time, I catch
you in the corn, I will put you into the pound, to the tune of, Come no more
there boys.

Q. With what words did one challenge another that had abused him, but was not
his equal?

A. J. N. do confess my self to be as base a villain as thou art, and therefore
let me see thee to morrow by such an hour in Hide Park?

Q. what said the Saylor when the ship was set on fire in the coast of Peru?

A. He cast himself into the sea, and cried, some roasted and some sod.

Q. what answer did one return him that desired to borrow his cloak?

A. Sir, seeing it rains not, what need you borrow a cloak; and if it should
rain, how can I my self be without it.

Q. what said the Lady to her son that was a great gamester, when she was
likely to be drowned?

A. Son said she, for your part you can swim, but if I am drowned to day, pray
thee play not away my clothes till I am buried.

Q. who are those that are near the Suns rising, and see the first day, yet
themselves are of the color of the night?

A. The Ethiopians.

Q. why are children oftener like their fathers then their mothers?

A. To give a modest reason, it proceeds from the imagination of the mothers,
that at such a time, thinks of the disposition of the father.

Q. what do the eyes chiefly betray?

A. Those things which a man would keep most secret, Love and Drunkenness.

Q. From whence is derived the power of feeling?

A. It spreads it self through every part by Sinnews, which descend from the
hand to the foot, and like a net spreads over the whole body.

Q. what thing is that which being blind it self, leads the blind, and bears
him that bears it?

A. A staff.

Q. why is the flesh of the lungs white?

A. Because they are in continual motion.

Q. what is an idle magistrate like?

A. The picture of Saint George on a sign-post, with his sword drawn to no
purpose.

Q. what may be said of him that speaks great Gunpowder words?

A. That he has a timpany in his mouth.

Q. what are lovers oaths like?

A. Mariners prayers, that last no longer then the storm.

Q. what may a Musician be compared unto?

A. To a Camelion that lives by the air.

Q. why does a Knight take place of a Gentleman?

A. Because some are Knights before they are Gentlemen.

Q. what is a domineering fellow to be compared unto?

A. A gingling spur, that keeps a noise but never pricks.

Q. what is the reason that captain Bulmur could not make his boat leap out of
the water, and fly over London Bridge?

A. Because the people could not believe.

Q. what did the fellow near Doctors Commons do that sent his wife for salt?

A. He eat up the quarter of lamb before she came, for which he is called lamb
without salt.

Q. what was Jeffry's the Queens little dwarf's usual hiding place?

A, In Parsons the Kings great porters fob.

Q. why are Tailers like woodcocks?

A. Because they live by their long bills.

Q. why is it dangerous to abuse a Physician?

A. Because if he once have to do with a man, he will make him stink.

Q. why are Players like to poor Philosophers?

A. Because they are as well contented with their rags, as when they are in
their richest robes.

Q. why are great eaters the most valiant men?

A. Because they never fight but with a good stomach.

Q. what are Horse-keepers and Oastlers, though the times are never so mutual?

A. Stable-men.

Q. why are Fiddlers so unfortunate?

A. For that they never do any thing, but it is against the hair.

Q. why are Scriveners hard hearted fellows?

A. Because they rejoice when they get other men into bonds.

Q. why is a miller the fittest husband for a scold?

A. Because when the mill goes, her tongue cannot be heard.

Q. what may be said of one that speaks hard words?

A. That he has swallowed a Doctor of Physick's bill.

Q. why are Glasiers good Arbitrators?

A. Because they spend their whole time in composing of quarrels.

Q. Why is it unlikely that Sailors should be rich men?

A. Because they are never so well pleased, as when they go down the wind.

Qu. Of all knaves, why is there greatest hope of a Cobbler?

A. Though he be never so idle a fellow, he is still mending.

Q. Why is a Hangman a person of a contemplative profession?

A. Because he never goes to work, but he is put in mind of his own end.

Q. Why is a Tooth-drawer a kind of an unconscionable trade?

A. Because he takes away those things, by which every man gets his living.

Q. Why is it not proper to call a Tapster a Drawer?

A. Because beer only makes men piss, but it is wine that makes them draw.

Q. Why is a Barber said to be such an active fellow?

A. Because when he uses his comb, he does so box one about the ears.

Q. Why are there so many Pick-pockets in every corner, though there be, for
the most part, a watch in every Street?

A. It is all one for that, for a Pick-pocket had as live meet with a watch, as
any thing else.

Q. Why are Tobacco-Shops of all other places most dangerous?

A. Because there is none ever frequented them, but he smoakt for it.

Q. Why is a Midwives trade of all others most commendable?

A. Because they lived not by the hurt of others, as Chyrurgions do, nor by the
falling out of Friends as Lawyers do, but by the agreement betwixt party and
party.

Q. Why do Lawyers Clerks write such wide hands?

A. To keep the peace, for if the Plantiff should be in one leaf, and the
Defendant in another, the lines being too near, they might perhaps fall
together by the ears.

Q. why must an Apothecaries shop needs be healthful?

A. Because the windows, boxes, benches, and all things in the shop take
Physic.

Q. what may an Antiquary be compared unto?

A. To a Dutch man, that loves cheese for being wormeaten and moldy.

Q. One drinking of a cup of burnt Claret, said that he was not able to let it
down, another asked him why?

A. He answered, because it was red hot.

Q. One seeing a man and his wife fighting, asked another why he did not part
them?

A. He answered, he was better bred then to part man and wife.

Q. why is it necessary for women to learn a Roman hand?

A. Because they are seldom very good Secretaries.

Q. One saying that it was a fine quality for one to speak extempore.

A. Another answered, it was no such fine quality, for every inconsiderate
Sectarist did it.

Q. Why is one squint-eyed most circumspect of all others?

A. Because he can look nine ways at once.

Q. why is corn a quarrelsome creature?

A. Because it rises by the blade, and falls by the ears with those that cut it.

Q. what may a Middlesex- man be called?

A. An Hermophrodite, because he is of both sexes.

Q. why have Hoasts red noses?

A. To show the world an experiment of the virtue of what they sold.

Q. A Gentlewoman that was always jealous of Latin, hearing one say bona
mulier?

A. That for bona, she knew that was good, but I will pawn my self on it, the
other word says she, means that which is stark naught.

Q. The people wondering at the Eclipse of the Sun?

A. One that stood by told them that it only burnt dim, and that Phoebus was
snuffing of it.

Q. What did the fellow to his wife, that said she was neither sick nor well?

A. He turned her out of doors, for said he, Hussie I am only bound to keep you
in sickness or in health.

Q. One told a gentleman that went by water, that his cloak burnt?

A. I knew that, said the gentleman, and therefore I put it into the water.

Q. A Wit meeting of a Usurer, desired him to lend him some money, Sir, said
the Usurer, I do not know you?

A. Therefore I ask you, says he, for they that know me will not lend me a
farthing.

Q. One saying that he was sorrowful, that such a Venison Pasty was eaten?

A. His friend replied, if he pleased, he would write an Epitaph on it.

Q. One asked in which part of the house a gentlewoman did use to lie?

A. Answer was made that she lay backwards, and did let out her fore rooms,

Q. One asked a pretty wench that came out of the country in her linsie woolsie
petticoats, very mean in habit, when he saw her not long after in the Strand
mighty brave, how she purchased such clothes?

A. Faith, said she, only for the taking up.

Q. One asking another what Superscription he had best write to his Mistress on
his letter, was told, Venus Lass of his affections?

A. No by troth, not I said he, she shall be styled as I think she, is, Venice
glass of my affections.

Qu. One asked what was the first commodity a young shop keeper would put off.

A. Another answered his honesty.

Q. One asked why men should think there was a world in the moon?

A. Answer was made, because they are Lunatic.

Q. what reply did he make to the Physician, that said that his liver was
naught?

A. Qualis vita, fuit ita,

Q. why are women like a piece of Grogram?

A. Because they are always fretting.

Q. One being asked what country man a Plough man was?

A. Was answered an Hungarian.

Q. One asking a Poet where his wits were?

A. Another that stood by, answered, they were a woollgathering, for said he,
no people have more need of it.

Q. One said he was so tender hearted, that he could not abide to kill a louse?

A. Another replied, because he was too cowardly to see his own blood.

Q. One persuaded another, because she was rich, to marry a whore, saying, it
was not too late for her to turn?

A. A Pox on her, says the other, she has been so much worn, it is to no
purpose, she is past turning.

Q. What said the Gentleman to the Citizen that with his hat in his hand began
a health to all the cuckolds in the world?

A. Sir, says he, be covered, what do you mean, pray be pleased to remember
your self.

Q. How did Phil. Porter rid himself and his company of the Fiddlers?

A. He caused one of his Comrades to snip off a piece of his ear, and drinking
off a beer-glass to the music, swore every one of them should follow his
example.


Wit and Language.
Set Forms of Expression inserted for imitation.
A Kiss is but a minutes joy. Your words are Delphian oracles. Your wit has
too much edge. I am a castaway in love. You are a flame of beauty. Sweet and
delicious as the feast of love. Sweet as the breath of lutes, or loves
deliciousness. I, like a child, will go by your directions. You are the rising
sun which I adore. It is a confidence that well becomes you. I see your wit is
as nimble as your tongue. Your favors I did taste in great abundance. Let me but
touch the white pillows of your naked breasts. Your words like music please
me. I prize your love above all the gold in wealthy Indies arms. I Will play at
kisses with you. Give me a naked Lady in a net of gold. Your fingers are made
to quaver on a lute, your arms to hang about a ladies neck. Your tongue is
oyled with courtly flatteries. You guild my praises far above my deserts. My
boldness wants excuse. Reward stays for you. I Will pay the tribute of my love
to you. Welcome, as light to day, as health to sick men. Let me share your
thoughts. Let men that hope to be beloved be bold. You have a face where all
good seems to dwell. My duty binds me to obey you ever. I sacrifice to you the
incense of my thanks. You wear a snowie livery. I will repay your love with
usury. Virtue go with you. You are the star I reach at. I am engaged to
business craves some speed. You speak the courtiers dialect. Inherit your
desires. You are my counsels consistory. Your title far exceeds my worth. I Will
bathe my lips in rosy dews of kisses. I wear you in my heart. You are the
miracle of friendship. You are the usurer of fame. My genius and yours are
friends. I will unrip my very bosom to you. My tongue speaks the freedom of my
heart. Give me leave to waken your memory. Of late you are turned a parasite.
With your Ambrosiack kisses bathe my lips. Sure winter dwells upon your lip,
the snow is not more cold. Mine eyes have feasted on your beauteous face. Your
favors have fallen like the dew upon me. Oh! I shall rob you of too much
sweetness. You have the power to sway me as you please. Your goodness wants a
president. Your acceptance shall be my recompense. The Sun never met the Summer
with more joy. You wrap me up in wonder. You temporize with sorrow* mine is
sincere. You have made me sick with passion. Oh! suit your pity with your
infinite beauty. There is no treasure on earth like her. Your breath casts
sweet perfumes. Goodness and virtue are your near acquaintance. You understand
not the language of my intent. My entertainment has confirmed my welcome. Your
words have charmed my soul. Make me companion of your cares. I want no part of
welcome but your wished presence. It is no pilgrimage to travel to your lips. I
am proud to please you. By you, like your shade, I Will ever dwell. The unblown
rose, the crystal, nor the diamond, are not more pure then she, I Will chronicle
your virtues. As white as innocence it self. As constant as the needle to the
adamant. You are the only anchor of my hopes. I am as mute as night. Women are
angels clad in flesh. My arms shall be your sanctuary. You, like a comet, do
attract all eyes. As kind as the Sun to the new born Spring, As glorious as
the noontide Sun. Your eyes are orbs of stars. You make my faith to stagger.
You are too much an adamant. As you have virtue speak it. You are a noble
giver. Let me seal my vowed faith on your lips. It is a paradise enjoying you.
You are a white enchantress, Lady, you can enchain me with a smile. I have no
faculty which is not yours. You are full of fair desert. Your purse is my
Exchequer. Your example steers me. Her name, like some celestial fire quickens
my spirit. You cannot tempt me Siren. Let me perish in your presence. Your love
out-strips my merit. Your complements call your faith in question. My wish
requites you. Midnight would blush at this. There Is music in her smiles. The
ocean's not more boundless then your favors. I Will lodge you in my bosom, and
wear you in my heart. It is the blessing of my fate. Fire quickens my spirits.
Your presence is restorative. Your language is more dubious then an Oracle.
Your heart's like pibble, smooth but stony. Passion, like midnight, sits upon
your thoughts. Her swan-like breasts more white then new fallen snow. Confirm me
in your favor with a smile. Welcome as Manna to my hungry soul. She is the glory
of her sex, she bears the palm of beauty from them all. Others to her seem like
the glimmering stars compared to the full moon. I Will pay the last tribute of my
lips to your fair hands. The music of the spheres is not so ravishing as her
voice. Report could never have got a sweeter air to fly in, then your breast.
You have the power to steer me as you please It Is my duty to obey your fair
commands. You are the only person I have ambition to honor. Pray point me out
some service to express my gratitude. I know you are all courtship. You are
liberal in language. Her breath perfumes the air. You embrace the occasion to
depart. You are the partner of my hopes. You are all worth, all bounty. She is
a mine of beauty. I Will like your shade pursue you. You have discourst me into
admiration. You have a soul is full of gratitude. This kiss seals my
repentance. Your fight gives me a lease of longer life. Let me now circle in my
arms all happiness. Let me be bold to claim your noble promise, my blood heaves
in my veins to be in action. It Is happiness enough that you have mentioned it.
She has an easy melting lip, and a speaking eye. I must enroll you in the
catalogue of my dearest friends. Trust not the unruly appetite of youth that
pines in more then wishes. You walk in artificial clouds, and bathe your silken
limbs in wanton dalliance. Farewell fair regent of my soul, you still obliege
my gratitude. The sight of loves on both sides, they send amorous glances from
one another eyes. The blessings of your Mistress fall upon you. Would I were
secretary to your thoughts. My best abilities of power are at your service. A
maiden head is a creature got in the eye, conceived in a kiss, I have no shift
of faces, no cleft tongue. I am not Oedipus enough to understand you, I am
wrapped with wonder. I have a strong assurance of your virtue. Trouble me not
with thanks, left I endeavor not to merit any. I Will rather doubt an Oracle,
then question what you deliver. You may teach Hermes eloquence. My want of
power to satisfy so great a debt, makes me accuse my fortunes. Your bounty,
like a new Spring, has renewed the Autumn of my years. I will not war with
Eloquence. You are Fortunes minion, you sleep in her bosom. Such endearments
will too much impoverish my gratitude. Take me into your bosom, and hide me
there. Not the mountain ice congealed to crystal is more chaste then she. I Will
celebrate my Mistress health to you. I ever held you my best example. I Will like
the perfumed wind sport with your hair. You may challenge all my powers on
your behalf. All valor is confined in within your breast, I emulate your daring
spirit. You overcharge me with so great a favor, as your descending thus to
visit me. I should do wrong to merit not to honor you. As loved as the air I
breathe. You are the friend of Fortune. All the days good attend you. You cast
your eyes too much upon the flame moves your destruction. I Will be as just to
you as heaven to truth, You Will set the aspiring Cataline to school. You are as
amorous as youthful May. I yield my self to your direction, manage me at your
pleasure. I listened for that string, and your discourse has touched it. You
have sucked the milk of the court. I will out-wait a Sergeant to attend you. You
set too high a price on my poor deservings. The virtues of your mind would
force a Stoic to be your Servant. You have fired me with the heat of your
deservings. You are the star by whom my fate is led. Her eyes are diamonds set
in purest gold. The very air is ravished with her touch. I cannot speak your
praise. You are the soul of goodness. You may as you please determine of me.
You are the star that rules my faculties Her breath is like the smoke of
spices. She whispers like the amorous lute. My desires equal your wishes. You
have out-stript me in the race of Honor. No service more then reciprocal. I
cannot pass you without an Ave. Your noble deeds transcends all presidents. It
is an honor and so I do receive it.
Select Sentences.
WHosoever writes a modern History, and follows truth too near the heels, may
chance have his teeth struck out. The dignity of truth is lost in much
protesting. No Hell so low, which lust and women cannot lead unto. The world is
a theater of theft, great rivers, small brooks, and they the ocean. True love
is a servant, brutish lust a tyrant. Duty must not assume the name of merit.
Unequal marriage is not love but lust. Revenge is lost, if men profess they
hate. Mischief does ever end where it begins. Where distaste begins, there
friendship ends. When a woman has lost her chastity, she has no more to lose.
Too much indulgence is not love but hate. Reason is the mistress of experience.
Nothing is hard to them that dare to die. He is next in right that has the
strongest power. Blind is the censure of uncertainties. Time wears out what
art and nature cannot bring about. Great sorrow is always dumb. Women are like
to Venice-glasses, one crack spoils them. Discretion is the better part of
valor. The man that would have sold the lions skin whilst the beast lived, was
killed with hunting of him. When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks.
Hope is a bate, it covers any hook. Libels are stifled with taking no notice of
them. Good wits are greatest in extremity. Mischiefs feed like beasts till they
be fat, and then they bleed. The worst deeds are made good with good success.
Invocation is more dangerous then error. A Politician must, like lightning,
melt the marrow but not pierce the skin. An old husband is good to make a
screen of, to stand next the fire, whilst his young wife sits behind him, and
keeps a Friends lips warm. Virgins resolves are weak. Envy stands on tip-toe to
pull down innocence. When lust is up, all women are alike. Love is the
sovereign virtue of the soul. The dawn of midnight is the drunkards noon.
Suspicion always has a ready tongue. The sun that sets, does rise again. All
faults are still bore that from greatness grows. The feast of marriage is not
lust but love. Love is a slave to hope.
A DICTIONARY FOR The more expeditious finding out of any Rhyme, being useful
for that pleasing Passtime called CRAMBO.
Ab. STab Scab drab slab crab mab blab dab
Ace. Ase uncase case dace lace place mace face trace base brace grace bebase
chase race embrace beface surface enchase pace apace space
Aze. Aies. Ays. allays. baies bewrays blaze days delays decays fraies glaze
gaze graze jayes keys maze amaze obeys plays pays prays praise rays raze
lays to laze raise slays stays assays essays sprays splays swaies brays strays
trays betrays ways
Ack. almanac black back track jack knack brack clack crack lack hack pack
quack rack attack sack smack stack slack thwack tack track wrack
Act. act fact compact bact tract pact quact jact cracked rackt sacked thwackt
Ad. add mad glad dad bad clad dad gad pad had lad sad swad
Ade. Aid. aid afraid blade brayde dismayed fade jade laid allayd delayed made
maid played paid prayed arrayd stayed staid shade bewrayd unstaid spade splaide
straid persuade diswade trade weighd wade obeyed decayed
Af chaff draff laugh quaffe staff epetaph
Afe safe Ralph chafe half calfe
Aft aft chaft craft daft haft graft laughed quaft shaft waft
Agg brag bagg cagg cragg clagg dragg flagg shagg fagg hagg jagg lagg magg nagg
ragg quagg stagg wagg to wagg
Ague plague prague
Age age engage gage cage stage parentage pilgrimage pupilage page rage assuage
sage wage
Adge badge fadge madge
Ai. Ay. aye bay obey defray delay decay bewray clay array dismay allay tray
gay gray hay jay lay may nay play pray dray raie slay say stay splay spray
stray sway tray way whey
Ache. ache bake brake cake drake slake jake make mistake quake rake sake shake
slake spoke stake awake betake undertake
Ale. Aile avail aile ale bale bewail dale engrail exhale flail entail fail
frail gale goal nail all hail male mail nail pale prevail pail quail rail
stale sale scale shail retail trail rale tail vale vayl wail whale
All. Aule. all appall awle ball brawle call caul crawl fall gall hall mawl
Paul pall small shall stall sprawl spawl tall thrall wail yawl
Ald balld embrawld called crawld enthralld galld mauld scauld sprawld besprawld
scalld walld yawld
Ayld. bayld bewaild faild engraild retaild haild hald exhald naild empaild
prevaild ralld saild scald retayld trayld vaild
Alk. balk chalk calk stalk talk walk
Alm. alm balm calm palm psalm qualm shalm
Als. alice malice
Alt. inalt exalt halt malt palt salt shall fault revolt
Am. am clam cram cham dam dram flam flimflam lamb ram ram mam slam whimwham
Ame. ame blame came claim dame frame flame fame game lame mame name same shame
tame
An. Ann began ban bran can clan can dan randan fan man unman nan pan paun
raun span scan swan tan vanne wan wanne
Ance. advance chance countenance dance deliance deliverance trance glance
enhance ignorance lance prance maintenance perchance balance governance
And. and band brand over-cand tand grand command hand land mand stand
with-stand understand scand strand stand spand tand wand
Ain abstain again bain brain blain Cain cane crain contain drain ordain
constrain disdain dane complain counterpan entertain fain fane distrain profane
grain gain Jane lane main maintain plain pain obtain regain reign slain sustain
retain rain slain Spain sprain stain swain restrain train vain vain vein wain
Amp. cramp camp champ damp lamp stamp ramp vamp
Anch. planch branch cranch hanch lanch stanch
Ang. bang fang gang hang pang sang rang sprang stang tang twang brang
Ange. change exchange grange mange strange range estrange
Ank. Mountebank bank blank crank drank dank flank franck frank lank rank stank
prank plank shrank shank slank thank
Ant. ant aunt daunt flaunt gaunt grant haunt want pant scant tant vaunt want
recant enchant
Aint. acquaint faint complaint pain Saint
Ap. cap clap chap flap gap hap lap map xap pap vap stap snap swap scrap strap
thunderclap trap tap entrap wrapped
Ape. ape gape grape jape cape nape rape shape scrape escape escape tape
Aps caps claps, etc. relaps
Apt apt chapt clapped flapt gapt lapt rapt wrapped escapt scrapt shapt swapt
intrapt snapt slapt strapt
Ar. are bar car sar tar mar scar spar star far war
Are. air bare care chair dare fair glair hair mair impair despair repair
prepare scare pair prayer rare share stare spare square swear ensnare aware
ware
Arb. barb garb herb orb
Arch. arch march starch parch torch search
Ard. award bard debard card discard dard outdard hard guard heard mard nard
pard ensnard despaird scard shard spard squard stard starrd reward yard
Arf. dwarf scarf wharf
Arge barge charge discharge enlarge large searge verge
Ark ark bark embark cark dark cleark hark jeark lark mark park querk spark
sark chark stark
Arle. earl charle marle snarle
Arm arm disarm barm charm farm to farm harm alarm sparm swarm term warm
Arn. barn fern learn stearn warn forwarn yarn
Arp. carp chirp harp querp sharp warp
Arrs. bars carrs dares fares
Ars. ars farce scarce Mars
Arsh. harsh marsh
As. ass brass ass class glass grass lass mass pass was repass alas
Art. art cart dart fart heart heart mart part impart depart puart start smart
tart thwart wart
Arth. swarth earth girth hearth dearth
Ash. ash cash clash crash dash flash gash gnash mash plash quash rash slash
swash stash trash thrash wash
Ask ask bask cask flask mask masque pask task
To these belong masquer masker mask her tasker ask her
Asp asp clasp gasp grasp hasp rasp wasp unhasp
Ast. blast bast cast chaste enchast fast too fast aghast have has't last mast
past pac't taste was it wast
At. at bat cat chat fat hat gnat bagat flat mat pat sat rat squat that what
Ate. abate bate debate delicate elevate date to date fate gate grate to grate
ingrate hate Kate late relate elate mate inmate plate pate conservate
consecrate contaminate slate state to state strait wait
Atch. batch catch cratch hatch dispatch latch match to match patch scratch
smatch snatch thatch watch
Ath bath faith has lath path rath swath says wrath
Ave. brave cave crave drove gave grave have knave lave nave pave save rave
shave slave stave thrave wave
Aw. aw claw daw draw withdraw flaw jaw law gnaw maw paw raw saw foresaw spaw
straw thaw
Awd. bawd clawd dawd fraud defraud laud applaud thawd gnawd abroad broad
Awn. brawn dawn drawn withdrawn fawn spawn gnawn lawn spawn prawn pawn yawn
Ax. ax flax lax tax wax
Ea. flea key plea sea yea
Ease. sease decease decrease increase flease grease lease peace pease please
seas seize disleize tease these
Each. each beach bleach breach leach impeach preach reach teach
Ead. bead bread flead glead knead lead mead plead read shead
Eaf. deaf leaf sheaf
Eak. beak bleak break creak freak leak peak sneak squeak streak weak reak
Eal. peal heal congeal meal peal steal squeal sweal reveal teal weal
Commonweal wheal zeal
Eam. beam bream cream dream fleam ream gleam seam scream stream theme team
extreme
Ean. bean clean dean glean lean mean queen skean wean yean
Eap. cheap heap leap reap
Ear. appear ear bear blear besmear cheer fear flear lear rear sphere spear
swear were wear where
East. beast breast deceast east feast least neast
Eat. beat bleat deceit conceit cheat feat defeat great heat jeat meat neat
pleat seat sweat theat teat retreat entreat repeat wheat
Eath. breath death heath sheath wreath
Eave. eave cleave deceive receive heave leave bereave sleave weave
Eb. neb web eb
Eck. beck check deck neck peck speck to deck
Ect. checked reflect reject respect decked correct erect eject sect neglect pect
circumspect protect detect recollect deject infect architect dialect infect
Ed. bed bled bread bred dead dread fed fled flead led ned red overspread shed
sped stead shred thread tred wed enamored enamelled polished
Edge. allege edge hedge pledge ledge wedge privilege
Ee be decree dee ce fee glee agree degree free flee gee he knee lee me pee
ree see she thee three tree we ye immortality deity divinity
everlastinglie lovinglie enmity vanity, etc.
Eece. geese Greece fleece piece
Eeze. cheese degrees decrees frees bees freeze knees lees sees squeeze trees
wheeze
Eech. breach breech leech speech beseech
Eed. bleed breed decreed deed freed fee'd feed agreed heed meed need seed
speed weed read reed
Eef. beef breef cheef greef releef thief
Eck cheek creek eke gleek greek leek meek seek shreek sleek squeek week
Eel. eel feel heel keel kneel peel reel we will
Eem. deem seem esteem redeem beseem teem
Even. seen green keen queen seen screen spleen ween over ween
Eep creep deep keep peep sheep sleep steep sweep weep
Ee't beet be it fleet crete feet greet meet Leet sheet see it street sweet
Eeth sees teeth
Eev beeve atchieve cleave grieve deceive conceive relieve believe reprieve
shrieve
Eft cleft deft left bereft
Eg beg dreg leg meg peg
El bell rebel cell dwell fell ell Hell knell nel repel expel refel compel
quell sell tell shell smell spell swell well yell citadell Nathaniel spaniel
Daniel
Eld feld geld held queld rebelld expelld spelld swelld commpelld repelld seld
Eild. field shield yield weild guild build
Elch. belch squelch welsh filch
Elf. delf pelf elf self shelf
Elm elm whelm overwhelm film helm realm
Elt, belt dealt dwelt felt smelt gelt melt pelt spelt welt
Ealth. health stealth wealth
Elve delve shelve
Em. condem gem hem kemb stem
En. Ben den fen ken hen wen men pen ten then wren when
Ence. intense incence insense innocence conscience hence defense influence
diligence negligence indigence offense sense excellence commence immense
recompense expense eloquence circumference quintescence tense pretense whence
thence
Ench. bench wench clench french quench drench trench stench wrench
End. amend bend blend comprehend condescend defend intend offend befriend
apprehend reprehend lend commend extend expend rend spend dispend pend attend
contend
Ength. strength. length
Ent. bent innocent ascent descent negligent indent repent indigent diligent
Kent spent lent commandment argument meant shent sprent constraint restraint
tent intent represent sent absent present consent dissent resent merriment
content extent attent Trent vent event invent circumvent underwent.
Ep. crep step leap
Ept. crept kept slept stepped swept
Er. her defer refer confer deter prefer inter foreiner loiterer poulterer
pewterer, etc.
Erb. herb. verb
Erse. fierce hearse amerce pierce serce terse converse reverse verse scarce.
Erch. birch perch surch search
Eard. beard bird cheard endeard feared fleerd herd heard unheard overheard
jeerd appeard sheard stird besmeard
Erge. verge dirge
Erk. cleark ferk jerk hark kirk perk querk smerk yerk
Earl. earl girl pearl twirle whirle
Erm. sperm term firm confirm affirm
Ern. concern discern earn dern fern stern girn yearn earn
Erp. chirp querp
Ears. Ers. bears chears endears fears fleers jeers hers peers pears shears
sears, spears spear besmears fears besmears tears swears converse reverse
adverse wears years refers defers differs confers prefers errs
Et. heart malepert pert skirt squirt shirt dert convert pervert assert desert
insert invert divert
Earth. birth dearth mirth earth perth
Erve. carve preserve conserve deserve reserve swerve serve nerve
Ess bess bless excess confess chess address redress express guess jess less
mess oppress repress digress ingress profess distress impress suppress yes.
Esh. flesh fresh
Est. best blessed breast incest addressed redrest oppressed professed confessed expressed
divest hest jest inest well guest ill guest lest nest deprest suppressed at least
rest interest quest pressed distressed dressed best contest invest detest protest
west assest wrest
Et. bet counterset debt fret tet get let pet regret cabinet coverlet set wet
whet yet spet
Etch. fetch stretch retch wretch bitch vetch
Ew. adieu blew chew crew dew slew hew few knew true few show slew view yew
Ex. sex vex rex perplex
Ey key weigh whey
I I by buy bribery bitterly bodily cry curiosity calamity die deity
dubiously dry divinity fie furiously fatally fatalitie fie fly fry guie hie
high lie lie
With all words ending in ly, as mutually heavenly, etc. my nigh pie comply
reply imply pry rye sky stie
And many words ending sie and cy, as ecstasy omnipotency stie tie thigh thy
try vie whey awrey
Ib bibb cribb gibb glib nib lib rib fibb snibb squibb tibb
Ibe bribe gibe prescribe proscribe describe scrib inscribe subscribe prescribe
transcribe ascribe kibe tribe
Ice, Ise deities vanities monstrosities circumcise precise obscurities
fallacities paradise advise edifice sacrifice demise eyes tryes styes lies dies
tries wise flies eternize immortallize fraternities disguise prize price
comprise disguise tries tyrannize hies lice mice pies precipice plies thighs
rice rise sieze sice devise villainies spice entice thrice twice dice vice
advice wise simplicities ties, etc.
Ich itch rich which bitch dich
Ick brick obick dick quick prick flick rick sick pick stick tick strick trick
bayliwick politic
Id bid child did hid kid amid stidd ridd stridd bestrid
I Would abide bride chide cried did dryd crucifyd fryd glid decide hide replied
relyd denyd applyd replied complyd implyd pride pyed ride deride descride slide
stride tide tied tried vy'd wide guide dignifyd aside allied espied provide
Idge abridge ridge flidge
Ife fife knife life rife strife wife
If cliff if stiff whiff
Ift drift fifth gift lift whift sift shift rift swift thrift
Ig bigg digg pigg rigg gigg figg ligg trigg twigg wigg perywigg
Ike dike pike like spike strike dislike
I Will bile reconcile crocadile defile i will beguile mile nile compile revile
smile style file vile wile while
Ill bill chill dill drill fill gill till spill mill nill pill kill quill rill
shrill skill fulfill still swill till thill will
Ild. build filld fulfilld killd milld pild guild skilld distilld stilld swilld
tilld untilld trilld willed selfwild
Ilde child defilde mild smild reconcild compiled beguild styled til'd wild
Ilk milk silk whilk
Ilt built milt guilt gilt quilt spilt tilt wilt
Im brim dim gim him limb trimb rim skim swim
I Am chime crime grime lime prime time slime rhyme time
Imp imp limp pimp shrimp
In bin been chin din fin inn in begin gin grin kin lin min pin shin spin thin
tin twin win sin
Ine columbine combine concubine brine incline decline chine dine fine kine
line mine design repine resign shine shrine swine vine wine valentine thine
tine twine divine trine whine
Ince. prince mince since quince rince convince wince
Inch finch inch binch winch
Ind friend grind pind skind spind
Inde blind bind inclinde declinde dinde find, mind grind behind linde
kind pined rind designde resigned twinde wind whinde unkind combinde
enshrinde
Ing. bring cling ding fling hing king ling ring spring sting string swing
thing wing flourishing nourishing easterling
Inge. cringe fringe hinge finge swinge revenge
Ink. blink brink cinque chink ink wink sink shrink slink link stink bethink
twink
Int. dint flint hint lint mint splint squint stint imprint
Ip. chip clip dip hip lip nip pip quip rip ship skip flip strip tip trip whip
Ipe. gripe wipe pipe ripe snipe type tripe wipe
Ipt. chipt clipped dipped hipt quipt ripped sipt shipped skipt slipped snipt stripped
tript whipped
Ir. fir myrh sir stir bestir
Ire. brier buyer crier dire dryer fire flire friar implyer ire higher ad mire
liar nigher quire desire expire aspire conspire Esquire retire attire friar
wire
Irt. dirt girt shirt skirt squirt
Is. is bliss cis dis his kiss miss abiss piss swiss this wis
Ish. dish fish pish wish rush
Isk. brik frisk fisk whisk
Isp. crisp lisp whisp
Is It. desist exorcist fist grist kissed list mist twist insist assist resist
consist persist
It. bit chit hit it knit kit acquit sit spit shit slit split commit remit
immit submit emit remit fit twit writ
Ite. bite bright dight light night sight knight fight delight mite might
benight affright pight plight requite requisite upright opposite oversight
shite smite spite excite sprite wight write white excite incite recite
Itch. bitch ditch breech fitch flitch rich switch twitch witch which
Ith. blithe lith belith fith tith writh
Ive. dive drive five give hive live alive contrive connive deprive reprive
rive shrive slive strive thrive wive
Oe do dough toe forgo fro go lo more no poe roe row so shoe show throw to
though woe woo who
Obe globe Job robe
Oach bloach broach coach encroach reproach loach poach approach roche
Oad abode abode abroad goad load rode tode trod yode
Oak oak broke choke cloak croak poke soke smoke spoke stroke invoke provoke
revoke awoke yoke
Oale bole cole dole tole goal hole mole pole sole soul shoal stole whole
Oam foam home comb roam tomb womb
Oan one bone cone drone flown gone groan hone Jone lone stone alone moan none
rone shown tone throne own
Open open cope coap grope hope Pope rope scope soap slope trope
Oar oar ore boar bore core door floor before adore glore goar store more hoar
lore moor deplore implore pore poor rore sore soar score shore snore restore
swore tore wore whore yore These rhyme all in their plural numbers.
Orse course horse hoarce source remorse gurse morse
Oard bored board accord afford record abhord goar'd gored hoar'd hourd implord
deplord por'd roared soared snord sword whord word lord
Ob bob cob fob rob sob throb stob
Ock block brock cock clock dock flock frock knock lock smock mock pock rock
stock shock sock hillock
Ockt. blockt cokt dockt flockt locked knocked mocked rockt stockt
Od cod clod pod nod god rod odd sod tod trod
Odge dodge lodge
Off cough doff goff rough scoff trough enough
Often cough'd croft doft often soft loft aloft scoft
Og brog clog dog frog cog pettifog gog hog log vog
Oll coll Doll Moll goll loll pole roll scrowle control toll
Old bold cold old fold controlld hold mold rolld sold scolld enrolld mold told
controlld should
Olk. folk yolk stalk
Olt. bolt colt dolt revolt
Olve. involve wolve revolve
Om. come comb from some plum Tom womb whom
Omp. pomp romp
On. con don John upon none won
Once. sconce once
And. bond cond dond pond strand enthrond bemond groand
Ong. among long song string strong throng thong wrong young
Ont. wont font hellespont
Op. crop pop dop sop chop lop hop knop fop prop shop slop top stop
Opt. chopped lopt cropped hopt dopt propt stopped topt
Or. dor for nor or
Ors. discourse concourse purse force horse source gorse remorse nourse
Erch, perch starch scorch torch
Orge, disgorge forge George scourge
Ork. cork fork pork stork work York
Orld. world hurld curld
Orm. form storm worm
Orn. born forborne corn horn ligorn forlorn morn mourn scorn shorn thorn sworn
torn worn adorn
Ornd. scornd adornd mournd hornd
Ort. cort report fort sport resort dort alamort exhort dehort transport
pourport sort short retort extort wort
Orth. worth forth
Os. imboss loss cross dos gross gloss goss ingross moss soss toss
Ose. chose closs enclose disclose propose gloze hose lose nose pose rose grows
compose repose depose expose impose transpose those whose shoes shows glows
Oast. boast ingrost imboast cost crossed frost host lost most impost tossed
Ot. blot clot got grot Castriot hot jot philamot knot lot not pot plot mariot
rot sot scot shot not snot spot trot wot
Oat. boat moat bloat coat float goat groat note denote oat quoat stoat rote
smoat throat wrote vote
Otch. botch scrotch notch
Oath. both broth cloth does oath froth loath moth quoth sloth troth wroth
Ow. bough bow allow blow brow cow crow dow flow glow grow know how low mow now
plow prow row sow bestow strew tow thou throw trow vow you
Own. blown known brown clown crown down drown flown frown gown known grown
renown mown shown town thrown unknown
Ox. box fox pox ox
Oy. boy coy enjoy cloy destroy annoy joy employ toy
Oyd. avoid employed enjoyd destroyed annoyd cloyd void
Oil. boil broil recoil oil foil moil quoil soil spoil toil
Oin. foin groin enjoin conjoin rejoin purloin coin
Oint. oint appoint anoint disappoint unjoint
Oice. choice rejoice voice hoice poise
Oist. rejoyc't voic't hoist foist coist
Ood. cood food brood mood withstood stood good wood woed hood blood rood could
should
Oof. hoof aloof reproof roof scroof woof proof
Ook. brook book overtook mistook undertook cook hook look shook rook took
Ool. cool fool pool tool school stool
Oom. bloom broom coom doom groom loom Rome room tomb womb
Oon. boon moon noon spoon
Oop. droop hoop loop poop troop stoop whoop coop
Oose, loose noose goose
Oot. boot foot root shoot soot
Ooth. sooth tooth truth youth
Ouch. couch pouch disavouch crouch slouch touch
Owd. bowd cloud crowd flowd glowd proud loud mowd shroud vowed endowd embowd
Owl. bowl cowl fowl towl howl jowl poul roll soul scrowl control
Old. could should controld would
Ound. abound redound confound rebound crowned drowned found frownd hound pound
round sound stound wound renownd
Ounce. bounce flounce renounce plounce trounce
Ount. account recount surmount mount fount count
Our. bower flower four hour parumour lowr power conqueror power sower cowre
tower tour devour impowre your
Ouse blouse house louse mouse rouse souse
Out. about out without throughout bought brought doubt lout clout drought
flout fought gout naught pout rout snout sprought stout trout thought devout
wrought taught thought
Outh. grouth mouth south youth
Ove above clove love dove drove grove move approve reprove rove shove shrove
stove strove
Vb. cub chub dub grub rub scrub stub shrub sillabub snub tub
Use abuse accuse excuse refuse choose recluse secluse cruse dues diffuse
confuse transfuse juice Jews luce muse news scrues sluice spruce stews sues
truce use
Vck buck chuck duck luck muck pluck suck stuck
Vd bud blood cud flood hood good mud sud spud stood understood wood
Vde brewd conclude imbrewd eschewd seclude exclude include crude feud glewd
dew'd lewd mu'd renewd rude scrude showed spud stu'd strewed intrude detrude
obtrud'd viewed
Vdge budge Judge grudge drudge adjudge snudge trudge
Vff buff cuff ruff stuff puff huff muff tough enough chuff
Ve blue brew imbrue eschew drew dew due accrue few slew glue hew hue Hugh jew
knew fore-knew lieu mue renew scrue show ensue sue slew show spew strew threw
true view you
Vg bugg drugg dugg rugg hugg jugg lugg tugg shrugg trugg pugg
Vl bull cull dull sorrowful pitiful merciful full gull hull lull mull annul
disanul pull trull wool
Vle mule pule rule thule
Vld bulld gulld dulld annulld disannulld lulld mulld pulld
Vlfe engulf wolf gulf
Vlk bulk hulk sculk
Vlse pulse repulse
Vm bumb come dum overcome drum some dumb gum hum mum number plumb some scum sum
swum thumb thrum stum womb whom
Vmp bump jump crump trump lump pump stump rump thump trump
Vme sum presume perfume plum rheum assume
Un dun done gun run bun sun some shun stun spun tun wun
Vne prune tune
Ounce. dunce ounce nunce
Vnch. bunch clunch munch punch hunch
Vnd. stund sund shund tund
Vng bung clung dung hung among flung rung sprung sung stung swung tongue young
Vnge plunge sponge
Vnk. drunk munk punk shrunk sunk shrounk slunk stunk trunk
Vnt. amount surmount blunt hunt fount runt wont
Up up cup tup sup
Vr bur blur cur demur fur slur spur sir
Ure. demure inure cure endure sure allure ensure obscure assure pure skuer
Vrb disturb curb
Vrse. disburse curse purse worse nurse burse
Vrch. burch church lurch
Vrd. bird blurd furd stird absurd curd slurd spurd sword turd word
Vrf. scurf turf
Urge, vide Orge. purge surge scourge
Vrk. lurk turk work
Vrle. curle hurl churl purle whirle
Vrld. curld whirld world hurld purld
Vrn. urn burn churn turn torn spurn mourn
Vrt. blurt spurt curt dirt hurt wurt flurt
Vss. buss us truss thus puss
Vsh. bush blush brush crush flush hush push gush plush rush tush thrush
Vsk. busk husk musk tusk
Vst. bust crust entrust dust gust just lust must rust trust thrust
Vt. but cut gut glut nut put foot rut scut slut strut shut hut
Vte. flute recrute dispute impute repute compute depute lute suite mute
Vtch. clutch hutch much grutch crutch such smutch touch crowch
Vth. truth Ruth youth pursu'th
Vrst. disburst cursed accursed durst burst purst worst first nursed
Vcks. bucks ducks plucks tucks dux sucks

THE ART of REASON IN THE ART of LOGIC.
Rendered so plain and easy by Questions and Answers, that the meanest capacity
may in a short time attain to the perfect ways of Arguing or Disputing.
The first Book of the Art of Logic.
CAP. 1. What Logic is.
Q. WHat is Logic?

A. Logic is the Art of disputing well, and in that sense is called Logic.


CAP. 2. The parts of Logic, and kinds of Arguments.
Q. How many parts has Logic?

A. Logic has two parts, Invention and Judgment.

Q. What is Invention?

A. Invention is a part of Logic of inventing Arguments.

Q. What is an Argument?

A. An Argument is that which is affected to argue any thing: such as are all
Reasons considered apart, and by themselves.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Artificial and Inartificial.

Q. What is an Artificial Argument?

A. That which argues of it self.

Q. What be the Kinds.

A. First, or derived from the First.

Q. What is First?

A. First is that which is of its own original.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Simple or Comparative.

Q. What is Simple?

A. Simple is that which is considered simply and absolutely.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Agreeing or disagreeing.

Q. What is Agreeing?

A. That which agrees with the thing which it argues.

Q. What be the Kinds?

A. Agreeing absolutely or after a certain manner.

Q. What is agreeing absolutely?

A. The Cause and Effect.


CAP. 3. The Efficient, Procreant, and Conservant Cause.
Q. what is the Cause?

A. The Cause is that by whose force the thing is.

Q. What is the profit of it?

A. This first place of Invention is the fountain of all Knowledge: and he is
believed to know, of whom the cause is held.

As the Poet says worthily:

The man sure happy is, who cause of things does know.
Q. How is the Cause divided?

A. Into two Kinds, Efficient and Matter, or Form and End.

Q. what is the Efficient Cause?

A. The Efficient Cause is that which the thing is.

Q. How many Kinds has it.

A. There appears to us no true Kinds, yet the great plenty of it is
distinguished by certain means.

Q. What is that which effects by the first means?

A. That which procreateth or defends.

Q. Give me an example out of some Poet!

A. Ovid first, remedio amoris.

Therefore when thou shall look in this our medsonal Art,
My admonition do, set idleness apart.
This causes thee to love, this does defend it still,
This is the cause of Joy, as meat sometimes breeds ill.
Take lastly sloth away, God Cupids bow is lost,
His torches lose their light, contemned, away they are tossed.


Q. Give me a more familiar example?

A. The Father and Mother procreate, the Nurse defends.

Q. Give an example of this out of some Poet?

A. 4. Aeneid. Th'rt no Gods child, ne Dardanus his son;
Thou rather from the steep hard rocks did come
Of Caucasus, it seems of that breed,
Hyrcanian Tigars thee with breasts did feed.
Aeglog. 8. Now what this whoreson love is I well wot.
It is a little busy boy begot,
Not of man's seed, ne sib to one of us,
But farthest Garamants, and Ismarus.
Or rockie Rhodope as it should seem,
In their rough ragged hills engendered him.


Q. Do not builders and governors of Cities come under this Head.

A. Yes, Romulus the builder of the City of Rome, also all other Kings,
Consulls, and Emperors are defenders and keepers.


CAP. 4. The Efficient alone and with others
Q. What is that which effects by the second means?

A. That which effects alone or with others.

Q. What are those others?

A. Some oftent imes are Principal, others are helping and Ministers.

Q. Give an example of the Cause that effects by it self?

A. Aeneid. 6. Nisus called back both the blame and the punishment of the
slaughter from Euryalus upon himself: because he was the only author. Lo here
I am who only did this deed,
Nations, against me turn your swords with speed.
TO was my deceit: He could it never do,
Ne would his courage serve him thereunto.


Q. Give an example of the solitary Cause with Principals and Fellows, out of
some Orator?

A. The Solitary Cause, with many, both Principals and Fellows, is diversely set
forth pro Marcello. For the warlike praises (says the Orator) they are wont to
extenuate truly by words, and to detract them from their Leaders, to
communicate them with many, lest they should be proper to their Commanders: and
certainly in War, the strength of the Soldiers, opportunity of places, help of
fellows, ranks, provision do much avail. But Fortune (as it were) by her own
right, challenges the chiefest part to her self; and whatsoever is
prosperously carried, that altogether she leads. But yet of this glory (O
Caesar) which a little before thou did obtain, thou have no companion: all
that, how much soever it is, (which truly is the chiefest) all (I say) is
thine. The Penturion, President, Ranks and Companies, have taken from thee none
of this praise: Yea, even the Lady of Humane Affairs, Fortune offers not her
self into the society of this glory; to thee she gives place, and confesses
it all and wholly to be thine.

Quest. Are not Instruments numbered among helping Causes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example of it?

A. By this Argument the impious Epicure disputes that the World was never
made. Primo de Not. For by what Eyes of the Mind (says he) could your Plato
behold the frame of so great a Work, whereby he makes it constructed and
builded of God? what labor? what iron hinges? what lever? what devices? what
ministers were there of so great a work?


CAP. 5. The Efficient by it self or an Accident.
Q. What is that that which effects by the third means?

A. That which effects by it self or an Accident.

Q. How effects it by it self?

A. When it effects by its own faculty.

Q. How effects it by its own faculty?

A. When it effects by nature or counsel.

Q. Give an example of that which effects by Nature?

A. The efficient of the winds is natural.

Aeneid. 1. The East and South winds on the Sea do blow,
They rush through deep, till on the top they show
The Afric often with these his blasts conjoyns,
And so the floods are cast up by the winds.


Q. Give some example of that which effects by counsel?

A. That confession of Cicero touching himself, is an example of Counsel. The
War taken in hand (O Caesar) waged also for the most part, not constrained by
any of my judgment and will; I came forth to those Wars which were undertaken
against thee.

Q. How does the Efficient Cause effect by an Accident?

A. When it effects by an external faculty.

Q. How does it effect by an external faculty?

A. When it is done by Necessity-or Fortune.

Q. How by Necessity?

A. When as the Efficient is constrained to the Effect.

Q. Give an example of this?

A. There is one in the excuse of the Pompenians. But to me truly (says the
Orator) if there may be sought out a proper and true name of our evil, it does
seem that we are fallen into a certain fatal calamity, that has occupied the
unprovident minds of men; that none should wonder how humane Counsel is
overcome by Divine Necessity.

Q. How by Fortune?

A. When somewhat happens beyond the scope of the Efficient.

Q. Give an example?

A. So the case chanced (says Tullius tertio de Not. deo.) That Pherius the
enemy was profitable to Jason, who opened his impostume with his sword; which
the Physicians could by no means heal.

Q. May not Impudence be numbered amongst these kind of Causes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example?

A. Ovid. de Trist. 2. Why hurtful light, or ought else did I see?
The fault was mine and not unknown to me,
Wise Acteon Diana naked saw,
And food became to's dogs devouring maw.
Blind Fortune amongst the Gods is surely blamed,
Ne pardon gets, the Gods she has so harmed.


Q. Do not Deprecations then proceed from hence?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example?

A. Pro P L. Pardon O Father: he has erred: he is slipped: he thought not: if
ever hereafter. And a little after I have erred: I have done rashly: it
repents me: I fly to thy clemency: I ask pardon for mine offense: I entreat
thee that thou will pardon me.

Q. What first caused the name of Fortune?

A. The ignorance of the Causes have feigned this name: for when as something
happened beyond counsel and hope, it was called by the common people Fortune.

Q. What is Juvenals Opinion of it?

A. Wise if we were, no God should want but Fortune:
We place thee high, and often thee importune.



CAP. 6. The Matter.
Q. What is the Matter?

A. The Matter is the cause of which the thing is.

Q. Give an example out of some Poet?

A. By this feigned Argument the house of the Sun is compounded of Gold,
Carbuncles, Ivory and Silver. Ovid. 2. Metamorf. The Suns high place was built
with Pillars tall,
The Gold did shire Carbuncles flames let fall:
The top thereof was laid with Ivory neat,
And silver doors in portal shined feet.
Aeglog. 3. A merry Musor framed of Beech in tree,
Carved work, by hand of divine Alcimeden,
It Is round impaled with a scattering trail
Of tender Vine, and over all between,
A pale green Ivy, wherewith as a vale,
The thick diffused cluster shaded been.


Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

Q. Caesar. 1. Bell. Civil. Caesar commanded his Soldiers to make ships of that
kind, which in former years the use of the Britains had taught him: first they
made the keil and pins of light matter, the rest of the body of the ship being
knit together with Osiers, was covered over with Leather.


CAP. 7. The Form.
Q. The first kind of the Cause, in the Efficient and Matter being expounded;
the second follows, in the Form and the End; what therefore is the Form?

A. The Form is the Cause by which the thing is that which it is.

Q. What is the benefit of it?

A. From hence the thing is distinguished from all other things, and the Form
is ingenerated together with the thing it self.

Q. Give some example of it?

A. A reasonable soul is the form of a man, because by it a man is a man, and
is distinguished from all other creatures thereby. The form of Geometrical
Figures is in Triangles and Quadrangles. Heaven, Earth, Trees, Fishes, are the
form of Physical things. From whence the chief explication of things, as it is
by nature, so (if it may be found out) it shall be, as in artificial things it
is more easily met withal.

Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. Caesar. lib. 7. But all the French walls are almost of this form, the beams
long and plain, with equal distance between them about two foot, are placed
upon the foundation. These are bound within, and fastened very strongly: for
those spaces (of which we spoke) are filled up to the top with great stones.
These placed and knit together, another row is also added, that the same might
keep the spaces: neither do the beams touch one another, but being distant by
equal spaces, all of them are strongly fastened, great stones being placed
between them. And even so is the whole work knit together until the just height
of the wall be sulfilled. This work therefore is not deformed, as well for the
comeliness and variety, beams and stones being by courses, which keep their
rows in right loins, as, because it has the chief strength for profit and
defense of cities; because it does defend both from the mischief of stones, and
the material Ram, which with its forty feet, being often bound to the long beams
inward, can neither be broken or drawn back again.

Q. Give an example out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid. 1. Virgil describes the form of his port. Between two Seas two
Islands there does lie,
Side-wayes they are made, the water runs fast by.
Huge double rocks that do reach up to heaven,
Under the which the seas lie still and calm:
And by that place green woods there are growing,
Forth from the same comes great black darkness flowing.
Under which rock a den's made very fleet,
Wherein's rich living stones, and waters sweet:
Houses for Nimphs, and chains for ships there laid,
Which would not by the anchor or the chains be staid.



CAP. 8. The End.
Q. What is the end?

A. The end is the cause for whose sake the thing is.

Q. Give example?

A. To Physical things the proposed End is man to man, God. There is some chief
good and last end of all Arts: as to speak well, of Grammar: to plead well, of
Rethorick: to dispute well, of Logic.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid. 1. Juno assumeth the end of Marriage, when as she promises
Deipopeia to Eolus, to wit, for solace and childrens sake. Nimphs full fourteen
I have of bodies rare
But who so is most beautiful and fair,
Even Deiopeia I to thee do give
Her year in marriage state with thee to live?
Thee to reward for thy love unto me,
And cause thine offspring beautiful to be.


Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. Cicero pro Lig. urges Tubero his accuser, when as he presses the end of
the Wars taken up against Caesar. And truly (says he) he is come forth armed
against Caesar himself. But what did this Tubero his sword do in the Pharsalian
Army? whose sides did the sharp point aim at? who was to feel the force of thy
weapon: where was thy mind, eyes, hands, courage? what did thou desire? what
did thou wish?


CAP. 9. The Effects.
Q. What is the Effect?

A. The Effect is that which arises from the causes, whether begotten or
corrupted, or whether any thing be moved by any means. Here the motion, and the
thing done by motion, is called the Effect. Of this place are praises and
dispraises, of which sacred and profane books are full.

Q. Give example of this out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid. 6. The facts of diverse people are compared to the praises of the
Romans. Some finely carve upon the boiling brass,
They Will on the marble grave a living face,
They wish the causes better, they will descry
Heavens shining parts, and tell the stars in the sky:
Remember thou Romes people brave to rule,
These things shall be thine art, peace to impose,
To spare thy subjects, and subdue proud foes.


Q. What else comes under this Head?

A. Hitherto are speeches and writings referred.

Q. Give an example?

A. Pericles and Hortentius did celebrate the praise of pleading well: and by
the same argument also, Demosthenes and Cicero of writing well.

Q. What further?

A. To this place are referred Councels and Deliberations, although not brought
to their end.

Q. Give an example?

A. Parmenio and Phylotus were beaten to death, because they were suspected to
be of the conspiracy against Alexander, as Curtius and Arianus have remembered
touching Lentulus, Cethegus, and others the accomplices of Cateline; they
suffered punishment by judgment of the Senate.

Q. Have not Virtues and Vices their effects also?

A. Yes.

Q. Give an example?

A. Horace after this manner describes the Effects of Drunkenness. Secrets it
shows, and Hope it does command;
Unto the Wars it drives, although unarmd:
It takes the burden from the careful man,
It teaches art to all that will or can.
Whoev'r was drunk that wanted Eloquence?
Was any poor that used this defense.



CAP. 10. The Subject.
Q. The argument agreeing after a certain manner succeeds, what is that then;

A. The subject and Adjunct.

Q. What is the Subject?

A. The subject is that to which any thing is adjoined.

Q. Make this plainer by examples?

A. The mind is the Subject of science, ignorance, virtue, vice, because these
happen beside the being. The body, of health, sickness, strength, weakness,
beauty, deformity. Man is the Subject of riches, poverty, honor, infamy,
apparel, company. The place is the Subject of the thing placed.

Q. How prove you this last by testimony and example?

A. The Philosophers attribute a place to Divine beings although wanting part
and greatness. So the place of Geometry, and the difference of places is in
Geometrical things. So of Physic, it is more diligently considered in Physical
things. In the world, in simple Elements, in Compound things.

Q. Give an example out of some Poet?

A. So Virgil in his Georgicks admonishes, that the place be diligently sought
out for things proposed: as corn, trees, plants, pastures. Before we pass into
a Sea unknown,
Know we the wind and various manner of heaven;
Our native soil, and every habitation,
What will refuse or grow in any nation:
Some bears corn, the other with grapes does pass,
Some with tall trees, the rest with unsown grass.


Q. Proceed further in explicating the Subject?

A. The subject of senses are called sensibles; of virtues or vices, things
proposed to virtues or vices.

Q. Give an example of the former?

A. Color is the subject of the sight, sound of the hearing; because these
senses are occupied and exercised in the sensibles

Q. Give an example of the latter

A. Virtues and Vices are set forth in moral Philosophy by this Argument,
Temperance and Intemperance, by Pleasure: Magnanimity and Sloth, by Danger:
Liberality and Covetousness, by Riches.

Q. Explicate the Subject further?

A. So things numerable of Arithmetic: measurable (as I may say) are the
subjects of Geometry.

Q. Give example of the Subject out of some Orator?

A. By the same Subject Cicero (second Agra) disputes, that there was no
contention amongst the people of Campania, because there was no honor. They
are not carried (says he) with the desire of glory, because where there is no
public honor, there the desire of glory cannot be. There is no discord,
neither by contention nor ambition; for there is nothing for which they should
strive, nothing for which they should war, nothing for which they should
contend.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Propertius uses this Argument. Of winds the Saylors talk, the Husbandmen
of bulls,
The Soldiers of their wounds, and Shepherds of their wools.



CAP. 11 The Adjunct.
Q. What is the Adjunct.

A. The Adjunct is that to which any thing is subjected: which Argument though
it be lighter then the Subject, yet more copious and frequent: therefore of its
signs Ovid speaks, Second Romans Anno. Some man (for such there be) may count
this small,
Yet that helps some which does not profit all.


Q. Make this plainer?

A. Those things which are called good and evil of the mind, Body, and the
whole man, are the Adjuncts of the mind, body, man: also whatsoever happens
without the Subject is the adjunct.

Q. May not time also be reduced unto this Head?

A Yes, as place was in the Subject, so is time in the Adjunct, viz. the
enduring of things past, present, to come.

Q. What further is comprised under this head?

A. All those qualities beside the causes, adjoined to the subject, whether
they be proper or common.

Q. What is Proper?

A. That which agrees only and wholly with the subject, as laughing with a
man; neying with a horse, barking with a dog.

Q. what is Common?

A. That which is not proper after this manner.

Q. Give example of the Adjunct out of some Orator?

A. By this kind of argument, Cicero in the defense of Roscius the Comedian,
cavelleth with Fanius Chercus. Does not his head and eyebrows altogether bald,
seem to favor of malice, and cry out of deceit? does he not seem to be
compounded from the foot to the head, (if a man may conjecture by his shape) of
frauds, fallacies, lies? Who therefore is altogether bald on the head and
eyebrows, lest he should be said to have one hair of a good man.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. So Martial lib. 2. mocketh Zoylus. Red hair, black mouth, short feet, and
ilk squint eyes,
It Is marvel Zoylus if goodness in thee lies.


Q. What further may be reduced under this head?

A. Garments and company are Adjuncts.

Q. Give example?

A. By this kind of circumstance, Dido going a hunting is magnificently set
forth, Aeneid. 4. The morn appeared, Dido forsook the sea,
The day stir up, to the heaven youth guides the way:
Both nets and gins, with pike-staves, all were ready,
Messalian horse, with hunting dogs so greedy.
Princes did wait, the slow queen did expect,
With fair clad horse, her way for to direct.
Forth comes she at length with mighty train,
In her long robe, with many a long seam?
Her horse down trap, with gold her hair was trest,
Her robes with golden hooks, together did she wrest.


Q. What is the benefit of Adjuncts?

A. There is great use of Adjuncts to the subject by which they are occupied.

Q. Give example.

A. By this argument Planto foretold those cities to be miserable, where the
multitude of Physicans and Judges were wanting: because, of necessity, there
was conversant in those cities, both Intemperance and Injustice.


And thus much for the place of agreeings, from whence every agreeing argument
may be said to be one or the same: and all manner of Unity and (as I may say)
Identity are referred hither, as the first and simple fountains.

CAP. 12. Diverses.
Q. You have expounded the first agreeing argument: the disagreeing follows,
what then is disagreeing?

A. That which disagreeth from the thing.

Q. How are disagreeings manifested?

A. Disagreeings are equally manifested amongst themselves and equally argued
one of another, although they do more clearly shine in their disagreeings.

Q. What are the kinds of disagreeings?

A. Two: Diverse and Opposite.

Q. What are Diverses?

A. Diverses are disagreeeings, which disagree only in reason.

Q. What are the most frequent notes of speech for this Argument?

A. These. Not this, but that; although, yet.

Q. Give some example from some Orator?

A. Pro Pompeio. He carried not the victory, but the ensigns of the victory.

Q. Give some other examples.

A. Ovid secund. Art. Amand. Ulysses was not fair but Eloquent.
Aeneid. 2. This Priamus though held in dust of death,
Yet ceased not.


Also this of the like matter, Pro Lig. call thou that wicked, (O Tubero)
why, he has not hitherto deserved this name. For some called error, some fear,
that which more hardly, hope, desire, hatred, pertinacy, the most grave
temerity, none wicked besides thy self.


CAP. 13. Disparates.
Q. What are Opposites?

A. Opposites are disagreeings, which disagree in reason and thing; therefore
cannot be attributed to the same according to the same, and at the same time.

Q. Make this plain by example?

A. So Socrates cannot be black and white of one and the same part; father and
son of the same man; whole and sick at the same time: but he may be white on
the one part, black on another; father of this, son of that man; sound to day,
sick to morrow.

Q. It should seem by this, that the one being affirmed, the other is denied?

A. So it is.

Q. What are the kinds of Opposites?

A. Disparates, or Contraries.

Q. What are Disparates?

A. Disparates are opposites whereof one is opposed equally to many.

A. Give example?

A. Green, Ash Color, Red, are means between White and Black, which are
Disparates, both with the extremes and among themselves. So liberality and
covetousness are Disparates among themselves. So, a man, a tree, a stone, and
infinite of this kind are Disparates; neither can one thing be, a man, a tree,
a stone.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Virgil. Aeneid. 1. disputes by this argument. O virgin, how shall I
remember thee!
Whose countenance not mortal seems to be:
Thy voice is sure above the humane reach,
Both which thee Goddeses proves, and so do teach.



CAP. 14. Relates.
What are Contraries?

A. Contraries are opposites, whereof one is opposed to one only.

Q. What are the kinds of it?

A. They are either affirming or denying.

Q. What is affirming?

A. Affirming is that of which both of them affirm.

Q. How many Kinds has it?

A. Two, Relate and Adverses.

Q. What are Relates?

A. Relates are Contraries affirming, of which one consists of the mutual
affection of the other: and from hence they are named Relates.

Q. Make this plain by example?

A. The Father who has a Son, and the Son, who has a Father are Relates.

Q. They may seem by this to be together by nature?

A. So they are, so that he which perfectly knows the one, knows all the
rest.

Q. Give some examples of Relates?

A. Pro Mare. By which thou truly understandest how much praise there is for
the benefit given, when as for the receiving is so much glory. Marc. against
Sosib. Sosibian, thou yield'st, thou wast born thrall,
When flattering thou thy Father Lord do call.


So Quint. Lib. 5. Cap. 10. If it be honest to place himself at Rhoades, and to
lodge at Hirmaereon. After which manner Tullius, in the perfect oration. It is
therefore dangerous (says he) lest any should think it dishonesty, to teach
that in the great and glorious Art to others, which it was honesty for him to
learn.

Q. Does not earnest affection sometimes flow from these Relates?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Cicero in his Oration has brought forth a certain earnest affection from
these Relates. Now these are grave (says he) Wife of the Son in law,
Stepmother of the Son, anp Bawd of the Daughter.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. All this Ovid has effected maniefestly in his description of the Iron Age,
Met. 1. Ne does the guest safe in his Inn remain,
His Host him troubles who does him retain:
Sisters even from their Brethren are not free,
The Husband longs the death of's Wife to see;
She hates him, and against him does conspire;
The cursed Stepdame's always in an Ire,
The Son before his time doth's Fathers years enquire.


Q. But the Argument of such Relations has nothing contrary: yea, it rather
argues mutual causes: as, thou art my Father, I therefore am thy Son, how then
appears the Contraries?

A. When I say I am Father, I am not therefore thy Son, then are the Contraries
true.


CAP. 15. Adverses.
Q. What are adverses.

A. Adverses are Contraries affirming, which are perpetually adverse among
themselves.

Give example out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid 11. No health in war, we all desire Peace.


Q. Give further example?

A. White and black, hot and cold, virtue and vice are opposed.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Parad. 1. Cont. Epe. Yet they do hold strongly and defend accurately, that
pleasure is the chief good: which to me truly does seem to be the voice of
Beasts, not of Men; when as whether God, or Nature (as I may say) the mother of
all things has given thee a soul, then which nothing is more excellent,
nothing more divine; do thou so cast and throw down thy self, as that thou
think there is no difference betwixt thee and the four-footed Beasts.

Q. Wherein consists the force of this example?

A. Cicero has opposed beasts and men, Adverses: pleasure is the good of
beasts, and therefore of men.

Q. Give another example out of some Poet?

A. So Liberty and Servitude in Tib. Lib. 2. So Servitude I see prepared for me,
Yet Parents Freedom would far better be.


Q. Give example out of an Orator?

A. Pro Marcel. For Temerity is never joined with Wisdom, neither is Chance
admitted to Counsel.


CAP. 16. Contradicents.
Q. Having spoken of contraries affirming, we are come to contraries denying,
what are they then?

A. Contraries denying are such, of which one says, the other denies the same.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. They are Contradicents or Privants.

Q. What are Contradicents?

A. Contradicents are Contraries denying, of which one denies every where.

Q. Give example?

A. Just, not just; a creature, not a creature; it is, it is not: These are
Contradicents.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Pro Murena. The sentence of Cato and Cicero are contraries; this of the
Stoics, that man of the Academicks. The Dialogue is in these words. Thou have
known nothing, yea something, but not all things. Thou have done nothing merely
for thanks, yet refuse not thanks when as thine office and trust requires it.
Be not moved with mercy in condemning. But yet there is some praise of
humanity. Stand in thine own opinion, except a better should overcome.

Q. Give example from some Poet?

A. Mart. lib. 2. Thou Art fair Fabulla, rich, and all is a maid,
Can you deny, it is truth that I have said?
But if thou boastest of thy self too much,
Thou Art neither fair, a virgin, nor yet rich.


Q. Give another example out of some Orator?

A. Cicero primo Tusc. Forces Atticus the Epicure by this argument to confess,
that the Dead were not miserable, if they were not at all, as the Epicures
believe; I had rather (says he) thou should fear Cerberus, then speak so
inconsiderately. Atticus, why? Marcus, that which thou deniest, that thou
say. Where is thy wit? For when as thou say he is miserable, thou then
say, he is, which is not. Then after long disputation Atticus said, go to
now I grant that those which are dead are not miserable; because thou have
forced me to confess, that they be not at all, lest they should be miserable.

Q. Give another example?

A. Terrence in Ev. Phedria frames his speech to Dorus, when as he had
affirmed that which he denied afterward. After a manner (says he) he says,
after a manner he denies.


CAP. 17. Privants.
Q. What are Privants?

A. Privants are contraries denying, of which one denies in the same Subject
only, in which the Affirmative (of its own nature) is.

Q. What is the Affirmative called?

A. The Habit.

Q. And what the Negative?

A. Privation.

Q. Make this plainer?

A. Motion and Rest, Drunkenness and Sobriety, are comprised under this Head.

Q. Give example?

A. Mart. Lib. 3. Thou Art drunken sure, sober thou would not do it.


Q. What may further be under this Head?

A. To be blind, and to see.

Give example?

A. Pro Celio. There is therefore one of this family, and he truly is greatly
blind: for he shall take no grief who shall not see her.

Q. What may further be under this Head?

A. Poverty and Riches are thus opposed.

Q. Give example?

A. Mart. Lib. 5. Poor shall thou be Emilian, if poor;
Wealth's never given but to the rich before.


Q. What further?

A. Death and Life.

A. Give example?

A. Cont. Mil. Sir ye still, O revengers of this man's death, whose life if you
thought you could restore, would you?

Q. What further?

A. Silence and Speech.

Give example?

A. Primo Cat. What expectest thou the authority of the Speakers, whose silence
thou beholdest to be their pleasures?

Q. What more?

A. Mortality and Immortality.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Marc. I grieve when as the Common Wealth ought to be immortal, that it
consists of one mortal life.


And this suffices to be spoken of disagreeing, from whence every thing may
differ from another by certain means.

CAP. 18. Equals.
Q. Simple Arguments were agreeings and disagreeings; we are now come unto
Comparatives; what are Comparatives therefore.

A. Comparatives are those which are compared amongst themselves.

Q. How are they manifested?

A. Although they be equally known by the nature of Comparison, yet one to
another is more known and illustrated then another: and oftentimes are judged
by shorter notes, sometimes distinguished by fuller parts.

Q. What may these parts be called?

A. They are named the Proposition and Redition.

Q. May not Comparatives also argue Fictions?

A. Yes, Comparatives to argue feigned things, and do cause trust.

Q. What be the kinds of Comparisons?

A. Comparison, is in Quantity or Quality.

Q. What is Quantity?

A. Quanity is that whereby is showed how much the thing compared is.

Q. What be the kinds of Quantity?

A. Equals or Unequalls.

Q. What are Equals?

A. Equals are those of which there is one Quantity.

Q. What is an equal Argument then?

A. An equal Argument is, when an equal is explicated by an equal.

Q. What are the Notes of it?

A. Even, equal, like, the same, that, so much the more, how much the more, by
so much, by how much, so much, how much, not more, not less.

Q. Give example?

A. Aeneid 2. Equal with light winds.

Aeneid 3. And now't should grow in equal age with thee.


Aeneid 6. Behold this thing, Great Rome with earth is even,
The spirit of man shall also equal heaven.


Q. What further is necessary to these equals?

A. A Proposition or Reddition does distinguish them.

Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Quart. Cat. Whose things done, and the virtue to the same, by which things
only the course is contained in its regions and bounds.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Aeneid 4. As well a bruiter of things false that be,
As messenger of truth and verity.


Cat. By how much I am worst of Poets all,
By so much the men best of patrons call.


Ovid de Trist. 4. As many shells on shore, as roses sweet;
As many sleep, as men, by poppy seeds do get;
As many heasts in woods, fish in the sea do lie;
As many birds as in the ayrie heavens do fly:
So many griefs me pass, their number should I tell,
Icarian waters I must surely number well.


Q. Proceed to further examples?

A. Phil. 9. Neither had he more skill of the law then of justice: therefore
those things which the laws had brought forth, chiefly the civil, he always
referred to ease and equity: neither had he rather approve actions of strife,
then take away controversies.

Ovid de Art. Amand. It Is no less virtue for to keep then get.


Pro Mur. I acknowledge this to be equal for Lucius Murena: and so equal, that
neither he shall be overcome by dignity, neither by dignity shall overcome thee.

Phil. 2. Whose burden being common, why not a common pray of them.

Ter. in Adelph. When as I care not for thine, care not thou for mine.

Q. What may further be comprised under this head?

A. Of this place are those that follow derived truly from contraries, but
treated of in the place of Equals; as this of Mart. Sosibian thou yield'st,
thou wast born thrall,
When flattering thou thy father lord do call.


Ovid. 1. Fast. There Is price in price, the Censors honors give;
He gives friendship, poor alone does live.


Q. But are they not more frequent from adverses?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Cicero Syl. Neither do I understand my self to have been angry. But if I
defend him whom thou accusest, why should I not be angry with thee, who
accusest him whom I defend? he says, I accuse mine own enemy; and I said, I
defend my friend. So primo Tusc. But when as they confess that there is force
enough in vices to cause a miserable life, why should it not be granted that
there is force enough in virtues to effect a blessed life.

Q. It should seem by this, that contraries are sequences of contraries?

A. So they are.

Q. What may further be comprised under this head?

A. Sometimes there is put forth like for like.

Q. Give example?

A. Such is the contention of the shepherds in Virgil.

Aeglog. 3. Damaetas first of all putting forth this riddle. Tell in what
place, and I will herry thee,
For great Apollo's self, the welken large
Just three else broad, and no more, seems to be.
And Menalcas answering in this other riddle.
Tell in what place the flowers have their marge,
With Kings names in their leaves inscribed plain;
And to thy self take Phillis for thy pain.


Q. Give example of feigned equals?

A. Feigned equals are such as is in Aeschinus Sacraticus, wherein Socrates
shows Aspatia, speaking to Zenophons wife and Zenophon himself. Tell me, I
pray thee, thou wife of Zenophon, if thy neighbor should have better gold then
thou, whether had thou rather have hers or thine? hers, said she. And if she
have a gown, and other women's garments of a greater price then thou, whether
had thou rather have hers or thine? hers, said she. Go to then, if she have a
better husband then thou, had thou rather have hers? here the woman blushed.
But Aspatia spoke to Zenophon himself, I pray thee (said she) if thy neighbor
have a better horse then thou, had thou rather have his or thine? his, said
he. But if he have better ground then thou, whether had thou rather have?
his, said he, viz. the best. But if he have a better wife then thou have,
whether had thou rather have his or thine? And here Zenophon also himself
held his peace.


CAP. 18. Greaters.
Q. What are unequals?

A. Unequals are those of which the quantity is not one.

Q. What be the kinds of unequals?

A. Unequal is greater or lesser.

Q. What is greater?

A. Greater is that which quantity exceeds.

Q. What be the proper notes of it?

A. Not only, but also; I had rather this, then that; more also by Grammatical
comparison.

Q. Give example.

A. Bicero pro Mur. There is taken from amongst us not only that verbal
counterseit of Prudence, but also that Lady of things, Wisdom it self. The
thing is carried by force, not only the hateful Orator in pleading, or the
pratler, but also the truly good is despised. A horrid soldier is loved.

Q. Is not a certain Logical gradation, sometimes joined with a Rethorical
climax taken from hence?

A. Yes.

Q. Show example?

A. Pro mil. Neither did he so handle himself to the people only, but also to
the Senate; neither to the Senate only but to the Public, President, and
Soldiers: neither to these alone, but also to the power of those, to whom the
care of Senate, Soldiers, and the whole Commonwealth of Italy was committed.

Qu. Give a Poetical example?

A. Ju. Sat. 8. Against a proud Noble man. Rather had I Thirses thy fire should
be,
Whilst that Aeacides is like to thee:
And that thou should with Vulcan armor make,
Then for Achilles son men should thee take;
Or that thy feature should like Thirses be.


Q. Proceed to further example?

A. Pro. Marc. Having more admiration then glory.

Aeneid. 1. O fellows we these evils knew before!
God will them end, we greater far have bore.


Cic. pro Mur. Be not so unjust, that when as thy fountains are opened by thine
enemies, our rivers should be stopped up even by our friends.

Q. Give an example of a gradation, without a rethorical climax?

A. Ter. Thr. But does Thais give me many thanks for it? Gn. Many. Thr. say
thou so? is she glad? Gn. Not so much for the gift it self, as that it was
given by thee; for that she triumphs in good earnest.

Q. Are not also greaters feigned?

A. Yes, and of great force.

Q. Give example?

A. Ter. Hort. A Noble man if he be made a lover can never undergo the charges,
much less thou then. Aeneid. 5. O great Aeneas, although Jove should not
Promise to help or aid me now one jot!
I hope that Italy shall reach to heaven,
The winds once charged their forces cross have driven:
Arising from black night in the city cast,
Our power is weak, our greatest strength but waste.



CAP. 20. Lessers
Q. What is Lesser?

A. Lesser is that whose quantity is exceeded.

Q. How is a Lesser judged?

A. Oftentimes by proper notes.

Q. What be these notes?

A. Not only, but not at all: rather this then that, when as, as also.

Q. How else?

A. By Grammatical comparison,

Q. How lastly?

A. By the denying of parts.

Q. Give example of the notes out of some Orator?

A. Cic. secund. Cat. No man not only of Rome, but in no corner of all Italy,
was ever oppressed with so great a tax, as that he once knew of so incredible a
Caesar. Cat. 1. Thou can rather as an Exul tempt, then as a Consul vex the
Commonwealth. Ag. 2. Which when to all it is very hard, and an evil reason,
then truly to me above the rest.

Q. Give Poetical examples.

A. Ovid. Trist. 1. More fierce then Busiros, more fierce then he,
Who in slow fire his Ox burnt furiously.


Ovid. pri. de. Rem. Amor. Thy body to redeem bear sword and fire,
Ne drink to cool thy thirsty hot desire:
To save thy soul will thou not all forbear,
This part exceeds the other price by far.


Q. Give example of those which are done by denying of parts?

A. Phil. 9. All in all ages who have had the understanding of the Law in this
City, if they might be brought together into one place, are not to be equalled
with Servius Sulpitius. Cat. 2. Although those which say that Catilina is gone
to Messilia, do not so much complain of it, as fear it.

Q. Is it not sometimes without notes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Mur. Thou art so much wanting from the perfection of great works, as
the foundation, which thou think thou have not yet laid. Pro Arch. The
stones and deserts oftentimes answer to the voice; wild beasts are tamed and
subdued by singing; shall not then the instructions of the Poets in the best
thing move us?

Q. Is there not also a gradation from lessers?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Ver 7. Is it a great act to over throw the city Rome, to beat a Knave, to
kill a Parricide, what shall I say? to hang him upon the gallows.

Q. Are not lessers also sometimes feigned?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Virg. Aeglog. 1. The light-heeld hyndes in the air shall feed therefore,
And in the Ocean all the fishes die,
For want of water, on the naked shore.
The wandering Parthyan first shall drinken dry
Huge Araxis; and gusling Germany,
Suck down their thirsty throats swift Tigris tide,
Ere his dear lovely face shall from my bosom slide.


Q. Give another exmple?

A. Phil. 2. O filthy thing, not only in the sight, but also to hear of! if it
had happened to thee amongst thine inhumane Pots, who would not accounted it
filthy? But in the assembly of the Romans about public affairs, the master of
the horse, to whom it is not comely to belch, he vomiting a crust of bread and
wine, filled his lap and all the Tribunal with stink.


CAP. 21. Likes
Q. You have expounded Comparison in Quantity, Comparison in Quality follows;
what therefore is Quality?

A. Quality is that whereby the things compared are said to be such.

Q. What are the kinds of quality?

A. Like or Dislike.

Q. Whatare Likes?

A. Likes are those of which there is the same quality.

Q. What are likes called?

A. Likes, is called proportion, as the likes are proportionable.

Q. What are the notes of likeness, whereby it is concluded in one word?

A. Likes, Effigies, in that manner, as also denials of dislikeness.

Q. What be they?

A. Such as this, not otherwise.

Q. Give example of the first sort?

A. Aeneid. 1. His mouth and shoulders being like to God. Phil. 9. Although
Servius Suspicius could leave no clearer monument then his son, the effigies of
his manners, virtues, constancy, piety, wit.

Q. Give example out of some Poet?

A. Ovid Trist. 1. For he or none, even he that made the wound,
Only Achilles it is can make me sound.


Q. Proceed to farther examples?

A. In Phis. There was one day which was to me the likeness of immortality,
wherein I returned to my country. Ver 1. But presently from the same likeness
of a man, as it were by some Circean pot, he is made a Bear. Pro Pomp.
Therefore all in this place do behold Cons. Pompeius not as one sent from the
city, but fallen from heaven. Aeneid. 3. They do not that which I have
commanded. Ter. I am not, neither have been otherwise then he.

Q. What is the partition of likeness

A. Disjoined or continued.

Q. What is a disjoined similitude?

A. A disjoined similitude is when as four terms are distinguished to the thing.

Q. Give example?

A. Aeglog. 5. So me thy song, as sleep on grass does quench
The traveller, his weary limbs to drench.


Q. What is the force of this example?

A. The songs to the hearers, as sleep to the weary, are four distinct terms.

Q. Give another example?

A. Ad fratrem. As the best Governous cannot overcome the force of the tempest,
so the wisest men oftentimes cannot overcome the violence of fortune.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Here are four terms, as the governor to the ship, so wise men to fortune.

Q. Proceed to farther example?

A. Trist. 1. Even as the yellow gold in flaming fire is seen,
So men may trust, behold, in time that is sharp and keen.


Cic. Phil. 2. But even as those who in a great sickness do not taste the
sweetness of meat, so the lustful, covetous, wicked, have not the taste of true
praise. Virg. made these verses. All night it rained, next day the signs are
seen,
The Empires parted Caesar and Jove between.


Battillus arrogated them to himself and obtained a great reward; therefore
Virgil in these Verses mocketh Batillus. I made these Rimes, another had the
Land,
So Birds, you nests not for your selves have made;
So you, O Bees, make honey not for you;
So you, O Sheep, bear wool but not for you;
So you, O Oxen plow, but not for you.


Q. Are not the notes sometimes omitted?

A. Yes, sometimes there is no note at all

Q. Give an example?

A. Virg. Aeglog. 2. Ah my fair Boy! trust not thy hew too much,
Hurtles though black, by every handsome hand
Are plucked while Dazies none vouchsafe to touch,
All be they white, yet shed they as they stand.


Q. What is continual likeness?

A. A continual likeness is when as the first term is to the second, so the
second to the third.

Give an example?

A. De. Leg. 3. See you not that this is the Migistrates power, that he should
rule and prescribe right, profitable, and agreeing things with the Laws: for
as the Laws do govern the Magistrates, so the Magistrates do rule the people.

Q. What is the force of this example?

A. Here are three terms, Laws, Magistrates, People.

Q. Have not feigned likenesses equal force with these above?

Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. It appears chiefly in this explicated similitude of Aesop his Apology
taken out of Horace. Epist. 1. But if Romes people ask me happily,
Why not amongst Judges on the Bench sit I;
And do that which they love, fly that they hate?
I answer as the crafty Fox of late.
When tooth-sick Lion he this message sent,
Fain would I come, to that thing was I bent;
But that I saw the steps of many feet,
That way to go, none back again to get.



CAP. 22. Dislikes.
Q. What are dislikes?

A. Dislikes are comparatives, whose quality is diverse.

Q. What are the proper notes of dislikes?

A. Dislike, different, another,

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Plan. Although the paying of money and thanks be unlike. Aeneid. 1. O
ancient house! O how unlike for that Lord to govern. Caes. Pri. Bell. Gal. All
these differed in their tongues, instructions, laws. Agra 2. One is known by
his countenance, another by his voice, another by his gate. De Not. Deo 2.
Because I have begun to do otherwise then I had said in the beginning.

Q. Are not dislikes also known by denying the likes?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. De Orat. 2. Philosophy is not like the other arts. Aeneid. 2. But he was
not of that seed wherein thou rememberest Achilles, such was Priamus his enemy.
Lor. Epist. 1. There is not the same age, the same mind, Ad frat. 1. So thy
ring is not as a certain vessel, but as thy self. Phil. 3. This certain day he
is wont to expect not so much of sacrafice as counsel.

Qu. Give some Poetical examples.

A. By this argument the shepherd confesses his error. Aeglog. 1. Ah fond
friend Melibe, I whilom dempt.
That famous city which I now and then,
In common chat amongst our contrymen;
Have heard, yea cliped by the name of Rome,
Certes for all the world cib to our homely home:
and by and by,
-- so did I dare.
Kids liken to their Goats, whelps to their dams,
And mole-hills wont to mountains to compare.


Qu. Show the force of this example?

A. As neither the whelps to the dogs, nor kids to their dams, so neither is
Mantua like to Rome.

Q. Be not notes of dislikes sometimes wanting?

A. Yes, oftentimes, and the dislikeness is more clearly explicated.

Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. Quint. L. 1. C. 11. Brutus slew the Children of the Traitors: Muntius did
punish by death the virtue of his Son.

Q. Give another example?

A. Cut. The Sun sets and rises again: but when our little light sets,
there is a perpetual night.


CAP. 23. Conjugates.
Q. Hitherto you have expounded the first arguments, those derived from the
first follow, what are they then?

A. Those derived from the first are these, which are even to that which they
argue, as the first from whence they are derived.

Q. What be the kinds of these arguments?

A. A Conjugate, a Notation, a Distribution, and a Definition.

Q. What are Conjugates?

A. Conjugates are names drawn diversely from the same principal.

Q. Give example?

A. Justice, Just, Justly.

Q. Is there not a Symbol in Conjugates of agreeing arguments?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Propert. Lib. 2. Because in love there is no liberty,
Whoever loves that man, can never be free.


Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Here liberty is the cause why we should be free.

Q. Give another example?

A. Cic. Not. Deo. 2. Where he speaks of Dionysius the tyrant. He commanded
that the tables of silver, in which were the Images of the Gods, should be
taken away; in which after the manner of the Grecians should be engraven, The
goods of the Gods, saying, that he was willing to use of their goodness.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. The Gods are good, therefore their goodness is to be used: here from the
effects it is directed to the causes.

Q. Give another example?

A. Ter. I am a man, no humane thing is strange to me.

A. Is it not sometimes from the Subject to the Adjunct?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Phil. 2. I will not handle thee as a Consul, lest thou handle me as one
standing for the Consulship. In Pis. When as all the cause was of the Consuls
and Senate, both the Consuls and Senate had need of my help.


CAP. 24. Notations.
Q. What is notation?

A. Notation is the interpretation of a name.

Q. what are names?

A. Names truly are notes of things.

Q. May there not be rendered a reason of the names?

A. Yes, either from the derivation or composition, if they be made by true
notation, from some first argument.

Q. Give example?

A. Homo ab humo. Ovid. Fast. 6. Stat vi terrasua, vi stando vesta vocatur.


Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from the cause.

Q. Give another example?

A. At focus a flammis and quod fovit omnia dictus.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from the effects.

Q. Give another example?

A. Vir. 4. O Verrea praeclara! quid enim accessisti, quo non attuleris tecum
istum diem? and enim quam tu domum, quam urbem adiisti, quod fanum denique,
quod non eversum atque extersum reliqueris? quare appellentur sane ista Verrea
quae non ex nomine, sed ex moribus, naturaque tua constituta esse videantur.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is also a notation from the effects.

Q. Give another example?

A. Ovid. Fast. 1. Prima dies tibi carna datur, dea cardinis haec est,
Nomine clausa aperit, claudit aperta sua.


Q. Wherein is the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from the subjects in the inward, about which the Deity
of this Goddess is exercised.

Q. Give another example?

A. From the adjuncts, there is a notation from Bambalion. Phil. 2. Quia balbus
and stupidus: hinc igitur cavilatio in Antonium generum. Tuae conjugis, bonae
faeminae, locupletatis quidem certe, Bambalio quidem pater, homo nullo numero,
nihil illo contemptius, qui propter haesitantiam linguae stuporemque cordis
cognomen ex contumelia traxer it.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This is a notation from adjuncts.

Q. Are there not notations also from disagreeings?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Quint. Lib. 1. Cap. 6 Lucus, quia umbra apacus, parum luceat. and ludus,
quia sit longissime a lusu, and dies quia minime dives.

Q. May not notation be also from comparatives?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example:

A. Pyropus, quod ignis flammam imitetur.

Q. But is there not, as to the notation to his name, so an affection of the
name to the notation.

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Animi plenus ergo animosus.

Q. Show the contrary?

A. Animosus, ergo animi plenus.


CAP. 25. Distribution.
Q. What are the other derived arguments?

A. Distribution and Definition.

Q. Is there not a reciprocal affection in both these?

A. Yes.

Q. What is the affection in the distribution?

A. Of all parts with the whole.

Q. What is the affection in the definition?

A. Of the definition with the things designed.

Q. What is a distribution?

A. A distribution is, when the whole is distributed into parts.

Q. What is the whole

A. The whole is that which contains parts.

Q. What are parts?

A. Parts are those which are contained of the whole.

Q. It should seem then that the distinction of the whole into parts is
distribution?

A. So I said.

Q. What is then the collection of the parts to the making up of the whole?

A. It is called induction.

Q. Whence is distribution taken?

A. Distribution is taken from arguments altogether agreeing, but disagreeing
amongst themselves: therefore it shall be by so much more accurate, by how much
the agreeings of the parts shall be with the whole, and the disagreeings among
themselves.


CAP. 26. The distribution from the Cause.
Q. Whence is the first distribution?

A. The first distribution is from absolute agreeings.

Q. What are these absolute agreeings?

A. The causes and effects.

Q. What is distribution from the causes?

A. Distribution from the causes, is when the parts are causes of the whole.
Here the distribution of perfect into its members is greatly praised.

Q. What is perfect?

A. Perfect is the whole, to which the parts are essential.

Q. What is a member?

A. A member is a part of the whole.

Q. Give example?

A. Grammar is divided into Etymology and Syntaxis; Rhetoric, into Elocution
and Action; Logic, into Invention and Judgment: for those Arts constituted of
those parts.

Q. What is the principal distribution?

A. When the explication of a longer thing is received.

Q. Give examples?

A. Georg. 1. What makes glad corn, and how to till the ground,
How to plant elms that be so strong and sound;
How to guide oxen, cattle how to tend,
And how the little pretty be defend,
I will declare. --


Q. Give another example?

A. Cic. pro Mur. I understand, O you Judges, that the whole accusation has
three parts, one of which is in reprehension of life, another in contention of
dignity, the third touching the fault.

Q. How is the second kind of handling this kind of argument?

A. Either from the parts to the whole; or from the whole to the parts.

Q. Give example?

A. Cat. Quintia is fair to many, so to me,
I will not therefore this same thing deny;
But wholly fair I will not say she is not,
True beauty in her there is not a jot.
Lesbius fair, in every part most fine;
Venus adorned her, clear did make her shine.



CAP. 27. The distribution from the effects, also the genus and species.
Q. What is the distribution from the effects?

A. The distribution from the effects, is when the parts are effects.

Q. Give example?

A. In a ship the seamen, some scale the masts, some run in at the doors, some
draw water, the governor holds the rudder in the ship

Q. May not distribution of genus into species be comprised under this head?

A. Yes, distribution of genus into species does here excel.

Q. What is genus?

A. Genus is the whole essential in parts.

Q. What is species?

A. Species is the parts of genus.

Q. Give example?

A. We say a living creature is the genus of a man, and a beast; for a living
creature is the whole of that effect: viz. a corporal living substance, which
commonly pertains to the beasts and men. We say the species of a man and a
beast is living, because they are parts of a living subject, which living
essence they have common. We say a man, the genus of every man; and a lion, the
genus of every lion; but contrary, every man, the species of a man; every lion,
of a lion.

Q. What is the kinds of the genus?

A. The genus is most general or subalternate.

Q. What are the kinds of the species?

A. The species is subalternate or most special.

Q. What is the most general genus?

A. The most general genus is that of which there is no kinds.

Q. Give example?

A. In Logical invention, an argument is the most general genus of artificials
and inartificials.

Q. What is the subalternate genus, and the subalternate species?

A. The subalternate genus, as also the subalternate species, is that which is
the species of this, but the genus of that.

Q. Give example?

A. The cause is the species of an absolute arguing argument, but the genus of
the matter and form.

Q. But what is the most special species?

A. The most special species is that which is individable into other species.

Q. Give example?

A. The matter and form singly.

Q. What are the genus and species notes of?

A. Of the causes and effects.

Q. Give example?

A. In a living thing there is a corporeal essence, which in the matter is
belonging commonly to the species; as also the faculty of life and sense, which
in the form pertains commonly to the species.

Q. It should seem that the genus contains the causes, which do attain to the
species of it; and therefore contrarily, the species contains the effects of
their genus?

A. So it is.

Q. From whence then is that universal famousness and excellency?

A. From hence, because it declares the causes,

Q. Show some example now of the distributions of the genus into species?

A. Distribution of genus into species is very excellent truly, but hard and
seldom found, yet we will bring what illustrations and examples we can. Ovid.
Met. 1. Divides living creatures into five species? stars, birds, beasts fish,
men: he gives life to the stars, as the Philosophers do.

No region is without some living thing,
Stars in the sky, the forms of Gods being:
Birds in the air in abundance be,
Beasts on the earth, and fishes in the sea.
But yet amongst these a creature more divine,
Who may them rule and govern all in fine;
There wanted much until that man was born.
So Cic. Offic. 1. Divides virtue into four species, prudence, justice,
fortitude, and temperance; but all that is honest springs out of one of these
four parts, for either it is conversant in the knowledge and skill of the
truth, or in the defending the society of men, and giving every one his own;
also in trust of things bargained, or in a high mind and admirable greatness or
courage, or lastly in all things which are made and called order and means, in
which is modesty and temperance.

Q. What is distribution of the genus into the forms of the species?

A. Distribution of the genus into the forms of the Species is the same;
because the form with the genus, constitute their species.

Q. Give example?

A. Of living creatures, one is speaking, another dumb.

Q. May not genus and species be handled a part and severally.

A. Yes, genus and species are not only handled after this simple form of
division, but also apart one from another.

Q. Give example?

A. Pro Arc. But lest any should wonder that we say so that there is a certain
faculty of wit, and this reason or discipline of speaking, neither that we have
truly given our selves al together to this study; for all arts which pertain to
humanity, have a certain common band, and are contained (as it were) in a
certain knowledge amongst themselves.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Art is the genus; poesy, and eloquence the species.

Q. Is not the genus handled by the species?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example?

A. Ovid de Trist. 4. Fill thy sad matter with thy virtues grave,
Hot glory does decay, it none can save:
Who had known Hector if Troy well had been?
Through public vices, way to virtue's seen.
Thine art (O Typhis) lies, if in the sea
There be no floods; if men be well truly,
Then Phoebus art decays instantly.
That which they hid, and is not known for good,
Appears at last, and shows where evil stood.


Q. But are there no special examples fitted to this kind?

A. Yes, such as this. Attic. 7. Will thou leave the city? What if the French
men come? The Commonwealth, he says, is not in walls, but altars and Religion.
Theomisticles did the same, and a whole host of Barbarians were not able to
take one city. But Pericles did not so, who in the year almost before fifty,
when he kept nothing but a wall; our city before being taken, they kept the
tower notwithstanding.


CAP. 28. Distribution from the Subject.
Q. what is the other distribution?

A. The other distribution is of agreeings afrer a certain manner.

Q. what are agreeings after a certain manner?

A. The subjects and adjuncts.

Q. what is the distribution from subjects?

A. The distribution from subjects is, when the parts are subjects.

Q. Give example?

A. Cat. Thy maiden-head's not wholly thine I ween,
One part thy Father gave, the part between,
Thou of thy mother had; so that to thee,
None but the third remains for to be.
Therefore resist not two, cast not away,
The thing thy parents gave to thee I say.


Q. Give example out of some Orator?

A. Cic. Tusc. 1. There are therefore three kinds of good, as I understand
from the Stoics, to whose use oftener then I am wont we give place. There are
therefore those kinds of good, whilst that the external things of the body are
cast upon the ground, and because they are to be undertaken, they are called
good. There are other divine things which do more nearly concern us, and are
heavenly; so that those who have attained them, why may I not call them after a
manner blessed, yea most happy.


CAP. 29. Distribution from Adjuncts
Q. What is Distribution from Adjuncts?

A. Distribution from Adjunct is, when the parts are Adjuncts.

Q. Give example?

A. Of men, some are sound, some sick, some rich, some poor.

Q. Give a poetical example?

A. Virg. Georg. 1. Divides the World into five parts, the middle scorching
hot, the other two extreme cold, the two last temperate. Five Zones the heavens
do hold, the middle hot:
The Sun there burns, cold in it there is not;
But on the right and left hand there is seen,
Rain, frost, and cold, that is bitter, sharp and keen.
The two last temperate, yet in them is,
Mortality, and many sicknesses.


Q. Give an Orators example?

A. Caes. Bell. Gal. 1. All France is divided into three parts; of which, one
the Belgians inhabit, the other the Aequitans, the third, those who in their
tongue are called Cetts, in our Language the Gauls.


CAP. 30. Definition.
Q. What is definition?

A. Definition is when it is explicated what the thing is, and that
interchangeably may be argued with the thing defined.

Q. What are the kinds of definition?

A. A definition is perfect or imperfect.

Q. What is the perfect definition called?

A. This is properly called a definition.

Q. What is the imperfect called?

A. A description.

Q. What is a perfect definition?

A. A perfect definition is a definition consisting of the only causes which
constitute the essence: such as the causes comprehended by the genus and form.

Q. Give example?

A. After this manner is a man defined, viz. by the genus (a living creature)
we understand (as it is said) a corporeal essence full of life and sense, which
is the matter, and a part of the form of a man; to which (if thou addest
reasonable) thou comprehendest the whole form of a man, by the whole faculty of
this life, sense, reason.

Q. It should seem then that the perfect definition is nothing else then an
universal symbol of the causes, constituting the essence and nature of things?

A. So it is.

Q. Give an example?

A. The Arts have such definitions, Grammar, of well speaking; Rhetoric, of
pleading well; Logic, of disputing well; Arithmetic, of numbering well;
Geometry of measuring well.


CAP. 31. Description.
Q. What is description?

A. Description is a definition defining the thing from other arguments also.

Q. Give example?

A. This is the description of a man, a man is a living crea^ure, mortal,
capable of discipline,

Q. Are not proper circumstances also mingled with common causes sometimes?

A. Yes.

Q. Then it seems that succint brevity is not always in this kind?

A. No, oftentimes it desires a clearer and greater explication.

Q. Give an example out of some Orator?

A. In Mil. Glory is described. But yet of all rewards of virtue, (if there be
a reason of rewards) the greatest is glory; this one comfort us, touching
the shortness of our life, causes that we are present with the absent, dead,
makes us live; to conclude, by these steps we do seem to ascend unto Heaven.

Q. Give a poetical example?

A. Aeneid. 4. Fame is described. From Libeans temple comes forth great fame,
Naught swifter then ill news which bears this name;
Moving she goes; by going, strength she gets:
She fears at first, at last with winds she fleets;
Walks on the earth, her head she lifts to the sky:
Earth brought her forth, the Gods were angry.
In Caeus and Encelladus his land,
She was at last as I do understand;
Her feet were swift, here wings most hurtful were,
A horrid monster, wicked, full of fear:
As many feathers as upon her are;
So many eyes attend her every where.
So many tongues: so many mouths do sound,
So many years do lessen her around.
In night she flies through heaven, and in the shade,
About the earth she goes, no noise is made:
She sits by the light on houses high,
And causes towns to quiver fearfully.
As well a bruiter of things false that be,
As messengers of truth and verity.


Q. Proceed to further example?

A. Such are the discriptions of plants and living creatures ^n physic: also
of rivers, mountains, cities, in Geography and History.


CAP. 32. Divine Testimony,
Q. You have expounded the artificial arguments, the inartificial follows;
tell me then what an inartificial argument is?

A. An inartificial argument is that which argues not by its own nature, but
taken force from some artificial argument.

Q. It seems by this, when a hidden truth of things is more subtily searched
for, that this argument has small force of proof?

A. So it is, but in civil and humane things, oftentimes this argument
effects the greatest trust from the moving arguments, if wisdom, virtue, and
good will be present.

Q. What is it called?

A. In one name is called testimony.

Q. What are the kinds of testimony?

A. Divine or humane.

Q. What may be comprised under the Head of divine testimony?

A. Not only the miracles of the Gods, but also the answers of Prophets and
Fortune Tellers are counted amongst divine testimonies.

Q. Give example?

A. All these are brought forth Cat. 3. For that I may omit (says the Orator)
the fires seen in the night from the West, and the burning of heaven, as also
lightning, as earthquakes, with other many things done to us Consuls, as those
which are now done to seem to proclaim the Gods immortality. And a little
after, at which time when the Araspatians were come together out of all
Herturia, they said that slaughter, burning, perishing of the laws, civil and
domestical war, and the fall of the whole city and empire approached; unless
the immortal Gods pleased by all reason, by their power should change those
destinies. At length when he said that they mocked at the answer of the
Arispatians, and that they did more regard the sign of Jove, turning to the
East, he then said, But is not he so present, that it should seem to be done at
the beck of the mighty Jove; that when this morning before my door, by my
command and conjuration, the Judges being then in the house of Concordia, at
the same time there appeared a sign, which being turned toward you and the
Senate, both you and the Senate saw manifestly laid open, who they were that
were against the health of all men.

Q. Give another example?

A. That of Tibullus is more short. But if that Oracles true things do tell,
Then this in our name see thou do declare?
That he does promise Delius to give,
To be thy spouse, with whom thou wilt happy live.



CAP. 33. Testimony from humane Law and Sentences.
Q. What be the kinds of humane testimony?

A. Humane testimony is common or proper.

Q. What is common?

A. Law, and a famous sentence.

Q. What is a legal testimony?

A. Legal testimony is both unwritten and written.

Q. Bring forth authority for this?

A. Pro Mil. for there is (O ye Judges) a law not written, but born with us;
which we have not received, learned, read; but taken, drawn, expressed from
nature: as if our life should be in some hazard, force, danger, either of
thieves or enemies, all honest reason were to be sought of safety; but if the
twelve tables will have the night thief, yea, the day thief too, if he defend
himself after any manner, killed without punishment; who is there that will
think him that is slain to be punished, when as there is a sword reached to us,
to kill that man, by the laws themselves.

Q. What are famous Sentences?

A. Proverbs.

Q. Give example?

A. They be such as these: Pares cum paribus facilime congregantur. Spartam
nactus es, hance ex orna.

Q. What may farther be under this head?

A. Sayings of Wisdom also.

Q. Give example?

A. Nosce teipsum. Nequid nimis. Sponde praesto ad detrimentum.

Q. What is proper testimony?

A. Such as this of Plato 1. ad Quint. frat. And then truly Plato the prince of
Wisdom and Learning thought those Commonwealths blessed, if either learned and
wise men governed, or those that did govern, placed all their study in wisdom
and learning.

Q. Proceed to further example?

A. Such were in the Poets, Aeneid. 4. Learn justice and admonitions, and
contenm not the rich. So in Homer. (...).
Ajax led out of Salaminus twelve ships.
The Magatenses were overcome by the Athenians.


Q. What are the testimonies of the living?

A. Testimonies of the living, are not only when it is inquired of ground,
felling of wood, and such like business, but also there are testimonies of
obligation, confessing oath.

Q. Give an example of obligation?

A. Phil. 5. For I dare bind my faith (P. C.) to you and the people of Rome,
that truly when no force constrained me, I durst do; and I feared an opinion of
timerity, in a thing greatly hurtful: I promise and swear (P. C.) to become
always such a citizen to Caesar as he himself is, and as we ought chiefly to
wish or desire.

Q. Have we not an obligation set forth sometimes with a pledge?

A. Yes. Virg. Aeglog. 3. Wilt then by turns, we hand to hand do try,
What either can, and prove each by our deed;
I Will pawn this heifer, (which lest thou deny)
She twice has come already to the pail,
And two twins suckles: at this time now say,
What pawn thou wilt gage with her to countervail.


Q. What are the kinds of confession?

A. Confession is free or extorted by torments.

Q. What is this latter properly called?

A. A question.

Q. Give example?

A. Such an argument there is against Milon whom Cicero derided. Go to then,
what, or how is the question? How? Where was Roscius? Where was Casca? Does
Clodius lay snares for Milon? He has done, surely the gallows. He has done
nothing.

Q. What further may be reduced hitherto?

A. Hitherto may be referred the argument which we used when we bring fourth
our approbation, and experience of our affirmative.

Q. Give example?

A. Ver. 4. Even Volcatio if he had come freely, would he have given a little
book? he shall come, he shall be tried; no man truly receives it. Ter. Spend
thy time in letters, in the woods, in music; it is meet for youth to know
these liberal things, I will give diligence.

Q. Give a Poetical example?

A. Ovid. Trist. 3. The which that thou may better credit me,
Try thou my pains, believe it then to be.


Q. Give an example also of the testimony of an oath.

A. Aeneid. 6. I swear by the gods, and all in earth unseen,
I have departed from thy shore, O queen.


Q. This reciprocation seems to be more obscure, as because the testimony is
true, the witness is also true?

A. So it is. And thus much suffices to have spoken of Invention, the first
part of the Science Logic.


THE SECOND BOOK OF THE Art of Logic.
CAP. 1. What Judgment is.
Q. Hitherto the first part of Logic in Invention has been expounded, the
other part follows in Judgment; what then is Judgment?

A. Judgment is the second part of Logic, of disposing arguments to be judged
well.

Q. How are they judged?

A. Every thing is judged by a certain rule of disposition.

Q, It may be thought then that this part of Logic is called both Judgment
and Disposition from hence?

A. So it is.


CAP. 2. An affirmative or negative axioma.
Q. What are the kinds of Judgment?

A. Judgment is axiomatical, or dianoctical.

Q. What is an axioma?

A. An axioma is the disposition of an argument, with an argument, wherein
somewhat is judged to be, or not to be.

Q. What is it called, and whence receives it the name?

A. In the Latin of Enuntiatum, it is called Enuntiation? of Pronuntiatum,
Pronuntiation.

Q. What are the affections of an axioma?

A. An axioma is affirmative or negative.

Q. What is affirmative?

A. Affirmative is when the force of it is affirmed.

Q. And what negative?

A. When it is denied, From hence springs the contradiction of axioma's when
the same argument is affirmed or denied.


CAP. 3. True and false.
Q. What may be a second kind of the effections of an Axioma?

A. An Axioma secondly is true or false.

Q. How true?

A. When it pronounces as the thing is.

Q. How false?

A. Contrary.

Q. What are the affections of a true Axioma?

A. A true Axioma is contingent or necessary.

Q. How contingent?

A. When it is so true that it may sometimes be false.

Q. Give example?

A. Fortune helps the bold; for it may be, that which is true to day, to
morrow may be false: and therefore the judgment of this contingent verity, is
called opinion: those things of the time past or present, may be certain to a
man, but of time to come, they cannot by nature, although with God all things
are present. Therefore Martial does worthily mock Priscus. Priscus, thou often
asks what I shall be,
If now most rich, hereafter what truly;
Things for to come, can thou not tell them me,
If thou a Lion art, what will thou be?


Q. How necessary?

A. When it is always true, neither can be false.

Q. What is this affirmative called?

A. This affirmative is called Katapantos of every thing.

Q. How impossible?

A. Contrarily, where it can be true of nothing.

Q. What belongs to an Axioma of the arts?

A. An Axioma of the arts ought to be Kantapantos, as also Homogene and
Catholic.

Q. What is an Homogene Axioma?

A. An Homogene Axioma is when the parts are essential among themselves: as the
form to the thing formed, the subject to its proper adjunct.

Q. What is this called?

A. This Genus of the Species is called ath' auto' by it self.

Q. What is a Catholic Axioma?

A. A Catholic Axioma is when the consequent is always true of the
anticedent; not only in every thing and by it self, but also reciprocally.

Q. Give example?

A. A man is a living creature, reasonable, number is equal or unequal.

Q. What is this called?

A. This is called Katholou proton universally first.

Q. What then are the laws of the proper documents of the arts?

A. These three, the first Ketapantos, the law of verity; the second Kath'
anto, the law of justice; the third Katholous proton called the law of wisdom;
and such is the judgment of Catholic Axioma's, the most true and chief
knowledge.


CAP. 4. The Simple Axioma.
Q. You have expounded the common affection of Axioma's, the kinds follow, what
are then the kinds of an Axioma?

A. An Axioma is simple or compound.

Q. What is simple?

A. Simple is that which is contained in the force of one word; and therefore
by an affirmative or negative word it affirms or denies.

Q. Give examples?

A. Fire burns, fire is hot, fire is not water.

Q. Show the force of these examples?

A. Here fire is the anticedent, burns the consequent: and this is the first
disposition of invented things; of the cause with the effect, as in the first
example; the subject with the adjunct, as in the second; the disagreeing with
the disagreeing, in the third: after a certan manner any argument may be
enuntiated, (except those full of comparison and distribution) agreeings truly
by affirming, disagreeing by denying.

Q. What are the kinds of a simple Axioma?

A. A simple Axioma is general or special.

Q. What is general?

A. General is when the common consequent is attributed generally to the common
antecedent. And this contradiction does not always divide the true and false,
but both parts of the contingent, as also not of contingents may be false.

Q. Give example of the first?

A. Each place delighted is with Baiis pleasant rooms. No place delighted is
with Baiis pleasant rooms.

Q. Give example of the second?

A. Every creature is reasonable, no creature is reasonable.

Q. What is a special Axioma?

A. A special Axioma is when the consequent is not atributed to every
antecedent, and here the contradiction ever divides the true from the false.

Q. What are the kinds of special?

A. Special is particular or proper.

Q. What is particular?

A. Particular is when the common consequent is attributed particularly to the
antecedent: But to this Axioma it is generally contradicted.

Q. Give example?

A. Somewhat is to be pardoned. Nothing is to be pardoned. Some clemency is not
to be praised. All clemency is to be praised.

Q. What is a proper Axioma?

A. A proper Axioma is when the consequent is attributted to a proper
anticedent.

Q. Give example?

A. Fabulla is fair, whose negative and contradiction is, Fabulla is not fair.


CAP. 5. The copulative Axioma.
Q. What is the compound axioma?

A. The compound axioma is that which is contained in the force of a
conjunction. Therefore from an affirmative or negative conjunction it is
affirmed or denied. And a part of the contradiction is true, a part false.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. A compound enunciate is for his conjunction congregative or segregative.

Q. What is congregative?

A. Congregative is that which enunciateth all agreeings by affirmings, and
disagreeings by denying.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. Copulative or connexed.

Q. What is Copulative?

A. Copulative is that whose conjunction is copulative.

Q. Give example?

A. Aeneid. 1. The East and South winds on the seas do blow,
They rush through deep, till on the top they show.
The Afric often with these his blasts conjoynes.
This therefore shall be the negative and contradiction.
The East and South winds not on seas do blow,
They rush not through the deep, ne on top show.
The Afric does not often his blasts conjoyn.


Q. But whereupon depends the judgment of the copulative enunciate?

A. The judgment of the copulative enunciate being true, depends of the
truth of all parts: false, at the least one part false.

Q. What may further be comprised under this Head?

A. The enunciate of a relate quality is of this kind, whose conjunction is
the relation it self,

Q. Give example?

A. Aeglog. 3. So me thy song as sleep on grass does queme,
The traveller his weary limbs to drench.


Q. Show the force of this example?

A. Here the copulative judgment is, as if he should say, sleep is grateful to
the weary; and so thy song is pleasing to me.

Q. What is the negative hereof? Not me thy song as sleep on grass does queme,
The traveller his weary limbs to drench.



CAP. 6. The Connexed Axioma.
Q. What is a connexed Axioma?

A. A connexed axioma is congregative, whose conjunction is connexive.

Q. Give example?

A. Aeneid. 2. If fortune does feign Simon miserable, it dishonestly feigneth
him to be vain and a liar; whose negative is, if fortune does not feign Simon
miserable, it dishonestly feigneth him to be vain and a liar.

Q. Is not this conjunction also denied more manifestly by denying the
consequent?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example

A. Pro Mer. I am not a murderer though in their company. De fato: Neither if
every enunciation be true or false, does it follow therefore that the causes
are immutable; for affirmation signifies, if the antecedent be, that the
consequent is also. Negation therefore and contradiction determines, if the
antecedent be, that therefore the consequent is not. Wherefore when thou shall
judge the connexive to be absolute true, thou shall judge it also necessary,
and thou shall understand this necessity to spring from the necessary connection
of parts, the which may also be even in false parts.

Q. Give example of this?

A. If a man be a Lion, he is also a four-footed, this is a necessary connection.

Q. But if the connection be contingent, and only put for probability, how shall
it be judged then?

A. Its judgment then shall be only opinion,

Q. Give example?

A. Ter. and Pamphilus, if thou do this, this day is the last thou shall see
me.

Q. What may be further under this head?

A. This relation connexive of consequence, is like to the connexed Axioma, as
when Tullius is said to be an Orator, he has also skill in pleading well. And
thus much of the congregative Axioma.


CAP. 7. The Discreet Axioma
Q. What is a Segregative Axioma?

A. A Segregative Axioma is that whose conjunction is Segregative, and
therefore enunciateth disagreeing arguments.

Q. What are the kinds?

A. A Segregative enunciation is discreet or disjunct.

Q. What is discreet?

A. Discreet is that whose conjunction is discretive, and therefore of
disagreeings it chiefly enunciateth diverses.

Q. Give example?

A. Tusc. 5. Although they may be judged by the force o^ the body, yet they are
referred to the mind: whose negativ^ and contradiction is, although they may
not be juged by the sense of the body, yet they are referred to the mind; or,
although they may be judged by the sense of the body, yet they are not referred
to the mind. For yet is here a chief conjunction.

Q. How is the discreet Enunciat judged to be true?

A. The discreet enunciation is judged to be true and lawful, if the parts be
not only true, but may be also discreet.

Q. How is the false or ridiculous judged?

A. Contrarily.


CAP. 8. The disjunct Axioma.
Q. What is a disjunct axioma?

A. A disjunct axioma is a segregative axioma, whose conjunction is disjunct:

Q. Give example?

A. Georg. 1. There, as they say, is either silent night,
Always most dark and void of any light;
Or else the morning from us here does go,
And brings the day unto them there also.


Q. Show another example?

A. De fate, ever enunciation is true or false,

Q. Here it seems is signified from the disjunst, that one only is true?

A. So it is.

Q. What shall the negative and contradiction be?

A. Not every enunciation is true or false.

Q. And what does the contradiction signify?

A. That one of them is not true by necessity, for if the disjunction be
absolutely true, it is also necessary: and the parts of the disjunct are
opposite without any means.

Q. But although the disjunction be absolutely true, and also necessary, may
there not be a necessity that the parts should be separately necessary?

A. No.

Q. Give example?

A. A man is good or not good, here the disjunction is necessary; and yet a man
is good, is not a necessary enunciation; also a man is not good, is not a
necessary enunciation.

Q. Whereupon then depends the necessity of the disjunction?

A. The necessity of the disjunction depends on the necessary opposition, and
disjunction of the parts, not as their necessary verity.

Q. But is not the disjunction oftentimes from condition?

A. Yes.

Q. Give example.

A. As if it be thought whether Cleon will come, or Socrates, because it was so
agreed that one of them only should come.

Q. It seems by this that if the disjunction be contingent, it is not
absolutely true, but is only opinionable?

A. So it is, and that more frequently in the use of man.

Qu. Give example?

A. Ovid. Epist. Lean. Either good hap shall now unto me fall,
Or else fierce death, the end of loving thrall.



CAP. 9. The Syllogism and its parts.
Q. You have manifested in its self the axiomatical judgment by axioma's; the
dianoetical follows: what therefore is dianoia?

A. Dianoia is when one axioma is derived from another.

Q. What are the kinds of dianoia?

A. A Syllogism or Method.

Q. What is a Syllogism?

A. A syllogism is a dianoia whereby the question is so disposed with the
argument, as the antecedent put, it is necessarily concluded.

Q. Make this plainer?

A. When the axioma is doubtful the question is effected, and there is need of
a third argument to be placed with the question, for its trust.

Q. How many parts has the antecedent?

A. The antecedent of a syllogism has two parts, a proposition and an
assumption.

Q. What is a proposition?

A. A proposition is the first part of the antecedent, whereby the consequent
of the question, is at least disposed with the argument.

Q. What is the assumption?

A. The assumption is the second part of the antecedent, which is affirmed from
the proposition.

Q. But what is the consequent part of the syllogism?

A. The consequent part of the syllogism, is that which imbraceth the part of
the question, and concludes it.

Q. What is it called?

A. It is called from the nature of it, complexion and conclusion.

Q. If any part of the syllogism want, what is it said to be?

A. It is called Enthymema.

Q. But what if any part happen to be besides its parts?

A. Then it is called a Porsyllogism.

Q. Is not the order of the parts oftentimes confounded?

A. Yes.

Q. What then if any doubt shall arise from it?

A. Then that shall be filled up which wants, those cut off which abound: and
every part digested into his place.


CAP. 10. The simple contracted syllogism.
Q. What are the kinds of a syllogism?

A. A syllogism is simple or compound.

Q What is simple?

A. Simple is where the consequent part of the question is placed in the
proposition, the antecedent part in the assumption.

Q. What are the affections of it?

A. It is affirmed, denied, general, special, and proper.

Q. How is it affirmed?

A. From all the affirmative parts.

Q. How is it denied?

A. From one negative of the antecedent parts, with complexion.

Q. How is it general?

A. From the general proposition and assumption,

Q. How is it special?

A. From one of the generals only.

Q. And how is it proper?

A. From both propers.

Q. What are the kinds of the simple syllogism?

A. The simple syllogism is contracted by parts, or explicated.

Q. What is contract?

A. Contract is when the argument for the example is so subjected to a
particular question, that the antecedent may be understood to affirm each part,
and in the assumption.

Q. Give an example?

A. Certain confidence is virtue, as constancy; certain confidence is not
virtue, as boldness.

Q. Show the force of this example?

A. This argument is understood to go before each part of the question, as if
it were expressed, constancy is a virtue, and confidence; and therefore certain
confidence is a virtue: also boldness is not a virtue, and yet it is
confidence; and therefore some confidence is not a virtue. So in the use of
disputing, the master of the Syllogism draws the judgment, neither is it set
forth otherwise. And this exposition the beginning of the Syllogism is
expounded by Aristotle, so that the Syllogism in its full judgment is more
clear and manifest.


CAP. 11. The first kind of the simple explicated Syllogism.
Q. What is the explicated Syllogism?

A. The explicated syllogism whose parts are explicated.

Q. What are the proprieties in this explicated Syllogism?

Q. Two, first the proposition is general or proper, secondly the conclusion is
like to the antecedent or the weaker part.

Q. What are the kinds of it?

A. The kinds are twofold.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first is where the argument always follow the negative in the other
part.

Qu. Show some syllogism of this kind?

A GENESIS 1.
Cesare. A troubled me uses not his reason well: But a wise man uses his
reason well. A wise man is not therefore troubled.



Q Produce the example of some Orator for this syllogism?

A. This Judgment is so brought forth of Cicero, Tusc. 3. And when (says he)
the eye is troubled, it is not honestly affected to the fulfilling of its duty,
and the rest of the parts; as also the whole body, when it is moved from its
state, wants its office and function. So a troubled mind is not honestly
affected to fulfill his duty. But the duty of the mind is to use reason; and a
wise man is always so affected, that he uses reason most excellently; he is
therefore never troubled.

Q. Give example of another general syllogism?

A. GENESIS 2.
Camestres A mortal thing is compound. A Soul is not compound. A Soul therefore
is not mortal.



Q. Produce the authority of some ancient avouching this syllogism?

A. Cicero judged the soul to be immortal by this syllogism. Tusc. 1. For we
cannot doubt (says he) in our minds, unless we be perchance ignorant in
physical things, but that there is nothing knit to souls, nothing connexed,
nothing copulate, nothing joined, nothing double; which when it is so can
surely never be parted, nor divided, nor severed, nor drawn asunder, neither
perish therefore: for perishing is as it were, a departure and separation, or
breach of those parts, which before the perishing were joined together.

Q. Give an example of a special syllogism?

A. SPEC. 1.
Festino A pale man is not courageous. Maximus is courageous. Maximus therefore
is not pale.



Qu. Produce authority for this syllogism?

A. By this judgment Ovid concludes de Pont. 3. El. 3. Paleness and sloth are
not in the high mind,
Rather with Vipers them on ground we find.
In highest things thy mind excels we see;
No name I find t'express the wit of thee.
Some miseries do taste, hurt and out-worn,
Are made to feel sharp pricking of the thorn:
Yet thou art wont to help complaining men,
Amongst which number pray let me be then.


Q. Show another example of the special syllogism?

A. SPEC. 2.
Baroco. A Dauncer is Lecherous. Murena is not Lecherous. Murena therefore is
no dauncer.



Q. Produce some Orator for this syllogism?

A. Cic. pro Mur. For no man almost being sober daunceth, unless perchance he
be mad, neither alone, nor at a moderate and honest banquet; for dancing is
the companion of untimely banquets, pleasant places, and many delights: thou
snatchest that from me, that it is necessary that vices should be; thou leavest
that whereby this removed, this vice ought not to be at all: no filthy banquet,
no love, no gluttony is showed; and when we find not all these things which
have the name of pleasure, and are vices, there thou can not find lechery,
nay, think thou to find a shadow of lust in such.

Q. Avouch some other authority after the like manner?

A. After this manner judgment, Ovid de Trist. 1. concludes triply, whilst he
sets forth the excuse of his verses. They that make verses should not merry be,
Our time is clouded with adversity.
They that write verses should enjoy their ease,
The seas, the winds, with winter fierce me press.
Good Poets should not fear, but I fear death,
I dread lest swords do take away my breath:
Then what is here, a right judge will admire,
If reading them they satisfie's desire.


Q. Give example of proper syllogisms?

A. PRO. 1.
Agesilaus is not painted by Apelles. Alexander is painted by Apelles.
Alexander therefore is not Agesilaus.


Q. Give another example of a proper syllogism?

A. PRO. 2.
Caesar oppressed his country. Tullius oppressed not his country. Tullius
therefore is not Caesar.



CAP. 12. The second kind of the simple explicate syllogism.
Q. What is the second kind of the simple explicate syllogism?

A. The second kind of the explicate syllogism is, when the argument goes
before in the proposition, the affirmative follows in the assumption.

Q. Give an example of an affirmative general after this kind.

A. AFF. Genesis
Barbara. Every just thing is profitable. Every honest thing is just. Every
honest thing therefore is profitable.



Q. Produce some Orator avouching this syllogism?

A. Thus Cicero concludes, offic. 2. The Philosophers truly with great
authority, severely, soundly and honestly, do distinguish these three confused
kinds by cogitation. For whatsoever is just, that also they think to be
profitable: also, whatsoever is honest, that is just; from whence arises that
whatsoever is honest, that is also profitable.

Q. Give an example of a negative general syllogism?

A. NEG. Genesis
Celarent. A fearful man is not free. A covetous man is fearful. A covetous man
therefore is not free.



Q. Prove this by some Poet?

A. It is thus concluded and judged by Horace, Epist. 1. Who freer is he, that
as a servant dwells?
Or he that in his moneys love excels?
I do not see, he that desires does fear,
And he that fears his freedom does not bear.


Q. Give another example of this kind of syllogism?

A. Ter in Eu. concludes and judges this, That which is void of counsel,
cannot be governed by counsel. Love is void of Counsel. It cannot therefore be
governed by counse


Q. Produce the words of Terence.

A. the former syllogism follows in these words: Master that thing which has
in it neither counsel nor means, that thou can not govern by counsel. In love
are all these vices, injuries, suspicions, enmities, flatteries, war, peace
again: these uncertain things if thou should guide by certain reason, thou
do no more then if thou should labor to be mad with reason.

Q. Give an example of the affirmative special syllogism?

A. AFF. SPE.
Darii. Consuls made by virtue ought studiously to defend the Commonwealth.
Cicero is made Consul by virtue. Cicero therefore ought studiously to defend
the Commonwealth.



Q. Produce Tully's words avouching this syllogism?

A. The Orator does both conclude and judge his own diligence Agr. 2. For the
great care and diligence as well of all the Consuls, ought to be placed in
defending the Commonwealth, as of those who not in the cradle, but in the camp
were made Consuls. None of our ancients promised to the people of Rome for me
that I ought to be trusted: to ask of me that I ought: even when I did ask,
none of our ancestors commended me to you: therefore if I neglect any thing,
there is none who shall entreat me for you. Yet while my life last, (I being he
who am able to defend it from their wickedness) I promise this to you, O
Quirites, that you have committed the Commonwealth to the providence of a good
trust: to a watchful man, and not a coward; to a diligent man, not a sluggard.

Q Show another syllogism of this kind?

A. That which comes wished for is grateful. Lesbia comes wished for to
Catullus.
She is therefore grateful.


Q. Set forth Catullus his words wherein he thus concludes?

A. That which we long for with desires great,
Is acceptable to us when we heat:
Wherefore this grateful is more dear then gold,
That Lesby is come, our friend of old.
Thou do our wishes grant, our hope restore:
O light most clear! who is there that is more
Happy then I, who have what I desire;
Even what I wish, there is naught I can require.


Q. Give an example of a negative special?

A. NEG. SPE.
Ferio. The deceiver of a loving maid is not to be praised. Demophoon is the
deceiver of a loving maid, to wit. Phyllis. Demophoon therefore is not to be
praised.



Q. Set forth the words of Phillis in Ovid so judging?

A. It is no glory Virgins to deceive,
Who love a man, and wish him for to have;
Simplicity should rather favor again,
But I that love and all is a woman am;
Deceived am by thee with flatering style,
The Gods thy praises make it all the while.


Q. Give example of an affirmative proper?

A. AFF. PRO.
Octavius is Caesar's heir. I am Octavius I am therefore Caesar's heir.


Q. Give example of a negative proper?

A. NEG. PRO.
Anthony is not Caesar's son. Thou art Anthony. Thou art not therefore Caesar's
son.



CAP. 13. The first connexed Syllogism.
Q. You have expounded hitherto the simple syllogism, what now is the compound
syllogism?

A. The compound syllogism is a syllogism where the whole question is another
part of the affirmed and compound proposition, the argument is another part.

Q, But what if any thing were taken away in the compound syllogism?

A. That were to put a special contradiction.

Q. What are the kinds of a compound syllogism?

A. A compound syllogism is a connexed or disjunct.

Q. What is a connexed syllogism?

A. A connexed syllogism is a compound syllogism of a connexed proposition.

Q. How many are the manners of distinction?

A. It is of two manners.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first manner of the connexed syllogism is that which assumeth the
antecedent, and the consequent concludes.

Q. Give an example of this?

A. After this manner Cicero concludes. Lib. 2. de Divinatione. If they be
Gods it is divination. But they are Gods. It is divination therefore.


Q. Give another example?

A. Offic. 3. And if also nature prescribes this, that a man to a man,
whatsoever he be for that same cause that he is a man, will use consultation;
it is necessary according to the same nature, that the profit of all should be
common: which if it be so, all of us are contained in one, and the same law of
nature; and this if it be so indeed, we are certainly forbidden by the law of
nature to violate one anther: but the first is true, the last therefore is also
true.

Q Give another example?

A. Aeneid 4. Dido judges Aeneas to remain with her. Do thou me fly, by
these tears I thee pray,
By thy right hand I thee beseech to stay:
Else thou will leave me wretched here alone,
By our dear marriage, our dear love like none.
If I do ought deserve, if thou have been
Sweet unto me, have pity on me then:
Look on thy slippery house, and now I pray;
If any place for prayers be, I say.
For Libians sake, for Nomades his kings,
Who hated me, and for all other things
Which I for thee did bear; my credit's lost,
I am alone, for thee thus am I crossed.
Besides all this, my fame is quite decayed;
Rather I had my flesh in dust were laid.


Q. Does it always assume the same?

A. Oftentimes not the same but a greater.

Q. Give example?

A. Cat. 1. If thy parents feared and hated thee, neither could thou please
them by any reason; in my opinion thou were to abstain a little from their
sight. Now the country (which is our common parent) hates and fears thee, and
of a long time judges nothing of thee, except it be touching thy death; can
thou neither avoid its authority, neither follow its judgment, neither fear
thou its force.

Q. What may further be under his Head?

A. This manner of concluding is the very same when the proposition is a relate
of time.

Q. Give example?

A. After this kind the nymth OEnon in Ovid concludes the error of her
foolishness. When Paris OEnon hoped to forsake,
It would to Xanthus with all speed betake.
Xanthus make have, return thou back again,
That so this Paris OEnon may sustain.



CAP. 14. The second Connexive Syllogism.
Q. What is the second manner of the connexed syllogism?

A. The second manner of the connexed syllogism takes away the consequent,
that it may take away the antecedent.

Q. Give example?

A. If a wise man assent to any thing, sometimes also he shall be opinionated.
But he shall never be opinionated. Therefore shall he assent to nothing.


Qu. Give another example?

A. By the like syllogism Ovid. Trist. 12. judges his foolishness. If I where
wise those sisters I should hate;
Deities hurtful to whom on them wait.
But now so great my foolishness is seen:
I build them altars whom my hurt have been.


These two kinds of the Syllogism are most usual of all.


CAP. 15. The first disjunct Syllogism
Q. What is the disjunct syllogism?

A. The disjunct syllogism is the syllogism composed of a disjunct proposition.

Q. What are the manners of distinction?

A. Two.

Q. What is the first?

A. The first takes away one and concludes the rest.

Q. Give example?

A. Either it is day, or it is night. But it is not day. It is therefore night.


Q. Give another example?

A. The judgment of Cicero in defense of Cluventias is such: but when as this
condition was proposed to him, that either he should accuse justly and piously,
or die sharply or unworthily: he would rather accuse after that manner, the die
after this.

Q. Make the disjunction appear clearer?

A. Either he must accuse or die. He must not die. He must accuse therefore.


Qu. Give another example?

A. There is the like reasoning, Phil. 2. Do thou not understand it is
determined, that either those who have done this thing are homicides or
revengers of liberty? But attend a little and take the thoughts of a sober man
for a little time, and I who am of them, as my self does confess, will
familiarly argue with thee as a fellow: I deny that there is any mean: I grant
that they are, except they be deliverers and conservers of the Roman
Commonwealth more then villainy, more then homicides, more parricides: if truly
it be cruelty, rather to be a father to the country, then a murderer of ones
self. Thou art a wise and considerate man what say thou? if they be
parricides, why were they honored of thee, and called to this order by the
Roman people? why was Marcus Brutus by thy means freed from the law, if he were
absent more then ten days from the city? why did Apolinares receive Marcus
Brutus with incredible honor? why was the provinces given to Cassius and
Brutus, why were their questors added? why were the number of Legates
increased, and this done by thee? they are not therefore homicides. It
follows then that by thine own judgment they are deliverers, when as truly
there can be no third admitted.

Q. If the parts of the disjunct proposition shall be more then two, how shall
they be judged then?

A. The art of judging them and concluding them shall be the same.

Q. Give example?

A. So Cicero judged Rabitious to be among the Consuls. And we see (says he)
these three to be in the nature of things, to wit, that either he should be
with Saturninus, or with the good, or that he should lie hid. But to lie hid is
proper to the dead and rotten: to be with Saturninus of fury and wickedness:
virtue, and honesty, and shamefastness constrained him to be with the Consuls.


CAP. 16. The second disjunct syllogism.
Q. What is the second disjunct?

A. The second disjunct, from the proposition the affirmative assumeth one, and
takes away the rest.

Q. Give example?

A. It is day or it is night. But it is day, It is not therefore night.


Q. Give another example after this manner?

A. Thus Juno concludes with Jove touching Turnus, Aeneid. 10. What if thou
say the thing thou do not mean,
end should to Turnus give his life again?
Now I remain in misery and woe,
And hope for that which will not happen so:
But rather then this ill should come to pass,
I Will mock my self, and hope past hope alas.


Q. Show another syllogism of this kind?

A. There is the like syllogism effected from a proposition copulative
negative, which is called negative complexion, and which obtains the force of
an affirmative disjunction.

Q. Give example?

A. It is not both day and night, But it is day, It is not therefore night.



CAP. 17. The only method according to Aristotle.
Q. What is method?

A. Method is a dianoia of diverse homogene axioma, preposed for the clearness
of their nature, from whence the agreeing amongst themselves of them are judged
and comprehended in memory.

Q. What is to be considered in method?

A. As verity and falsity is beheld in the axioma, consequence and
inconsequence in the syllogism; so in method it is to be considered that by it
the more clear may precede, the more obscure may follow, and that altogether
order and confusion be judged.

Q. Make this plainer?

A. After this manner is disposed from homogene axioma's in the first place, by
an absolute notion, the first; in the second place the second, in the third
place the third, and so forwards

Q. It seems by this that method does continually pass from universals to
singulars?

A. So it is, for by this sole and only way it proceeds from antecedents
altogether, and absolute notions, to the declaring of unknown consequences: and
this is the only method that Aristotle taught.


CAP. 18. The first illustration of methods by illustration of arts.
Q. But do not examples set forth this head more clearly?

A. Yes, the examples of doctrines and arts do chiefly demonstrate and set
forth the unity of method, in the which, although all the rules are general and
universal, yet the degrees of them are distinguished: and by how much every
thing shall be more general, by so much it shall more precede.

Q. Why shall the first be in the most general place and order?

A. Because in light and knowledge it is first.

Q. Why shall the subalternates follow?

A. Because in their clearness they are next.

Q. It seems by this that those things which by nature are more known shall
precede, those which are less known are substitute, and at length the most
special follow?

A. So it is.

Q. What then shall precede pand be first?

A. The most general definition must be first.

Q. What shall follow?

A. The distribution.

Q. But how if there be many?

A. Then the partition in perfect parts shall precede.

Q. What shall follow?

A. The division into kinds.

Q. What then?

A. The parts themselves and the kinds are in the same order to be handled and
defined again in which they were distributed.

Q. What further is required?

A. If there shall be a long explication of them, they are to be chained
together by the chains of transcition.

Q. What benefit redoundeth from hence?

A. It refreshes and recreateth the auditor.

Q. But may not example be under this head?

A. Yes, as a more familiar thing is taken, so a more familiar example must be
used.

Q. Give example of what you have here showed out of the art of Grammar?

A. All definitions, distributions, are found in the rules of Grammar, and
every one of them severally judged; and all these documents inscribed in
diverse tables, are confounded and mingled together as it were in a certain pot.

Q. What part of Logic teaches us to compose these confused Rules and digest
them into order: first there is no need of the places of invention, when as
they are all found: neither in the first judgment of axioma's, when as every
axioma is proved and valued: neither of the second judgment of the syllogism,
when as all of them are disputed and concluded controversies of several things
by these only syllogisms; it seems therefore to be only method, is it not?

A. Yes it is only method,

Qu. How is it done?

A. The Logician by this light of artificial method selected out of this pot
the definition of Grammar; (for that is most general) and places it in the
first place: Grammar is the doctrine of speaking well. Then he takes out of
the same Oven the partit on of Grammar, and places it in the second place. The
part 1 of Grammar are two; Etimology and Syntaxis. Then outs of the same vessel
he seperateth the definition of Etimology of words, and joyneth it in the third
place to those that go before: then he seeks out parts of words in letters
and syllables, and the kinds in words of number, and without number; and
places them with their transcitions in their several places. And so the
definitions of all the parts of Etimolog, together with their distributions,
colligations, and most special examples he places in their several places, and
so likewise in the Syntax. This way all the arts have proposed to themselves.


CAP. 19. The second example of Method by example of Poets, Orators,
Historiographers.
Q. But is method only set forth in matter of the arts and doctrine?

A. No, it is also declared in all things which we would teach easily and
plainly. Therefore Poets, Orators, and all manner of writers, as often as they
propose any thing to teach to their auditors, do follow this way; although they
do not enter and insist upon it all alike.

Q. Give an example out of some Poet?

Virgil in his Georgicks distributeth, as I said before, the proposed matter
into four parts; and in the first book follows common things: as Astrology,
Meteorology, and of Corn and Tillage; this was the first part of his work. Then
the transcition is adhibited in the beginning of the second book. Thus far of
tillage and of stars were we;
Now of the Bacchus we'll sing presently.


Then he writes generally of trees, as also specially of plants; the second
transcition is adhibited to the third part, but more imperfect and without an
Epilogue. In the beginning of the third book of Oxen, Horses, Sheep, Goats,
Dogs. We Will sing of Goddess Pales, all is of him,
Who by Amphryso kept his sheep most trim.


At length in the beginning of the fourth book, there is the third transcition
of the fourth part; but also imperfect from the only preposition of their Bees.
Now of their air honey Be I Will speak.


So therefore the Poet studieth to place the most general first, the
subalternate middle, the most special in the last place.

Q. Give another poetical example?

A. Ovid. in Fast. Uses this kind of disposition, proposing in the beginning
the sum of his work. I Will sing of times that pass throughout the year,
Fall of the stars, and rising I Will declare.


By and by having made imploration, he determines the partition of the year
made first by Romulus into ten months, which he reprehendeth. When as Romes
builder did the year divide,
In it he made five months, and five beside.


And a little after he adjoyneth Numa his more full devisor. But Numa neither
Janus did omit,
Nor yet the ancient shadows out did put:
But to the old months two more appointed be.


Here the Poet having interpreted the common differences of Holy Days,
Working-dayes, Banquet-days, Kalends, Nones, Ides; at the last he follows
every month in his place, and with a preface after this order he passes from
generals to the study of specials. I the what I have you showed what things be,
It now remains, we part them presently.


At length after the exposition of every part, the transcition is joined as in
the end of the first, and beginning of the second book. The first part of my
task is ended now,
The month is done my little book also:
Janus is done, another month begins?
Another book now with that month renews;


And in every one of his books after the transcitions are adhibited, but less
accurately.

Q. How do the Orators follow this method?

A. The Orators in Poems, Narrations, Confirmations, Perorations do follow this
order, as the nature both of the art, and the order of the thing do require,
and sometimes more studiously too.

Q. Give example?

A. Cicero in an accusation first by propounding, then by parting, follows
this order. Questor Cu. paxeris, says he, thou have been Consul unto this time
fourteen years, and from that day unto this day in which thou have made me, I
call thee unto judgment; there was no void hour found in robbery, wickedness,
cruelty, iniquity. This is the proposition and definition of the chief matter,
as in this judgment most generral. The partition follows: These are the
years consumed in the questorship, and a Sciatican embassage, and the Urban
pretorship, and in the Sicilian pretorship: wherefore this shall be the
fourfold disposition of my accusation; which four parts with their particular
partitions he has also handled in their several order and place, and coupled
them with transcitions; the three first in the third book. Wherefore (says he)
his questorship being showed, and his first magistracy, together with his theft
and wickedness looked unto, let us attend to the rest. Then having expounded
the faults of his embassadorship, the transcition to his pretorship, follows.
But let us now come to that famous pretorship, and those faults which were more
known to those which were present, then to us who come meditated and prepared
to pleading. This transcition is more imperfect without an epilogue: at length
in the beginning of the fourth oration, there is the like transcition to the
fourth part of the Sicilian pretorship. Many necessary things, O Judges, I must
pretermit, that I may in some manner speak of those things which are committed
to my trust, for I have received the cause of Sicilia, that province has drawn
me unto this business.

Q. Give an example ott of some Historiographer?

A. Livy does so embrace the sum of seventy years in the beginning, then
divides them by tens.


CAP. 20. The Secrets of Method.
Q. It seems that in the diverse axiomatical homogenes, as also in the
judgment of the syllogism, the notes of method shall be as often as any thing
is taught clearly: but is there no other kind of method?

A. Yes, when as the auditor shall be deceived in a certain part with
delectation, and a greater motion then certain homogenes are rejected, as the
lights of definition, partition, and transcition: and certain heterogenes are
assumed; as digressions from the matter, and commemorations upon the thing; but
chiefly the order of things in the beginnings is turned over, and certain
antecedents are put after consequents. Therefore to that rule of perfect
method, this may seem somewhat more imperfect; the form is not only lame things
being detracted; or abounding, things being added; but also the order of it
being inverted by certain degrees, is preposterous.

Q. Give an example of it?

A. The like the Poet makes with a certain greater kind of artificialness,
while he propounds to himself to lead the people. Viz. the beast like heads
of the multitude, and therefore he deceived diverse ways, he begins in the
middle, and there oftentimes he comprehends the first; to conclude the last
he places in an uncertain and an unthought of chance. So as ( Horace says)
Homer disposes his Iliads. Ne does this man Troy's Wars divide so well,
He always makes haste the vent to tell:
Even in the midst his reader he does catch;
Leaves off his tract, with haste from it does snatch.
And thus he lies, thus mingles false with true;
So that ne first nor midst in it I view.


Q. Proceed to further example?

A. So Virgil takes Aeneas from Sicilia, and makes a narration of him in the
banquet of Carthage; and at last brings in his diverse troubles. So the
Commedian Poets, although with great judgment they have distinguished their
Comedies by Acts and Scenes, yet do so effect, that all things seem to be done
by chance. The Orators attribute all to victory. Therefore this seems to be
placed chiefly by them, not so much to teach as to persuade; when as also those
things which do equally excel, are kept even unto the last, and the means are
conferred into the middle, according to Homers disposition.


FINIS.
GENEROSI LVDENTES
A Description of those Joviall al-a-mode sports and games, that are most
celebrated by Persons of Honor.
A brief Description of the sport of Cross Purposes.
EVery one round the Company are to whisper their Questions about, which are to
be concealed, till every Question is gone round, and afterward every man is to
tell aloud what question he was asked, and what answer was given him to his
question; it may be in more, but I will only for brevity give you a plain
example in three Persons; The first was asked in secret of all complexions,
which he liked best, the answer was whispered a black Woman; the second was
ask't in secret; how many women he had lain withal in his life, to which he
whispered, as many as he had fingers and toes; the third was secretly ask't,
what kind of pleasure he found in lying with a woman, to which he whispered
this answer, pretty pleasant encounters; Now for the publishing of this sport,
it must be thus managed, the first was ask't what complexion he liked best in
a woman, the cross answer to his purpose was, as many as he had fingers and
toes, the second was ask't, how many women he had lain with, the cross answer
was pretty pleasant encounters; the third was ask't, what kind of pleasure he
found in lying with a woman, the cross answer was a black woman, and so it goes
circling round according to the number of the Persons.

The Description of the sport called the Lovers Alphabet.
FIrst it mst be said, what good quality a Mistress is to be loved for.
Secondly, what bad qualities she is to be hated for. Thirdly, her name.
Fourthly, what part about her you love best. Fifthly, what sign you invited her
to. Sixthly, what dish of meat you treated her with.
This may be do successively by all (...) the Company throughout the Alphahet,
I will only instance a plain example in the letter A. First, I love my Love
with an A, because she is Amiable. Secondly, I hate her with an A, because she
is Apish. Thirdly, her name is Alcinda. Fourthly, the best part about her is
her Arm. Fifthly, I invited her to the sign of the Artichoak. Sixthly, I gave
here a dish of Asparagus.


The sport of Questions and Commands is inserted at the beginning of the Book,
Page 13, as also the sport of Crambo is contained in a Dictionary, Page 223.

The Description of the sport of the Bird in a Tree.
FIrst the name of the Tree. Secondly, the name of the Bird. Thirdly, what the
Bird said;


all which must begin with the same letter; as for example, though it may be
done throughout the whole Alphabet, I will only give an instance in P.

Going through an Orchard, I spyed a Peacock which sat upon a Plum-Tree, and
cried Peeter, Plucked, Placket.

The Description of the sport of Gliphing.
IT chiefly consists in the quick pronouncing of a sentence, hard to be uttered
without a wanton or some other unlucky kind of merry mistake, it runs on
chiefly with one letter of the Alphabet; as for example, the Cock sat at the
barn door picking, Poppy Cock, Pick Poppy, etc. the several gamesters posting
through the Letters of the Alphabet, by turns, as fast as they can speak, that
the mistakes may the sooner provoke laughter.

A Description of a sport, called the Cra^, or a thing done, and who did it.
FOR the better understanding of this recreation, the places are to be
distributed, and sundry names to be invented, as they shall follow in the
sport; for example Phantaste she begins, I imagine says she a thing done:
Heidon thinks, who did it; Moria, with what was it done; Anaides where it was
done; Argureon, when it was done; Amophus, for what cause was it done;
Philantia, what followed upon the doing of it; Asotus who would have done it
better; One asks what is it conceived about, they all answer yes, yes. Then
speak you sir, says Phantaste; who would have done it better, says Asotus,
how does it begin at me, Phantaste, gives him a reason, and says yes sir, this
play is called the Crab, it begins backwards; Asotus says may I not name my
self, Phantaste answers yes sir if you Please to abide the venture of it,
Asotus then says I would have done it better whatsoever it is, Phil. no doubt
on it sir, a good confidence* what followed upon the act, Phil. a few heat
drops, and a months mirth, Pha. for what cause, Amo. for the delight o^ Ladies,
Phag, when, Arg. last progress, Pha. where. Ana* why in a pair of painted
slops, Pha. with what, Mor, with a Glister, Pha. who, Head. by a Traveller,
Phantaste then reveals the subject, till then concealed, says she, the thing
done was, an Oration was made, afterward they all of them in order rehearse an
Oration was made, Head. by a Traveller, Mor. with a Glister, Ana. in a pair of
painted slops, Au g. the last progress, Amo. for the delight of Ladies, Phi. a
few heat drops and a months mirth, followed, Pha, and this silent Gentleman Mr.
Asotus would have done it better.

A Description of the witty sport of Substantives and Adjectives.
FOR the more easy apprehension of this recreation, I will make use of the
former names used in the game at Crab. Phantaste says I have thought, speak
your Adjectives sirs. Phi. but do not you change then, Pha. not I, who says
Mor. Odoriferous, Phi. Popular, Arg. Humble, Ana. white-liverd, Head. Barbarous,
Amo. Pythagoricall, Head. yours seignior, Asotus says, what must I do sir, Amo.
bids him give forth his Adjectives with the rest as prosperous, good, fair,
sweet, well -- Head, tells him he may speak any thing that has not been spoken.
Aso. answers why then we^ spoken shall be his, Pha. says what have you all
done, they all cry yes. Phantaste then tells them that the Substantive i^
breeches, and then she says to moria, why are they Odoriferous. Mor. Answers
that which contains most variety of savours and smells, we say is most
odoriferous, now breeches are presumed to be incident to that variety, and
therefore odoriferous breeches: Pha. answers well, we must take i^ what is next
Philantia. why popular breeches. Phil. marr^ that is says she when they are not
content to be generall^ noted in Court, but will press forth on Stages and
Broken stals, to the common view of the world. Pha. good, wh^ humble breeches
Argurion. Arg. he answers humble, because they use to be sat upon, besides if
you tie them not up, the^ property is to fall about your heels. Pha. but why
white ^verd Anaides. Ana. answer, why are not their linings whi^ besides when
they come in Company, and will pocket (...) any injury or abuse, may they not
properly be said to b^ white liver'd. Pharoh, yes we must not deny it, but w^
barbarous Hedon. Hedon. answers, because commonly when you have worn your
breeches sufficiently, you give them to your Barber. Pha. that is good, but
Amorphus why Pythagolical breeches. Amo. oh most kindly of all, it is a conceit
of that fortune I am bold to hug my brain for. Pha. how is it exquisite,
Amorphus. Amo. oh I am rapt with it, it is so fit, so proper, so happy -- Pha.
you trifle and prolong time for to study, come you shall no longer rack our
expectations. Amo: I never truly relisht my self till now, give me your ears,
breeches pythagoricall, by reason of their transmigration into several shapes.
Pha. Most rare, but now Mr. Asotus for your well spoken breeches. Aso. well
spoken, I marry well spoken -- because whatsoever they speak is well taken, and
whatsoever is well taken, is well spoken. Mor. oh most excellent believe me!
Aso. not so Ladies neither. Pha. but now why breeches. Asot. most fortunately
etymologized, breeches quasi bear riches, when a gallant bears all his
riches, in his breeches.

The Trial of wits, a new invented Alphabet of Epithets, properly applied to
their several subjects, that they may be rendered no less useful on the
sudden occasions of discourse, or writing; then delightfully pleasant in the
witty sport commonly named Substantives and Adjectives.
Aspect. SMiling, favorable, sad, Tragical, stern, grim, gracious, generous,
winning. Allurements. Sweet, false, flattering, lovely, deceitful, attractive,
wooing, Sirenian-inveigling, Cozening, Treacherous. Affections. Passionate,
transporting, vehement, ardent, hearty, burning, intranceing, amorous,
inordinate, disordered, melting, blind, doting, tyranicall, wanton,
thoughtfull. Air. Moist, fleeting, pliant, free, whispering, spicie, gilded*
diffused, yiedling, moving, unwounded, dewy, sounding* empty, dispersed,
nimble, breathing, melting, sharp, soft* wandering, liquid, enlightened,
transparent, subtie. Absence. Tedious, prolonged, constrained, unwelcome,
forgetful* envious. Apparel. Magnificent, costly, gaudy, fashionable, neat,
sumptuous* gorgeous, spruce, decent, rich, trim. Accomplishment. Absolute,
perfect, blessed, admirable, desired, wished. Adeiu. Sad, last, tedious,
lingering, sighed, greived, loathed. Bawd. Shameless, impudent, alluring,
training, old, drunken loathsome, fat, painted, goatish, lustful, rampant,
beastly, obscene, pocky, lascivious, brotheld, withered, lying, cheating,
pocket-picking. Breath. Ambrosian, sweet perfumed, spicy, nectar'd, muskie,
rosied, stinking, poisoned, strong, blasting, Body. Strait, crooked, slender,
voluptuous, sensual, healthful, diseasefull, rotten, Breasts. Soft, snowie,
milk-white, alablaster, tender, pressed, veined, spicie, delicious, flowing,
luxuriant, warm, azure, melting, pregnant, amorous, maiden, inticeing alluring,
flowery, delightful, inveigling, enamouring. Beauty. Fresh, smiling,
entranceing, spotless, triumphant, admirable, incomparable, glorious,
inexpresseable, wyring, enamouring, persuasive, counting, resistless, cometed,
desired, wished, celestial, divine, rosye, angelical, supreme, ravishing,
heavenly, spotless, unsullied, bright, shining, sparkling, flaming, immortal,
lascivious, wanton, radant, civil, modest, attractive, intrancing, enchanting,
charming, chaste, dazzling, assailing, murdering, imperious, commanding,
inticeing, alluring, murdering, killing, blazening, heart-winning,
soul-invading, commanding, conquering, wounding, captivating, enslaveing,
bewitching, inaccessible, perceiving, exquisite, transparent, spruce, neat,
comely, pleasing, delightful, magnetic. Coyness. Peevish, pettish,
slighting, dissembling, squemish, froward, scorning, contemning, disdainful,
untoward, angry, tempting. Courtier. Complemental, glittering, lascivious,
wanton, costly, expensive, sportive, smooth, royal, proud, glorious, gaudy
Oily, supple, neat, polish't, spruce, silken, smooth-faced, fair-spoken,
well-tounged: silk-worme, perfidious, fantastic, running, spritely, talking,
glittering, flaunting, starcht, deceitful, accomplished. Cruelty. Murdering,
destroying, rageing, barbarous, scythian, marble-hearted, flinty, savage,
wolvish, inhumane, tigress, odious abhorred, detested, remorsless, dogged,
incensed, bloody, grim, stern, haughty, dreadful, devouring, frowning,
awful, tyrannical. Charms. Powerful, enchanting, perplexing, potent,
binding, imperious, commanding, sorceing, ceremonious, misterious. Cheeks.
Bashful, rosy, smiling, lovely, silken, delicious, blushing, tempting,
ambrosian, gentle, swelling, plump, smooth, soft, beautiful. Complaint.
Mournful, whining, puling, pitious, sighing, sad, doleful, soft, womanish,
amorous, passionate, bitter, male-contented, groaning, just, inward, weeping,
wailing. Complement. Generous, ceremonious, courtly, refined, curious,
eloquent, needless, trustless, fantastical, apish, improper. Chinne. Dimpled,
bonnie, hairy, well-tacht, bushie, slauerd, stubled, smooth, dainty, delicate,
lovely. Comedy. Jovial, Hymineall, fresh, gay, clapping, amorous, Nuptial,
plauditizing. Cherries. Plump, soft, tender, blushing, delicious, pleasant,
luscious. Countenance. Graceful, modest, comely, handsome, beautiful,
amorous, lovely, generous, sweet, lively sprightly, disdainful, joyful,
smiling, pleasing, winning, wooing, sparkling, attractive, admirable, ugly,
stern, audacious impudent, grim, grave, severe frowning, lowering, disguised,
affected, distracted pouting, mournful, dreadful, lightsome, cheerful,
supercilious, blushing, sad, sour, dissembling. Curles. Shining, crispy, neat,
graceful, waveing, beauteous, frizled, uncomposed, twisted, pleated, braded,
rusled, dispersed, dangled, scattered, silken, flowing, Destiny. Remorsless,
unrelenting, surprising, truthless, inevitable, blind, unmoved, severe, deaf,
inflexible, inexorable, cruel, unbribed, imperious, commanding, unchanged,
triumphant, misterious, adamantine, fixed, unconquered, compelling,
irresistible, eternal, fatal, uncontrouled, impartial, tyranizing, overruling,
exacting, importuning, arresting, blind, unavoided, inevitable. Delay.
Freezing, dull, lingering, tedious, comfortless, weary, sad, pensive, slow,
snaile-paced, lazy, tardy, cold, fruitless, vain. Dove. Trembling, courteous,
gentle, wanton, simple, sprightly, panting, timorous, billing, amorous,
fearful, airy, peircing, harmeless, melancholy, silly, venerous, mourning,
clipping, gentle, whispering, swift, weak, wheeling, turtle, fleet-winged,
tender, Idalian. Desires. Melting, effeminate, wanton, soft, sensual,
enamoring, dallying, intrancing, pleasant, luxurious, wished, tickling, loose,
tempting, riotous, superfluous, courtly, princely, royal, voluptuous, carnal.
Danceing. Swimming, lascivious, graceful, courtly, flowing, nimble, tripping,
measured, inamouring, sportive, wanton, attractive, well-ordered, moving,
modest, wel-timed, pleasing, winning, allureing. Delights. Melting, effeminate,
wanton, soft, sensual, inamouring, dallying, intrancing, pleasant, luxurious,
desired, tickling, loose, tempting, rioutous, superfluous, courtly, princely,
royal. Disdain. Coy, scornful, arrogant, proud, envious, unkind, chaste,
wry-mouthed, sore-eyed, pettish, insolent, haughty, peevish, swelling,
squint-eyed. Despair. Hopeless, dark, grim, ugly, pensive, heavy, dull,
sorrowful, comfortless, cold, faithless, damned, ugly, dark, gloomy, meager,
stern, sighing, groaning, weeping, sullen, dull, drousy, doleful. Dreams.
Vain, deluding, fantastic, pale, disastrous, distracting, doubtful,
flattering, busy, senceless, flying, careful, lying, wandering, ominous,
pleasing, sensual, bewitching, auspicious, black, slippery, carnal.
Eloquence. Persuasive, nectar, drooping, captivating, bewitching, charming,
enchanting, intrancing, commanding, winning, wooing, delicious, smooth, oily,
ravishing, soft, rich, quaint, courtly, insinuating, victorious, triumphant,
glorious, tickling, insulting, invading, subtle, conquering, tempting, painted,
insinuating, glozeing, inveigling, deceitful, pollisht, sweettongued, grave,
ciceronian, happy, attractive, circumventing, fancy, tickling, overcoming,
successful. Ecstasy. Soule-rapt, amazed, ravished, removed out of the right
mind, astonished, lost in admiration. Ears. Listening, attentive, glowing,
whispering, inquiring, winding, judging, Elegy. Waleing, lamenting, whining,
mourning, puling, weeping, amorous, bawdy, wanton. Eunuch. Smooth-faced,
delicate, effeminate, soft, unmanly, womanish, smooth-chinned. Entertainment
Glorious, costly, gracious, courteous, welcome, loving, friendly, pompeous,
fair, kind, rich, profuse, liberal, hearty, sumptuous, magnificent. Eyes
Sparkling, flameing, dazzling, burning, twinkling, passionate, weeping,
lascivious, lively, lovely, wounding, melting, inveigling, charming,
traitorous, wanton, persuasive, rolling, inflaming, pleatling, greedy,
scorching, smiling, beauteous, glistering, starry, discoursive, betraying,
beamie, attractive, wandering, inflaming, commanding, inamouring, transparent,
cheerful, soul-wounding, modest, assailing, bashful, lustful, intentive,
courting, tempting, triumphant, conquering, notorious. Embraces. Wanton, warm,
strict, joyful, greely, mutual, delicious, dear, sweet, pleasant, amorous,
ardent, fervent, inseparable, growing together, soft, close, circling,
grasping, twisting, twining, loving, fruitful. Farewell. Sad, grievous,
loathed, tedious, lingering, last, pensive. Feet Delicate, tender, soft,
beauteous, swift, flying, tripping, wanton, nimble, swift, paced, active,
ivory, snowy, silver, stalking, trampling, Fancy. Quick, working, pregnant,
nimble, contriving, active, stirring, roaming, vagrant, roving, industrious,
plotting, studious, plodding, wandering, projecting, ranging, forging, working,
teeming, busy, coining, spinning, enriched, wealthy, industrious, traveling.
Forehead Smooth, sleek, stately, beauteous, delicious, majestic, comely,
polisht-ivory. Fairies. Dairy, hunting, green, clothed, nimble, right-walking,
dancing, tripping, sprightly, nipping, pinching, sporting, silent, soft-footed,
light. Fortune. Inconstant, fickle, blind, hood-winkt, disastrous, slippery
perfidious, froward, malicious, wanton, flattering, deluding, injurious,
wayward, unlucky, malignant, imperious, domineering, tyrannizing, treacherous,
commanding, insolent, envious, stepdame, dreadful, peevish, uncertain,
wheeling, giglet, deluding. Fountain. Silver, glideing, purling, pearly,
crystal, gushing, prattling, twatly, weeping, rolling, sweet, sparkling,
flowing, glideing, bubling, chideing, running, sacred, grass, fringed, moss,
margend, trickling, delicate, straggling, wandering, dancing, whispering, fluent,
clear. Frencie. Hot, roveing, chafeing, chollerick, furious, untamed. Flower.
Perfumed, sweet, smileing, verdant, spicy, enameld, gaudy, checkred, fragrant,
pregnant, pyed, painted, blushing, vernall, freckled, glittering, delicious,
musky, short-lived, tufted, unspotted, lovely, swelling, odorous, vermilion,
purple, silver, diapred, fadeing. Face. Beautiful, bewitching, inamouring,
smiling, lovely, rosiat, inchaunting, inamouring, entrancing, attractive,
heart-wounding, charming, sweet, admirable, captivating, unparaleld, wanton,
pensive, lowering, frowning, winning, soul-conquering. Fate. Irresistible,
inexorable, cruel, restless, rugged, flinty, remorsless, unmoved, unchanged,
uncontrolled, surly. Fingers. Slender, soft, delicate, nimble, quavering,
sleek, long, small, active, pliant, industrious, ivory, wanton, trembling,
alablaster. Fruit. Sweet, well-tasted, delicious, dangling, sweet smelling,
lean, inwrapped, mellow, green, yellow, golden, blushing, lean, inwrapt,
hanging, painted, delightful, autumnall, expected, desired, nectard,
ambrosiall. Frown. Disdainful, proud, angry, coy, surly, lowering, scowling,
killing, murdering, discontented, clowdy browed, tempestuous, imperious,
domineering, supercilious, tyranizing, lawful. Glory. Shining, painted,
ambitious, costly, swelling, amazing, pompeous, dazeling, radiant, triumphant,
victorious, immortal, windy, fleeting, fading, insolent, desired, inflaming.
Grass. Pleasant, green, plusht, rich, verdent, springing, flowery, tufted,
dasied, tender, deary, herby, pleasant, moist, checkerd, inameled, crisped,
fadeing, withered. Grape. Soft, plump, nectareous, pleasant, cluttered,
blushing, swelling, purple, youthful, viny, dangling, delicious, generous,
juycie, wanton, chearing, lusty, bleeding. Grove. Solitary, unfrequented,
silent, shady, close, leavy, melancholy, lovely, solitary, forsaken, sullen,
dark, unknown, remote, gloomy, mossy, ecchoing, delightful, tufted, quiet,
obscure, dusky, clowdy, secret. Honor. Popular, inthroned, glorious, shining,
prodigious, bright, blazing, gaudy, pompeous, swelling, magnificent, glittering
radiant, triumphant, inflamed, waxen-winged, timpanized' Heart. Bleeding,
wounded, melting, marble, tender, obstinate, relenting, adamantine, flinty,
cruel, passionate, pitiful, thoughtfull, obdurate. Hair. Spreading, witty,
golden, dangling, glittering, radiant, curling, tresses, careless, braided,
silken, scattered, shining, pleated, rufled, fluent, artless, snarled,
disheveld, discomposed, dispersed, ambrosiall, fragrant, graceful, waveing,
beauteous, fragrant, crisped, spangled, delightful, lovely, pleasant,
fettering, bushy, frizled, rosiate, shady. Hands. Ivory, snowy, marble, lilly,
alablaster, well proportioned' beauteous, ambrosial, veinie, nervious,
delicate, velvet, trembling, white, active, slender. Happiness. Desired,
unexpressible, unfathomed, endless, enamoring, soft, ravishing, undisturbed,
uninterrupted. Harmony. Enchanting, ravishing, seraphick, celestial,
according, agreeing, numerous, sweet, pleasant, melodious, joyous, gladsome,
soule-raping, intranceing, charming, measured, invading. Head. Towering,
majesticall, lofty, stately. Hate Heart, gnawing, cancred, festred, fretting,
mortal, inveterate, deadly, irreconcilable, rancourd, fewd, revengfull,
heart-gnawing, rooted. Jealousy. Hellish, trembling, enraged, suspicious,
heart burning, selfe-wounding, soul mar^yring, plae, groundless, rageing,
wakefull, wary, timorous, fearful, causless, furious, peevish, cautelous,
hateful, revengfull, brutish, ^ottish, q^icksighted, yellow, ghostly, r^veing,
suggesting, rival, wakeing, outrageous, searching, imp^tient, unhappy, blind,
boiling, tormenting, frantic, distempered, stern, insaged, lean-chop,
wrathful, surmizing, transporting. Flattery. Smooth, Oily, Courtly, base,
slavish, servile, subtle, crowching, clawing, tempting, collogueing,
honey-mouthed, sweet-tongued, glozing, insinuating, lisping, obsequious,
dissembling, gilt-tongue, melting, officious, windy, cogging, pick-thankt,
sugared, pliant, fawning, treacherous, circamventing, deluding, wily, crafty,
sly, glasse-faced, fair-spoken, smooth-tongued, dawbing winning, deluding.
Fields. Gaudy, painted, flowery, tufted, checkred, grassy, sportive, spacious,
wide, green, pleasant, delightful, open, inamel'd, dasied, smiling, verdant,
herby, fragrant, diapred, fruitful, pregnant, embroidred. Flames. Aspiring,
mounting, towering, raging, licentious, insultive, catching, devouring, wirling,
sparkling, embraceing, subtle, amorous, courting, greedy, lurking, nimble,
searching, glowing, ruddy, radiant, flashing, furious, imbosomed, pierceing,
scorching, glittering, climbing, impetuous, violent, untamed, bright,
self-consuming, cheerful, lightsome, proud, ambitious, destroying, pursuing.
Flea. Blood-thirsty, nipping, biteing, disturbing, peevish, sipping sucking,
twitching. Forest. Leafy, woody, shady, hoary, verdant, savage, gloomy, mossy,
shaggy, beast-hunted, bushy, silent, shrubby, ecchoing, spacious, mast-bearing,
dreadful, grassy, wild, desert, rough, rocky, wide, devious, melancholy,
uncouth, pathless, unfrequented. Fear. Pale, trembling, startling, wary,
palsied, presageing, faint, chilling, jealous, sallow, reverentiall, ominous,
superstitious, heartless, ^old, guilty ^overing, sullen, suspicious, anxious,
bloodless, distracted, unresolved, doubtful, ignominious, restless,
creame-faced, pale-hearted, ghostly, projecting, icy, suggesting, degenerate,
puling, unresolved. Gentleman. Courtly, gallant, generous, noble, valiant,
honored, brave, free-hearte, high-spirited, ingenuous, famous, illustrious.
Garden. Painted, flowery, gaudy, embroidred, bordered, squared, knotted,
enclosed, diapred, levelled, sweet, lovely, verdant, fragrant, well-drest,
delicious, smiling, herby, pleasant, fruitful, enameld, checkred, painted,
delightful. Gesture. Stately, courteous, speaking, flowing, gentle, seemly,
comely, graceful, winning, unaffected, gracious, composed* free, handsome,
lovely, ingratiating, pleasing, haughty. Grief. Whining, puling, complaining,
heart-tearing, contracting, rending, killing, imbosomed, heart-confounding,
drooping, melancholy, eye-wringing, unbounded, gnawing torturing, impatient,
inexpressible, heartbreaking, pinching, pettish, peevish, dreary, doleful,
oppressing, fretting, froward, sullen, gloomy, whimpering, melting, froward,
wayward, gnawing. Gloves. Fringed, embrodered, perfumed, fragrant, white,
furred, musky, trimmed, fashionable, gentle, handsome, spruce, neat.
Ingratitude. Odious, shameful, foul, base, loathsome, nasty, filthy,
stinking. Instrument. Well tuned, melodious, harmonious, consorting, according,
laborious, sounding. Jewels. Sparkling, glittering, rich, costly, pendant,
radiant, flaming, precious, airy, inlightning, unvaluable. Insolence. Haughty,
arrogant, disdainful, triumphant, swelling, stately, proud, puffed, souring,
tyrannizing, brow-beating, scornful, imperious, strutting, ambitious,
presumptious, rash, disrespective, audacious, rufling, rustling, supercilious,
surly, bold, respectless, fantastic, lofty, towering, mounting, insulting.
Innocence. Dove-like, soft, quiet, peaceful, spotless, unsullied, unstained,
harmless, untainted, snowy, pure, clear, bright, simple, chaste, lillied,
calm, unimpeached, guiltless, blanched, meek, blameless, religious, pious,
sacred. Importunity. Undeniable, unmannerly, unhandsome, uncivil, uncomely,
impatient, unanswerd, courtly, urging, odious, forceing. Inconstancy. Wavering,
wheeling, turning, changeing, light, vaineairy, mutable, moveing, floating.
Influence. Heavenly, celestial, virtuous, gracious, propitious, favorable,
generous, vigorous, powerful, masculine, unresisting, smiling, happy, frowning,
malignant, disastrous. Impudence. Brazen, scared, steeled, unblushing,
shamless, audacious. bold, brasse-browed, bold-faced, insolent, proud,
arrogant, undaunted, fancy, fearless, unawed, shallow, headstrong, immodest,
shame-confounding. Joy. Transporting, heart-chearing, active, lightsome,
diffusive, nuptial, fresh, enchanting, soft, imparadising, balmy, deluding,
deceitful, pleasing, fleeting, trembling, transitory, attractive, frisking,
danceing, leaping, melting, enlarging, smiling, intranceing, ravishing,
bursting, delicious, luxurious, tickling. Knee. Ceremonious, supple,
complementall, humble, obsequious, adoring, bended, cringing, crouching,
honoring, sinewy, willing, obedient, supplyant, bowing. Kisses. Tempting,
wooing, delicious, spicie, balmy, impressive, zealous, uniting,
soul-transfusing, ravishing, inchaunting charming, heart-stealing, melting,
nectard, sugared, lingering moistning, fond, ceremonious, wanton, leacherous,
amorous, bawdy-breathing, roseat, fragrant, treacherous, arresting, smiling
courting, straggling, bashful, modest, virgin, maiden, chaste, favorable,
delightful, voluptuous, joyous, lascivious, deawy, repeated, love-darting,
printing, sealing, dinting, love-dropping, smacking, wounding, intranceing,
forced, untoward, wrested, musky, warm, chearing, sweet, billing, Ambrosian,
yiedling, welcome. Lute. Lesbian, many-string, warbling, quavering, harmonious,
melodious, trembling, pleasant, delightful, charming, delicious, ivory,
golden, melancholy, amorous, sweet, sounding. Looking-glass. Representing,
smooth, crystal, shining, sleek, shapereflecting, portraying, unflattering,
silver, glittering, resembling, impartial. Lust. Wild, burning, scorching,
brutish, untamed, itchy, flameing, goatish, stallion, disordred, greedy, hot,
secret, dark, impure, poisoning, provoking, obscene, inconsiderate, licentious,
infamous, uncouth, unbridled, rammish, loathsome, unruly, lawless, beastly,
unrestrained, filthy, damned, odious, contagious, furious, portentious,
impetuous, voluptuous, sensual, beastiall, lascivious, whorish, insatiate,
bawdy, brotheld, liver, scalding, raging, luxurious, tempting. Logic. Arguing,
disputing, contentious, wrangling. Labyrinth. Winding, amazing, turning,
intangling, confounding, curious, mazy, doubling, intricate, snaky, subtle,
ingenuous, pathless, crooked, meandring, Language. Smooth, oily, insinuating,
fluent, sweet, flowing, strewed* with flowers, stately, winning, persuasive,
taking, nectarean* delicious, intranceing, enchanting, charming,
soul-ravishing* overcoming. Luster. Resplendent, bright, dazzling, victorious,
pompeous, varnisht, triumphant, radiant, beamy, darting, transparent,
reflecting, glorious, graceful, flowing, shining, adorning* beauteous,
flaming, fiery, sparkling, glitering, eye-conquering, starry, cheerful,
twinkling, Lullaby. Pensive, careful, charming, soft, drowsy, sleepy. Lilly.
Unsullied, unspotted, bright, tall, untainted, pale-faced* silver, smiling,
painted, fruifull, royal, maiden. Loadstone. Attractive, embracing, tenacious,
subtle, drawing, wanton* uxorious. Longing. Amorous, desirous, unsatisfyed,
insatiate, passionate* greedy, ardent, burning. Laughter. Loud, side, holding,
loose, shrill, wanton, saucy, disordered, fawning, silly, ignorant, unseasoned,
unruly, fleering, sneering, noisefull, disturbing. Lethargy. Dull, forgetful,
drowsy, lither, sluggish, unactive, doting, dreaming, sleepy, cold, moist,
heavy, lumpish, sottish. Love. Blind, inflaming, ardent, fervent, zealous,
officious, obsequious, resolved, doting, passiionate, tedious, unexpressible,
unmeasured, silent, transported, impatient, gamesome, unfathomed, secret,
mistrustfull, jealous, careful, ambitious, audacious, ticklish, sugared,
wanton, lascivious, honyed joyous, slippery, untainrted, flattering, fawning,
thoughtfull, fearful, solicitous, idolatrous, captivated, winged,
superstitious, conquering, deceitful, heart-stealing, thievish, enchanting,
bewitching, imperious, adventrous, uncontrolled, commanding, affectionate,
sporting, marrow-boyling, melting, truell, remorsless, venerous, fond. Lover
vide love. Fantastic, gorgeous, perfumed, complementall, pale, fainting,
eve-ravisht, thoughtfull, grieved, secret, near, spruce, flattering, trim,
brisk, languishing, frisled, crispe^, impatient, sportive, inconstant,
submissive, fresh, sleek, joyous, glancing, melancholy, obsequious, watchful,
captivated, jealous, boasting, youthful, blin, uxorious, pensive, modest,
mute, bashful, pleasant, frollick, whispering, courteous, distracted, sad.
Looks. Smiling, cheerful, modest, disdainful, speaking, whispering,
discoursive, mournful, attractive, supercilious, winning, wooing, stern.
Locks. Frisled, braided, wiry, golden, glittering, sparkling, bright, sleek,
spreading, flowing, snary, dangling, nets to catch a lover in, curled,
scattere, pleated, amber, floating, flatted, disheveld, bushy, discomposed,
artless, careless, dispersed, fluent. Lips. Balmy, tempting, melting,
carnation, vermilion, ruby, scarlet, amorous, rosy, cherry, blushing, coral,
delicious, charming, enchanting, intrancing, smiling, wanton, life, breathing,
infusing, honey, flowing, trembling, swelling, love, dropping, juycy,
nectarean, gentle, purple, warm, soft. Limbs. Graceful, well-shapt, lovely,
snowy, beauteous, hansome, harmonious, comely, ivory, well-proportioned.
Marigold. Sun, inamoured, yellow, shining, flaming, blazing, Suncourted, dew,
drowned, opening, shutting. Marble. Corinthian, Parian, sleek, enduring,
obdurate, curled, smooth, breathless, unrelenting, hard, cold, stiff,
senseless, glittering, phrigian, weeping, azure, speckled, colored, unmidian,
solid, polisht, spotted, rocky, lasting, Magic Secret, hidden, enchanting,
charming, dreadful, execrable, mumbling, cursed, hellish, murmuring,
commanding, ceremonious, superstitious, powerful, deceitful, juggling,
presaging, misterious, enforcing, victorious, efficacious. Magazia.
Well-stored, wealthy, thronged, furnished, crowded, spacious, copious, large.
Metaphors. Quaint, far-fetcht, strained, forced, translated, painted, flowery.
Melancholy. Solitary, pensive, sad, dreary, black, subtle, froward, lovely,
dampish, heartbreaking, unsociable, drooping, dejected, whining, puling,
powting, cross, armed, sullen, down-cast, lumpish, swarthy, fearful, dull,
reposed, recluse, retired, discontented, dark, gloomy, weeping, discontent,
dusky, heart-contracting, distracted, despairing, fickle, untoward,
heart-rending, killing, imbosomed, complainfull, whimpering, macerating,
heart-eating, oppressing, fretting, smarting, torturing, hellish,
eye-squeesing, gnawing, unexpressible, heart-afflicting, soule-wounding,
heart-confounding. Melody. Sweet, pleasant, gladsome, harmonious, according,
soul-invading, ravishing, intrancing, delicious, charming, Seraphick. Martyr.
Constant, joyful, faithful, willing, patient, valiant, courageous,
languishing, burning, pitied, unmoved, glorious, honored, persecuted,
tormented, wretched. Marmoset. Grinning, antic, toying, foolish. Mind. Active,
thoughtfull, roveing, discoursive, pregnant, teeming, wealthy, studious,
industrious, minting, coining, hewing, ranging, poisoning, floating, wandering,
forgeing, working, busy, quick, moving, stirring, possing, inventive, careful,
winged, subtle, deceitful, contriving. Marriage. Solemn, ceremonious,
ingrafting, uniting, shackling, settering, coupling, sacred, cementing,
fruitful, joyful, chaining, riveting, captivating, geniall, feastfull,
fruitful, happy, succesfull, lawful, stolen, manacling. Mirth. Joviall,
frolic, joyful, pleasant, tickling, jolly, gamesome, sportive, delightful,
sprightly, giddy, heart-easing, defusive, melting, frisking, soft,
melting-heart, enlarging, enchanting, lovely, loose toyish, gigling,
sprightfull, graceful, frantic, heart-chearing, dancing, lightsome, gladsome,
youthful. Madness. Furious, wild, savage, distempred, frantic, giddy,
disordred, headstrong, untamed, unruly, flaming-eyes, ghostly, enraged,
tempestuous, stormy, boiling, impetuous, transporting, haire-brained,
distracted. Mystery. Concealed, hidden, secret, high, admired, amazing,
stupendous, unconceived, uncomprehended, solemn, ceremonious, sacred, divine,
unvulgar, unexpressible, deep, unknown, profound. Moon. Horned, waining,
increasing, decreasing, waxing, dewy, pale-eyed, pale-faced, silver,
inconstant, wandering, radiant, silent, bright, tinseld, glistering, Diana,
aged, newborn, growing, decreasing, woman-governing. Moore. Black, Negro,
swarthy, tawny, cruel, subtle, jealous, barbarous, sallow, curled, lustful,
broyled, flat-nosed, black-eyed, ox-eyed, unshaved, cruel, speedy,
swift-footed, nimble, fierce. Modesty. Virgin, maiden, sober, pure, blushing,
silent, vestall, grave, chaste, bashful, trembling, civil, strait-laced,
well-tempered, respective, sweet, cold, graceful, winning, shame-faced.
Monkey. Chattering, toyish, gamesome,, unlucky, lustful, counterfeiting,
meddling, sprightfull, wily, imitating. Myrtle. Pap hian, tender, Venus, tree,
drowsy, sleepy, fading, short-lived, cold, trembling, narrow-leaved,
frost-fearing, quivering, odorous, fragrant. Music. Heart-ravishing, charming,
enchanting, intrancing, celestial, heavenly, crocheting, melodious,
harmonious, soule-invading, well-turned, according, consorting, well-measure,
sweet, pleasant, delightful, cheerful, seraphick, sense, bereaveing, fancy,
tickling, wanton, descanting, well-proportioned, quavering, diapasoned,
delicious, warbling, eare-commanding angelical. Multitude. Wild, credulous,
hair-brained, mad, furious, tumultuous, ignorant, stiff-necked, stubborn,
heady, rebellious, humorous, self-willed, many headed, misled, giddy, frantic,
shallow-pated, unlearned, promiscuous, inconstant, unsettled, weak-brained,
crowding, hronging, thick-shouldred, thicksculled, clustred, lawless,
seditious, factious, implacable, storming, wild, credulous, soon-perswade,
soft-pated, the rascal herd, misjudging, unletterd, unconceiveing, barking,
buffle-head, impertinent, mangy, stinking, admiring, news-affecting, prattling,
innovating, clownish, outrageous, railing, silly, deluded, malignant, saucy,
foolish, way-ward, whirligig-pated. Nymph. Fair-haired, bright, lovely,
sleek-haired, nimble-footed, painted, shining, spangle-glittering, tripping,
sportive, chaste, gamesome, fair, wanton, spring, haunting, dancing, merry,
frollick, gleesome, neat-drest, amorous, skipping, Diana, following,
wood-haunting, quiver-bearing, soft, haired. Navel. Round, tying, knotty,
nursing. Nuptialt vide marriage. Amorous, wanton, solemn, ceremonious, joyful,
hymeneall, gorgeous, pompeous, sacred, divine, fruitful, feastfull, fettering,
shackling, managing, uniting, happy, unhappy, succesfull, ominous, lawful,
geniall, sheets. Night. Ethiopian, Negro, gloomy, shady, dark, drowsy. Nox.
Still, black-eyed, sullen, shady, swarthy, starry, silent, black-browed,
gloomy, sable, dreaming. Nightingale. Sweet, harmonious, warbling, quivering,
ravishing, chanting, amorous, pleasant, wailing. Nature. Pregrant, solicitous,
officious, vigorous, teeming, provident, courteous, industrious, fruitful.
Nose. Stately, majestic, Roman, snotty, snivelling, snufling, sagacious,
crooked, smelling. Obsequies. Sad, ceremonious, religious, pompeous, mournful,
honored, solemn. Orange. Yellow, golden, delicious, odorous, thirst,
allayinging, face-washing, juicy, squeesed. Orator vide Eloquence. Sweet-lipt,
insinuating, persuasive, sweet-tongued, subtle, learned, flowing, smooth,
melifluous, bewitching, enchanting, intrancing, double-tongued, glozing,
commanding, victorious, eare-tickling, charming, soul-ravishing, Ciceronian,
smooth, oyled, courtly, flowing, captivating, sententious, grave. Odours or
Smells. A romatick, luxurious, voluptuous, spicy, subtle, rich, costly,
precious, perfumed, ambrosiall, joviall, pleasant, wanton, delicious, assyrian,
chafed, musky, Arabian, Panonian, Indian, Sabean, melifluous, ungrateful,
malevolent, loathsome, noisome, stifling, infectious, fulsome, suming
sence-stifling, sulphurous, overcomeing. Oath. Strict, religious, awful,
sacred, binding, enforcing, obliging, ceremonious, truth-confirming, faithful,
inviolable. Ornament. Beauteous, gorgeous, stately, graceful, glorious,
gallant, pompeous, magnificent, curious, embolisht, shining, dazzling,
glittering, costly, sumptuous, ambitious, curious. Ode. Lyrick, wanton,
amorous, charming, pleasing. Obleigment. Binding, tying, deep, strong, great,
forcing, slavish. Obsequiousness. Active, humble, nimble, pliant, servile,
slavish, yiedling, officious, obedient, crouching, fawning, flattering, oily,
clawing, soft, smooth, melting, soothing, ready, winning. Oblivion. Dark,
dusky, solitary, gloomy, obscure, unkind, forgetful, buried. Opinion. Giddy,
vain, doubtful, floating, inconstant, wavering, reeling, groaping,
staggering. distracted, discornposed, tottering, suspicious, common, received,
false, vulgar, erroneous, jealous, heartless, faint, fading, hovering.
Opportunity. Favorable, propitious, smiling, inviting, crowning, wooing,
seasonable, smooth, convenient, sudden, unexpected, offered, occasioned, fair,
courting, mature, commodious, fit, pleasing, desired, wished, well-suiting,
proper. Paradise. Celestial, immortal, glorious, beauteous, happy, deathless,
delicious, eternal, triumphant, flowery, joyful, enamouring, ever-springing,
intrancing, soul-ravishing, soule-invading, transporting. Pace. Grave,
measured, quick, nimble swift, soft-footed, theevish, slow, speedy-winged,
breathed, tardy, slow-footed, stealing, gliding, swimming, silent. Palace.
Aspiring, magnificent, gorgeous, sumptuous, royal, majesticall, stately,
beautiful, lofty, clowd, kissing, exalted, glorious, ambitious, glittering,
gilded, towred. Purple. Tyrian, Persian, royal, princely, stately, blushing,
shining, pompeous, glittering, vermilion, bloody, ruddy, rich, sumptuous,
glorious, magnificent. Fantasies. Empty, insubstantiall, vain, ravishing,
imaginary, airy, flying, uncertain, dreadful, pale, greasy, affrighting,
ghostly. Pity. Affectionate, yiedling, bleeding, melting, calm, soft,
charitable, feeling, affectionate, weeping, compassionate, tenderhearted.
Poison. Rageing, sleepy, drowsy, cold, hot, secret, sly, working, treacherous,
lurking, deceitful, banefull, pale, rageing, deadly, tainted, eating, black,
swelling, spreading, destroying, viperous, benumming, stupifying, burning,
inflaming. Poetry, Poesy, Poet. Immortal, deathless, sacred, enamouring,
soule-bereaving, sprightly, lively, almighty, well, composed, couchedlabord,
powerful, embalming, fluent, nimble, learned, numerous, sinewy, sweet,
flowing, smooth, swelling, flattering, enthusiastic, lascivious, stately,
lofty, wanton, pleasant, brisk, amorous, sacred, numbers, measures, heaven,
bred, muse, inspired, harmonious, melodious, honored, biting, lashing,
satyrick, lyrick, heroic, Jambick, prohetick, winding, artfull, knowing,
well-tuned, tickling, nectareous, Ambrosian, sugared, divine, facetious, loose,
fabulous, fictious, lascivious, witty, well-drest, lawreat, soul-ravishing,
charming, enchanting, intrancing, musical, soul-invading, imparadising, grave,
immortalizing. Pomander. Perfumed, delicious, sweet, well-sented, pleasing,
odoriferous, well-smelled, fragrant. Pomgranate Many, kernele, juicy,
pelicious, vemilion, blushing. Park. Pleasant, delightful, herby, woody,
grassy, enclosed, fruitful, verdant, flowery, empaled, green, plusht, spacious.
Page. Quick, diligent, speedy, officious, observant, ready, careful,
serviceable, obsequious, brisk, dutiful, attending, nimble, waiting. Paradox.
Improbable, stoicall, unvulgar, unbelived, incredible, false-seeming. Paleness.
Trembling, chill, cooled, bleak, fainting, meager, affrighted, ghastly,
difigured, discolor'd, fearful. Palate. Delicious, nice, curious, luxrious,
judicious, insatiate, greedy, gluttenous, well-tasted. Prejudice. Partial,
corrupting, blinding, injurious, disadvantagious, indammaging. Praise. Lasting,
immortal, never-dying, monumentall, deserved, windy, lavish, admired, glozing,
inflaming, triumphant, swelling, attractive, magnetic, big-bellied, deathless,
unmeasured, unsounded, timpanized, lasting, enduring, blazing. Pride. Stately,
high, swollen, dareing, unconfined, swelling, boundless, triumphant, envied,
fantastic, insulting, imperious, hateful, lofty, shameless, unblushing,
vaunting, flaunting, tyrannizing, sky-towring, boasting, purple, ambitious,
heady, portly, mounting, respectless, haughty, insolent, squint-eyed,
audacious, stern, scornful, disdainful, presumptuous, overweening,
strutting, rebellious, lucifernal, impetuous, flaming, glittering,
brow-beating, frantic, supercilious. Presumption. Adventurous, bold, arrogant,
insolent, daring, rash, audacious, savage, proud, swelling, puffed, unmannerly.
Pretense. False, lying, juggling, glozing, cogging, likely, colorable.
Proportion. Beauteous, lovely, sweet, uniforme, measured, squared, handsome,
equal, comely, graceful. Picture. Lively, speaking, rich, painted, fair,
dumb, artificial, deluding, eye-deceiving, water-coloured, oily, toyey, life,
dead, varnisht, skillfull, counterfeiting, eye-deluding, representing,
resembling, inimitable, beautiful, lascivious, unparalleld, coppying,
imitating, stout, stern, majesticall, soulconquering, enchanting, charming,
commanding, incomparable. Pardon. Gracious, favorable, merciful, free,
indulgent, smiling, remissive, willing, courteous. Plays, Sports, Games,
Pastimes. Pleasant, frollick, delightful, soft, mirthfull, sportfull, wanton,
care-killing, facetious, idle, unthrifty, time-stealing, harmless, voluptuous,
sensual, loose, dissolute, lascivious, vain, empty, delicious, beguiling,
refreshing, honest, sweet. Passion. Distempred, distracted, headstrong,
frantic, untamed, unruly, uncollected, disordred, wild, furious, raging, mad,
light-winged, usurping, unbridled, irefull, stormy, tyranous, wilful,
disquiet, transporting, roaving, affectionate, turbulent, vehement, violent,
ardent, fervent, surprising, impetuous, monstrous, importuning, impatient,
blind, imperious, inconstant, irresistible, inexpressible, unlimited,
unadvised. Pastorals. Pleasant, jolly, rustic, rural, innocent, plain,
youthful, harmless, low-stiled, humble. Plains. Flowery, fragrant, verdant,
spacious, enameld, delightful, humble, smiling, fruitful, grassy, pleasant,
green, tufted, frollick, stream-haunted, lovely, dasied, inameld, flowery,
spangled, odorious, sweet, delicious, embrodred, diapred, leveld, green,
plusht, fair, clothed, sprightly, joviall. Parasite. Dissembling, officious,
fawning, obsequious, pliant, sugared, pick-thank, glass-faced, treacherous,
smoothing, lisping, golden-tongued, quaint, oily, courtly, filed-tongue,
smooth-tongued, flattering, serving, cogging, insinuating, slavish, lying,
greedy, smell-feast, idle, collogueing, chearing, juggling, circumventing,
knee-crouching, crafty, wily, deluding, clawing, dowbing, tempting,
fair-spoken, smooth-worded, glozing, tickling. Parrat. Prattling, babbling,
green, painted, fair, plumed, chattering, takling, tatling, gaudy. Pandar. Sly,
crafty, importunate, beastly, brutish, obscene, wary, perfidious, soothing,
cunning, cheating, tempting, deceitful, lascivious, fawning, villainous,
youth-corrupting, immodest, filthy, shameless, brazen-faced, enticing,
alluring, training, impudent. Pyramid. Star, pointing, monumentall, aspiring,
tall, towering, clowd, bearing, prodigious, lasting, heaven-peirceing, proud,
ambitious, sky-bearing, sky-threatning, heaven-pierceing, mounting, exalted,
lofty, sowring. Pomp. Stately, sumptuous, costly, magnificent, gorgeous,
glorious, golden, glittering, superfluous, smiling, courtly, ambitious,
expensive, excessive, needless, vain, glorious, wastfull, ceremonious,
dazzling, triumphant, solemn, proud, royal, fantastic, blazing, profuse,
lavish, unthrifty, gallant, shining, flaming. Persuasion Moving, courting,
soft, insinuating, subtle, ssie, winning, victorious. Periwig. False,
counterfeit, hairy, curled, frizled. Perfume. Sweet, spicy, fregrant,
Ambrosian, compounded, choice, rich, odorous, costly, sacred, ravishing,
lascivious. Pen. Learned, quaint, polite, studious, laborious, eloquent,
artfull, industrious, nimble, quick, clarkly. Pelican. Solitary, lovely,
melancholy, Aegytian, indulgent, sharpbeakt, mourning, officious, loving,
breast-peirceing, bloodfeeding, afflicted, distressed. Pearl. Precious,
Indian, costly, inchasing, flaming, blazing, airegilding, inlightning, orient,
rich, beauteous, eastern, curious, delicious, sparkling, reflecting, oriental,
radiant, beaming, dangling, bright. Pleasure. Soft, delicious, melting, wanton,
alluring, enticing, easy, idle, itching, lulling, desired, inveigling,
transitory, inamouring, empty, charming, fancy, tickling, glozing, pernicious,
treacherous, intemperate, gliding, blind, fulsome, toyish, disordred,
revelling, care-killing, unbridled, effeminate, honey-flowing, depraved,
unmeasured, delightful, fresh, choice, intrancing, imparadising, balmy,
beckoning, magnetic, attractive, sportive, chearing, heart-inlarging,
luxurious, voluptuous, lascivious. fadeing, vain, nectareous, Ambrosian,
spicy, active, lightsome, beguiling, ravishing tempting, captivating,
transporting, bewitching, syrenian, flashy, soul-invading, smiling. Patron.
Propitious, benevolent, favorable, protecting, liberal, beneficious,
bountiful, smiling, defending, securing. Perjury. Impious, cursed, damned,
hellish, black, hollow. Perfection. Divine, rare, absolute, admired, complete,
exact, accomplished, unexampled, unequaled, unparaleld, unmatcht, singular,
beauteous, desired, unpattern'd, unparagon'd. Qualme. Sudden, oppressing,
unexpected, surprising, overcoming. Quiver. Painted, sounding, arrow-bearing,
dangling, hanging, gilded. Quince. Strong-sented, yellow, downy, soft-skinned,
woolly. Queen. Stately, majestic, imperious, awful, scepter-bearing, sacred,
glorious, virtuous, glittering, commanding. Question. Doubtful, perplexing,
puzling, obscure, debated, auxious, argued, discussed, brawling, jangling,
controverted, discoursive, contentious, wrangiling, dispvted. Quicksilver.
Nimble, squeomish, stirring, active, coy, skipping. Renegado. Perfidious,
false, apostate, faithless, dammed, infamous, branded, revolting, perjured.
Rusticity. Glownish, lubberly, untaught, barb arous, ignorant, unmannerly,
blundering, plain, simple, saucy, rude, slovenly, absurd, boisterous,
blustering. Rose. Fragrant, sweet, blushing, odorous, early, delicious,
painted, dew, empearl'd, thorny, prickly-bearded, smiling, vermilion,
carnation, perfumed, maiden, virgin, untainted, unspotted, lovely,
dew-dropping, fading, blowing, senceravishing, languishing, weeping. Race.
Speedy, sinewey, nervy, swift, nimble, quick, light-footed, puffing,
breathless, sweating, contentious, posting, active, short-winded. Rock.
Hanging, lofty, craggy, mossy, aged, hollow, vaulted, sea-surveying,
high-browed, uncouth, forsaken, sky-braving, sky-invading, obdurate, flinty,
hard, impregnable, melancholy, dashing, splitting, sea-confronting,
sea-over-hanging, wave-breaking, sea-daring, over-looking, repelling, churlish,
surly, aspiring, sleepy, barren, unfrequented, impregnable, ship-wracking,
unfruitful, ambitious, dreadful, portentuous, exalted, wave-spurning, gutter'd,
crannied, slippery, inaccessible. Rape. Deflowring, enforcing, violent,
ravishing, impetuous, unwilling, inexorable, resistless. Rainbow. Checkered,
embroidred, purple, Iris, painted, arched, various, Junoes handmaid, moist,
presaging, gaudy, crooked, sun-opposing, streaked, eye-pleasing,
sun-confronting, manycoloured. Recreation. Sportful, gamesorne, toyish,
harmless, civil, moderate, temperate, sweet, lovely, lavish, unthrifty,
fruitless, heartchearing, so lacing, reviving, pleasing, time-beguiling,
delightful. Repulse. Sharp, coy, scornful, churlish, sower, stern, dogged,
cruel, angry, courageous, impetuous, manly, obstinate, resolved, valiant,
sturdy, brave, glorious, victorious. Request. Solicitous, importunate,
seasonable, suppliant, earnest, humble, submissive, urging, pressing,
unreasonable, fair, pertinent, impertinent, unseasonable, seasonable, honest,
civil, fawning, crouching, bold, audacious, easy, undeniable. Rapture.
Poetic, raveing, high-rapture, flowne, enthusiastic, refining, lofty,
intranching, enchanting, flameing, sparkling, soul-moving, bewitching, melting,
ravishing, transporting, glorious, pleasing, elevating, mounting, towering,
inspired. Reproof. Angry, sower, stern, grim, courageous, magnanimous, stout,
furious, just, unjust; deserved, undeserved, merited, sharp, harsh, smart,
satyricall, biting, surly, dogged, chollerick Ruby. Precious, wealthy,
blushing, orient, glittering, beauty, shining, Indian, radiant, invaluable,
inestimable. River. Silver-breasted, crystal, swelling, winding, amorous,
wheeling, wrigling, sliding, smooth, floating, swan-embrodred, hasty, swift,
whispering, gulphy, uxorious, bank-courting, bank-saluting, glassy, vaulting,
dancing, wandering straggling, whirling, le aping, snaky, gliding, parling,
hurrying, incensed, rolling, tumbling, clear. Revenge. Bloody, insatiate,
black, dismal, boiling, raging, furious, passionate, sparkling, selfe-willed,
impatient, impetuous, swelling, burning, stormy, barbarous, fiery, hot,
flaming, thirsty, cruel, hellish, just, stinging, rash, implacable, sad
unappeased, snake-haired, desperate, flame-eyed, grim, stern, frowning,
wrathful, threatening, menacing, regefull. Rites. Misterious, sacred, solemn,
venerable, ancient, received, pious, religious, Rival. Suspicious, jealous,
envious, ambitious, fearful, cautious, circumspect, amorous, wary,
heart-wounded, eye-observing, calumnious, malicious, revengfull. Rigor.
Flinty, cruel, marble-breasted, furious, imperious, stern, savage, obstinate,
obdurate, relentless, remorsless, bitter, angry, tyrannous, merciless. Riddle.
Subtle, profound, knotty, dark, perplexed, puzling, hard, posing, ambiguous,
secret, doubtful, scrupulous, concealed, misterious. Reverence. Ceremonious,
pious, solemn, submissive, auspicious, obsequious, fearful, awful,
knee-bowing, prostrating, adoring, silent, dreadful. Rhetoric, vide
Eloquence. Charming, enchanting, Nectareous, Ambrosian, quaint, terse, fancy,
tickling-eare, captivating, soule-moving, heartstealing, persuasive,
soul-ravishing, sweet-lipt, soul-invading, bewitching, tempting, overcoming,
courtly, varnisht, smooth glozing, insinuating, victorious, painted. Repose.
Soft, quiet, secure, easy, silken, happy, peaceful, desired, warm, lazy,
calm. Simpathy. Mutual, agreeing, uniting, according, loveing, natural,
inbred, amorous, secret, silent admired, affectionate, innate. Symetry.
Attractive, harmonious, comely, graceful, beauteous, perfect, complete,
accomplished, eye-pleasing, proportioned, becoming, handsome, lovely,
harmonious, equal, measured. Suspicion. Groundless, squint-eyed, jealous,
dark, wary, frantic, causless, secret, pale, fearful, trembling, probable,
prying, wakefull. Summer. Flowery, green, plusht, verdant, pleasant, friutfull,
sultry, tanning, scalding, scorching, hot, boiling, parching, sweltring, beamy,
pestilential sweaty, thirsty, yawning, fiery, peirceing, embroidred, inameld,
diapred, chequerd, fair, temperate, cheerful, harvest-bringing, barn-filling,
corn-hoarding, infectious, diseased, yellow-eared, glorious, quickening,
reviving, impartial, gladsome, dusty, joyful, refreshing, plentiful,
fruit-bearing, laborious, requiting, crowne-rejoycing, youthful, leavy,
fragrant. Strawberry. Creeping, spreading, crawling, blushing, cooling,
mountainous, creamy, soft, delicious, pleasant. Strains. Warbling, harmonious,
melodious, high-tuned, inspired, sprightful, sence-bereaving, charming,
bewitching, entranceing, pleasant, delightful, lofty, celestial, heavenly,
angelical, soul-ravishing, sence-captivating, stately, homely, rural, rustic,
humble, pastoral, martial, warlike, tunefull. Style. Elegant, eloquent, terse,
delicate, soft, smooth, natural, facituous, unforced, easy, fluent, learned,
polite, accurate, grave, humble, grovelling, stately, satirical, well-coucht,
curious, lofty, farre-fetcht. Stoic. Rigid, obdurate, dull, sullen, unmoving,
senceless. Sacrifice. Humble, appeasing, solemn, bloody, religious, sacred,
victim, pious, burning. Saint. Honored, exalted, blessed, glorious, divine,
immortal, celestial, inthroned, exalted, triumphant, canonized, inshrined.
Silkworm. Industrious, laborious, pompious, wealthy, working, nimble, active,
teeming. Silence. Peaceful, slumbring, reposed, dull, concealing, monastic,
awful, blind, selfe-deceiving, shady, still, listening, appeased, attentive,
secret, calm, forced, willing, yiedling, night-enamoured, phlegmatic, trusty,
faithful, nightcourting, timorous, fearful. Sighs. Blood-sucking, thirsty,
consuming, scalding, burning, airy, scorching, blasting, fiery, deep-fetcht,
heart-rending, wounding, breaking, burning, whispering, amorous, dissembled,
concealed, secret, interrupted, sweet, trembling, enclosed, breathing, weeping,
repeating, heartbreaking, languishing, fainting, penitent, bewailing,
lamenting, remorsfull, zealous, religious, pious, amorous, heart-fretting,
mournful, sad, pensive, melancholy, penitential, melting, fervent winged,
stormy, restless, hearty, affectionate, groaning, compassionate. Strumpet.
Shameless, impudent, notorious, bawdy, lascivious, rampant, salacious,
dissolute, uncivil, wanton, lustful, immodest, intangling, insnaring,
enticing, alluring, rammish, goatish, rotten, loathsome, painted, cancred,
itchy, dallying, infamous, night-walking, captivating, inthralling, mercenary,
perfidious, dissembling, perjured, pocky. Streams. Silver, crystal, purling,
foaming, winding, curled, writhing, wrigling, uxorious, courting, hasty,
embrodred, swift-paced, tumbling, frothy, bank-courting, bustling, murmuring,
rumbling, surgy, chiding, impetuous, resistless, snaky, hurrying, silent,
sweeping, chiding, azure, wany, rustling, amorous, careering, angry, boiling
fruitful, fishy, flowing, running, gliding, slippery, raging, incensed,
vaulting, dancing, soft, whispering, wandering, straggling, gushing, drenching,
whirling, rushing, glassy, pearly, silver-breasted, yelling, swelling,
wheeling, spreading, glancing, gently-sliding. Servant. Active, willing,
nimble, ready, officious, industrious, quick, stirring, obedient, pliant,
diligent, laborious, toylsome, obsequious, careful, painful, watchful,
faithful, honest, assiduous, idle, negligent, insolent, proud, disobedient,
regardless, repining, fancy, uncivil, droanish, lither, lazy, drowsy, sleepy,
rebellious, grumbling, murmuring. Service, Servitude. Rigorous, hard,
honorable, happy, drudging, easy, cruel, slavish, wretched, constrained,
dejecting, vexing, detested, unsupportable, intolerable, burdenous, toylsome,
shameful, tyrannous, ignominious. Sense. Active, nimble, voluptuous, errone
ous, seducing, sportive, gamesome. Secret. Hidden, misterious, private,
concealed, sequestered, undivulged, private, reserved, coverd, enclosed
imbosomed, imprisoned, committed, deep, profound, silent, treasured, pensive,
lurking. Sea. Angry, raging, swelling, boiling, working, floating, surrounding,
stirring, winding, sail-bearing, ingorging, incircling, ingulphing, girdling,
unconfined, boundless, devouring, roaring, bellowing, insatiate, shelfy,
soundless, rocky, billowy, frothy, wealthy, tossing, swelling, swallowing,
awful, dreadful, ship-wracking, insulting, licentious, toyling, floody,
pathless, surgy, irefull, stormy, ebbing, flowing,, tumbling, glassy, plowed,
unbottomed, unfathomed, unmeasured, impetuous, blew-waved, Neptune, Thetis,
brackish, tumultuous, yiedling, aged, hoary, rugged, rufled, vaulting,
fretting, belching, untamed, foamy, high-waved, troubled. Sparrow. Salacious,
lustful, fruitful, ingendring, procreative, increasing. Spaniell. Questing,
ranging, fawning, shaggy, loving. Squirrell. Active, lightsome, nimble,
nut-cracking, vaulting, leaping, skipping, stirring, bush-tailed. Scold or
Shrew. Angry, cursed, frowning, peevish, way-ward, sower-lookt, brow-beating,
sullen, furious, brawling, clashing, wrangling, storming, fretting, railing,
tippet, upright. Sycophant, vi de Parasite. Smooth-tongued, oily, pick-thank'd,
calumnious, juggling, decietfull, slanderous, detracting, defaming, cogging,
glozing, collogueing, cheating. Soul. Divine, immortal, deathless, lively,
subtle, active, sprightly, sparkling, unfathomed, apprehensive, unbodied,
dislodged, undiscerned, celestial, nimble-winged. Slye. Lofty, stirring,
crystal, glittering, glorious, azure, inameld, embroidred, marble,
transparent, spangled, beamy, empty, dusky, transparent, vaulty, starry. Slave.
Servile, infamous, oppressed, branded, drudging, dejected, abused, ignominious.
Sleep. Soft, peaceful, reposed, leaden-fingred, silent, arresting, gentle,
downy, calm, silken, forgetful, golden, drowsy, surprising, yawning,
healthful, all-subduing, refreshing, delicious, senceless, counterfeiting,
death-imitating, benumming, heavy, pale, deceitful, curtained, balmy,
charming, heavy. Smell. Sweet-breathing, delicious, pleasant, perfumed,
odoriferous, fragrant, Arabian, Indian, Aromatic, spicy, sence-affecting,
delightful, balmy, geniall, musky, aire-perfuming, unwhole some, loathsome,
fullsome, noisome, infectious, contagious, sence-overcoming, stinking. Snow.
Soft, white, fleecy, driven, flaky, wooly, untrodden, Alpian, Thracian,
Scythian, plumy, fear hered, melting, itchy, freezing, hoary, scattred,
showring, drizling, mountainous, curled, blandched, ragged, shivering. Sorrow.
Weeping, wailing, whining, sighing, groaning, lamenting, pining, inward,
inexpressible, lumpish, wrinkling, griping, drooping, eye-wringing, brinish,
killing, heart-contracting, wounding, heart-rending, tearing, gnawing,
fretting, unquiet, impatient, gawling, eating, devouring, heartbreaking,
pensive, melting, pinching, discontented, sable, mournful. Speech. Witty,
winning, popular, rational, taking, well-coucht, learned, captivating,
tedious, ingenuous, terse, pleasing, tarte, polite, fawning, rhetorical,
eloquent, sharp-eare, enticing, bewitching, pleasing, charming. Spheres.
Spangled, whirling, rapid, harmonious, beauteous, glorious, wheeling,
embroidred, inamel'd, crystal, lofty, moving, turning, musical, azure,
chimeing, tunefull, rolling. Solemnity. Lofty, ceremonious, thronged, exact,
sacred, superstitious, famous, honorable, royal, religious, venerable. Song.
Enchanting, intrancing, harmonious, delicious, lulling, sprightfull,
enamouring, ravishing, bewitching, sweet, flowing, warbling, sence-bereaving,
melodious, quavering, pleasant, rural, pastoral, mournful, joviall,
sence-chearing, heart-reviving, life-infusing, voice. Shade, shadow. Gloomy,
darksome, Syluan, lightsome, whispering, scowling, sullen, cooling, refreshing,
dewy, befriending, courteous, kind, sad, melancholy, genial, hospitable,
verdant, deceitful, drowsy, flying, glancing, fading, vain, sun-dispersing,
empty, griefly, ghastly, unfrequented, silent, glimpsing, flitting, stirring,
dusky, brown, pale, feeble, dogging, pursuing, sable, meager, gliding,
wandering. Shame. Bashful, blushing, infamous, disgraceful, opprobrious, pale,
concealing, ignominious, fearful, trembling, reproachful, modest, ingenuous,
dishonest, ugly, lasting, Shepherd, swain. Piping, gleesome, mirthfull,
jolly, frollick, silly, gamesome, rural, rustic, active, loving, careful,
harmless, contented, secure, buxome, jocond, brisk, trim, neat, buskind,
spruce, honest, unenvied, blithe, Phillis-enamour'd, lovesick, despairing,
careless, whistling, burnt, parcht, dusky, tawny, lovely, sportive, Snare.
Subtle, deceitful, slye, treacherous, intangling, catching, surprising,
inthralling, sence-beguiling, captivating, imprisoning. Sun. Glorious, lofty,
bright, golden, Apollo, Titan, beamy, glittering, radiant, scorching, broyling,
parching, rosting, cheerful, vapour-attracting, heaven-surrounding, crested,
inlightning, peirceing, infusing, burning, thirsty, drying, life-infusing,
flamy, fiery, golden-haired, careering, wheeling, galloping, mitred,
faire-tressed, flame-haired, dazzling, quickening, reviving, discerning,
illustrating, all-seeing, garish, gladsome, unweared, rolling, glowing,
restless, galloping, sparkling, speedy, posting. Sport. Delightsome, pleasant,
gamesome, toyish, wanton, delightful, choicest, joyous, mirthfull, active,
time-beguiling. Springs. Bubling, murmuring, purling, silver, crystal,
clear, sacred, fruitful, flowing, rolling, rising, Nimphs, prattling, tatling,
sparkling, whispring, chiding, weeping, pearly, gliding, delicious, dancing,
grasse-fringed, streaming, mossy, margind, gushing, soft, rustling, trickling,
dropping, distilling, running. Stallion. Lustful, rampant, ingendring,
breeding, covering. Star. Lofty, bright, sparkling, floating, swimming,
spangling, heaven-embrodering, enamelling, lucky, unlucky, auspitious,
malignant, smiling, frowning, radiant, silver-tressed, burning, gliding,
shining, wandering, twinkling, blazing, glorious, succesfull, ill-bideing.
Stranger. Unacquainted, unfriended, disregarded, wandering, unknown, traveling,
journying, housless. Springtime. Pregnant, fragrant, youthful, flowery,
verdant, smiling, wealthy, teeming, embrodred, enameld, geniall, pearly,
showry, joviall, earth-awaking, amorous, refreshing, reviving, lusty, gladsome,
gaudy, leavy, painted, beauteous, lovely, infant, inamouring, bridal, dawning,
lively, blithe, buxome, joyous, mirthfull, joccund, blooming, budding,
quickening. Skin. Alablaster, Ivory, white, delicious, soft, sleek, smooth,
azure, veined, beauteous, lovely. Smile. Cheerful, sweet, pleasing, lovely,
delightful, peaceful, bewitching, enchanting, charming, soul-ravishing,
intrancing, dimpled, simpering, gladsome, alluring, intrancing, shining,
deceitful, becoming, graceful, traitorous. Tragedy. Buskind, sockt, sad,
bloody, woeful, doleful, ruthful, lofty, stately, sententious, high, severe,
grave, elaborate, heroic, pensive, weeping, swelling, great, mournful, subtle,
worded. Treachery. Secret, alluring, enticing, intrapping, deceitful,
concealed, surprising, dissembled, smooth, glozing, training, inveigling,
gilded. Theater. Public, spacious, thronged, gorgeous, pompeous, applausive,
populous, open, crowded, mirthfull, joyous, clamorous, well-filled, crammed.
Temptation. Enticing, alluring, secret, soliciting, slye, subtle, crafty,
sedncing, treacherous, wooing, pernicious, gilded, smiling, courting. Temper.
Mild, willing, loving, ingratiating, quiet, peaceful, pleasing, sweet,
winning, stormy, chasing, angry, sullen, surly. Taste. Pleasing, delicious,
accurate, judicious, quick, sharp, nice, offensive, curious, exquisite, savory,
unpleasant, insipid. Thoughts. Swift-winged, roving, discoursive, nimble,
teeming, plodding, projecting, contriving, musing, studious, contemplative,
working, devising, ranging, scattred, wandering, running, rolling, tumbling,
confused, flitting, vain, silent. Touch. Smooth, yiedling, soft, gentle,
harmless, rough. Tongue. Seraphick, Nectarious, sweet, harmonious, heavenly,
celestial, melodious, victorious, persuasive, enamouring, enchanting,
intrancing, charming, bewitching, soul-ravishing, conquering, captivating,
satyricall, rolling, bitter, invective, lashing, filed, gilded, oily, venomous,
glozing, collogueing, lying, deceitful, enviuos, treacherous, unbridled,
insnaring enticing, delicious, detracting, malicious, calumning, reproachful,
babbling, delicate, lavish, smooth, flattering, soothing. froward, clamorous,
scolding, brawling, stammering, lascivious, luxurious, wanton, pleasant,
tatling, noisefull, full-mouthed, shrill, allaruming, juditious, eloquent,
rhetorical, mellifluous, fluent. Teeth. Pearly, white-Ivory, even-ranged,
smooth-tongue, enclosing, alablaster, sinowy, grinding, tongue-lodging,
guarding, sharp-set, burnisht. Tears. Melting, trickling, numerous,
transparent, pearly, crystal, persuasive, victorious, moving, dissembling,
falling, pittyed, wailing, weeping, rolling, solemn, swelling, dreary,
doleful, constrained, careful, silver-shedding, relenting, tender, fluent,
obsequious, tributary, sable, complaining, instructed, bursting, comeing,
pleading, springing, brinish, forced, gushing, penitential, pensive, sad,
dewy, passionate, scalding, drowning, troubled, obsequious, tributary, dumb,
speaking, salt, soft, captivating, commanding. Thighs. Plump, sinewy, smooth,
Ivory, Alablaster, marble, stately, majesticall, portly, supporting, moving,
delicate, graceful, well-proportioned, twin-born, fleshy, muscely, solid.
Turtle. Pensive, mournful, murmering, whispering, sighing, billing, amorous,
silver, wanton, chaste, meek, gentle, plaining, constant, loving, faithful,
fleeting, venerous, sullen, querelous, hoarse, courteous. Tyrant. Insulting,
insolent, imperious, stern, lawless, cruel, bloody, wrathful, flint-hearted,
rigorous, marble-hearted, remorsless, unrelenting, inexorable, passionate,
oppressing, awless, savage, surly odious, haughty, fearless, self-willed,
blood-sucking, unlimited, proud, ambitious, aspiring, usurping, Trihumps,
Trophies. Magnificent, gorgeous, pompeous, solemn, joyful, majestical, stately,
laureat, honored, swelling, crowned, proud, peaceful, sceptred, sacred,
joyful, mirthful, glorious, feastful, victorious, insulting, lasting,
memorable, never-dying, immortal, famous lofty, deathless. Tresses. Crisped,
curled, frisled, ruffled, scatterd, disheveld, golden, dispersed, lovely,
beautiful, nets, snares, wavering, lascivious, wanton, dangling, twisted,
shining, glistering, radiant, amber. Trees. Pregnant, spreading, budding,
green, fruitful, flourishing, blooming, branching, leavy, verdant, shady,
sturdy, shrubby, sky-kissing, reaching, wavering, towering, lofty, high-topt,
knotty, vegetive, deep-rooted, ingrafted, inoculated, planted, bushy,
full-grown, curled, gloomy, arched, bending, fragrant, ambitious, flourishing,
fading, withering, sappy, shaggy, well-grown. Tune. Enchanting, delicious,
ear-ravishing, melodious, pleasing, bewitching, alluring, enticing, charming,
sence-bereaving, heart-intrancing, warbling, quavering, harmonious, celestial,
according, musical, heavenly, consorting, lightsome merry, mournful, sad,
pensive sprightly, melancholy, heavy. Tobacco. Cavaleering, smoking, spitting,
spauling; smoaky, flameing, swaggering, huffing, puffing, generous, whiffing.
Teats. Milky, corral, cherry, vermilion, nipled, gushing, nursing,
milk-spinning. Tennis Racking, bandying, active, sportive, gamesome,
time-spending. Thanks. Hearty, lusting, obleiged, dutious, officious,
obsequious, engaged, unmeasured, unumbred, bounden, serviceable, obedient,
humble, immortal. Tiger. Libian, Hercanian, Midian, fierce, cruel, savage,
bloody, Affrican, Indian, Armenian, speckled, furious, impetuous, merciless,
blood-thirsty, streaked, swift-footed, greedy. Time. Speedy-winged, consuming,
all-ripening, injurious, domineering, grey-headed, aged, crazy, wastful,
restless, gliding, posting, stealing, flying, creeping, feathred, wheeling,
succeeding, incroaching, invading, light-heeled, running, opportune,
seasonable, convenient, all-gnawing, rusty, irrevocable, present, future.
Twilight. Dapled, gray, gloomy, ambiguous, neutral, doubtful, darksome, dewy,
grizy, dusky. Virago. Manly, masculine, heroic, valiant, courageous, sturdy,
stout, audacious, bold, adventurous, fearless undaunted. Vesture vide Garment.
Sumptuous, magnificent, costly, gentile, stately, rich, glorious, shining,
glittering, pompeous, gorgeous, spruce, neat, handsome, decent, fashionable,
a-la-mode, curious, becoming, gaudy, gay, trim. Verdure. Pleasant, youthful,
smiling, flowery, joyful, springing, blooming, leavy. Violet. Aznre, creeping,
soft, pale, nodding, purple-streakt, beautiful, odorous, glowing,
sweet smelling. Verse. Lofty, exalted, immortal, high, smooth, swelling,
harmonious, well-labour'd, well-drest, deathless, powerful, intrancing,
enchanting, nectar-dropping, charming, fancy, tickling, sacred, measured,
sprightly, sententious, sinewy, buskined, nerved, facetious, eare-inamouring,
muse-inspired, prophetic, embalming, numerous, well-composed, fluent, learned,
amorous, wanton, lascivious, delicious, sweet, flowing, ravishing. Virtue.
Fair, bright, untainted, cold, chaste, active, maiden-sacred, immortal,
deathless, spotless, generous, glorious, divine, heroic, conspicuous,
unregarded disrespected. Vow. Pious, religious, solemn, sacred, ceremonious,
binding, chaste, obleiging, strict, severe, irrecoverable, fervent, rash,
inconsiderable, unadvised. Urne. Peaceful, sacred, forgetful, quiet,
mournful, sable, darksome, silent, shrowding, shady, cooled. Voice.
Celestial, heavenly, harmonious, sweet, delicious, enchanting, intrancing,
bewitching, charming, pleasant, delicious, soul-conquering, heart-captivating,
sence-bereaving, Siren, eare-taking, sprightfull, mournful, puling, whining,
alluring, enticing, victorious, triumphant. Veins. Azure, violet, purple,
swelling, flowing, winding, warm, fluent, dancing, trembling, seething,
boiling, branched, meandring, interlacing. Vales, Valleys. Fruitful, flowery,
sportful, verdant, green, plusht, inameld, checkered, diapred, motly, fragrant,
pleasant, sweet, delightful, smilling, embrodred, turfed, dasied, grassy,
herby, green-cloathed, gamesome, soft-coated, spangled, perfumed, ecchoing,
green-breasted, strame, embrodred, gloomy, dark, humble, narrow, grovelling,
crowtching, low, dejected, solitary, shaded, gloomy, over-looked, bushy,
tufted, leveld, green-mantled, flower-spangled, hollow, stooping, crooked,
resounding, winding, melancholy. Virgin. Bashful sober, untained, spotless,
chaste, modest, civil, blushing, pure. Veil. Virgin, maiden, shadowing,
dangling, beauty, concealing, masking, spreading, clowdy, faintly. Vulgar vide
Multitude. Rude, unconceiving, lawless, misjudging, illiterate, shallow-pated,
tumultuous, rebellious, saucy, confused, ignorant, surly, giddy, haire-brained,
distracted, inconstant. Unicorn. Long-horned, Virgin, loving, Indian, savage,
Lion, hating, precious, rich, horned, furious. Wife. Careful, loving, happy,
solicitous, indulgent, chearing, embracing, loyal, sweet, dear, delicious,
scolding, brawling, unquiet, disloyal, unhappy, jealous, litigious,
contentious. Widow. Pensive, melancholy, sad, desolate, comfortless, lovely,
distressed, mournful, afflicted, oppressed, bouncing, lusty, joviall,
frollick. Whore. Incestuous, leprous, obscene, lustful, lascivious, wanton,
rammish, brotheld, uncivil, strumpeting, bawdy, dallying, rampant, infamous,
Leprous, fallacious, dissolute, rotten, impudent, shame less, mercenary,
immodest, notorious, filthy, painted, unblushing, impudent, cankerd, itchy,
Goatish, loathsome, musty, nasty, pocky. Women. Inconstant, crafty, deceitful,
wanton, beauteous, soft, tender, passionate, weak, frail, pitiful, delicate,
melting, prattling, inconsiderate, rash, smooth-faced, revengfull, whining,
puling, scolding, brawling, unquiet, unchaste, lascivious, melting, weeping,
impudent, jealous. Whisper. Secret, close, hollow, silent, soft, guilty,
fearful, magical, drowsy, pleasing. Welcome. Cheerful, smiling, bounteous,
hearty, loving, kind, free, liberal, gracious, courteous. Will. Unforced,
uncontrouled, free, active. Wanton, wantonness. Sportive, toying, dallying,
lascivious, rude, unruly, ungoverned, unattained, tempted, unbridled,
luxurious, full-fed, revelling, fearless, insatiate. Wish. Longing, greedy,
desirous, ambitious, passionate, ardent, hearty, insatiate, sollicitous. Wrest.
Ivory, sinewy, snowy, azure, streaked, veined. Wonder. Attractive, amazing,
intrancing, stupendous, prodigious, silent. Womb. Teeming, pregnant, fruitful,
swelling, painful, barren. Wine. Generous, spruce, near, brisk, rich, odorous,
sparkling, fragrant, sprightly, lusty, care-drowning, heart-chearing,
delicious, green, pricked, hearing, inspiring, blood of the canubian, caudian,
lesbian, chain, joyous, grape, inlivening, smiling, genious-exalting,
nectareous, pleasant, forgetful, reason-depriving, furious, raging. Wit.
Sagacious, contriving, peirceing, pregnant, active, quick, plotting, stirring,
rich, happy, nimble, humerous, mature, inventing, pregnant. Youth. Vigorous,
blooming, fresh, loose, wild, unbrideled, giddy, amorous, green, raw,
unexperienced, untutored, active, smiling, wanton, downy, beardlesse,
untrained, untemperate, dissolute, proud, ambitious, voluptuous, unreclaimed,
indiscreet, riotous, tender, soft, lascivious impatient, smooth, jovial,
inconsiderate, witty, inconstant.
FINIS.
A GARDEN of TULIPS OR, The Pleasant Prospect.
An Alphabetical Collection, beautified with flourishing Similitudes and
Comparisons, for the better imitation, admirably applied to their several
Subjects.
ANger is blood powered, and perplexed into a froth. Reason to rage is like
bands to a sore, which often stroking makes the anguish more. Anger is like a
deadly weapon, we hear his voice before it does execution, and then we arm. So
looks the chased Lion on the daring Hunts-man that has galled him, then makes
him nothing. As a Savage Bore (that hunted long assailed and set upon) with his
only eyes swimming in fire, keeps off his baying hounds, though sunk himself,
yet holds his Anger up, and shows it forth in foam, makes firm his stand of
battalious bristles, feeds his hate to die, and whets his tusks with wrathful
majesty; So fares a furious Anger. Anger is like a full hot horse, who being
allowed his way, his self metal tires him. Ambitions gilded spheres are like
to painted hells, which please the eyes, even while they show the heart where
horror lies. Ambitions thoughts, like woods, whilst they maintain the flame of
high desires, grow ashes by the same. Ambition, like water floods, not
channel-bound, neighboring banks, does overrun, and grows nothing when its
rage is down. So have I beheld an exhalation, that would be a star fall, when
the Sun forsook it, in a sink. Ambitious men like furious cannons, are often
burst with over-charging. Ambition like an ignis fatuus, misleads our fond
mortality, hurries us about, then sets us down just where we first begun.
Allegiance tempted too far, is like the trial of a good sword on an anvil, as
that often flies in pieces without service to the owner; so trust enforced too
far, proves treachery, and is too late repented. Affections injured, like
tempest threatened, trees not firmly rooted, never spring to timely growth. Our
love like sparkles are, they brightest shine when they go out. The pleasures of
Adulterers, are like to the sea, groundless and wide. Look how a wolf does like
a dog appear, so like a friend is an Adulterer. We see that trees bears no such
pleasant fruit there where they first grew, as when they are new set, perfumes,
the more they are chafed, the more they render their pleasant scents; and so
Affliction expresses virtue, whether true, or else adulterate. It is not the
Apparel, the brisk pert Linnet in his russet feathers, flies as warm as the
bird of Paradise with all his painted and his gilded train. A Broker is a City
Pestilence, a moth that eats up gowns, doublets, and hose. What are our Bodies?
A little curded milk, fantastical puff-past, like paper prisons they use for to
keep flies in. A Boasting Swaggerer is like a walking spur, he gingles much,
but never pricks. A Swaggerer that fights, as the geese did that saved the
Capitol, only with prating. Beauties are like to books, those that do study
them do know them best: and to say truth, it is still much as it pleases the
Common Reader. Beauty concealed, is like a Jewel in the dark. A Bawd is like a
Broker, she takes fees on both sides. A Bawd is both Ware and Merchant, Flesh
and Butcher. Chamber-maids are to show Mistresses, like porches, unto doors,
you pass the one before you can have entrance to the other; or like mustard to
a piece of brawn, if you will have one taste well, you must not scorn to be
dipping in the other. Chamber-maids are like lotteries, one may choose twenty
before they shall find one good one. To say a Waiting Woman is handsome, and
yet chaste, is to affirm all pages gelt; or that the Knight keeps to his Lady
in the high bed, and never truckles. A good Consceince is a well built castle,
no battery nor invasion can take it. A Princes Court is like a common fountain,
whence should flow pure silver drops in general; but if it chance some curse
example poison it near the head, death and diseases are spread through all the
Land. Courtiers are fickle things to deal with, a kind of Marchpane men that
will not last. Courtiers in Citizens houses are summer fires, that may be well
spared, and being quite out are best; they do the house no good, but help to
consume and burn the wood up, and overheat the rooms. Credit is like the
chastity of a maid, which if once broke, is ever after lost. Credit not kept up
is like a Palace, which for want of repair falls to ruin. Credulity is
securities blind nurse, the dream of fools, the drunkards ape, that feeling for
his way, even when he thinks drunkards ape, that feeling for his way, even when
he thinks drunkards ape, that feeling for his way, even when he thinks
drunkards ape, that feeling for his way, even when he thinks in his deluded
sense to catch at safety, falls without defense. Great Elephants and Lions
murder least; the ignoblest beast is the cruelest. To be a Cuckold is as
natural as to be a married man, as to eat, sleep, or wear a nightcap. It is
all one to trust ones arm in the throat of a Lion, ones purse with a Curtizen,
ones neck to the chance of the dice, ones religion to a Synagogue of Jews, as
ones wife with a friend. So tall a Cuckold, that he ducks at the penthouses,
like an Ancient that dares not flourish for fear of the sign-posts. As hearty
Seamen in desperate storms stem with a little rudder the tumbling ruins of
the Ocean; so with their cause and swords good men meet Dangers. Our Desires
are like our fates, our own stars, all our fortunes, which as we sway them, so
abuse or bless us. Who rises from a feast with that keen appetite that he set
down; such are Desires obtained. Where is that horse that does untread again
his tedious measures with the unbated fire, that he did pace them first; so our
Desires fix on their objects with far more spirit then they do enjoy them. How
like a yonker, or a prodigal, the scared barque puts from her naaive bay,
nugged and embraced by the strumpet wind, how like a prodigal does she return
with our withered ribs and ragged sails, lean, ren, and beggered by her
blustering voyage; with such satisfaction our night Desires do the next morning
leave us. Despair is a plummet in the heart, that weighs and pulls us living to
the dust we came from. Disdain is like to water powered in fire,
Quenches the flame a while, to raise it higher.
Dissimulation is a canker, which for the most part, seizes the choicest fruit
with its infection, still ordained for to disease the natures of best
complexions. Goodness is but an out side, we all set
In rings of gold, stones that are counterfeit.
A Dissembler is like a goodly apple, rotten at the core. Women's tongues for
their garulity are like to clocks, if they go too fast, they never go true Envy
does feed on entrails like a Kite, in which foul heap, if any ills lie hid, she
strikes her beak into it, shakes it up, and hurls it so abroad that all may
view it; corruption is her nutriment, but touch her with any precious
ointments, and you kill her. Envy is like a fly that passes all the bodies
soundest parts, and dwells upon his sores, and if her squint-eye have power to
find out none, she then forgeth some; she makes that crooked, ever which
before was straight, calls valor giddiness, and justice tyranny. Extremes in
our delights have violent ends, and in their triumphs die, like fire and
powder, which as they kiss consume; the sweetest honey is loathsome in its own
deliciousness, and in the taste confounds the appetite. As the east and west
upon the globe a Mathematical point only divides: thus happiness, and misery,
and all extremes, are still contiguous. They are as sick that surfeit with too
much, as they that starve with nothing: So, it is a happiness to be seated in
the Mean, superfluity comes soon by white hairs; but competency lives longer. A
false Dissembler is like the serpent that parted with its subtilty, and closed
it in the fruit. It Is with our souls as with our eyes, that after a long
darkness, over dazzled with the approach of sudden light; when in the midst of
fears we are surprised with unexpected happiness; the first degrees of joy are
mere astonishments. Fidelity in secrets, though it be honest, bears its
punishment with it; such a person is like to one, that in cold nights will
needs have all the fire, and there is held by others, and embraced only to burn
himself by their direction. Flattery is the bellows that blows up sin; we
seldom see a flattering Knave turn Courtier, but many Courtiers have turned
flattering Knaves. Fools are like obedient children brought up under a hard
mother in law, and a cruel; who being not used to breakfasts and collations,
when they have course bread offered them are thankful, and take it for a favor
too. A man of Fortitude does imitate the weather, that sings in tempests, and
being clear is silent. Fear dwells with earthquakes, shipracks at sea, or
prodigies in heaven; a valiant man, he cannot see so many fathom beneath the
height of his own heart, as fear is. Valiant hearts Kings may dissolve, but not
defeat; a man that is void of fear when he does fall, he lies great in his
ruins (like the sacred carcasses of scattered temples) he still reverend lies,
and the religious honor him no less, then if he stood in all his majesty.
Without misfortune virtue has no glory, valor is of no use, opposed trees make
tempests, show their powers, as waves forced back by rocks, make Neptunes
towers. It is not breath can fright a noble truth, nor is there Magic in the
person of a king that plays the tyrant; if that there be a good sword can
easily uncharm it, as the calm air stills tempests. Fortune has hours of loss,
and hours of gain; the brave man feels them both, who like the angry bull,
never goes back for breath, but when he means to arm his fury double. Fortune
is a slut, and being a whore her self, would have no Lady marry, and live
honest Glory is like Alcides shirt, if it stay on us, till pride has mixed it
with our blood; nor can we part with it at our pleasure, when we would uncase,
it brings along with it both flesh and sinnews, and leaves us living monsters.
Gamesters have hearts more spacious then Kings: did they divide the Empire of
the world, they would make one throw for all. To define a Gallant of the times
right, a Mercer formed him, a Tailor makes him, and a Player gives him spirit.
The shrub securely grows, the tallest Cedar stands most in danger of the wind.
Thus we distinguish the noble from the base, the noble find their lives and
deaths still troublesome: but Humility does sleep while the storm grows hoarse
with scolding. The gates of Honor are arched so high, that Giants may let
through, and keep their impious Turbands on, without good morrow to the sun.
Why do we scorn inferior men, since to be lower then the worms, is to be
higher then the greatest Monarchs. Humility is young Ambitions ladder, whereon
the climber upwards turns his face, but when he once attains the upmost round,
he then unto the ladder turns his back, looks in the clouds, scorning the base
degrees by which he did ascend. When once the Spring, main Hope, is fallen into
disorder no wonder if the lesser wheels (Desire and Joy) stand still: our
thoughts, like Bees when they have lost their King, wander confusedly, and
settle no where. The Powers, like to best Tutors, do inflict hard tasks upon
great natures and of noblest Hopes, read trivial Lessons. Hope is in
opposition with Despair, and like the zealous advocate in the cause of his
afflicted client, labors still to overthrow the quirks and fallacies Despair is
nimble in, whilst Fear with trembling expects trials issue. Honor in noble
persons, as the pure oar refined, exceeds in value treble proportions of the
courser dross. Men in themselves entirely Honest, may march safe with naked
feet on coals of fire; so flames do reach at heaven ere they expire. An Honest
soul is like a ship at sea, that sleeps at anchor when the ocean's calm, but
when she rages, and the wind blows high, he cuts his way with skill and
majesty. As the light serves not only to show, but renders us mutually
profitable; so our lives spent in acts examplary and Honest win our selves good
names, and do to others give matter for virtuous deeds by which they live. How
subtly Hell does flatter Vice, mounts it aloft, and makes it seem to fly; so
the fowl the Tortois mocked, who to the sky the ambitious shellfish raised: the
end of all is, only that he may from thence dead fall. As men in scorn of a
true flame that is near, run to light their tapers at a glo-worm, so pleasures
are valued above heaven. Hatred, like clocks wound up to watch the sun, hasting
a headlong, course on many wheels, has never done, until all be undone.
Hatred hatched at home is a tame tiger, may fawn and sport, but never leave its
nature. Our Hair grows in our grave, and that alone
Looks fresh, when all our other beauty's gone.
There is no Joy on earth, never so rational, so pure, so holy, but is like a
Jeaster, Parasite or Whore, in the most worthy parts with which they please, a
drunkenness of soul and a disease. What unsubstantial bubbles are the beast of
humane Joys? Things that we daily see the affections cloy,
Hope long desired, does bring the greatest Joy.
Without Injuries the world would languish, and have enough to do; discord in
part, makes harmony in the whole, and some must laugh whilst others do condole.
Wrongs, like great whirlewinds, shake the highest battlements; few for Heaven
would care, should they be ever happy; they are half Gods, who both in good
days and good fortunes share. Ingratitude, is like a dog that flies at his
master, which it is just with us to strangle, neither his kind nor use
considered. Shame of Infamy does extinguish lust as oil does fire. Where shame
and Infamy are too much enforced on a delinquent, they breed too often an
audacious defense of sin, but no sincere repentance; so the rain slides to the
root, and nourishes, where great storms make a noise, wet but the skin of the
earth, and run away in a swift channel. Our Industry, is as our soul; which is
not put into the body to be idle; it has too many rare and curious pieces of
Mathematical motions to stand still. Incontinency is a vice sooner condemned
then banished, easily spoke against; but yet will fawn as smoothly on our flesh,
as Circe on the Grecian travelers, when she detained them in the shapes of
beasts. Lust and Incontinency, like the plummets hanging on clock lines, will
never have done, till all our faculties are undone and ruined. Oh with what
virtue should lust be withstood,
Since it is fire seldom quenched without blood.
Lustful Incontinency is like an overswoln river that breaks all bounds; it is
a devil bred in blood, nursed in desire, that like the Salamander lives in fire.
Lust is a gilded pill, which sinful nature does prescribe, desire strokes the
sense with pleasure; but at last, the shining outside leaves a bitter taste.
Of such an Inconstancy, as boys gay bubbles, blown in the air and broken. The
wind is more fixed then her Inconstancy, the beaten Mariner with his shrill
whistle calms the loud murmurs of the troubled main, and sooner strikes it
smooth again, then her soul to have peace in love with any. Our constitutions
vary, herbs and trees admit their frosts and summer; and why then should our
desires that are so nimble, and more subtle then the spirits of our blood, be
such staid things within us, and not share their mutual Inconstancy. He wears
his Faith like the fashion of his hat, it changes with the next block.
Jealousie's fits present a man (like so many bubbles in a basin of water)
twenty several crabbed faces, many times makes his own shadow his cuckold
maker. The Devil gives this Jealousy to man as nature does a tail unto a lion;
which thinks in heat to beat away the flies, when he does only more inrage
himself. A Jealous fellow is like a cowardly Captain in a Garrison Town, fears
every assault, trembles at every battery, and doubts most lest the gates should
be opened, and his enemy let him in at midnight. Those wounds heal ill that men
do give themselves omision to do that is necessary, seals a commission to a
blank of dangers; and danger like an Ague subtily taints, even then when we sit
idly in the sun. Kings lives are fortunes misery, like dainty sparks, which
when men dead do know, to kindle for himself each man does blow. The lives of
Kings should like to Dials move, whose regular example is so strong, they make
the times by them go right or wrong. Princes, like lions, never will be tamed;
a private man may yield and not care how, but greater hearts will break before
they will bow. If a Kings Government be easy, the many headed monster,
Multitudes, like Aesops foolish Frogs, they trample on him as a senseless block;
and if he prove a Stork, they croak and rail against him as a Tyrant.
Knighthood is like Marriage now-adayes, which though it honorable be with all
men, yet it is beggarly with a great many. Law is as the worlds great Light, a
second Sun to this terrestrial Globe, by which all things have life and being;
and without the which, destruction and disorder soon would seize the general
state of men. Learning and Languages cannot set a nap upon a threadbare gown.
Art is like common Fiddlers, draws down others meat with liquorish Tunes, whilst
they the scraps do eat. Liberty and Public good, are like great Ollio's, must
have the upper end still of our Tables, though they are but for show. Life is
the frost of cold, Felicity and Death the thaw of all our vanity. Life is but a
walking shadow, a poor Player that struts and frets his hour upon the stage,
and then is heard no more Life is a tale told by an Idiot, full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing. Like to an Ass whose back with ingots bows, we bear
our heavy riches but journey, and death unloads us. Life is but a dark and
stormy night of senseless dreams, terrors, and broken sleep; a tyranny, devising
pains to plague and make men long in dying. Love is a rasor cleansing if well
used,
But fetches blood if that it be abused.
Love, like to sin, inveterate is, and strong,
He prevents danger that destroys it young.
Love can no more be dissembled, then to bear hot burning coals in our bare
palms or bosoms; and less concealed and hidden, then a flash of inflamed
powder, whose whole light does lay it open to all discovery even of those who
have but half an eye, and less of nose. Loves service is much like our honored
Lord, where Mignions carry more then servitors; the bold and careless servants
still obtains, the modest and respective nothing gains. Lovers are like
Astronomers, that when the vulgar eye discovers, but a sky above, studied with
some few stars find out besides strange fishes, birds and beasts. Lovers in
favor are like Gamesters in good fortune, the more you set them, still the
more they win. Love is but a card play, all is lost,
Unless you cog, he that pricks best, wins most.
At the games of Love we set all, but the best is, we cannot stake; and there
is no loss of credit in the breaking. Love is like to wax, the more it is
rubbed, it sticks the faster to: or like a bird in bird-lime, or a pit-fall,
the more one labors, still he is the deeper in. Love is an idle fantasy, bred
by desire, nursed by delight, an humor that begins his dominion in Leo, the
Lion, the sign of the Heart; and ends in Aries, the Ram, the sign of the Head;
his power is to stir the blood, prick up the flesh, and fill the body with
libidinous heat. A young man's Love it is like Ivy, it must have something to
cleave to, or it prospers not. Love is like fasting days, but the body is like
flesh days; and it is our English Gallants fashion, to prefer a morsel of
flesh, before all the fasting days in the year. This Love is a troublesome
thing, Jupiter bless us out of his fingers; there is no estate can rest for
him, he runs through all Countries, will travel through the Isle of Man in a
minute, but never is quiet till he comes into Middlesex, and there keeps his
Christmas; it is his habitation, his mansion, from which he will never out,
until he be fired. A Platonic Love is no other, then to have men brought in
Litters disguise, to cuckold us in virtue. Luxurious Riots are the shames of
men, that have the seeds of virtue in them, springing to glory, that drowned
their spirits in lees of sloth, and yield the glories of the day to wine, to
lust, and banquets; that dress themselves up like to Pageants, with thousand
antic and exotic shapes, that make and Idol of a Looking-glass, sprucing
themselves two hours by it, with such gestures and postures, that a waiting
wench would be ashamed of; and then come forth to adore their Mistresses fan,
or tell their dream, ravish a kiss from her white glove, and then compare it
with her hand, to praise her gown, her tire, and discourse of the fashion;
discovery make, which Lady paints, which not, which Lord plays best at Gleek,
which at Racket; these are fine Elements. A Lie is like a Lap-wing, which still
flies,
Far from her sought nest, still here it is, she cries.
Lies hide our sins like nets, like perspectives, they that draw offenses
nearer, make them greater. Truth though it trouble some minds, that are both
dark and dangerous, yet it preserves it self, and comes off pure, innocent; and
like the sun, though never so eclisped, it breaks in glory. Man is a tree, that
has no top in cares, nor root in comforts. It is the deepest art to study man,
the world's divided into knaves and fools. Men are like pollitick states, or
troubled seas, tossed up and down with several storms and tempests, change and
variety, wrack and for tunes, till laboring in the Haven of our homes, we
study for the calm that crowns our ends. Man is a ship that sails with adverse
winds, and has no Haven till he land at death, then when he thinks his hands
fast grasp the bank, comes a rude billow betwixt him and safety, and beats him
back into the deep again To Marry is to be long-lived, variety is like rare
sawces, provoke too far, and draws on surfets more then the other. The marriage
rites are like to those that do deny a purgatory, they locally contain a heaven
or hell, there is no third place. The joys of Marriage are a heaven on earth,
life's paradise, there is no rest orative like to a constant woman; (but where
is she) it would puzzle all the Gods to create such a new monster. Misfortune
vexes us like to Quotidians, they intermit a little, and return e're we have
lost the memory of our first fit. If a Man be thrust into a well, no matter
whose hand is to it, his own weight brings him to the bottom, Fortune makes
this conclusion, All things shall help the unhappy man still to fall lower.
Mischiefs are like to darts shot at repelling walls, in their return they light
on them that did direct them. To think of crimes when they are done and past,
and to be punished does but mischif breed, we are then like beasts, when they
are fat they bleed. Mischief is like Cockatrices eyes, sees first and kills; or
is seen first and dies. Mischief overflows our thoughts, and like a sea devours
the dew, the rain the snow, the springs, and all the sweetness of the loveliest
things. Money is a chick of the white hen, old fortune he that has it,
whatsoever he treads upon shall be a rose. Murder is open eyed, and as the
sea, whose covetuous waves imprisoned by the land, bellow for grief, and roar
upon the sands; so from the earth it cries, and like a child wronged by its
careless nurse, will not be stilled. Natures crescent does not grow alone in
shows and bulks, but as her temple waxes, the inward service of the mind and
soul withal grows wider. What a fine book is heaven, which we may read best at
night, then every star is a fair letter. How much they wrong thee (Night) which
call thee guilty of rapes and murders; it is the day, that like a glorious
whore engages men to act them; and taking thee, the darkness to obscure them,
unjustly lay the shame upon thy brows, thou art so innocent thou never saw
them. Old men lustful, do show like young men angry, eager, violent, out-bid
alike their limited performances. Old men are discreet sinners, and offend with
silence; but young men when the feat is done; do crow like pregnant cocks, boast
to the world their strength of their most vicious follies. He that has got the
Elixir of Opinions, has got all, he is the man that turns his brass to gold.
Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan
The outward habit by the inward man.
He that weighs men's thoughts, has his hands full of nothing; a man in the
course of this world should be like a Chyrurgeons instrument, work in others
wounds, and feel nothing himself; the sharper and subtler, the better. All are
not Bawds, I see now, that keep doors,
Nor all good Wenches that are marked for Whores.
Where Order is once shaked (which is the ladder to all high designs) the
enterprise is sick. With what a compelled face a woman sits, whilst she is
Drawing, I have noted diverse, either to feign smiles, or suck in their lips, to
have a little mouth, dimple their cheeks, and so disorder their face with
affectation; at next sitting it has not been the same. I have known others
have lost the entire fashion of their face in half an hours sitting; in hot
weather, the painting of their faces was so mellow, that they have left the
poor man harder work by half to mend the Copy they wrought by. Indeed, if ever
I would have mine drawn to the life, I would have the Painter steal it at such
time, when I am devoutly kneeling at my prayers, there is then a heavenly
beauty in it, the soul moves in the superficies. Paintings and Epitaphs are
both alike, they flatter us, and say, we have been such. When Princes heads
sleeps on their Councels knees, a State's deep rooted must grow up high, when
Providence, Zeal, Uprightness, and Integrity husband it. He that suffers
Prosperity to swell him above a mean, like those impressions in the Air that
rise from Dunghill Vapors, scattered by the wind, leaves nothing but an empty
name behind. Prosperity is the Bawd of Love, whose fresh complexion, and whose
heart together, affliction alters. It fares with some in their Prosperity, as
with others I have known of rare parts, who from their success of fighting of
Duels, have been raised up to such a pride, and so transformed from what they
were, that all that loved them truly wished they had fallen in them. Like dust
before a wind those men do fly,
That prostrate on the ground of Fortune lie;
And being great (like trees that broadest sprout)
Their own top-heavy state grubs up their root.
Gentlemen, as soon as they come to their lands, get up to London, and like
squibs that run upon lines, they keep a spitting of fire, and crackling till
they have spent all, and when the fire is out, what says the Punk, Foh, how
the Prodigal stinks. How blind is Pride, what eagles are we still in matters
that belong to other men, what beetles in our own. Swelling spirits hid with
humble looks,
Are Kingdoms poisons hung on golden hooks.
Valleys that let in rivers to confound
The hills above them, though themselves do drowned.
Of an excessive Pride, his marble Portals richly gilded ore, his Assyrian
Carpets, Chairs of Ivory, his Garments perfumed, his Jewels valued not for use,
but needless Ornaments, a sumptuous Stable, a stupendous House, with all the
baits of sense, that catch a vulgar eye. Poverty is like the rack, it draws a
man to danger, to the Gallows, rather then endure it. Oh happiness of Poverty,
that rest securely on a bed of living turf; while we with making cares, and
restless thoughts, lie tumbling on our down, courting the blessing of a short
minutes slumber which the Plough-man shakes from him, as a ransomed slave his
fetters. Poverty puts a multiplying glass upon our faults, and makes them
swell, and fill the eye; our crimes shows highest then, when we our selves are
lowest. Pleasure, farewell to thy enticing vanity, thou round gilt box that
do deceive man's eye; wise men knows when thou art broken open, the treasure
thou includest, is dust and smoke; even so I do esteem thee. Books, music,
wine, brave company, good cheer,
Make Poets to soar high, and sing most clear.
Poetry (though it be of a quite contrary nature) is as pretty a jewel as plain
dealing, but they that use it, forget the Proverb. Verses, though freely born,
like slaves are sold;
I crown thy Lines with bays, thy Love with gold.
Players were never more uncertain in their lives, they know not how to play
for fearful fools, where to play, for puritan fools, nor what to play for
critical fools. When I Achilles hear upon the stage, speak honor and the
greatness of his soul, methinks I too could on a Phrygian spear run boldly, and
make tales for after times; but when I come to act it in the deed, death mars
my bravery, and the ugly fears of the other world, sits on my frighted brow.
Phisiognomy do you call it, there is no more credit to be given to it, then to
a sick man's urine, which some call the Physicians Whore, because she couzens
him. A witty person may with ease distinguish all men by their Noses, as thus;
your nose Tuscan, is lovely, large, and broad, much like to a goose's beak;
your valiant generous nose, crooked, smooth, and puffing; your Scollars nose is
very fresh and raw for want of fire in winter, that quickly smells his chop of
mutton in his dish of pottage; your Puritan nose is very sharp and long, (much
like your widows) and with ease can find an edifying Capon five streets off. I
have skill in Faces, yet the world is so deceitful, that I can hardly
distinguish a Baud from a Midwife; or an hypocritical Puritan from a devout
Christian. Physicians are for the most part, like beasts for sacrifice, there
is nothing left in them but tongue and belly. A Physician is too often a
lingering executioner to death, the greatest disease to nature; one that strives
by art to make us long a dying; he practices on our bodies, as men pull roses,
not for their own relish, but to kill the flower: so they maintain their lives
by others deaths. Your Physician is like your hawk, the greater the fowl is
that he kills, the greater is his reward. He that takes Physic trusts to one
that has art, and leave to kill. Your Physicians are as good as false doors
behind hangings, to Ladies necessary uses. Since the great master of Philosophy
(Aristotle) died, that fooled the drunken Macedon out of a thousand Talents to
buy books; what have the multitude of his learned successors done? only write
comments on his Works, scribbling to no but to make paper dear. Oh brave
Philosophers, I will name you three of them: First the merry fop of Thrace,
(Democritus) that always laughed, pretending it was at Vanity; alas, it was his
disease, going to steal Mushrooms for his supper, the blew mouthed serpent
skulked under a dock leaf, and bit him by the thumb, from whence he took that
languishing malady. And his Antagonist Heraclitus, that would ever seem to weep
out of a pious cause, he was a fine dissembling fellow; no sorrow made him
weep, there is a Manuscript now kept in the Vatican, that shows he had nine
years a Fistula in his eye. As for Diogenes that fasted much, and took his
habitation in a Tub, to make the world believe he loved a strict and severe
life, he took the diet, Sir, and in that very Tub sweat for the French disease;
and some unlearned Apothecary since, mistaking its name, called it Cornelius
Tub. There was never yet Philosopher that could endure the toothache patiently;
however they have writ the style of Gods, and made a pish at chance and
sufferance. The Vulgar sort of People in Rebellion, are like unknown Lands,
those that first possess them have them. What can be expected from the Herd but
contraries; he that trusts them, where he should find them Lions, finds them
Hares; where Foxes, Geese. The Vulgar have, for the most part, sick men's
apperites, they desire that most, which does them most hurt. He that Repents
e're he commits a fault, does like a thrifty sinner store his soul with mercy,
to absolve that sin himself, which he hereafter is so like to fall into. The
Drunkard after his lavish cups, is dry, and then is sober: so at length when we
are awak't from our lascivious dreams, repentance then will follow like the
sting placed in the Adders tail. Divinity which calls our anger sin, and
courage pride, has sent this silly Cherub on earth, Patience. (The Cowards
sword) which only does disarm
Dull sleeps, that neither can nor will do harm.
Patience it is the greatest enemy to law that can be, for it does embrace all
wrongs, and so chains up Lawyers and Women's tongues; it is the perpetual
Prisoners liberty, his Walks and Orchards; it is the bond-slave's freedom, that
makes him seem proud of his iron chains; it is the Beggars music, who thus
sings, Although their bodies beg, their souls are Kings. He is more Patient
then a Brown Baker when he heats his Oven, and has forty Scolds about him. The
fears and joys, hopes and desire mixed with despairs and doubts do make the
sport in love; they are the very dog with which we hunt the hare, but as the
dogs would stop and straight give over were it not for the little thing before;
so would our Passions, both alike must be flesht in the chase. The grief that
melts in tears, by it self is spent,
Passion resisted grows more violent.
Faults are in flesh as motes are in the sun, where light does show each little
thing amiss; Presumption and Despair live opposite, as times false glasses,
wherein frailties see their faults too great, or else too little. A Rape is
like to unripe fruits, they have proportion, color, but no taste. Rebellion
walks with claws bowed in, and a close mouth, which only she keeps for
opportunity of prey. Tumults are not laid with half the easiness that they are
raised; all may begin a War, but few can end it. Revenge will never slack till
it has spent its fuel,
Intemperate Agues make Physicians cruel.
Pluto, the God of Riches, when he is sent (by Jupiter) to any man, goes
limping; to signify, that wealth that comes in Gods name, comes slowly: but
when it is sent on the Devils errand, it rides post, comes in by scuttles full.
Lovers Swearing and Forswearings, are like Mariners Prayers uttered in
extremity; but when the tempest is over, and the Vessel leaves tumbling, they
fall from protesting to drinking: and yet amongst young Gentlemen, protesting
and drinking do go together, and agree as well as Shoe-makers and Westphalia
Bacon, they are both drawers on; for drink draws on protestations, and
protestations and oaths draw on more drink. Success is a rare paint, it hides
all ugliness. Success, like Lethe, to the souls in bliss, makes them forget
things past, and crowns our sins with the name of valor: be we never so
impious, a scelus foelix styles us virtuous. They are like to Thrive, whom fate
in spite of storms does keep alive. Never yet was any Nation read of, so
besotted in reason, as to adore the setting Sun; many adored him rising. The
Soul is a tree whence several branches spread; loving affections; suffering
sorrows: these affections and sorrows, as they are branches, sometimes are lopt
off, or of themselves do wither, in whose rooms, others spring forth. Like to a
Lark in a cage, such is the Soul in the body; this world is like her little
turf of grass, and heaven over our heads, like her looking-glass, which only
gives us a miserable knowledge of the small compass of our prison. How slow
paced is Sorrow; grief is a Tortois to the nimble senses, and chills their
motions. Some cloud of rain (since my own eyes refuse to drown me) melt and
overwhelm this miserable Island. There is no Rhetoric can express my woe,
Small rivers murmur, deep streams silent flow.
Soldiers that feed the victories of the conquerors, as witches do their
serviceable spirit, with their prodigal blood, what do they get but (like the
wealth of Captains) a poor handful, which in their palm they bear as men hold
water, seeking to gripe it fast, the frail reward steals through their fingers.
Sleep lies in smoking cribs, upon uneasy pallats stretching her, where hushed
with silent night, she courts her slumbers, rather then in the perfumed
chambers of the great, under the canopies of costly state. Sleep that sealest
up the sea boys eyes, and rockest his brains in the cradle of the rude
imperious surges, and in the visitation of the winds; who take the russian
billows by the tops, curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them with
deafning clamors in the slippery clouds, that with the hurly death it self
awakes: Can thou, Oh partial Sleep, give thy repose to the wet sea boy in an
hour so rude, and in the calmest and the silentest night (with all appliances
and means to boot) deny it to a King. Uneasy lies the head that wears a Crown.
Oh fie upon this Single life! we read how Daphne, for her peevish flight, was
turned into a Bay Tree; Syrinx into a pale empty Reed, Anaxarete was frozen
into Marble; whereas those which married, or proved kind unto their friends,
were by a gracious influence transformed into the Olive, Pomegranate,
Mulberry-trees, became Flowers, precious Stones, and eminent Stars. Sin, like a
pregnant mother,
From the success of one beget another.
Fowl deeds will rise,
Though all the world o're-whelm them to men's eyes.
There is no gamester like a politic Sinner, for who ever games, the box is
sure to win. I want no worth (if I have not too much self-love) still to merit
honor; it is honor that wants worth to me rit me. Fortune thou arbitress of
humane things. Thy credit is at stake, if I but rise,
The worlds opinion will conceive thou have eyes.
The man that trusts a woman with a Secret, and hopes for silence, may as well
expect it at the fall of a bridge; a Secret with them is like a Viper, it will
make way, though it eat through their bowels; and when they have insinuated
themselves into our counsels, and gained power over our lives, the fire is more
merciful, which burns till it goes forth. Thunder speaks not till it hits, be
not Secure; none sooner are oppressed then those whom confidence betrays.
Security is the suburbs of Hell. We must with Temperance smooth our passions,
if we intend to attain our wished ends, through things called good and bad;
like the Air, that evenly interposed betwixt the Seas and the opposed Element
of Fire, at either touches, but partakes of neither; is neither hot nor cold,
but with a slight and harmless temper mixed of both the extremes. Philosophy,
Religions Solitude, and Labor, wait on Temperance; in these, Desire is bounded,
they instruct the mind and bodies actions. The greatest fault that some can
find with Theft, is, that it cozens the Scriveners; for it borrows money
without giving any Obligation. Your greatest Theives are never hanged, for why,
they are wise, and cheat within doors. The Sun is a Theif, that with his great
attraction robs the vast sea: the Moon is an arrant Theif for her pale fire she
snatches from the Sun, the Sea is a Theif, whose liquid surge dissolves the
Moon into salt tears: the Earth is a Theif, that feeds and breeds by a
composture stolen from the general excrement. Every thing is a Theif, only the
Laws are curbs and whips; by their rough power all punishments are determined.
It is a dull thing to Travel like a mill horse, still in the place we are born
in, round and blinded; living at home is like it: pure strong spirits that
covet like the fire, still to fly upwards, and to give fire as well as take it;
cased up at home like lusty mettled horses only tied up in stables to please
their masters, beat out their fiery lives in their own litters. There are many
half Travelers, that went out men, and good men, that when they have returned,
looked like poacht eggs; their souls sucked out, empty and full of wind; all
their relations baked like rye crust, to hold carriage from this good town to
the other; and when they are opened, they are ill cook't and musty. Truth is
not made of glass, that with a small touch it should fear to break. Truth is
like your Coat of Arms, richest when plainest. Whom heaven is pleased to style
Victorious, to such applause runs madding; like Bacchus drunken Priests, who
without reason in their Sacrifices, voiced their Leader on a Demigod; when as
indeed each common soldiers blood drops down as current coin in that hard
purchase, as his, whose much more delicate condition has sucked the milk of
ease; judgment commands, but resolution executes. He that fights well at the
end of the Wars,
His head wears Sun Beams, and his feet touch Stars.
Virtue is a sollid rock, whereat being aimed, the keenest darts of envy cannot
hurt, Her Marble Hero's stand built on such Bases,
That they recoil, and wound their shooters faces.
The World is a Labyrinth, where unguided men walk up and down till they are
weary. The World is a Foot ball, we run after it with whoop and hollow, he that
is next to it is sure to catch a fall. The World's a City full of straying
Streets;
And Death's the Market place where each one meets.
The World is like an Innkeepers Chamber Pot, it receives all waters, both
good and bad, it has need of much scowring. The World shoots up daily into
more cunning, the very spider weaves her cawls with more art to entrap the
wanton silly fly; so that we had need to keep our wits wound up to their
strecht height. Where the Whore ends, the Bawd begins; and the corruption of a
Bawd is the generation of a Witch. Pythagoras holds an opinion, that a Witch
turns to a wild cat; as an old Oastler turns to an ambling Nag. As of the Lion
and Eagle, it is said, that when they go they draw their sears and tallons
close up, to shun rebating of their fierceness; so our wits sharpness which we
should employ in noble knowledge, we should never waste on vile and gar
admiration. They talk of Jupiter, and a golden shower; give me a Mercury with
wit and tongue, and he shall charm more Ladies on their backs, then the whole
bundle of the Gods besides. You have a pretty ambling Wit in summer, do you let
it out, or keep it for your own riding; who holds your stirrup whilst you jump
into a jest, to the endangering of your Quodlibets. Like Jupiter you want a
Vulcan; but to cleave your head, and out peeps bright Minerva. The War is a
school, where all the principles tending to Honor are taught, if truly
followed; but for such as do repair thither, as to a place in which they do
presume, they may with license practice their Lust and Riots; such will never
merit the noble Characters of Soldiers. All Wars are bad, yet sometimes they
do good,
And like to Surgions let sick Kingdoms blood.
Whores are sweet meats, which rot the eater, poisoned perfumes, cozening
Alchimy, shipwracks in calmest weather, Russian winters, which appear so baren,
as if that nature had forgot the spring. Whores are the true material fires of
Hell, worse then the tributes paid in the Low Countries; exactions upon meat,
drink, garments, sheep, I, even one man's prediction, his sin. Whores are like
those brittle Evidences of Law, that forfeit a man's wretched estate for leaving
out a syllable. Whores are like those flattering bells, that ring one tune at
Weddings and at Funerals. A Whore is like the guilty counterfeited coin, that
whosoever first stamps it, brings in question, and troubles all that do receive
it. A Whore is as modest as one can be, that has left to blush at twelve: felt
motions at eleven, and has been hardened before three congregation, and done
penance. A Wench that will make a Hermit run to Hell for a touch of her. For a
Whore for to turn honest is one of Hercules Labors; it was more easy for him
in one night to make fifty Queans, then to turn one of them honest again in
fifty years. A Whore is one of the devils vines, all sins like so many poles,
are stuck upright out of hell to be her props, that she may spread upon them;
and when she is ripe, every Knave has a pull at her; till she be pressed, the
young beautiful grape sets the teeth of lust on edge; she will be tasted though
she be rank poison. Sives can hold no water, nor Harlots hoard up money; she
has too many sluices to let it out; yet she is the Gallipot that drones do fly
to for the sweet sucket that they thinks within it. Your Widows are a politic
generation, proved so by Similies, many voyages make an experienced Seaman;
many offices a crafty Knave; so many marriages, a subtle cunning Widow. A
Widow is a garment worn threadbare;
Selling at second hand like Brokers ware.
A good Wife she is a golden sentence, writ by our Maker, which the Angels know
how to discourse of; only men know not how to make use of. A Woman was made of
the rib of a man, and that rib was crooked: the Moral of which is, That a man
from the beginning must be crooked to his wife, let him be an Orange to her,
and she will be as sower as Vinegar to him. Women are the baggage of our lives,
they are troublesome and hinder us in our great march; and yet we cannot be
without them. Women are like to burs, where their affections throw them, there
they stick. Women carry springs within their eyes, and can out-weep the
Crocodile, till too much pity betrays us men to their merciless devourings. A
Woman is a Labyrinth, we can measure the height of any Star, point out all the
demensions of the Earth, examine the Seas great womb, and sound its subtle
depth; but Art will never be able to find out the demonstration of a Woman's
heart.
FINIS.
A general Table of the Contents of this Book.
Courteous Reader, the Epithets and Similitudes being placed at the latter end
of this Book, and beginning Folio 1. thou may easily find the Word there,
having this addition in the Table, The Epithets, or, the Similitudes.
A
AN Abstract of all the perfections of ones Mistress together Page 22 To make
an Acquaintance 37 An Address to a company of Ladies 16 An Address to make
known his affection to his mistress 18 Address of salutation 19 An Address of
Courtship to his mistress 22 Several Addresses of perfect Courtship 25 Aspect
the Epithets 6 Allurements the Epithets 6 Affections the Epithets 6 Affections
the Similitudes 50 Air the Epithets 6 Absence the Epithets 6 Accomplishment the
Epithets 6 Adieu the Epithets 7 Apparel the Similitudes 50 Apparel the Epithets
6 Anger the Simil 49 Ambition and Ambitious men the Similitudes 49 On her arms
22 The Art of Reason or Logic 252 Demand of assurance 29 Allegiance the Simil.
50 Affliction the Simil. 50 Adulterers the Simil. 50
B.
The ballad of S. George 104 Beauty the Epithets 7 Beauty the Simil. 50 On her
Beauty 73 Bootless complaint 76 On her Breasts 22 Breasts the Epith. 7 On her
Brow 22 A Broom-man in Kent-street to a young Lady 166 Bastard children why more
ingenuous, for the most part, then Legitimate 184 Bald why 191 Bawd what she
like 194, 198 Bawd the Epithets 7 Bawd the Similitudes 51 Broker the
Similitudes 50 Body described 183 Body's signs to know the mind by 182 Body the
Epith. 7 Body the Simil. 50 Boasting swaggerer Sim. 50 On her Breath 21 Breath
stinking why 195 Breath the Epith. 7
C.
CHaracters from 182 to 196 Cheeks the Epith. 8 On her Chastity 72 Coyness the
Epith. 7 Charms the Epith. 8 Complaints the Epith. 8 The choice of a Gentleman
Usher 53 Chin the Epith. 8 Comedy the Epith. 8 Cherries the Epith. 8 Cherry
women and Orange women, their address among the Ladies in Hide Park 3 The
Clowns description of his mistress 100 Commendations on the several parts of
ones mistresses body 20, 21 On her Chin and Cheeks 21 A Cockney to his mistress
161 Complements between Ladies and Gentlemen going to Hide Park 12 Complements
in the Park 34 between a Gentleman and a Lady before a Ribband-shop 43. Between
a Prentice and a young Lady at a Boarding-School 44. Between a Horsecourser and
a Parsons Widow See. Mock Complements the Epith. 8 Complements defined and
discoursed of at large in the advertisement to the Reader. An amorous
Complement 33 Complements, Vide the advertisement to the Reader. Constancy
resolved 78 Curles the Epith. 9 A Country Parson to a Farmers Daughter 167 A
Country Bumpkin to his Mistress 169 To request a Courtesy 39 For Courtesies
received to give thanks Ibid. The Sport called the Crab 3 The Crambo Dictionary
223 Children why liker their Fathers then their Mothers 179 Creatures which
live the longest 186 Creditor defined 194 Cupid contemned 76 Cupid why paint
with the words, Spring Time and Winter 181 Cupid why painted bare headed 181
Cupid why represented with Arrows 182 Cupid why pictured flying 183 Cupid why
painted a Child 186 Cupid why Life and Death painted in his Robe 195 Cupid why
represented with flowers in one hand and with a fish in the other 198 Courtier
Epith. 7 Cruelty Epith. 8 Countenance Epith. 8 Chambermaids Simil. 51
Conscience Simil. 51 Court, Courtiers Simil. 51 Credit Simil. 51 Credulity
Simil. 51 Cuckold Simil. 51
D.
DEmand of assurance 29 The Departure 27, 27 A Decription of Love 57 Dialogues
between the Gentleman and the Jockey in Hide Park 6 To a friend before Dinner
41 After Dinner ibid. To enter into discourse with a Lady being in Company 17
To Discourse concerning the noise of a Match 23 The discourse of a Gentleman
bringing his friend into Company 35 Diseases indintce to a Gentle man Usher 54
The Dressings of a Gentleman Usher. 54 Against drinking of Sack 136 Drolling
Complements 43 See Mock Complements Drolling Letters 160, 161 Duns what
compared to 192 Delay the Epithets. 9 Dove the Epithets. 9 Danceing the
Epithets 9 Dreams the Epit hets. 10 Dying to Love 72 Destiny the Epithets 9
Desires the Epithets 9 Desires the Simil. 52 Dissimulation the Simil. 52
Dissembler the Simil. 52 Dangers the Simil. 51 Delights the Epithets. 9 Disdain
the Epithets 10 Disdain the Simil. 52 Brawing a woman's face the Simil. 61
Despair the Epithets. 10 Despair the Simil. 52
E.
THe Efficient cause 254 Epithets 6 On his mistress Eyes 20 Of Expressions
several set forms, from 201 to 208 Eunuchs why shrill voiced 191 Eunuchs the
Epithets 10 New England brother defined 192 Echo why she reports the last
words 193 Earths Center where 195 Earth how many miles in compass 196 Eloquence
discoursed of, and defined in the davertisement to the Reader Eloquence the
Epithets 10 Ecstasy the Epithets 10 Ears the Epithets 10 Elegy the Epithets. 10
Entertainment the Epithets 10 Eyes the Similitudes 53 Eyes the Epithets 11
Embraces the Epithets 11 Envy the Similitudes 52 Extremes the Similitudes 52
F.
ON her Face 20, 21 Fancy awakened 181 The Fond design 65 In praise of Fools 80
On her Forehead 20 Forms for the concluding of Letters 129 Several Forms of
Letters 132 133, 134 To begin a Friendship 37 Fools the Similitudes 53
Fortitude the Similitudes 53 Faith the Similitudes 55 Full Satisfaction 32
Fencer defined 182 Feeling from whence derived 195 Farewell Epithets 11 Feet
the Epithets 11 Fancy the Epithets 11 Forehead the Epithets. 11 Fortune the
Epithets 11 Fortune the Simil. 53 Fidelity the Simil. 53 Fountain the Epithets
12 Frenzy the Epithets 12 Flowers the Epithets 12 Face the Epith. 12 Faces the
Simil. 63 Fate the Epith. 12 Fingers the Epith. 12 Fruit the Epith. 12 Frowns
the Epith. 12 Flattery the Epith. 14 Flattery the Sim. 53 Fields the Epith. 14
Flames the Epith. 14 Flea the Epith. 15 Forest the Epith. 15 Fear the Epith.
15 Fear the Simil. 53
G.
GAmes used among Gallants to pass away the time 13 See Sports A Garden of
Tulips 49 Glyphing 3 The Golden Age 69 The old Gill 109 Glory the Epith. 13
Glory the Simil. 54 Gamesters the Simil. 54 Grass the Epith. 13 Grape the
Epith. 13 Grove the Epith. 13 Gentleman the Epith. 15 Gentleman the Simil. 68
Garden the Epith. 11 Gesture the Epith. 15 Grief the Epith 15 Gloves the Epith.
16 Gallant the Simil. 54
H.
ON her hands 22 Hands the Epith. 13 The Hectors Farewell 89 A Hector to his
Mistress 147 Hide Park Mode 163 etc. Horse-races, their Mode in Hide Park. 6 On
his Mistresses Hair 20 Hair of the head why of one color, and the beard of
another 184 Hair why it curles 185 Hair curled why sooner gray 188 Hair
Epithets 13 Hair Sim. 55 Heart why in the midst of the body 188 Heart Epith 13
Hicup 199 Hermophradites why begotten 188 Host defined 191 Honor Epith. 13
Honor Simil 54 Happiness Epith. 14 Harmony Epith. 14 Head Ep. 14 Hatred Sim 55
Hatred Ep. 14 Humility Sim 54 Hope Sim. 54 Honesty Sim. 54 Heaven Sim. 55 Hell
Sim. 55 Heard Sim. 56 Harlot Sim. 68, 69
I.
THe Impolitick Beauty 18 A Private Intercourse between the Page, and the
Waiting Gentlewoman 42 Invitation of a Friend to Dinner 40 On the death of Jo.
W. 92, 93 The Jolly Ale Drinker 97 The Jovial Companion 102 Jesting and Jovial
Questionsfrom 181 to 200 Intermixed Jealousy Ep. 14 Jealousy Sim. 56 Injuries
Sim. 55 Ingratitude Ep. 16 Ingratitude Sim. 55 Infancy Sim. 55 Instrument Ep.
16 Jewels Ep. 16 Insolence Ep. 16 Joy Sim. 55 Joy Ep. 17 Innocence Ep. 16
Industry Sim. 55 Importunity Ep. 16 Incontinency Sim. 56 Inconstancy Ep. 16
Inconstancy Sim. 56 Influence Ep. 16 Idleness Sim. 56 Impudence Ep. 16
K.
KIssing how used 183 Kisses Ep. 17 Kings Sim. 57 Knighthood Sim. 57
L
ON a fair Lady at a Mask 73 To a Lady in Prison 77 A Lady to her inconstant
Servant 136 A Lawyer to his Mistress 163 On her Lips 20, 21 Several Forms of
Letters amorous 132, 133 Familiar Letters to Friends 143, 144 etc. Letters in
Verse 150, 151 etc. On her Locks 20 What Logic is 252 On her Looks 21 Loose no
time 78 Lungs their flesh why white 195 Law what compared to 193 Against Love
63 Loves Martyr 68 Protestation of Love 69 Lying on the back why we dream 191
Lying on the back why unwholesome 191 Logic Ep. 18 Logic 252 The Definition
ibid The parts of Logic 252, 253 The Efficient Cause 253 The Matter 257 The
Form 258 The end 259 The Effects 260 The Subjects 261 The Adjunct 262 The
Diverses 264 Desparates 265 Relates 265 Adverses 267 Contradicents 268 Privants
269 Equals 270 Greaters 273 Lessers 274 Likes 276 Dislikes 279 Conjugates 280
Notations 281 Distribution 282, 283, etc. Definition 289 Description 289
Testimony 291, 292 Judgment 295 Axioma 295, 296, etc. Syllogisms 301, 303
Method 313 Love defined 201 Loves Attendants 182 Love why compared to a Maze
197 Lovers why they so use to blush 181 Lovers why some of them look so pale
186 Lovers breasts why they leap so 190 Lovers Oaths what they are like 196
Lovers why they kiss the eyes 190 Love the Sim. 57, 58. Lovers Sim. 58 Lovs Ep.
19 Lute Ep. 17 Looking-glass Ep. 17 Lust Ep. 17 Lust Sim. 56 Labyrinth Ep. 18
Language Ep. 18 Lullaby Ep. 18 Luster Ep. 18 Lilly Ep. 18 Loadstone Ep. 18
Longing Ep. 18 Laughter Ep. 19 Lethargy Ep. 19 Lovers Ep. 19 Looks Ep. 19 Locks
Ep. 19 Lips Ep. 20 Lims Ep. 20 Law Sim. 57 Learning Sim. 57 Liberty Sim. 57
Luxury Sim. 58 Lie Sim. 59 Life Sim. 57
M.
THe master of the Balls address to the company as they come in 9 The
Maidenhead 64 The Melancholy lover 58 Miscelania's 181 To his Mistress, a copy
of Verses, 55. To his Mistress falsely accusing him, 59. To his false Mistress,
61. On his Mistress singing, 66. On the perfections of his Mistress, 70, 71.
Who his Mistress is, 80. To his Mistress desiring Enjoyment, 151. To his
Mistress recovered of an Ague, 132. To his retired Mistress, ibid. See Letters.
The Mode of Hide Park 139 The Mode of Balls 9, 10, etc. Mock Complements, 43.
Between a Gentleman and a Lady before a Ribband-shop at the Exchange, 43
between a Horse-courser and a Parsons Widow, 44 between an Apprentice and a
young Lady at a Boarding-school, ibid. between a Gentleman and a Sempstress, 46.
between a journyman Haberdasher and a Ladies Chambermaid, ib. between a
Gentleman Usher and a waiting Gentlewoman, 47. between a Lawyers Clerk and his
mistress daughter, 48. between a Country Bumpkin and his Mistress, 49. between
a Coachman and the Kitchin-maid, 51. between a Gentleman and a Lady meating in
several coaches going to Hide Park 45 Mock letters 160, 161 Marriage what
compared 198 The Mountebanks letter to the Chyrurgeons 165 Musician what like
to 196 Members first formed 187 Memory's seat 193 Misfortune Sim. 59, 60
Marigold Ep. 20 Marble E. 20 Mean Sim. 52, 53 Magic Ep. 20 Magazen Ep. 20
Metaphors Ep. 20 Melancholy Ep. 20 Melody Ep. 21 Martyr Ep. 21 Marmoset Ep. 21
Mind Ep. 21 Marriage Ep. 21 Marry Sim. 59 Marriage Rites Sim. 59 Mirth Ep. 21
Madness Ep. 21 Mystery Ep. 22 Moon Ep. 22 Modesty Ep. 22 Monkey Ep. 22 Myrtle
Ep. 22 Music Ep. 22 Multitude Ep. 23 Man or men Sim. 59 Mischiefs Sim. 60
Money Sim. 60 Murder Sim. 60
N.
NOt to be altered 67 Nature Ep. 24 Nature Sim. 60 Nature produces monsters
196 On her neck 22 Nymph Ep. 23 Navel Ep. 23 Night Ep. 23 Nuptials Ep. 23
Nightingale Ep. 23 Nose Ep. 24 Noses Sim. 63
O.
ORator, See the Advertisement to the Reader. Orator Ep. 24 Odors Ep. 24 Oath
Ep. 24 Ornament Ep. 24 Ode Ep. 25 Obliegement Ep. 25 Opinion 25 Opinion Sim. 60
Opportunity Ep. 25 Old men Sim. 60 Order Sim. 61
P.
PArting 66 Passages between Ladies and Gentlemen in the Ring in Hide Park 2, 3
A Passionate love letter 166 A Pedagogue to his Mistress 163 The Picture of the
Poets mistress. 51 Phisiognomy Sim 63 Plurality of Love 65 Posies for Rings
170, 171 The pleasant Prospect 49 Page Ep. 27 Paradox Ep. 27 Protestation of
love 69 Pomgranate Ep. 26 Park Ep. 27 Proverbs 174 to 180 Puritan defined 193
Poetry, Poet Ep. 26 Poetry Poet Sim. 62 Pomander Ep. 26 Cross Purposes Ep. 1
Prayers Sim. 62 Players like Philosophers 196 People dim sighted why given to
venery 194 Pyrat defined 183 Princes Sim. 57 Paradise Ep. 25 Pace Ep. 25 Palace
Ep. 25 Purple Ep. 26 Fantasies Ep. 26 Pity Ep. 26 Poison Ep. 26 Poverty Sim.
62 Prosperity Sim. 61 Paleness Ep. 27 Palate Ep. 27 Prejudice Ep. 27 Praise
Ep. 27 Pride Ep. 27 Pride Sim. 62 Presumption Ep. 28 Presumption and Despair
Sim. 65 Pretense Ep. 28 Proportion Ep. 28 Picture Ep. 28 Painting Sim. 58, 59,
61 Pardon Ep. 28 Physician and Physicans Sim. 63 Plays, Sport, Games, and
Pastimes Ep. 28 Patience and Patient Sim. 64 Passion Ep. 28 Passions Sim. 64
Passions Sim. 65 Postorals Ep. 29 Plains Ep. 29 Parasite Ep. 29 Prodigality
Sim. 61 Parrat Ep. 29 Pyramid Ep. 29 Pomp Ep. 29 Persuasion Ep. 30 Periwig Ep.
30 Perfume Ep. 30. Pen Ep. 30. Pelican Ep. 30 Pearl. Ep. 30 Pleasure Ep. 30
Pleasure Sim. 62 Patron Ep. 31 Perjury Ep. 31 Perfection Ep. 31 Philosophy and
Philosophers Sim. 63, 64 People vulgar Sim. 64
Q.
THe Queen of Fairies 74 Questions and Commands 13, 14 Several Questions,
Enigmatical, Natural, Amorous, Moral, Paradoxical, Jovial, from 181 to 214
Quakers why 184 Qualm Ep. 31 Quiver Ep. 31 Quince Ep. 31 Question Ep. 31
Quicksilver Ep. 31
R.
ON a Race-Horse 99 To request a Courtesy 39, 145 Resolution in Love 62 The
Return 28 Return of thanks 144, 149 Riddles. See Enigmaticall Questions from
183 to 196 The Ring in Hide Park, what passages happen in it 2, 3 Reason what
compared to 195 Riches Sim. 65 Rose Ep. 32 Race Ep. 32 Rock Ep, 32 Rape Ep. 32
Rape Sim. 65 Rainbow Ep. 32 Recreation Ep. 32 Repulse Ep. 33 Request Ep. 33
Rapture Ep. 34 Reproof Ep. 33 Ruby Ep. 33 River Ep. 33 Revenge Ep. 34 Revenge
Sim. 65 Rites Ep. 34 Rival Ep. 34 Rigor Ep. 34 Riddle Ep. 34 Reverence Ep. 34
Rhetoric Ep. 34 Repose Ep. 34 Rebellion Sim. 65 Riches Sim. 57 Repentance Sim.
64
S
FVll Satisfaction 32 A Seaman to his Mistress 162 To offer Service and begin
a Friendship 37 A Letter of Smiles from a Scrivener to his mistress 168 On her
Smiles 22 Select Sentences 221, 222 The Shepherds Song in praise of Pan. 98 A
Song made upon the fatal Disaster that befell the Gallants upon May Day last in
Hide Park 7 Songs mistake me not 55 From the fair Lavenian shore 70 Celia thy
sweet Angels face 74 No roses coucht, etc. 78 read in the roses the sad Story
79 The Song of the Caps 94 Song of the Puding 111 Song on a Weding 113 Song on
the Courtier 116 Song on the friar 119 Song of Tom of Bedlam 120 Song on the
Scholar 122 Song the Ep. 40 To Sorrow 77 A Song of a Soldier to his Mistress
160 The Strangers reply to the Company 35 Similitudes and Comparisons.
Superscriptions for Letters 125 Superscriptions for drolling Letters 158
Swearing and foreswearing Sim. 65 Superscriptions for Letters 159
Superscriptions for drolling Letters. 158 Sports and Games 13 Questions and
Commands 13 Cross Purposes 1. The Lovers Alphabet 2 The Bird in a tree 2 The
Sport called the Crab 3 The Sport of Glyphing 3 Substantives and Adjectives 4
Soldiers Sim. 66 Sleep on the right side best 192 Skin Ep. 42 Smiles Ep. 42
Stomach why it disgests 196 Sins Sim. 66 Single life Sim. 66 Sneezing 197
Success Sim. 65 Senses why in the head 197 Star Ep. 41 Stranger Ep. 41 Spring
time Ep. 41 Sparrow Ep. 38 Simplicity Ep. 34 Simetry Ep. 35 Suspicion Ep. 35
Summer Ep. 35 Srawberry Ep. 35 Srawberry Ep. 35 Strains Ep. 35 Style Ep. 35
Stoic Ep. 35 Sacrifice Ep. 36 Saint Ep. 36 Silkworm Ep. 36 Silence Ep. 36
Sighs Ep. 36 Strumpet Ep. 36 Streams Ep. 37 Servant, Service Ep. 37 Servitude
Ep. 37 Sense Ep. 37 Secret Ep. 37 Secret Sim. 67 Sea Ep. 37 Spaniel Ep. 38
Squirril Ep. 38 Scold or Shrow Ep. 38 Sicophant, Vide Parasite Ep. 38 Soul Ep.
38 Soul Sim. 65 Sky Ep. 38 Slave Ep. 38 Sleep Ep. 39 Sleep Sim. 66 Smell Ep.
39 Snow Ep. 39 Sorrow Ep. 39 Speech Ep. 39 Spheres Ep. 39 Solemnity Epith. 40
Shade or shadow Epith. 40 Shame Epith. 40 Shepherd or Swain Epith. 40 Snare
Epith. 40 Sun Epith. 41 Sport Epith. 41 Spring Epith. 41 Stallion Epith. 41
Secure Simil. 67
T.
TAking leave of his friends Wife 41 Taking leave of a Lady with whom you are
familiar 2 To give thanks for a Courtesy received 39 Thrift or thrive Sim. 65
Theft or thieves Simil. 67 Travel or travelers Sim. 67 Temperance Sim. 67 On
the Tombs at Westminster 82 On her tongue 22 Tongue Epithets. 43 Teeth
Epithets. 43 Tresses Epithets. 44 Thighs Epith. 43 The trial 31 The trial of
wits 6 Tragedy Epithets 42 Treachery Epithets 42 Theater Epithets. 42
Temptation Epithets. 42 Temper Epithets. 42 Taste Epith. 42 Thoughts Epithets.
42 Touch Epith. 43 Tyranny in Love 63 Tyrant Epith. 44 Tinker what 191 Tears
from whence they proceed 193 Tears Epith. 44 Truth Simil. 68 Truth Epith. 43
Turtle Epith. 43 Triumphs Epith. 44 Trophies Epith. 44 Treet Epith. 44 Tumults
Simil 56 Tobacco Epith. 44 Tennis Epith. 44 Thanks Epith. 45 Tygar Ep. 45 Time
Ep. 45 Twilight Epith. 45
A
A Visit 39 On her Voice 22 Voice Ep. Voice when changed in men 188 Urban the
eight his expression 190 Virago Ep. 45 Vesture Epith. 45 Verdure Ep. 45 Violet
Ep. 45 Verse Epith. 45 Virtue Ep. 45 Virtue Sim. 68 Vow Ep. 46 Vrn Ep. 46 Veins
Ep 46 Vales, or Valleys Ep. 46 Vulgar Ep. 46 Unicorn Ep. 46 Virgin Ep. 46
Victorious Sim 68
W.
THe Watchmans song 101 Wit Ep. Wit Sim 69 Wit and Language from 215 to 222 On
her Words 22 The Song of Women 99 Women why smoother then men 183 Women how
they look after the bridal night 187 Women why they endure cold more then men
198 Women why more silent in love then men 197 Women Ep. 47 Women Sim. 70 Wife
Ep. 46 Widow Ep. 47 Widow Sim 70 Whore-master definition 186 Whores trade why
opposite to all others 189 Whores barren why 192 Whores why so many, and so few
Bawds 194 Whores Ep. 46 Whores Sim. 69 Womb Ep. 47 Welshman Bragadocia defined
200 Wars Sim. 69 World Sim. 68 World how long the learned guess it will last
193 Waiting Gentlewoman Simil. 51 Wrongs Sim 55 VVish Ep. 47 VVrist Ep. 47
VVelcome Ep. 46 VVinter Ep. 47 VVindes Ep. 48 Whisper Ep. 46 Will Ep. 47
Wine Ep. 48 VVanton or wantonness Ep. 47
Y.
Youth Epith. 48
FINIS.

