A Short Account of the Proceedings of JAMES PERCY late of Ireland, inpursuance
of his Native Right to the Earldome of Northumberland as Cousin and next Heir
Male to Jocelin Percy late and last Earl Deceased, who at his coming into
England, was informed, that the Countess was with Child, which prevented him
for Entering his Claim until the Third of Feb. 1671. and then understanding the
contrary, Entered it at Whitehall at the Signet Office, and has used all
Honorable and justifyable endeavors to accomplish his just Dues for Three
Years and upwards, as follows.
God forbid that He should hinder an Heir, but that He should have the benefit
of the Law: In pursuance of which Answer, there was an Information (in the
nature of a Quo-warranto presented to the Attorney General, which he refused
to Sign, Declaring that He was Council for the Countess of Northumberland, and
therefore prevented him from due course in Law.



Yorkshire, and one in Northumberland, and one in Cumberland; at his return the
Trustees came to his Council, and desired him to persuade his Clyent to go on
with but one Trial for all, and that should include all the rest; Thereupon it
was agreed to proceed upon that in Northumberland, by reason the Title was from
thence; and accordingly Esquire; Champion one of the Countesses Trustees, was
appointed to be Defendant.

Senior Countess of Northumberland put in a cross and scandalous Petition to
prevent the proceedings of his Petitions, which caused him to swear 43
Witnesses at the Bar in his Vindication; and whereas his Council did not in due
time appear, being pressed upon to examine Witnesses or be mute, to give that
High Court content, then assembled upon that occasion, did by their Instance
examine Four of his Witnesses, which cleared him from being an Impostor as her
Petition did pretend; But when the Countesses Councels had heard these
Testimonies, and his Councels, though late appearing, and desiring to hear the
said Witnesses over again, her Council waved her Petition, (saying) they did
not own the Grand-Daughters Right, as her Petition did pretend, but set up the
Kings Interest; but his Council gave them a check, (saying,) They ought not to
plead for the King and the Subject both at one time; and also pleaded that his
Petitions might be dismissed, and left to the Common Law; And his last Order in
Parliament says they were dismissed accordingly: But he must ever own and Honor
the great Patience of the Kings Cracious Majesty, and the Lords Committees in
the absence of his Councels.

Newcastle this last Assizes, the junior Countess obstructed it by pleading her
Privilege in these words following.

For Mr. James Percy these.
Mr. Percy.
The Countess of Northumberland will not gratify such a Person as you by
quitting her Privilege, therefore in the Cause upon the Ejectment betwixt
Utting and Champion if you shall proceed is must be at your peril, for her
Ladyship stands upon her Privilege.

June 26. 1673. John Gee.




England, to prevent the like troubles to such as shall succeed; and that the
mature Wisdom of the Nation would take it into their serious consideration.

Court of Wards was put down, all these Inconveniences were not foreseen; But
had they considered, of some Office in the nature of the Court of Wards and
erected it, it would have prevented troubles, past, present, and time to come:
He is at the Law, but prevented by privilege.

Champion, and Mr. Orlando Gee, the junior Countess of Northumberland's
Trustees, desired the Plaintiff James Percy to put a stop to the Duke of
Monmouth's Agents Proceedings, for they had a Grant, and the Patent was ready
to pass the Seal; He replied he could not have worser enemies than they had
been to him; it could do him no harm, for the King was so Gracious that He gave
it with this Caution, if there was no Heir Male, though it has past the Seal;
This is to crave a stop, that the Patent may not pass the House till a fair
Trial at Common Law be had, to know whether an Heir or no Heir be; for He is
resolved that Honorable Family and Name of Percy shall not be extinguished by
a Gazette.

Percies after the death of Edward Rogers and his Heirs Males, which is fallen
lately, and begged by others, that their Patent may be taken notice of, and
prevented, that the Estate may not be scattered before a Family be extinct,

Esau.

I am Your Humble Servant, JAMES PERCY.


