The LIFE of a CHRISTIAN WHICH IS A Lamp kindled and lighted from the Love of
Christ, and most naturally discovers its Original, by the purity, integrity
and fervency of its motion, in love to its fellow-partners in the same life.
Briefly displayed in this its peculiar and distinguishing strain of Operation.
As also some few Catechistical Questions concerning the way of Salvation by
CHRIST. Together with a Postscript about Religion.

By ISAAC PENINGTON, (junior) Esquire.

John 13.34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another,
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.

By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Lodowick Lloyd, and Henry Cripps, and are
to be sold at their shop in Pope's Head Alley, near Lumbard-street. 1653.

The Preface.
THe most excellent kind of things is hid, and those kinds which appear, in
their greatest worth and excellency are but vails to that life wherein lies
our happiness. Miserable were the estate of man, could he enter into that
estate of life which he desires and seeks to enjoy; but more miserable is
his condition, in that he is not only fallen short of that glory which is
perfectly satisfactory in God, but of that glory which belongs to him to adore
and solace himself in, in his estate and condition. All Truth is a shadow
except the last, except the utmost: yet every Truth is true in its kind. It is
substance in its own place, though it be but a shadow in another place, (for it
is but a reflection from an intenser substance:) and the shadow is a true
shadow, as the substance is a true substance. But this is the exceeding great
misery of man, he meets not with Truth either in substance or shadow, but (that
which the world is full of) vanity, a lie, a fiction of his own heart and the
Devils, in imitation of the Truth of God: A Doctrine of his own framing out of
the Scriptures, Graces of his own forming in his Soul, and a Worship and
Ordinances of his own creating for his public or private Devotion. And yet
such has always been the thick darkness of man, that he could never see the
lie (though never so palpable) in his right hand. When the light shines, we
shall all see where we are; but in the dark who is it that does not mistake! We
are all justifying our selves and condemning one another, but who is it that
shall be found able to stand before the righteous Judgment of God? who is it in
whom the true light and life of God is sown, and in whom does it truly spring
up and shoot forth?

Surely if ever there was need of provoking one another to love and good works,
the season is now proper: Religion is grown so outward, and has spread forth
into such various forms, pleasing it self so much in that dress which it most
affects, that the inward substantial part, viz. the life and power of it, is
almost lost in the varieties of shapes and shadow: The excrescencies of
Religion are become so exuberant, that the vigor of it is much drawn from the
heart. I profess I can hardly blame men for growing out of love with Religion,
both it and the Professors of it being grown so unlike what it and they once
were, and still pretend to be. The worth of Religion consists not in a name
or profession, but in such a life, power, righteousness and holiness as the
spirit of man, with all the art and strength of man, cannot attain. Where this
is and appears in truth, it will gain esteem in the spirits, hearts and
consciences of men; whereas a name and profession of Religion, falling short of
the truth and substance of that common righteousness and good will which is
found in man, cannot but most deservedly become a reproach. Love, true love,
the love of Christ (sown and springing up) is the life of true Religion; which
as it is like the love in Christ, so it will appear and act like it. This love
being of a deep intense and most pure nature, goes forth with mighty strength
and entireness toward the fountain of life from which it came, and toward all
the branchings forth of this life into such as are changed and renewed by it:
nay it extends it self to all men, even the greatest enemies, blessing them
that curse, and wishing well to them that use the subjects of it in the most
despightful manner; nay to all creatures, expressing it self in sweetness,
meekness, tenderness, pity, mercifulness, and in what way else soever it can
vent it self in doing good to any sorts of things, persons or creatures. This
love in its way of acting (according to the pattern) to the household of faith,
is in part here described and exposed for the view of such as may stand in need
of such an help, and shall find hearts to make use of it.

And now Sirs, ye that profess Christianity, look to your spirits, Watch and
keep your garments close about you, lest the Lord discover your nakedness, and
men see your shame. Little do ye think what the Lord is in doing. This great
noise which ye have heard is not for nothing. Life is sunk into the root: The
branches are withered, and a purifying fire will not now serve the turn. God,
as he can embrace where it may seem impossible, even that which was utterly
cast off and lost for ever; so he can throw away that which seems saved, he
can cast off that which seems united to him in a link of perpetuity: God can
both raise up from among the stones children unto Abraham, causing them to sit
down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom; and likewise keep out the
children of the Kingdom, nay thrust them out of that Kingdom whereof they have
already possession in part: Ye have had the experiment of this already in the
Jews, take heed of it the second time. But ye will say, the natural people were
but a type or shadow, and stood upon other terms then the spiritual seed did,
and therefore that might very well befall them which cannot befall these. This
is very true in it self, though not true as it is understood and applied. They
are not the spiritual seed which account themselves so, but those whom God
makes so by the generating virtue of his own Spirit, and yet those that are
the spiritual seed (or rather they in whom the spiritual seed is) may fall in
their outward station, and so lose that life and sweetness which they had in
their standing. But I shall not at this time dispute the case, All that I shall
now say to you is, Look to your feet, Look to your standing, Look well to the
Rock whereupon ye bottom your Souls, and look that ye be well bottomed on that
Rock, lest either your bottom fail under you, or the boisterousness of a wind
ye have not yet been acquainted with, shake you from it. He who is not well
rooted in the Truth, may easily be shaken from the Truth: and he whose root is
not good will certainly be cut down root and all, when the Ax is laid to him.
If the Lord have a time to pluck up what he himself has planted, to break down
what he himself has built, alas what will become of the plantations and
fabrics of man in his own spirit, when the Lord shall come to deal with him! O
Sirs, Look to your selves, Look to your Life, Look to your Salvation, Look to
your Happiness, Look to your Crown. Think of that advice which was given to the
Gentiles upon this very consideration, wherewith I shall conclude this Preface:
BE NOT HIGH-MINDED, (Be not over-conceited of the excellency of your own light,
Do not push with your horns at others, Be not always so busy in engaging the
powers of this world against your poor afflicted brethren, nay do not so much
as judge them in your own spirits; ye are not to sit in the seat of Judment to
judge others, but to come to the throne of Judgment your selves to have sentence
passed upon your light, upon your life, upon your heart, and all the motions of
it, which are not yet justified, how justifiable soever in your own eyes,) BUT
FEAR, fear what the Lord can do, fear what the Lord may do, fear what the Lord
will do. Be not exalted above others, but fear concerning your selves. Be not
proud because of your present station, but fear your fall. Lift not up your
selves above others in your own spirits, but throw down your selves at his feet
who is a laying all flat, because he finds so much fault with every height,
that he will have nothing exalted any more; and this ye will find your best
security in the cloudy and dark day, which how far soever ye may put from you,
or how far soever it may seem from you, makes haste.

THE Life of a Christian.
JOHN 15.12. This is my Commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you.


CHrist being now to leave his Disciples, (his time drawing very near) begins
to break the matter to them, to let them understand the necessity of his
departure from them, and to prepare them for those directions he was about to
give them, how to behave themselves in this world during his absence.

In the 33 Verse of the 13 Chap. He tells them he must be with them but a
little while, and what he said to the Jews they should find true also, namely,
that he was going whither they could not follow him. Little children, yet a
little while I am with you: Ye shall seek me, and as I said unto the Jews,
Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say unto you.

The whole 14 Chapter is taken up with this argument, wherein he explaineth
unto them many things about it. The end of his going, Verse. 2. I go to prepare
a place for you. The certainty of his return to them, Verse. 3. And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there ye may be also. Their own knowledge both concerning the place
whither he was going and the way thither, which if they could retire inwardly
enough into their own spirits, they would be sensible of, Verse. 4. And whither
I go ye know, and the way ye know. His care of them in the time of his absence,
that they should want nothing, but have what ever they can desire, he would
speed all their prayers, nay he would fulfill them himself, Verse. 13, 14.
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do. Neither would he leave them
destitute here on Earth, but send his entirest bosom Friend to dwell
continually in their bosoms, Verse. 16. And I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: Who should do
great things for them, Verse. 26. He shall teach you all things, and bring
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Lastly he would
give them a very rich blessing at his parting, given after such a manner of way
as the world cannot give, Verse. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you: let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid. Hereupon he tells them how they ought to
part with him, with what temper of spirit, which love to him upon a right
understanding would work in them, namely with joy and not with grief. For we
willingly, readily and joyfully part with that, which we entirely love, for its
advancement, especially if it be very great, and also very beneficial to us.
This he urges, Verse. 28. Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and
come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go
unto the Father: for my Father is greater then I.

Now there are two things Christ most especially bends himself to urge upon
them, to leave imprinted on their spirits at his departure. The one relates to
Faith, the other to Obedience: That they would look to their Faith, and to
their Obedience: that they would believe on him, and keep his Commandments. He
had bid them look to their Faith in the first Verse of this 14 Chap. Believe in
God, and believe in me. And he had bid them look to their Obedience, in a very
affectionate strain of expression, Verse. 15. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. If ye love me, do it. If ye love me, ye will do it. His commands
are ever forcible with us, whom we entirely love. He follows this
consideration, being a very close one, Verse. 21, 23, 24. professing that he
that loves cannot but do this, that he that does this does love, that he that
does not love cannot do this, and he that does not this does not love.

In this 15 Chapter he proceeds to urge both again. He begins with Faith, Verse.
4. Abide in me, and I in you. I have told you these things that ye might
believe, (Chap. 14. 29.) and I am your Vine whereinto ye are ingrafted, from
and in whom ye have your life; abide in me. When I depart from you with my
bodily presence, do not let your faith depart from me, but as ye came to me by
faith, so stay with me by faith: abide in me, and I in you: stay in me by
faith, and keep me in you by faith. He presses this upon them from diverse
considerations, as first there is no bringing forth of fruit else, Verse. 4. As
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine: no more
can ye, except ye abide in me. Secondly, without this ye will be in danger of
your Souls, nay of a truth ye will miscarry, Verse. 6. If a man abide not in me,
he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast
them into the fire, and they are burned. As faith declines, life wastes, and
the Soul runs further and further into the danger of the fire, which by faith
alone is avoided. Thirdly, Hereby ye may have what ye will. If ye abide in me,
and my words abide in you, if your faith remain, and your obedience also, ye
shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you. And therefore he bids
them also look to their Obedience, for that was the way both to glorify God,
Verse. 8. and to abide in the love of Christ, Verse. 9, 10. As the Father has
loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. If ye keep my
Commandments, ye shall abide in my love: even as I have kept my Fathers
Commandments, and abide in his love. Not as if Christ did love them simply for
their obedience, no more then God did love him for his obedience simply: but as
this was the way wherein the power of the Father led him to remain in the love
of the Father, so this is the way Christ's power guides them in to abide in his
love: for God and Christ must be just in dispensing their love even to their
own, according to the Rule of that dispensation which they set up, and under
which they put their own.

Now Christ tells them plainly verse. 11. the ground why he did thus vehemently
urge these things upon them, which was double. 1. That his joy might remain in
them, that that joy which he had in them from their obedience in and unto the
faith might remain, that he might still find the same cause of joy in them. 2.
That their joy which they had in him might be filled, that they might have not
only joy, but fullness of joy in Christ, which arises from the other, for our
joy in Christ is filled from Christ's joy in us: When he delights in us, in our
state, temper, and motions, in the dispensation wherein he sets us, then he
spreads himself abroad so sweetly and pleasantly in us, as causes us
abundantly to delight in him: both these are mentioned in the 11 verse. These
things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your
joy might be full. As if he had said: It Is true, though ye should be negligent
of these things, and run into great dangers thereby, yet I might bring you to
Heaven at last; nay I would not lose you: but I should have no great delight in
you here, nor would ye take any great delight in me, neither would God get any
great honor by you, (according to verse 8.) But now, I would not only bring
you to Heaven at last, but take great delight in you here, and fill your hearts
with joy too, and therefore would I have you abide in me, and keep my
Commandments, which is the only way thereunto; These are the very ends that I
so press these things thus earnestly upon you for. Now if ye would know what
Commandments I mean, this is it I chiefly intend, namely of love one to
another. This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you.

In the words we may take notice of three particulars.

1. The Command it self. That ye love one another.

2. The rule of this command, the rule whereby the love that answers this
command must be squared, and that is Christ's love, it must be squared by the
love which Christ had in him, and which he manifested unto, and exercised
toward his. As I have loved you.

3. Christ's peculiar owning of both, both of the command and the rule, or of
the command according to the rule. This is my commandment. This is my
commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you.

To glance a little at the sense of the words.

That ye love one another.

That ye] Ye my disciples whom I have cherished all my days, and am now about
to dye for: for whom I came from Heaven, and for whom I go again to Heaven. Ye
who were mine before the world was, Ye who are mine, and have been mine
throughout my whole ministry, Ye who shall be mine for ever and ever.

That ye love] Love in heart, love in word, love in action. Bear a tender
affection to them in the bottom of your souls: Speak well of them, and good for
them, both to God and men: and do any service of love for them. Let them have
all the interest in you, and power with you that love can command. Think it not
much to suffer with them, nay to suffer even death it self for them. Love is
the continual drinking in, and the continual letting out of desire, delight and
service. Our desire is still after, our delight is still in, our service is
still about what we love. And love though it be still busy about what it
loves, yet it can never drink in enough, nor let out enough toward it. Two
things make it unsatisfiable, Want of fullness to vent upon its love, and want
of ability and skill to vent what it has upon its love.

One another,] This is the extent, the bounds of this love, it must reach to
all that belong to Christ: and it is no difficult matter, no hard task, for it
is only to them that have the same image, the same nature, the same life, the
same beginning, the same end. If thou love thy self aright, if thou love
Christ aright, then thou will also love these who are truly part of thy self,
and part of Christ. I know the world will hate you, and I do not bid you love
it, for there is none of this kind of loveliness in it, nothing in them to
receive this love, nothing in them for you to fasten this love upon, but I bid
you love one another. The world is not to draw forth your love, not to partake
of this love, be it never so excellent: nor must any of these miss of it, be
they never so weak, never so vile.

As I have loved you.] Just as I have caused my heart to go forth toward you,
as I have ever been tender of you, and passed by all manner of weaknesses in
you, as I have ever thought well of you my self, and spoke well of you to the
Father, not taking notice of any of your sins or frailties further then for
your good, as I have performed all manner of services to you, I have descended
that ye might ascend, I have fallen that ye might arise, I have not stuck at
giving my very life for you, and all my strength and glory to you, so true, so
great, so strong has my love unto you been: even so after this manner do ye
kindle affections and so act them one toward another.

This is my commandment,] This is that commandment which is properly mine. This
is that commandment which of all other I will own. This is that especial
commandment, which God in this his ministration by me toward you, gives you.
This is that commandment, which my soul, which my heart, which my nature is
most in. This is that which I most desire to find in you, which I from my self,
from my own heart and soul enjoin you. This is my commandment. Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul, and thy neighbor
as thy self: these were Moses commandments, but that ye love one another, this
is my commandment. That man should love the Lord who made him, and his neighbor
whom he made like him: that the Jews should love God who made them in that
their dispensation a vessel of Glory beyond all Nations, and that they should
love their fellow-brethren in that dispensation, yea and in nature too; This
was Moses commandment. But that he who has the seed of the new-life in him,
should love him who is a partner with him in the same life, This is Christ's
commandment. The love to this brotherhood is from the nature and by the command
of Christ.

The words do naturally and plainly signify and hold forth thus much unto us.

Observe. That for the Saints or Disciples of Christ to love one another, upon
such grounds and in such a way as he loved them, is a thing his heart is very
much upon.

It is the main thing he has commended to them, it is the great injunction he
has layn upon them. As it was the especial Command which God gave Christ, to
love his Saints, and that which his heart was most upon of all the Commands
which ever he gave him; which if he had neglected, the keeping of all the rest
would have been of no value: So it is the especial Command which Christ has
given to his people, and which he most eyeth them in, that they love one
another. This is my Commandment. Among all the Commandments I have dispensed to
you, I shall observe you most in this. Ye must keep them all to remain in my
love, verse. 10. but this is the most principal of them all; this is that which
I understandingly and most affectionately give you in especial charge as mine:
This is my Commandment.

To evidence how much the heart of Christ is in this Commandment, we need go no
further then this place for the illustration and demonstration of. Consider but
his giving out the Commandment; observe but the circumstances of it, and it
will very clearly appear.

There are three things very observable about it. The time of his giving it
out, The manner of his giving it out, and his vehement pressing of it, both
then at his first enjoining of it, and again and again in this his farewell
Sermon.

First, For the time, There are two things eminent in that.

One is, in that it was when his love had been well grown toward them, after
it had had long duration and frequent exercise, this was particularly taken
notice of by this Evangelist just before his relation of it, Chap. 13. 1.
Having loved them constantly, having loved them from first to last, having
loved them as his own with a love suitable in strength to the relation, having
thus loved them unto the very end, what does he for them? how does he show it?
Why he addresseth himself to the imposing of this Command in the most engaging
manner that could be, as may be read in the following Verses.

The other is, that it was just before his passion, when he was about to do the
greatest act of love for them that could be done, (for greater love could no
man show, as he tells them, Chap. 15. 13.) and answerably had been
strengthening his affections toward them, that he might do it the more
willingly; even then, when his heart was most operative in love toward them,
then he gives out this Command, as it is observed by this Evangelist John,
Chap. 13. 1. Now before the feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that his
hour was come, that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having
loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. And Supper
being ended, etc. Having his eye upon his Passion, and his heart upon his
Disciples, for whom he was to dye, and whom he was now to leave, the strength
of his Soul works it self out in love toward them, and the strength of his
love thus vents it self, in contriving how he might most effectually imprint
this Command upon them. Having so great things to suffer, and his eye being
upon it, for he knew that his hour was come, one would have expected that his
thoughts should have been taken up about them; and so they are, but yet not so
as to divert him from his contrivance and dispatch of this, which that he
should now be so busy and industrious about, it shows plainly how much his
heart was in it.

2. For the manner of his giving out this Commandment, It is very observable,
for it was both by example, by precept, and accompanied with reason backing
both.

1. It was commended to them by his own example, he taught it them by his own
practice, which is the most effectual way of teaching. He would not barely by
word of mouth issue out this Command, but he sets his own pattern first before
them; He would do it himself before he would impose it on them. And his example
is very full. For, 1. That service of love which now he did set his example
before them in, viz. washing the Saints feet, was one of the lowest acts of
service. We are all apt to perform honorable acts of service, nay perhaps some
low acts of service to them that are far above us in gifts and graces, or to
persons in a sick and weak condition: but to persons that are in health, and to
persons that are beneath us in degree, love will carry very few to perform such
an office of love as Christ did here: yet these Disciples of Christ were far
below him in the graces and gifts of the Spirit of God, besides that present
relation wherein he stood as a Lord and Master unto them. 2. He did it in the
lowest manner, with the towel girded about him, verse. 4. as a servant, they
sitting, and he standing, verse. 12. and in a ready manner, for he rose from the
table to do it, and took the towel, and girded himself. 3. He did it to Judas,
who was no Saint, which takes off that great objection which is so ready to
rise in men's spirits, viz. If I knew he were a Saint I could do it, but I fear
he is an hypocrite. Why Christ did it to an hypocrite, to one whom he knew to
be an hypocrite. That Judas was there, may appear by this, it was not the
Passover night, but the night before, Chap. 13. 1. and Christ after this gives
him the sop, verse. 26. Lastly, he did it, not in the meanness and lowness of
his spirit, being now cast down with the sight of that misery which was
hastening upon him; but with the view and consideration of his own greatness,
as appears verse. 3. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his
hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God, He rises from supper,
etc. He had not forgot how great he was before this Ministration, how great he
was in this Ministration, and how great he should be immediately again, but his
eye was fixed upon his glory and greatness in and from and with God, when he
did this to them.

2. There was not only example, but precept added to example (and that again
and again) and that in a very sweet way, telling them that they ought to do it,
and that his doing of it, was but to teach them their duty. It was not
necessary for him to do it, only he chose this way of imprinting his
instruction the better upon them.

3. He adds a forcible reason, that he being their Lord and Master, and having
made known to them his pleasure, and that both by his own command and pattern,
they cannot be excused if now they neglect it. Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. Ye call me
Master and Lord, etc.

3. For his vehement pressing of it. He does not only lay it before them, but
he presses it home upon them. 1. He shows them that it is their duty, Verse.
14. Ye ought also to wash one another feet. 2. He tells them, that the meaning
of this piece of service in this abased manner, was to commend it to them so
closely, that they might not avoid it, or think much of it: Verse. 15. For I
have given you an example, that ye should do, as I have done to you. 3. By
enforcing the reason of his example, Verse. 16. Verily, verily I say unto you,
The servant is not greater then his Lord; neither he that is sent, greater then
he that sent him. The greatest among the Saints, are such as are sent by
Christ, and yet they are not greater then Christ who sent them, and therefore
need not think much of that (as of an inferior piece of work) which Christ did.
4. By pronouncing blessedness upon them according as they did observe it, Verse.
17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. Happy are ye if ye
learn from this pattern, if ye take out this copy, if ye practice the duties of
this Law of Love according to it. The happiness of the Disciples of Christ,
consists much in knowing and practicing the duties of love (even in the
meanest offices of it) one toward another. Thus he drives home this duty here.

He urges it again in this same Chap. v. 34. where he calls it a new
Commandment, to set their spirits more eager upon it, A new Commandment I give
unto you. And what is this new Commandment? That ye love one another, as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another. He had been telling them of his
departure from them, and that very affectionately in the foregoing Verse,
Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me, etc. My
little children, I must leave you, Poor sweet babes, poor little brats, I must
be gone, I cannot stay with you: But when I am gone remember this Commandment
(ye little think what sweetness ye will find in it) that ye love one another,
with the same love and after the same manner as I have loved you; performing
the same services of love with the same willingness and delight. And then in
the following Verse he knocks in another nail to drive it yet more home: By
this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to
another. He makes it the badg of Discipleship, that whereby men should be
distinguished to appertain to him, to be retainers to him: By this shall all
men know, etc. It is a great privilege and dignity to be known to be a Disciple
to Christ, to be taken notice of by men as a retainer to Christ, as one who
does not merely pretend, but has indeed learned of him. And love to the
Brethren (such love as Christ expressed) is an unquestionable character, a
distinguishing badg, such as the world cannot but acknowledge to be a peculiar
property of a Disciple, which you have had from Christ, and which none else can
attain.

In the 14 Chapter he persuades them very affectionately to keep his
Commandments, Verse. 15, 21, 24. and so again, Chap. 15. 10. If ye keep my
Commandments ye shall abide in my love, etc. declaring unto them in the next
Verse, that his intent in this vehement Injunction, Exhortation and Persuasion
of his, was entirely for their good: Verse. 11. These things have I spoken unto
you that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. And then
immediately in the very next words, verse. 12. shows what Commandment he did
chiefly mean all this while, This is my Commandment, that ye love one another
as I have loved you. These things I speak, I thus vehemently press obedience
upon you for your own good, that I might have joy of you (which will be very
profitable for you) and your hearts might be full of joy: But this is the
Commandment which I principally intend, and which I most especially expect
obedience unto; This is the Commandment which is peculiarly and properly mine,
which my joy will be greatest in seeing observed, and the observation of which
will conduce most toward the filling of your hearts with joy, This is my
Commandment, that ye love one another, etc. How he proceeds yet further to fix
it upon their spirits by very close considerations in the following part of the
Chapter, as verse. 14. and 17. I shall not need to make mention of, it being
already so fully and clearly evidenced. Out of the abundance of the heart, out
of the vehemence of his desire in this particular, has his mouth uttered all
these things.

For the further opening of it, these two particulars following are to be
enquired into.

1. How Christ loved his Saints? with what kind of love? what his love was, and
how it went forth toward them? and so we shall see the rule whereby our love
is to be squared one toward another.

2. Why the heart of Christ is so much set upon this, to have his Disciples
thus love one another? why of all other he makes this his especial Commandment?

Touching the former, What the love of Christ to Saints was? or how Christ
loved his Saints?

Love, we know, is that glue which unites things together (or, at least, makes
them desire, study and endeavor union) causing them both to wish well and do
well one for another, according to the nature and degree of it. As hatred is
that which dissevers things, and makes them wish ill and do ill one to another,
according to the nature and strength of it: So love, which is contrary to it,
does the clean contrary. What makes God to hold a kind of union with all his
creatures, and to wish well to them, and do good for them, according to their
several ranks, but his love to them in its several degrees? It is from Gods
love that he provideth food for the creatures, but from a further degree of
love that he provideth Redemption for Man, and from a further degree of love
yet that he foundeth and fasteneth the Union (and universal Communion) between
him and his Elect in Christ.

Now to search out this Love, we must seek both into the Nature of it, what
kind of affection it is; and into the grounds of it, whereupon it is fastened;
as also into the degree and strength of it, and into its several actings, and
the manner of its actings.

I. For the nature of it. We know (after our manner of knowledge) that there is
a twofold Love: A natural love and a supernatural, an earthly and an heavenly.

The natural love is that affection which God has put between creatures from
some suitableness among them. There is an earthly affection which God has
placed in this Earth toward the things of this Earth, which as they come all
out of the same Earth, so they are a kin and bear a natural affection to one
another, though in this hidden state (even in the things of this world) both
the relation and affection is much unknown. There is an universal love among
all creatures (even there where there appears an antipathy) from some general
likeness, suitableness and connaturalness among them: but this love is more
especially to be discerned and taken notice of among creatures of the same kind.

This love is heightened in man, above all other creatures, according to the
elevation of his nature. It is a stamp upon his Soul suitable to the nature of
his Soul. It is a kind of more spiritual glue in him (as his nature is more
spiritual, whereas it is but a corporeal glue in other creatures) a tincture
whereof still remains, though much defaced in him by his fall, as all his other
excellencies of Nature are.

The supernatural love is that which grows in Gods own heart, and which he
writes with his own finger on the hearts of whom he pleases, and in what
degree he pleases. It is that love of a spiritual nature, which flows from
God the root, into Christ the spiritual man, and so through him into all the
spiritual branches, which are ingrafted into and grow in God and in Christ. So
that this love must needs be of a more excellent, high, pure nature then that
which is naturally sown, or can naturally grow in the heart of man.

There are all kind of natural excellencies (which are the shadows of the
spiritual) in man naturally: They are sown in the nature of the first Adam, as
the spiritual excellencies are in the nature of the second Adam. There is a
natural faith in man, whereby man is able to believe, upon good arguments laid
before him; but yet this is not THE FAITH, this is not THE HEAVENLY GIFT. So
there is a natural love in the Soul of man, whereby he cannot but love God, and
every thing that is lovely and excellent, (though he cannot but also hate them
in those various dispensations and discoveries of them wherein God still
crosses his fleshly wisdom and desire,) but this is not this love. This love
is of a more inward, of a more full, of a more substantial nature then that
which grows in the Soul of man. Now such was the love of Christ, of this kind
of nature; Not that affection which did naturally belong to his Soul, but that
spiritual affection which came into his heart with that special grace which God
gave him, with that special nature which God breathed into him. As his nature
was different from the nature of Adam, so was the faith of it, and so was the
love of it. Every thing in him was of the same stamp with his nature. His love
was the very spiritual image and substance of that love which remains in the
heart of God.

This is the nature of it in general, whereby it is distinguished from all
things which are not spiritual, and more especially from that love which is
naturally planted in the Soul of man. But now we are to enquire into the nature
of it yet further, whereby we may distinguish it from all other spiritual
things. And that may be done by the common properties of love which are
peculiar to it in and according to its kind, as by its desire of union, by its
wishing well to the object beloved, by its readiness to do for it, etc.

There is nothing desires union but love. Faith indeed unites, but it does not
so desire union as love, it does not desire that kind of union which love does.
Faith lays hold for help, the desire of faith is help; but the desire of love
is union. So take hope, patience, humility, meekness, etc. they have their
several other properties and operations agreeable to their nature, but not this
of uniting, they leave this to love. And nothing wishes well to the object but
love: Faith wishes good from the object, Hope expects good from the object,
but it is Love only that wishes good unto it. And it is love only that acts for
it, that acts for the good of it: Faith will make a man work for his own good,
but it is love which makes him work for the good of another. It is faith
whereby we fasten on God for our own happiness, but it is love that makes us
eye his glory, and work for him: Or if faith also do this, it is from that
influence that love has upon it, so that still it is love, love in faith, love
with faith, love by faith.

This then is the love of Christ, namely that spiritual affection planted in
his new nature (besides that affection planted in him as a man) whereby he
desires union with, and wishes well to his, and whereby he is ready to do any
thing for them.

II. As touching the grounds whereupon Christ loves them, the grounds
whereupon this love, which is planted in Christ, is drawn forth toward them,
They are these.

1. The first is the Fathers love. God the Father loves them, and therefore
Christ the Son loves them also. As God has writ the same love in the heart of
Christ, as is in his own, so it goes forth the same way. There are two ways
wherein the heart of God goes forth exceedingly, and the heart of Christ
follows him in both, which are himself and his people; his own glory, and his
peoples welfare: God loves them both entirely, and Christ treads in his very
steps in each.

First, for Gods glory, It was the main thing Christ aimed at in all he did,
his greatest work was to honor his Father, I honor my Father, and ye
dishonor me: and Joh. 17.4. I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished
the work which thou gave me to do: His glorifying of God he looks upon and
casts up as the sum of all he did or was to do. And if any did wrong his
Father, he felt it; the reproaches of them which reproached thee, fell upon me.
What made him so zealous about the Temple, but because it was his Fathers
house; which though expiring and growing out of date, was as yet his Fathers,
and therefore more worthy then to be so profaned? The zeal of thine house has
eaten me up. Yea the very end for which he desired his own glory was, that he
might be the more able to glorify his Father. Father, glorify thy Son, that
thy Son also may glorify thee.

And for the people of God, Christ's heart goes forth in wonderful love toward
them. He loved them all his life long even to the very last: Joh. 13.1. Having
loved his own, which were in the world, he loved them unto the last. His heart
was ever working toward them, He never thought any thing too good for them,
yea he laid down his very life freely for them, and while he was doing it, his
thoughts ran more upon them then upon himself.

God had expressed perfect love to them, in that he had chosen them as his
peculiar treasure, which he would enrich suitably to himself, and enjoy in
himself, and make happy with himself for ever. He chose Christ but to bring
this about, who in that respect is beneath them, though as he is the chiefest
part of this treasure, and the head of it to them, he is far above them. Now
Christ having just such an heart as his Father had, could not choose but
entirely love that which his Father so loved before him. Having the same love
with his Father, he could not choose but act toward the same object as his
Father did. The love in Christ is the same still in him as it was first in God,
and therefore cannot but behave it self as the same.

Christ does what he sees the Father do: Now seeing the Father do this so
eminently, he cannot but do it as eminently also. His love is a copy of the
Fathers love, and his actings forth of it are a draught of the Fathers actings.
This ground Christ himself intimates, Joh. 17.20. That the love wherewith thou
have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. Christ desires perfect union with
them, to be perfectly in them, that is the prime and complete operation of
love: yea but what is the rule whereby, what is the attractive which he desires
might draw him into them? why that he himself tells you is the Fathers love.
Let thy love, the same love, wherewith thou have taken possession of me, take
possession of them also, and then I will immediately come after and dwell in
them too. It is from thy love that I love them, and therefore I must first see
thy love go before, and then I will soon follow. And for this cause take I such
pains with them, that I might make them a fit habitation for thy love, and then
that I my self might dwell and enjoy them in the same love, and the same love
in them.

2. Another ground of Christ's love to them is, his Fathers will. His Father
gave them him to love, and commanded him to love them, yea and gave him that
love wherewith he should love them. As the Father gives Christ to us to love;
so he gave us to Christ to love: And as there are a great many duties we owe
Christ, but love is the main; So of all the duties Christ did owe us (as to
leave all his glory, and come into this world and seek us out, and to dye for
us, to arise for us, to ascend for us, to take possession of our life and
inheritance for us in Heaven, and to take care of us here on Earth) love was
the main, and that which fitted him for all the rest, even as it fitteth us for
all our duties, both toward God, toward Christ, and toward one another. Yea
as this was the especial command which Christ gave us, to love one another; so
it was the especial command God gave Christ, to love us.

In this 15 Chapter of this Gospel of John, Christ tells his Disciples, That
if they keep his Commandments, they shall abide in his love: even as he kept
his Fathers Commandments, and abode in his love. And of all his Commandments he
picks out one presently in the 12 Verse following, as if he would commend it
unto us as that which will have the most especial influence of all, to keep us
in his love, which is this of loving one another. Now how comes Christ to pick
out this of all the rest, but that his Father had set him such an example, he
had picked it out for him, it was the main thing he had given him in charge,
and the main thing he expected from him, as he intimates in the 10 Chapt. of
this Gospel, verse. 17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my
life, that I might take it again. He had been speaking verse. 15. of laying down
his life for the sheep, from his knowledge of the Father, from his knowledge of
the heart and will of the Father. As the Father knows me, even so know I the
Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. The Father knows me whom he
has entrusted, and I know him who has entrusted me, and want neither love to
him nor them, but lay down my life for them. And other sheep he had to take
care of, besides those of this fold, which he would take care of also, verse.
16. Now says he, therefore my Father loves me, because I lay down my life, that
I might take it again. This is that act of love in me, this is that act of
obedience from me to the will and command of the Father, which draws and
engages the heart of the Father so exceedingly to me. Therefore my Father
loves me, because I lay down my life, so readily, in such a way of love, in
such strength of love to my sheep, that I might take it again to perfect their
Salvation. So that God gave Christ this especial command, as well as Christ
gives it us; and his heart was so much in it, that his love went out toward
Christ, as Christ's heart went out in love toward his sheep: This was the
motive, the attractive of the Fathers love to him; (...), therefore or for this
my Father loves me, because I lay down my life, etc.

And could God do less then give Christ a command to love them, when he gave
them him to this very end, and therefore gave them unto him in all such
relations as might draw love, as, as his brethren (wherefore he is not ashamed
to call them brethren) as his own children (behold I and the children which
thou have given me) as his own most proper Spouse, as the very natural members
of his own body? What could his meaning be in all this, but that he should
exceedingly love and cherish them? And surely his Father would never have given
them him, unless he had had very good assurance that he would love them well:
And therefore, to put that out of doubt, he gave him love first before he gave
him them, and when the Law was in his bowels, then he calls him forth to take
care of them, Psalm. 40.7, 8. God first writ the Law of Love in his heart, and
then he gave him these to love. And this is a second ground which does much
prevail with the heart of Christ, and would sway exceedingly with him, had he
no affection of his own unto them: It is his Fathers will and pleasure, it is
the great command of the Father to him, that he should love them, very truly,
fully and heartily, even as the Father loved him. But thirdly.

3. Christ loves them because of their relation to the Father and himself.
They belong to the Father, and they belong to him; they are Gods proper goods,
and his proper goods: Thine they were, and thou gave them me. They are the
children of the most High, the sons and daughters of his own Father, his
brethren and sisters by generation; his Spouse, the Spouse which his Father
prepared for him and brought him, the Spouse which he himself purchased with
his dearest blood. There is the strength and sweetness of the choycest
relations to draw his love, and these relations set off too with all the
commendable accents that can be. Now we know, Relations carry love with them,
though there be no other ground of love besides the relation. It is not
deformity (or any other unloveliness in others eyes) which can eat out the love
of relations. A man loves his brother, his sister, his wife, his child; though
black, though crooked, though weak in body and mind. And this is another ground
why Christ loves his, it is because they are his and the Fathers, it is
because of their relation to the Father and him.

4. There is yet a further ground why Christ loves them, which is because of
their likeness to himself and the Father; because his image (which is also the
image of the Father) is implanted in them, and shall be perfected upon them.

Likeness is the greatest attractive of love that can be (for it most naturally
draws it forth.) Likeness in nature, likeness in feature, likeness in
disposition, etc. are strong drawers. Now there is the greatest likeness in the
Saints to Christ that can be: There is no such likeness to him any where else
to be found, and therefore no such love can go forth from him any whither else.
They have the same nature, the same lineaments, the same course, the same end
with him. They have grace for grace with Christ. They are like to him in every
respect; There is not one thing admirable in him, but there is the likeness of
it in them. Is he wise, holy, full of faith, love, all spiritual wisdom and
excellency? why they have not only a share in these, but they have also a copy
of them writ on their own hearts. Did he descend, suffer, dye? etc. They follow
him in the same steps, they take the same course with him, and are changed and
perfected by him through these, after the same manner as he was changed and
perfected by his Father (who made him perfect through sufferings) 2 Cor. 3.18.
so that every day they grow more like him. It is no marvel therefore if Christ
love them so, how can he choose, they being already so far in, and growing so
continually further and further into his likeness?

And they are like his Father too: And next likeness to our selves, the image
of our parents does exceedingly take us in any: and it takes Christ as much as
his own likeness, because he loves the image of his Father, as well as himself.

These are the grounds whereupon the love of Christ is drawn forth toward the
Saints.

III. For the degree and strength of it, it is the greatest that can be. It is
not only the most excellent kind of love, but it is advanced and drawn forth
likewise to the utmost kind of degree. He loves them with all his heart, and
with all his soul. Greater love there cannot be then Christ's, nor can love go
out with greater strength: And therefore Christ when he would express how he
would have us love our brethren to the utmost degree of our love (of that love
God has placed in us) he bids us love one another as he has loved us.

The strength of Christ's love to his appears in these three things. In his
wishing well to them, in his desire of union with them, in his readiness to do
any thing for them. According to the degree and strength of these, is the
degree and strength of love. For these as they flow from love, so they rise in
height, life and vigor according to the degree and strength of love.

1. The strength of Christ's love appears in his wishing well unto them. We
ever wish good to the party we love, according to the degree of love we bear
them: Now Christ wishes to his the greatest good that can be. Look what ever
is good for them in this world, what ever is good for them in the other world,
he wishes unto them in the fullest manner and measure.

There are three things chiefly good for his in this world, in that station
wherein they stand, and in that course which they are to run here, which are
these. Preservation from the evil of the world, Communion with their God, and
to joy in God through him. (Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil. It is good for me to draw nigh to God. Rejoice evermore.) And all these
he wishes to his very heartily and fully.

See how vehemently he urges that request, that God would preserve them from
the evil of the world, Joh. 17. He urges it so far, that he is fain to make an
apology for it, that it was not so much in reference to him, as to them and
their state; it was not so much to draw the thing down from him, as to draw up
their hearts to believe the certain descent of it, Verse. 13.

Then for Communion with God, He did not only begin it, but he has taken all
ways to preserve and increase it. He has laid the foundation of it between
them, he has entered them into it, and has appointed Ordinances for the
exercise and continuation of it, that therein God and they might still be
meeting. He receives God on the one hand, and them on the other hand, and knits
them both in himself, causing them to flow into and live in each other. He
knows God will abide in him, and thither he brings them, and bids them
abide there also, Joh. 15. that they may still be sucking the sweetness of God
through him, that being the only way: for as they come at first to enjoy God by
Christ, so they must ever draw the sweetness of God through Christ.

And for joying in God, he would always have them be doing it, and therefore
leads them the ready way to it, Joh. 14.1. Let not your heart be troubled;
believe in God, and believe in me. Yea he would have them have full joy, Joh.
14.11. These things have I spoken unto you that my joy might remain in you, and
that your joy might be full. Thus he tells them, and he tells God the same,
Joh. 17.13. And now I come to thee: and these things I speak in the world, that
they might have my joy fulfilled in themselves. I am coming to Heaven to thee,
where I shall have joy enough, to sit at thy right hand, where is fullness of
joy; but for all that I shall never be at rest, unless my Saints on Earth be
full of joy also, and for that very end I speak these things here at my
departure, and press thee thus earnestly in their behalf for those things which
their hearts most desire, and which are most necessary for them, that it might
conduce somewhat that way, namely to the filling of their hearts with joy when
I am gone.

So likewise for the other world, he wishes them the best thing there, viZ.
the full and perfect enjoyment of God. It was his very design, and the very end
for which he underwent all miseries in this world, to bring them near to God,
even into his presence, that they might be filled with all the fullness of God,
(as every thing, which is there, is,) and he will never leave till it be done.
This is that he has undertaken to bring them to in eternal life, or this is
that eternal life which he is fitting them for, and will not fail to bring them
into, viz. the enjoying God in perfection, the perfect enjoying of a perfect
God, to enjoy God as he himself does, which is as much and as fully as he can
be enjoyed: They must be fellow-heirs, have the same inheritance with him, the
same Kingdom, the same Crown, the same Life, the same Glory, the same
Immortality, punctually the very same inheritance, which inheritance is God,
for he is the sole portion of Christ and of all his people. And then shall
Christ see of the travel of his Soul and be satisfied in and concerning his
seed, when he has perfectly redeemed them, and laid them in the bosom of God,
to suck in and enjoy all that is to be enjoyed there: when he has fitted their
hearts to receive God, even the fullness of God, and has seen the fullness of
God poured out into their hearts, and does himself taste and enjoy it there.
The Lord could never rest (in the way of his operation) till he had emptied
himself fully into Christ, and Christ can never rest till he has emptied
himself with all that fullness into them, and till he has brought them into
himself, and through himself into God, and so both ways into all that fullness.
And that God might take delight in them, and be as much with them, and do as
much for them as is possible (in this time and day of separation and distance)
he plants waters, and causes to spring up in them the light, the life, the
love of God, and whatsoever else God delights to be in and with, both to
cherish with his presence, and to fill with his appearance, Joh. 17.26.

This is the first thing wherein the strength of Christ's love discovers it
self, viz. in wishing well to them: His desires of their good and welfare are
extended to the utmost degree, and therefore his love from whence they proceed
must needs be very large.

2. The strength of Christ's love appears further, in his desire of union with
them. Every thing desires union with what it loves, according to the nature
and degree of the love it bears: If therefore we would know how strong Christ's
love is, let us see what kind of desire of union there is in him.

Now his desire of union with them is as large as his well-wishes to them. He
desires the most perfect and complete union with them that possibly can be,
and as soon as may be. He would have the union present and growing, large and
lasting.

Not to follow these heads particularly, consider how full an union he desires
and the largeness of his desire but in these four respects.

1. He desires to have them with him, to have them be where ever he is. If
there were a person whom we could never endure to have out of our sight, but he
must still be where we were, in the room with us, at board with us, in bed with
us; if we could never abide to go any whither or do any thing without that
person, every one (who saw this) would conclude there to be a great strength of
affection in us toward that person. Why thus it is with Christ: Do the Father
what he will for them, take he never so much care of them, etc. it will not
serve Christ's turn, it will not satisfy Christ's heart, but they must be with
him, in his Country, in his house, at his board, in his bed, they must walk up
and down with him in the fullness of the Father. And this little momentany
absence of his from them, it is merely out of judgment, knowing it to be good
both for himself and them, and for the glory of his Father; but it is as much
as his heart can do to bear it. And he professedly tells his Father it must not
be so always, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am, etc. Did ye ever observe Christ to use such a manner
of praying before, Father, I will? as if he had said, If I would abate somewhat
of my former petitions, and should be content that thou should not preserve
them from the evil of the world, but let them tumble a little in the mire, so
that thou did them good by it, Though I might like this well enough, yet this
of their being with me I cannot, I will not: Father, I will. Thou have made me
a King, and this is my will and pleasure in reference to them, which I cannot
vary from. I must have them with me; I do so love them, that I cannot live long
here without their company: My glory is no glory to me, unless they see and
enjoy it with me. If therefore thou meanest to keep me in Heaven, thou must
bring them up to Heaven, for I cannot, I will not live there without them.

2. It will not serve Christ's turn to have them with him, but he must also have
them in him: A strange kind of union. What we love we hug in our bosoms. Now as
Christ's love is more inward and intense then any other love, So he must have
more inward expressions too, he must hug them in the inside of his bosom, They
must be in him: He must have them within his very heart, to make much of them
there. Joh. 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us. This desire, this request Christ puts
up for them all, he would have them all both in God and in himself. This is the
thing he drives at concerning them, and this is the reason why he begs so much
the care and protection of God over them, in the foregoing part of the Chapter,
that they all may at length come to a perfect union in God and in him. Indeed
the station of Believers here is in Christ, they are graffed into him, planted
into him, seated in him, in him to abide, and in him to grow, as the branch is
in the Vine: But this is not the perfect kind of union, or at least not perfect
in its kind, they are not all thus in him, nor are any, that are but thus in
him, perfectly in him. There is a sweeter, a fuller, a compleater being and
abiding in him, which he longs and prays for, to fill him, to be his
fullness, to be all to him and suck all from him.

3. Nay thirdly, This will not serve his turn neither, but he must also be in
them. They must be with him and in him, and he with them and in them. They must
live in his Kingdom, in his Spirit, within his Life; and he must be, live,
dwell, in their Spirits, in their country. Now this is such an union as was
never heard of, for one to be in that which is in him: But Christ's love is a
strange kind of love, and therefore may well produce a strange kind of union,
even so strange as he that is not acquainted with this love cannot apprehend
possible. For that to be the continent which is contained, to be in that which
it does contain in it self, how can this be? Yet the Scripture is express for
it, Joh. 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in
one. And again, Verse. 26. That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in
them, and I in them. He cannot be satisfied, only to have them lie in his heart
(though that likes him very well,) but he must also lie in their heart. He
must have the same place in them, that he gives them in himself. As he
prepares a bosom for them, so he cannot be content unless he find a bosom in
them. They must be his house, his home, his Tabernacle, his dwelling, yea his
resting place, as he is theirs. I in them. No where must they be, but in
Christ; no where will Christ be, but in them: He can be no where else, He can
live no where else, He can rest no where else, He can enjoy himself no where
else. What Christ is to God, we are to Christ; we come from him, and yet he
cannot be without us: As we cannot live but in him, so he cannot live but in
us; He does not reckon his life as life, until he come to enjoy us. His life
does as it were wither while it is banished from us; it lives alone, it does
not bring forth fruit, nay it does not enjoy it self: But when it comes to be
set up in us, then it will be life indeed, and then it will live indeed.

4. Neither will all this serve, but that nothing might draw him from them, and
he might have full and only content in them, he must have all of God (all that
ever he can need to look after or desire) in them. As he places all that they
shall need or can desire of God, he places all this in himself, that they
shall not need to seek for any thing out of him: So he places all that he can
desire in them, that he may have no temptation to move his eye or spirit any
further in the least. The fullest enjoyment of God that ever his heart shall
meet with, he desires to have in them. That he may have no cause of stirring
out from them, to seek any thing of God, he will have all of God in them. He
does as it were let go God, as he himself grew out of him, to cleave to God, as
he (that is, God) grows up in them. This is the great Mystery, the Mystery of
that spiritual affection which is between Christ and the Church; They forsake
God to enjoy one another; They can delight no where, in nothing of God, but in
one another. Ephesians. 5.31. For this cause shall a man leave his father and
mother, and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a very
mysterious thing: That a man should leave that tie and relation which is
natural, to make up another which is artificial; That a man should loosen
himself from that which is nearest to him, to unite himself to that which is
far off from him; That a man should leave his own father who begat him, and his
mother which bare him, and go cast all his love upon a wife which was a mere
stranger to him. Yea says the Apostle, but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church, This is a great Mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the Church,
verse. 32. There Is a Mystery indeed, That Christ should leave his Father as it
were, that no communion of Christ with his very Father will serve him but in
his Church, that what ever sweetness God will give him to taste of, he must put
it into his Church, and let him taste it there, that he is not satisfied with
his Fathers house and presence in any other way of enjoyment but in his Spouse,
and will leave it every other way, but as he can have it and enjoy it in her.
This is wonderfully mysterious, and is a little shadowed out in that common
relation between man and wife, where we find such a kind of passage as this is.

And this may be the reason why Christ desires that the love of God may be in
them, even that very love wherewith God had loved him, Joh. 17.26. That the
love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them. I would fain
be in them, and yet I would lose nothing of thee by it, therefore I would have
that very love wherewith thou have loved me, be in them, that I may find it
there. As God has placed all his love in Christ for us, and there we come to
it: So Christ would have God place all his love in us for him, that he need not
go any further then us for any thing of God. Christ knows that if he has the
love of God, he has all; and that he would have in us, because he would
constantly and perfectly be centred in us: Because he would be fixed there, he
would have every thing there that his heart can desire, and that only is the
love wherewith God loved him, which he was contented to part with, that he
might take it up again.

This is the second thing wherein the strength of Christ's love appears, His
desire of union, which being so vast, what is the spring which nourishes it?

3. The strength of Christ's love appears yet further, in his readiness to do
any thing for them. Love is active, it is ever in doing for that it loves
according to the degree of it. Now the greater and more constant this
propensity is, the greater and stronger must that root of love needs be from
whence it flows. His readiness to do for them appears in these three respects.

1. What ever excellency was in him which might do them good, he would put
forth to the utmost: His wisdom, his strength, his love, or what ever else was
precious in him, he never spared, when they had need of them. What ever he was
able to do in himself, he was sure to do for them, when their need called for
it.

2. What ever was dear to him, he would part with for them. He would let any
thing go (though never so pleasant) which he himself enjoyed, if thereby he
might advantage them. The glory he had with his Father before the world was, he
lays down for their sakes: His dear life he counted not dear to him, when he
was to part with it for their good.

3. He would and still will venture any thing for them, his choycest interest
in God he has and will hazard at any time to save them: When God is most
angry, he is not backward to step in and desire him to sheathe his sword, for
he must not strike them unless he strike through him first, which he knows he
cannot, he will not do. Was it not a venturous thing for Aaron, when God was
angry and executing vengeance, to run and stand between the living and the
dead, to stop God in the course of his wrath, to beat it back as it were
forcibly? yet Aaron was but a type of Christ herein, who does the same thing
more effectually and powerfully every day.

He that will thus lay out all, he that will thus lose and part with all, He
that will not yet stick continually to venture what he has received anew, has
certainly a stock of very rich love, and great store of it.

IV. For the actings of his love, wherein both the nature and strength of it
will yet further appear, they are wonderful great and strange, and that if we
consider them either in the varieties of his conditions, or in the varieties of
their conditions, for he is still the same in both. How ever his state or heart
was changed by the power of his condition, yet it was never changed toward
them, when it most failed and fainted it remained in strength of love to them;
and how ever they were changed either in themselves or toward him, yet it
could produce no other alteration in him toward them, then such as proceeded
from his love, and was profitable for them.

1. Look on him under the variety of his own conditions.

When he was in Heaven, long before this world was made, he fell in love with
them there. The first sight his Father gave him of them ravished his heart. His
love then acted three ways, or expressed it self in three things toward them.

1. In his desire to have them his wife. So soon as ever he saw them, This is,
says he, bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, This was taken out of me,
this is part of my self, which must be again united to me, or I shall feel
want. There is no helper to be found for me out of my self, and this is that
meet helper in which my heart can alone find rest. He knew her, so soon as ever
he beheld her, as the beloved of his Soul, and never did any more ardently or
naturally seek room for his spirit in any thing, then he did for himself in her.

2. In undertaking all that God required thereto. He was content to serve for
his wife, ( Jacob's serving for his was but a type hereof.) He was content to
purchase, to buy his wife, and that with no small price: And he was content to
fight for her, after he had done it, he undertook to deal with all her enemies,
Sin, Devil, Death, Grave, Hell, and redeem her from them all. He did so love
her, that he was willing to take the hardest ways that could be to come by her,
rather then go without her. His love would not suffer him to stand capitulating
upon the terms, but so she may be his, he cares not what he undertake or
undergo for her.

3. In his delighting in her then. He did not grumble at the price when he
began to consider of it, he did not repent of the large offer he made for her,
nor ever so much as said she cost me too dear, but it rejoices his heart to
think on her, and the sight of her does revive him more then the sight of the
trouble, hardship and misery that lies between him and her, and which he must
necessarily pass through before he can enjoy her. Prove. 8.30, 31. Then was I by
him, etc. rejoicing in the habitable part of his Earth, and my delights were
with the sons of men. This he did notwithstanding he was then in Heaven,
drowned in glory there, and knew she was to be found by him in this miserable
corrupted world, and in a most corrupt and miserable condition in it, yet the
sight of his Spouse is of such virtue with him, that notwithstanding this
disadvantage, it can administer joy and delight to him even in the midst of the
fullness of the joys of Heaven.

Again, Look on him when he came into this world. Though he was to leave the
glory of Heaven, after he had been so accustomed to the sweetness of it, yet he
comes skipping into it, Lo I come, says he; have thou prepared me a body? I
will not delay to take it up. And what made him so willing thereunto, but the
strength of his love to them for whose sake he did it? Thy Law is in the midst
of my bowels; what Law, but the Law of Love to his Father and to his Spouse?
And his low and mean condition we never find troubling of him, nor any
affliction he met with, his love to them so sweetened every thing he was to do
for them. Yea that bitter cup at which he so startled when he took it, because
of that terrible gall and wormwood wherewith it was filled, yet how did he long
to drink it off for their sakes! I have a Baptism to be baptized with, and how
am I straightened till it be accomplished! Methinks my bowels are bound up, I do
not seem to my self to have expressed love enough to my people, until I have
done it.

And while he was present here, he bent himself to give forth and leave behind
him testimonies of his love to all posterity. He chose a company of Disciples
to be patterns of his actings toward all his Saints, to the worlds end; who
themselves were types of what his Saints would be, and his actings toward them
were types of what he would act toward his Saints, which is not again to be
done outwardly, but is continually done by him inwardly in and toward his. Now
consider what these were, and how he behaved himself toward them. They were
men full of weakness, full of darkness, full of passions, full of pride, often
striving who should be greatest, expecting fleshly pomp and advantage by him,
much failing in love to him, (what, not watch with me one hour?) in so much as
they left him when he had most need of them, they hid themselves from him, they
denied him, they feared a little reproach or danger for his sake, who feared
nothing for theirs: And yet how tender was he of them continually, not
upbraiding them for their unkindnesses, nor neglecting any act of kindness
toward them. After his Resurrection he stays forty days from glory for then
sakes, to satisfy them about his Resurrection, and his love to them, and to
give them full instructions about the ordering of his Kingdom here on Earth,
wherein their safety, peace and comfort lay.

And now he is in Heaven, he spends his whole time for them. He is taking up
still there what belongs to them. He is keeping all surmises from the heart of
God, and dashing all pleas which the Devil craftily and maliciously is still
entering in against them. He is suing out warrants from God to have daily
bestowed upon them what grace can do for them for the best, according to their
conditions: And he sends his best friend, the Spirit, out of his own bosom to
bring him news how it fares with them, and to look to their hearts while they
are in this world, and to be daily working them up to blessedness. And,
methinks, I hear Christ ever and anon renewing his charge, as he sends him; Go,
look to my little ones, see they want nothing that thou can do for them: See
that they want no light in that dark world wherein they are: See they want no
life in the midst of that dead world: See they want no comfort in the midst of
those distresses, which it pleases my Father to exercise them with. Go and
bear with their unkind actings toward thee, Consider where they are, consider
what they are, consider what they suffer, and deal gently with them for my
sake, and what affronts they put upon thee, or what injuries they offer thee, I
will make up to thee, as I have already done unto my Father.

2. Look on the actings of his love toward them under the variety of their
conditions.

First; In their unconverted estate, in that most loathsome estate wherein he
finds them lying, before he brings them home to God: His heart does not
then loath them, but is pitying them, and contriving how he may bring them home
with most advantage; Other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them also I
must bring, Joh. 10.16. He shows where his heart was, when he said little,
namely upon his sheep, his lost sheep, his scattered sheep, about bringing them
into the fold where they may be safe and at rest.

2dly. In their converted estate, and their several turns and changes there. In
all their sicknesses, in all their relapses, in all the miseries which befall
them by their own folly, in all their sinful actings against God, in all their
unkind actings toward him, in the midst (which goes most to his heart) of
their grieving of his holy Spirit, when they are stubborn and rebellious, and
act most unthankfully, when they will not trust him, nor by no means be
persuaded of the love he bears toward them, but are interpreting that ill
which he intended well, striving against all the good which he is doing them,
and doing that most eagerly which his Soul most abhors in them, yet then,
even then is he doing for them the best offices of love which possibly can be
done. As they then most need the care, love and tenderness of Christ, so he
will be sure then to lay it out for them. And when at any time he works in
them, by his own Spirit, what is pleasing in his eyes, he attributes it to
them, and accepts it from them, as if it were their own. Indeed they do
nothing, not so much as think a good thought of themselves, but he does all in
them, and yet he attributes all to them. If he put it into their hearts, and
enable them to feed or clothe any of his, he sets it upon their account, and
upon an high account too, even as their feeding and clothing of him. He thinks
no ill of them, he interprets every thing in the best kind concerning them, He
loves them so as nothing in them or from them can mitigate his affection to
them, or hinder him from doing the utmost he can for their good, He takes
occasion from all their unloveliness to stir up his heart to acts of love
toward them suitable to that their state, but never to decline thereby from
them, Here is love indeed. It would be too tedious to instance in the several
acts in the several kinds of it, as in pity, in care, in bounty, in delight,
etc. wherein the high and noble strain of his love does on every occasion put
forth it self, Let it suffice therefore to have given a little touch at it.

V. For the manner of his acting love, Love acts in him this fourfold way, or
he performs the acts of love after this fourfold manner, Primarily, Purely,
Suitably, and Fervently.

1. Primarily, He is first in love, and first in every act of love. What he
speaks of that one act of love, viz. of Election, Joh. 15.16. Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, he was first in it, is true of every act
else. He does not stay for acts of love from us, before he performs acts of
love to us, but we love him because he loved us first, and we perform acts of
love to him, because we first learned them of him. As Christ learned his love
of the Father, so we learn our love of Christ. Yea before we can perform any
act of love to him, there must several acts of love go forth from him toward
us: he must both give us the grace, and quicken it, and draw it forth
whenever we act any thing with affection toward him. They are not our
prayers that move him, but his love is before them, (and yet what can move him
more?) but it is his love, the spirit of his love from and according to his
love, that teaches, guides and enableth us to pray.

2. Purely, not with by-ams or by-ends concerning himself, but as he loves with
pure affection, so he loves in a pure manner. As his love is spiritual love, so
it acts spiritually, it has no by-ends, no by-ways, but all its motions are
like it self. Its purity discovers it self in these three respects.

1. It will do nothing to dishonor God through love to them. Though Christ
love them unspeakably, exceedingly desiring their happiness and his enjoyment
of them, yet he will not entrench upon God in the least, in effecting of it. Lo
I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God. And again, I do always the things
which please him. And when he speaks of having finished his course, Joh. 17. I
have glorified thy Name, says he. Though he was always full of affection of
strength to them, and did every thing in great love to them, yet it never
carried him aside from the honor of his Fathers Name.

2. It will neglect nothing that may be for their good, though it never so much
offend them. If they want a chiding, if they want reproof, if they want rods,
yea if they want scorpions, they shall have them: And if they grow froward and
cry out, Christ does not Love me, for if he did he could not thus deal with me,
all this shall not save them, but he will lash and sting them so much the more,
not out of ill will or passion, but because the condition of their froward
spirits requires so much the more, which cannot (as the state stands) be
abated without prejudice. Christ does not love them with a doting love, to let
them see nothing but what they will call acts of love, but he will do that
which he knows to be an act of love, how ever they interpret it.

3. It will do nothing which may be for their hurt. Though they are apt to
nourish humors, yet Christ will never be drawn, through his love to them, to
nourish those humors. Hence it is that the Soul though it beg never so hard for
some one mercy, and that a spiritual mercy, using all its interest in Christ to
obtain it, yet (in some cases) it can by no means come near it, but the mercy
does as it were run the further from him, by how much the more he seeks it.
This proceeds from the purity of the love of Christ, who knows what
condition they are in, and how ill this mercy would suit them in their present
condition. Perhaps it would feed some lusts (whereof they are not aware) which
stand ready to prey upon it, and fatten themselves with it, so soon as it
should be given in: Perhaps it would lift them up in their own thoughts, and so
(either that or some other way) interrupt their naked dependence upon God, and
any such evil consequence (which they may not fear, but suppose that the mercy
it self might preserve them from) would do them more harm, then the enjoyment
of the mercy could do them good.

3. Suitably. Christ puts forth such acts of love and so, as their need
requires. Sometimes he puts forth acts of pity, sometimes acts of help,
sometimes acts of delight: Not all at all times, but what our present estate
and every thing considered together does call for. The not understanding of
this causes Christians so often to question the love of Christ toward them:
If he be not continually putting forth acts of delight in them, and giving
testimonies of sweetness to them, they are apt to think that his love at least
declines; whereas there are heart-workings of love in Christ which they cannot
perceive (but only know by faith that they must needs be) nor is it fit that
they should perceive them, in the condition that they sometimes are in: But as
Christ has revealed his love to be ever constant and strong to them, so they
should ever believe it to be so; and it is the glory of faith so to judge of it,
when as nothing of it appears in the view of sense. To what end has God given
them faith, if they notwithstanding esteem of things by and according to sense?
But what ever condition they are in, though Christ's love may not discover it
self to them in the way they expect and desire, yet it always goes forth in
the most suitable way. In all their miseries he is not only pitying them, but
bearing them company; He bears their burdens with them, he helps them, he
supports them, he contrives and prosecutes their rescue and redemption; and if
he may not do it openly, yet he will not fail to do it effectually, though
secretly and unseen by them. What ever their distress be, whether outward or
inward, whether by sin from within, or by affliction from without, even when
they have caught a grievous fall by their own folly and head-strongness, yet
even then is he mourning over them, and considering how he may raise them up
again with most advantage. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall,
I shall rise again. In our lowest ebb he is certainly thus with us, doing this
for us, though we cannot possibly imagine; Nevertheless I am still with thee,
thou hold me by my right hand, said the Spirit of Christ in David, when he
had seemed to himself neglected and removed from the care and love of God
beyond the common sort of the world. In their weaknesses he is still
condescending to them, he bears with all their infirmities, yea he apologizeth
for them in his own heart, The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak:
He considers both what frail flesh they are, and what a strong body of
corruption hangs about them in this their weak estate. When ever they do
well, he is delighting in them: A father will not stroke or be pleasant with
his child when he behaveth himself untowardly, Christ knows it is unfit to
express delight in them then, Therefore Christ tells his Disciples in the 10
verse of this 15 Chapter of John, that if they kept his Commandments they
should abide in has love, that is (in part) in the sensible expressions of it,
they should find him delighting in them, verse. 11.

4. Fervently, He performs every act of love in a warm manner; He burns,
his heart boileth in every act of love. As his love is strong, so he performs
every act of love with the strength of it. His bowels yern and roll within him,
when he pities. He helps with all his might: He vehemently gaspeth after
union with them, and enjoyment of them: He delights in them with his whole
heart and with all his Soul, His heart leapeth within him in acts of delight;
He never expresses more to them then is in his heart, nay he never expresses
so much, he lets them only see what is profitable for them to see. This is
the manner of the acting of Christ's love. And thus we see the love of Christ,
after a sort, in a weak dark manner, opened.

Behold then the Rule ye are to set before you, the Copy which ye are to write
after in loving one another. Thus has Christ loved his, and thus are they who
are Christ's to love one another, which to imprint the better I shall a little
briefly recite, as

1. With a love of this nature; not with carnal love, but with spiritual love;
not with the love of your own old nature, but with the love of the new nature;
not with your own natural affection which ye have from Adam, but with that new
affection which God has given you from and in Christ.

2. Upon such grounds. Not for the loveliness of their persons, the sweetness
of their disposition and carriage, or their kindness to you or your, etc. Alas,
these are too carnal grounds for that love, which is truly spiritual, to move
upon: These may move your natural affections, (and those indeed such kind of
things as these should move,) but the love, which is here called for, is
spiritual, and so must the grounds be, even such as Christ's own love moves
upon, as

The Fathers love to them, and Christ's love to them. If thou partakest of the
divine nature, and have the same love with the Father and with Christ, let it
follow them in acting. Love what they love, and love because they love.

The Fathers will and Christ's will, that thou should love them. Let that Will
which is the Former of thy love be the guide and ground of thy love.

Their relation to the Father and to Christ, yea and to thee too in the Spirit
and Body of Christ. As thy love is spiritual, so thou may found it upon thy
spiritual relation.

Their likeness to the Father and to Christ, yea and to thy self too in that
which is best in thee.

If thy love be not spiritual, and fastened upon spiritual grounds, it will not
last. If thou love them for sweetness of disposition, nay for the gifts of
God which appear in them; when these shall at any time fail, thy love wanting
its groundwork, will also fail: but if it be well-founded, it will then be as
firm and as full as ever, when all such considerations and motives sink from
under it. O take heed of loving Saints for gifts, not for mere grace; or for
the outward lively actings of grace, not for the inward substance of grace in
their hearts.

3. With such strength of love. Come as near the degree of Christ's love toward
them, as thou can. Let thy well-wishes be large toward them, (be ever
praying for them,) thy desire of union and communion with them strong, thy
readiness to do them good (even to the laying down of thy life for them) great.

4. Let the actings of thy love remain vigorous toward them in all the
varieties of thy conditions, and in all the varieties of their conditions. We
are very unlike Christ in this respect, Our own conditions seldom change, our
brethrens conditions seldom change, but our love varieth toward them.

5. Love in such a manner as Christ did. Be first in love; Aim at a precedence
in all the acts of love, who shall first pity, and who shall first pardon, etc.
Do not stay for the workings of their affections to measure or let out thine
by, (this is a rule corrupt nature has set up, not grace,) but kindle and
inflame theirs by thine.

And be sure to love purely. Love one another with a pure heart. Never dishonor
God, never do any thing which may hurt them, by any act of love. Never forbear
doing them good for fear of crossing them. Cross them as much as thou will, so
thou manage it with wisdom and tenderness proportionable for their good. Let
all thy oppositions against them appear to be the oppositions of love, formed
by love, brought forth with love, and only continued in love. Sweet and
wholesome are those wounds which love measures out.

And act love suitably. When they are in distress, pity them: When thou see
them heavy laden, help to bear their burden with them, Bear ye one another
burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, (this is a great part of the Law of
this Love, which is Christ's Law, which is his Commandment, the bearing of one
another weights and pressures, whether of sin or sorrow.) Wherein they are
over-layd bear for them, wherein they are weak bear with them, condescend to
their lowness, to their shallowness, in the things of God; what is above their
strength do not admit them unto by no means, how angry soever they may be
thereupon; him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations, not to the judging and discerning of such things as require a
greater strength of eyesight then is dispensed to him. Where thou see their
hearts act plainly toward God, express delight in them, but take heed of
manifesting delight in them when they are stubborn to Christ: for thou art not
left at liberty to act love to them as thou shall think good, but in a way
suitable to their conditions. When thou see the flesh prevail in them, thou
must warn and check them, and complain to the Church of them if need be. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Levit. 19.17. So when thy brother
offends thee, thou art first to tell him of his fault between him and thee,
then to take two or three with thee, and at last to acquaint the Church with
it, Mat. 18. This is not to be done simply to get thy self righted, but rather
in love to thy brother, for the good of whose Soul (as well as for the peace
and safety of the Church) this Ordinance is appointed. But there is a vast
difference between these things being done from the truth and purity of love,
and from a fleshly selfish spirit, the one seeking its brother, the other it
self in these things.

Act love also fervently. Let love burn within, and let all the motions and
operations of it come forth boiling hot. Pity fervently, pray fervently for
them, put forth thy helping hand with ardency of affection. Let there be such
an heat in the spirit as may cause the whole course of love sweetly and warmly
to flow from the new nature, that the motions and operations of it may not come
unkindly and coldly forced out of the old nature. Is any afflicted, and I burn
not? says Paul: and how was he in travel again with the Galatians? Love one
another with a pure heart, fervently.

Lastly, Be sure thou let nothing in or from them mitigate thine affections
toward them. It may mitigate thy expressions in some kinds, but it may not
dull thine affections, but whet and sharpen them to fit them for that which is
now proper for them. Though thy brother trespass against thee, thou must not be
provoked by him, but forgive him till seventy times seven times. Seventy times
seven times trespass of thy brother against thee, must not put thee out of a
forgiving temper toward him, but thou must be as ready, nay more ready to
forgive; then he can be prone to offend, Thou must not say it is carelessness or
obstinacy in him, or he might have avoided it if he would, no not at his
seventy seventh time of his tresspassing against thee, but thou should be as
ready to forgive him as thou wast or could be the first time. We should not
be murmuring against any miscarriages of our brethren, but bless God who has
taught us and given us grace to pity them, to pray for them, and to be
otherwise sweetly and meekly helpful to them in love, toward raising and
restoring of them. And thus the first Question is dispatched, How Christ loves
the Saints? The second is now to ensue, which is,

Why the heart of Christ is so much in this thing? why of all Commandments
Christ picketh out this Command as his, and drives it home in such a forcible
manner upon them, as here he does?

Ans. It is not for nothing, or upon no consideration that the Spirit of Christ
is thus earnest, for there is a weight in the spirit of the thing which draws
him. The practice of this is of mighty concernment in this dispensation of
life, which God is pleased to minister by him, and that both in respect of God,
and in respect of the duty it self.

In respect of God. There are some considerations in reference to him, which
cannot but incline Christ's heart very much unto it; as,

1. Christ's heart is set so much upon this thing, because the heart of God is
so much in it. Christ came but as Gods Minister, and gave Commandments in Gods
Name; The words which he spoke, and the commands which he gave, were not his
own primarily, but his that sent him, as he often says. Now the Apostle (who
lay in Christ's bosom, and was continually searching into his heart, and
learning the mind of God there) expressly tells us, that this is Gods
Commandment. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment, 1 John 3.23.
There were two things which Christ especially applied himself unto; first to
bring men to believe on him, and afterward to love one another, and the reason
was, because these were the especial things which God required. They were first
Gods chief Commandments, and then Christ's chief Commandments.

2. Because it is so much for the honor of God. To have his children, his
family full of love, living in love, acting love in strength one toward
another, is greatly for his honor. It is a dishonor to a Master of a family
to have his servants quarrelling, and his children falling out. It does not
become the God of Love to have his children destitute of or short in love,
especially one among another. Hatred becomes the Devil and the men of this
world, but it is a dishonor to God to have it found in his children toward
one another. Christ came with love, and Christ came to give and teach love, and
it is an honorable badg of them who are taught by him to know God and his
Gospel: It is an honor to them, an honor to him who has thus dignified and
qualified them.

In respect of the duty it self. There are some considerations there too, which
were great attractives in the eye and to the heart of Christ, to move him
vehemently to desire it in them, and so strictly to enjoin it to them, as
namely, Its excellency in its own nature, its comeliness in them, and its
profitableness both to them and others. Christ loving them so much, cannot but
much desire to find in them, that which is exceeding excellent, that which is
so wondrous comely, and that which cannot but be so richly profitable
wheresoever it is.

1. It is a duty of a most excellent nature. Love is the most excellent of all
graces, (the Apostle ranks it in the first place of the most choice graces, the
greatest whereof he affirms to be love, 1 Cor. 13.13.) therefore the actings
of love must needs be the most excellent of all actings. That grace which is of
the most excellent nature, and which has the strongest influence into all the
work we are to do for God, is love; and answerably the actings of love have the
most noble and lively operations in them. It is both the most quickening and
most mortifying grace, having least of self, most of God in it. Faith goes out
much for self (for its own safety and salvation, for the supply of its own
wants) but love always for another. And in loving one another, the clearest,
purest and excellentest acts of love do shoot forth; because there often
appears that in this object which would take away or at least stop love in
its current, if it were not very clear, pure and excellent. There are always
infirmities there at least, if not corruptions, and perhaps unkind actings
toward us also, which have too too much influence upon the best in damping
their love. God is such an object of love, that even the eye of Nature sees
loveliness in him, and calls for love toward him, and that so strongly, that
it hides the natural enmity that is in men against him from their own eyes, in
so much as they think they love him, and cannot but love him, though in truth
they hate him: but as for the Saints, there are abundance of unlovely things in
them, hardly any thing lovely but the grace of Christ, and commonly that also
covered with much unloveliness.

There is likewise usually that in this object of love, which most sets off
the actings of faith. What is it most commends the actings of faith, but its
duration and activity in the midst of that which is contrary and dangerous to
it? As when God distresseth the Soul, appearing as an enemy, seeming even to
kill faith it self, taking away all visible ground of hope in him, for faith
now to continue, yea and act still in strength, exceedingly commends the virtue
and excellency of its nature. Why love has this trial very frequently, It has
still almost somewhat or other in the Saints to slacken it, if not quite to eat
it out; much unloveliness of their own appearing amidst a little loveliness of
grace, yea and perhaps that little grace hid too, and nothing but corruption
visible: So that love toward this object thus held on, is an excellent duty
indeed.

2. It is a comely duty. O how comely is it for brethren to live together in
unity, to love and cherish one another! There are two things which much adorn
Religion, obedience to God, and love to our brethren. It is an uncomely thing
to see men fall out because they are of one nature, which is a strong bond of
agreement, yea stronger and more extensive then is in the rest of the
creatures: but O how uncomely is it to see Saints fall out, who meet in the
bonds of so excellent a nature as theirs is! To see the world hate them, and
make a prey of them, is no more wonder, then to see a Wolf persecute and prey
upon a Lamb: yet if they were of the world, the world would love them; If ye
were of the world, the world would love its own, Joh. 15.19. It is such a piece
of uncomeliness as the world is ashamed to be guilty of, not to love its own;
do ye not see every thing, throughout the world, tender of its own? how much
more uncomely is it for you, who have a closer union then this world knows
of, to hate one another!

Every nature has a love proportionable suited to it, which is comely, and the
contrary whereof is uncomely. This is the most excellent nature, and therefore
has the highest love suited to it, and the greatest comeliness attends it, and
the contrary thereunto must needs be most uncomely. O how comely is it for
brethren to live together in unity: for Jews, for true Jews, who are brethren
in Christ, to live together in the union and love of Christ; who can express
how comely, how sweet, how pleasant it is?

3. It is a profitable duty. As it is of the most excellent nature of all
graces, so it is the most profitable, bringing forth fruit answerable to the
excellency of its nature. It is profitable to others, It is profitable to
themselves.

It is profitable to others, and that to all sorts of men whatsoever, whether a
friend or an enemy, whether in an unconverted estate, or in what condition
soever being converted.

1. To men in an unconverted estate. There is a double profit may arise unto
them from the actings of love.

1. It will make them take more notice of Christ and of his ways. This kind of
love exercised among the Saints, will make the world begin to perceive that
their life is more sublime and weighty, then the life which is in the world is:
it will help to convince them and force them to see what their eyes are shut
against, namely the reality of the life and power of Christ, and the truth of
their relation to him. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye have love one to another, Joh. 13.35.

2. If exercised toward the world (as it cannot but break forth that way also)
it cannot but melt them. Harsh ways harden, but sweet ways melt. Passion
breaking forth seldom does good, but acts of affection are very powerful. This
is an heaping coals of fire upon their head, which will assuredly melt them at
last, Romans 12.20. for none is able to stand before the enchantments of the
truth and power of love. Yea this, the very worlds sight of the exercise of
love of the brethren among themselves, may in a great degree produce, though
not so fully as if it were exercised much and several ways toward the world it
self.

2. To men in a converted estate. There is nothing more useful to them, in what
condition soever they be, then love. What ever faith it self can do for them,
love must quicken and give vent to, Faith works by love. Love, as it is
generally serviceable and profitable, so especially to fellow-Saints, and to
them it cannot but be profitable, what ever they be, where ever they be, how
ever it be with them. Be they weak or strong, standing or falling, sweet or
sullen in their spirits, any other way rightly tempered or distempered, how
ever inclined or acted, love rightly going forth toward them, is very fit to
do them good, which will easily appear if we consider these few properties in
love.

1. It has an edifying property. The great use both of offices and gifts in
the Church, is the edification of the Church: but love is more profitable to
edification then all gifts whatsoever. The Apostle sets up prophesying above
all other gifts in this respect, and yet lays that also flat before love, 1
Cor. 13. We do not take a right course, so much to bewail the loss of gifts, we
should first and chiefly bewail the loss of love. We might do well enough
without gifts, if we had but love enough: but we could not possibly edify
without love, had we never so many gifts. They are not gifts simply, but grace
which edifieth, which love is, whereas gifts are not so: And gifts when they do
edify must be subordinated under and ordered by grace. It is not thy gift, but
the grace of Christ in thy brother, which makes him edify by thy gift.
Therefore though thy gift be never so large, and never so well improved and
employed, yet if the heart of thy brother be not in a gracious frame, he is not
edified thereby. Yea further, it is not the learning more of the knowledge and
mysteries of Christ (which is the proper end of gifts) but love which edifieth;
A man may be swelled up by knowledge, but it is love whereby he both edifieth
and is edified, Knowledge puffs up, but love edifieth. It is not simply the
use of a gift, but the gracious use of it, the use of it in love which
edifieth, in so much as that a little delivered in a sweet gracious manner,
will edify much more then a great deal delivered by virtue of a gift. Gifts
without grace dispose us rather to slight and cast off persons, then to take
that pains which is necessary to edification, the will whereunto, and skill
wherein, only love has.

2. It has an assisting property. Love is ever ready to aid and assist. Love
will set its shoulder to every burden, lend its hand to every work. What is
there, or can there be to be done, which love will not help to do?

3. It has an encouraging and strengthening property. Love delights to be
encouraging and strengthening the faint and the weak. Weak Saints may make much
use of a Soul, where there is much love. Thus Christ taught Peter by the
exercise of his own love to him, When thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren.

4. It has a recovering property. What made God recover sinners, but his love?
Had he not loved them, he would have let them lie for ever in their lost
estate: And he who has the same love in him, cannot rest till he has raised
and restored his fallen brother. Into what traveling pangs did love put Paul in
for the Galatians, toward the recovery of them?

5. It has a communicative property, and that in a sweet distilling way. Love
is ever communicative; it will reserve nothing, but impart every thing. God
loving his, can withhold nothing from them. This makes love so edifying,
because it cannot but impart whatsoever it has that may tend to edification,
or to the good of another in any kind. And it does not barely impart, but in
the sweetest way: It does distill and drop into another, making insensible
impressions, stealing into the heart and overcoming it before the party is
aware. Love has every property suitable to communicativeness, and to a sweet
way of communication, as in the Apostles description of it, in 1 Cor. 13. may
easily be Thus useful and profitable to others, is love.

And it is also profitable unto themselves. The practice of this duty of love
to the brethren, is very profitable to them in whom it is, and from whom it
issues, which may evidently appear in these several particulars following.

1. It will teach them to love both God and Christ in the fullest manner. Our
happiness consists in loving of God: The knowledge of God is but a means to
make us love him: It is not either Gods bare knowing of us, or our bare knowing
of him, which most advantageth or satisfies either, but the meeting of our
affections together, which all the discoveries and knowledge of each other do
but make way for. And there would be no want of any thing to us, were there not
want of love in us: There is life enough in God, and were there but love enough
in us, we could not but draw out and take in enough of it. The Lord thy God
will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord and
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. There would be no want of spiritual life in us, or of the motions
of this life in and toward God, were there not a want of love unto him.

Now loving of the brethren will teach us to love God: both because there is
that more abundantly in God which we love in them, and because in him it is
pure without that imperfection which attends and soils it in them. If we love
the image though so full of spots, how can we choose but love the substance,
which is without any spots, much more? He that loves him which begets, loves
that which is begotten: and by loving that which is begotten, he grows more
and more in love with that which did beget. The frequent practice of love
toward that which is weak and imperfect, will advantage it both in skill and
strength toward that which is perfect and completely able to receive and
answer all the touches of it.

2. It will teach them to interpret things well from God. This one thing does
us most harm of any thing, our harsh interpretations of the good ways of God
toward us. It is not only very unnatural and unkind in us, and most irksom to
the heart of God, but it is also most prejudicial to us, for in a degree (so
far as it goes) it withdraws our spirits from the fountain of our life and
strength: It puts a stop to our spirits in our drawing of that, which at that
time we most want.

Now love to the brethren will teach us otherwise: for this ever accompanies
love, namely, a good interpretation of the actions of those we love. Let any
one tell us of what an ill turn our friend has done us; Surely he did it not,
says Love; or If he did it, it was with no ill intent toward me; Though it
has proved ill, he intended it well: Love thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. yea
verse: 7. It believes all things, it hops all things. Though sense and
experience say otherwise, yet if says or hope can put a good interpretation
upon it, it will receive it; if it can but find any ground to believe
otherwise, or to hope otherwise, it is glad of it: and it is a very hard case
wherein there is room neither for faith nor hope. Love it very incredulous of
any ill (though God continually found the Jews a lying generation, whose heart
was not right with him, neither were they ever steadfast in his Covenant, yet
his love made him upon all occasions say and think concerning them, Surely they
are children that will not lie, Isai. 63.8.). Where we are so apt to surmize or
believe surmises, there must needs be great want of love.

But how does this teach us to interpret things well of God? Why thus. A man
that accustometh himself to interpret things well concerning his brother shall
find very great benefit in it. He shall find himself delivered from many harsh
and evil thoughts of his brother, which otherwise would attend him: He shall
find many times how he had wronged his brother, if he had judged otherwise; and
though his brother should prove faulty at length, yet it will be time enough to
judge it so then. Why now, has he not much more cause of interpreting things
well from God? Cannot a man repent of interpreting things well of his brother,
and shall he ever repent of interpreting things well of God? Besides, the
practice of this duty toward his brothers will enforce him to observe it in
the same degree at least, if not further, toward his God also. Shall a man not
dare to believe any thing ill of his brother, until it evidently appear, and
shall he judge his God so soon as Satan puts him upon it?

3. It will teach them to bear any thing from Gods hand. We shall have enough
to bear from our brethren, and yet love will not refuse to bear, be it never so
much: Love bears all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. We shall never have that to bear
from God, which we daily meet with, and have reason to expect from our
brethren. We have ground to expect from them unkind, froward, injurious actings
toward us, besides their prejudicial actings to their own Souls, (which will
wound no more then the former, if we be spiritual;) all which we must bear, and
yet proceed on in every act of love toward them. We shall find none of these
things in God, but only pure, wise actings for our good: And can a man bear the
weaknesses of men, and yet grumble at the wisdom of God?

4. It will teach a man to look the better to his own heart: The observing and
helping to cure the evils of other men's hearts, will teach us to espy and
prevent the evils of our own. This is the great benefit which attends the
practice of all the duties of love to the brethren, namely, that what we do but
endeavor to do to them, we do to our selves insensibly: While we are teaching
them, we are imprinting truths on our own hearts; while we are watching over
them, we are looking to our selves, etc. So that though others should reap no
benefit by our care and pains, yet we our selves shall have no cause to repent
of it.

5. It will make us very feelingly to admire the wonderful strength and virtue
of the love of God, and that will be a very profitable thing to us: for as our
stability, the certainty of our state, is in the love of God, by its laying
hold of us, and comprehending us; so our sweetness, our rest, our content, our
satisfaction, is by beholding it, and reposing our selves in it. Now the
practice of this duty of love to the brethren cannot choose but very effectually
work up the sight and admiration of this in us, when we shall continually see
so many failings and loathsome things in our selves and in others (as this will
draw us to do,) and yet God, notwithstanding all these, to entirely, so fully,
so constantly, so perfectly still loving us all.

6. It will make all duties, of one toward another, easy. Love is a
quickening ingredient, which puts life into the spirit, and makes every
thing light with which we have to do. What made Jacobs hard servitude so easy,
but his love to Rachel? What made Christ so lightly trip through those
intricate thorny paths through which he passed, but his entire love to his
Saints? The weightiest service of love is easier then the largest liberty in
the very kingdom of enmity. That which is a great load to a weak back, alas
what is it to him who abounds with strength? Strength of love in the heart will
put strength into the feet, into the arms, into the hands; into the shoulders,
etc. so that every motion in every one of them will be easy and delightful. It
is the setting about duties without love which makes them so heavy: How can
that be done without love, which is only to be done with love! This is the
great difference between our motions now adays, and the motions of the
primitive Christians, theirs did issue from a Spring, we go about to force out
ours with artificial engines: They had love kindled in them, and love drawn
forth in them by virtue of the same life which kindled it; We reason love into
our hearts, and reason out the practices of it, and alas how weak is this! But
had we, of a truth, love enough (enough of that love) and the art of
proportioning out love enough to every duty, we should fail in none, nor
complain of any.

Thus exceedingly profitable to our selves is love exercised by us toward the
brethren. (Where, by the way, we may take notice of the strength of Christ's
love to us: It is love in him to us, which makes him so strictly to lay this
Commandment upon us of loving one another: He knew how useful it would be for
us, and therefore in a more then ordinary manner he enjoyneth it unto us.)

And thus we see the Reason why Christ beats so much on this subject, why his
heart is so much in it, why he makes it his Commandment? It is a thing which
his Father much desires, and is much for his Fathers honor: It is exceedingly
useful to his Saints; both them that practice it, and all to whom they practice
it: and can you blame Christ in laying so much weight upon it?

To propose now a little Application of all this.

Is the heart of Christ so much in this thing? is this his especial
Commandment, his peculiar Commandment, the Commandment of his choice, which his
Soul so thirsts after to have observed by us, That we should love one another
as he has loved us? Then,

1. What shall we say to our Lord Jesus Christ, when we come to stand before
him and his Father, in the presence of all his Saints and Angels, for our so
gross neglect of this duty?

When this Law shall be read before us (This is my Commandment, that ye love
one another, etc.) and the often pressings of it by Christ himself and by his
Apostles throughout all the New Testament; and when our hearts and actions
shall be looked into, and so little of it found in either?

When the Saints in the Apostles times shall rise up, and their hearts shall be
opened, which were so full of love and entireness, that they could spend and be
spent one for another?

When the Saints under the ten Persecutions shall arise, whose love is reported
to have been so firm and large, that the very Persecutors themselves did bear
witness unto it, and were amazed at it?

When the hearts of worldlings shall be ripped up, and stronger love appear
there toward their fellow-worldlings, then in the Christians of this
generation toward their Fellow Christians?

When men directly-wicked shall appear to have loved the image of the Devil
better in one another, then we the image of God and of Christ?

Yea when our own hearts shall be ripped up, and the actings of our natural
affection being made visible, it shall appear concerning our selves that we
gave scope to that, but the new nature, and the powers of love in it, have been
rather choked in us, then drawn forth toward one another?

What shall we say in our own behalfs? We can blame one another very sorely now
in cases of far inferior consequence, but how shall we answer this our selves
before the Judge? We own the life of Christ in one another, but alas where is
our love to that life! We say Christ is our Lord, why this is his great
Commandment, that wherein his very heart and soul and spirit is, where is our
obedience? who can answer this in his own spirit now? and if not now, how will
he be able to acquit himself then, when the light shall be perfectly clear, and
all the fig leaves, wherewith we now so cunningly cover the evil of our hearts,
ways, motions and actions from our own eyes, quite taken away, and made
altogether unable from affording any shelter to us?

2. It may occasion an enquiry, why love should be so barren, so dead among
Christians? so backward in its growth, so prone to decay? That little life and
virtue which it had among us once, where is it? I shall not prosecute this
enquiry so far as it lies open to me, but mention only these two causes from
whence it may very well arise.

1. From a decay of grace in us, from our decay in love to Christ; or at least
from the weakness of it, where it is not decayed. Were grace strong, were love
to Christ strong, we could not choose but love those that are Christ's more. If
we did not fail in love toward him who does beget, we should better love those
who are begotten by him.

2. From a carelessness in acting the duty. We are not careful to draw out a
spiritual affection (and a natural affection will not do it,) and upon
spiritual grounds, and with a spiritual fervency, and in a spiritual manner:
but we go to love Saints, as we do other men. We do not simply love grace in
them, There must be somewhat besides grace to draw forth and continue our
affections, or else they warp. Our love goes forth in flesh, and not to the
pure life, but partly toward flesh, which it many times missing of, there
presently grows a faintness and decay of love. If love were more pure in us,
and were drawn forth more purely from us toward its own pure object, it would
be more lasting.

3. It speaks out a very strong Exhortation, of it self inviting and vehemently
persuading Christians to press hard after this duty, and never to give their
spirits rest till this duty be as much in their hearts and lives, as it is in
the heart of Christ concerning them.

For the prosecution of this Exhortation, I shall propound some few Motives to
it, some Directions concerning it, and likewise some Helps toward it.

To begin with the Motives. Though all that has been said be of a stirring
attractive nature, yet it may not be amiss at last cast to drive in two or
three nails again.

First then, Consider this well, that this is the way which Christ himself has
appointed us to express our love to him in. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments; and what Commandments? This is my Commandment, that ye love one
another. Peter, love thou me? feed my Lambs: If thou love me, show it, and
if thou will show it, show it in thy love and care of my Lambs; what thou do
to them, thou do to me. Our goodness cannot reach God or Christ, but the
Saints, Psalm. 16.2.

2. Remember that this will yield unto Christ matter of joy in you. He
rejoices in working this love in you, and he will rejoice more in the
continuance, growth and exercise of this love. These things have I spoken unto
you that my joy might remain in you, says he in the very next words to this
Text, verse. 11. of the 15 Chapt. It will continually administer joy to the
Spirit of Christ, to find love flourishing in you one to another.

3. Remember also that it will be an occasion of filling your own spirits with
joy, so it is also expressed in that verse. 11. These things have I spoken unto
you that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. It is
incredible what fullness of joy streams along in the sweetness of love: besides,
it is the delight of Christ to fill his spirit with joy, whose spirit he has
already filled love.

Quest. But how may I attain this duty? I find my spirit much inflamed with it,
O that I might be a little guided to it.

Ans. If thou be not better provided apply thy self to the observation of
these few Directions.

1. Set this duty clearly before thine eyes. Consider well what kind of love it
must be, upon what grounds it is to be fastened and carried on, in what degree,
what must be the actings of it, and in what manner it is to act. Christians
commonly do not understand what they do, when they buckle to this duty; nor how
purely and firmly this affection must move, notwithstanding all manner of
discouragements from them we love, which cannot but cause them much to falter
in the performance of it.

2. Be working up thy heart to it daily. Be working it up to a spiritual love,
be working spiritual grounds into thy heart, that thy spirit may be engaged and
move spiritually. Thou must be a kind of husbandman to the seed of the life of
God in thee, thou must receive it, thou must cherish it, and thou must provoke
it unto motion. This thou must be doing, though thou can not do this nor any
thing else that is spiritual. Wonderfully strange and mysterious is the
operation of God in the Gospel: He works all in us of his own pleasure, and yet
so as if we moved and wrought all our selves. The Lord lies hidden in all the
motions of our spirits, and by an unseen strength, virtue and influence does
all there, yea even that which we seem to do our selves; and yet we must up and
be doing every thing, though we can do nothing.

3. Entreat God to write this Law in thy bowels. God wrote it in Christ's heart,
and he must also write it in thine, if ever it be found there. Therefore pray
to God to write it there, and to write it there abundantly; that as he has bid
thee love all Saints, so he would give thee love large enough to go forth fully
toward all Saints. We must be taught of God to love one another, if ever we
learn this Lesson.

4. Entreat God to draw forth this love, when ever thou art to act it. If we
see a thing to be duty, we presently set about it, and blame our hearts if they
fall short in it. This we should do indeed, but we should also when this is
done (or rather while this is in doing) go to God, in whom all our strength
lies, to perform it in us. And this we might do at first, if we were but
sensible enough of our own weakness without a practical experiment; but
therefore God puts us continually upon endeavoring our selves, because we
forget how weak and unable we are to do any thing, any longer then we find it
in our utmost strivings. Go therefore to God, who has promised not only to
write his Law in our hearts, but to cause us to walk in his ways. What ever way
of God there is, God will not only write the Law of it in the hearts of his
people, but he will make them walk in it. He will put such affections and
strength into them, that they shall not be able to forbear walking therein.

Quest. But are there no Helps which may further me herein? Those which are
skilfully practical know how to lead another into that path wherein they
themselves have walked. If you have met with any knowledge or experience in this
kind, O do not hide it from us, but help us a little in this track which is so
auk and difficult to the spirit of man.

Ans. What I have found most beneficial unto and powerful with my self herein,
I shall very willingly impart unto you in whom this desire is kindled.
Therefore from my own proof and experience I shall commend unto you these four
Helps.

1. Would you love the Saints as Christ has loved both them and you? Then, in
the first place, Look upon them in Christ, and there thou shall ever see them
full objects for thy love. Thus God looks upon us in our wretched estate
(even in Christ) or he could never continue loving us. O how lovely are the
Saints in Christ! They are imputatively perfect in him at present, (God reckons
so, and why should not thou reckon so?) and they shall be absolutely perfect
ere long. They shall be made perfectly like Christ, and have all those spots
taken away which now thou espiest in them, which are left upon them at present,
not to make them unlovely in thine eyes, but for a design which God has for
his own glory, the good of all Saints, and thine in particular. If a pure
spiritual eye were always thus fastened upon them, a pure spiritual heart would
always love them.

2. Expect all manner of weaknesses and imperfections in them. Look for
distempers upon them, and all manner of evil breaking forth and taking its
swinge in them, so far as God leaves them. Do thou not find it so in thine
own heart?

This is another means whereby God strengthens his heart in loving us. He
expects no manner of good from us, but what he himself works in us: He expects
all manner of evils and distempers which he himself does not prevent. And all
the evil that issues forth, he attributes not to us, but to sin that dwells
in us. Why go thou and do likewise, and thou will love as God loves.

Paul does thus concerning himself. The good I would do I cannot, nor avoid the
evil which I would not do, but what I hate that do I, oh wretched man, etc. I
can expect no good from my self, I can hinder no evil in my self: but yet it is
not I, but sin that dwells in me. It is the unlovely part, that which I am to
hate, not that which I am to love, which does this.

There are two great faults in us. We do not labor enough to be holy our
selves, and we expect it too much in others. If we did look for holiness more
in our own hearts, and expect it less in others, this duty would be far easier
then it is. But when we expect much, what ever falls short of our expectation
displeases us, and dampeth our affections.

3. Be ever stirring up their graces in them, and mark the workings of their
graces in the midst of their distempers. This will still keep thine eye upon
their loveliness at all times, and so will still draw forth love toward them.

1. Be ever stirring up their graces in them. Grace is the proper attractive of
spiritual love, the sight whereof cannot but kindle it. Thus Christ makes the
flowers and spices in his garden to yield their savor, and then falls in love
with their scent. We think it is the duty of others to give forth their light
and discover their graces to us; but we are apt to forget that it is also our
duty to be drawing forth their light, and stirring up their graces. This was
Paul's practice (that great Lover of the Saints,) Romans 1.11, and 12. For I long
to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end you may
be established. That is, that I may be comforted together with you, by the
mutual faith both of you and me. This was his design and course when ever he
came among Saints, to see what grace they had in them, to search out and stir
up grace, that he might draw forth his own love in enjoying of them, in
delighting in them, and in adding somewhat to them suitable to their state and
condition. 2. Observe the workings of their graces in the midst of their
distempers. We are usually exceedingly faulty in this: We never consider the
distempers in Christians, but look they should always act as if they were in a
right temper, (though we expect they should consider our distempers.) And then
in their distempers we mark the stirrings of their corruptions, but though
grace strive and help much to the keeping of them down, we take little notice
of that. Whereas God considers the least distempers in us, and cherishes and
is delighted with the least motions of grace in us in our distempers. If it
were otherwise, what would become of us?

4. Consider thine own weaknesses and sins. Does any evil befall thy brother
which thou can avoid? Does thy brother neglect any good which thou can do?
He has fallen into this or that evil; who has kept thy heart? How long will thou keep out of the same evil into which thy brother is fallen, if God leave
thee to the same temptation? Consider therefore the breakings forth of thine
own heart in sin, where God does suffer it; and how far it would break forth if
God did not hinder it. And take heed of murmuring against thy brother as one
that falls into sins, breeds troubles, hinders mercies, interrupts the
sweetness of communion, etc.

There is a very notable place to this purpose, Jam. 5.9. Groan not one against
another, Brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold the Judge stands before the
door. Our spirits will be very apt to groan one against another, O such an one
has hindered much good, if it had not been for him things might have gone well.
Take heed, the Judge stands at the door, who will come and rip open thy heart
and thy ways, and show thee somewhat which thou little thoughtst of, and so
thou who groanest against another wilt be condemned thy self. Nay though thou
have spoken to them in the Name of the Lord, (as he carries it, verse. 10.) and
they may seem to have despised thy message, nay have really both despised thee
and the Lord in whose Name thou have spoken; yet take heed of so much as
groaning against them, lest the Judge also find matter against thee. It is not
fit for one guilty person to breathe out complaints against another.

Therefore consider thine own heart well, and observe the failings there; Are
there not more there then in thy brothers, all things considered? And consider
if thou would be willing to have Christ withdraw his heart from thee, or
whether thou would have him take occasion hereby to exercise toward thee
such acts of love as thy need now requires, as to pity thee, to stand ready to
help thee, to take that course which may best help thee, etc. If so, go and do
so to thy brother. If thou would have him keep that Law of Love which God
has given him concerning thee, do thou by his strength improve his grace to
the keeping of that Law of Love which he has given thee concerning thy
fellow-Saints: and this is his Commandment, that we love one another as he has
loved us.

Now for a close, that he that reads may understand.

All this is but an exercise by way of Discipline to the seed in its childhood,
as indeed all other things also are. The threatenings, the rewards, the
promises, the comforts, the enjoyments, etc. in every dispensation, are suited
to the state of the child.

When the day dawns, the shadows will fly away: When Truth appears, that which
did represent it, as an image of it, must give place.

Yet these images or representations are not such as either Satan or the mind
of man frames, which are vanity and a lie, but true and substantial
representations of Truth.

But though they are truth in their kind, yet they must not stand for ever, but
only their appointed season, which is till Truth of a deeper kind come, or at
least till the night before the day of Truths discovery.

It were good for every one that he knew his dispensation, and what is proper
for him in it, that he might both bear the yoke and enjoy the sweetness of it,
not leaping out of it before he be led. This overmuch haste will cost him
dear, for all the ground he treads after this rate, he must traverse back
again, before he can come to that forwardness wherein he was, even under that
dispensation out of which he thus slightly passed.

There is a true death in and to a dispensation, which there is no redemption
from: There is no more life to be had in or under that dispensation by him whom
God has truly slain in and unto it. But there are deadnesses in and under
ministrations, which are not so much as degrees of this death, nay there are
deaths also which are not this death, which the life in those that are under
those ministrations is to recover out of, or they must suffer loss thereby.

In the most lively ministration among Christians, Love has still been the
life: and in that way wherein they yet are, these things may be useful. But yet
there is a more excellent way, and more excellent things then are now thought
of, which will be manifested in due time. But it is very dangerous striving to
ascend up to them aforehand, the sweetest and safest way is to wait the season
of their descent. The deep sense of the want whereof, with an assured
expectation and quiet waiting and groaning for, is the best strain of Religion,
of the purest stamp of any I know extant. Life is now wrapped up, coming very
little forth; yet most in these motions to the sense and judgment that I have
of it.

Some few Catechistical Questions concerning the way of Salvation by Christ.
Quest. WHat is the sum of the Gospel?

Ans. It contains the news or tidings of one anointed by God to be a Prince
and Savior to his people, to redeem them from their sin, misery and captivity,
into the happy freedom of true life.

Q. How does this Savior save?

A. By reconciling God and his people together by virtue of the anointing.

Q. How came God and his people to be at odds?

A. By their disobedience to a Law set up between God and them (which was
agreeable and assented unto by their own nature) the effects whereof severed
them from God, and Gods own righteousness severed him from them; which
disobedience of theirs (to his most righteous Law in it self, and most natural
to them) though it could not root them out of the inmost of each others hearts,
yet it raises a wall of enmity and separation on each hand to the utmost
limits of that dispensation, wherein God and they are perfect haters one of
another; They the objects of his wrath as much as any (the children of wrath as
well as others,) and he as hateful unto them as unto others.

Q. How does Christ effect a reconciliation between them?

A. By his mediation between God and them, the anointing fitting him, and he
making use of the anointing to the utmost, to work both unto terms of hearty
agreement. For he undertaketh to stand as a middle person between them, equal
to each, proposing such terms whereon they may agree without prejudice or
detriment on either side; and to ratify and establish this agreement himself,
so as they shall never have cause more of variance on either hand. He takes off
the old occasion wholly, and will not suffer any new seeds of division to be
sown, or any new occasion of difference to arise.

Q. How can he possibly do this?

A. He cannot miss of it the way that he takes, which is, by taking the whole
work of each upon him (he being sufficiently furnished to do it, by the Law of
Life in himself) that neither shall expect any thing from the other, but only
from him, who as he is powerful, so he promises to be faithful unto each. God
knowing his power and fidelity, is easily satisfied; and when he is a little
acquainted with them (or rather they with him) he makes them sensible thereof
likewise, and fails not of begetting confidence also in them.

Q. What does he undertake in reference to God?

A. These two things.

1. To give him full satisfaction for the offense committed. Let Justice cry
with open mouth, it shall be filled, it shall have enough.

2. To fit them fully for him: To make them a fit Spouse, a fit Temple, a fit
Habitation for his Life, Majesty and Holiness.

Q. What satisfaction does he give to God?

A. He pays him in the coin wherein he was robed, and that very perfectly
stamped, for he gives him both active and passive obedience in every thing he
calls for from him. He does his Will and suffers his Will as much and as long
as he pleases. This he did all his life, and at last at his death gives him a
full round sum of both, in sacrificing himself to his pleasure, which was both
his act (for he gave himself, he gave up his life,) and his passion (for he
suffered most deeply in it.)

Q. How does he fit them for God?

A. Three ways.

1. By cleansing them from all their pollutions.

2. By filling them both within and without with all such riches, glory and
beauty as is comely in the eye of God.

3. By turning their hearts toward God: for all manner of fitness without this
will not make a match.

Now these though they be distinct works, yet they are done together. They are
begun together, they are carried on together, they are perfected together.

Q. But by what means does Christ accomplish all this?

A. By working repentance and faith in them, and by causing repentance and
faith to grow up in them: for hereby he both changes their natures, and
transplanteth them; so that they are no more what they were, nor where they
were; so that God cannot look upon them either as such as they were, or as in
such a state as they were in, for Christ (who is real in his operations) has
really changed them in both respects.

Q. What is Repentance?

A. It is the turning of the heart from sin, upon the sight of the evil and
misery of it, shown by Christ to the eye of the new nature. (Repentance is only
the diversion from, the conversion to, is faith, or an act of faith.) He gives
them a sight of the evil of sin, of what a loathsome nature it is, how filthy
and odious it makes them in themselves and to every pure eye; as also of the
misery of it, which is both present slavery and future condemnation and wrath:
And hereby he turns their hearts clean from it, that they desire nothing more
then to be fairly rid of it.

Q. What is Faith?

A. It is a receiving of Christ into the understanding, into the heart, into
the whole man; and a giving up of the understanding, heart and all unto Christ.
It is a taking in and a giving it self up unto the leaven of the Kingdom. It is
the Souls glue, given it by Christ, whereby it clings and fastens to Christ,
and whereby it fastens Christ to it self.

(It is a very curious work, requiring very accurate skill, which Christ
operateth between God and his people. He offers force to neither, but deals
with each suitable to their natures, and by his skill and power therein,
works and brings both about.)

Q. How does Christ work repentance and faith in them?

A. He bestows them upon them. He sends his Word, the Gospel of the Kingdom,
by his Ministers, wherein or in which Vessel is this seed of Light, of Life, of
Liberty, which he distills or drops into their understandings, and into their
hearts, whereby (by the presence of which, by the growth of which, by the
influence and operation of which) he gains upon them.

Q. What does he undertake in reference to them?

A. Two things.

1. To give them in the pardon of their sins from God, so that they shall find
them washed off from their own Consciences, they shall feel him at peace with
them. This was not an imaginary act of the Soul (as it is very much now adays)
but a real act of God, really transacted by God upon the Soul, and really seen
by the eye of the Soul, and truly felt in the heart and spirit.

2. Communion with God, both in such a degree as is needful for them at
present, and in perfection of glory at last. They are sons now, heirs at
present, having fellowship with God as his sons, as his heirs; but then, in the
time of it, they shall enjoy their inheritance, which is reserved for them till
they be grown up.

Q. But may not God and they fall out afterward as they did before, and so
their end prove worse then their beginning?

A. No, for Christ undertaketh to preserve them, to keep them safe from all
evils and dangers, in so much as they shall not fall upon them further then
shall be for their good: to work in them and for them all their works: to keep
off wrath, that it shall seize no further upon them, then he himself in wisdom
and love sees good to let it out. In a word: God shall never have more to say
to them, but from him; nor they never have more to do with God, but through
him, who loves them perfectly, and who as he began, so he will continue merely
from the strength of his own love to perfect his own work in them, which though
his wisdom may cause him to carry on very mysteriously, yet his love will not
let him fail doing of it very safely.

Q. What must he do who is instated in this Salvation, in and for whom this
Redemption is begun by Jesus Christ?

A. He must be continually sacrificing himself by the Spirit of the Lord (in
which he that is in Christ lives and moves and acts) until he become an whole
burnt-offering unto the Lord: until all his light, all his life, all his will
be swallowed up and perfectly lost in the Light, in the Life, in the Will of
the Lord. Not only until his corruption be dissolved and consumed, but till his
very nature and being (in all the powers, motions and operations of it) be
changed into the Nature and Being of the Lord: until the new creature has
wholly spread it self all over him, and he be become wholly a new lump. This, he
who is not truly changed, cannot do; and he who is truly changed cannot but do.

A Postscript about Religion.
THere have always been two kinds of Religions in the world, (besides the
several strains in each, and the several ways of jumbling each together, which
the vain heart of man has invented to entangle and vex it self withal,) The
one Heathenish or Devilish, The other Heavenly or Divine; The one wrought out
of the Earth by the assistance of Satan, The other let down into the Earth by
the Spirit of the Lord.

The whole Earth is still taken up about Religion. It is both natural and
artificial, and that about which the whole strength of Nature and Art is most
employed. There has not been any part of the Earth so barbarous, wherein there
have not been some strains of devotion found. There is every where (where the
nature of man appears, where the art of man is exercised, and where there is
any breath either of God or Satan stiring) some kind of seed, and some kind of
culture of Religion.

The main end of Religion (in reference to us) is Salvation. Not only present
relief and protection in our present feeble estate, but Salvation in a future
estate, which the very nature of man points him unto, and teaches him to
look after. We are at present involved in misery, we feel it: Every creature
feels it according to its kind, and we according to our kind. There is some
future estate of things unto which we all are passing: And this present estate,
though it be wholly vain in reference to us, as we now are, yet it cannot be at
all vain in reference to that; but that which is perfect must of necessity
order every thing perfectly to its end, so that nothing be lost, not any one
motion of any creature in any kind.

Now this is most evident, That though all men almost expect Salvation, yet the
attainment of it will be very rare. The common paths of Heathenish Worship will
not lead to it, and in the midst of the Dispensations of God there are few who
truly walk to it. How few of the Jews, under the Dispensation of the Law, did
truly walk toward Salvation! And how many Disciples, under the Gospel, ran so
as they could not obtain! Many shall say, Lord, Lord, open to us; but the Lord
shall answer them, Verily I know you not. They shall speak like persons well
acquainted with the Lord, and very sure of entrance: but the Lord will disown
them, and tell them publicly, Of a truth I know you not.

Does it not then behove every one to look about him? It is very ill trifling
about Eternity. Thou will one day be ashamed, O confident Soul, who have sought
for the treasure in the wrong field; who have laid out thy money for that which
is not bread, and thy pains for that which will not satisfy. Would thou but
consider how unable thou art to justify thy Religion now, I speak to the most
strict, to the most exact persons living, I say, bring thy Religion to that
touchstone which may now be held forth, how will thou manifest it to thine own
spirit to be weighty! Thou know, thou beleevest, thou love, thou obeyest.
Very good. But how will thou justify any of these? I dare boldly affirm, that
unless thou have seen the stamp of God (with the eye of a true understanding, 1 John 5.20.) thou can not be able to say that these are of his stamp; and
unless they be of the stamp of God, and have the very Nature and Life of God in
them, I am sure they shall not save thee. Ah foolish man, Because thou have
lighted upon the Scriptures, and read, and hear, and prayest, and
conformest thy life (as well as thou can) to the directions thereof, yea
prayest for the help of the Spirit, acknowledging thine own weakness and
unprofitableness, etc. do thou think to be saved? Do thou not know that the
root of all this is rejected by the Lord, and can any of the fruit be accepted?
I can assure thee, the spirit of man will do this, and the spirit of man in
thee may do this. (The Lord has written this in the nature and present state
of man, and when he pleases he may draw it out.) And seeing with God it is all
one to will as to do, the spirit of man, which is universally willing unto
this, shall be as well accepted herein as thine. He who would have been wrought
upon to do this, is as justifiable before God, as thou who have been wrought
upon, and have done it: And thou who art uncircumcised in heart (for that which
thou call the circumcision is no more it, then that which the Jews called
so) art as loathsome before God, as those who are uncircumcised in their outward
practices and professions.

Let me plead a little further with thee. Do thou know what the spirit of man
can do, when his whole nature, when all his understanding, his affections and
passions are purified and heightened? It is a dull frothy stupefied spirit,
which can please it self in this drossy world, a spirit a little sublimated, a
little enlightened, a little quickened, cannot but mind things of another
nature, even such as are suitable to its inward part, and the future estate
thereof: And what would not a natural spirit thoroughly sensible do, to avoid
its perfect misery, and attain its perfect life, rest and happiness?

Again, Do thou know how near thou may approach to the Truth, and yet
remain short of it? how far thou may walk in a way like the strait way, and
yet it not prove the way? how high thou may ascend on the ladder (which
seemingly to thee leads up to Heaven) and yet that not prove the ladder? There
is no Christ can save but the Lords anointed, nor can he save any otherwise
then by his anointing thee in the Name and with the Nature of the Lord; He
shall save because of the anointing. Thou may have all the similitudes of
Truth and Salvation in every kind, and yet not one spark of Truth in any kind.
Thou may have light, great light, which thou may confidently believe to be
the light of the Lord, and yet it may not prove so: Thou may have fresh and
vigorous life, and yet not that life prove the life of the Spirit neither; And
if so, then all the motions of this life, all thy steps in this light, will not
lead thee toward, but further from the Lord. Thou may offer sacrifices, and
yet those sacrifices not be the Lords, though in thine appearance instituted by
him, and by thee dedicated to him: Thou may season them with salt, and offer
them up with fire on that which thou take to be the Lords altar, and yet
neither that salt, that fire, nor that alter be the Lords. To come yet nearer,
Thou may have faith in God through Christ, love to God and the Saints, peace
in thine own spirit, rest and joy in believing and obeying the voice of the
Lord, and all these very pure and spiritual in thine own view, and yet not so
before the Lord who knows things, and cannot be deceived with vain
appearances. In a word, Thou may come from a Land of bondage, through a
wilderness, into a state and condition of rest; and yet this may not be the
child of the Lord whom he called out of Egypt (out of Egypt have I called my
Son,) nor this Egypt the Egypt out of which he calls his Son, nor this state
of rest Gods Canaan, Gods holy Land unto which he leads his son. There are
Egypts (states and places of bondage) for the spirit of man: There are
wildernesses, thousands of wildernesses (as there were many wildernesses in the
world besides that which Israel passed through) in which the spirit of man may
be entangled, and through which he may travel, and after his passage through
them may find a condition of rest. But yet the Lords Egypt, the Lords
Wilderness, the Lords Canaan are different from these, as they are prepared for
a different end, namely, the subjection, the correction and enlargement of his
son.

There is a threefold state of persons standing for life; There are three sorts
of Runners, all which make account to obtain, but only one of them can.

1. There is the pure extract of this Earth, the natural man, him I mean (not
whom thou art apt to call so, but he) who notwithstanding all his Religion (all
his devotion, his reading the Scripture, his praying, hearing, believing, etc.)
in the eye of God is so, and by his trial will be found so. This man, though he
be very zealous, yet he has no more Religion in him, then the spirit of man,
by serious consideration with himself, and by solid meditations on the
Scriptures, may attain to. This man, finding a necessity of believing, and just
ground for it, cannot but believe, cannot but love, cannot but strive after
obedience, in the midst of all encumbrances and hangings back; his spirit, thus
lighted, convinces, persuades, and thus directs him. This man makes no
question of acceptance here, and of enjoying God hereafter. Of this sort is the
greatest part of Religious persons upon the face of the Earth, though because
the spirit of man is more enlightened and heightened in some then in others,
therefore some are apt exceedingly to justify themselves and condemn others;
calling the Religion of others formal and earthly, little suspecting that their
own is so, not only in its most sublime outgoings, but even in its very root.

2. There is an heavenly kind of birth, from an heavenly gift, from a gift of a
new life as it were, from a light let from God into the Soul, which shining
about it and quickening it, which showing it the world to come, and letting in
the powers of it, must needs make great changes in it, and beget an higher
faith, love and obedience then the former. These make no question but that
theirs is the Kingdom, and yet these may fall away and miss of it, as is
testified Heb. 6. and what if they had kept their standing, can a nature
subject to change inherit Eternity? In rewards appertaining to Dispensations
there may be loss or gain, but in eternal life there comes in no consideration
of the motions of the creature, but it is the free gift of God through Jesus
Christ, which he that well understands can unfold many riddles, wherein the
spirit of man must needs be entangled and lost.

3. There is a birth from a new nature, from the life of God sown and springing
up in the Soul, which seed contains in it and brings forth faith and love, and
every other spiritual thing, Joh. 1.12, 13. This man is not changed either by
outward Reason or inward impressions from Nature or Scriptures, or by a gift of
light let into his spirit; but by the true Nature of God shed into him, and
swallowing him up into it, and bringing him forth anew in it. This is the only
change, (for all other changes will return again to their principles:) The
others make real changes in their kind, but this alone is the perfect kind of
change, this only is true, full, lasting, consisting of the very Nature and
Life of God, and therefore must of necessity abide with it, and admit of no
change but what it is also capable of.

Now what is thy Religion? what image, what superscription bears it? How rare
is it to find the natural Religion of the spirit of man fairly improved and
well grown? Alas, the Religion now abroad cannot justly satisfy the plain
honest spirit of natural man! but where shall we find the second kind? and if
we be put to it for the second, where shall we seek for the third?

The present estate of Religion is exceeding sick and weak. Religion has lost
its first light, its first life, its first strength and vigor. True Religion
eats out the life and strength of man, bringing forth a life of another nature;
but where is there any Religion now which flows out from the nature of man,
which would easily be acknowledged, were the nature of man rightly measured and
understood? We have indeed a great deal of humane knowledge of the things of
God, a great many fleshly fabrics, but who can produce one spiritual building?
The best symptoms that I find of Religion, are its sickness, its languishing.
That which flourishes and boasts it self so much, savoreth too strongly of
the flesh to pass for current.

But alas, who is truly sick! We want a Physician, but who is prepared for the
Physician! what work were there as yet for him, should he come but to wound,
for who among the wounded has his wound upon him?

I do not delight to afflict the spirits of men: but I confess it much grieves
me to see them so greedily run after vanity, kindling such sparks, and walking
in the light of such a fire, as serves only to lull themselves asleep at
present with, but will not secure them from the bed of abiding sorrow. Read
that place, Isai. 50.11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your
selves about with sparks: Walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks
that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in
sorrow. I am assured in my Soul that the Religion abroad will not save men;
that under their professions and practices of holiness there is a root of
wickedness which must to Hell, and they in whom it is found. It is not all the
knowledge of Christ, nor faith nor love, nor all the exercises of Religion of
the common kind, that will save; but a new life, a new spirit, a renewed
nature, which is a rarer thing then we commonly think for.

Being thus wounded, being thus afflicted for you, will ye think much that I
speak a little to you, because it sounds somewhat harsh in your ears, because
it strikes at the foundation not of your outward worship (which ye cannot bear
neither) but the very life and hope of your Souls? I am jealous over you, I
would not have you cozened of eternal life, I would not have you trifle away
your Souls in a dream. I would have you saved, therefore do I tell you of a
deeper wound (which your sickness requires) then ye have yet been acquinted
with. I would have you found for ever, therefore do I tell you of your lost
estate, therefore do I strive to heave up that vail of seeming safety and
happiness which covers your true misery from your eyes, and makes you run
dancing into your own utter ruin.

Look upon the primitive Christians (ye pretend to be successors to them) where
is the truth of that life which they once had? It is true, they had spots as
well as you; but as your life is not their life, so your spots are not their
spots. Ye confess ye want many circumstantial (tending to the outward glory of
that state) which they had; but do ye not want the inward substance of that
life which tends to the very Being of that state? (O Sirs, consider it, All the
wit of man, All the art of man, All the serious industry of man's spirit, can
never lay one stone in this building!) I will mention a few differences between
us and them, and consider ye of what force they be. If any shall contend that
there is no such difference, but his Religion is the same in these respects, I
have nothing further to say against him, I have but given in my testimony,
which is only so far valid as my spirit has in true judgment searched and
weighed this thing: nor does it positively conclude against all Religion, No,
It rather believes that there is a seed of Truth somewhere, though deeply hid.

The especial differences (or at least some of them) which I have observed
between Religion in its first birth and growth, and now in its state of
depravation or weak restitution by man's endeavors, are these, or in these
respects.

1. It differs in its descent. That came down from God, The sacrifices therein
were appointed by God, The fire which kindled their sacrifices was let down
from Heaven: The Religion now extant is generally of the Earth, of man's pumping
up from thence, which man is not able to justify to be the same with the
former, though every sort would fain have theirs acknowledged to be so. There
is indeed some kind of likeness, in some respects, in every way of Doctrine and
Worship which man forms out of the Scripture: but it is not the life, the
substance, the truth, the Religion which the Lord once formed, and which the
Lord alone can form again.

2. It differs in its nature or principle. That as it was from Heaven, so it
was heavenly: There was a seed of God, a seed of life, which was sown and
sprang up then. Now there is much natural, much artificial devotion, but it
has not this nature in it: The repentance, the mortification, the self-denial,
etc. of this age, bears not the image of the former. It is such a kind of
things as may deserve such a name here in this world, but not being set by the
other. I do not say there is no such thing now as the former principle, I
rather believe the contrary: but I confess I think it very rare, and hardly
visible so much as to it self.

3. It differs in its guide. That life had a guide, It had the Spirit of life
to guide it: The life now, where it may be best supposed to be, is at a loss;
And though it may be given to the Spirit to be preserved, yet the Spirit is not
given to it to make use of. No life now runs so high and pure, as to be
entrusted with the Spirit. It may be secretly led into faith, into love, into
prayer, into obedience by the Spirit, but it knows not that it is so, or its
own motions when they are so. We are fain to take it for granted that our
prayers and motion are such; And when the natural or artificial fire burns in
us any thing warmly (much more if our spirits be much heated) we readily take
it for granted, without through searching, without true discerning (which is
too difficult and costly) whether this be the heat, the warmth, the life of the
Spirit or no?

4. It differs in its light. They had a light suitable to their nature,
suitable to their eye, suitable to the divine Spirit in them: We have a light
suitable to our nature, suitable to our eye, suitable to our humane spirit: We
see things just as other men see them; We reason our selves into truths and
practices, as any other man might do. I do not say that this should not be done
(for the humane spirit is to go along, and to have its own light with it too,)
but I cannot but say, that this is not enough.

5. It differs in the things conversed with. They were led into and did walk in
the substance of things: They felt the nature, the truth, the power of
Salvation: The life in them tasted and enjoyed the life of God in Christ. They
did not take it for granted that God was a Father, and that Christ was a
Savior, and was set up by God to dispense eternal life; but they were in his
Fatherhood, they were in Christ, and had the eternal life of God and Christ in
them. They knew that they were of God, and that the Son of God was come, who
gave them an understanding to know him that is true; and that they were in him
that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. (And this was no high-flown fancy
concerning God and eternal life, which consists only in the elevation of the
imagination, but the truth.) This is the true God, and eternal life. 1 John
5.19, 20.

What shall we say then to these things? Is it not time for us to make a stand,
and look about us? Is it not time for us to miss the Lord, and seek to begin
with him? Man is naturally confident, and yet commonly deceived in the
groundwork of his confidence. From our first springing up in Popery unto all
our rents and divisions thence both in Doctrine and Worship, we have still been
confident, that we have always been in the right. How vain is man! In every
change he confesses himself wrong, and yet that still to which he changes
must needs be right. Ah wretched man, There is a lie in thy heart, which
springs up in all thy thoughts and ways of devotion; and until thou be new
formed, thou will not be capable of entertaining the truth, but only of
deluding thy self! What should I advise thee? what can be proper for thee, but
to examine the true ground, and join with the house of Israel lamenting after
the Lord? to bewail the loss of his light, his life, his guidance, his
presence? The cause of joy is not, the cause of grief only is, and is in
abundance; and where it is manifested with demonstration and power, there will
not need any exhortation to it. I must profess, I would rather choose tears,
although I were sure they should never be wiped away from mine eyes, after
substance, after that which my spirit wants, and can alone take up with, then
the greatest mirth or pleasure which vanity (for such I account all the
Religion of man, with all that springs from it) can afford.

Rejoice in the Lord always. They might well rejoice always in the Lord, who
enjoyed the Lord, who had a kind of constant presence of the Bridegroom in
their spirits. Their Lord lived in them, walked with them, and kept them
company by his Spirit. But is this spoken to us who are Orphans? (Though the
spirit of man, in his several ways of Religion, is not an Orphan, therefore he
may rejoice also.) The same Spirit of the Lord which piped unto the Apostles
and primitive Christians, administering unto them occasion of dancing, mourns
unto us, and our proper way of answering it is in lamentation.

Lament therefore after the Lord, and mourn over Jerusalem. Mourn over the
ruins and desolations of Jerusalem: Pity the dust of Sion. Jerusalem has been
laid waste, Sion lies in the dust, nay Sion is it self burnt into dust by the
extreme jealousy and fury of the Eternal, who has let out his flames more
fiercely upon her, then upon any abomination to be found among men. Jerusalem
has drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury, yea it has drunken the
dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out, Isai. 52.17. Yet she is
still Jerusalem, she is still Sion, and her very dust is lovely. The Lord
knows her, and loves her dust: and it is impossible for any to discover her
native worth and beauty, and not to pity and mourn over her present condition.
What, is this the Lords darling, is this the only beauty, will scoffing earth
say? Ishmael cannot but despise Isaac though growing, though thriving, though
owned by the Lord; how contemptible then must he needs be in his death and
burial? The world (wanting the inward eye) wonders to hear God speak such great
things of his people, of the abundantly rich glory and excellency of their
life, they appear so mean to them at the best. They never have the loveliness
of man in them; how loathsome then must they needs be, when all that which is
their own beauty is broken down in them! when the remainders of their earthly
beauty, with the whole frame of their spiritual beauty, is dashed in pieces
like a potters vessel, and burnt up together! Yet how precious is the seed of
God under all these! how amiable is this very dust of Sion! The very
brokenness, sickness, misery of this estate, is of more true value then all the
soundness, then all the health of life and Salvation that is any where else to
be found throughout the whole Earth. Yet this object is very lamentable, and it
would grieve any ones heart to behold it. He who has seen, known, tasted or
had the least glimpse of Sion in her glory, O how would his heart throb at the
view of her here! yet here, if not here alone, is she to be found.

Is it nothing to thee, O thou Preserver of man, that the foundations of thine
own holy Habitation are thus shaken? Where is thy Zeal? where is the sounding
of thy Bowels at the death and misery of thine own seed! O Lord, will thou also
bring forth children to the Murderer? Awake, O Lord, Rouse up thy self; Let
thine own everlasting Spirit stir in the motions of its own life, and never
leave till it has raised up disconsolate Jerusalem. (desolate Jerusalem,
afflicted Jerusalem, distracted Jerusalem, Jerusalem which is sunk, dead and
rotten, Jerusalem which is not) and has made it the praise of the whole Earth.
AMEN.

FINIS.

