THE SECOND PART OF THE Heroine Musqueteer: OR, THE FEMALE Warrier. A TRUE
HISTORY: Very delightful, and full of Pleasant Adventures in the Campagnes of
1676, and 1677.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, and J. Tonson, at the Judges-head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street. 1678.

Licensed,

Feb. 1. 1677/8.

R. L'Estrange.

THE Heroin Musqueteer: OR, The Female Warrier.
PART. II.
NEver was Man so astonished as the Marquess d' Osseyra, when he found he had
wounded his Mistress the same moment, and with the same Weapon he thought he
had taken Revenge of his Rival. The Count de Benavidez gave him an account of
all that had happened, when he surpised (the supposed) S. Aubin with his Lady,
and particularly of the discoveries he fancied he had made of the Intelligence
between them: The Relation was so surprising, and the Circumstances so
extraordinary, the Marquess was confounded, and under so strong a Convulsion of
different Passions, that what with fear, what with grief, he was Mute for some
time, and appeared like a Statue without Sense or Motion: But the Passion he
had had for Christina prevailing over the rest, and reproaching him fecretly
with having destroyed her, he prayed the Count to go instantly learn what news
of her wound; the disorder he was in being so great, he had not the confidence
to visit her; but he followed the Count, though he scarce knew what he did. At
the news of the Rancounter, several of his Friends flocked to the Marquess;
some of the Commanders were so impertinently officious, they would needs stop
him from going any further, to save him the trouble of seeing his Enemy the
second time: But the return he made their mistaken Civility, was so
unexpectedly untoward, his best Friends not knowing the motions of his heart,
were highly offended at it. They were all amazed to see him so troubled, and
not one could imagine what reason he should have to go to the Count of
Benavidez's, where he knew they had carried his Enemy S. Aubin. The Marquess
was not inclined to violent courses, yet they apprehended he might use his
Authority to ruin the unfortunate Person that so publicly engaged him. A
Colonel, his Friend, was so officious, that to prevent a mischief he dreaded so
much, he met him by the way, and entreated him to go no further, assuring him
S. Aubin was so desperately ill, he could not live an hour longer. This was the
Critical moment the Marquess really needed the assistance of his Friends, and
had they not hindered him, he had certainly stabbed himself. The Count de
Benavidez mindful of the disorder he had left him in, returned as hastily as he
could, to let him know S. Aubin's wound was not dangerous: But the Marquess,
who began to relapse into the extremity of his first Passion for Christina, was
so fully prepossest with the discourse of the Colonel, that he thought the
Count did out of kindness conceal the danger S. Aubin was in, and was loath to
tell him News he knew would grieve him. This made the Marquess resolve
personally to visit S. Aubin in his Chamber; and he had certainly done it, had
net the Count diverted him, by representing the inconveniences might attend the
surprise and discoveries their first Enterview would occasion before so many
persons who were of his Retinue, and then bore him Company. The Marquess
yielded to the persuasions of his Friend, but not till the Chyrurgion had
assured him, the wound he thought so dangerous would be cured in a short time.
The Marquess could not forbear telling the Chyrurgion his Life should answer
for S. Aubin's; and swore to him, that if he died, he should be concerned to
make ready to follow him presently into another World. This being past, they
brought the Marquess home, where he was visited by all the Persons of Quality
in the Court at Brussels, who complemented him for his pretended advantage:
Some carried on the Complement so far, that they blamed him for the trouble he
was in, having so great reason to be satisfied with the advantage he had gained
over one of the bravest men of France. He was so tired with these troublesome
Civilities, that to be rid of them, he was forced to give order to his Porter
to say, he was not to be spoke with. The Count de Benavidez loath to leave him
under so much vexation, staid with him, in hopes by his Company to ease him a
little of the Tyranny of his Passions. As soon as they were alone, the Marquess
conjured him, to tell him truly what he thought of Christina's wound: The Count
assured him it was very slight; and to pleasure him, offered to prepare
Christina to receive his Visit that night. This offer comforted the Marquess,
and the Count had no sooner made it, but he was forced to go home to find means
to satisfy the impatience of his Friend. At his return, he found his Wife was
gone to Christina's Chamber, and he took the advantage of it to give her a
Visit: When he had expressed the trouble he was under for her misfortune, he
assured her the Marquess was almost distracted at it, and begged her permission
to throw himself at her feet. Christina thinking the Marquess still took her
for S. Aubin, not knowing the Count had told him all, was extremely surpised
at the news; and answering, she passionately desired to justify her self, and
let the Marquess know she was incapable of betraying so generous a Friend, who
had so highly obliged her. The Count hasted away to carry his Friend the good
News, and shortly after both entered the Chamber where Christina lay, who taking
upon her to be S. Aubin, assured the Marquess he could never have been
satisfied with himself for being so unfortunate as to have disobliged him, had
not the Counts Relation, and the generous Visit he was pleased personally to
make him, given him reasonable hopes he was satisfied of his Innocence. The
kind Marquess, as if he had forgot Christina had ever been S. Aubin, answered
in terms full of transport and tenderness, praying her to change her Language,
and quite rid her self of that unfortunate Name of S. Aubin, that had so
unhappily occasioned his mistake, and engaged him blindly to attack a Life a
thousand times dearer to him than his own. He continued the discourse with so
much Passion and kindness, that Christina finding it impossible to keep him
longer in Error, gave free vent to her tears, perhaps for joy she found him so
constant: However, she pretended her self angry with the Count for having
broken his word in discovering her to the Marquess. The Marquess then telling
her how much he longed to know what had befallen her since she left Spain, the
Countess having observed how much he was concerned for Christina, saved her the
trouble of the Relation, and gave the Marquess a complete Relation of all the
Adventures Christina had acquainted her with. The loving Marquess, who thought
all along Christina was Married, but hearing no such matter in all the
Relation, was extremely impatient to know the truth of that particular. But the
Count having bethought himself that longer discourse might incommode the Sick
Party, told his Friend of it, and prevailed with him to withdraw.

The Marquess was so full of the Idea of Christina, that he called to mind the
smallest circumstances of his first passion; and not able to comprehend how she
had left her Husband, his Love made him wish heartily he might find she had not
been Married. He could not give over musing of his former Amor; at length he
remembered, that the Person he had imploid to carry her his Letter, and told him
she was Married, was a Sergeant in a Spanish Regiment in Garrison at
Valenciennes: He presently dispatched a Messenger to bring him to him in all
haste: The Sergeant being arrived betimes the next morning, the Marquess locked
him up with himself in his Chamber, and with horrible threats charged him to
declare truly why he had deceived him, and what reason he had to tell him his
Mistress was Married, whereas he was newly informed by a French Prisoner, she
never had been so. The Man was so astonished at the Marquesses Menaces, and
betrayed by his own Conscience, that he stood for a while mute as a Fish: But
being pressed to tell the truth, he fell at his feet, and confessed he had been
forced by the Marchioness his Mother to tell him that Lie. The Marquess not
desiring to know any more, sent back the Sergeant; and not doubting but
Christina had been always faithful to him, he resolved to love her as long as
he lived. A Servant he had sent to enquire of her health, brought him word she
was much better: With that he went presently to her, and entered her Chamber the
moment they were going to blood her: But the Chyrurgion remembering how terribly
the Marquess had threatened him the day before, was so disordered at the sight
of him, that he missed the Vein twice; so that they were forced to pray the
Marquess to withdraw, and sent for another Chyrurgion, who had a better heart,
and did the business. As great care as was taken to conceal Christina's Sex,
her Combat with the Marquess was become the discourse of the Town, and the
noise of her Adventures had inspired into all a curiosity about her: Every one
spoke of her according to his humor: The Public is never satisfied with the
bare truth of things, and you may believe so many circumstances added to the
disadvantage of the Countess in the story of Christina, that coming to her
Husbands Ear, he could not forbear expressing to her his Resentment, and in
very harsh terms. The Countess having already entertained a secret jealousy
against Christina, and perceiving her self the Cully of all this Intrigue, was
vexed at the heart to see her self robbed of her Gallant, and at the same time
in disgust with her Husband. This made her resolve to endeavor making sure of
the Marquess, being satisfied, that Guilty or Innocent, she should be equally
odious to her Husband, having the misfortune to be already suspected by him.
The design was scarce framed into her mind, but the Marquess entered her
Chamber, entreating her, that since he could not with decency visit Christina
alone any longer, she would favor him with her company to Christina's Chamber.
The Countess received him with more kindness than ordinary; and the Marquess
sensible what advantage it might be to him to have her his Friend to do him
good Offices with Christina, laid hold on the occasion, and answered her
Civility so very obligingly, it gave her great satisfaction.

As soon as Christina began to be somewhat better, she was visited by all the
Persons of Quality in the Court at Brussels, Curiosity moving several to see
her, who had no other reason to perform that respect. Her ilness made her look
much thinner than ordinary, but her Complexion had mended upon it, her long
lying a-bed having recovered the delicate white and red of her face, which the
service of War had miserably tanned. She appeared very charming in very plain
habit; and the Gentlemen of the Court expressed so much esteem for her, that it
contributed very much to her cure. It may be said to the praise of the Spanish
Gentry, that they are the greatest Gallants of any in Europe; and in menage of
Intrigues, and carrying on the subtilties of neat and delicate Gallantry,
exceed the French, who value themselves so much upon it. They have the Sex in
so great Veneration, that to praise their Mistresses, they seldom scruple to
run into profaneness: so that it will not appear strange, that the miserable
condition of a Person beautiful as Christina, confined to her Bed upon an
occasion so unusual with those of her Sex, moved all those who visited her, to
pity her extremely.

But the Count de Salazar, Governor of the Citadel at Antwerp, had scarcely
seen her, but he fell desperately in Love with her. This Gentleman was a near
Kinsman of the Countess de Benavidez, which gave him the advantage of visiting
her oftener than others. His Love tormented him, yet he durst not complain of
it, either fearing it might be in vain, or finding no small reluctance in
himself to act so unfaithful a part against the Marquess d' Osseyra his Friend.
Love observes no mean, when fixed on extraordinary persons; and every Visit the
Count made Christina, he found his Passion increase. At last it became so
violent, he could not Master it: He thought it high time to make his
Declaration, and resolved twenty times to tell her how much he loved her, and
twenty times failed of the confidence to do it. After all, he resolved to make
his Kinswoman his Confident; and having acquainted her with the vehemence of
his Passion, the Countess pretending her self very much concerned for him,
promised to serve him; though in truth the principal motive that engaged her in
the affair, was her particular interest to rob Christina of the Marquess, and
at the same time to revenge her self of her Husband for his jealousy. Salazar
assured of the Protection of the Countess, visited Christina very frequently,
who as courteously received him, as introduced into her Acquaintance by the
Marquess. Christina's Civility made Salazar believe the Countess had spoken to
Christina in his favor. Being full of this Opinion, he spoke to her with that
liberty he durst not otherwise have done. Christina perceiving by Salazar's
discourse he was more concerned for her Recovery than might be expected merely
from his friendship for the Marquess, made as if she understood not his
meaning; and to prevent the occasion of a breach with him, answered in Railery
his obliging expressions. Salazar applauded himself for the good success of his
first attempt: this confirmed his Passion, and made him forget the respects he
should have retained for his Friend. The Countess de Benavidez omitted nothing
the while to rekindle the Marquesses flame: But finding her endeavors vain to
recover for her self the affection of a heart which had newly submitted it self
to the violence of its first impressions, which are ever the strongest, she
bethought her self of an expedient, which (she doubted not) would make her
Mistress of her design; and the better to deceive Christina, pretending her
self very much her friend, she told her, by way of confidence, she had newly
learned a secret Christina was very much concerned to know. When she had made
all the Preambles usual to smooth the way for a piece of ill news, she fell to
aggravating the unhappiness of Women that trust the Oaths of men who make Love
to them, when after her signal fidelity to the Marquess d' Osseyra, he was
still in doubt of her, and set on his Friend Salazar to try her, by pretending
to love her: that the Conduct of the Marquess in this particular appeared so
criminal, when he had so great reason to rest assured of her fidelity, that she
thought it her duty to make her acquainted with it as soon as her Kinsman
Salazar had told her of it. Christina calling to mind Salazar's discourse,
thought the intelligence the Countess had given her of very great importance,
and no less sincerity; and having expressed no small resentment against the
Marquess, she thanked the Countess, and assured her she would take her
advantages of the advice she had given her, and would make that fickle-headed
Lover know the interest he had in her was not so well-grounded, but a
proceeding so unhandsom and disobliging as this might utterly destroy it. The
Countess joyful to see her Intrigue take so well, and making no doubt but
Christina to be revenged of the Marquess would use Salazar well, made him
sensible what good service she had done him, and told him he might declare
himself freely, and never fear the success. This made him wait on Christina the
oftener, and take his opportunity to make a formal Declaration of his Passion.
Christina received his Complement so gently and quietly, that Salazar flattered
himself she was in Love with him. The Marquess observing how constant and
diligent his Friend Salazar was in visiting his Mistress, began to apprehend he
might be his Rival: And she used him with that kindness in the Marquesses
presence, it almost distracted him. He made his complaints of it to Christina,
but she made so light of all he said, it vexed him at the heart. The Countess
watching all opportunities, took her advantage of these favorable
circumstances, to invite the Marquess more than ever: But all to no purpose;
this threw her into absolute despair, and made her resolve to satisfy her
Revenge if she could not her Love. A Woman in that condition will sacrifice any
thing to her resentment; and the Countess had recourse to new Artifices to
provoke Christina against the Marquess, and him against Salazar: They were all
so disposed for her purpose, she easily accomplished her design. The Marquess
and Salazar were at very high words; and the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands being informed of it, ordered them both to be secured. Christina
having newly recovered her health, was so troubled she had been the cause of so
much noise, she resolved to return into France, and spend her life in a Covent,
and be no longer the May Game of Love, and of Fortune. She imparted her
resolution to the Countess, who seeming to disapprove it, offered some weak
reasons to divert her from the design, though in truth she was glad at heart
she had taken that resolution, in hopes to see so dangerous a Rival at further
distance, which Christina might have easily perceived, had she not been
prepossest to Blindness with the Opinion of sincere kindness she thought the
Countess had for her.

The Duchess of Arschott having about that time obtained a Passport from his
Majesty of France to go from Mons to Lille, to settle some private affairs,
passed through Brussels. Christina being in search of means to execute her
design, and looking upon this as a favorable occasion for her return into
France under the Passport of the Duchess, communicated her thoughts to the
Countess, who seeing her resolved, facilitated all things for her private
retirement, that the Marquess might know nothing of it. She presented her to
the Duchess, and said in her favor whatever she thought necessary to persuade
the Duchess to take her along. The Duchess received her very obligingly, and
declared her self very glad of the company of so lovely a Person. Christina
left Brussels abundantly satisfied, at least in appearance, to have the
opportunity of returning to her Country, yet not without a secret reluctance to
be at so great a distance from the Marquess, for whom she had more kindness
than she was aware of. The Amorous Marquess failed not a day to send to the
Countess to inquire of his Mistress: The Countess fearing he might have news of
her departure timely enough to stay her, took care to tell those who were going
from the Marquess to her Lodging, that she went to Bed very late the Night
before, and desired not to be awaked. The second day the Countess laid her self
in the Bed Christina usually lay in, and counterfeiting her voice, answered the
Person the Marquess had sent to inquire of her health, that she was much
obliged to his Master for his care of her. The Countess had longer continued
the Cheat, had not one of her Maids (who knew by experience the Marquess never
failed to reward very liberally the smallest services done him) given him
intelligence of passages; those who have been in Love can easily imagine the
effect this News had upon the Marquess: He would presently have followed her,
but that he continued under Confinement: the thoughts of the ill condition he
was in, inspired into him a thousand extravagant resolutions, when he called to
mind how he had lost a person he had so dearly loved in the Flower of his
Youth, and had luckily met with after so long separation by extraordinary
Adventures, and had no sooner discovered her, but he yielded himself absolutely
at her dispose. He strictly examined his Conduct in the affair, to the very
smallest circumstances, but could not find any cause to charge himself with
having occasioned so sudden a departure: it was not in his power to guess the
reason of it, though sufficiently assured he was not the cause of it; but he
looked upon her remove as fatal to him, who could not live separated from her.
Having tired himself with reflections, he thought he should but labor in vain
to retrieve her, who in all appearance was got already to Lille: Yet unwilling
his passion should justly reproach him to have omitted any thing in his power
for recovering Christina, he resolved at all adventures, to pray the Duke de
Montalto, General of the Horse, and his very good Friend, to send out a strong
Party toward the way of Lille, with strict Order to stay all they met with,
whether with Passport, or without. The Orders were punctually executed, and
the Party brought in several who traveled with Pass-ports, but no news of
Christina; and all this ado served only to make a great deal of disorder, and
give occasion to the Rumor raised about that time, that the Duke de Villa
Hermosa had called in all his Pass-ports.

The Marquess would not be discouraged for all this, but searching the means to
have a Letter conveyed to her, he found a man who promised to follow her to her
very home, rather than fail to bring him an account of her. The Marquess in the
condition he was in thought this some comfort; and having loaded the man with
his liberality, and filled him with hopes of more, he dispatched him away with
this Letter:

WAs it in your Power to resolve to be gone, and leave behind you the most
passionate of Lovers? Did you not think me sufficiently mortified by your
permitting Salazar to presume to make Love to you, but you must utterly destroy
me by your unkind departure? Ah Cruel! Can you doubt that if you continue your
Voyage, I will not quit my Charge, my Fortune, and (it may be) my Duty to
follow you? I had done it already, but that I looked on my Employments as
advantages that belong to you, and I ought to preserve, to take away from you
all pretense for reproaching my Love. Heaven is my Witness, that to engage my
self to you with Bands indissoluble, I waited only the recovery of your health,
with that extremity of impatience you might easily have perceived, had you not
been the most insensible person in the World. Let me know what shall become of
me, and assure your self, your Answer shall regulate the Destiny of the most
faithful of Lovers,

The Marquess d'Osseyra.


When the kind Marquess had written this Letter, he read it several times, and
finding it very agreeable to his sentiments, thought it long till 'twas
delivered to his Mistress: But fearing the Bearer might by the way be taken by
some Party, he resolved to send a second with such another Letter, in hopes
that if one miscarried, the other might pass safe.

Salazar was much troubled for Christina's departure, though the despair his
Rival was in gave him some comfort: The passionate love he had for her, and the
opinion he flattered himself with, that she hated him not, made him send after
her a trusty person, that upon his report he might the better take his measures
for his future Conduct: And not long after the Marquesses Friends, and his,
reconciled the two Rivals, and Salazar received Order to repair to his
Government.

The Countess the while triumphed for the good success of her Artifices; and
the passion her desire of revenge had given birth to, was grown up to that
violence by the resistance it found from the Marquess, and the advantages she
promised her self by the remove of her Rival, it was not in her power to
conceal her joy and her transport from the passionate Lover; who far from
answering her hopes, loaded her with reproaches; letting her know, he was not
ignorant what Tricks she had used to make his Mistress fall out with him. This
touched her to the quick, and put her into such a confusion, and so desperate a
fret, to see her Artifices discovered, she took her Bed upon it that very day,
and continued a long time very dangerously ill; the Physicians who attended her
having never discovered the cause of her distemper, but using Remedies for
Diseases she never was troubled with.

While the Countess was in Cure, the Duchess of Arschott was at Lille, so
well-pleased with the agreeable Conversation of Christina, that she entreated
her company, at least for the time she tarried at Lille. Christina finding her
self staid by reasons she could not master, easily consented, being glad of a
pretense to continue a little longer in Flanders. He whom Salazar had imploid
to inquire after her, had learnt she was to spend some days at the Duchess of
Arschott's; and as he returned to give Salazar that account, he met one of the
Marquesses Messengers; and being a witty man, and well-acquainted with
Salazar's secrets, he presently suspected the Messengers business, and examined
him so cunningly, that at last he discovered the occasion of his Journey: And
applying himself after to get out of his hands the Marquesses Letter, he set
about him so dexterously, that he fingered the Letter, and carried it to
Salazar, who received it with all the satisfaction imaginable. But the
Marquesses other Messenger more fortunate than his Fellow, delivered his Letter
to Christina; who heartily glad of it, was extremely satisfied to find the
expressions so passionately kind, and answered it thus:

THank your own Jealousy, and reproach not me so unjustly, that I admitted of
Salazar 's Addresses: The passion of Love is none of the weaknesses I am
subject to; yet I must own, I make a great difference between you, and any
other man; and find, that could you be constant to the sentiments expressed in
your Letter, it will be very difficult for me to hold the resolution I have
taken, never to love. The Duchess of Arschott has a desire to keep me here,
and I cannot deny her, without appearing unworthy of the kindness she has for
me. In the mean time you may assure your self, no person has a greater respect
for you than

Christina.


The Marquess having received this Letter two days after it was writ, was so
well-pleased with it that he never inquired whether both his Letters were
delivered. He kissed Christina's a thousand times over; and impatiently longing
to see her, he did nothing but think of the means how to do it* The enterprise
was dangerous, and he saw well enough what a hazard he should run to enter an
Enemies Town, where the vigilance of the Governor justly heightened his
apprehension of being surprised.

But Love, which never loves long debates, especially such as tend to keep it
at distance from its object, quickly suggested an expedient the Marquess
thought infallible. He procured from the Marshal d' Humiers a Passport for a
Peddler of Brussels to go trade at Lille; and having got some English Point, the
best he could meet with, he went for Lille, and easily got entrance to the
Duchess of Arschott's, under pretense to sell his Points; which were so fine,
and so very cheap, he sold many of them to the Duchess, and her Women. At last
he was brought into Christina's apartment, who very luckily was alone in her
Chamber, perhaps to read over the Marquesses Letter.

The Love she had for him preserved the Idea of him so fresh in her mind, that
disguised as he was, she knew him at first sight; and concealing her surprise,
she prayed the Dutchesses Maid who had brought in the Peddler, to go call
another Maid who had good skill in Points. By good fortune that Maid was
abroad, and she who had been to call her being withdrawn, the two Lovers having
cleared all misunderstandings, and the Marquess having justified himself, they
had the opportunity to express themselves with all the freedom and tenderness
imaginable. Christina quarreled with him for having exposed himself to such
evident danger: the Marquess took that occasion to tell her, that if she were
so much concerned for his danger, as she appeared, she might easily prevent his
exposing himself for the future, by permitting him to take her back with him to
Brussels, and marry her. She confessed with some trouble, she could find in her
heart to do it; yet found by her self, it would be impossible for her to
resolve to be married to an Enemy of the Kings: What, interrupts the Marquess,
would you have me then be a Traitor to my Prince, and my Country? I am not so
unjust, replies Christina, nor can I think you capable of such a thought, and
should esteem you much less if you were: But there is hope the War will not
last ever; and the scruples you make to be married to an Enemy of your Prince,
I may very justly pretend to, would my love give me leave: Do not you think we
sufficiently espouse the Quarrel of our Sovereigns, by sacrificing every day
our Lives and our Fortunes to their Interest, without making our Love a part of
the Sacrifice? But pray, let us have no more of these matters of State, but
employ better the moments of a Conversation has cost me so dear* Company
coming in as he was speaking, Christina was forced to dismiss the pretended
Peddler, and appoint him to come two hours after to her, being unwilling to buy
any thing till she had first shown it to one who had judgment in it. He went
away displeased he was so unhappily interrupted. Christina seeing it would be
hard for her to have private discourse with him, writ him a Billet which she
resolved to deliver him secretly, to let him know her mind.

The supposed Peddler being returned at the hour assigned, Christina who was in
the Dutchesses Chamber went to meet him at the door, and told him aloud, she
had as much English Point as she needed, and would buy none but Spanish, which
pleased her best of any. With that she neatly slipped into the Marquesses hand
a Billet to this effect:

I Cannot without fear see you here: if you love me, provide for your safety,
and stay not a moment in a place so dangerous for you as this. Time
peradventure will be more favorable to us than we can hope for at present. The
Duchess is so obliging, I doubt not but she will engage me to continue here
longer: if I comply with her, you may believe it is much for your sake. Once
more, let me beg you instantly be gone, and think that my repose depends on
your safety.


The Marquess having understood by this Billet the disquiet of his Mistress,
returned for Brussels, and appeared at Court before they missed him: the
Duchess of Arschott was the mean time visited by all the Persons of Quality at
Lille, her Merit no less than the respect due to her Birth, drawing to her
House all the good company of the Town. The Marchioness de Belabre, in her
return from Paris, (where she had been cast in her Suit) gave the Duchess a
Visit, and was extremely surpised at the sight of Christina there, whom she
presently knew for S. Aubin; and calling to mind the last years Carnaval, she
made no doubt but Love had a great share in this new disguize; and according to
most Women's humor, thinking it a mighty matter to penetrate the depth of an
Amorous Intrigue, she was ready to applaud her self for the discovery she had
made; and to carry on her design, came frequently to the Dutchesses. Christina
having been very well acquainted with the Marchioness at Paris, presently knew
her; and not able to forbear blushing as often as she saw her, she resolved to
take her time to speak to her in private, and undeceive her: But the
Marchioness out of excess of discretion always avoided her; and perceiving it
troubled Christina, she came to her one day, and whispered her in the Ear,
Trouble not your self, and never fear me, I can keep my Friends counsel.
Christina endeavored to disabuse her, but in vain. The Marchioness having a
strong fancy she knew the Lady had engaged S. Aubin to put on this disguize,
though she made a thousand false guesses: for as soon as she saw S. Aubin speak
to any Lady, immediately she concluded she was the Person.

After much labor in vain, and fruitless observation, the Marchioness made the
Baroness of S. Sauveur her Confident in the business, imparting to her the
Mighty Mystery; imagining S. Aubin not mistrusting the Baroness, she would not
be so reserved in her presence; and so she might easily find out the truth of
what she earnestly desired to know. The Baroness being a young Lady, and of a
very jovial humor, was ravished with joy at the discovery of such a Secret,
and applying her self to a business so suitable to her humor, she observed
Christina with a great deal of care, though little satisfaction. Angered at her
ill success, and apprehending the Marchioness would impute it to her want of
Address, she doubled her diligence, and watched Christina more narrowly than
before: But all this care and extremity of attention served for no more, than
to make her take better notice of the good mien of the pretended Gentleman. She
thought him so amiable, and took such delight in viewing him, that in a short
time she found her Curiosity had produced an effect quite other than she
expected, having insensibly engaged her in a passion for S. Aubin which was
already so strong, she perceived she was not Mistress of it. This made her long
for an intimate acquaintance with so Charming a Person; and the better to
obtain it, she sought for occasions of seeing and discoursing her; which was
easy to find, all Persons of Quality having free access to the Dutchesses.
Christina satisfied the longing of the Baroness with so good a Grace, she was
no less pleased with her Civility, than taken with her good mien. She was a
hundred times upon the point of telling her, she knew the secret of her Sex;
and that natural modesty that sticks so close to Women well-born, made her as
often change her resolution, and quit her design. After many Conflicts in her
heart, where Love, Modesty, Freedom and Reservedness strove in vain to get the
better one over the other, she found Christina alone, and adventured to tell
her, she had never known a Person so deserving of Love as she was, and that had
Heaven made her of a Sex different from hers, she should have found it very
difficult to save her self from passion for a person so amiable. Christina who
thought of nothing less than Love, thought this discourse an effect of her
friendship; and answered, she was extremely obliged to her for her kindness,
assuring her she would endeavor to return it her with all the tenderness of
affection she was capable of. The Baroness having already advanced so far, was
not satisfied with so cold an answer: However, she thought it necessary to
appear content for the present, and to prevent the loss of all, she embraced
her tenderly, and gave her many thanks. The Duchess coming in, and finding
them in that posture, asked the reason. The Baroness who thought her embraces
as criminal as Christina believed them innocent, answered with some trouble
(for a pretense to deceive the Duchess) that she was upon going, and could not
take leave without embracing her dear friend. What she said was believed, not
one having perceived how heartily she was vexed to leave a House where she so
much loved to be.

Every time the Marchioness saw the Baroness de S. Sauveur, she asked if she
had not found out the reasons why S. Aubin had disguised himself: But having no
account to satisfy her Curiosity, she became more impatient, and resolved to
know it one way or other. Having mused a while, she resolved to tell her (whom
she thought S. Aubin) of the business, and to oblige him to impart to her the
secret of his Love; and in case of refusal, to threaten him she would publish
the secret of his Sex. Christina extremely surpised with the Proposal, would
have undeceived her, by making her a saithful Relation of her Adventures. But
the Marchioness prepossest with an Opinion she spoke to S. Aubin, gave no
credit to the discourse, telling him, she would allow him till that time to
morrow to think on it, assuring him he might rely on her discretion; but if he
delayed any longer to acquaint her with the secret, she would certainly spoil
all. Christina who concealed nothing from the Duchess, gave her an account of
the perplexity she was in, by the earnest solicitations of the Marchioness.
This was good sport for them, and made them laugh heartily, and resolve
together, since the Marchioness was so absolutely bent to be deceived, and not
be disabus'd, they would for their divertisement afford their help to deceive
her: the sole question remained was, what Lady should be the Object of the
pretended passion: Several were in nomination, but none so likely to take as
the Baroness de S. Sauveur, being a handsome and jovial young Lady, and
Christina's intimate friend. The Marchioness being told of it, was surpised at
the news, but promised to keep his counsel, and expressed great satisfaction at
the confidence he reposed in her.

Christina, by agreement with the Duchess affected thenceforward so much
kindness and care for the Baroness de S. Sauveur, and to appear so much
concerned for her, and still long for her company, which the Baroness answered
on her part with a great deal of pleasure, that the Marchioness having often
observed them, was confirmed in her Error; and inwardly applauding her self
for having so luckily discovered the Intrigue, would needs make the Baroness
sensible of it, that she might know her self at her mercy for the discovery.
And not longer able to keep a secret which was already a burden to her, she
gave her a visit; and having reproached her for not dealing clearly by her, in
concealing her knowledge of S. Aubin's passion; In earnest, says she, by way of
Railery, (...) was not ill prepared to penetrate S. Aubin's concerns, and you
have acted your part very well, only it is pity you had not to do with a Fool.
All things seemed to conspire to deceive the Marchioness; for the Baroness
blushing, made her think that change of her countenance an effect of her
confusion at the discovery she had made. You do not deserve, adds the
Marchioness, I should use so much discretion in your concern, who were so
unwilling to make me of your counel: But fear me not, had I not promised S.
Aubin secrecy at his confession, the respect I have for you would oblige me to
silence. The Baroness surpised at the discourse, stood mute for some time, not
knowing what (...) think on it: but as we easily believe what we passionately
desire, the Baroness no ^nger doubting but S. Aubin loved ^er, and that the
Marchioness ^oke in good earnest, quickly past ^ut of a great astonishment into
a ^^r greater joy: If a man will love one, says she, how can we help it? Would
you not think it hard to throw a Gentleman into despair, who does things so
extraordinary for his Mistress, and demonstrates by his actions the violence of
his passion? I will pardon you, replies the Marchioness, your want of
confidence in me hitherto, upon condition you will hide nothing from me for the
future. It was agreed, and they parted both very well-pleased with their
mistakes; the Marchioness to see her self the Confident in an Intrigue she had
so great a desire to penetrate; the Baroness to be assured by so good a hand
thing that did so much flatter her passion She was so fully persuaded S. A^bin
was in love with her, she began to repent she had been so forward to let him
know the kindness sh^^ had for him, fearing it might have lessened the esteem
she could will he should have for her. This made her resolve to force her self
into more reservedness, and be more shy for a while, to set an edge o^ his
passion. It fell out as she wished; for Christina to mainta^^ throughout the
part she was to a^^ for the Dutchesses divertisement and her own, was every day
kind than other to the Baroness, wh^ through dissimulation (usual with Women)
receiving Christina's Courtship very coldly, hoped by that means to heighten
the passion of her supposed Lover.

Christina not knowing the intention of the Baroness, nor the reasons she used
her so, took so ill the slight return she made of her Civilities, that she
forbore the continuance of them, and shunned her company, to prevent occasions
of discourse with her. The Baroness perceiving it, could not brook this
indifference above a day; the morrow she goes to Christina, and in some heat
asked her what she had done to be slighted so by her, and make her affect
avoiding her company, as she observed she did. She let fall some other hasty
words, which surpised Christina extremely; who answered, she had never been
wanting to the friendship she had promised her; but that the Baroness had
appeared so cold the day before toward her, she had no reason to wonder it had
made her more shy. The Baroness was so impatient, she would not allow he time
to finish, but embraced her instantly, and was upon the point of telling her,
'twas in vain to endeavor concealing his Sex from her, who knew it already, by
very good information: But she forbore foreseeing she could not with decency
take some little liberty with S. Aubin discovered she used with Christina
disguised. Never did Woman love more to deceive her self, and never was there
love of so singular a Character. Pressed by her passion, she gave S. Aubin
thousand occasions to declare him self to be what she took him for but finding
all would not do, and attributing it to his fear, she studie^ a thousand
expedients to accomplish an Adventure she could not endure should hang in
suspense. Time furnished her with an unexpected occasion: Her Husband being
gone one Evening for the Country, she sat up very late at the Dutchesses, and
having cunningly let fall a^word, she would willingly lie there that night: She
asked one of the Dutchesses Women if she would admit her her Bedfellow:
Christina offered her a part of her Bed; the Baroness at first seemed loath to
accept of it, for fear of incommoding her, but at last she was persuaded, the
Maid she had first spoken to having a Bedfellow already, which the Baroness
knew, though she pretended the contrary.

When they were just ready to go to bed, the Baroness retaining some remains of
modesty, was so troubled, and out of countenance, she knew not what she did.
But to give her dying Virtue some small satisfaction for the disorder her
passion had brought her in, she told Christina she would have only one corner
of the bed, where she prayed her to let her sleep quietly without touching her
all night. Christin very readily promised what she desired, and as readily
performed i^ When the Lights were taken a way, the Baroness who expected with
impatience the darkness s^^ longed for, was astonished to fin^ Christina fast
asleep. At first s^^ thought it her own fault, and the her Gallant feigned
himself asle^ to express his obedience to he^ yet she knew not what to thi^^
on it. But having long expected vain to find him more confider she asked him if
he were aslee^ but receiving no answer, it alm^ put her beside her self. She
fell^ sighing, but her sighs as little (...) fected Christina, who was in a de^
sleep. The Baroness thought tw^ty times to awake her, but sha^ and vexation
made her forbe^ Never had Woman so bad a night, though never Woman expected a
better. At length it was day; and seeing her insensible Lover lie still as a
Stock, she dressed her self hastily; and the despair she was in not permitting
her to quit the Room without leaving behind her some mark of her resentment,
she found Pen, Ink and Paper ready on the Table, and writ immediately this
Billet:

I Have received from you the most sensible outrage a Lady can suffer; but it is
what I deserved, having so blindly abandoned my self to a passion for a man who
knew no better to answer it. I must now endeavor to cover my shame: As for
you, I advise you to continue the disguize that becomes you so well. You have
already the modesty of the Sex whose habit you carry; and you are not to
despair, but Heaven sensible of its Error in making you a Man, me take from
you that little you have r^ maining of that Sex.


The Baroness having written the Letter, laid it on Christina's To^ let, and
withdrew. As soon a she got home, she feigned she ha^ been all night up at
Play; and h^ ving had her self undrest, went presently to bed, which you may
believe was not very easy to her Christina at getting up having found the
Billet, dressed her self in a haste to carry it to the Duchess: (...) made them
good sport; and when they reflected on the course the Ba^ roness had taken to
get an interest in Christina, they concluded the Marchioness had imparted her
secret to her, and so involved her in the same Error with her self.

The Duchess was concerned at it, and had the goodness to go to the Baroness
to undeceive her; and having fully told her what she knew of the business, at
last, though with difficulty, disabus'd her. She would have gone thence to the
Marchioness of Belabre to do her the like good office: but the Baroness
sufficiently confounded already, and fearing further explication might reflect
more on her Credit, entreated the Duchess to say no more of it, but to leave
the Marchioness to her mistakes, as not daring to trust her discretion in so
tender a point, where the matter appeared so fit for mirth, and her Reputation
was so deeply concerned.

The Duchess had now almost finished her business at Lille, and had written to
Brussels she would return thither speedily, and hoped to bring Christina back
again with her. The Countess de Benavidez, who was pretty well recovered, and
had not lost by her sickness any part of her passion for the Marque d' Osseyra,
hearing talk of Chr^stina's return, was so frighted (...) the News, she made it
her busine^ by all means to prevent it; and length found an occasion to have
Letter writ to the Duchess of A^schott by a Lady, and of her be^ Friends, to
inform her she was wi^^ impatience expected at Brussel^ that her concerns being
very de^ to her, she thought fit to acquai^^ her there was great murmuring
Court that she had thoughts bringing back Christina, who wou^^ not fail to give
intelligence to t^^ French of all she could learn^^ Brussels; at least it would
be b^ liev'd so, Christina being alrea^^ under suspicion of Guilt in that
pa^ticular. The Duchess being hig^ly concerned to hold fair with the
Spaniards, and fearing their j^^lousie of her long stay at Lille, (...)
specially since the News spread (...) Flanders of her having had a hand in the
Marriage of the Prince of Izinguien with the Daughter of the Marshal d'
Humiers, looked upon the advice as not to be slighted: And whatever kindness
she had for Christina, she could not find in her heart to expose her self to
ruin for her sake, in praying her to bear her company to Brussels. As they
were alone one day, the Duchess took her opportunity to make a long discourse
of the state of her affairs, and the necessity she was under to avoid any thing
that might give a jealousy of her to the Spaniards: adding, that this obliged
her to be very cautious in her Conduct, and to deny her self many things in
themselves very agreeable to her. Christina had too much Wit not to apprehend
the meaning of this discourse, and answered, she had for the same reasons
resolved to return into France, as soon as she should receive Answer to a
Letter she had writ into her Country; and in the mean time to put her self into
a Covent. They concluded their discourse with mutual assurances of Eternal
Friendship; and two days before the Duchess left Lille, Christina entered the
Covent of the Nuns of S. Thomas.

The Marquess d' Osseyra seeing the Duchess arrived at Brussels without
Christina, was very much alarmed at it, and went in great haste to inquire the
news of her. When he heard she was gone into a Nunnery, it extremely disturbed
him, not knowing what reason she had for it: But the Countess de Benavidez
watching all occasions to vex him, dexterously gave out, that Christina had long
since privately communicated to her the disgust she had for the World, and the
design she had espoused to spend her days in a Religious House. This coming to
the Marquesses ear, the violence of his affection allowed him so little time of
consideration, that he went away that Evening for Lille, with his former
Passport as a Peddler; and made such haste, that he would have been there
timely the next day, had he not been unfortunately staid by the way by Robbers,
who pretending themselves Soldiers of the Garrison of Ypres, got together to
the number of seven, and robbed Travelers without any regard to their
Pass-ports. They led away the Marquess into a very thick Wood, where deceived
by his Habit and Pass-ports, they took him for a Tradesman, and forced him to
draw a Bill of Exchange upon some of his Correspondents, threatening to kill him
if it were not paid at sight; and that in the mean time he should stay with
them for security. The Marquess was in no small perplexity, not knowing who to
draw the Bill on; and if he discovered himself, they would certainly kill him,
for fear of being punished by him when once at liberty: what course soever he
took, death seemed inevitable; but to gain time, he gave them a Bill upon an
Innkeeper at Brussels, who had been his Servant, and knew his Character. When
he had written it in the most pressing terms for payment at sight, they could
not agree which of them should be trusted with it for receiving so considerable
a Sum: At last they pitched upon two of their Company whom they put most
confidence in: The Marquess in the mean time endeavored to insinuate himself
with the Robbers, letting them know he could scarce find in his heart to be
angry with them, not doubting but that they had been reduced to that way of
living through the avarice of their Officers, who perhaps defrauded them of the
poor Pay their Prince allowed them; and that he thought himself happy, in
falling into their hands who used him so civilly, and were satisfied with a
little Money. The desire he had to see Christina made the Marquess descend into
Complaisances for saving his life, he had disdained to stoop to on any other
score: These were so agreeable to their humor, that he was presently very
familiar with them, and they used him more kindly than at first, and made him
sup with them. The morrow betimes they sent away one of their Comrades to buy
in Provisions; the Marquess seeing their number lessened, and fearing the
return of those who were gone to receive the Money on his Bill, resolved to
seize one of their Swords, and die at least with his Weapon in his hand. One of
the four who staid in the Wood, watched always while the other slept: The
Marquess feigning himself very sleepy, the Watchman observing it himself, went
a little further into the Wood. The Marquess to lose no time, instantly seized
their Guns before any of them awaked: but being too generous to kill men in
their sleep, he took out the priming out of two of the Guns, having the other
two in readiness to be discharged: Then went he to meet him who was gone into
the Wood, and having threatened to kill him if he made the least resistance, he
told him he was unwilling to take the advantage he had against him, and his
Fellows, and was content they should have the Money on the Bill of Exchange,
but that for his safe passage through the Wood he must have his company a
League further, assuring him he would do him no harm. The Robber believing a
Tradesman incapable of so bold a resolution, and astonished to hear him speak
so stoutly, was forced to obey, and do whatever the Marquess commanded him.
They were scarce got out of the Wood, but they were met by a Party of Horse of
the Garrison of Lille. The Marquess immediately presented his Passport; but
having been taken with two Pistols about him, and in a quarter very suspicious,
they told him, he made use of his Passports to rob the more safely: The
Marquess to clear himself, told them, he had been robbed in that Wood, and
related truly what had past, and how he had escaped out of the Robbers hands,
which made the Troopers resolve to enter the Wood to seize upon the Thieves.
But the Commander having bethought himself this discourse might be a mere
invention of the Marquesses, to draw them perhaps into some Ambush, ordered
only ten Horsemen to dismount, and g^ into the quarter the Prisoner should lead
them, where they found the Rogues, and took them without resistance. They were
all brought t^ Lille, and having confirmed all the Marquess had said, he had
his libe^ty, and no doubt made but he was as he pretended, a Trades-ma^^ What
became of the Robbers, know not, though likely they were hanged: But it is
certain, the Mar^quess impatiently longing for new of Christina, went strait to
the C^vent where he had been told she was. When he was come, the^ told him
there was no speaking with any of the Nuns, that da^ being set aside for
receiving (...) French Gentlewoman into the H^bit.

The reports which had past of Christina's having taken that resolution, and
the Marquesses fears, made him believe it was she. Confirmed in this Opinion by
his, desperate Love, he bustled through the Crowd, and without further inquiry,
addressed himself to the Priest ready to begin the Ceremony, and prayed him to
stay till he had spoke with the Abbess. Those who observed with what disorder
he pronounced his words, were surpised; and the Priest who had prepared an
Elegant discourse in praise of a Religious Life, was afraid he should be
obliged to reserve it for another occasion. The Marquess in the mean time was
got to the Grate, and the Abbess appearing, he told her he was come to acquaint
her, the Person she intended to receive into the Number of her Sisters had
promised him Marriage, and all the Vows she should make would be null. The
Abbess much surpised, called the Maid to the Grate, and having told her what
the Marquess had said, she charged her to declare the truth. The Young Maid,
already sufficiently perplexed, under the apprehension of that variety of
Functions she was to undergo that day, thought the discourse of the Abbess a
piece of formality, usually observed on such occasions, the better to assure
her self of the willingness of those who took the Habit; and turning toward the
Sister who had the care of her Education, she asked her very Innocently, what
Answer to make. This, and the confusion in the Marquesses countenance at the
sight of a Person he knew not, made all believe she was in good earnest. And
the people cried out the man was a Fool. The Marquess defended himself so ill,
that the distraction of his looks, and his silence, made them absolutely
conclude he was mad; and they drove him out of the Congregation, without his
being able once to make his Complaint.

While his passion procured him all this ill usage, his friends were extremely
concerned for his person. The Innkeeper at Brussels having been much pressed by
the Thieves to pay his Correspondents Bill of Exchange, knew the hand, and
pretending he would pay them, went to the Marquesses quarters, and showed the
Bill to one of his principal Servants, who confirmed it was of his Masters
handwriting, which made them believe he was in the Robbers hands: They applied
themselves to the Duke de Montalto, whom they knew to be his very good friend;
and having showed him the Bill, the Duke caused the two men, who demanded
payment of it, to be presently arrested; and having severely threatened them,
they confessed all. The Duke was in fear for the danger of his Friend, and went
out in Person in the Head of a Party of three hundred Horse, and some Dragoons.
When he came to the Wood where the two Robbers had left their Comrades, he
placed Guards at all the Avenues, and went in himself at the Head of his
Dragoons, and so crossed all the Woods, but found not one person. This
heightened his fear, and made him detach three several Parties, sending them
away into several quarters, to endeavor a discovery where these Rogues had
their refuge, but all to no purpose; so that he was forced to return without
having any account of his Friend.

The morrow, a servant of the Marquesses impatient for news of him, and
thinking he might find him at Lille, put himself into Boors habit, and went in
search of him. As soon as he was arrived at Lille, he pretended he had a Letter
for Christina; and having got her called to the grate of the Covent she was in,
he asked her privately what news of the Marquess. Christina not able to give
him any account of him, the Servant acquainted her with the departure of the
Marquess from Brussels, the adventure of the Bill of Exchange, and all other
circumstances of his absence. Christina who found in her heart a stronger
inclination for the Marquess than she thought she had, was so concerned for his
misfortune, that the trouble she was in at the news convinced her of the height
of the passion she had for him. She earnestly prayed the Man to return
instantly for Brussels, not to omit any thing, to learn some news of his
Master, and to let her know without delay the success of his care. Before she
could make an end of these few words, her tears betrayed the affection of her
heart. When the Servant was gone, she past some hours in those inquietudes none
can comprehend but those only who have been in Love. The mean time the
Marquesses Servant being an honest Fleming, and very devout, despairing to find
his Master, goes into a Church, and having heartily prayed God to inspire him
where to meet with the Marquess, he no sooner turned himself about toward the
Church-door to go out, but he spied the Marquess standing before him; and not
able to contain himself, cried out at the Miracle. The Marquess also astonished
at so unexpected an accident, had much ado to make his Man hold his peace; and
giving out he was his Comrade, he told those who came running in at the report
of the Miracle, that the Man was a little cracked, and had often such Fits.
They got off by this Artifice, and went into a house where the Marquess had
lain. His Man gave him an account of what had past at Brussels, and of the
disorder Christina was in at the news; the tears she shed, and the lamentable
condition he left her in. The Marquess, who after the last days work durst not
appear at the Covent-gate, was ravished with joy at the news of her being so
concerned for his misfortunes; and having got her called for by his Man, he
slipped into the Speaking room, and quickly revived her by his presence. Never
was Conversation more tender than theirs; 'twas not in Christina's power to
reproach her Lover with any thing the violence of his passion for her could not
presently justify. She promised him once for all, never to be any man's but
his, and prayed him not to expose himself again to so many accidents, assuring
him she had already written into her Country to desire the Abbot Dizeste, who
had the management of her Affairs, to take a journey into Flanders to agree
with him about her Marriage. The Marquess well satisfied with these fair hopes,
that she might be at ease, withdrew sooner than he would have done, and
returned to Brussels, where his Friends by their joy to see him again,
convinced him of the trouble they were in by the fears they had been under of
having lost him: To keep them in ignorance, lest they should discover the
mystery of his absence, he gave out he had lost himself a Hunting, (a Sport he
was known to use) and was taken by Robbers, who having detained him three days,
set him a^ liberty. This past for current, being so very probable, only the
Countess of Benavidez would not believe it, her Jealousy having given her a
true guess at the cause of his absence; it vexed her to that height, she
presently resolved to leave no stone unturned to break the Correspondence
between the Marquess and Christina.

About this time news came to Brussels, the French Troops were on their march:
it was very early in the year, and the Spanish Generals were extremely alarmed
to hear of an Army in the Field in January, in a very cold season. All the
considerable Officers came to Brussels to assist the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands with their counsel in a conjuncture of this importance. Count
Salazar being ar^iv'd there one of the first, and having given the Countess of
Benavidez a Visit, she endeavored to revive his passion for Christina,
reproaching him with his indifference, and acquainting him the same time with
the dangers his Rival had exposed himself to for a sight of her. Salazar, who
had been discouraged from seeing Christina by the difficulties appeared in the
attempt, was somewhat ashamed; and to cover his coolness with a plausible
pretense, and let her see he had not been wanting to his Duty, he bethought
himself of putting a Trick on his Kinswoman, and persuading her he was more in
Christina's Books than she made account. The Countess answered, She could
hardly believe it: He offered to make it out, and desired only time to step to
his Quarters to do it. 'Twas not long e're he returned, and brought her a very
passionate Letter of the Marquesses to Christina, being the same formerly
spoken of which Salazars men cunningly got from the Marquesses. Salazar having
in his hand a Letter which so clearly proved what he had said, showed it his
Kinswoman, and told her, she might judge by the Sacrifice Christina had made
him, how much he was in her favor. The Countess having read the Letter, was
very well pleased, and thought it very proper and effectual for setting the
Marquess and his Mistress at variance: She spoke Salazar so fair, that she
prevailed with him to leave it in her custody, upon her promise to make no ill
use of it; which she kept so ill, that the very next moment she went to one of
her friends, a Lady of the Marquesses familiar acquaintance, and having
aggravated the dangers the Marquess had exposed himself to for seeing
Christina, and the ill consequence of his passion; it might be excused, adds
she, did Christina but love him; which she is so far from, that she cannot
endure him, but sacrifices his kindest and most affectionate Letters to
Salazar, who to my knowledge has several of them, though he has the
discretion not to show them. To this she added many other particulars which
convinced the Lady, and made her believe she could not do the Marquess a better
office, than to cure him of his passion, and disabuse him as to his Opinion of
Christina. She fell to work on the morrow, and made use of all means the
Countess had furnished her with to persuade the Lover to think no more of so
faithless a Mistress. The Marquess who could not imagine Christina capable of
falsehood to him, did not easily believe what was said of her, and would not for
a long time admit the suspicions they endeavored to infuse into him of her:
But this Lady pressing him to it continually, he promised at length to believe
what she said, if she would show him one Letter to convince him of the falsehood
of Christina. The Countess of Benavidez informed of this good success, sent the
Letter to her good Friend, who having showed it the Marquess extremely
disturbed him: He read it over and over, and knew it to be the same he had writ
to Christina, and she had sent him an Answer of. He made no longer doubt but
she had betrayed him, and his heart reproaching him for having been so long
fooled by so ungrateful a Wretch, he blindly resolved to declare his
resentment, by writing her a Letter full of Scorn and Contempt, and in the most
vilifying and bitter terms he could invert; which he did to this purpose:

THe Interest I have in your Concerns ingages me to write to you; to furnish
you the means to make new Sacrifices to my happy Rival: But I advise you to
make good use of this Letter, as the last you shall receive from me. Force your
self no further to comply with me, yet assure your self I shall not envy the
surprise of Salazar, for I hope you will revenge me of him, and will in a short
time make a sacrifice of him also to another, who could find in your heart to
betray the most sincere and most passionate of Lovers,

The Marquess d' Osseyra.


The Marquess had no sooner written this Letter, but he gave it him who carried
the former, charging him to be gone immediately, and deliver it Christina. Ill
news fly apace, and the Letter was delivered her within two days after the
writing it. Christina was so little acquainted with the language of it, she
could hardly believe what she read: We are naturally inclined to be ignorant of
what we wish should not be, and she would fain have been deceived. But seeing
the Letter unquestionably of the Marquesses handwriting, and knowing the
Bearer to be one he confided in, it offended her so highly, she thought it
below her to justify her self against an Accusation so improbable and unworthy
her Noble and Generous Soul: And laying aside, on the sudden, the gentleness
and sweetness of her Nature, she angrily told the man who waited her Answer,
she would never take the pains to clear her self to a man who thought her
capable of Falsehood: And tearing the Letter in pieces in the presence of him
who delivered it, she threatened to have him apprehended for a Spy, if he went
not away immediately, or ever saw her face more.

As haughty and courageous as she appeared before the Marquesses man, it was
not in her power to overruled the infirmity of her Sex, but she burst out into
tears, and was tormented with a thousand different thoughts. The despair she
was in pressed her to take a course that should remove her for ever far enough
from the Marquess: yet a secret inclination (the cause where of she knew not)
rendered her resolutions uncertain and ineffectual. Sometimes she thought to
return home, but presently disliked it, a having lately received a considerable
supply of Money, and desired her Friends Consent to be married to the Marquess,
which now could be of no other use to her, but to procure her the reproaches of
(...) Province, where people naturally love to talk of their Neighbors. A
Religious Life pleased her as little; and after a thousand reflections, finding
none so agreeable to her humor as the Military, she took a strong resolution
to spend the rest of her days in Arms.

While she was taking private order for going to another Town to put her self
in fit Equipage for War, the Marquess (now his passion was over) began to
repent all he had done: And having considered former passages, and endeavoring
to find his Mistress less guilty, he bethought himself that the man who had one
of his Letters to carry to Christina, never came back again, but took Arms for
the French. This made him believe he had sold his Letter to Salazar, and
deserted the service of his Prince, for fear of being punished. The quick
return of him he had sent to Lille two days before, who brought him the news of
Christina's indignation, and the Answer she had made him, confirmed his Opinion
of the Innocence of his Mistress. He was upon the point of going to cast
himself at her feet; but desirous to know the manner how this Letter came into
the hands of his Rival, he prayed the Duke de Montalto (who was both their
friend, and charged them never to question one another) to go to Salazar, and
entreat him to tell him upon the word of a Gentleman, how he came by that
Letter; assuring the Duke, however it had happened, he would not resent it,
provided he might know the truth, which for other reasons he was concerned to
be informed of.

Salazar being pressed by the Duke to give a positive answer, was highly
displeased to find himself reduced to such a strait by the indiscretion of the
Countess; and after a weak denial, was at last obliged to confess to his Friend
the truth of the business. The Marquess having made this discovery by the Duke,
was ready to die for grief, for having upon so light (...) suspected the
fidelity of his Mistress. This was not all his misfortune; for while he thought
of going to ask her pardon, news came to Brussels, that the Monarch of France
was at the Gates of the strong Tower of Valenciennes, which he besieged in a
season, when the Heroes of former Ages would have thought it impossible to have
an Army in the Field: Wherein he surpassed the Sun (which he has taken for his
Devise) since the Frost and the Snow which hinder the appearance of that
Luminary, could not retard for one day the course of his Conquests.

The surprise the Spaniards were under at the news, was incredible. Every man
had order to be in readiness; and the Marquess d' Osseyra, Master of the
Artillery, had his hands full: yet he was not so taken up with the business of
his Charge, but he thought how to make his peace with his Mistress. But how
pressing soever his passion was, his duty was more; and he found himself under
the necessity of being content with writing her a Letter, which probably was
very submissive and kind: What it contained, I cannot give you a certain
account, Christina having never received it. This Illustrious Heroine, who had
laid her design for serving in the Wars, and promised her self never more to
entertain any passion but for Honor, had left Lille, and put her self into
Equipage, good or bad; and having joined the Kings Army, near Vilenciennes, in
a Troopers Habit, and under her former Name S. Aubin, he made his Court to the
Marshal of Luxembourg, who formerly knew him; and having prayed to be admitted
to serve him in the quality of Aid de Camp, the generous Marshal having
inclinations of kindness for those who are handsome, especially if persons of
Merit, granted his request, and employed him that very day to carry Orders into
several Quarters of the Camp. Valenciennes, which boasted it self to have been
fatal to the French, willing to preserve the reputation it had gained in the
late Wars, made a vigorous defense. This happy beginning put the Spaniards in
hopes the valor of the Inhabitants, assisted with the rigor of the season,
would give them time to assemble their forces, and expect those of their
Confederates for raising the Siege. But the Renowned Monarch who besieged it,
taking notice of this vigorous resistance, and that they were provided to
endure a Formal Siege, caused them to be attaqu'd a new way, which may serve
for an example to the Captains in future Ages. For having made a Detachment
from his Army, those brave Souls animated by the presence and Orders of a
General so much Superior to others, made themselves Masters of all the
Outworks in open day: Nor can it be said it was by surprise, or without
resistance, eight hundred men having died upon the spot, in an obstinate
defense of their several Posts. The Kings Musketeers being foremost of the
Assailants, entered the Town pellmell with those that fled into it.

I shall not undertake to write the Great Actions done this Remarkable
Expedition; I leave it to the Historians, whose business it is, and shall speak
only of what concerns my Heroine. This Generous Person was always near
Mounsieur de Luxembourg, who being upon the service of the day, commanded that
glorious Detachment. S. Aubin seeing that Worthy Marshal carry his Orders in
Person throughout, thought the assistance of an Aid de Camp very useless in so
hot a service; and having mingled himself among the Kings Musketeers, he
entered the Town with them, and shared in the glory of so hardy an Action. The
Grenadiers of the Kings Household, and the Regiment of Guards following the next
moment, the Garrison laid down their Arms, and the Squadron of Horse who were
drawn up in the Marketplace were dismounted. The Townsmen, who never expected
an Assault of that nature, were so amazed to see the French in the Town, that
most of them retired into the Churches and Monasteries to avoid the fury of the
Soldier.

While all was yet in confusion, some greedy Soldiers broke into the first
Houses they met with; and S. Aubin seeing no more Honor to be gained where
there was no more resistance, was marching out of the Town; and having by the
way spied some Soldiers entering a House, which probably belonged to some
Person of Quality, his generosity inspired him to enter among them, to prevent
their pillaging it. He presently met with a young Maid, very handsome, who all
in tears threw her self at his feet, praying him to save her Honor, and rest
satisfied with the many Goods he should find in the House, which she wholly
yielded up to him with all her heart. S. Aubin's heart melting at the disorder
and tears of the poor Maid, he put on a face of Authority, and made the
Soldiers, partly by civility, partly by force, to get out of doors; and having
locked them, promised the Maid he would protect her, and stay by her as long as
should be necessary to save her from the insolence of the Soldiers. This
discourse, which in appearance should have dissipated her fears, served only to
heighten them: She could not imagine a man covered with blood, and with dirt
('it was not a season for dust) should have so much Humanity, but fancied he
saved her from others, the better to play a Game for himself. Prepossest with
these thoughts, she stood at a distance, and in a lamentable tone prayed him
not to lessen the Greatness of the service he had done her, ^y offering her
violence to no purpose, being resolved rather to lose her life, than her
Honor: Fear nothing, says S. Aubin, were you acquainted with me, and knew me
better, you would have better thoughts of me: I stay here only to guard you,
and will be gone as soon as you command me.

This Maids Mo^^^r was gone that morning to Mass, and the Town was so suddenly
taken, she had not time to return home e're the business was done. The Father,
who could not find in his heart to see his House rifled, retired into the
Covent of Capucines, in company with several others who expected like usage, as
very well knowing the Rights Victory gives them who take a Town by Assault. But
the Serene Monarch of France, as full of Clemency as Valor, and willing the
season of the Siege, the taking of the Town, and the use of the Victory should
^e equally extraordinary, sent in Mounsieur de Louvoy, who by mentioning the
Kings Name, presently staid the fury of the Soldiers, and within a quarter of
an hour caused better Orders to be observed in Valenciennes taken by Assault,
than had been observed by the Enemies at three days end in Treves, surrendered
by Composition. It Is easy to guess what a pleasant surprise it was to the
Inhabitants, when creeping out of their lurking-holes, and places of refuge,
instead of smoking runes they expected to see, they found houses very well
furnished, and in the same condition they had ^eft them; and instead of Fire
and Sword they were so justly afraid of, they met with Officers coming unto
their houses with Gold and Silver in their hands to pay for what they wanted.
S. Aubin a while after looking out at a Window, saw all things quiet by the
indefatigable cares of the Minister I have named: And having observed the Shops
of that great City begin to open, and that his fair Hostess was now out of
fear, he went out to seek his General, whom he found with his Majesty, giving
him an account of the particulars. The Parents of the Maid S. Aubin had so
generously protected being returned home, ravished to find their Daughter
there, embraced her with inexpressible joy. The first transperes of this
pleasant Enterview being over, she made them a faithful Relation of the
Obligations she had to the brave Frenchman who succored her, and declared the
circumstances of the service he had done her so much to the life, and how free
the Gentleman appeared from Self-interest, that her Father conceiving it not in
his power sufficiently to acknowledge so virtuous and excellent an action;
resolved to clear himself from being liable to an imputation of ingratitude,
and spent two whole days i^ searching (though in vain) for his Daughters
Deliverer in the City and Camp. Having heard the Kings Musketeers had first
entre^^ the Town, he presently fancied the man he looked for might be one of
them. But having acquainted his Daughter with his thoughts, and told her the
Musketeers were Redcoats, she presently undeceived him, by assuring him, her
Protector was in a Habit of a different color. Those who are good-natured,
will easily guess what a torment it was to those grateful persons not to find
him they held themselves so much obliged to: They were vexed at the heart they
could not have saved their Goods without being ungrateful, and resolved to make
new search for the man, when S. Aubin curious to know who she was he had been
so happy to save from the fury of the Soldiers, entered the House by a
Backdoor, the very same he entered by at first.

He crossed a little Yard, and found himself just in the Room of a young
Servant-maid, who not fully recovered of her frights the day before, was so
troubled to see a Stranger in her Chamber, that she set up her throat, and with
the ^oudness of her cries drew all the House to her. They had certainly taken
him for a Robber, had no^ his good mien, and his Habit which was very decent,
made then think him no such man. The^ looked on him with astonishment and knew
not how to begin speaking to him, till the Daughter of the House came in after
the rest, an^ knowing S. Aubin's face, cried ou^ That same was her Guardian
Ange^ and stood at his Elbow in a transport of joy with the ingenuity an^
innocence of a true Flemish Gi^ The Father and Mother as sensib^ as their
Daughter of so happy (...) rencontre, ravished with joy to fin^ themselves
under those strong obligations to so lovely a Gentleman embraced him with that
affection and kindness may better be understood than expressed. The Father made
him an offer of what part b^ pleased of his Goods, owning h^ held them of him,
by whose bounty and goodness alone they were still his. The Mother, who had not
yet spoke a word, interrupted her Husband, telling him, that in giving the
Gentleman part of their Goods, they paid him only in part for the service he
had done them: But since he had preserved Mary-Anne their Daughter, dearer to
them than all the treasures of the World, it was but reasonable to recompense
so considerable a good Office to the full, by entreating him to marry her;
adding, she was their only Child, and that they had demy'd her to Wife to one
of the best Gentlemen in their Country. The Father applauded his Wifes
Proposals, and Mary-Anne gave consent by her silence. S. Aubin who was not
altogether so hasty, answered their offers with a great deal of Civility, and
gave them thanks for the Honor they would have done for him. The modesty of
his answer heightened their kindness, and made them more eager, and put him to
no small trouble to resist their pressing solicitations.

After long discourse, S. Aubin being called away by his Employment, was going
off with promise to see them again; but his intended Father-in-law looking upon
him already as his Son, would not run the hazard of seeking him in vain, as he
had done, over all the Army, but bore him company to his Quarters. By the way
he gave him account what a considerable Estate he had, and forgot not to
acquaint him with the personal Merits of his Daughter, and the Quality of her
Suitors. S. Aubin desirous to put the thoughts of Marriage out of his head,
took occasion to tell him, it would be great wrong to the Fair Mary-Anne to be
married to a Stranger, who had nothing to trust to but his Sword, and must
needs make her unhappy, by being forced the morrow after his Marriage to follow
the Camp, and leave her. The grateful Father was so far from being discouraged
by these Reasons, that having highly commended S. Aubin for his modesty, he
embraced him again, and with wonderful frankness told him, he thought himself
the happiest man on Earth for having it in his power to contribute to the
making the Fortune of a Gentleman of so singular Worth. With that they parted,
and the Father, when returned home, gave there an account of his discourse with
S. Aubin, magnifying the good Fortune of his Daughter, now likely to be the
Wife of a Gentleman, the handsomest, the least huffish, and the best humored
of any in France.

The mean time the Victorious Monarch having given order for he reparations
necessary for the safety of the place, decamped a few days after; and S. Aubin
going to take leave of those who had so much kindness for him, the whole Family
was extremely surpised to see him upon going. To be rid of them, he told them,
he was under an indispensable necessity to follow the Army the beginning of the
Campaign, upon pain of losing the little Honor he had gained, and the esteem
of all that knew him; yet to satisfy their importunities, he promised in some
time to come and refresh himself at their house for a month. The Mother taking
notice he said not a word of Marriage, asked him if he intended not to be their
Son-in-law. S. Aubin having thanked them for the Honor they would have done
him, repeated almost the very words he had said to the Father on the like
occasion. But being desired to speak more positively, he answered in general
terms, he had never yet thought of Marriage; that in truth he found himself
very averse from it, and would advise them to lose no time for settling their
Daughter. The Parents offended at the Answer, thought he slighted their
Daughter. S. Aubin perceived it, and knowing they were troubled at it, he took
his occasion to speak of Mary-Anne with all imaginable esteem and respect: But
seeing they were not persuaded his discourse was sincere, he was at last
forced, for their satisfaction, to make them a promise (which they desired of
him) that he would never marry any other Maid but Mary-Anne. The Father
presented him with a very fine Horse, which he was obliged to accept, to avoid
utterly disguisting them: And having taken his leave, after a thousand
embraces, S. Aubin got again to the Army.

All Europe had their eyes fixed on the march of that victorious Army; some
believed, that after an advantage which appeared rather the work and fruit of
an entire Campaign, than a Conquest of fifteen days, the King would have
returned to S. Germain to refresh himself after so great Fatigues, especially
when his Majesty had News from all parts of the motions of the Prince of
Orange, to join his Troops with those of the Spaniards, with design to oppos^
his Majesty's undertakings. Bu^ that great Monarch not used to qui^ his
delicious Palaces, to end (...) Campaign by the taking of on^ Town, how
important soever, doubled the surprise and astonishment of the World, by
pouring his Forces upon Cambray, the same which the Emperor Charles the Fifth
had fortified with so much care and expense, the last Age, to heighter the
Trophies of that Great, that Wise and Generous King, though the Emperor, when
he fortified it, designed it the Bull-wark of the Low Countries, and Citadel
of France, as the Spaniards in the late times called it.

While the greatest part of Europe was differently concerned for so famous a
Siege, S. Aubin was busy in the service of his General with extraordinary
assiduity and care, far beyond the usual rate of Ayds de Camp, which the
Marshal de Luxembourg so well approved of, that he chose to employ him before
any other. The City of Cambray being reduced to capitulate, the Governor,
before he would retire into the Citadel, desired some favor (the particulars
I know not) in behalf of the Wives of the principal Officers. Mounsieur de
Luxembourg being upon the service of the day in the Trenches, and concerned in
that Negotiation, sent S. Aubin to Complement the Ladies from him. He entered
the City for that purpose; and having learnt that several of these Women were
retired into a Monastery, he went thither; and seeing two or three amongst
them, to whom all the rest paid extraordinary respect, he made up to them to
speak to them. He had scarce begun, but he perceived he spoke to the Countess
de Benavidez, who had followed her Husband to Cambray, where his Regiment was.
S. Aubin, though surpised at the sight of her, endeavored to recover himself,
and would have made an end of his Complement: But the Countess, who presently
knew him, would not give him time, but embraced him with such a transport, as
scandalized the Company; this Lady, who always loved S. Aubin, having then
forgot her Jealousy that made her hate Christina. They spent some time in
private discourse; and S. Aubin having told her what great reason he had to
complain of the Marquess de Osseyra, the Countess who had so great a hand in
setting them at variance, was glad at the heart to hear the News, and
pretending her self much concerned for her, prayed her to show her the
quarrelling Letter he had injuriously sent her. S. Aubin having torn it, could
not satisfy her desire, but told her the substance of it, assuring her it had
occasioned her taking Arms afresh, with a resolution not to entertain any
passion but for Honor and Renown. The Countess would gladly have continued
this discourse, but fearing the Company would take it ill, she put an end to
it, telling them, this Gentleman having been Prisoner the last year at
Brussels, had done her the Honor to visit her often. S. Aubin having confirmed
what the Countess had said, retired, having offered them all the service in his
power to obtain the favor they desired; which he performed so well, that the
Ladies were satisfied, and gave him thanks by Letter.

The King desirous his Subjects of the Province of Boulonnois might be eased of
the continual Incursions of the Garrison of S. Omer, and by his reducing that
place might enjoy the redress his Majesty intended Picardy by the taking of
Cambray, and the quiet all the rest of the Provinces of his Realm are blessed
with in the heat of War, his Majesty ordered a Body of an Army to be formed
under the Command of his Worthy Brother for besieging S. Omer, the same time he
lay before Cambray. This Enterprise appeared so great, that Strangers doubted
the success; and the Spaniards, who very well knew the strength of those
places, and how well they were provided of necessaries for a long resistance,
made no great haste at first to send their Succors: But frightened by the
example of Valenciennes, they used extraordinary diligence to join their Troops
to those of the Prince of Orange, in order to raising the Siege of S. Omer. The
King having notice of their motions, and foreseeing their design, made a
Detachment out of his Army, which he sent under the Command of Mounsieur de
Luxembourg, in aid of the Duke of Orleans before S. Omer.

While Mounsieur de Luxembourg was conducting his Detachment with his usual
activity and vigilance, S. Aubin, who followed him still, and animated by the
happy success of the Kings Arms, and the Marshals Illustrious example,
fortified his resolution of continuing in Arms, had by his diligence so far
gained the esteem of his General, that he took particular notice of him, and
employed him on all remarkable occasions. This drew on S. Aubin the envy of his
Comrades, particularly a young Gentleman's, whose other good qualities prevail
with me to conceal his right Name, and to give him that of Richmond. This young
Gentleman, jealous of the kind usage S. Aubin received from the General
Officers, and looking on him as an Upstart, and a very raw Soldier, let fall
on several occasions some sharp language against him. S. Aubin, who was
naturally good-humored, and had a very insinuating way, perceiving his
disgust, endeavored to gain him by fair means, Courting him every day, and
omitting nothing that might oblige him to answer his kindness by some evidence
of affection. Richmond had the ill nature to attribute S. Aubin's Civilities
and obliging Carriage to his weakness, and fear of quarrelling him. This made
him more insolent, so that he purposely affronted him on several occasions,
reproaching him often with his Woman's Face, and telling him a Martial-soul
seldom lodged in so delicate a body. S. Aubin finding himself touched in so
nice a point, could not forbear blushing at his reproaches; but willing to
decline the noise of a quarrel, endeavored to put off all with a Jest, which
did but encourage Richmond to be worse than before. At last S. Aubin, urged by
frequent persecutions, and sensible he could no longer conceal his resentment,
without exposing himself to continual affronts, he took his time to find him
alone, and tell him he was a-weary of his Raileries, nor would endure them any
longer, but prayed him, once for all, to put an end to them; otherwise he
should be obliged to let him see, he knew how to revenge himself, though
unacquainted with the ways of giving affronts. Richmond made small account of
this discourse, but fell again to his old way of Jeering. S. Aubin met him one
day on his march, and taking his Pistol in his hand, told him, he was now
resolved to keep his word with him. Richmond having put himself in a posture of
defense, S. Aubin discharging his Pistol, wounded him in the arm he held his
Pistol by. Richmond being disabled, S. Aubin making use of his advantage, laid
his other Pistol to his breast, threatening to kill him, unless he would beg his
life. Richmond obstinately refusing, S. Aubin insisted on it no further, but
told him, his obstinacy should not make him forget to be generous. Presently
after they were parted by some Horsemen that overtook them. The Marshal of
Luxembourg having heard of the Combat, caused them both to be arrested; and
having carefully inquired into the cause of the quarrel, he heard only in
general, that S. Aubin was the Aggressor. This surpised him the more, as
having ever known him of a sweet and peaceable humor; which made him believe,
he came not to these extremities without great provocation: So that he resolved
to know the bottom of the business, and found S. Aubin had made use of all fair
means in his power to win over his Adversary (but all to no purpose) before he
had engaged him. Richmond was blamed for it, and Mounsieur de Luxembourg
unwilling he should serve any longer under him, sent him to Perron, under
pretense of having his wound cured, though 'twas very light. The Combat proved
much to S. Aubin's advantage, the General esteeming him the better for it; and
the other Ayds de Camp finding 'twas ill jesting with him, forbore their
Raileries.

Mounsieur de Luxembourg was by this time arrived before S. Omer, just as
Mounsieur was preparing to quit his Lines to go meet the Enemy, though far more
numerous. The succor came so seasonably, that both Armies being engaged, that
of the Confederates was entirely defeated: The particulars of the Battle have
been already so faithfully and fully related, I shall not attempt writing what
is better done to my hand by another; the very relations made of it by the
Enemy, attribute all the advantage and glory of it to the Valiant Philip de
France, who was everywhere present; reviving their courage who began to give
ground, and animating the whole Army by his Example and Orders.

S. Aubin having still had a longing desire to see a Battle, was heartily glad
of being at this: the several Orders he had from his General to carry through
the Army, gave him the occasion to satisfy himself to the full, and to be
present where the Victory was most smartly disputed. Happening to be at the
defeat of a Spanish Battalion of Foot, out of his natural abhorrence of
bloodshed, he saved the lives of two Officers, under pretense of carrying them
Prisoners to Mounsieur de Luxembourg: And having asked them several questions
about the condition of their Army, and what Generals they had, he found the
Spaniards made a Body apart, under the Command of the Marquess de Osseyra. S.
Aubin was so troubled at the Name, he stood mute for some time. He was thinking
at first to seek him out, and demand satisfaction with his Arms in his hand for
the outrage he conceived he had received from him; but he had scarce framed his
design, but he felt his heart fail him, and more concerned for the person of
the Marquess than it could be for an Enemy. He did what he could to suppress
and get rid of that unseasonable tenderness, but all would not do, his heart
still hankerd after news of the Marquess, and was strongly bent to save his
life, if possible.

While S. Aubin continued under these uncertainties, the Kings Victorious
Brother taking his advantage of the disorder and consternation the Enemies were
in, commanded Mounsieur de Luxembourg to pursue them with some Squadrons: And
with admirable foresight, his Royal Highness sent other Troops to possess
themselves of the Posts, by which the Enemies, though routed, might have
attempted the relief of S. Omer. The Duke of Luxembourg the mean time being in
pursuit of the Enemy, and perceiving the Dragoons (who should have followed
him) lag behind, and busy themselves in taking Prisoners, which would but
hinder the service of the day, he sent S. Aubin with Orders for them to march,
and to kill all their Prisoners. S. Aubin carried these Orders, but with some
reluctance; yet knowing it his duty to obey, not dispute the Orders of his
General, he carried them with his ordinary diligence; and had no sooner
approached the Dragoons, but he discerned the Marquess de Osseyra among the
Prisoners, which troubled him beyond expression. The Officer who commanded the
Dragoons, seeing an Aid de Camp coming toward them a gallop, made no doubt but
he brought Orders; and having advanced a little way to receive them, S. Aubin
concealing to his power the surprise he was in, without loss of time, he made
use of that readiness of wit incident to those of the Sex, and told the
Officer, that the Marshal de Luxembourg demanded a Prisoner, named the Marquess
de Osseyra: As for the rest, they should be put to the Sword, and the Dragoons
to march up to the Troops, in pursuit of the Enemy. The Order was presently
obeyed, and the Marquess consigned into the hands of S. Aubin, whom he followed
some paces on foot, not able to comprehend by what good fortune he had escaped
the fate of the rest of the Prisoners. The Countess of Benavidez had told him
Christina was in the French Army, which made him resolve, after the loss of the
Battle, to expose himself where he might be made Prisoner, in hopes by that
means to have a sight of his dear Heroine. The thought of this flattered him so
pleasantly, that he had not yet cast his eyes on his Deliverer, being overjoyed
with his having escaped the danger he feared of dying with grief, for want of
an opportunity to clear himself to his Mistress. This joy was but short; for S.
Aubin to carry on his design to the utmost, clapped a Pistol to the Marquesses
Breast, and bid him prepare for death. This troubled the Marquess more now than
it would have done on another occasion; and not able to Master his passion on
the sudden, he reproached S. Aubin with his cruelty, in making him languish so
long, when he had resolved to kill him. But reviving himself; I will die (says
he) contentedly, if you will give me your word to look out in your Army a
Cavalier who goes under the Name of S. Aubin, and tell him, the Marquess de
Osseyra thought upon him to the last moment of his life, and had some pleasure
in his death, as having been occasioned by the Love he had for him. He fixed his
eye the while on him he spoke to, and began to remember himself, when S. Aubin
being on this occasion more Christina than S. Aubin, and having had much ado to
act this part with her Lover, dismounted, and expressed by her tears the passion
of her heart, with greater Eloquence than the best Orator on Earth could have
done it. The Marquess by this time knowing Christina was his Deliverer, was so
deeply affected with this new Obligation, that he stood seized with a pleasant
amazement at the goodness of his Mistress, at a time when she had so great
reason to be angry with him. Yet as joyful as he was for having found her again
in so extraordinary a manner, when he called to mind he had given her cause of
offense, it almost distracted him; and not able to endure the misery of that
condition, he begged her pardon, in terms so submissively passionate, that it
was readily granted him, before explication made of the mystery of the Letter
which had caused that disorder.

They had scarce understood one another, but they found themselves hemmed in by
a Body of Spanish Horse, which the Duke of Montalto had sent to rescue his
Friend out of the hands of the French. The Marquess was so full of Idea's of
Love, and appeared so little concerned for a liberty he was no longer Master
of, that he was not yet sensible of his good fortune; when the Duke of
Montalto, who had given him up for dead, or a Prisoner, embraced him with all
the marks of joy a true Friend could express on such an occasion. The Duke
seeing him out of humor, and musing, imputed it to the ill success of their
Enterprise, and thinking to comfort him said, their loss was not so great
perhaps as they feared it on the sudden, and assured him they had taken a
considerable number of Prisoners. He observed, in the mean time, the Marquess
had his eye fixed on S. Aubin, which obliged the Duke to advise him to send away
that Prisoner with the rest, and not trouble himself with taking charge of him.
I owe my life and my liberty, says the Marquess, to his Generosity; but these
are the least of my Obligations to him, and the weakest reasons I have to share
fortunes with him; and then judge you what reason I have to see him well used.
This discourse awakened the curiosity of the Duke, and made him look more
earnestly than before on S. Aubin, whom after a short view he knew to be the
fair Christina he had seen at Brussels, and was no stranger to her
extraordinary Adventures. He gave his Friend joy of his good fortune, and being
well acquainted with the passion he had for her, he easily imagined they had
many things to say to one another, and discreetly retreated, on pretense of
fetching up the Straglers of his Troops.

Though the day of the loss of a Battle may be thought a time very improper for
a General Officer to busy himself with matters of Love, the Marquess could not
forbear entering into a large discourse, to clear all misunderstandings between
him and his Mistress. After a thousand reciprocal assurances of loving one
another for ever, Christina represented to him the inconveniences she exposed
her self to, by being discovered by several Officers, as she had been by the
Duke de Montalto; and made him so sensible of the injury it would do them both,
and what a trouble it would be to her to be the subject of discourse for a
whole Army, that the Marquess persuaded by so convincing reasons, consented at
last she should return to the French Camp, having faithfully promised him she
would presently retire to Paris, quit an employment so unsuitable to her Sex,
and put her self into a Covent till the end of the Campaign, and that she would
then marry him; it being her desire to delay it so long, that she might do it
with more decency. The Marquess in Person guarded her as far as he could, and
then ordered a Trumpet to bring her safe into the Camp. The General was in pain
for S. Aubin when he arrived, and had sent into several Quarters to inquire
what was become of him: He told him, he had had the misfortune to be taken
Prisoner; and that he was let go upon his Parol. Mounsieur de Luxembourg
believed him, and promised to send the Spaniards a Prisoner in Exchange.

The morrow after the Battle, Mounsieur to make his Victory complete, by taking
S. Omer, returned to his Camp before the place, and pressed it so vigorously,
that they were glad to Capitulate before he was Master of the Counterscarp: And
S. Aubin had the pleasure to be in employment about his General, the day the
place was surrendered, as he had been at the taking of Valenciennes and Cambray,
Mounsieur de Luxembourg having had the good Fortune to Command the service of
the day, when every of those places was surrendered.

Three of the most considerable places of the Low Countries reduced under the
Kings Obedience, a great Battle won, wherein the Forces of two great Potentates
were defeated; and all this in the height of Winter, and in less than six Weeks
time, are Prodigies Posterity will have scarce Faith to believe: Yet hardly any
were surpised at the News, though very surprising; all who had heard of the
Kings Marching in February, having expected Actions altogether extraordinary:
And we may truly say of him, he has taught the World not to be amazed at his
extraordinary performances. His Enemies do him right in that particular. The
Court of Spain was in some Consternation at the News, the wise Prince, who is
Prime Minister there, having heard some Grandees speak of it with surprise, and
attributing the success of the Kings Arms to his good Fortune, interrupted
their discourse, to tell them, his success depended more on his Conduct and
Merit, than on his good Fortune.

When S. Omer's was taken, the King put his Troops into Quarters of
Refreshment, until the ordinary season for drawing them into the Field: And
most of the General Officers went to taste the Pleasures of Paris. The Marshal
of Luxembourg being of the number, S. Aubin to perform the Promise made to the
Marquess, would not lose so favorable an occasion of accompanying the Marshal
to Paris. He found himself by the way engaged in an Adventure extraordinary, as
those he had formerly met with. The Duke of Luxembourg and Count Louvigny going
together for Paris, the Baron d' Angosse, who has a dependence upon the Count,
having in their March taken notice of S. Aubin's Countenance, thought he had
seen him, but could not remember the time, or the place: He took occasion one
day to tell him h^ had seen him before. S. Aubin (...) at it, made d' Angosse
(...) inquisitive. Having racked his memory a good while, he be thought himself
at last this Aid d' Camp had the Air of a Man he had seen at Mounsieur
Strasburg's at a Ball the year before, whom he had taken for Mademoiselle de
Meyrac, the only thing that puzl'd him was, that Man was a Fleming, and the
Duke of Luxembourg's People assured him, this was a Frenchman, and had served
among the Musketeers. This put him upon a second address to S. Aubin, to pray
him to tell him seriously, if he was not the same Person who was in Maids habit
when he mistook him for a Gentlewoman of Bearn. S. Aubin perplexed to find him
so closely and busily curious, thought it better confess he had been disguised
in Maids Clothes, than give him occasion to discover he had been disguised in
Man's Apparel. D' Angosse having learnt what he so much longed to know, told
him, they might have very good sport when they came to Paris; and that if he
would but put on Woman's Clothes, he should easily pass for Mademoiselle de
Meyrac, by the help he would give him, to put a Trick on his Countrymen, which
would be excellent divertisement. S. Aubin promised him all he desired; both
arrived at Paris extremely well satisfied, D' Angosse tickled with the Conceit
of his Projects, and S. Aubin glad at heart to get rid of his Importunities.

FINIS.
New Books Printed and sold by J. Magnes, and R. Bentley.
French Books.
L' Heureux Esclave, in 3 Tomes. 3 s. Galand Escrock. 12 d. Le Princess de
Monferat. 2 s. 6 d. Le Grand Visiers. 2 s. Duble Cocu. 12 d. Civilities of
France. 1 s. 6 d. Le Mercury Galand. 7 Tomes. 7 s. Le Memoirs de Sweed. 3
Tomes. 10 s. Le Memoirs de Silive Demolier. 6 Tomes. 6 s. Rare-Entout, a
Comedy. 1 s. Le Countess de Barcellon. in the Press.
English Novels.
ZElinda, by Mounsieur Scudery, Englished by T. D The Happy Slave complete,
Englished by a Person of Quality. The Disorders of Love. The Cheating Gallant.
The Triumphs of Love over Fortune. The Heroine Musqueteer. Part 1, 2 The
Heroine Musqueteer. Part 3. i^ the Press. Almanzor and Almanzaid, a Nov^ in the
Press.
Some new Plays.
THe Fond Husband, or the Ploting Sisters. The Plain Dealer. The Rival Queens,
or Alexander t^^ Great. The Destruction of Jerusalem, bo^ Parts. The Fool
turned Critic, in the Pre^^ Mithridates, King of Pontus. Limberham, or the
Kind Keeper.

