THE GUARDIAN'S INSTRUCTION, OR, The Gentleman's Romance, Written for The
Diversion and Service of THE GENTRY; Particularly those Educated in Cambridge,
and Oxford.

The second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1697.

TO THE ENGLISH GENTRY.
AFter the very copious Treatise of Education, the Gentleman's Calling, and
other Excellent Advices of Manners, Civil prudence and Institution, it looks
somewhat Assuming to invade any the least part of that Subject.

But I am so far from pretending to vye Art and Contrivance, that the main
Design of that Part of this Tract which interferes is to exemplify and
illustrate the Practicableness of those General Rules and Instructions which
the forementioned Authors have deduced from Nature and Reason. And therefore
sometimes a Coincidence of the same Thoughts upon the same Subject is
unavoidable, as Mr. Osborn has alleged to excuse himself on the like Occasion.

And truly to be just to them who have written before, the whole
serviceableness of this small thing does depend upon and absolutely require a
previous frequent Resort to those Books, which ought never to be out of the
Studies of any Schoolmaster, Parent or Tutour in the Kingdom.

And though the Management of my Project can hardly stand the Trial, yet the
Design of it will not be censured by any man who loves a Gentleman.

I have had Experience how far the Honor and Interest of Great Families is
concerned in the Virtuous Accomplishment of the Eldest Sons and Heirs: And if
the Observations which mine own Experience has forced me to make, are any
thing worth, they are but a reasonable Acknowledgement of the Respects which I
have received from the Gentry, both Fathers and Sons.

I foresee some Objections which I must account for.

Object. I. Why is the Book so short, when the Pretensions seem so considerable?

1. Because I told you that other Persons had written before upon one Great
Part of my Subject, to whom I refer you for a thousand wiser Instructions.

2. I sometimes only give bare Hints of serious things, when they carry so
much Evidence of Reason with them as will make the Active Soul of any Man who
is Good, and desires to be Wiser, consider and exercise his Thinking.

3. I have heard a Wise man say, that there may be as much Judgment required
to make a short Book as a long one.

4. Suppose the Persons for whose use this is written, should be somewhat
Impatient of Reading long things, then perhaps they may be the less displeased
with an ordinary Subject, provided they can read it over at one sitting.

Object. II. The Romantic manner of Writing.

Truly, when I was of the Age of those persons in kindness to whom I write, I
then thought that Fiction and Intercourse was somewhat more diverting than
uniform Narrations or dogmatical Propositions. And I was about to say, that
they better understand Hobbs his Sense and Principles by Timothy and Philautus,
than from the Grand Author himself: For there they see Consequences displayed,
and the Slye Connection between Dangerous Conclusions and Plausible Premises
exposed, which was palliated before under Good Style and Language, and the
Magisterial Authority of the Proponent.

Object. III. The Style sometimes will seem eager.

Verily this I my self am afraid of, for fear of Indecency, (no man being a
competent Judge of his own Indecencies.)

But two things I have to offer for my self, if the good natured Reader will
accept of them.

1. That I do assure him (who am best able) That no single Person alive is
aimed at or intended to be described and pictured in the angry Characters of a
Fond Father, a Womanish Mother, Debauched Son, Wanton Daughter, Ill
Schoolmaster, Careless Tutor, etc. that would be Rude and Barbarous.

I set up one of Plato's Ideas's, and sometimes shoot Bitter Words, but this
hurts none; there is no Blood drawn from Universals.

2. Whoever thinks the Language Angry; surely, if he would consider well,
Sharpness of Style would not be looked upon as more unnecessary for
Instruction, than pickled Sauces are for insipid Meat: It Is true, they grate
the Palate, but they make the Meat go down, and help Digestion.

Object. IV. Expressions sometimes mean, and Similes too vulgar: This I confess
my self ashamed of, and is one Reason why I do not put my Name: but really, I
knew not how to avoid it; I knew not how to expose and lessen culpable things,
but by culpable Language.

Object. V. -- Wandering and hunting out to fetch in heterogeneous Matter.

You may remember, that I told you before, how impatient Youth is wont to be,
and how to chain it I know not, but by various and unpected Subjects: and there
is not any Digression, but some Person or other will be concerned to understand
the Design. And whosoever shall be so kind as to apply the Instructive part to
his own Use, He is the Man for whom I write, and He only comprehends my
Intention.

Object. VI. Why does it come out at such a time as this?

And why not? No dangerous Design, that I know, is in it, but this, that
Gentlemen's Sons may hereafter be bred up better than some of their Fathers have
been.

I have oftentimes grieved, when I have considered the Gallant Youth of the
English Gentry, who have as good Parts, and are as well natured as any Men in
Europe: and yet as to Learning and Politics, I am sorry to see some of them
turn to so little Account in the Service of the King and Country.

This was the occasion of these Papers; and when they were first written, a
Reverend Divine of good Estimation hearing them read, was earnest for their
Publication: But the frequent Readings over, and continual Reflexionson them
glutted my Fancy, that then it became too familiar, fulsome, and of no Taste:
And thence it lay buried in the Dust for several years.

A while since I fastened upon it with a Fresh Stomach, and tho it did not taste
very salt, yet I thought it relished somewhat better than it did before. And
having added some few things, I communicated it to a Friend or two on whom I
much depend; they were so complemental as to warrant the good Effect for which
it was very sincerely intended; Tutoring being now as necessary (for ought I
see) as ever. And those young Gentlemen are able to read this, who want Age and
Solidity to be affected with Learned Discourses of Controversies and Politics.

One thing I heartily beg of the Reader, if any Hint in these Papers, or any
former Discourse of this kind, suggest a Suspicion of the Author, in the Name
of Friendship, do not discover him: For at this time, when Writing, both as to
Substance of Matter and Ornament of Language, is at highest, it is not fit to
be subscribed by a man, who has thought away some Years.

Farewell and be Civil.
THE Guardian's Instruction.
A Letter from a severe Enemy of (...) University to his Guardian, a p^ (...)
moderate, and Member of the Parliament at Oxford.
SIR,
WE have here the news of another Parliament very speedily at Oxon, and, which
is more surprising, the Report of your Resolution never to serve as Member
more: the Nobility and Gentry will expect some Account why a Person who has
served the Government and Religion with that faithfulness and dexterity for
above twenty years, should at last be wanting thereunto, when perhaps one brisk
attempt more might be as much worth as Property and Religion. How you will
escape the name of Tory I know not, and then it is an casie step to Papist.
Pray, Sir, rectify me if I am mistaken by thinking the K. necesstated to call
a Parliament, by some unexpected emergency either Foreign or Domestic: for I do
not think the Country Prepared yet: But if it must be summoned, why at Oxford
again? that Idle, Ignorant, Ilbred, Debaucht, Popish University of Oxford? If
you do not stand, I am desited to appear, and beg the favor of your Direction
toward the management of the Canvas, and if I am chosen, toward the managment
of my self in the House: I had waited upon you my self but that I am confined
by a great uneasiness contracted by a Cold, and if you fancy my style is grown
somewhat more eager thereby, do not look upon me as a man incapable of being
better advised, but frankly use the Authority which a thousand Circumstances
give you over.

Honored SIR, Your most Obedient and Affectionate

The Answer
Dear SIR.
THE solitary Retirement whih I have lately undertaken being liksome at the
first, you could not be more artificial in your Relief, than to engage me in
the Answer of a Letter, the Substance of which requirers more than an ordinary
Reflection, and whereon the Discharge of my thoughts may be Instructive as well
as Diverting: what Censure I shall undergo for Declining the Character I have
hitherto born, does not now so much trouble me as it might have done heretofore
at your Age, when full of Youth and Heat, coming newly to an Estate and
Business, I thought it the speediest Courie to be Considerable, to appear
Haughty and Designing. But now I am grown so much more old than I was forty
years agon, that I perfectly contemn censure, which operates no farther than you
make it, and which nothing but an unmasculine Timorousness or slavish Ambition
of Popularity makes considerableIf you measure your self from abroad, you must
be the cheapest thing alive; I will teach you the true way to Popularity; Let a
sincere Design of Honor and Justice be at the Bottom of all your Actions: let
an exemplary Piety and Devotion make the world gaze upon you: let no base
Words, Actions or Acquaintance lessen the mention of you wherever you come
then may you d^fie Censure: the Good will honor, and the Bad will fear you, you
will be applauded by the Wise, and then Fools need not be courted. Whereas on
the other side, if you shall forbear an Action fit and reasonable merely upon
the account of the Censure you are likely to undergo (either from the vulgar or
great Ones) you will often find it very hard to be Honest and Just.

There are many Hindrances of Justice and Honesty; Prejudice, Pride, Malice,
Selfishness, Interest and Passions, but none so great as Cowardice and Fear.

This Humor makes Princes stattered, and Great Ones never hear their faults:
makes Actions of Truth and Justice so ^amely preformed: and is in earnest the
very bane of all Worth, Honor and Integrity.

But yet I must be so civil to your Reauest as to say, that I am so far from
any Contempt of that Honorable way of serving my King and Country in
Parliament, that I desire never to be valued more for any thing in this Life,
then for having been in a good measure Instrumental toward the passing some
special Bills since the King came in. But I never thought it unhappy and
dangerous for a man to Dye full of noise and business. And men of Action cannot
so soon prepare for another Life, as sedentary men of Thought and Study may. I
have ever pitied those men whose necessitous Emploiment and Fortune has put
them under an Obligation of making even at one time the Accounts of the World
and the next. I therefore now fully resolve to narrow my thoughts and take the
advantage which old Age and Experience gives of thinking strictly, and
reviewing my Life; and being freed from fancy (which often cheats the younger
Judgments) to consider how far the Rules I have gone by, how specious soever to
others, and pleasant to my self, may be consistent with a severe expectation of
an A^count above, where Pleasure, Interest and Passion most disappear. I have
procured me many Practical Books of Divinity to assist my untutoured
Conceptions, Books of men of all Persuasions: but all do not please me alike:
some of them speak fine things, but their Meditations are Poetical, Verbose and
Fanciful: others are Grave indeed, but they are Learned and Difficult when they
would instruct: A third sort are Sober, Pious and Easy, but flat, void of all
Metal and Spirit, all Cant and Formality: A fourth insinuates an Opinion he is
of.

But another sort of Writers there are with which this Age abounds, and which I
mainly dwell upon: wherein with simplicity of style and seriousness of thought.
I find a sincere state of truth and just limits of duty, neither too loose and
large, left a man should grow wanton, nor too strict and scrupulous, lest he
should despair. And all with a due movement of Passion; out of which I intend
to shape a true Measure of my self; learn the Contempt of what hitherto I have
admired; humble my Soul for my many failings, and warm my Devotions by the
expectation of a wiser and better state.

And forasmuch as an universal Charity and compassionate Beneficence to all
mankind is an indispensible Condition of Divine Clemency and the most agreeable
Companion of Mortification: it were barbarous for me (who Bred you) to let so
good a Disposition go unguarded, which by reason of Youth is as capable of
Direction as it is of Temptation by Prosperity. Therefore take my Experience
along with you in the Practice of a few Rules, by which your great Condition in
the World may become more Easy. Useful.


I. More Easy, Quiet, and less Disturbed.
1. Because true and real Happiness is within, endeavor for a solid Persuasion
of God's Goodness and Willingness to pardon sin upon Faith and Repentance and
the train of Duties they imply: for the frequent recurring of Guilt and
unavoidable Infirmities will beget great solicitousness of thought and
dejection of spirit, and if the Devil should suggest hard and false notions of
God, it may not only disturb your Happiness, but your Senses too: I would have
it a solid Persuasion, not the fancifull Presumption of every hasty Believer;
and upon Terms of the Gospel, to distinguish it from an holy Stupidity, which
is as far from true Peace of Conscience as a Sleep procured by Opiates is from
the natural Refreshment of a sound Constitution.

2. Because Fear has torment, and no torment greater than the Fear of Dsath:
make the thoughts of mortality familiar, and habituate your self into a
Capacity of Dying, this will prevent the great amazement a fit of Sickness many
times begets.

3. A Resolution sometimes upon occasion to deny your self some satisfactions
which your Appetite pursues, though they seem very reasonable; then
Disappointments and cross Accidents will be easy.

4. Not too much to value the Censure of others in the performance of what you
apprehend to be your own Duty; neither let Ceremony or Civility at any time
hinder Business.

5. Not to be discouraged in your Duty by the foresight or opinion of
Vnsuccesfulness.

6. If you are complying and of an easy Temper; not to be hasty and lavish of
Promises, the Performance may be troublesome.

7. If of a grateful Temper, not to accept of unnecessary Favors, the thoughts
of Requital are afflicting.

8 If of a good natured pitying Disposition, not to be unwarily free to
Strangers or Relations of mean fortune, lest they erave too much, and think all
you have there due.

9. If melancholy; to labor against it, as the Parent of Fears Scruples which
are vexatious and endless.

10 If proud; to consider, it will create Envy, Contempt and Design, and is
really the greatest Folly, and yet we are all marvellously subject to it.

11. If passionate; to study the Prevention of the obvious Occasions, consider
the Indecency and the many Disturbances of it, to be always on your guard for
fear.

12. If given to women, consider the Shame and Scandal, and slavish fear of
Discovery.

13. If malicious; to consider the Enmity and Danger it begets, and that you
must forgive, if you hope to be forgiven.

14. If disputations; to consider how disobliging and uncivil it seems.

15. Not to be inquisitive into Secrets or meedling in other men's Affairs you
are not concerned with. Not to be always asking Questions in Company, it is ill
Breeding.

16. Not to contend with great ones, but quickly yield, whatever be the
Provocation: They will worst you at last.

17. Not to name or reflect on Persons in promiscuous Company: You know not
their Relations, or whom you disoblige.

18. Not to believe every man you converse with as honest as your self, upon a
friendly and complaisant Address: The World is a great Cheat.

19 No to be ashamed to ask pardon of whom you have injured, and make what
restitu^^n you are capable of.

20 Not to be too open and free of conversation (whatever by your Wit)and how
pleasant soever you may seem to Company, they will contemn you, and may
mischief you afterward.

21. Not to be too weary and cautious in your Opinion of small things, amongst
wise men: this looks like suspicion and is ridiculous to whisper Proclamations,
and not tell a man what day of the month it is, without considering, this is
formal and foppish.

22. Not hastily to think any man your Enemy, it may make one, a man may be
angry with you, and not hate you.

23. Not to trust one whom you have disobliged, too soon.

24. To expect and resolve to bear with many Offenses and Indignities, and
consider that no condition of Life can be free from all disquiet, for ought I
know, it would be dangerous.

25. Not easily to believe Reports concerning your self or others.

26. Not quickly to espouse the Quarrels of our Relations or Friends.

27. Beware of being too much obliged by Great Men, they will be apt to impose
Hardships upon you, it may prove a slavery to you, if they are proud.

28. Beware of setting up that stirdy Resolution which ^^me make, never to give
(...) what they have once begun, but at all adventures to go on; this may run
you into vast inconveniences.

29. Be cautious of undertaking greater Designs than what are just and suitable
to your Condition; then if you miscarry, you will not be contemned.

30. Be careful to treasure up the Remembrance of all God's mercies to you and
yours; For Gratitude is a good Guard against sin, Genesis 39 9.

31. In time of great Crosses and Affliction, be sure first to pray for Pardon
of sin, and then you may with Earnestness and hopes beg Pity, Mat. 92, 5, 6.
I^a. 59.1, 2.

32. When you pray for Pardon of sin, because we all forget many sins we would
repent of, if we thought on them, be careful to mention secret and forgotten
sins.

33. You must resolve to marry; for to leave the management of your great
Family to Servants only, is neither for Credit or Profit, and to undertake all
the little things of Housekeeping your self, will be Gossiping: Beside the
dull converse of Servants only, will either give Scandal, or tempt you to
ramble, and make you be thought looser than really you are.

34. If Circumstances will permit, put your self into the state of Life, which
most agrees with your Temper.

35. Do not accustom your self (be your riches what they will) to be too nice,
curious and fantastical in Diet, Habit, Attendance, that will prove very
troublesome.

36. Be not extravagantly high in expression of your Commendations of men you
like.

37. Study and pray for a perfect Resignation of your will to God's will, and
with all imaginable Application of mind say. Not my will, but thy Will be done;
and then go, be as happy as you please.

II. Your Life is also to be Useful to others as well as Easy to your self.
1. By the good Example of a yertuous and holy Life; incredible is the
influence of a great Man on a Family, Parish and Neighborhood: for the Vulgar
have quite lost their Hea^ing; Preaching is but an honester sort of Diversson:
they learn all by gaping and staring on a man in fine Clothes. And therefore
since you can so easily do God and Man so great service; pray look on your
self obliged. Do not put God off with a little fashionable Civility to the
national Religion. I am afraid the serious Reflecting and Meditating part is
not frequent enough among the Gentry. Let not Pastime, Business or Company
waste all the day: Retire a little and Enjoy your own Soul. This will not
lessen the Pleasures of Life but sweeten and make them solid; and make them
differ from the crackling of Thorns and the flame of Straw: I mean the thin,
short lived delights of the boisterous part of the world.

2. Knowledge. Great are the Advantages which the Wealth of the Gentry affords
them for Knowledge; they are capable thereby of the choicest Education,
greatest variery of useful Books and learned Companions is study. But one
sort of knowledge above all the rest will render them exceeding serviceable in
the places where they live. (a considerable knowledge in the Law) beside the
pleasure that Study would afford, as copying out the Reasen and Wisdom of the
Nation. This will make them more securely possess and prndentially manage their
Estates for their Posterity. And what Service may they do others by untying
knots and composing differences? By bindring men from suffering Oppression by
Ignorance; by directing the management of Parochial and Country Business; which
the general road men go in does not safely show.

3. Power. What should hinder the Master of a Family from keeping his Servants
duly to Prayers at home, and in their turns to Sermons and Sacraments at
Church? What an Empire has a Justice of Peace in the Country! and how
gallantly is that Power bestowed when an extravagant Alehouse is unlicensed, a
common Swearer fined, an useless Vagabond forced to work, a quarrelsome
Neighbor reduced to manners, and a poor abused Minister is assisted? at what a
mighty rate does the Judge sell every minute wherein righteous Judgment is
given; the Cause of the Widow patiently heard, and the fraud and wit of the
Oppressor overruled? When the Bribery, Perjury and Malice of a Witness is
condemned, and the greatest Man that offends afraid to come before him.

4. By Wealth. It is an ill-natured sort of Doctrine to preach, and will not
hold at Westminster, that the Poor have a good Title to some of the rich man's
Money: But it would be an unlucky Disappointment hereafter, if instead of
asking how many Lordships you left your Heir, How many Daughters you married to
great Fortunes, How many Livery-men you kept etc. God should demand, How many
poor Widows have you sav^d from starving? How many Laborers you have set to
work and paid h^nestly: how many d^eay'd Families you have relieved; what you
did give to a Brief for a Fire, Church, or Hospital, etc. Read Barrow of
Charirity. The practice of these Rules will help qualify a Life of Action such
as yours must be, and mine has been:

But now I bid adieu to all public Affairs: this Nation will never want a
breed of men to manage its Concerns.

As for the next thing. The King's being under the necessity of a Parliament.
I know no necessity can be upon the King to call a Parliament but a Foreign War
and want of Money: As for a War, it is not likely (unless by the Moors upon
Tangier) we have attempted to play the King at France, but they two will hardly
meddle with one another; we have endeavored to make Spain break with us, but
they are poor, the Dutch are cunning, so that his Majesty is secure in that
point, As for want of Money, it is said and believed that the King is now made
a good Husband, and has money in the Chequer: if so; it will bring down the
price of Membership: We had been better to have given him a million of money
than to have suffered him ever to come to Think and grow cunning; for, if I ken
him aright he has Parts enough to govern a bigger Nation than this, if he can
once endure the penance of Business and leave off to be afraid of meeting us at
Westminster. And it is probable he never will be so again, since the Success of
that Venture of Contempt upon us, in the amazing precipitated dissolution at
Oxford; from which time I will be bold to date the sinking of Parliamentary
Grandieut.

I guess who it was within one man or two who for interest and security thought
it necessary that things should be put to some issue at Oxford, the City being
embittered by the removal of us, and things carried so high as to force the
King either to show Fear and yield to terms; or Fury, and so act a severe part
upon some Members, and by that give occasion to a Tumult in the City, which
then certainly was designed.

Whereas you question the King's Interest in the Countery, let me tell you, I
perceive the Country cools apace, and he who deals with the Vulgar must do his
business quickly, for seven hours sleep will make a Clown forget his design. It
has been no small advantage to the King that his Adversaries still act with
more noise and tumult than he: and though noise and tumult does wonders while
it continues, yet when it once sinks and grows calm, it is far more difficult
to be useful again. I take the Vulgar to be like a Race horse, when he is upon
speed it is a mighty pace, but if in the course he be checked and comes to
trot, it is very hard to make him gallop again.

If a Parliament must be summond, yet why at Oxford? Idle, Ill bread, Ignorant,
Debauched, Popish Oxford?
You will wonder how I should come to be an Advocate for Oxford, who have
railed at it for above forty years together, and perhaps upon better grounds
than most men do.

I was entered there when the first great difficulties arose betwixt the old
King and Parliament, and as much care was taken as was usual in the choice of a
Tutour: But as I came to understand there was a certain Master of Arts who was
to be the next Tutour of course, and so the next Gentleman who entered was to be
recommended to him in his turn, it happened I was the man, who came with
tolerable Parts and Learning at the rate of a Gentleman; I had a great
reverence for the Person that was to be my Guide, and a strong opinion to be
made very wise.

It happened that my Tutour was a great Philosopher, which made me proud to
hear of, expecting in some short time to be so too: He began at first
gloriously with me, to magnify the advantages of a good Education: How the
greatest Conditions of Honor and Trust were supplied from the University: What
a disgrace it was to the Nation, and what an injury to Government of Church and
State, that when other Gountries, France, Poland, Scotland, etc. are studious
to discipline their Nobility and Gentry into good Manners, Politics and
Religion, here eldest Sons are generally condemned to Hawks and Hounds, and
Wisdom left the Patrimony of younger Brothers only, and Poor men's Sons; That
the mutual luster of a Diamond beset with Gold was a mean Comparison to Wisdom
in the breast of such a man as I. This ravished my rustic modesty, and made me
proud with the thoughts of what I should hereafter be. I out-waked the Bell,
and scorned to be called to my Duty. I attended every motion of his Eye for a
Summons to Philosophy, and thought every minute an hour till I was entered into
that course of study, which was to make me and all my Relations happy. But
alas! the same of his Parts and Learning had gained him Acquaintance whose
company was dearer than mine; so that a Lecture now and then was a great
Condescension (and I most days in the week, when others were carefully looked
after, left naked to infinite temptations of doing nothing, or worse; but God's
Grace, the good Example of my Parents and a natural Love of Virtue, secured me
so far as to leave Oxford (the troubles coming on) though not much more
learned, yet not much worse than I came thither: I must in justice say in
favor of the University in general, that the growing disturbances in Church
and State, and some Disputes in the University, may well be supposed an unhappy
occasion of slackening the Discipline there at that time.

But this infinite Disappointment did so afflict me, that when I came to have
Children, I did almost swear them in their Childhood never to be friends with
Oxford. This peevishness of mine was much increased by a Chaplain of my
Sister's, who was made a Fellow of a College in the late times, and turned out
upon the Restoration of the King. He sought occasions continually to rail at
the University for Ignorance, Debauchery and Irreligion, insomuch that I sent
my eldest Son abroad, to try what improvement might be gained by traveling; at
least to divert. I would willingly have sent him to the Inns of Court but that
I had observed for these last twenty years how the Gaiety and Frolic of the
Court, and the great admiration of Wit, had softened the Souls of many excellent
Persons into an aversion from Industry; who made themselves no otherwise
considerable than for assisting at a Ball, and instead of adding Wealth and
Honor to a Family by advancement through the Law, impaired both; and which is
most deplorable of all, at length came off poisoned with such a licentiousness
of Manners, shameless Atheism, and heathenish promiscuous use of Women, that
either Gentlemen could not persuade their eldest Sons to (the Confinement of)
Marriage; or scarce find Ladies of Fortune and Quality which dared to venture
to have them for Hushands.

Nothing but such Reasons as these can justify my venturing my eldest Son so
early into the wide world: And I must confess that when he returned from beyond
Sea, I was pleased to see the ruff boyish humor filed a little, and shaped
into much of a Man. I was infinitely delighted with the prospect of the
Happiness I promised my self in the Conversation of an Heir who brought home
the same Innocence of Inclinations he carried, and by staring about France and
Italy, had furnished himself with a Complaisance very acc^ptable where ever he
came.

But you must pardon two qualities he had contracted. 1. An humor of
magnifying things abroad in comparison with his own Country. 2. A stateliness
of behavior, and contempt of mean Acquaintance. The last of these I did not
much discourage, finding him Just and Gharitable. For I have often seen young
Gentlemen guarded from low and base Actions and Company by generosity of
Spirit. And how many men do you and I know, loose enough (God help them) from
the Bigotry of Conscience, and yet upon the bare Religion of Honor, rather
than disgrace a worthy Family, misbecome a Character, or fail the opinion of
the World, do as much scorn a base Action, will be as true to their Word, when
they might gain by Lying; as far from cheating a Widow, Minister, or Orphan,
who cannot contend, or do any ungenteele thing, as that man who thinks the
world to come worth twenty of these.

But (Nephew) you are Rich and Great, and therefore I must have a care you do
not mistake me, when I say I would have my eldest Son a little Stately: I do
not mean any degree of that gross imperious Pride which God and Men bates: That
firstborn Monster of Selfishness, and illnatur'd Complexion of the Devil;
Poisoned and puffed up with Envy of what Equals and Betters enjoy; which makes
a man think all the World made for his single Lust and Preasure: Overlook
Mankind, Rebel against Superiors, Mal^tious to Equals, Frants to inferiors
Merciless to the Offencour, Cruel to the Needy and False to the Hireling: Kind
only to Syc^phants, and Friend to None; Walk, Spread and Swell like the mighity
builder of Babylon when he was turning Brute.

And not only the Vileness of the Sin makes the Proud Man as sure to be hated
in this World as he is to be Damned in the next; but the Proud Man is a greater
Fool than I believe he thinks himself: For he loses what he mainly aims at,
instead of being Honored and Esteemed, he makes himself the most Contemptible
thing alive. For he is discovered by all his Words, Actions and Designs, even
when he countersits Humility end Obligingness: oh how it is overdone, strained
and formal. It was always thought a great measure of Folly to be able to be
Flattered, and of all men living if you meet with a Proud Man, you have him at
your mercy; It is but to magnify his Ancient Family, thoperhaps his Great
Grandfather could not Write and Read; The Splendor of his Living, when perhaps
the hired Liverymen dare not drink once in a month in his House: His Wit, when
perhaps it is most shown by holding his tongue, etc. do but all this and keep
your Countenance, ask what you will he never denies the man that understands
Worth. And you must be sure also to sune your cringing Muscles by a French
Fiddle, Shrugg, and make your honor punctualy, you may lead the great Thing to
and fro as if he had a Ring in his Nose.

But to come to my Son again. It quickly appeared how sad is the condition of a
Gentleman without Learning. For wanting some ingenuous Diversion to fill the
deal of void time young Gentlemen have in the Country, and being ashamed to be
still obliged to Silence in all discourses of Learning and State, for want of
more Knowledge; he fell into such an immoderate love of Sports that he was
never well but when he was managing or talking of his Dogs: and in a little
time became fit company for nothing else: Debauched, and wholly useless to King
and Country, and his Family, and if I had not been alive to to secure the
Estate, he proved as likely to have made a Gentleman of his Steward as any Man
in England.

I know I am blamed (but my Wife must bear her share) for breeding him up at a
mean School: For she pretending the danger in great Schools of growing a Man
too soon, and learning ill Tricks (but in Truth, because this place was near,
and she could see him, and hear from him often) would hear of no other Master.

And really the Country Gentlemen are somewhat hardly dealt withal in this
point: For sometimes very mean Persons are licensed to ruin our Children, to
the great Prejudice of Church and State; a Schoolmaster being the best or
worst Subject in the Nation: not but that we have now as many worthy
Schoolmasters as ever; but one Ignorant one does mischief enough.

The Parliament has used all the Prudent Caution imaginable, by referring that
Affair to the Inspection of the Ordinary: It cannot be objected, that we do not
give encouragement enough to maintain fit Persons; for I am bold to say, no
Gentleman is so weak, as not Plentifully to gratify that Person, who is to
contribute to the Prosperity of a whole Family, by spending all his Thoughts,
Pains, and Time in studying the various Tempers and Inclinations of Youth as he
must do, if he will be just to our Expectations.

But very Mean was that Person to whom I sent my Son, upon my Wife's
Importunity.

And perhaps, hereafter you may find it a very hard matter, not to be guided by
a Wife in the breeding your Children. For that Fondness, which is a just debt
from all to a Wife, and is in some by Nature excessive, if she be cunning
enough to humor it well with a few Tears or a pretended Fit, will melt your
sweet Disposition. Mistake me not, I speak this only by way of Caution, that
when you Marry and grow fond, you may manage your uxoriousness more warily than
I have done, for your own Credit, and the good of your Children.

I do not speak this to discourage Marriage. For I will sincerely aver, that
where the choice of Quality, Temper, and Fortune, is tolerably Prudent, there
is a great deal more Happiness than in a discontented, loose, unsatisfied
single Life, unless to those Persons whose Callings oblige them to a continual
Thoughtfulness and moderation of Diet.

I cannot but speak upon this Subject with a great Concern; For, I believe, if
I had Married my Son immediately after his return from Travel, while he was a
stranger to bad Company, and the Vices in fashion, I might have prevented his
Extravagances, and fixed the Mercury. But afterward, too late, when I had
provided an agreeable Match, his Comrades had instilled into him such an
Aversion, and taught him to rail at Matrimony in the Language of the Stews,
that the design of Happiness to my Family, was utterly descated: And once, I
remember, full of Grief, upon that Account, I was visited by a Friend, who
condoled the mischief of such Evil Principles, and the sinful Consequences of
them. And, the better to relieve the Burden I was oppressed with, and prate
some of my Thoughtfulness away; I asked him, what he conceived were the
Occasions of the present great Contempt of Matrimony. He smiled, and told me,
that he had no great skill in the business of Matrimony, but the Contempt of
it, he thought, arose,

1. From the Influence the Devil has upon the wild Libertinism of Nature, for
want of the fear of God, Genesis 20.11. and our cross-grained Appetite, still to
the Forbidden Fruit.

2. The frequency of lewd Examples, which have baffled the Courage of
Ecclesiastical Censure.

3. The popular notion of Matrimony being a slavish confinement: It is
voluntary, and therefore the less to be complained of, and sometimes it proves
better to have business to do than to be Idle; An Huntsman, no doubt, if he
should see a Shopkeeper walking all the day long in a little Room, would think
it a damnable Confinement, and the other Man makes it his Happiness.

4. The Women Govern: The Wiser they: But I fancy that the Women never govern
where the Man has Wit enough to do it himself; and I hope you would not have
Government dye?

5. False notions of the Instances and Allowances in the Old Testament.

6. Some peevish Expressions against Marriage, in the good Old Primitive
Fathers, not to say any thing of Modern Writers.

7. The barbarous forcing Matches upon Children, without their own Consent; and
sad consequences of that.

8. The everlasting Din of Mother-in-law.

9. The hard usage of the first Brood, if they Marry again.

10. The Railery of such who either voluntarily undertake Coelibacy, or whose
Condition of Life obliges them to it.

11. The easy Cure of the French Complement; otherwise the sense of Honor,
and care of Health would make many a Gentleman like his Own Lodging.

There are many other Reasons of the contempt of Matrimony, which you may find
in the Lady's Calling, and in another Waggish Book, which I dare not name for
fear of displeasing an excellent Mistress I have in the World, and because, I
hope, he wrongs new Married Ladies. These, Nephew, we both agreed, were the
common Occasions of that Contempt, under which Matrimony now labors, to the
great inconvenience of the Nation by Immortality, to Families for want of
Heirs, and good young Ladies for want of Husbands.

This I thought fit to Write to you; for whom we have provided an admirable
March, a Lady of all the good Qualities I would desire, if I were of your Age.
She is very Beautiful, and not Proud; She is Well. shaped, and not Stiff; She
is Witty, and not Impertinent; She is Familiar, but not Fond; Good-natured but
not Easic.; Rich, but not Imperious; Young, but not Foolish; Religious, but not
Fantastical: She wants but one good Character more, that is, being Your Wife.
And, I hope, we shall not find you so difficult to the wishes of your best
Friends, as my ungovernable Son, my incurable Son has proved, utterly undone
for want of Education.

But (God be thanked) a better Instruction fell to your share: And though I was
against your going to Oxford, yet the little Time you spent there, was to so
good purpose, that I am sorry for the Occasion of your not continuing longer,
(which, I perceive, you will never forgive the University.) But now it may be
hoped, that you are of Age to consider, that Conscience and Care could not but
oblige the Head of your House and Tutor, to send home the first Alarm of
Danger, when a Person of so great Hopes and Fortune, out of Youth and Goodness
of Disposition, was like to become a Prey. Sure I am, the sense of Virtue and
Religion, and industrious Inclinations you brought thence, deserves Thanks,
which my Son wanted Thanks to a foolish Father and Mother.

Well, whether I or my Wife were most Guilty, it is now only matter of
Repentance; But our Schoolmaster (as appeared) by reason of Ignorance, was
never able to proceed to a Degree in the University, and set up his Staff for a
Livelihood, which fell toward a Country-School. He riggs himself out with a new
Suit, broad Hat, and Silver headed Staff, and being secure from all Censure in
point of Learning, his business with us was only to counterfeit a wise and a
good man, the first he gained the esteem of by an affected Gravity, and a wary
Silence in Company; the second he was secure of in our Country, by acting an
extraordinary Preciseness and disgusting the imposed use of Ceremonies,
confounding the Order of Bishop and Presbyter, magnifying the Advantages of a
Commonwealth, railing at the Bishops Courts, and pitying the Hardships of
taking Oaths, and being forced to Church. And having Wit enough to cringe to
every Person, and comply with his Betters in all Discourse without the least
Contradiction, he gained the Character of an humble and meek Man. So that now
Employment quickly came on, and happy was the Gentleman who could welcome this
great Gamaliel with the first tender of his Respect, that is, the Sacrifice of
an Eldest Son.

Being settled in his Dominion, lest the forementioned humility and want of
Learning (which Children are apt to smell out) should end in Contempt. He puts
on a great self-conceit, ruffles amongst the trembling Boys with a Fantastical
Imperiousness, and procures the name of a strict and careful Man by a partial
Cruelty to poor Men's Children, for he knew Mothers had somewhat as sovereign as
Crab's-eyes to sweeten the Choler, lest the dearly beloved Eldest Son should
come to a mischance.

For a long time I stood by and looked on, but my Wife did so hale and pu'l me
to send my Child to so near a School, that I saw no hopes of Peace, till I
complied; I had the Flattery of several Years, of the Dutifulness and
Proficiency of my Son, which my Wife never doubted of; seeing her Son kept
sweet, neat in Clothes, and Sheepish (which she called Good-Manners.) This
Sheepishness, or over Bashfulness of his, I was troubled at, and endeavored to
mend, because of an Accident which I knew had befallen a young Gentleman my
Neighbor: He was a genteel Youth, very fine in Parts and Dispofition; his
Mother was sensible of this, and fond enough; and so jealous of every Action,
imperious and rigid to an hair's breadth of Duty, loud and noisy at every small
miscarriage, (and sometimes at none.) This made the near Youth dread the place
wherever his Mother was: timorously perform every Duty for fear of being
chidden, and at last so far dispirited, that when he grew up, and for Age and
Knowledge was thought fit to be courted by the best sort of Acquaintance, he
was quite overgrown with that Curb of just and public Actions called
Infirmitas frontis; he would behave himself so diffidently, that sense and
words would fail him; and if his Mother came into the Room he was presently
struck dumb.

Another Youth (exactly such) I knew whose Schoolmaster was rough and hasty, so
that whenever he came into the School the gentle Boy trembled, his heart
constantly aked for fear, and at last contracted such an incurable Hectic as
destroyed him.

These two Instances give me an unavoidable occasion of recommending the
Practice of the Schoolmaster I was bred up under: He was a plain man, skilled
in his Profession, industrious and undesigning H^s way was this; First to sift
the Temper of every Youth; if he found a Boy ruggish and untractable, quickly
to ease himself of the uncomfortable duty of Severity: But if they were
tractable and easy, what ever were their Parts or Learning, to make the best
of both, encourage the Children with Civility and Kindness: He knew there was a
Generosity in Gentlemen, and that what Imperiousness could not do, Courtesy
might, and out of Gratitude, and a sense of Love and Care, he found better
success than if he had affrighted them into Duty.

Well, when my Boy grew toward a Man, I took him away, and upon Examination, I
found that he had sent me home nothing but the very shell of a Gentleman,
spruce indeed in Habit, handsome and well natured, but infinitely void of all
Knowledge, either of Words or Things. It is true, I got him turned out; but in
the mean time, my hopes were lost, so that it became no small Concern of mine
to take better Care for the second Son, who had smarted for a better share of
Learning somewhat than his Brother, at a greater School. Him therefore I was
resolved not to condemn (as Gentlemen phrase it) but to prefer to a Profession.
But what Course to take, I was at a loss. Cambridge was so far off, I could not
have an Eye upon him, Oxford I was angry with.

There was in the Neighborhood an old grave Learned Divine (a rigid
Churchman) and therefore thought me not Zealous enough: but yet the great
Integrity and Simplicity of this Life, and the Inoffensiveness of a free
converse in matters of Indifferency, was Reason enough to me of standing by his
Judgment in this great Confusion of mine own Thoughts.

I desired his advice in the choice of a Profession, for I thought the Gentry
and Nobility of this Nation, the most mistaken Men alive.

First, for breeding the Elder and Younger Sons at one common Idle rate, as if
both were to Inherit equally, so that afterward when they grow Men, and a
Distinction must of necessity be made, it always breeds ill Blood, and
sometimes proves dangerous.

Secondly, For thinking it somewhat beneath Persons of Quality to gain a
Livelihood by the industry of a Profession, such as a Child's inclination
points to.

Physic we both did own to be in the speculation very pleasant, and in the
Practice gainful; but forasmuch as Eminency in that Study requires a more than
ordinary Knowledge in many sorts of Learning, and is so full of Care and
Hardship, we left that to such who were furnished with more Learning, and
invited by a strong natural Propensity thereunto.

Civil Law, was then proposed as a genteel sort of Study, but when I considered
into how few hands the Gains of that Profession falls, and how few Offices of
Preferment there are; I laid aside all thoughts of that Learning, though most
Honorable of any next to Divinity.

My Neighbor spoke well and largely of Divinity; and such was the honesty and
clearness of his Humor, that he franckly told me, that,(...) not favoring
Episcopacy much, would hardly encourage a Son to be a Divine: I was not angry
with his undesigning plainness, but grievously afflicted not to be more truly
known to him; and with some kind of trouble in Spirit, I made him my Confessor.
I told him,

That it did please God, out of a Sense of human Infirmity, I was naturally of
a disposition prone to great Pity and Compassion to such as were Poor, most of
all to such as I saw Honest in their Morals, and, as I thought, sincere in
Religion. And that once (out of Curiosity) I went to a notorious Meeting, upon
the fame of an extraordinary gifted Preacher. I would, I confess, willingly,
being a Member of that Parliament (which made the Act of Uniformity) have
contracted my self, and not have been known to appear so much in opposition to
it, but that could not be; and yet I was resolved to see what matter of moment
there was, to encourage my favoring of Dissenters, being Born of Parents, who
paid dear for their Loyalty in the late times.

When the Meeters had given me the invidious unacceptable deference of Place,
up springs a Man with a briskness of Look, fit to have domineered in the best
Auditory in England. He throws his gaping Eyes about upon the numerous throng.
He had no sooner named his Text, but about the Leaves and the blew Strings of
the Dutch Bible flew, happy was the man whospit upon his Thumb, and first found
the Chapter.

He began (I suppose upon a mistake of his Auditory) with Address, Language,
Rhetoric, and thought as if he had been an Angel; and I never in all my Life
time prepared my self so much for attention; no not in the House of Commons:
But he Correcting himself, descended to such a lamentable meanness of Looks,
W^^^^, and Thoughts, a plainly affected Wink, Shrugg and Whine, that I was
altogether as much Ashamed to be a Witness of what the Women sighed at and
admired: And coming home to my Lodging, sent to speak one Word with the
Preacher, who enquiring what I was; and understanding me a Member of
Parliament, shifted his Lodgings.

This afterward, I complained of in the House of Commons, freely confessing my
Curiosity, and excusing the same by the Design I had in it. But I perceived
that some of the most clamorous Members, against Conventicles, laughed at the
Story, and found out business of another kind to stop any reflection upon the
Circumstances I related, from which time I began to be jealous of Conventicles,
which before I pitied.

I went on, and told him farther, that I thought, if at the Restoration, some
things had been left out of the Liturgy; and others added, it might perhaps
have bated many exoeptions which are now made, but never in my Life thought an
Alteration of it afterward safe for the Kingdom.

That I go to Church with as much Affection as any Man breathing, admire the
simple, full, and significant style of the Liturgy, and the distinction of
short Collects as an ease to tired Devotion; Pictures in Churches and frequent
bowings I never was fond of, but as a Gentleman of breeding, wherever I saw
others bow, I did so too, thinking singularity stiff and ungenteel.

And as for change of the Monarchy into a Commonwealth, I scarce ever heard, I
am sure never endured, any Discourse tending that way. Alas! I remember the
Protectorship of a fortunate Officer, and the Tyranny of Major-Generals: and
were not I fit to be begged for a Madman or a Fool, if I should encourage a
Tumult wherein it is Cross and Pile but some Varlet or other whom I have laid by
the Heels for tearing Hedges, shall-swagger at the head of twenty men worse
than he, rob my Study, fire my House, ravish my Children, and cut my Throat.

Let the faults of Governors (said I) and Government be what they will, it is
much safer to bear these faults than to venture a Change: which I consess many
an innocent undesigning man may contribute to accidentally, but on purpose and
studiously, none but such as either disgorged King and Church Lands at the
Restoration, or such as failed in expectation of great Places, or were
dispossessed from them, or such whose Vices have consumed a large Patrimony,
and disgraced an ancient Family, shall attempt a Reparation from King or
Church: all which I and my Ancestors have ever abhorred; and now said I, Sir,
with the great freedom you began, pray tell me what I am sick of, that the best
Churchmen should bid such a man as I stand off, and cry unclean, unclean.

Upon this the honest man replied, that I was a better Church of England man
that himself: And yet notwithstanding all this I was resolved against making my
Son a Divine, though for reasons not to the discredit but to the honor of the
Church.

I look on it (said I) as an incomparable advantage of that Profession to have
for its single especial Calling what is the concern of all mankind, namely, the
study of the knowledge of our duty toward God and Man: from which all other
Professions, some more, some less, afford great Avocations and incredible
Hindrances. Nay, if temporal advantages were a man's design, a Child could not
be placed in more probable circumstances (having Friends to lend a helping
hand) of an early plentiful fortune than holy Orders. And having mentioned the
Temporal Advantages of the Clergy, I cannot forbear on this occasion giving
you, Nephew, my advice concerning the disposal of your great Living of C. which
I am told is likely to be void by the death of the Doctor who is now past all
hopes of Recovery. You must expect infinite solicitations when so great a
preferment falls; and if you have any value for one who resolves to spend all
his wisdom upon you, let me beg you to act like an English Gentleman: it is
reported that Master H. your Bailiff has a Kinsman very fit to be recommended:
Others say that your Mother's Nurse's Daughter knows a man very deserving; and
some report that his Grace the D. of -- intends to oblige you by giving you
this fair occasion of owning the favor of his Grace's condescension to be
acquainted with you, by making his Friend Rectour of 500 li. a year. Come,
come, act like a man who understand and deserves the true name of Patron, that
is wisely dispose the Living, and then Protect the Minister in his Rights and
Privileges, neither wrong him your self, nor suffer other to do it: Do not
hamper him and call him ungrateful fellow if he refuse to compound for twenty
per Cent. Perhaps while you are warm with Pride and Prosperity, Repentance may
look Cowardly, and Restitution Ungenteel. Acts of Injustice may go down easily,
but they will rattle in your Throat when you come to Die. You are secure from
my Begging, for my Son shall not be a Divine; For in Truth, the Knowledge real
or Pretended of Scripture and Divinity which the Wise sort of all Professions
now pretend to, and the great Controversies and variety of Opinions which of
late have been set on foot; Make it absolutely necessary, for a Divine to be
furnished with deeper Learning than ordinary, and the want of strictness in the
Education of a Son of a great Family; will render the Confinement in that
Severe Profession irksom to such a Youth as mine, and without which he can
never adorn his Function.

At last, I plainly owned, that the Common Law was my design, having observed,
that critical Learning was not required, and I desired my Neighbor's Opinion
and Direction hereunto. He did Confess,

That he thought it a Study so Laudable, that he would willingly have spent
some time in it himself, but that the loss of so much time must needs have
entrenched upon his proper Calling.

He looked upon each great Lawyer capable of signal Service to the State, and
infinite Acts of Charity to private Persons; and that it must be impossible
twenty Years hence, for a good Lawyer to want Preferment. But he offered many
things to be considered before the Law was to be attempted.

1. Whether my Son had Strength of Constitution, to undergo the Drudgery of six
or seven Years close Study.

2. Whether living in an University as a Gentleman at large, without close
confinement, would not habituate him to Laziness, greater than that Study is
consistent with.

3. Great care must be taken, to give him sound Notions of Justice and Charity.
Because, though neither the Law nor any other Profession brings any necessity
on a Man, or irresistible Temptations to be injurious, yet in all Professions
there are some, and in the Law, from the show of Parts, being able to carry a
doubtful Cause: And I verily believe (said he) that many a good Man at the
hour of Death, does repent of having served the interest of an ill Suit,
notwithstanding the excuse of being obliged by the Calling to speak, having
received his Fee. After all this, if I did stand it out in favor of the Law,
then Logic, for a year or two in some University would be useful, because
frequent formal disputation makes a Youth more attentive to a Discourse, and
more quickly apprehensive of a false or weak Reasoning.

And when I Objected my Prejudice against Oxford, from my own experience
formerly, and from the Suggestions of my Sister's Chaplain, just before and
after the King came in: the first, he could not answer for, the latter, he
confessed in part was true, at the time it points out.

For of all places, the University being fast to the Monarchy, suffering most,
and being most weary of the Usurpation, when Oliver was Dead, and Richard
Dismounted, they saw through a maze of Changes, that in little time the Nation
would be fond of that Government, which twenty years before they hated. The
hopes of this made the Scholars talk aloud, drink Healths, and Curse Meroz in
the very Streets: Insomuch that when the King came in, nay, when the King was
but Voted in, they were not only like them that Dream, but like them who are
out of their Wits, Mad, stark staring Mad; to Study was Fanaticism, to be
Moderate was downright Rebellion, and thus it continued for a Twelvemonth,
and thus it would have continued till this time, if it had not pleased God to
raise up some Vice-Chancellors, who stemmed the Torrent which carried so much
filth with it, and in defiance of the Loyal Zeal of the Learned, the Drunken
Zeal of Dunces, and the great Amazement of Young Gentlemen, who really knew not
what they would have, but yet made the greatest noise, reduced the University
to that temperament, that a Man might Study and not be thought a Du^ard; might
be Sober, and yet a Conformist; a Scholar, and yet a Church of England Man; and
from that time the University became Sober, Modest, and Studious, as perhaps
any University in Europe.

And, if after all this, I thought well of an University, he advised me not to
avoid this or that House, because a Vicious Debauched Person came thence, not
to be fond of an House because I my self was of it, or because the Head thereof
was a Famed Man: These, said he, many times prove very fallacious Measures: The
only sure Method to proceed by was the known Integrity and Prudence of a Tutor,
who would improve him if he were regular, if not, would certainly tell me it.
Such an one he told me he knew, and would write unto.

Now, full of Instruction, I was not long in getting on Horseback, but an
unhappy accident at Oxford had almost spoiled all: For at ten of the Clock, in
the Inn, there was such a Roaring and Singing that my Hair stood an end, and my
former Prejudices were so heightened, that I resolved to lose the Journey, and
carry back my Son again, presuming, that no noise in Oxford could be made but
Scholars must do it: But the Proctour coming thither, and sending two young
pert Townsmen to the Prison for the Riot, relieved my fears; and quickly came
to my Chamber, and perceiving my Boy designed for a Gown, told me that it was
for the preservation of such fine Youths as he, that the Proctours made so bold
with Gentlemen's Lodgings. He was a Man of Presence and suitable Address, and
upon my request sat down; I told him I was glad to see Authority discountenance
the public Houses, because it is an incredible scandal the University labors
under, from the account that Country Gentlemen (who come and Lodge in Oxford)
give of Ranting in Inns and Taverns, as if there was no sleeping in that Town
for Scholars: He civily replied, that things might be better, but he thanked
God they were no worse; that Scholars did often bear the blame of Country
Gentlemen and the Townsmens guilt, and that absolutely to keep Young Men from
public Houses was impossible, but by Parents injunction to their Children, by
Tutors observing the Conversation of their Pupils, and every Head of an House
commanding home in time all the Junior part at least of their Societies.

As for the Prejudices we suffer under in the Country, he said there were many
reasons of that: The constant Declamations against us of those intruding
Members, who were turned out again in 60, the Hatred all Enemies of King and
Church show against us for being presumed Parties, and the Envy the Gentry bear
us upon a false supposition of our Ease, Luxury, and Prosperity: To which, we
our selves (said he) do foolishly contribute by treating Friends in our
Chambers, as splendidly as if we were worth thousands, when perhaps half a
Fellowship would not pay for two such Dinners, as are made upon a slight
occasion. And of all Men Living, the Gentry ought not to be against us, or envy
our moderate Fortunes, whose whole Employment is taking up in serving them, by
Breeding their Sons here, and Serving their Cures hereafter. Perhaps it will be
said the Sons of some of them Miscarry: It is great Pity any one should, but I
am sure that Person ought to vindicate us, whose Son goes off Virtuously Bred:
they do not know the Care is taken to secure their Children, and make them
happy. I could willingly have heard him longer, but that he was to go his
Rounds: It was pleasant to see how my Son trembled, to see the Proctour come
in, without knocking at his Father's Chamber Door.

The next Morning, I carried my Neighbor's Letter to the Tutor, who expressed
a just deference to the Hand, but did not seem fond of the Employment. I
thought to have found him mightily Pleased with the Opinion we had of his
Conduct, and the Credit of having a Gentleman's Son under his Charge, and the
Father with his Cap in Hand: Instead of all this, he Talked at a rate, as if
the Gentry were Obliged to Tutours, more than Tutours to them. And when I asked
him whether he thought me a Man who did not know how to be grateful? No, said
he, (with somewhat of sharpness) I never met with a Gentleman backward in that
in my life; and to tell you a great Truth, if I were of a craving Temper, I
would not take half the care I do. For many Mothers (I would say Fathers too,
were it not for shame) are so Wise as to think that Man much more accomplished
for a Tutor, who can Cringe solemnly, Tattle in their way, lead them handsomely
over a Gutter, and kiss their Hands with a good grace, than a Man of less
Fashion and Ceremony; who instead of flattering Parents, and humouring the Son,
sets carefully to work, and lets the Youth know what he comes up for. Though,
in the mean time, I do not think Clownishness a Virtue, but plain Dealing was
always thought so: And some Parents have not Wit enough to distinguish these
Two, especially when they are a little Proudish: As for Ingratitude in
Gentlemen, I never had any reason to complain; nay, I have often refused
Presents, when I thought my Pains over-valued, though I believe (generally) an
honest Tutor sells his Hours cheaper than the Fencer or Dancing Master will.
That which I value, is the great success and satisfaction I have had in the
towardliness and proficiency of a great many Young Gentlemen, who, at this day,
do the University Credit, and the places where they live Good, by their
excellent Example: But, to be in earnest, the Care is Infinite, and the Fear
they should Miscarry is very Afflicting: And yet, after all this, if the Divine
you came from, told you, That he thought I would undertake your Son for his
sake, then I must do it; and your Son shall know, before your own Face, what he
must trust to. I do not see any lines of Disobedience in his Countenance. But I
must desire you to lay your Commands upon him.

1. That he observe the Duties of the House, for Prayers, Exercise, etc. as if
he were the Son of a Beggar: for when a young Boy is plumed up with a new Suit,
he is apt to fancy himself a fine Thing: Because he has a penny Commors more
than the rest, therefore he ought to be abated a pennyworth of Duty, Learning,
and Wisdom. Whereas the Gentlemen in the University ought to do more Exereise
than others, for they stay but little Time there, and ought to be accomplished
in haste, because their Quality, and the National Concern make them Men apace.
And truly, if Men may be heard in their own Cause, the Gentry are too severe in
condemning the Universities for not sending home their Sons furnished with
Ethics, Politics, Rhetoric, History, the necessary Learning of a Gentleman,
Logic and Philosophy, etc. and other useful Parts; when they send up their
Sons for Two, perhaps Three Years only, and suffer them to trifle away half
that time too: It is an ungrateful task to the Tutor always to be Chiding, the
Father must command greater Strictness; otherwise, when the Young Man, who has
been long in Durance, and here finds his Shackles knocked off, and the Gate
wide open, he will Ramble everlastingly, and make it work more than enough for
us to keep him Sober: whereas, if they will take care that he be furnished
early at School with Latin, come up hither young and pliable, stay here and
study hard for Five Years, then if he prove not able to do the King and his
Country Service, I am content it should be our Fault.

2. That he writes no Letter to come home for the first whole Year. It is a
common, and a very great inconvenience, that soon after a young Gentleman is
settled, and but beginning to begin to Study; we have a tedious ill-spell'd
Letter from a dear Sister, who languishes and longs to see him as much, almost,
as she does for a Husband: and this, together with rising to Prayers at Six a
Clock in the Morning, softens the lazy Youth into a fond desire of seeing them
too: Then all on the sudden up Posts the Livery-Man, and the led Horse,
enquires for the College where the young Squire lives, finds my young Master
with his Boots and Spurs on beforehand, quarrelling with the Man for not
coming sooner. The next news of him is at home, within a day or two he is
Invited to a Hunting Match, and the Sickly Youth, who was scarce able to rise
to Prayers, can now rise at Four of the Clock to a Fox-chase, then must he be
treated at an Alehouse, with a Rump of Beef, Seven Miles from home, hear an
Uncle, Cousin, or Neighbor Rant and Swear; and after such a sort of Education
for six or eight Weeks, full of Tears and Melancholy, the sad Soul returns to
Oxford: his Brains have been so shogged, he cannot think in a Fortnight: And
after all this, if the young man prove Debauched, the University must be
blamed. And, Sir, if you can bear a Truth, I hope you are not concerned in; the
first Question the Tutor should ask, is, in what kind of Family and in what
manner the Child has been bred up before he comes to us. For, where Parents
give good Examples themselves, and keep good Order in a Family, the University
Business is half done to our hands: But if he shall come out of a Sty or a Den,
see his own Father carried up three times a Week to Bed; hear nothing but Oaths
and ill Language from Servants, etc. it must needs Vitiate the Virgin Soul; he
comes up Diseased, and it will require very skilful Application to correct an
Error in that first Concoction.

3. That he frequent not Public Places, such as are Bowling-Green,
Racket-Court, etc. for, beside the danger of firing his Blood by a Fever,
heightning Passion into Cursing and Swearing, he must unavoidably grow
acquainted with Promiscuous Company, whether they are, or are not Virtuous.
Nay, were his new Acquaintance all very good, and of the strictest House, the
certainty of making him Idle, by receiving and paying Treats and Visits is
dangerous. I have seen two sorts of Liquor, each of them cold when they were
singly touched, but when they were put together, they flamed with such a degree
of Heat as melted the Glass they were in. Besides this, all young Gentlemen are
not sent to the University with the same design with your Son; I know a very
Honest, Lusty Country Gentleman of four or five Thousand a Year, who sent his
Heir to the University, merely for Credit's sake; and wisely bid him spend what
he would (which the Youth dutifully Obeyed), required no more of his Tutor than
to keep him from knocking his Head against a Sign-post, and dirting his silken
Stockings at Nine of the Clock: do you think such a Man fit Company for your
Son, whom you design to be Lord Keeper?

4. Be sure that he discharge all Dues Quarterly, and not learn to run into
Debt, this will make him gain Credit and Buy Cheaper. Whatever he saves of your
Allowance, let it be his own gain, perhaps that may teach him Thrift, and if I
were fit to be your Tutor, I would advise you to double it: for Prodigality is
a little more catching than Niggardliness with Young Gentlemen. I know a Person
in the World who lived with as much Credit in Oxford as any Man, always Genteel
in Habit, and where Entertainments were, becoming always Generous; and yet
carried away with him a good Sum of Money, saved out of his Father's Allowance,
and if he would give me leave, I would propose him as an Example to the Gentry
of the University.

5. What ever Letters of Complaints he writes home, I desire you to send me a
Copy: for ill-natured untoward Boys, when they find Discipline sit hard upon
them, they then will learn to Lie, Complain and Rail against the University,
the College, and the Tutor, and with a whining Letter, make the Mother, make
the Father believe all that he can invent, when all this while his main design
is to leave the University, and go home again to spanning Farthings.

6. I understand, by one of your Daughters, that you have brought him up a fine
Padd to keep here for his Health's sake, now I will tell you the use of an
Horse in Oxford, and then do as you think fit. The Horse must be kept at an
Alehouse or an Inn, and he must have leave to go once every day to see him eat
Oats, because the Master's Eye makes him Fat: and it will not be Genteel to go
often to an House and spend nothing; and then there may be some danger of the
Horse growing resty, if he be not used often, so that you must give him leave
to go to Abingdon once every Week to look out of the Tavern Window, and see the
Maids sell Turnips: and in one Month or two come home with a surfeit of
Poisoned Wine, and save any farther charges by dying: and then you will be
troubled to send for your Horse again: This was the unhappiness of a delicate
Youth, whose great misfortune it was to be worth Two Thousand a Year before he
was One and Twenty.

7. That he go constantly to the University Church on Sundays.

Before I came to be a Tutor, curiosity and a natural share of Thoughtfulness
made me observe the Tempers of the Youth of the University, such as either
Necessity or Accident had brought me acquainted with: and I found one too
common an humor, which from the beginning, I did Lament, foreseeing, even
then, a very unhappy consequence of it. You should see young Gentlemen mighty
forward to hasten to St. Mary's, and happy the Man who could get the foremost
place in the Gallery: but if the Preacher, who came up, did not please, either
with his Looks, his Voice, his Text, or any Whimsey else, immediately a great
bustling to get out; Neighbors of each side disturbed to make the Gentleman
room: (who sometimes drags half a score along with him) especially if he had a
pointed Band, and a silk Suit, and kept a Brace of Geldings; Well, when they
had Fought their way out into the Streets, they were for venturing their
Fortunes at another Church; but there the Minister was practical, dull, and
plain, and being uncertain what to do, it being not yet Dinner time, they
resolved to stumble in at one holy Threshold more, and what with staring about
on the Auditors, talking aloud of, and censuring the Preacher, they made a hard
shift to hold out till the little greezy Bells began to Ring to Veal and
Mutton, and then by the modest admonition of going our, put the Minister in
mind of being Civil to the rest of the Hearers. Coming Home, they talk as big
as Bull-Beef of each Man they Heard: Though if you ask the very Text, (Alas!)
He Talked so low they could not remember that.

At last, I perceived that this Ambulatory Roving carelessness of Humor, begat
an indifferency of going to any Church at all: And so prepared the young
Gentry, when they should come to be let loose into the wide World, to be no
great opposers of Atheism.

This was unhappily contributed to, by the Disputes concerning the Sabbath:
Some contending for a very Jewish observation; Others, disproving it is
Morality, both brought contempt upon that Day, and accidentally upon Religion
it self: As did also the Levelling Churches with Stables, and making the Inward
Worship of God, oppose the Outward

For whosoever knows the great Laziness and Supidity of the Vulgar, need not be
told that Religion is kept up by the distinction of the Lord's Day from other
days; and if the Plough were stopped, a long Sermon Preached, and a Psalm or
two Sung, Religion, Name, and thing, would quickly be destroyed, and the
Country Peoples Hair and Nails would grow as long as Nebuchadnezzar's in the
fourth of Daniel.

Therefore, I pray Sir, command your Son to be true and just to the Outside of
Christian Religion, and leave the rest to God's Grace upon the use of means.
Let him not harken to the Whispers of such as would insinuate distastful
Notions of Ceremonies of Church Government; for if he once grows dissetled in
his Mind from the Public Worship, then he will pickeer out under every Hedge,
for a new Religion, and finding himself disappointed, it is odds but in a twelve
Months time he may magnify the Leviathan, and when he comes to that, if he
does not cut your Throat (provided he can do it safely) for fear you
disinherit him, truly you are beholden to him.

8. Oblige him to frequency of Writing Home: For coming to the University is
not like going beyond Sea, where some Persons learn to forget their Relations,
and would absolutely Slight them, were it not for a Bill now and then. Letters
to and fro are some kind of Guard upon a Youth: And it will not only be an
honest means of filling up some Idle time, but will make him better able to
Write an handsome Letter which is no disparagment to a Gentleman, or to Write a
good Hand, which few do. Beside all this, he who begins to contemn his
Relations, to whom he owes all, will quickly reckon Tutoring a Relation not so
considerable and regardable as at first he was told. And in a little time
Commands will look like Tyranny and Usurpation; and then Tutour, Father, and
Vice Chancellor, will never be able to balance the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil.

9. I would not have him grow in love with Cards and Dice. For though at first
nothing may seem more harmless than to cheat a tedious hour or two with the
loss of a Trifle: Yet by degrees much Play will beget Skill, and Skill will
beget Emulation, this will heighten Wagers: Frequent losses will increase
Passion: Frequent conquests will make him think himself a greater Gamester than
really he is: And whenever he goes so far that Passion blinds what Skill he
has, or Opinion makes him bold of what Skill he has not, then it will be time
to send him up to London, to help maintain the Wits of the Town.

Among'st whom, if he loses, it is likely he is Cheated; if he wins, then he
must Fight the Man he has Undone: And so stake 2000. Pounds a Year against a
Silver Sword: If you permit him to be fond of Gaming while he is young, and
this does not befall him, indeed it is none of his Father's fault.

10. As for your Allowance and moderate Pocket-Money, it must be at your
Discretion: Only I desire that it may go through my hands, at least the whole
first year, till I can take some measures of his Discretion. I would not have
him allowed too little, that he may live like a Gentleman; and I would not have
him allowed too much, lest he should set up for nothing else.

11. That he grow intimate with none, but such as I shall recommend to his
Acquaintance: Necessity, Good Manners, and the customary Respect which is
usually paid Strangers, will command a friendly Correspondency with the Members
of the same College. But it is of very ill Consequence, for an unexperienced,
easie-natur'd Person of Quality, (the better natured, the sooner undone) to
make himself fond of every Man, who shall court a constant Familiarity, with
all the Civility of Address and Friendship.

For, if he be a man of great Acquaintance, so must you. If he be Idle, then,
by frequent Avocations, he will by degrees lessen the Practice of your Duty,
and jest you out of the Opinion of it. Then Prayers shall be called Loss of
Time; Disputations, School-play; and Lectures, Pedantry: Then the Tutor's
Presence will become frightful, Advice useless, and Commands provoking.

12. You must leave him wholly to me, for the Method of his Study, and the
Books he must read; and expect an Account from me, of his Abilities and
Inclinations, in order to a Course of Life hereafter.

13. And now, last of All, I must ingenuously tell you both, That if he
observes all these things, and does it merely out of a Fear of your
Displeasure, and not out of a Sense of his Duty to God, as well as Man, (and
secretly wish, that he had Liberty to be as wild as the worst;) it will be but
a sort of Eye service, a forced Complement of good Nature, and never come to
much.

But, if he be a serious and thinking Youth, Virtuously and Religiously
inclined; if able to consider the Performance of his Duty, as a share of that
Service God requires for the Talents He affords: Then he will study without
bidding, and say his Prayers when no Man sees: And a Voice then from behind,
shall bid him go on, and presper; and all the Care and Kindness in the World I
will promise you, shall be thought too little.

It was very Comical, to hear the differing Apprehensions I and the rest of the
Company had of this Discourse. For the Women longed to go, and see the College,
and the Tutor. And when he was gone out of the Room, I asked, how they liked
the Person, and his Converse? My Boy clung about his Mother, and cried to go
Home again; And she had no more Wit, than to be of the same Mind: She thought
him too weakly, to undergo so much Hardship, as she foresaw was to be
expected. My Daughters, who (instead of Catechism, and Lady's Calling) had been
used to read nothing but Speeches in Romances, and hearing nothing of Love and
Honor in all the Talk, fell into downright scolding at him; called him the
Meerest Scholar: and if this were your Oxford-Breeding, they had rather he
should go to Constantinople to learn Manners. But I, who was older, and
understood the Language, called them all great Fools; and told them, That there
was so much plain, practicable Truths in what he had said, that if every
Gentleman would effectually take such a Course, it were impossible for one
Child in Forty to miscarry.

But perceiving, by some Part of the Discourse, that our Children should be
earlier furnished in the School with Learning, and so come sooner to the
University than generally they do, before they are too much their own Men, and
in sight of One and Twenty: In behalf of a Young Noble man of my near
Acquaintance, whose Eldest Son was about four or five Years of Age, and who was
very solicitous to manage his Education to all the best Advantages, I desired
him to furnish me with some Instructions, serviceable to that Noble Family, in
the Prevention of such Inconveniences, as I my self had run into.

He told me, That he thought a Child might, by Twelve Years of Age, be
furnished with good Skill in Latin, and some in Greek; and then, after Five
Years stay in the University, be very well prepared for all the Uses of Travel,
according to the Methods and Directions in the Book of Education, and
Gentleman's-Calling; which can never be read over too often by the Gentry. The
most easy and common Advice, which every Man's Experience shows to be most
absolutely necessary, he bade me practice, as follows.

General Directions for the better Education of a CHILD of Great Quality.
1. CUre the Mother of the Disease called Fondness, if you can; otherwise the
Child will be bred so tenderly, as to be good for little. Every Door must be
shut, and a Fire made in the midst of July, while my young Master's a dressing;
so that most times he does not prove Hardy enough to be Healthy or Wise. Take a
curle headed Boy from the Side of a Beggar, (the Phlegmatic Offspring of
Butter-Milk, and sour Cheese) who runs Bare-headed all Day, and snoars all
Night upon a Bagg of Straw: Take and spirit this Rational Clod into Turkey; and
after a Course of Hardship, in Thirty Years time, You may meet him at the Head
of an hundred thousand men, matching Politics with all the witty and civilized
World. Certainly Gentlemen are born with better Blood, Spirits, and Parts, than
such a Fellow; but you see what Discipline may do with One; while, through too
much Warmth, Laxity, and Softness of Skin, the very Soul of the Other
transpires and wastes.

2. Though I would not have a Child dealt withal peevishly; yet it is of very
ill Consequence, always to gratify him in the unsatiable Wantonness of his
little Wishes. This naturally tends to the making him humorsome and
self-willed, and all that the Parents get by that Quality, when he grows
toward One and Twenty, they may put in their Eyes, and see never the worse.
Place a Child at the Table where there are Twenty Dishes, He shall reach out
his Finger, point and call for every one; and when he has dined, (too long by
an Hour) ask him, If he will have this or that? he never fails to say, Yes:
which is not worse for his Health, than in other Instances for Morals.

3. Good Care ought to be taken what Diet the Child eats: For, though I cannot
mechanically show, how heavy Pudding, and Salt, or (which is worse) Fresh Beef,
gets in, and mixeth with the Soul of a Child; yet I dare say, The Learned in
Physic are able to prove, That the more of such things you load a tender
Stomach with, the longer you keep him from being a Poet, or a Privy-Counceller.
I should go nigh to rail at Sweetmeats too; but that we have a scurvy Proverb
of being ill-natured, if you love them not; whether Wine (which is now
frequently given) be proper for Children or no, you were best consult the
Doctor. Light Meats, Chicken, Mutton, etc. once every Day, and Spoon-Meat are
thought most agreeable.

4. The Exercise which a Child should use, is to be considered: I would not
have his Motions violent, but I would have him much stir, and often fan his
Blood with dry and fresh Air: I have heard of a certain Great Lady, Mother of
many Children, which deserved as much Fondness as any breathing; but instead of
Riding in a Coach, and Glasses up, made them Walk out a Mile or two in a clear,
sharp, frosty Morning, put their Noses and Lips into such a Red and Blue that
would have made half the Mothers in England think their Children Dying; but
after this, I never heard any Man complain, that it spoiled either their
Health, Beauty, or their Wit. Of all Hardships, use the Child to Rise early.

5. Care must be taken what Company the Child keeps.

I am not yet come to the inconvenient mixture of Persons of Quality in the
same School with Tinkers and Cobblers Children, which, perhaps, may teach them
base, dirty Qualities (they were never Born to) of Lying, Filching, Railing,
Swearing, etc. because I have not yet resolved my self how it can be avoided: I
am only now speaking of a Child very young, and bred at Home.

I have observed, that the Eldest Sons of Great Families, lose Three Years at
least. For the common Cry is, that it is time enough to learn their Books when
they come to be seven or eight years Old. This might in a degree be true
enough, if in the mean time they did only converse with Wise and Serious
Companions.

But when they are able to speak and prate, they begin to be exceedingly
acceptable, and the Dalliance of every Creature toward them is obliging; but
all this while, this does but invite the useless Tattle of a foolish Nurse, a
Footboy, or a Kitchin-wench: and, if his Mastership is to be pleased with
seeing the Stable, and Sitting on an Horse, then he is farti^e^ accomplished
with the ill-bred Language and Actions of the out-lying Servants also. This I
mention, because I know some Familes, in which Children sometimes better
Beloved then the rest, or else because there were no more, having had constant
familiarity, and scarce any other converse with their Parents, and Those
Persons of Experience and Thought. The Children have grown apace into Sense and
Reflection, and made wiser Persons ashamed of their own Age.

But for a Child to be most in the Company of Servants, and so many Livery-men
always waiting and bare-headed, if it does not make the Living-Creature Proud,
Idle, and think himself fit to be a Lord, (before the King and Nation does)
truly he is less of kin to Adam than I am.

6. Since this Youth of Quality must be bred up at Home, my next Advice is, To
get a grave, experienced, well-tempered Person to manage him, by descending to
all the little Observances his Age and your Expectation requires: But then I
must have leave to tell you, that your Allowance must be very considerable, and
his Estate will bear it: For no Wise Man will Play the Fool to no purpose: And
if you or his Relations shall fancy that common Maxim, The cheaper the
better, you will meet with Men, who will Serve and Please you, and the Child at
present; who perhaps hereafter, will reckon himself no great Gainer, when he
finds the want of that Accomplishment which his Quality and Parts deserve, and
that his Brains were sold for twenty Pounds a Year.

It is not well enough considered, what it costs to be Dearned and Wise, both
pains and money: And where as Scholars are looked on as Poor and Mean, born to
serve them who have the luck to be Rich; yet I do not find truly that great
Ones part easily with what they come hard by.

I could tell you of a Person in the World, worth some Thousands Yearly, a Man
very considerable for Management, Temper, Justice, and all the Qualities of a
Gentleman, if he had not placed too much Wisdom in thrift. He had an Eldest
Son incomparable for Parts and Goodnature, and more willing to be made a Wife
Man than Boys generally are. But the good Father, to save the charges of a
great School, and Boarding abroad any where, was resolved to diet him in
Wisdom at his own Table, with the cheap assistance of a poor Chaplain, who was
to bestow upon him all the week as much Wiseness as ten pounds a year, and a
good stout Dinner is generally worth.

When the young Heir came toward Age, I happened to be acquainted with him,
and in some degrees of Familiarity; and finding very fine Parts in the Rubbish
of a great deal of Clownery, I once dealt with him very Frowardly, and asked
him plainly, How it came to pass that he was not a Wifer Man? Ask my Father,
said he. And when I replied, That his Father was reputed a Discreet Man; Yes,
said the young Gentleman, and I thought him so, when I was a young Child: But
now I am growu up, and the World expects some agreeable Conversation with my
Age, Quality and Acquaintance, I appear so little in Company, and am sensible
how little I appear, that I wish I had either only been Born with Wit enough
not to be Begged, or that my Father had valued the Improvement of my Parts at a
Thousand a Year of my Estate.

7. The Tutor, I propose, will do well by all the Artifice of Kindness, and
easiness to gain Affection from the Child. For otherwise by Force and bare
Duty, he will Learn as little from that Tutor, as a Farmer does from the
Minister, by the Sermon which is next Preached after he has paid his Tithes.

8. Keep the Child, as much as possible, out of all Company, wherein there may
be danger of seeing Actions of Rudeness, Indecency, Debauchery, Infirmity,
especially if they are committed by near Relations, Father, Mother, Brother,
etc. Incredible is the observation of Children: And, I dare say, they think
long before we perceive it; and the Reverence and Regard they have for
Relations, recommends all Actions to their Imitation, with a strong Prejudice.

9. By all Arts of Kindness, prevent Frowardness in him, which will turn to a
very ill Quality, when he grows up.

10. When he is able to Speak plain, and capable to be Taught, let him learn
Sense and Words together: I mean, Teach him such Words as signify some
material Sense, either of Breeding, Morality, or Religion; and not idle,
useless Words, which signify nothing but the Folly of such as Teach them.

11. When you begin with him, do not clog him with too much, to make him loath
or dread it; but let him come to the Book as to his Recreation, or to gain
Credit.

12. Accustom him to kind and friendly words even toward Servants and
Inferiors. This will not only be obliging but will habituate the Child to
Respect and Decency to men of higher Degree, to Parents and Tutor himself; and
be sure to instruct him of the regard to be had according to men's different
Qualities.

13. The method how to teach him Latin with most advantage and expedition I
must wholly leave to the Tutor: For whether it be sooner learned by the Rules
of Grammar as is done in Schools, or barely by Construing Authors and talking
Latin with the Child always, by which sometimes Gentlemen are taught, I am not
able to answer mine own Arguments for each: Use him much to Translation, which
I think much better than Composition.

14. Be sure to keep him constant to Devotion, and let not his own private
prayers be tedious and wearisome.

15. Make him able to read Greek, and turn the Lexicon upon occasion, as far
as the Greek Testament.

16. A short Series of the History and Chronology of the Old Testament, by
Question and Answer, with a general Knowledge of the Globes, would be useful,
and make him proud of Learning.

17. The excellent Qualities of Cyrus in Xenophon translated and commended
would be an admirable Pattern for Emulation.

18. Of all the good Qualities, from the very beginning, accustom the Child to
speak the truth, and when he is faulty, do not affright him into lying, and
silly excuses (which Servants commonly teach them) but by mildness and security
from childing, at the first beget in him the courage of confessing his faults:
Great Actions of Honor and Justice depend upon Veracity.

19. Whatever the Child does well, either voluntary or out of observance of
former Commands, be sure let him have Commendation enough, this is a principal
Reward and tickles the proud Flesh.

20. Let no Person chide the Child who is in a great fit of Anger, lest the
violence of it make him moped, or the indecency of it make him grow careless.

21. I would not have Parents or Tutour be always childing for little things:
those will better be mended by persuasion; and to chide for every fault alike,
will in time make the Youth think great faults no worse than little ones, and
reproving a mere thing of course; it is the Common, but a very inartificial way.

22. Whenever you find the Child in an Extravagant fit of Froppishness and
Anger (how little soever be the provocation) do not express anger to him at
that time, but immediately sweeten him, take his part, and get him out of the
fitas soon as you can, lest it grow violent and lasting, and at a cooler season
argue the indecorum with him, when Reason will come in to his assistance.

23. Never disgrace the Child or upbraid him with his Follies before Strangers:
this may cut him too much, and never be forgotten; and it will be very obliging
when he is afterward made understand how kind you were in moderating your
reproofs for his Honors sake.

24. Let not the Child be frighted with horrid stories of Bug-bears or idle
tricks in the dark: the ill consequences may be very-great.

25. Never let him be accustomed to laugh at men's natural Infirmities, but give
him occasion from thence of thanking God who has made the Difference.

26. Magnify and help him to admire the glorious parts of the Creation and
variety therein: this will beget early Notions of Reverence and Honor for the
Maker.

27. Keep him from hearing any Paradoxes disputed in the place where he is,
either of Religion, Morality, Government, etc. and when ever it happens, let
him see his Parents and Tutor undertake always the better side.

28. A good short Collection of Proverbs out of Solomon, and the Proverbs of
each single Nation (wherein their Wisdom consists) such as respect God,
Religion, good Manners, civil Breeding and Duty in all Relations, well digested
into a Method, and under proper Heads, to be judiciously explained to the Child
at leisure times, would be of incomparable use: Because that short grave,
sententious way of Instruction sticks better in the Memory and helps his
Thinking.

29. Let him read nothing by himself which is not very easy for him to
comprehend, lest it discourage his reading: and let all your Discourses with
him be very plain, and of such things as he is capable to be instructed in:
this will help and draw out his Parts, whereas Difficulties will baulk and
stifle them.

30. If you find him begin to grow pert and forward, never check him, but you
must be sure to modifie his Wit, you must set limits, and say hitherto and no
farther, bound it with Goodnature and Decency: For there is one Quality
mightily taking, and especially if it discover it self early in a Child, which
is to Jeer and Reflect upon Men and their Actions: Beside the Impudence,
Ill Nature, and Abusive Language which this is generally attended with (and so
is the most unbecoming Breeding for a Gentleman) it many times proves very
dangerous in promiscuous Company. It is not long since, for a Sentence no
greater than the Wise men's of Greece (and not half so witty) a fine Gentleman
had his Brains beaten out: Cicero was a great Jester, but the cry went on
Antony's side for Wit, when he had gotten his Head off.

31. If you find him impetuously in love with any thing you do not like, you
must not bluntly and suddenly check him, this may make him love it the more,
and look on you as the Enemy of his Happiness; but by degrees lessen the value
of the Object, persuade him of its disagreeableness, and divert him with
something more innocent, and of a differing nature, Alterius vires subtrahit
alter amor.

32. If you find him apt to take offense at any single man's Person, disgust
and hate him; by all means strive to qualify this, never rest till you have
made him a Friend, let him know the Duty and have the Honor of Forgiving. This
may be of use if he live to be a great Man.

33. If you find him inclining to Thoughtfulness, Sadness and Sighing, correct
it with all imaginable pains by pleasant Converse, light Diets, cheerful
Recreations, delightful Readings, lest he get an Habit, and at last grow
Melanchely, that is, useless and unserviceable.

34. That all occasions in his Company to magnify Virtue and debase Vice:
Furnish him with Examples of both out of Scripture, of God's Judgments and
Deliverances: but till he is ripe enough to be instructed, you may forbear
letting him read those Chapters wherein the failings of good Men are recorded.
The Plainness and Spirit of Devotion contained in the Psalms, speak them
fittest to be read by a Child.

These (said the Tutour to me) are the uppermost Rules that occur as absolutely
necessary to be observed in the first breeding of the Person of Quality you
talk of: Though, if your Dinner did not wait you, perhaps I might think of
more, but first try these effectually, and consult the Book of Education for
other necessary Instructions.

I heartily thanked him, and finding it late, I invited him to Dinner with me
at the Inn, but he refused, saying that such Houses were not built for
Gown-men, and made me leave my Son to dine with him, having (said he) observed
the great Improvidence of the Gentry who when they come to enter a Son, (which
is commonly at the Act, that solemn season of Luxury) bring Wife and Daughters
to show them the University; there is mighty Feasting and drinking for a week,
every Tavern examined, and all this with the company of a Child, forsooth, sent
up hither for Sobriety and Industry.

After this he invited us the next day to a Commons, and according to his
Humor before, I expected to have been starved in his Chamber, and the Girls
drank Chocolette at no rate in the morning for fear of the worst.

It was very pleasant to see, when we came, the constrained Artifice of an
unaccustomed Complement, Silver Tankards heaped one upon another, Napkins some
twenty years younger than the rest, Glasses fit for a Dutchman at an East India
Return.

And at last came an Entertainment big enough for ten Members of the House: I
was ashamed, but would not disoblige him, considering with my self that I
should put this man to such a charge of forty shillings at least, to entertain
me, when for all his honest care and pains he is to have but forty or fifty
shillings a Quarter, so that for one whole Quarter he must do the drudgery to
my Son for nothing.

After Dinner I went to the public Bowling Green, it being the only Recreation
I can affect. Coming in, I saw half a score of the finest Youths, the Sun, I
think, ever shined upon: they walked to and fro, with their hands in their
Pockets, to see a match played by some Scholars and some Gentlemen famed for
their skill. I gaped also and stared as a man in his way would do: But a
Country ruff Gentleman, being like to lose, did swear at such a rate that my
heart did grieve that those fine young men should hear it, and know there was
such a thing as swearing in the Kingdom. Coming to my Lodging, I charged my Son
never to go to such public places unless he resolved to quarrel me.

Having settled my Son and lest my commands with him, we all made haste home
again, in earnest much better satisfied with the Government of the University
than I was before: for all this while I had as critically observed all
miscarriages as a prejudiced man may be imagined to do.

And (to say more) when we were summoned thither a while before to sit in
Parliament, I was resolved narrowly to scan the carriage of the University
toward the Members, to understand the temper and opinion, as far as the free
converse in Coffee Houses (where every man's Religion and Politics are quickly
seen) could discover.

The plainness and freedom young Masters used was odd at the first, but
afterward very pleasant, when it appeared to be a kind of Trade not Policy:
For being used all the week long to dispute Paradoxes, the Disputacity reached
afterward to matter of Religion and State. But in fine I perceived there was
nothing of design or malice in all this, but a road of Converse, arising partly
out of hatred to Fanatics and want of experience and conversation in the
world, which teaches men to be more cautious in promiscuous discourse.

As for their Civility to the Members we must own it, we had their Lodgings (as
good as they were) for nothing, with civility and respect wherever they met us
agreeable: when at the same time the Townsmen put Dutch rates upon their
Houses, that under five or six pound a week a Whig could not have room enough
to speak Treason in. I could not perceive but they both talked and preached
against Popery as much as any men, though in the business of Succession they
still favored the Duke. I walked the Streets as late as most people, and never
in ten days time ever saw any Scholar rude or disordered: so that as I grow
old, and more engaged to speak the truth, I do repent of the ill opinion I have
had of that place, and hope to be farther obliged by a very good account of my
Son.

And upon the whole matter let me offer you one Caution, when you cry out Idle,
Ignorant, Ill-bred, Dekauch'd, Popish University, I am sure you speak at a
venture, and do but echo the ill-natured Fame of things: And ill Language does
not become the mouth of a Gentleman though the matter be true. But I am now
convinced that we wrong them; As for their Idleness, the Graver sort kept
close: it is true Curiosity brought out the young Gentlemen to see new Faces and
show their new Ribbons: for Ignorance we are not Judges, and the Nation
generally frees them from that: for their Ill-breeding, Simplicity and
Plainness is their Guise, and they look upon all things else as Art. Debauchery
may happen among some of so many, but all my Acquaintance abominate it as much
as you and I do. And as for Popery, the most serious men I knew there study to
make themselves able to resist the Temptation: so that for us of the Gentry to
rail at them for Popishly affected, and men forlorn as to Protestant Religion,
is very Unjust and Uncharitable.

In the next place you beg my direction in the management of the Canvas: I
confess I shall never be able to admire enough the most excellent Constitution
of our Government by way of a Parliament, wherein the meanest Subject has his
just regard, and forty shillings a year makes a man wise enough to choose his
Representative: nay now of late very Cottagers and Quakers come in for a share
in electing that Assembly, which for ought I know turns and winds the great
Affairs of all Europe: Though I must confess I am sorry, that in Elections so
little regard is had to the Wisdom and Virtue of the Candidate, and that so
much use is made of the Ignorance and Vices of the people.

It will not be safe to depend upon the vulgar of your own Party, because many
of them will appear to have no Votes either on Account of Swearing or Estates;
and yet their Zeal for the Cause will hurry them on to poll.

If you manage your self wisely, I know no man can make a better Figure in the
Field than you, and thus, presuming of you in the House, I will next give you
my thoughts concerning your Behavior there. For the least misbehaviour at
first coming is not easily forgotten in that Place.

1. I will recommend and furnish you with Books and Copies which give an
Account of the Original, Privileges and Proceedings in that House, which will
make you capable to act very serviceably, whether you prove a great Speaker or
no.

2. It will be the best use you can make of the first three or four months (if
you sit so long) to be particularly acquainted with the Face, Parts and Designs
of every Member, more particularly, I advise you,

1. Not to be a Speaker too soon, which is incident to Youth.

2. Whenever you speak, your native Modesty will be very becoming, and Brevity
withal; for we old Stagers did always look on it as our Privilege to be
tedious.

3. Meddle with no man's Person, because you do not know how many you
disoblige; do not begin early to reply to other men's Speeches, because such a
man ought to be very considering and ready.

4. Never speech it when you are provoked to be angry, because it will be hard
then to act with decency, required in so great a Meeting.

5. Study not to be much concerned when you are replied upon with Sharpness or
Jeer.

6. Beware of discovering any Affectation of being Witty: for that shows you
pleased with what you say, which is unacceptable, and beneath the Opinion you
ought to have of an Assembly so august. Do not affect great Words, for a design
to be thought Learned shows the want; and the more knowing any man is, the
plainer he is able to express his mind. But on the other side, you must not
descend to low and mean expressions, that will savor of an ungenteel Breeding.
Beware of all unusual motions and gestures of Head, Eyes, Hand, Body, or the
like.

7. When any matter of great moment is debated, be not forward to speak,
because at your Age it is impossible you should comprehend the matter, design
and managery of the Case. But be sure at such a time to frequent the House, and
be a diligent Auditour: for then you will hear the Reason, Law, Policy and
Eloquence of our English Gentry: Masculine Eloquence which flows upon all
Occasions, not constrained to the fulsome Anaphora's and Paranomasia's of the
modern Rhetocians, those Whistles and Rattles of Schoolboys: Not but those
Figures when they were first, or now when they are wisely used, are good
Ornaments: But it is a vast mistake to transplant those Flowers out of the
fertile soil of Cicero and the Ancients, and think they will thrive and grow in
every Clod-pate; to think that those Schemes in a small Epitome, robbed of the
Advantages to be understood, such as are the Occasion, Person, Time, Connexien,
etc. should by being barely learned by heart, make every Puny able to imitate
the greatest Master of Speech in all mankind.

When you come once to be taken notice of; then remember to fortify your self
against solicitations to serve a Party, and that from men who will think they
do you Honor to vouchsafe you a gracious Nod: the Inconveniences will be many.

1. Under Pretense of preparing Buness you must be a Slave to Clubbs of twelve,
one, two, three of the Clock, whereby the Health will be impaired and ill
Habits gotten.

2. You must then resolve to captivate your Judgment to the Opinion of the
Leading-men of your Party. And then your own Reason will be quite lost, you
will never attempt to examine the true merit of the Cause, and so many times be
betrayed to the eager persuit of what you would abhor did you well consider
what perhaps your mighty Leader pursues out of Passion, Interest or Human
Inadvertency, when all the while you think he does act with due Deliberation;
Integrity of Intention, and merely on Public good: such an Authoritative
Leading-man is the Bane of any Society whatever.

3. You must expect to bear a share in Answering for all the Imprudences of
your Party. No number was ever so happily combined, but that some Persons in it
would be apt to act some extravagant Part, out of Zeal to serve a Cause, which
will make a Thinking-man blush to favor.

4. You certainly create Enemies to your self, all of the opposite Persuasions,
though you never had thoughts or design so to do. All Acts of unkindness
received, or Acts of Revenge threatened, shall respect you as one of the Party,
who are purely simple and passive, as much as if you had been the first Mover
or Executioner of the whole; this makes Neighbors, Friends, Kindred, at
Daggers drawing when ever they meet: Believe it, the necessary Mixture and
Complication of your Affairs in the World, and the various Relations you must
bear, will afford you Contrasting more than enough. Create as few Troubles to
your self as you can.

An INDEX of the most remarkable Common-Places hinted in the foregoing Papers.
A Rash and uncharitable Censure of the University of Oxford, page 2. Fear of
being censured is a great hindrance to good and honest Actions, page 4. A busy
Life requires some Leisure more than ordinary to prepare for Death, page 5.
Some obvious and necessary Rules to make a Gentleman's Life more easy and
quiet, page 7. A few short Rules to make his Life more useful in the World,
page 13. No men greater Enemies to the University than such who afterward are
sensible that they were neglected there, page 19, 20. A little stateliness in a
young Heir, not to be condemned, page 22. The odiousness and folly of imperious
Pride, page 23. The sad consequences of want of Learning in a young Country
Gentleman, page 24. The necessity of Care in licensing Schcolmasters, page 25.
The Mother an incompetent Judge of Childrens Education, page 26. Marriage
preferable to a single life, ibid. The obvious occasions of the Contempt of
Matrimony, page 27, The Character of a young Lady fit for a Person of Quality,
page 29.
(...)
