AN ESSAY Concerning the Multiplication of Mankind: Together with another ESSAY
IN Political Arithmetic, Concerning the Growth of the City of LONDON: WITH THE
Measures, Periods, Causes, and Consequences thereof. 1682.

The Third Edition Revised and Enlarged.

By Sir WILLIAM PETTY, late Fellow of the Royal-Society.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock, and Henry Mortlock at the
Phoenix in St. Paul's Church Yard, School.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
THE ensuing Essay concerning the Growth of the City of London, was Entitled
[Another Essay] intimating that some other Essay had preceded it, which was not
to be found. I having been much importuned for that precedent Essay, have found
that the same was about the Growth, Increase, and Multiplication of Mankind,
which Subject should in Order of Nature, precede that of the Growth of the City
of London, but am not able to procure the Essay it self, only I have obtained
from a Gentleman, who sometimes corresponded with Sir William Petty, an Extract
of a Letter from Sir William to him, which I verily believe contains the
scope thereof; wherefore, I must desire the Reader to be content therewith,
till more can be had.

The Extract of a Letter concerning the scope of an ESSAY intended to precede
another ESSAY concerning the Growth of the City of LONDON, etc.
An ESSAY in Political Arithmetic, concerning the Value and Increase of People
and Colonies.
THE Scope of this Essay, is concerning People and Colonies, and to make way
for another Essay concerning the Growth of the City of London. I desire in this
first Essay, to give the World some light, concerning the Numbers of People in
England, with Wales, and in Ireland; as also, of the Number of Houses and
Families, wherein they live, and of Acres they occupy.

2. How many live upon their Lands, how many upon their Personal Estates and
Commerce, and how many upon Art and Labor; how many upon Alms, how many upon
Offices and Public Employments, and how many as Cheats and Thieves; how many
are Impotent, Children, and decrepit old Men. 3. How many upon the Poll-Taxes
in England, do pay extraordinary Rates, and how many at the Level. 4. How many
Men and Women are Prolifick, and how many of each are Married and Unmarried. 5.
What the Value of People are in England, and what in Ireland at a Medium, both
as Members of the Church or Commonwealth, or as Slaves and Servants to one
another; with a Method how to estimate the same, in any other Country or
Colony. 6. How to compute the Value of Land in Colonies, in comparison to
England and Ireland. 7. How Ten Thousand People in a Colony may be, and planted
to the best advantage. 8. A Conjecture in what Number of Years England and
Ireland may be fully peopled, as also all America; and lastly the whole
habitable Earth. 9. What spot of the Earth's-Globe were fittest for a general
and universal Emporium, whereby all the People thereof may best enjoy one
another Labors and Commodities. 10. Whether the speedy peopling of the Earth
would make, 1. For the good of Mankind. 2. To fulfill the revealed Will of God.
3. To what Prince or State the same would be most advantageous.
11. An Exhortation to all thinking Men, to salve the Scriptures and other good
Histories, concerning the Number of People in all Ages of the World, in the
great Cities thereof, and elsewhere. 12. An Appendix concerning the different
Number of Seafish and Wild-Fowl, at the end of every Thousand Years, since
Noah's Flood. 13. An Hypothesis of the use of those Spaces (of about 8000 Miles
through) within the Globe of our Earth, supposing a Shell of 150 Miles thick.
14. What may be the meaning of Glorified Bodies, in case the place of the
Blessed shall be without the Unequal of the Orb of the fixed Stars, if that the
whole System of the World was made for the use of our Earth's Men.
The Principal Points of this Discourse.
1. THAT London doubles in Forty Years, and all England in Three Hundred and
Sixty Years. 2. That there be, Anno 1682. about Six Hundred and Seventy
Thousand Souls in London; and about Seven Millions, Four Hundred Thousand in
all England and Wales, and about Twenty Eight Millions of Acres of profitable
Land. 3. That the Periods of doubling the People, are found to be in all
Degrees, from between Ten to Twelve Hundred Years. 4. That the Growth of London
must stop of itself, before the Year 1800. 5. A Table helping to understand the
Scriptures, concerning the Number of People mentioned in them. 6. That the
World will be fully Peopled within the next Two Thousand Years. 7. Twelve ways
whereby to Try any Proposal, pretended for the public Good. 8. How the City of
London may be made (morally speaking) Invincible. 9. An help to Uniformity in
Religion. 10. That it is possible to increase Mankind by Generation four times
more than at present. 11. The Plagues of London are the Chief Impediment and
Objection against the Growth of the City. 12. That an exact Account of the
People is necessary in this Matter.
Of the Growth of the City of LONDON, and of the Measures, Periods, Causes and
Consequences thereof.
BY the City of London, Wh^^ is me^^t by Lo^^on.
we mean the Housing within the Walls of the Old City, with the Liberties
thereof, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, and so much of the built Ground
in Middlesex and Surrey, whose Houses are contiguous unto, or within Call of
those aforementioned. Or else we mean the Housing which stand upon the Ninety
Seven Parishes within the Walls of London; upon the Sixteen Parishes next,
without them; the Six Parishes of Westminster, and the Fourteen out-Parishes in
Middlesex and Surrey, contiguous to the former, all which One Hundred and
Thirty Three Parishes are comprehended within the Weekly Bills of Mortality.

The Growth of this City is measured, Wha^ is mea^^ by ^he Gro^^h of Lon^on.
1. By the Quantity of Ground, or Number of Acres upon which it stands. 2. By
the Number of Houses, as the same appears by the Hearth-Books and late Maps. 3.
By the Cubical Content of the said Housing. 4. By the Flooring of the same. 5.
By the Number of Days-work, or Charge of Building the said Houses. 6. By the
Value of the said Houses, according to their yearly Rent, and Number of Years
Purchase. 7. By the Number of Inhabitants; according to which latter Sense
only, we make our Computation in this Essay.

Till a better Rule can be obtained, we conceive that the Proportion of the
People may be sufficiently measured by the Proportion of the Burials in such
Years as were neither remarkable for extraordinary Healthfulness or Sickliness.

That the City has Increased in this latter Sense, (...) what M^^sures the
City ha^^ incr^^sed.
appears from the Bills of Mortality, represented in the two following Tables,
viz. One whereof is a continuation for Eighteen Years, ending 1682. of that
Table which was published in the 117. Page of the Book of the Observations upon
the London Bills of Mortality, Printed in the Year 1676. The other shows what
Number of People died at a Medium of two Years, indifferently taken, at about
Twenty Years distance from each other.

The first of the said two Tables.
Anno Dom. 97 Parishes. 16 Parishes. Out-Parishes. Buried in all. Besides of
the Plag. Christn'd 1665 5320 12463 10925 28708 68596 9967 1666 1689 3969 5082
10740 1998 8997 1667 761 6405 8641 15807 35 10938 1668 796 6865 9603 17267 14
11633 1669 1323 7500 10440 19263 3 12335 1670 1890 7808 10500 20198 11997 1671
1723 5938 8063 15724 5 12510 1672 2237 6788 9200 18225 5 12593 1673 2307 6302
8890 17499 5 11895 1674 2801 7522 10875 21198 3 11851 1675 2555 5986 8702 17243
1 11775 1676 2756 6508 9466 18730 2 12399 1677 2817 6632 9616 19065 2 12626
1678 3060 6705 10908 20673 5 12601 1679 3074 7481 11173 21728 2 12288 1680 3076
7066 10911 21053 12747 1681 3669 8136 12166 23971 13355 1682 2975 7009 10707
20691 12353

According to which latter Table there died as follows.

The latter of the said two Tables.
At a Medium between the Years There died in London, 1604 and 1605 5135. A.
1621 and 1622 8527. B. 1641 and 1642 11883. C. 1661 and 1662 15148. D. 1681 and
1682 22331. E.

Wherein observe, That the Number C. is double to A. and 806 over. That D. is
double to B. within 1906. That C. and D. is double to A. B. within 293. That E.
is double to C. within 1435. That D. and E. is double to B. and C. within 3341.
And that C. and D. and E. are double to A. and B. and C. within 1736. And that
E. is above Quadruple to A. All which Differences (every way considered) do
allow the doubling of the People of London in Forty Years, to be a sufficient
estimate thereof in round Numbers, and without the trouble of Fractions. We
also say, That 669930 is near the Number of People now in London, because the
Burials are 22331. which multiplied by 30, (one dying yearly out of 30, as
appears in the 94 p. of the aforementioned Observations) makes the said
Number; and because there are 84000 tenanted Houses (as we are credibly
informed) which at eight in each, makes 672000 Souls; the said two Accounts
differing inconsiderably from each other.

We have thus pretty well found out in what Number of Years ( viz. in about 40)
that the City of London has doubled, and the present Number of Inhabitants to
be about 670000. We must now also endeavor the same for the whole Territory of
England and Wales. In order whereunto, we

First say, That the Assessment of London is about an The People of London are
about the 11th. part of all England and Wales.
Eleventh part of the whole Territory, and therefore that the People of the
whole may well be Eleven times that of London, viz. about The People of England
about seven Millions and Four Hundred Thousand.
Seven Millions, Three Hundred Sixty Nine Thousand Souls; with which Account
that of the Poll-Money, Hearth-Money, and the Bishops late numbering of the
Communicants, do pretty well agree; wherefore although the said Number of Seven
Millions, Three Hundred Sixty Nine Thousand, be not (as it cannot be) a
demonstrated Truth, yet it will serve for a good Supposition, which is as much
as we want at present.

As for the time in which the People double, it is yet more hard to be found:
For we have good Experience (in the said 94 page of the aforementioned
Observations) that in the Country, but one of fifty die per Annum; and by other
late Accounts, that there have been sometimes but Twenty Four Births for Twenty
Three Burials: The which two Points, if they were universally, and constantly
true, there would be color enough to say, that the People doubled but in about
1200 Years. As for Example: Suppose there be 600 People, of which let a
fiftieth part die per Annum, then there shall die Twelve per Annum; and if the
Births be as Twenty Four to Twenty Three, then the Increase of the People shall
be somewhat above half a Man per Annum, and consequently the supposed Number of
600, cannot be doubled but in 1126 Years, which to reckon in round Numbers, and
for that the aforementioned Fractions were not exact, we had rather call 1200.

There are also other good Observations, That even in the Country, one in about
30, or 32 per Annum has died, and that there have been five Births for four
Burials. Now, according to this Doctrine, 20 will die per Annum out of the
above 600, and 25 will be born, so as the Increase will be 5, which is a
hundred and twentieth part of the said 600. So as we have two fair
Computations, differing from each other as one to ten; and there are also
several other good Observations for other Measures.

I might here insert, That although the Births in this last Computation be 25 of
600, or a Twenty fourth part of the People; yet that in Natural possibility,
they may be near thrice as many, and near 75. For that by some late
Observations, the Teeming Females between 15 and 44, are about 180 of the said
600, and the Males of between 18 and 59, are about 180 also, and that every
Teeming Woman can bear a Child once in two Years; from all which it is plain,
that the Births may be 90, (and abating 15 for Sickness, Young Abortions, and
Natural Barrenness) there may remain 75 Births, which is an Eighth of the
People; which by some Observations we have found to be but a two and thirtieth
part, or but a quarter of what is thus shown to be Naturally possible. Now,
according to this Reckoning, if the Births may be 75 of 600, and the Burials
but 15, then the Annual Increase of the People will be 60; and so the said 600
People may double in 10 Years, which differs yet more from 1200,
abovementioned. Now to get out of this Difficulty, and to temper those vast
disagreements, I took the Medium of 50 and 30 dying per Annum, and pitched upon
40; and I also took the Medium between 24 Births and 23 Burials, and 5 Births
for 4 Burials, viz. allowing about 10 Births for 9 Burials; upon which
Supposition, there must die 15 per Annum out of the abovementioned 600, and
the Births must be 16 and two thirds, and the Increase 1, and two Thirds, or
five Thirds of a Man, That the time of doubling is here, and now 360 Years.
which Number compared with 1800 Thirds, or 600 Men, gives 360 Years for the
time of doubling (including some Allowance for Wars, Plagues, and Famine; the
Effects whereof, though they be Terrible at the Times and Places where they
happen, yet in a period of 360 Years, is no great matter in the whole Nation.
For the Plagues of England in 20 Years has carried away scarce an Eightieth
part of the People of the whole Nation; and the late 10 Years Civil Wars, (the
like whereof has not been in several Ages before) did not take away above a
fortieth part of the whole People.)

According to which Account or Measure of doubling, if there be now in England
and Wales, 7 Millions 400 Thousand People, there were about 5 Millions 526
Thousand in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Anno 1560, and about two
Millions at the Norman Conquest; of which Consult the Doomsday Book, and My
Lord Hale's Origination of Mankind.

Memorandum, 320 Millions now in the World.
That if the People double in 360 Years, that the present 320 Millions,
computed by some Learned Men, (from the Measures of all the Nations of the
World, their degrees of being Peopled, and good Accounts of the People in
several of them) to be now upon the face of the Earth, will within the next
2000 Years. so increase, as to give one Head for every two Acres of Land in the
Habitable part of the Earth. And then, according to the Prediction of the
Scriptures, there must be Wars and great Slaughter, etc.

Wherefore, as an Expedient against the abovementioned difference between 10
and 1200 Years, we do for the present, and in this Country admit of 360 Years
to be the time wherein the People of England do double, according to the
present Laws and Practice of Marriages.

Now, if the City double its People in 40 Years, and the present Number be 670
Thousand, and if the whole Territory be 7 Millions 400 Thousand, and double in
360 Years, as aforesaid; then by the underwritten Table it appears, that Anno
1840, the People of the City will be 10718880, and those of the whole Country
but 10917389, which is but inconsiderably more. Wherefore it is certain and
necessary that the Growth of the City must stop before the said Year 1840; and
will be at its utmost height in the next preceding Period, Anno 1800, when the
Number of the City will be Eight times its present Number, viz. 5 Millions 359
Thousand. And when (besides the said Number) there will be 4 Millions 466
Thousand to perform the Tillage, Pasturage, and other Rural Works necessary to
be done without the said City, as by the following Table, viz.

Annis. Burials. People in London. People in England. As in the former Tab.
1565 2568 77040 5526929 1605 5135 1642 11883 1682 22331 669930 7369230 1722
44662 1762 89324 1802 178648 5359440 9825650 1842 357296 10718889 10917389

Now, That London will be at its highest growth, and eight times as great as
now, Anno 1800.
when the People of London shall come to be so near the People of all England,
Then it follows, that the Growth of London must stop before the said Year 1842,
as aforesaid, and must be at its greatest height Anno 1800, when it will be
eight times more than now, with above 4 Millions for the Service of the Country
and Ports, as aforesaid.

Of the aforementioned vast difference between 10 Years and 1200 Years for
doubling the People, we make this use, viz. A digression of the use of the vast
difference between 10 and 1200 Years of doubling.
To justify the Scriptures and all other good Histories concerning the Number
of the People in Ancient Time. For supposing the Eight Persons who came out of
the Ark, Increased by a Progressive doubling in every 10 Years, might grow in
the first 100 Years after the Flood from 8 to 8000, and that in 350 Years after
the Flood (whenabout Noah died) to one Million, and by this time 1682, to 320
Millions (which by rational conjecture, are thought to be now in the World) it
will not be hard to compute, how in the intermediate Years, the Growths may be
made, according to what is set down in the following Table, wherein making the
doubling to be 10 Years at first, and within 1200 Years at last, we take a
discretionary liberty, but justifiable by Observations and the Scriptures for
the rest; which Table we leave to be Corrected by Historians, who know the
bigness of Ancient Cities, Armies, and Colonies in the respective Ages of the
World: in the mean time affirming, that without such difference in the Measures
and Periods for doubling (the extremes whereof we have demonstrated to be real
and true) it is impossible to solve what is written in the Holy Scriptures and
other Authentic Books. For if we pitch upon any one Number throughout for this
purpose, 150 Years is the fittest of all round Numbers; according to which,
there would have been but 512 Souls in the whole World in Moses's time (being
800 Years after the Flood) when 603 Thousand Israelites of above 20 Years Old
(besides those of other Ages, Tribes, and Nations) were found upon an exact
Survey appointed by God; whereas our Table makes 12 Millions. And there would
have been but 8000 in David's Time, when were found 1100 Thousand of above 20
Years Old (besides others, as aforesaid) in Israel, upon the Survey instigated
by Satan; whereas our Table makes 32 Millions. And there would have been but a
quarter of a Million about the Birth of Christ, or Augustus his Time, when Rome
and the Roman Empire were so great; whereas our Table makes 100 Millions. Where
Note, That the Israelites in about 500 Years, between their coming out of Egypt
to David's Reign, increased from 603 Thousand to 1100 Thousand.

On the other hand, if we pitch upon a less Number, as 100 Years, the World
would have been over-peopled 700 Years since. Wherefore no one Number will
solve the Phenomenon; and therefore we have supposed several in order to make
the following Table, which we again desire Historians to Correct, according to
what they find in Antiquity concerning the Number of the People in each Age and
Country of the World.

We did (not long since) assist a worthy Divine, writing against some
Scepticks, who would have baffled our belief of the Resurrection, by saying,
that the whole Globe of the Earth could not furnish Matter enough for all the
Bodies that must Rise at the last Day, much less would the surface of the Earth
furnish footing for so vast a Number; whereas we did (by the Method
aforementioned) assert the Number of Men now living, and also of those that had
died since the beginning of the World; and did withal show, that half the
Island of Ireland would afford them all, not only Footing to stand upon, but
Graves to lie down in, for that whole Number; and that two Mountains in that
Country were as weighty as all the B dies that had ever been from the beginning
of the World to the Year 1680, when this Dispute happened. For which purpose, I
have digressed from my intended purpose, to insert this Matter, intending to
prosecute this hint further, upon some more proper Occasion.

A Table showing how the People might have doubled in the several Ages of the
World.
Periods of doubling Anno after the Flood. Persons. In 10 Years 1 8 10 16 20 32
30 64 40 128 50 256 60 512 70 1024 80 2048 90 4096 100 8000 and more. In 20
Years 120 Years after the Flood. 16 Thousand. 140 32 In 30 Years 170 64 200 128
In 40 Years 240 256 In 50 Years 290 512 In 60 Years 350 1 Million and more. In
70 Years 420 2 Millions. In 100 Years 520 4 Millions. In 190 Years 710 8
Millions. In 290 Years 1000 16 In Moses Time.
In 400 Years 1400 32 About David's Time.
In 550 Years 1950 64 In 750 Years 2700 128 About the Birth of Christ.
In 1000 Years 3700 256 In 300 Years 4000 320 In 1000 Years

It is here to be noted, That in this Table we have assigned a different Number
of Years for the time of doubling the People in the several Ages of the World,
and might have done the same for the several Countries of the World, and
therefore the said several Periods assigned to the whole World in the Lump, may
well enough consist with the Three Hundred and Sixty Years, especially assigned
to England, between this day, and the Norman Conquest; and the said Three
Hundred and Sixty Years may well enough serve for a Supposition between this
time, and that of the World's being fully Peopled: Nor do we lay any stress
upon one or the other in this Disquisition concerning the Growth of the City of
London.

We have spoken of the Growth of London, with the Measures and Periods thereof,
we come next to the Causes and Consequences of the same.

The Causes of its Growth from 1642 to 1682, may be said to have been as
follows, viz. From 1642 to 1650, that Men came out of the Country to London,
to shelter themselves from the Outrages of the Civil Wars, during that time;
from 1650 to 1660, the Royal Party came to London, for their more private and
inexpensive Living; from 1660 to 1670, the King's Friends and Party came to
receive his Favors after his Happy Restoration; from 1670 to 1680, the
frequency of Plots and Parliaments, might bring extraordinary Numbers to the
City; but what Reasons to assign for the like Increase from 1604 to 1642, I
know not, unless I should pick out some Remarkable Accident happening in each
part of the said Period, and make that to be the Cause of this Increase (as
vulgar People make the Cause of every Man's Sickness to be what he did last
eat) wherefore, rather than so to say, quidlibet de quolibet; I had rather quit
even what I have abovesaid to be the Cause of London's Increase from 1642 to
1682, and put the whole upon some natural and spontaneous Benefits and
Advantages that Men find by living in great more than in small Societies; and
shall therefore seek for the Antecedent Causes of this Growth, in the
Consequences of the like, considered in greater Characters and Proportions.

Now, whereas in Arithmetic, out of two false Positions the Truth is
extracted, so I hope out of two extravagant contrary Suppositions, to draw
forth some solid and consistent Conclusion, viz.

The first of the said two Suppositions is, That the City of London is seven
times bigger than now, and that the Inhabitants of it are four Millions Six
Hundred and Ninety Thousand People; and that in all the other Cities, Ports,
Towns and Villages, there are but two Millions Seven Hundred and Ten Thousand
more.

The other Supposition is, That the City of London is but a seventh part of its
present bigness, and that the Inhabitants of it are but Ninety Six Thousand,
and that the rest of the Inhabitants (being Seven Millions Three Hundred Four
Thousand) do co-habit thus, One Hundred Four Thousand of them in small Cities
and Towns, and that the rest, being seven Millions Two Hundred Thousand, do
inhabit in Houses not contiguous to one another, viz. In Twelve Hundred
Thousand Houses, having about Twenty Four Acres of Ground belonging to each of
them, accounting about Twenty Eight Millions of Acres to be in the whole
Territory of England, Wales, and the adjacent Islands; which any Man that
pleases may examine upon a good Map.

Now, the Question is, In which of these imaginary States, would be the most
convenient, commodious and comfortable Livings?

But this general Question divides it self into the several Questions, relating
to the following Particulars, viz.

1. For the Defense of the Kingdom against Foreign Powers. 2. For preventing
the Intestine Commotions of Parties and Factions. 3. For Peace and Uniformity
in Religion. 4. For the Administration of Justice. 5. For the proportionably
Taxing of the People, and easy Levying the same. 6. For Gain by Foreign
Commerce. 7. For Husbandry, Manufacture, and for Arts of Delight and Ornament.
8. For lessening the Fatigue of Carriages and Traveling. 9. For preventing
Beggars and Thieves. 10. For the Advancement and Propagation of Useful
Learning. 11. For Increasing the People by Generation. 12. For preventing the
Mischiefs of Plagues and Contagions. And withal, which of the said two States
is most Practicable and Natural; for in these and the like Particulars, do lie
the Tests and Touchstones of all Proposals, that can be made for the Public
Good.
First, as to Practicable, we say, That although our said Extravagant Proposals
are both in Nature possible, yet it is not Obvious to every Man to conceive,
how London, now seven times bigger than in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, should be seven times bigger than now it is, and Forty Nine times bigger
than Anno 1560. To which I say, 1. That the present City of London stands upon
less than Two Thousand Five Hundred Acres of Ground; wherefore a City seven
times as large may stand upon Ten Thousand Five Hundred Acres, which is about
equivalent to a Circle of Four Miles and a half in Diameter, and less than
Fifteen Miles in Circumference. 2. That a Circle of Ground of Thirty Five Miles
Semi-Diameter will bear Corn, Garden-stuff, Fruits, Hay, and Timber for the
Four Millions Six Hundred and Ninety Thousand Inhabitants of the said City and
Circle, so as nothing of that kind need be brought from above Thirty Five Miles
distance from the said City; for the Number of Acres within the said Circle,
reckoning Two Acres sufficient to furnish Bread and Drink-Corn for every Head,
and Two Acres will furnish Hay for every necessary Horse; And that the Trees
which may grow in the Hedgerows of the Fields within the said Circle, may
furnish Timber for Six Hundred Thousand Houses. 3. That all live Cattle and
great Animals can bring themselves to the said City; and that Fish can be
brought from the Lands-end and Berwick, as easily as now. 4. Of Coals there is
no doubt: And for Water, Twenty Shillings per Family (or Six Hundred Thousand
Pounds per Annum in the whole) will serve this City, especially with the help
of the New-River. But if by Practicable be understood, that the present State
may be suddenly changed into either of the Two abovementioned Proposals, I
think it is not Practicable. Wherefore the true Question is, unto or toward
which of the said Two extravagant States is best to bend the present State by
degrees, viz. Whether it be best to lessen or enlarge the present City? In
order whereunto, we enquire (as to the first Question) which State is most
Defensible against Foreign Powers; saying. That if the abovementioned Housing,
and a border of Ground, of Three Quarters of a Mile broad, were encompassed
with a Wall and Ditch of Twenty Miles about (as strong as any in Europe, which
would cost but a Million, or about a Penny in the Shilling of the House-Rent for
one Year) what Foreign Prince could bring an Army from beyond Seas, able to
beat, 1. Our Sea-Forces, and next with Horse harrass'd at Sea, to resist all
the fresh Horse that England could make, and then Conquer above a Million of
Men, well United, Disciplined, and Guarded within such a Wall, distant every
where Three Quarters of a Mile from the Housing, to elude the Grenades and
great Shot of the Enemy? 2. As to Intestine Parties and Factions, I suppose
that Four Millions Six Hundred and Ninety Thousand People united within this
great City, could easily Govern half the said Number scattered without it; and
that a few Men in Arms within the said City and Wall, could also easily Govern
the rest unarmed, or armed in such a manner as the Sovereign shall think fit.
3. As to Uniformity in Religion, I conceive, That if St. Martin's Parish (may
as it does) consist of about Forty Thousand Souls, That this great City also
may as well be made but as one Parish, with Seven times One Hundred and Thirty
Chapels, in which might not only be an Uniformity of Common Prayer, but in
Preaching also; for that a Thousand Copies of one Judiciously and Authentically
composed Sermon, might be every Week read in each of the said Chapels without
any subsequent Repetition of the same, as in the Case of Homilies. Whereas in
England (wherein are near Ten Thousand Parishes, in each of which upon Sundays,
Holy Days, and other extraordinary Occasions, there should be about One Hundred
Sermons per Annum, making about a Million of Sermons per Annum in the whole:)
It were a Miracle, if a Million of Sermons composed by so many Men, and of so
many Minds and Methods, should produce Uniformity upon the discomposed
Understandings of about Eight Millions of Hearers.

4. As to the Administration of Justice. If in this great City shall dwell the
Owners of all the Lands and other valuable Things in England; if within it
shall be all the Traders, and all the Courts, Offices, Records, Juries, and
Witnesses; then it follows, that Justice may be done with speed and ease.

5. As to the Equality and easy Levying of Taxes. It is too certain, that
London has at some times paid near half the Excise of England; and that the
People pay thrice as much for the Hearths in London, as those in the Country,
in proportion to the People of each; and that the Charge of Collecting these
Duties, have been about a sixth part of the Duty it self. Now, in this great
City, the Excise alone, according to the present Laws, would not only be double
to the whole Kingdom, but also more equal. And the Duty of Hearths of the said
City, would exceed the present proceed of the whole Kingdom: And as for the
Customs, we mention them not at present.

6. Whether more would be gained by Foreign Commerce?

The Gain which England makes by Lead, Coals, the Freight of Shipping, etc. may
be the same, for ought I see, in both Cases. But the Gain which is made by
Manufactures, will be greater, as the Manufacture it self is greater and
better. For in so vast a City Manufactures will beget one another, and each
Manufacture will be divided into as many parts as possible, whereby the Work of
each Artisan will be simple and easy; as for Example. In the making of a
Watch, if one Man shall make the Wheels, another the Spring, another shall
Engrave the Dial-plate, and another shall make the Cases, then the Watch will
be better and cheaper, than if the whole Work be put upon any one Man. And we
also see that in Towns, and in the Streets of a great Town, where all the
Inhabitants are almost of one Trade, the Commodity peculiar to those places is
made better and cheaper than elsewhere. Moreover, when all sorts of
Manufactures are made in one place, there every Ship that goes forth, can
suddenly have its Loading of so many several Particulars and Species, as the
Port whereunto she is bound can take off. Again, when the several Manufactures
are made in one place, and shipped off in another, the Carriage, Postage, and
Travelling-Charges will inhance the Price of such Manufacture, and lessen the
Gain upon Foreign Commerce. And lastly, when the imported Goods are spent in
the Port it self, where they are landed, the Carriage of the same into other
places will create no surcharge upon such Commodity; all which particulars tend
to the greater Gain by Foreign Commerce.

7. As for Arts of Delight and Ornament.

They are best promoted by the greatest Number of Emulators. And it is more
likely that one ingenious, curious Man may rather be found out amongst Four
Millions than Four Hundred Persons. But as for Husbandry, viz. Tillage and
Pasturage, I see no Reason, but the second State (when each Family is charged
with the Culture of about Twenty Four Acres) will best promote the same.

8. As for lessening the Fatigue of Carriage and Traveling.

The thing speaks it self; for if all the Men of Business, and all Artisans do
live within Five Miles of each other: And if those who live without the great
City, do spend only such Commodities as grow where they live, then the Charge
of Carriage and Traveling could be little.

9. As to the preventing of Beggars and Thieves.

I do not find how the differences of the said two States should make much
difference in this particular; for Impotents (which are but One in about Six
Hundred) ought to be maintained by the rest. 2. Those who are unable to Work,
through the evil Education of their Parents, ought (for ought I know) to be
maintained by their nearest Kindred, as a just Punishment upon them. 3. And
those who cannot find Work (though able and willing to perform it) by reason of
the unequal application of Hands to Lands, ought to be provided for by the
Magistrate and Landlord till that can be done; for there needs be no Beggars in
Countries, where there are many Acres of unimproved improvable Land to every
Head, as there are in England. As for Thieves, they are for the most part
begotten from the same Cause; for it is against Nature, that any Man should
venture his Life, Limb, or Liberty, for a wretched Livelihood, whereas moderate
Labor will produce a better. But of this see Sir Thomas Moor, in the first
part of his Utopia.

10. As to the Propagation and Improvement of Useful Learning.

The same may be said concerning it, as was abovesaid concerning Manufactures,
and the Arts of Delight and Ornament; for in the great yast City, there can be
no so odd a Conceit or Design, whereunto some Assistance may not be found,
which in the thin, scattered way of Habitation may not be.

11. As for the Increase of People by Generatior,

I see no great difference from either of the two States, for the same may be
hindered or promoted in either, from the same Causes.

12. As to the Plague.

It is to be remembered, that one time with another, a Plague happens in
London once in Twenty Years, or thereabouts; for in the last Hundred Years,
between the Years 1582 and 1682, there have been Five great Plagues, viz. Anno
1592, 1603, 1625, 1636 and 1665. And it is also to be remembered, that the
Plagues of London do commonly kill one fifth part of the Inhabitants. Now, if
the whole People of England do double but in Three Hundred and Sixty Years,
then the Annual Increase of the same is but Twenty Thousand, and in Twenty
Years Four Hundred Thousand. But if in the City of London there should be Two
Millions of People, (as there will be about Sixty Years hence) then the Plague
(killing one fifth of them, namely, Four Hundred Thousand once, in Twenty
Years) will destroy as many in One Year, as the whole Nation can refurnish in
Twenty: And consequently the People of the Nation shall never Increase. But if
the People of London shall be above Four Millions (as in the first of our Two
extravagant Suppositions is premised) then the People of the whole Nation shall
lessen above Twenty Thousand per Annum. So as if People be worth Seventy Pounds
per Head (as has elsewhere been shown) then the said greatness of the City
will be a damage to it self and the whole Nation of Fourteen Hundred Thousand
Pounds per Annum, and so pro Rata, for a greater or lesser Number; wherefore to
determine, which of the Two States is best, (that is to say, toward which of
the said Two States, Authority should bend the present State) a just Balance
ought to be made between the Disadvantages from the Plague, with the Advantages
accruing from the other Particulars abovementioned; unto which Balance a more
exact Account of the People, and a better Rule for the Measure of its Growth is
necessary, that what we have here given, or are yet able to lay down.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT was not very pertinent to a Discourse concerning the Growth of the City of
London, to thrust in Considerations of the Time when the whole World will be
fully Peopled; and how to justify the Scriptures concerning the Number of
People mentioned in them; and concerning the Number of the Quick and the Dead,
that may rise at the last Day, etc. Nevertheless, since some Friends liking the
said Digressions and Impertinences (perhaps as Sauce to a dry Discourse) have
desired that the same might be explained and made out: I therefore say as
follows 1. If the Number of Acres in the habitable Part of the Earth, be
under Fifty Thousand Millions; if Twenty Thousand Millions of People, are more
than the said Number of Acres will feed; (few or no Countries being so fully
peopled;) and for that in Six doublings (which will be in Two Thousand Years)
the present Three Hundred and Twenty Millions will exceed the said Twenty
Thousand Millions. 2. That the Number of all those who have died since the
Flood, is the Sum of all the Products made by multiplying the Number of the
doubling Periods mentioned in the first Column of the last Table, by the Number
of People respectively affixed to them, in the third Column of the same Table;
the said Sum being divided by Forty (One dying out of Forty per Annum, out of
the whole Mass of Mankind) which Quotient is Twelve Thousand Five Hundred and
Seventy Millions; whereunto may be added, for those that died before the Flood,
enough to make the last mentioned Number Twenty Thousand Millions, as the full
Number of all that died, from the beginning of the World, to the Year 1682;
unto which, if Three Hundred and Twenty Millions, the Number of those who are
now alive, be added, the total of the Quick and the Dead will amount but to One
Fifth Part of the Graves, which the surface of Ireland will afford, without
ever putting two Bodies into one Grave; for there be in Ireland Twenty Eight
Thousand square English Miles, each whereof will afford about Four Millions of
Graves, and consequently above One Hundred and Fourteen Thousand Millions of
Graves, viz. about Five times the Number of the Quick and the Dead, which
should arise at the last Day, in case the same had been in the Year 1682. 3.
Now, if there may be place for five times as many Graves in Ireland, as are
sufficient for all that ever died; and if the Earth of one Grave weigh five
times as much as the Body interred therein, then a Turf, less than a Foot
thick, pared off from a fifth part of the surface of Ireland, will be
equivalent in bulk and weight to all the Bodies that ever were Buried; and may
serve as well for that purpose, as the Two Mountains aforementioned in the
Body of this Discourse. From all which it is plain, how madly they were
mistaken, who did so petulantly vilify what the Holy Scriptures have delivered.


FINIS.

