PROPOSALS Of the Undertakers for settling a Free Port in WEST INDIA.
WHereas many and great Advantages have been Reapt by most Nations of Europ,
from and by the discovery of that Rich and spacious Country West India, and yet
many Rich and valuable Discoverys both of profit and place in the same,
convenient for setlement are hitherto unknown and unposest by Europeans.

Which the Undertakers having been conversant in these parts, are ready to
demonstrate when occasion requires with the advantages, that will acrue to all
who shall be willing to adventure therein, either in person or purse.

And for the public and universal Improvement of the said Advantages in this
and time to come, the Undertakers intend to manage the same by a Society to be
called and known by the name of the general European Company for West India.

And for the more free and easy management of this great and good undertaking,
the Company do declare, that they will setle a free Port and Trade upon some
convenient place in the said Countries, for the Seat of Commerce between that
and Europe, as well as other parts of the World.

And since every man ought to be informed of the particular Advantages, before
Adventure be made, none are obliged to subscribe any sum upon their Admission
into this Company, but the terms of such Admission shall only be subscribing to
the Conditions upon the Roll here underwritten.

And he who is admitted in manner aforesaid, shall ever after by himself, or
Deputy, be duly informed of all the succeeding undertakings, and have vot and
share in the same suitable to his Adventure, which is not to exceed ten
thousand Gilders in principale stock for any one man at any time for the first
three years.

And the same Company do resolve from time to time, to defray all and every
part of the Charge of their several undertakings by their joint consent and
common stock.

And as it may be necessary for the said Society in time to come in some
particular undertakings to make their Application to the High and Mighty
States, and other Governments of Europe, as well as particular persons, so this
as all other things, shall be done, as need require, by advise of the Company,
and Charge of the Common stock.

The Company think fit at present only to give this general account of things
and public Invitation for persons to subscribe reserving the secrets of Trade,
and the Company to the assembly, or such as they shall order from time to time.

Those that are willing to enter into this Society, but would conceal their
names for a time, may enter, or cause to be enterd what other name they please,
and take a note from the Steward, to signify, that such name is only in trust
for him provided, always that such notes of Trust shall be produced, and the
right Names enterd when the Assembly shall please to order it, least by such
means one, or a few persons under several names should engrose to themselves
too great an interest in this undertaking.

The Members who have already subscribed, have chosen and appointed Rest
Fenner, Bookseller, near the Exchange in Amsterdam, being one of the Company,
the present Steward to keep the Roll, and take Subscriptions until the meeting
of the Assembly.

All the persons who live at a distance from Amsterdam, may send their Order in
writting to any Friend, to do it for them; but such Orders must be filled up
for the warrant of every one who subscribes for his Friend; and such
Resolutions of the Company as are needful to be made public, shall be given in
the Courants or by other public Notice from time to time.

The Underwritten is the Copy of the Roll for Subscription.

Whereas the Freedom and Liberty of the Worship of God, according to the holy
Scriptures, is the first and most desirable thing, and in the next place the
Security of the Liberty, and property of the persons and Estates of every man
to him and his posterity so far as humane prudence can extend it self for the
common good of mankind ought to be preserved; We therefore do resolve and
agree by Gods permission to setle a free Port and Trade for all Nations in an
Eminent part of West India, whereunto we are invited by a great and populous
Empire, where we shall not only by the Divine Assistance be capable of
promoting the true Worship of God, but also of enriching our selves, and all
that shall be concerned with us, and therefore We propose to our own and all
other Christian Nations, who are desirous to join in so glorious and great an
undertaking to incorporate with us; resolving to give and allow equal
Privileges and Advantages to all, according to their Merits. And because so
great an undertaking cannot be effectually carried on without the concurrence
of many persons of ability and Substance, We do resolve and agree that when we
have received the Subscriptions of Seventy persons to this undertaking, a
general meeting shall be appointed and held, where the whole Affair shall then
be debated, and such Officers, both Military and Civil as may seem convenient,
shall be settled with the methods for effecting this great glorious and
advantageous Affair, which we question not but God that has inspired us in the
undertaking, will bless and prosper to the accomplishing thereof; but in regard
all things are intended to be managed by a Common Stock, and the Advantages
distributed according to the Quantum of every persons subscription, which
cannot be brought to the desired perfection, without some present Charge. It is
therefore agreed that every Subcriber shall deposite the sum of twenty Gilders
upon his Subscription, to be employed for and toward the necessary charge of
the promoting and obtaining the Subscriptions, and meeting of the said Assembly
of Seventy, to whom affair and just Account shall be given at their meeting,
and then the Remainder of that Money and all such Sums as shall then and after
be subscribed, shall be ordered and disposed as they and future Subscribers
shall agree upon and direct from time to time.

When whose names are hereunto subscribed, do ingadge with, and incorporate our
selves into the Society pursuant to the Ends above written.


