TO THE Anti-Quaker MISORCUS CONCERNING OATHS
A Strange foreign Name, come from Rome or Constantinople, as the illiterate
Quaker may think (he for whom he pretends to have taken such Pains) who being
better acquainted with Scripture Language, and seeing his whole Endeavors
through his Book employed in Opposing the Command of Christ, and adjuring men
to break it by Swearing, thinks it might have been far more truly, properly and
pertinently ANTICHRIST's EXORCIST, as one likely to have such an Office in that
Synagogue, as the highest Preferment he has been capable to attain. And the
rather because after the innate Principle thereof he takes upon him immediately
after the mention of his weak Endeavors in Doctrine, to ad^ure the Magistrate
to severe Discipline, only short of killing the Quakers; they that delivered
the Martyrs to be burned, used as mild Expressions. But whether they will obey
the Doctrine or no, they must not know their dogmatical Doctor further then by
his Mystical Name, for fear (it seems) to have that laid (which he casts upon
us) where it is due, which he calls Calumnies, Reproaches, Railings,
Invectives, against which he says there is no Fence for the most unspotted
Innocence, and such may he think there is not against his, who hiding himself
throws them at us, and bespatters us for our dissenting from his Opinions,
which (in ours) rather deserves the Epithetes he bestows. But what Reason has
he to fear, seeing in all our Treatise he cannot find it done to any Name
there, though many dissenting from us at very great Distances; but that we
rather there show our selves willing to own the Truth in all, where we can find
it in any measure, passing by the other; yea, even in some that have given as
severe and uncharitable a Character of us, as he has, which, for that Cause he
revives and returns upon us, being offended that any should mention any Truth,
that we might agree with them in, and own, accounting that a Detraction from
their Reputation, to whose Person he confesses we have not spoken any thing
derogatory (neither to any in our whole Treatise of Oaths) And his Words,
namely, Bp. Gauden's, he does not deny, neither the purport of them; only he is
offended they are to our Purpose: As he is also at Robert Sanderson's,
afterward Bishop, whereto he is not ashamed to say, There is not a Syllable
thereof in that Page, viz. 141. printed 1670 in the 5th Lecture, De Obligatione
Juramenti. Let any that understands Latin but look the Page toward the
Beginning, and see if there be not Twenty Eight Syllables, a whole Sentence, an
entire Proposition betwixt two full Points, viz. Non opus fuit ista novo
interdicto prohibere quae ex se erant semper illicita. There was not need by a
New Interdiction to prohibit those things, which of themselves were always
unlawful. Because he cannot mis-interpret this Man a^ he does Jerome, he takes
another course, a shameful one, to tell a gross Lie, in denying there are any
such words, taking Advantage belike of the supposed Perfunctoriness, Credulity
or Ignorance of his Readers, thinking they would take all on his Word, without
Examination, which is great In ustice. Else he durst not affirm what he does of
Chrysostom; for if any look into the Places cited by us, he may evidently see
the contrary; and a Man that durst show his Face, not brazen, durst not for
very Shame say as he does, That his Saying, at least, where there is no
Necessity, does therefore allow it, and authorize it; contrary to all the rest
he writes. These Three are all (with Jerome) he medles with in his Preface,
which is all we hear of after so long Expectation, and so return this in short;
which is enough for a Dogmatical we know not who.

But as for Jerome's Translation and Interpretation that he makes, he has showed
himself as bad a moral Man as divine; for he leaves out of him [But the Truth
of the Gospel receives not an Oath, seeing every faithful Word is for an Oath]
He might with as good Reason leave out of Christ's Speech, But I say unto you,
Swear not at all: in the mean time charging us with leaving out that which even
the Unlearned may read in our Book, all but [us] which is not Jerome's, but his;
and yet is not ashamed to tell them, He shall for their Benefit translate it
Word for Word: And if so, how is it that he never charges us with leaving out
[us] a principal Word that determins for him, unless it were taken
indifinitely, as [We] before for Men, as sometimes by Paul and James, the
Apostles: and why charges he us not with adding all that restrictive part
aforesaid, which is to be read in ours, and not his? Can it be expected, that
the Man that charges us with leaving out that which in plain English is there
to be seen, with our Observation on it, would be so favorable, as to pass by
our leaving out that principal Word for him, and adding the principal part for
us too of the whole Comment in ENGLISH, if it were not in the LATIN. The
Quaker is not so unlearned as not to perceive these things; and to know and
discern the Voice of the true Shepherd from the Stranger, and him that hides
himself, and thinks he may say any thing, and not be aspersed, as he says,
that is, charged with his lies and deceit. Can he account him a true Shepherd
that flees and hides himself from those he accounts the Woolves Prey, and be so
rash and careless (to say the least) in the Work he says he undertakes for
their Benefit and Recovery, as to examine and compare things no better, and
then be so bitter against them for his own Negligence, as to set the Magistrate
at work? Has not the Quaker learned so much as to know, that such a one cares
not for the Sheep, and therefore is a Hireling? He can find no Benefit in
receiving by an implicit Faith, as of old, a Latin Comment from a Priest's
Mouth, that distinguishes nothing between the Commands of the Law and the
Gospel by his Interpretation, which he has cause to suspect, as aforesaid. And
also that after Tithes, he will come for Offerings and Sacrifices too: And if
they will not give the Priest raw Flesh, he will take it by force before he
burn the Fat: And can he believe that he Translates it for his Benefit, that
like the Rhemists leaves Victims and Demons untranslated, that he may come to
him for a new Interpretation, and yet knows not where, nor what is his Name,
unless it be St. Jerome, so not only Christening but Sainting himself. For
instead of confirming his Interpretation, or explaining it out of other places
of the same Father (as one would think by his appeal he would have done) he
asks the Question, Does St. Jerome say any such thing? And answers himself, I
absolutely deny it, without further proof, but his own forged Interpretation,
and dogmatical Assertion, the Authority of this new spurious Jerome. For as for
the ancient Father Jerome, the Illiterate Quaker need but turn back the Leaf in
our Treatise of Oaths, and there he may find, that in one of his Epistles, he
writes, that We must not blaspheme, and say, the Lord forbad us, what he did
himself: And says, That we that are Servants must not think to do as the Lord
did; which this man dare not say was Swearing falsely or vainly: For that were
to blaspheme with a witness. But yet he says, to take off that Objection,
After the Lord forbad us to Swear, neither did he ever Swear himself: May not
therefore the Illiterate Quaker from this place justly suspect, that he has put
[us] not in ours, into his Translation, which makes the Father contradict
himself, whom he has a better belief in, then his false Son. And may not the
Illiterate Quaker justly suspect his [if] and his [should] which he finds not
in ours to be of the same Progeny? Seeing it thrusts out a whole Sentence (to
make his sense) which he finds in ours, for none of which passages he taxes
ours; which certainly he would have done, if we had given him that Advantage,
he may think, he finds him not so favorable: Neither does he find him
disapproving our Translating [by God] which he without any instance opposes
with his Translating [against God] for as for ours there may be an Instance in
the same place, for there [(...)] is rendered by Pagninus and Arias Montanus
[in Jerusolyma] by our Translators [by Jerusalem] not [against Jerusalem]
answerable to (...) But that his learned Brethren of the Ministry (as he owns
them) may take notice how learnedly this their Brother has come to their
Assistance against us; let them consider that by his Forgery he has not only
made the learned Father break his own Head by Contradiction, and other learned
Fathers his Contemporaries, as Hilary, Chromatius, etc. who with others agree
with him, saying, Observe that Christ here not only Reproves the Jews
Superstition of old, but also Forbids his to Swear. (And to them we appeal for
Jerome, as well as to himself: But also, he makes him also desperately to break
(his Contemporary also) Priscian the Grammarian's Head. And we do not read, he
bare him such ill will, showing himself as bad Garmmarian as Moral or Divine:
For besides the [quasi. as] of similitude, coupling [parvulis] to [Judaeis]
understood; he forges another [quasi, as if] of simulation to serve to [fuerat]
the indicative, and thinks he has got a great advantage (tanquam fecerit ipse
aliquid) that he has got [fuerat] instead of fuit: Which, alas! is none at all,
for fuerat makes more for us, then fuit. He says, it is not [fuit] and say we,
it is not [fuisset] oh, but, says he, it is [fuerat] quasi non norimus, that
[quasi] of Simulation [as if] requires a Subjunctive, and not an Indicative.
Let any Boy look in his Grammar, and prove this learned Translator for the
Illiterate Quaker, and for his [quasi parvulis] he will write him therein
[Haereticus majusculis] as his properest name: And to make this pass, he forges
a distinction after [hoc] to make it accusative [this] and out of it another
[hoc] a Nominative [it.] And so with this great literate man, these little
Notes of sense [ but's, not's, ifs and and's] are but as Nonsense and
Metaphyfical Notions, as Insignificant Nothings, to be multiplied or
subtracted at pleasure. This shows he has learned these and the other Arts he
speaks of very notably, or the art of Grammar very sorrily. What would this Man
have done, if he had lived at that time, and had the Translating of Matthews's
Book, or had had the handling of Jerome's Works before Erasmus; he would have
been a notable Artist in the Expurgatory Office: And as if he had learned it
there, and were to Practice it among Protestants; he shows what he would do,
(if it were feizable and permitted) by Bishop Sanderson; for he would not leave
one Syllable un-obliturated, that made against him or his Party. But the Lord's
Mercy has rescued these our Times and Places from any ones expectation of any
such attempt. We say not Bishop Gauden and Bishop Sanderson are against
Swearing at all; but we say, what we cite out of them is truly cited: whose
words one would have thought, he would have made it his business, not to deny,
and oppose with several Reasons, as if they had been Forged by us: But to have
defended, and shown to what purpose they had been, if not to ours, if he could;
and so to have shown his Art.

But we say, That Jerome and Chrysostom and those learned Fathers, with several
others are against it; as they that will make trial, will be able to judge, if
they do it without Prejudice; and to that we refer it, against all his
Slanders, Forgings and Wrestings, which are not worth answering, they are so
gross. What are of any moment in his Arguments are answered already to others,
only this at present to what is cited by him out of Bishop Sanderson, saying,
Swearing is not Ceremonial, and must continue, because Controversies must: We
deny that Strife and Controversy must endure; especially such Controversies
for the ending of which Oaths were permitted, they must fail, and Charity never
fail. Controversy is not of an everlasting Nature, as Love that is moral, is,
upon this ground Swearing must fail. And so is not Moral but Ceremonial; as may
be showed by the definition of a Ceremony from two Bishops, J. Wilkins, and W.
Floyd, in the real Character. For there Ceremony is defined a solemn
Circumstance, which is an external mode, wherewith things are accompanied and
done: Now without this the controversy fails betwixt us; for abate us the
solemn Circumstance wherewith it is accompanied and done, the thing, confessing
Truth, speaking in the fear of God, we do not refuse. The Circumstances
denominates and determins it Swearing. For the number Seven, as the word
[sheba] signifies, is a Circumstance used by the Ancients about it, as appears,
Genesis 21. the first place we find the word in: And so is jicrethu berith (...)
they made a Covenant, the same with Ferire Faedus used by the Heathen. The
Substance of the old Swearing, which the Apostle calls Confessing, Romans 14.11.
we deny not. It is the Ceremony, Circumstance and Solemnity you contend with us
for, which is Swearing, if Judicial it binds not.

Yet this Man is not ashamed to expostulate, WHATSOEVER IS COMMANDED IN THE OLD
TESTAMENT, IS IT NOT COMMANDED IN THE NEW; making no Distinction of Judicial,
Ceremonial and Moral, and making it heinous to affirm the contrary. Who knows
what he would be at?

By One subscribed to the Treatise of OATHS, with Consent of the Rest, R. R.

THE END.

