THE GLORY and HAPPINESS OF THE SAINTS IN HEAVEN: OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning
the Blessed State of the Righteous after Death.

By Nathanael Ranew, late of London, Bookseller.

London, Printed for N. R. and sold by J. Robinson, A. and J. Churchill, J.
Tailor, and J. Wyat. 1694.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
I Dare not suppose thee, in an Age of so much Light and Knowledge, to be
ignorant of a future State and Condition, that does abide thee and all Men
after this Life; for this were to conceive of the contrary, not only to the
sentiments of all Christians, but even of Heathens themselves. Neither can I
think any to be so far blinded and hardened, as to believe that this State,
which shall befall all Men after Death, to be the same unto all Persons,
whether they be good or bad; for though the Wise Man tells us, in Eccles. 9.1,
2. That in this Life, All things come alike unto all Men, and there is one
event to the Righteous and to the Wicked, to the Clean and to the Unclean. So
that in the way of God's common Providential dealings with Men in this World,
no Man knows Love or Hatred by all that is before them. Yet when Death and
Judgment come, a discriminating Sentence shall pass upon all Men, According to
what they have done in the Body, whether it be good or bad. And then as the
Apostle speaks, All those, who have not obeyed the Truth, but have lived in Sin
and Unrighteousness, shall receive Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish upon every Soul of Man that has thus done Evil; But to them, who by
patient continuance in well-doing, have sought for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, shall be Eternal Life. And of this none that live under the Light
of the Gospel can be ignorant.

Now as to the former of these, that State of Woe and Misery, that is to be the
Portion of Sinners in Hell, it is not my design in the following Discourse to
say any thing: Having confined my Thoughts and Meditations therein unto the
latter, and that is that State of Bliss and Happiness that shall be the Portion
of Holy Souls in Heaven.

All Men now will say they desire and seek after happiness, but few there are
that attain thereunto; not that there is no such Thing or State attainable; for
Holiness always lays a sure Foundation for Happiness: But Man being fallen from
God, and sunk into the Creature, cannot without the help of Divine Grace, raise
up his Soul, his Affections and Desires toward God, toward Heaven and
Heavenly things; but takes up with what is suitable to his Earthly and Fleshly
part; and so the World and the Enjoyments thereof, being adapted to the
Inclinations of his present State and Condition here below; accordingly with
the greatest eagerness, he pursues the Riches, the Honors, the Pleasures and
Delights of this World; as those things which when attained, he vainly fancies
will make him truly Happy; but when he comes to enjoy them, meets with
Frustration and Disappointment: All Men being forced sooner or later to
subscribe unto what the Wisest of Men faith, as a great Truth, concerning all
things under the Sun, that they are but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

Would thou not, Christian Reader, when thou come to die, be eternally
deceived in thy Hopes and Expectations of Happiness: Let not the World and the
Enjoyments thereof, take up thy Thoughts and Affections now. God has provided
the good things thereof, and by his Care and Providence brings them to thee
daily for thy use, that with this Gracious and Liberal Allowance of his; thou
may serve him with the greater Cheerfulness and Delight of Soul, in thy
Passage through this World: But he never intended, thou should take up with
them as thy Happiness. Believe it, God has provided better things for holy
Souls in another World; he intends himself to be their Portion, his Heaven to
be their Habitation and Dwelling place, Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
to be their Associates and Companions; where they shall live in the light of
God's Countenance, see his Face, behold his Glory, and be filled with his Love
to all Eternity. O blessed State of infinite Bliss and Happiness, beyond what
words is able to express. Well may holy Souls with wonder and amazement cry out
with the Apostle, and say, Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, nor can it
enter into the heart of Man to conceive what God has provided for them that
Love him.

And why may not thou who now castest thine Eyes upon these lines, make one
of that great number of holy Souls, that shall be thus Eternally Happy and
Blessed? God has not Excluded thee out of Heaven, and why should thou
exclude and shut out thy self? God is now displaying before thee, the
Excellencies and Glory of that Blessed State, and wherefore does he do so, but
to invite and draw Sinners to come and partake of this Happiness; not that God
needs us, or any thing that we can do; for he is as Happy without us, as he can
possibly be with us: But we need him, and cannot be happy without him.

Now therefore since he is pleased to continue the offers of such rich Grace
and Mercy, let none be found slighters and contemners thereof. Disappoint not,
O Sinners, the design of God in seeking to bring Souls to Heaven. Frustrate not
your own Expectations of Bliss and Happiness. Make not your selves Eternally
miserable, by choosing any sinful course, or walking in any allowed way of
Wickedness: Nor yet provoke God by any sinful delays, or any sluggish and lazy
desires and endeavors in seeking to obtain this Everlasting Happiness, to deal
with you as obstinate despisers and contemners thereof, and swear in his Wrath
that you shall never enter into his Rest.

If God may be Glorified, and Souls receive benefit hereby unto Eternal Life,
the Author has the desire of his Soul, and an abundant Reward for what he has
done in the ensuing Discourse; and that a Blessing from Heaven may make is thus
Successful unto all that shall read it, is and shall be the Prayer of the
Publisher.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. AN Introduction. A State of Future Glory and Happiness proved. What
it is that makes the Happiness of Heaven so Excellent and Glorious, with a
short and brief Description thereof.

CHAP. II. A more particular Consideration of the Happiness of Heaven. Of the
Company and Society Believers shall enjoy in Heaven. As, (1.) Communion with
all the People of God. (2.) Communion with Angels. (3.) Enjoyment of Jesus
Christ their Redeemer. (4.) Sight and Fruition of God. What kind of Sight or
Vision of God, Saints shall have in Heaven. Which shall be, (1.) Immediate and
Clear. (2.) Transforming. (3.) Joyful. (4.) Permanent and Perpetual. This Sight
and Vision of God in Heaven will be a great Happiness, because God is, (1.) An
Universal Good. (2.) A Pure and unmixed Good. (3.) A Suitable Good. (4.) An
All-sufficient Good. (5.) A Satisfying Good. (6.) An Everlasting Good.

CHAP. III. Further Discoveries of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, manifested
in their being freed, (1.) From all Afflictons. (2.) From all Temptations both
from Satan and the World. (3.) In a perfect freedom from all Sin. (4.) In a
Perfection of Grace and Holiness. (5.) In partaking of fullness of Joy, being
Pure, Spiritual, Full, and Everlasting. (6.) In Excellent Glory and Honor that
shall then be put upon them.

CHAP. IV. Of the Resurrection of the Body, in order to the Saints Enjoyment of
the Happiness of Heaven. A more particular Description of the Happiness of the
Bodies of the Saints in Heaven: which shall there be, (1.) Incorruptible. (2.)
Spiritual. (3.) Powerful. (4.) Beautiful. Of the Happiness of the Soul in
Heaven, as (1.) In having its Understanding enlarged. (2.) In its being
perfected in Holiness. (3.) In having its Affections brought into a perfect
Regularity. Of the Eternity of the Saints Happiness in Heaven.

CHAP. V. Of the Efficient Cause of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, namely, the
Free Grace of God. Of the Meritorious Cause of the Saints Happiness, namely,
the Death and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ. Of the Final Cause of the
Saints Happiness in Heaven, namely, the Glory of God. Holiness the Saints great
Qualification for Heaven. Wicked Men unsuitable to the Work of Heaven, and to
the Reward of Heaven, both which are Holy. In Heaven there is both an Eternal
Work for Saints to be employed in, and an Eternal Reward for Saints to enjoy.

CHAP. VI. A Resolution of some Questions, as, (1.) Whether the Saints shall
know one another in Heaven? (2.) Whether there are different degrees of Glory
in Heaven? (3.) How the Saints are said to be equal with, and like unto the
Angels in Heaven. (4.) In what respects Heaven is called a Reward or
Recompense. Some useful and necessary Inferences from the consideration of that
Happiness the Saints shall enjoy in Heaven, deduced in order unto Practice, as,
(1.) Hopes of Heaven should make the World contemptible unto Believers. (2.)
None that expect Heaven hereafter, should be offended at any thing they meet
with in their way thither. (3.) Expectations of Heaven should make Christians
live as those that are Heirs of so great a Happiness. (4) Frequent Thoughts and
Meditations of Heaven should possess the Minds of those that hope to partake of
the Happiness of Heaven. (5.) The Greatness of the Happiness of Heaven should
put Christians upon Examing of themselves what Right and Title they have
thereunto. (6.) Hopes and Expectations of Heaven hereafter, should Reconcile to
Believers the Thoughts of their own Death; and moderate their Sorrows for the
Death of their Godly Friends and Relations. (7.) Hopes of Heaven should put
Christians upon unwearied diligence in the Service of God, that is attended
with such a Reward. (8.) The Consideration of so great a Happiness as Heaven
is, should cause in all Believers a Holy longing of Soul after the Enjoyment of
it. The Conclusion.

THE GLORY AND HAPPINESS OF THE SAINTS.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction. A State of future Glory and Happiness proved. What it is
that makes the Happiness of Heaven so excellent and glorious, in a short and
brief Description thereof.

THE framing a Discourse of Heaven, that Place of inexpressible Bliss and
Happiness, the Portion of Holy and Righteous Persons to Eternity, is a Work
fitter for an Angel, one of those Heavenly Courtiers, who have ever since their
Creation, and for many Ages and Generations now past, been happy partakers of
that blissful State; than the lisping and stammering of any mortal Tongue:
Sense here being the best Orator, and they fittest to describe Heaven unto
others, who live in the fruition of it themselves. And indeed all Discourses of
this nature, by poor frail Creatures, are rather a darkning and diminution of
that Glory and Happiness, than an ample Illustration or Discovery what it is.
And when the People of God shall come to the enjoyment thereof, they will soon
find themselves wonderfully, but happily deceived by the most glorious
Descriptions that ever were laid before them. What the Prophet says in Hab. 3.
where, after he had given us a short description of some of the glorious
Excellencies and Perfections of God, he tells us in the 4th. Verse, His
Brightness was as the Light; that he had Horns coming out of his hands; which
usually are a signification of Strength and Might; but says the Prophet, There
was the hiding of his Power: As if he had said, Whatever Strength and Might God
had thereby put forth, it was so far from manifesting the fullness and greatness
thereof, that it was rather a Hiding, than a Revelation of his Power; there
being infinitely more Power in him, than was ever yet put forth by him. The
like may truly be said concerning Heaven and its Glory and Excellency. Take all
the Descriptions that since the Creation of the World have been made of the
Glory and Happiness thereof, and put them all together, and we may say of them
all, that they rather hide and eclipse the Glory of Heaven, than any way come
near to a manifestation of the Fullness and Excellency thereof; still is there
infinitely more hid from us, than can possibly thereby be made known to us.
Heaven is like God himself, an infinite Good and Happiness; and so cannot be
fully known or enjoyed by any who are but of finite Capacities and
Understanding. And therefore after all that we have heard thereof from Men, or
received from God himself, either by what he has revealed to us in his Word,
or secretly elapsed down immediately into our Souls by his Spirit; yet what
holy Job says of God, we may say of the Heaven of God; Oh how little a Portion
of it is known! And therefore those Words of St. Paul need not be looked upon
with admiration, when he tells us, Phil. 1.23. he desired to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ; that is, in Heaven, where God and Christ are known and
enjoyed; for that is it which makes Heaven so desirable; yea, to be best of
all, as the same Apostle speaks. For why should any think it strange, that the
blessed Apostle, who had been wrapped up into the Third Heaven by extraordinary
privilege, as well as in an extraordinary manner, and there heard and saw so
much of that Glory and Happiness that was there enjoyed, as that himself said
was unutterable, that he should long after a fuller enjoyment of it? Christians
who profess their Hopes and Happiness is laid up in Heaven, should rather
wonder at his willingness to abide here any longer in the Flesh. And certainly,
had not Love; yea, great Love to him, who had prepared and purchased so great
and inexpressible a Happiness for him, wrought very powerfully in him; it may
seem almost impossible that Heaven and St. Paul should have been kept longer
asunder, if any thing in him, or to be done or suffered by him, could have
brought him thither sooner than his appointed time.

Great and glorious things does the Scripture speak concerning Heaven, the
Palace, or City rather of the great God; but how great the Glory and Happiness
of the Blessed shall there be, none are able now to express: The blessed
Apostle therefore, in 2 Cor. 12.3, 4. when he sets himself purposely to relate
his Journey into the other World, all that he tells us of it, is only this,
That there he heard those Words that were unspeakable; and saw those Things
that were not lawful, or not possible to be uttered. And other-where he tells
us, Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither is it possible for the heart
of Man to conceive, what God has prepared for them that love him. The Eye has
seen great and glorious. Things, and the Ear has heard much greater; but the
Heart of Man is able to imagine much more than either of them: But whatever the
Eye has seen, or the Ear has heard, or the Heart can imagine; yet neither of
them can reach to apprehend or conceive the great things that God has prepared
for them that love him Hence therefore it is that the same Apostle, 2 Cor.
4.17. calls Heaven a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory The
Happiness that a Believer attains to even on this side Glory, when he has
received an Earnest, or Beginning of Heaven in some glorious work of
Sanctification upon his Soul, Oh how does the Joy of the Knowledge and
Assurance thereof pass all understanding; as the same Apostle speaks, Phil.
4.7. Who is able to utter the sweetness of that Peace of Conscience, and the
spiritual Joy and Rejoicing of a Soul, on whom the Love of God is shed abroad
by the Hory Ghost! Such a ravishing, overcoming Joy and Delight flows in upon
the Soul, as it cannot express; no, nor sometimes is it able to bear up under
it. And if there be so much sweetness in a Taste of Heaven, what is there then
in a full enjoyment of Heaven. The Beloved Apostle St. John tells us, in 1 John
3.2. It does not yet appear what we shall be; no, nor indeed can it appear now,
for in our present state we are not able to bear it. Should but a little of the
Glory of Heaven be revealed to us now, Oh how would it amaze and confound us!
That weight of Glory would be so great, that it would overwhelm us. We read in
Exodus 34.34. That when Moses had been conversing with God in the Mount, and
came down to the People again, that his Face did so shine, that the Children of
Israel could not behold him, until he put a Vail upon his Face. And did a a
small Ray of the Glory of God reflected upon Moses's Face, shine so gloriously,
that the Israe lites could not look upon him? Oh what a dazzling, confounding
Brightness and Glory would Heaven it self break forth upon us with, if the Vail
between us and it, were removed out of the way; surely Flesh and Blood could
not be able to bear it. When the same Moses therefore, in Exodus 33.18. besought
God to show him his Face, or, his Glory, which is all one; what Answer does God
return him? Not a positive Denial of his Request; for he does not say, I will
not show it thee: No, but he tells him, Thou can not see my face and live. It
is that thou can not bear; it is an Object too glorious for thee to behold:
As if God had said, Moses, thou have had some discoveries of my self unto thee;
and they have begotten farther desires in thee after more and greater
manifestations thereof: What thou ask at my hands, is not a thing too great
for me to bestow; but it is too great for thee to receive: a happiness it is
too great to be enjoyed in this Life; and therefore though I do not, nor will
not for ever deny thy Request, yet I must defer it till it may be a Happiness
unto thee; and that is, till thou come to Heaven, where thou shall for ever see
my face, and enjoy my Presence in as large and ample a manner as thou can
possibly desire; but now thou can not bear it; for no man can see my face and
live. And as no man can take in the Happiness of Heaven here, so no man can
understand the greatness of it: So true are the Words of the Apostle, The
things that God has prepared for them that love him, are so many, and so
great, that they cannot enter into the heart of man to conceive. The Psalmist
therefore, upon this Consideration, cries out with Admiration, Psalm. 31.19. Oh
how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee;
great it was, but how great he could not express. And thus truly must we do;
when we have said all we can concerning Heaven, we must sit down and admire the
Greatness and Excellency of it; but the Fullness, Riches and Glory of it, we
shall never understand till we come for ever to enjoy it.

But though we cannot fully understand the Happiness of Heaven; yet for the
raising of the Hearts, and exciting and quickening the Affections and Desires of
Christians toward it; and that their pursuits after the obtaining of it, may
be more diligent and servent, I shall endeavor to represent something of the
Glory and Excellency of that Blessed State, that is to be enjoyed there,
according to what God has been pleased to discover to us thereof in his holy
Word; though still when all that has or can be said, it is the Enjoyment of
Heaven only that can make known to us what the Happiness of Heaven shall be.

But before I proceed unto a particular and distinct Explication of the
Happiness of. Heaven, it will be necessary by some convincing Arguments to
prove the Reality and Certainty of that Glory and Happiness that shall be
enjoyed by the Godly there. Now this I shall demonstrate by these following
Arguments.

First, From the infallible Promises of the Truthspeaking God. Now so many are
the Promises scattered up and down in sacred Writ concerning the Certainty,
Futurity, and Eternity of the Saints Happiness, that I cannot number them; and
surely Believers, who have by those Promises an everlasting Inheritance of
Glory and Happiness conveyed to, and settled upon them as their Portion, cannot
be supposed to be Strangers unto them; upon the supposition whereof, I shall
instance only in a few Fear not little Flock, says our Lord, for it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you a Kingdom, Luke 12.33. Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God, Matt. 5.8. My sheep hear my voice, and I give
unto them eternal life, John 10.28. This is his Promise that he has given unto
us, even eternal life, 1 John 2.25. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us, says the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree
of Life that is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. To him that
overcomes, will I give to sit with me on my Throne, even a: I have overcome,
and am set down with my Father on his Throne, Rev. 3.21. Believers are the
greatest Heirs in all the World; for, as the Apostle speaks, They have the
Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come. And says the
same Apostle, All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come; all is yours, and you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.22.

Secondly, The Certainty of a future state of Glory and Happiness, may be
demonstrated from the great Undertaking of the Lord Jesus Christ. And indeed
this was a Work fit for none but him to undertake; for none else were able to
accomplish it. Whatever worth or excellency there is either in all the Men on
Earth, or in all the Saints, and Angels in Heaven should they have proffered to
have done and suftered all that their Natures are capable of, to have purchased
the Love and Favoun of God, to have been enjoyed, though but by one Soul, and
that but for one moment of time in Heaven; it would have been rejected and
despised by God. But now the Death and Sufferings of Jesus Christ were of equal
worth and value with Heaven, and the Enjoyment of God to eternity; for his
Blood was the Blood of God, and therefore the shedding of it deserved the
Presence, Love and Favor of God to be bestowed upon Believers, as their
Portion for ever. This Jesus Christ has done, for this he has both suffered
and died; and because he has made a Purchase of these things with his Blood,
Believers shall therefore enjoy them; for Christ will not lose his Purchase,
nor shall Believers therefore lose their Happiness. The bringing many Sons unto
Glory, was the End which Christ designed in the laying down of his Life, and
therefore he willingly submitted unto the Way by which he was to accomplish it;
and that was by his suffering Death; and from hence therefore the People of God
are said to obtain an inheritance among them that are sanctified by Faith in
him.

Thirdly, Another Ground or Reason we have to believe a state of Glory and
Happiness hereafter, may be taken from the Spirit's introductory or preparatory
working in the Hearts of Believers here in this Life. By this now I mean, the
Beginning of Grace wrought in the Soul; for Grace and Glory are one and the
same thing; Grace is Glory, and Glory is Grace; all the Difference between
them, is only in the degree; Grace is Glory begun, and Glory is Grace
perfected. And when the Spirit of God works Grace in any Soul, he then gives
the first Fruits, the Earnest, or Fore-taste of Glory. Grace therefore is
sometimes called Glory in Scripture; so we read, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open
face beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image from Glory unto Glory; that is, from one degree and measure of Grace unto
another. And Grace there is called Glory, because, when Grace is advanced unto
its highest degree of perfection, it is Glory. Now where ever any receive the
first fruits of Heaven in Grace and Holiness, they shall receive the full
Harvest of Glory it self. Grace therefore is called the Spirit's forming, or
fitting of the Soul for Glory. Hence the Apostie speaking of himself and
others, as groaning and longing to be clothed with their House which is frown
Heaven, that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life. In 2 Cor. 5.3, and 4. he
adds in the 5th. verse, He that has wrought us for the self same thing, is
God; who has also given us the Earnest of the Spirit; which, in Ephesians. 1.14.
is called the Earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
Possession. Where ever Grace is in truth, it is always in Growth, and it shall
be in perfection: So says the Apostle, Phil. 1.6. He that has begun a good
work in you, will perform it unto the Day of Jesus Christ. Where the Spirit
gives unto any the Nature and Disposition of the Children of God, he thereby
gives them an undoubted Right and Title unto Heaven and Glory; yea, such a
Right and Title as shall never be lost or broken off: So says the Apostle,
Romans 8.16, 17. For the Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits, that we
are the Children of God; and if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and
joint-Heirs with Jesus Christ; and if we suffer with him, we shall also be
glorified together.

Fourthly, and lastly, Imight argue the Certainty of a future state of Glory
and Happiness, from the constant believing Hopes and Expectations; yea, and
Sufferings also of the Saints and People of God in all Ages. If Believers had
hope only in this Life, they were then, as the Apostle speaks, of all men most
miserable. But it is not so; for their Hopes and Happiness lies in those things
that are to be enjoyed beyond Time, even in Eternity. And hence it is, that
they have such strong Consolation as bears up their Souls above all the
Sufferings that they meet with in this present Life; because they have sled for
Refuge to lay hold on the Hope that is set before them, which Hope they have as
an Anchor of the Soul, that is sure and steadfast, because it enters into that
within the Vail, Heb. 6.18, 19. It is the Nature of the New Creature,
wherever it is, to cause the Soul to look upwards; and hence it is that the
People of God are said to be begotten again unto a lively hope of an
Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. From this now springs great Joy and
Consolation, and therefore upon this account it is that Believers are said to
rejoice in hopes of the Glory of God, Romans 35.2.

Should I now attempt to lay down a Description of Heaven, that Place of
perfect Bliss and Happiness, I should prevent my self in what I intend to speak
more fully and largely to afterward: Only in the General, to excite and
quicken our Desires and Affections after it, take this following short Sum of
it.

Heaven is a Place where there is a total and everlasting exclusion of all that
is evil and imperfect, and where there is a full perfection and perpetual
enjoyment of all that is Good, and that in the largest latitude and extent of
it. In Heaven there is nothing to afflict or torment; but every thing that is
satisfactory and delightful. There is nothing of Sin there, and therefore
nothing of Sorrow. Saint in Heaven enjoy the best Company. There is the Great
and Glorious God seen and known in all his glorious Excellencies and
Perfections. There is the Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Life and
Glory, exalted in our Nature, at the Right Hand of God; through whose
meritorious Undertakings we come to be presented unto God, and to stand in his
Presence with Confidence and Joy, as having neither spot nor wrinkle, nor any
such thing. There are the glorious Angels, the Cherubims and Seraphims, with
all the glorified Saints and Servants of God, that have lived in all Ages of
the World; as, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, who are always standing round
about the Throne of God, crying, Alleiuja, Praise, Honor and Glory unto him
that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. In Heaven there is
not only a perfect freedom from all Sin, but from all Inclinations; yea, from
all Temptations thereunto. Grace and Holiness are there in their Fullness, in
their Perfection and Glory. There it is that this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on Immortality. There it is that these
vile Bodies of ours shall be made like unto the glorious Body of Jesus Christ.
There it is that these Souls of ours shall be enlarged in their utmost
Capacities and Desires, and yet filled and satisfied to the utmost also. There
it is that there is fullness of Joy, excellency of Glory, with an Eternity of
Enjoyment of both. This now is the Building of God, that House not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. This is that Kingdom that is to be
inherited by the People of God, prepared for them from the foundation of the
World, Matthew. 25.46. This is that City that has Foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God, Heb. 11.10. The Streets whereof are paved with Gold, and the
Gates whereof are Pearl, Rev. 21.21. In which there is no Temple; for the Lord
God Almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of it. Where there is no more Night
no more Candle, nor any need of the Sun, or of the Moon to shine in it; for the
Lord God gives them Light, and they shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 22.5.
This now is Heaven, and much more than all this; for when we have spent all our
Days and Time in Hearing, in Reading, in Discoursing, in Meditating upon
Heaven, and upon nothing else; yet after we have done all we can, said all we
can, thought all we can; yet can we never set forth the Thousandth Part of that
Happiness that is to be enjoyed in Heaven; for it is that which is beyond
expression, beyond imagination; but blessed be God, it is not beyond enjoyment;
for the having and possessing of these things in their Fullness, in their
Perfection, and in their Perpetuity, is that, which, as it makes the Happiness
of Heaven so excellent and glorious, so does it make it also so desirable to be
enjoyed.

CHAP. II.
A more particular Consideration of the Happiness of Heaven. Of the Company and
Society Believers shall enjoy in Heaven; as, (1.) Communion with all the People
of God. (2.) Communion with Angels. (3.) Enjoyment of Jesus Christ their
Redeemer. (4.) Sight and Fruition of God. What kind of Sight or Vision of God,
Saints shall have in Heaven: Which shall be, (1.) Immediate and clear. (2.)
Transforming. (3.) Joyful. (4.) Permanent and perpetual. This Sight and Vision
of God in Heaven will be a great Happiness; because God is (1.) An Universal
Good. (2.) A Pure and Unmixed Good. (3.) A Suitable Good. (4) An All sufficient
Good. (5.) A Satisfying Good. (6.) An Everlasting Good.

HAving in the Conclusion of the Former Chapter, laid down a brief Description
of Heaven, and the Happiness thereof, I now come to a more particular distinct
handling of the several Branches of it.

Now here the First Thing that I shall instance in, as a Part of that
Happiness, is the Company and Society that the Saints shall eternally enjoy in
Heaven. Which is comprehended in these Four Particulars: Fellowship with all
the Saints. Communion with Angels. The Sight of Jesus Christ, as our Blessed
and Glorious Redeemer. And the eternal Vision and Enjoyment of God himself.

First. The Happiness of Believers in Heaven consists in their Fellowship and
Society with the Saints and People of God, that have lived in all Ages of the
World. The Communion of Saints, and the great Delight the People of God have
taken therein, is that we often read of in Scripture. Holy David speaks of it
with great pleasure, Psalm. 42.4. I went, says he, to the House of God with the
voice of Joy and Praise; But why so? it was, says he, with a Multitude that
kept Holy Day. Such Society were the Delight of his Soul: Psalm. 16.3. But to
the Saints, the excellent ones of the Earth, in whom is all my Delight. O how
rejoycingly does his Soul speak when such Company came unto him! I was glad
when they said unto me, Come, let us go up unto the House of the Lord, Psalm.
122.1. It is true, David's greatest Delight was in God, and in the enjoyment of
him; and therefore says he, I will go unto God, my exceeding Joy and Cheer,
Psalm. 42.4. But next unto God, the People of God, and Communion with them, were
those he most esteemed: And therefore, though his going to the House of God,
was chiefly to meet with God, whom his Soul did most pant and breath after; yet
was it no small matter of Joy to him, that he went to the House of God in such
Company. And if the People of God now be accounted by a Godly man to be such
delightful Company here on Earth, whilst Sin as well as Grace is in them in
conjunction; O how delightful will their Company be in Heaven, when they shall
be free from all Sin and Corruption! having nothing but Grace in them in
Perfection. Here on Earth, the Communion of Saints is sweet and desirable,
though mixed with Communion with the World; so that while we have Fellowship
with them, we are to have Fellowship with Sinners at the same time; and indeed
there is no Society so pure and holy, but there are, and will be a Number of
unholy ones among them. To be full of Holiness our selves, and to have none but
holy ones in our company, is a desirable thing on Earth; but enjoyed only in
Heaven: Here the Chaff and the Wheat must grow together. All that are now
called by the Name of the Lord are not all holy; but Saints and Sinners dwell
together in the same House; sit together at the same Table, lie together in the
same Bed; yea, eat both of the same Spiritual Meat, and drink the same
Spiritual Drink; enjoy the same Ordinances, partake of the same Sacrament, even
the Body and Blood of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. So that the
People of God, though they have Communion one with another, yet have they
Fellowship with Sinners also. And this will always be the state of the People
of God while they are here. But now in Heaven, Believers shall have Communion
with the Saints and Servants of God, and with none but them; for all Sinners
shall be eternally excluded out of that holy Plaee; no thing or person that is
defiled or polluted, shall ever enter there; and certainly this must needs be
sweet and delightful. Were it a thing that we might suppose possible (as indeed
it is not) that here we could have Communion with the People of God, and with
them only, yet the best of them have now so many Weaknesses and Imperfections,
as would render the purest Society of them sometimes uncomfortable; for here
being in their imperfect state, they must be born withal in many things; for
they are still Men subject to like Passions and Infirmtiies with others. Moses,
a Man eminent for Meekness, so that there was none like him on Earth; yet
sometimes spoke unadvisedly with his lips. Job, a patient Man, even to a
Proverb; yet had sometimes his Fits of Impatience and Discontent. Jonah, a
Prophet of the Lord, yet very froward and peevish, and justifies his Passion
and Anger, not only before Men, but even unto the Face of God himself, saying,
I do well to be angry, even unto the death. Yea, most, if not all the Saints
and People of God mentioned in Scripture, though eminent for Grace and
Holiness, yet have they had some Sins, some Infirmities or other recorded of
them, that it might be known they were Men; yea, sinful Men also, as well as
Saints; and if we expect Communion with any while we are here, that are not
Sinners as well as Saints, we must then go out of the world; as the Apostle
speaks; for all the People of God here have Flesh in them as well as Spirit;
Sin and Corruption in them, as well as Grace and Holiness. And yet
notwithstanding all their Frailties and Infirmities, they are still the best
Company, and Fellowship, and Society with them most desirable. And if, while
they have their Spots, their Stains upon them, their Company is so excellent
and desirable, what shall they be when they shall be free from all their
Imperfections, when they shall have no Ignorance, no Blindness, no Pride, no
Impatience, no Spots, no Blemishes, nor any thing whereby they may be polluted
or defiled; but shall be adorned and beautified with all Grace and Holiness in
the Fullness and Perfection of it: Surely then their Company must needs be far
more desirable; yea, even a kind of a little Heaven it self.

Secondly, The Happiness of Believers in Heaven, consists in their Communion
with Angels, the highest, the noblest, and most excellent of God's Creatures.
The Welfare of Man is that in which the Angels delight. When Man was at first
created, those Morning-Stars sang together, and those Sons of God, as holy Job
speaks, shouted for joy, Job 38.7. When Jesus Christ, the Savior of Mankind,
came into the World for this very end and purpose, that he might be a Redeemer
unto Man, it is said, that a multitude of the Heavenly Host joined together in
praising of God, saying, Glory to God on high, on Earth Peace, and Good Will
toward Man, Luke 2.13. And when any Sinners are turned unto God, there is joy,
says our Lord, among those Blessed Spirits, Luke 15.10. This Heavenly Host of
God, now as the Apostle speaks, rejoice to be ministering Spirits unto the
Saints, Heb. 1.14. They are therefore called Ministering Spirits, sent forth by
God to minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation. Many Offices of Love
and Kindness they do for the People of God now when they are in danger, which
they cannot observe, nor take notice of; for though their Help and Assistance
be always real, as to the effect and operation thereof; yet is it always
invisible as to their knowledge and observation; it being impossible for them
to understand, how often, and after what manner they are employed by God for
their Benefit. The Angels are the continual Guardians and Attendants of the
People of God while they are in this world; hence therefore our Lord bids those
he spoke to, in Matt. 18.10. Take heed that they offended not any of those
little ones that believed in him; for, says he, in heaven their Angels do
always behold the Face of my Father which is in heaven. And that the Angels do
protect and defend the People of God here, is very clear, in Psalm. 34.7. The
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them. And that is a great Scripture, and adds much to the confirmation of the
Happiness of the People of God, both in respect of their Fellowship with the
Saints, and their Communion with the Angels in Heaven, in Heb. 12.22, 23. Ye
are come unto Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable Company of Angels, and to the Spirits of just men made
perfect. While we carry about with us these earthly Tabernacles of our Bodies,
we are scarce capable of Communications with such spiritual heavenly Creatures;
but at Death, the Saints shall know their old Friends and Fellow Servants, and
then those Heavenly and Triumphant Chariots shall carry up their departed Souls
with Shoutings and Acclamations of Joy, into the Presence of God; where they
shall make Relations of the strange and wonderful Providence of God toward
them while they were here, and join together in the high Praises of God for
evermore. In this world the sight of one Angel, though a Messenger of Peace,
and one that brings good Tidings along with him; yet does cause Fear and
Amazement. But in Heaven the Saints shall behold all the Angels of God, and
that not only without Dread and Horror, but with Joy and Delight, as being
their Fellow Creatures, with whom they shall eternally maintain a blessed
Communion and Correspondency. And oh, what happy and delightful Company will
those Glorious Creatures be, in whom there is nothing but what is Amiable and
Lovely; yea, nothing but what is Admirable and Wonderful! And though this
Communion with Angels, be a part of that Happiness which the Saints shall enjoy
in Heaven, and a Truth of great Certainty, yet the Way and Manner of the Saints
converse with them there, is very dark and obscure, and that to which we are
now altogether strangers. Let therefore the Certainty thereof, suppress our
Curiosity, and satisfy our Minds until we come thither; when we shall have a
full Revelation and Enjoyment thereof together, being made not only like unto,
but equal with the Angels.

Thirdly, The Happiness of the Saints in Heaven, lies in this, that there they
shall have a Sight and Enjoyment of Jesus Christ, as their Blessed and Glorious
Redeemet. Now this is a Happiness so great, that a Saint cannot but account
himself recompensed with infinite Gain and Advantage, though he lost his Life
in the attaining of it. Christ (says the Apostle, Col. 3.11.) is all in all. It
was doubtless a blessed and glorious sight to behold the Lord Jesus Christ,
when he was here upon Earth, when in the days of his Flesh, he humbled himself,
and took upon him the form of a Servant; for certainly he was the comiiest
Person for Flesh and Blood that ever was born; in respect whereof, he might
well be said to be fairer than the Children of Men; and therefore the sight of
him daily among the common People with whom he lived, was no small Privilege;
but much greater was the Happiness of his Disciples, who had constant converse
with him, being those he made choice of to make known himself unto, declaring
to them the things relating to himself, and to their Salvation and Happiness
through him; in respect whereof our Lord calls them Blessed, in Mat. 13.16, 17.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear; for verily I
say unto you, many Prophets and Righteous Men have desired to see the things
that you see, and to hear the things that you hear, and have not seen nor heard
them. Yea, even then when his Visage was marred more than any man's, and there
seemed to be no Form nor Comeliness in him; so that as to outward appearance,
there was no reason why any should desire him; yet was he then most lovely and
beautiful. And was the Sight of him so glorious and so desirable when he was on
Earth, and came with Sin upon him, that is imputed to him; O how glorious will
the Sight of him be in Heaven, when he shall appear without Sin?

The Scripture gives us an Account of two great Desires the Blessed Apostle St.
Paul had, upon which his Soul was much set; the one was in reference unto this
World, and the other in reference to the World to come; but the Object of both
was Jesus Christ: That which he desires in this World, was, to know Christ and
him crucified: That which he desires in reference to the world to come, was, to
see Christ glorified. Concerning his knowledge of Christ crucified, we read in
1 Cor. 2.2. I determined, says he, to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. And in comparison of this knowledge of Christ, all other
things were but as Dung and Dross unto him; so himself tells us, in Phil. 3 8.
And concerning his knowledge of Christ glorified, we read in Phil. 1.23. I
desire, says he, to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: And concerning this
knowledge of Christ, which comprehends Enjoyment also, he tells us in the
following Words, that it was best of all. Whatever Sight the People of God have
of Christ in this World, though in it self it be very sweet, and that which is
more desirable than all the Pleasures and Delights that the World can afford;
yet is it but imperfect, and a small thing, compared to that Sight and
Enjoyment of Christ which God intends his People in Heaven; when their Graces
shall be full and perfect, and their Souls fully and completely like unto him
whom they shall behold; not as once he was the Object of the Scorn and Contempt
of the World, not as one beholding to others for a supply of his Wants and
Necessities; not as dying, crucified, and rejected; but Jesus, the lively and
express Image of his Father, and the brightness of his Glory; Jesus, the Lord
of Life, and King of Glory, accompanied with Thousands and Millions of Angels,
all of them at his Command, and yet at the same time not disdaining, ut
graciously smiling upon all the Saints in general, and upon every Saint in
particular, who shall equally behold the blessed Face of him who did suffer so
great and wonderful things to obtain that eternal Life and Happiness for them,
into which they are now instated, and shall be possessors of in his glorious
Presence to all eternity. When holy Job, that Man of Sorrows and Troubles; for
as there was none like him for Patience; so was there none like him for
suffering of Affliction. How heavy was the Hand of God upon him both in Soul
and Body? How did Satan worry and torment him? His Friends and Relations, who
should, as might well be expected, have pitied and compassionated his sad
Condition, censure him for a Hypocrite, in Job 19. from ver. 1. to 22? Now
under all his Sorrows and Sufferings, what was that which supported him? Why,
it was the consideration of a time that was coming, when he should have a
Glorious Sight of his blessed Redeemer the Lord Jesus Christ; and it is
wonderful to read in what Triumphant Expressions he discovered his Faith and
Hope herein, Job 19 from ver. 23. to 27. of that Chapter. O that my words were
now written; Oh that they were printed in a Book; that they were graven with an
Iron Pen and Lead, in the Rock for ever. I know, says he, that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. And though
after my Skin, Worms shall destroy this my Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see
God; whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another
for me, though my Reins be consumed within me. As if he had said, though by
this Affliction that now lies upon me, I should die, as die I must one time or
other; yet I do not, nor will not give up all for lost, I am not an undone man
hereby; for I have Faith and Hope in a Blessed and Glorious Redeemer left me
still; not as in one who may possibly come for my Redemption and Salvation; but
as in one whom I am sure will come: For I know that my Redemer lives, and that
he shall stand upon the Earth; that in my Flesh I shall see God, that mine Eyes
shall see him, and that I shall see him for my self; that is, so see him as to
be made happy in the eternal Enjoyment of him: And this doubtless was that
which this holy Man's Faith had an Eye unto, and was the Support of his Soul
under his present Sufferings.

Now that this Sight of Christ will add much to a Believer's Happiness in
Heaven, is not to be questioned; for the beholding of Christ in Heaven, is
doubtless the most Glorious Object the Saints can look upon, next to the
Beatifical Vision it self; for as the Apostle speaks, Col. 2.19. In him, that
is in Christ, dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. And how can they
but rejoice when they behold him who was wounded for their Transgressions, who
was bruised for their Iniquities; who laid down his Life for their sakes, and
shed his Blood a Ransom for their Souls, and a Propitiation for their Sins? And
that they should not lie eternally under the Wrath of God in Hell, did himself
suffer willingly under the Wrath of God, what was equivalent to an eternity of
Sufferings, for their sakes? Certainly therefore when the Saints in Heaven
shall look upon the blessed Lord Jesus Christ, and be able to say upon certain
evidence, as then they will, that this was he by whose wounds they were healed;
that this was he that once had a Crown of Thorns platted upon his Head, that
they might now wear a Crown of Glory; that this was he that once died for their
sins, but arose again for their Justification and Glorification; that this was
he that with the price of his own Blood, not only bought their Pardon, but
purchased that glorious Inheritance for them, which now they are instated into
the possession of; this must needs put a new Life of Joy into their Souls, and
create a new kind of Happiness in them, which they never were acquainted with,
nor was it possible for them to understand before. Christ is the Desire of all
Nations, the Joy of Angels, the Delight of God himself; he in whom he is always
well pleased. All the Glory and Happiness of Heaven is wrapped up in him. The
Treasures of the Divine Wisdom, Love, and Kindness, which were sometimes hid
and concealed, are now laid open in Heaven to the view of all the Saints. O
with what ravishing Joy and Delight then must those Souls be eternally filled
with that live in the Sight and Possession of him, as theirs for ever! Is not
his Love better than Wine? Will not the lifting up of the light of his
Countenance upon the Soul, administer more cause of Joy and Rejoicing than the
greatest increase of all worldly enjoyments whatsoever? O is not this the
Language of holy Souls, His Love is! Life; yea, his loving kindness is better
than Life O how should thou chide thy self, O Believing Soul, whose Faith
gives thee an Interest in him, that thou art so afraid of his Appearance!
Whence is it that thou art so backward to go unto him? Is the Enjoyment of him
in Glory, who is all Love, all Life, all Joy, all Peace, a frightful thing? How
comes it to pass that thou art so unwilling to die, and be for ever with him
whom thou call thy Savior? Has he laid down his Life, and shed his Blood
to redeem thee, and will he now make an eternal Slave of thee? What, has his
Ascension into Glory changed his Nature, and rendered him less lovely; or the
Happiness of Heaven in the Enjoyment of him, less desirable? No certainly, he
is not less lovely in himself, because of his Exaltation into Glory; but the
more: Nor is the Happiness of Heaven in the Enjoyment of him, less, but the
more desirable, and the more easily to be obtained; for as the Apostle says, If
when we were Enemies we were reconciled by his Death, much more, being
reconciled, shall we be saved by his Life. And because he lives glorified in
Heaven, therefore shall Believers live with him there; and therefore also
should they be the more desirous to be there, because he is there.

Awake therefore, O ye drowsy Saints, rouse your selves up out of your
Security and Slothfulness; for a careless indifferent frame of Spirit does not
become those who are Expectants of so great and glorious a Redeemer, and of so
great a Happiness as is the eternal Enjoyment of him. O what a holy Impatience
and Unquietness of Soul should rather be found in Believers after this Blessed
Redeemer? Is it not he by whom you expect to escape the Wrath and Vengeance of
God? Was not his Body broken and his Blood poured forth to make an Oblation for
your Souls? Was it not he, whose Death and Sufferings have made full
satisfaction to the Justice of God for your Sins? Is it not he, who, to deliver
you from the Curse of the Law, was himself made a Curse for you? Is it not he
by whom alone you escape everlasting Burnings, and hope to obtain an
Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for you? Is there any thing either in this World, or in the World to
come that is comparable to him? Look upon him well, O Believing Souls, both in
respect of what he once was, and in respect of what he now is, and you cannot
but say he is made up of Love.

Henceforth therefore wonder not, O blind and ignorant World, that the People
of God express such passionate, longing Desires after the Enjoyment of this
Blessed Jesus; but rather wonder at your selves, that such Blindness and
Darkness should be found within you, that you should not be able to discern
those Excellencies, and that Loveliness that is in him: Were the Eyes of your
Understanding opened; had you but a Spirit of discerning bestowed upon you, to
see into those glorious Excellencies and Perfections that are in the Lord
Jesus, and the Happiness that is in the Sight and Fruition of him in Heaven,
you would then say, We see now there is the greatest Reason in the World, why
the Saints and People of God have such vehement Desires after him, are so
covetous of being in his Presence, and beholding of his Glory: For, what Soul
that knows him, that has tasted of his Love, and experienced the
Manifestations of his Grace and Favor toward it, but does most earnestly
wish, not only to see him, but to live for ever with him

O my Soul, Whence is it then that thou, that can say thou love him in
Truth and in Sincerity, do yet make it no more thy daily Care and Study to
gain more and farther Knowledge of him, and, a more dear and intimate
Acquaintance with him, that so thou may be brought into a more full and
immediate Enjoyment of him? And O thou infinitely Blessed Lord Jesus, who have
all Loveliness and Amiableness in thee; look down graciously upon thy poor
Creatures, and discover unto them more of those ravishing transcendent Beauties
and Excellencies that are in thee; and let us every day have more and farther
insight into those, never to be fully known, Perfections of Glory and
Loveliness that are in thy self, that thereby we may be enabled, not only to
commend thee a thousand times more feelingly and affectionately unto others,
but may thereby also win upon; yea, command the Affections and Desires of all
that hear of thee, unto thee, that nothing short of the Enjoyment of thy self,
and the Manifestations of thy Love and Favor in Eternal Glory, may satisfy
and content us, or them, but that we may continually be crying out in that
known Language of thy Church, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Fourthly, and Lastly, The Saints Happiness in Heaven, consists in this, That
there they shall have the Vision and Enjoyment of God himself, being always
where he is, seeing his Face, and beholding his Glory.

Now in speaking to this great Happiness of the Saints, the Beatifical Vision
of God, I shall content my self with those things that are most plain, and will
be most benificial.

Now the Sacred Scripture gives us an Account of this Great and Mysterious part
of the Saints Happiness, in many high and lofty expressions; calling it
sometimes a seeing of the Face of God, Rev. 22.4. They shall see his Face.
Sometimes it is set forth by our becoming like unto God, and seeing him as he
is; so, in 1 John 3.2. Now, says the Apostle, we are the Sons of God, but it
does not, no nor can it yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. These are
some of those great and glorious, those deep and mysterious Expressions by
which that unknown Happiness of the Saints in the Vision of God, is set forth
to us in Scripture: What is comprehended in these great and mighty, I had
almost said, almighty Expressions, of seeing God, of beholding him Face to
Face; of being made like unto him, and seeing him as he is; at present we are
much in the dark about, being beyond the reach of our finite Understandings.
Certain it is that there is something of an extraordinary Happiness intended
unto the People of God thereby; but how full, how glorious an Happiness it is,
and in what way and manner it shall be communicated to them, are things that
pose our Reason, and nonplus our Understanding to search into the bottom of. O
this great Word, GOD, as it signifies the Divine Essence and Being, and as it
holds forth a Happiness that shall be communicated unto the People of God,
according to the meaning of those Expressions beforementioned, of seeing of
God, of beholding him Face to Face, of being made like unto him, and seeing him
as he is; of which, our Ignorance at present, is greater than our Knowledge: I
say, this great Word, GOD, has more in it than all other Words can express to
us; yea, there is more in it than all the Understandings of Men or Angels can
unfold to us: A Happiness there is contained in it, that is so great as can
only be known and understood by the Enjoyment of it; yea, it is a Happiness so
great as shall never be fully understood; no, not by those that enjoy it; for
from this Blessed Vision of God, which Glorified Souls always behold, there
shall continually arise such fresh Discoveries of new and glorious Excellencies
in the Divine Being, as shall ravish the Saints with new Joys and Pleasures to
all Eternity.

In speaking to this Vision of the Saints, I shall endeavor to explain these
Two Things:

First, What kind of Sight or Vision of God the Saints shall have in Heaven.

Secondly, Wherein it does appear that this Sight and Vision of God will be so
great a Happiness to the Saints in Heaven.

First, What kind of Sight or Vision of God the Saints shall have in Heaven.

Now to this I Answer,

First, The Saints Vision of God in Heaven, will be immediate and clear. What
Representations the Saints have of God in this Life, comes to them by the
interposition of some Means by which God is pleased to make himself known,
which is a dark and imperfect way of Revelation, (though suitable to our
present State,) compared with what the Saints shall have in Heaven. In this
Life the People of God see him, as the Spouse saw her Beloved through the
Lattice, Cant. 2.9. Or as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 13.12. Through a Glass,
that is, darkly; and indeed it can be no otherwise, because it is through a
Glass. Now the Word of God is a Glass, in which great Discoveries are made of
God. The Works of God also are another Glass held before our Faces continually,
in which we may see more of his Excellencies and Perfections displayed: But
neither in the Word of God, nor in the Works of God, is God so clearly
discovered to us, as he shall be to the Saints in Heaven. While we are in this
World. God makes use of the Ministry of Men like our selves, to instruct us in
the knowledge of himself; and though they may do something toward the
enlightening of our Minds, and the building up of our Souls in the Knowledge and
Love of God, when assisted by the Spirit of God; yet is it but little that they
themselves know of God; and therefore is it but little that they can
communicate unto others: So says the Apostle, and he puts himself into the
number, 1 Cor. 12.9. We know but in part; and therefore We prophecy but in
part: As if the Apostle had said, There are great and glorious things to be
known hereafter when we come to Heaven; but at present our shallow
Understandings cannot reach them. All that we can do in our present state, is
to receive and take in a little knowledge of them, to know in part: And
according to that Knowledge which we have, such is the Knowledge we communicate
unto others; we know but in part, and therefore we prophecy but in part. This
now is the present state of a Christian, and the highest he can attain to in
this World, to know something of God, to have some Sight of the Divine
Excellencies and Perfections; but it is but mediately, and but in part; not
immediately, and clearly, as the Saints shall do in Heaven. This is indeed
according to their present Capacity, and according to their present Necessity;
but not according to what shall be. It is according to their present Capacity;
that is, according to what they can bear; for should God make immediate
Discoveries of himself unto us, this would sink and overwhelm our Beings, and
we should not be able to bear up under them. It is also suitable to the Saints
Necessities; for when a Soul is begotten again by the Word of Truth, unto a
lively hope of Glory and Immortality, the building up of that Soul in Grace and
Holiness, that it may be sit for the Vision and Enjoyment of God, is to be
carried on gradually in the Use of Means and Ordinances instituted and
appointed by God for that End and Purpose. But as it is in a Building, when
that which is designed thereby, is accomplished and perfected, the Scaffolding,
and other Instruments that are made use of for the erecting thereof, are all
taken down, and removed out of the way: So is it here, while Believers are in
the way to Heaven, that is, in a state of Preparation for the Enjoyment of God,
Means and Ordinances are necessary; but when they are come to Heaven, these
things are at an end: Prophesying and Teaching shall there cease, as the
Apostle speaks; there being no use of them in Heaven, because Believers are
there come to their perfect State, and God will there communicate himself to
them immediately and clearly. In Heaven God unvails himself to the Saints,
displays himself to them in his Glory, according to their ability to receive
and bear it; and that which adds much to their Happiness, in this blessed
Vision of God, is this, That there the Understandings of the Saints shall be
enlarged, and strengthened, that they may be able to take in according to what
a finite Capacity can bear of the Fruition of an infinite God; in which Vision
and Enjoyment of God, they shall be spending an Eternity, with everlasting Joy
and Delight.

Secondly, The Saints Vision of God in Heaven, will be transforming; not barely
speculative, or notional, but influential and operative upon the Mind and Soul.
By seeing God, we shall become like him. It is not so with us here; if a
deformed Man look upon the most beautiful Persons, or Objects in the World, yet
is there no transforming Power coming from them, to work any alteration in the
Complexion of the Beholder, rendering him the more beautiful by the sight of
those Persons, or Objects. He may carry away an Idea of the Beauty and
Comeliness of those Persons, or Objects that he has beheld, in his Mind, which
may delight his Fancy in the thoughts of them; but there is no Alteration made
in him, but the same Deformities and Blemishes remain still, notwithstanding:
But it is otherwise in Heaven; the Sight of the Glorious and Holy God, makes
the Saints that behold him, to become like unto him in Holiness and Glory; for
so are the Words of the Beloved Apostle, who lay in the Bosom of Christ, 1 John
3.2. We shall be like unto him, that is, unto God; and the Ground or Reason of
it follows in the next Words; for we shall see him as he is. It is true, the
People of God are like unto him while they are in this World; but their
Likeness to God here, and their Likeness to him in Heaven, greatly differ. The
Likeness that the People of God have unto God in this Life, is both an
imperfect Likeness, and a growing Likeness; neither of which are the People of
God capable of in Heaven.

First, The Likeness they have to God here, is an imperfect Likeness. In some
things they are like unto God, and in other things they are not. Wherein they
are like unto God, they are comely; but wherein they are like unto the World,
they are deformed, and therefore uncomely. It was the Complaint of the Church,
whom Christ called his Love, and his Fair One, that she was comely; but yet she
was black also, Cant. 1.5. I am black, but comely. She was comely with Grace,
and there was her Likeness unto Christ; and that made her so lovely: But yet
she was black with Sin; and there was her Imperfection and Deformity. And hence
it is that we read, Cant. 6.10. That the Church is said to look forth as the
Morning, fair as the Moon; now the Moon, though she be one of the great
Luminaries of Heaven, yet has she her Spots; and the Morning-Light is but
small and imperfect unto a Noon-Day-Brightness; and therefore it increases
more and more unto the perfect Day. Thus it is with the best of God's People
here. Grace gives them a Likeness unto God; but with the Moon, they have their
Spots; Sin and Corruption still remaining in them, while they are in this
World. But now the Saints Likeness to God in Heaven, by the Vision they have of
him there, it is such a Likeness as excludes all Sin, and all Imperfection.
They are so like unto God, that they are nothing but what he is; not as to his
Being and Essence, for that is incommunicable; but in Grace and Holiness; and
so according to their Capacities, they partake of the Divine Nature it self.
And Oh what a blessed State will this be, when we shall have nothing in us, but
what we partake of from God, and wherein we shall be in every thing like unto
him!

Secondly, That Likeness the People of God have unto God here, is a growing
Likeness. That Grace and Holiness Believers have in this Life, wherein consists
their Likeness unto God, it is always growing and increasing in them. Hence the
Apostle tells us, That the state of Christians here, is like unto newborn
Babes, who are always desirous of the breast, for their Nourishment and Growth,
1 Pet. 2.2. As Newborn Babes that desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we
may grow thereby. No Saint or Servant of God ever attained to that degree of
Grace and Holiness here, but still there was something lacking in his Faith,
something defective in his Love, something wanting in his Patience, something
that might be added to his Heavenly-mindedness, to his Meekness, to his
Humility, and to all his other Graces. Hence therefore it is, that the People
of God are so often commanded to add to their spiritual stature, to increase
with the Increases of God, to grow in Grace, and in the saving knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And to explain this Truth no farther, that of
the Apostle is full to this purpose, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open Face
beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from Glory unto Glory. That is, from one degree and measure of Grace and
Holiness unto another. Believers are now like unto God, but this Likeness is
Imperfect; and therefore while they are here, they are still growing into a
greater Conformity unto him: But now in Heaven, Grace in the Saints is in its
Perfection. Heaven is a Place where the Spirits of just Men are made perfect.
Holiness is the Advancement, the Elevation of the Soul, a higher pitch of Glory
and Excellency it is not capable of; for Holiness is the Glory of God himself;
and therefore though God is said to be Infinite in regard of his Wisdom;
Almighty, in regard of his Power; yet is he only said to be Glorious, in regard
of his Holiness: So we read Exodus 15.11. Who is a God like unto thee, glorious
in Holiness? Now in Heaven, the Saints Holiness shall be in the highest degree,
in the greatest eminency and perfection; and because herein they shall be like
unto God, they also shall be glorious in Holiness; for they shall then have as
much of Grace and Holiness as they can desire, or as God would have them to
have; for when that which is perfect is come that which is imperfect shall be
done away. And O what a blessed state will that be, when the Saints shall have
nothing in them that is weak and imperfect, nor nothing that is wanting or
defective, but shall be for ever like unto God himself, perfect in Grace and
Holiness.

Thirdly, The Saints Sight and Vision of God in Heaven, will be happy and
joyful. A Believer is the only happy Person in all the World; his Life is a
Life of continual Joy: either he does, or he may always rejoice. He has always
the Presence of God with him; he has always the Love of God toward him; he
has always the Hopes, shall I say; nay, he has the Assurance of Heaven and
Glory in the Promise, continually set before him. And who may rejoice, if he
may not? He has the Great, the Almighty God for his Shield and Protection
here, and to be his exceeding great reward hereafter. And shall not such a one
rejoice? Is not here cause of Joy? O how happy is the Person that is in such a
case as this! Such are commanded to rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5.17. Nay, in the
most afflicted state and condition, such have cause of Rejoicing. I am, says
the Apostle, exceeding joyful in all our Tribulations. And says our Blessed
Lord, Matthew. 5.11, 12. Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and speak all manner of evil against you falsely for my Name sake: Rejoice,
and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in Heaven. Thus, whatever
condition the People of God are in, yet still they ought always to joy and
rejoice in God; and the Reason is this, because they have the special Presence
of God with them; and where that is, there are frequent, though secret
discoveries of God's Love unto them. How often does God lift up the light of
his Countenance upon such, whilst they are attending upon him in holy Duties,
secretly whispering to their Souls, that they are accepted in the Beloved;
vouchsafing to them some Discoveries of the invisible and unseen, but yet real,
Glory and Happiness of Heaven, and of their Interest in it; whereby their Souls
are even ravished with an excess of strange and unusual Joy and Delight, beyond
what they are able to express: And yet all this is, whilst, as the Apostle
speaks, Believers walk by Faith, and not by Sight. Now if this little Sight,
and these small Enjoyments that the Saints have of God here, which, in
comparison of what they shall see and enjoy of God hereafter, may be said to be
no Sight; for so the Apostle calls it, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom as yet having not seen;
if this Sight of God, which as it follows in the next Words, is only our
Believing in God; if this fills the Soul of a Believer with so great Joy and
Delight, what then shall the Beatifical Vision of God in Heaven do? If Faith
and Hope do so ravish the Souls of Believers with Joy and Delight, even then
whilst we are absent from the Lord; for as the Apostle speaks, Whilst we are at
home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord. If yet the Joy of Faith and Hope
be so great, O what then shall the Joy of Vision be, when Believers shall not
only be absent from the Body, and present with the Lord, but shall be ever
present with the Lord both in Soul and Body, seeing him face to face, and
enjoying him as he is? Surely this Joy must needs be unspeakably great and
glorious; indeed this Sight of God is that which will not only amaze the Eye
with wonder, but ravish the Heart with eternal Ecstasies of Joy and Delight.

Fourthly, The Saints Sight and Vision of God in Heaven, shall be permanent and
perpetual. In this Life the People of God have not always the Presence of God
with them, nor the Manifestations of his Love and Favor toward them; but are
often in the dark; for either they sin away God's Presence from them, which is
most frequent; or else God for wise and holy Ends, sees good to withdraw
himself from them for a time; and when either of these happen, it is a sad time
with such Souls; especially, if Sin has been the Cause of it: Such therefore
walk very dejectedly; and the Truth is, their Case is very sad; but yet it is
that which many of the People of God have experienced. See how the Church
complains, Esa. 49.14. But Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, my God has
forgotten me. So the Spouse, Cant. 5.6. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved
had withdrawn himself, my Soul failed when he spoke; I sought him but I could
not find him, I called him, but he gave me no Answer. And as it has been thus
with the People of God formerly, so sad Experience tells us, it is so with many
of them still: Sometimes they enjoy something of God, his Presence, and the
Manifestations of his Love toward them, in a Duty; and O how sweet and
delightful is it to their Souls, when they thus meet with God! It is Heaven
upon Earth; but these things do not last; for when Duties are ended, the People
of God grow careless and remiss, yield to Temptations, give way to Sin, become
vain and worldly, and so lose the Presence of God, by reason whereof, they walk
in Darkness, have no Manifestations of his Love and Favor toward them;
insomuch that their Souls are even ready to faint and sink within them, under a
despair of Mercy. This now is the Case of many a Child of God in this World;
sometimes he has the benign Instuences of the Divine Favor darted into his
Soul, which makes him greatly to rejoice; but what God thus graciously gives,
he does not wisely and holily retain. These joyful Seasons abide not always
with the People of God; but they soon lose them; the Light of God's Countenance
is eclipsed, and his Face hid from them, by reason of their Foolishness. But it
is not thus in Heaven; no Sin comes there to intercept between the Face of God,
and those holy Souls for ever. There is no complaining of any Saint in Heaven,
that God has forsaken him, or hides his Face from him: But it shall ever be
with those holy Ones, as our Lord tells us it is now with their Angels, Matthew.
18.10. They shall always behold the Face of God in Glory. This blessed Object
of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, shall never be withdrawn from them to
eternity; nor shall their Sight ever be wearied with beholding of it; nay,
without this constant Vision and enjoyment of God, Heaven would not be a
Happiness great enough to fill and satisfy the Desires of the Saints. Their
Souls are so raised, so capacious, that they cannot be content with any thing,
even in Heaven it self, unless they enjoy God there. Should God bestow upon
them the Glory of all the Creatures either in Heaven or in Earth; should he
confer upon them the Glory of all the Kings and Emperors in the World; yea,
should he add to that the Glory of the Sun, Moon, and Stars; nay, should he add
to them, the Glory of all the Angels and Cherubims in Heaven, yet still they
would say, they had not enough to make them happy; for all these are not God.
When therefore God has given Heaven to the Saints, he must there give them the
Vision and Enjoyment of himself, or else they will not account themselves
happy. Nay, I will go a little farther still; it is not the Vision and
Enjoyment of God in Heaven for a little time; suppose it were for a few Days or
Years; nay, were it for many Thousands of them, this would not give their Souls
full Satisfaction and Contentment, unless they could eternally enjoy God: This
only, can make them completely happy; and now, and never till now, do they say
they have enough. And O how sweet is this Word Ever, unto the Saints in Heaven,
in the sense I am speaking of! Ever to be with the Lord; ever to have him smile
upon the Soul; ever to behold his Face; ever to have his Presence with it; and
ever to be under the Manifestations of his Love and Favor: Here, here is
Heaven and Happiness indeed, thus to see, and enjoy God for ever.

And so much for the First Thing; What kind of Sight or Vision of God the
Saints shall have in Heaven.

Secondly, Wherein does it appear that this Vision of God will be so great a
Happiness to the Saints in Heaven?

To this I answer in general; There is in God every thing that can make a Man
perfectly blessed and happy. It is beyond all disputation, that the Happiness
of Man must be that which is good; for that which is evil in it self, is not,
nor cannot be desired as such, by any rational Creature; much less proposed by
him as his ultimate End: No, the Object of Man's Happiness, must be something
that is Good; nor yet is it any Good that will make a Man completely happy
neither; but it must be a Good in which all Good is contained; now such a Good
is God; and only he is such a Good: and therefore, to be a little more
particular in the Answering of this Question, consider,

First, God is an universal Good, a Good in whom all Good is contained. It is
impossible there should be any desirable Perfection but what is in him. All the
Croatures here below, are the several effects of the Divine Bounty and
Goodness; and though they are good in themselves, yet have they their several
particular limited Goodness. Health has its particular goodness in it; and
Wealth its particular goodness; and Learning its good; and so I may say of all
other things whatsoever; they are all stinted to their particular ways of
Beneficialness unto Man: To instance a little; The Air refreshes us, but it
does not feed us; our Food nourishes us, but it does not cloth us; our
Clothes warm us, but they do not quench our Thirst; Water cools and cleanses
us, but it is not a Habitation for us to dwell in; our Houses preserve us from
the Injuries of the weather, but they cannot secure to us our Health. And all
these put together, cannot defend us against Losses in the World; much less can
they keep away Death from us, which will be the destruction of them all. Nay
all these things, and whatever else there is, or can be imagined of goodness in
all other things put together, and enjoyed at once, in the fullness of them; yet
have they not All Good in them; no, so far are they from having all Good in
them, that they are no way beneficial to us farther than they have the Blessing
of God going along with them; for it is he that is all in all unto us in and by
the Creatures. It is he that feeds us more than our Food. He warms us more than
our Clothes. He is more a Habitation to us than our Houses. He is more our
Health and Strength than Physic and Means are. Yea, he is more our Life than
our very Souls are. The Light of his Countenance, the Smile of his Face, is
more our Joy and Consolation than all the Enjoyments of this World can be. Now
God, that is all these things to us in the use of them, he is a thousand times
more than all these things in himself: And if there be any of these things
aforementioned, that are desirable, certainly then that God that makes them
desirable, is infinitely more desirable himself. It is God's Prerogative alone,
that he is eminently good, and altogether good, and every thing that is good is
in him. And surely if God be so good to his People in the Enjoyments he
vouchsafes to them here, when they have but some small Tastes of his Bounty and
Goodness; O how good will he be to them immediately by himself in Heaven! And
this is that enjoyment of God which manifests it to be so great a Happiness to
the Saints in Heaven, that there God will be all in all unto them.

Secondly, God is a pure unmixed Good. He is so good that there is nothing that
is evil or hurtful in him. All Earthly good things are defective and imperfect;
there is something of Sweetness in them; but withal there is something of
Bitterness also; if there be a drop of Honey, there is a drop of Gall mingled
with it; no Rose is without its Prickles, nor is there any Condition without
its Troubles; no Enjoyments God bestows upon his People, that have every thing
that is good, and nothing but what is good in them; no, there is still a
mixture of some evil with them. And this is the Reason why a Believer cannot
find Happiness in any thing on this side Heaven, and the enjoyment of God
there. God indeed is such a Good in whom there is no Evil. He is Light, says
the Apostle, and in him there is no Darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. Light here
below, is very pleasant and delightful; but yet when it shines in its greatest
Luster, it is scarce enough to be a Shadow of the Light above in which God
dwells; yea, which God is, and unto which no man can approach; as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Timothy 6.16. While we are in this World, our State without us, will be
like our State within us: Now in us, even in the best of us, there is Sin, as
well as Grace, Flesh as well as Spirit. Now because all is not well within us,
therefore all is not well without us. A Mixture of Sin and Grace causes a
mixture of Joy and Sorrow in every condition here below: But it shall not be
thus with the Saints in Heaven; for God, who is the Object of their Happiness,
is a Good, in whom, as there is all good, so there is nothing in him but what
is good. Now that which is not only good, but contains in it all good, and has
nothing in it but what is good, that must needs be an Object that must always
be desired, and always be delighted in. Such an Object now is God; and hence
therefore it is that after he has been Millions of Years enjoyed by the Saints
in Heaven, yet still is he as much desired as at the first moment of their
entrance into Heaven: And hence therefore also it is, that that Life which the
Saints shall always be spending in Heaven, but shall never be spent unto
Eternity, shall be a Life of Joy and Praise. And this is it that makes it
appear that the Saints Vision and Enjoyment of God in Heaven, will be so great
a Happiness unto them.

Thirdly, God is a suitable Good; and therefore the enjoyment of him in Heaven
must needs be a great Happiness to the Saints. The things of this World, when
enjoyed in the greatest abundance, cannot make up a Happiness suitable to the
Desires of a godly Man. Worldly Enjoyments have some Suitableness in them unto
the vilest part of a Saint, his Body: But as to his better Part, his Soul,
which is that by which he is denominated to be a Man; so these Worldly Things
have no Suitableness at all in them unto him, no not while he is here below.
What has a Spiritual Soul to do with Earthly Objects? What Communion has
Light with Darkness? The like may I say here: What Communion between a
Spiritual Soul, and all Earthly Objects? Earthly Things are of too gross a
Nature and Quality to agree with the refined Nature of the Soul; yea, it is a
great Affront and Abuse that we put upon our Spiritual, Heaven-born Souls, when
we give them nothing to feed upon, or to delight in, but what the Dregs of
Earthly Enjoyments will afford them: Alas, the Soul is of so pure and refined a
Constitution, that it cannot live in, much less be delighted with the foggy,
thick, Air of Earthly and Sensual Enjoyments. It is a debasing the noble and
highborn Soul of Man, to attempt to match it with the low and base things of
this World. Spiritual Beings and Existences must have spiritual Objects to be
pleased and delighted with; for they can take no Delight in other things,
because they are unsuitable to them. But now, when Souls are joined unto God,
spiritual things are joined unto that which is spiritual; the spiritual Soul
unto God who is a Spirit, and the God of Spirits: And therefore from the Soul's
enjoying of God, and having eternal Communion with him, who is the Father of
Spirits, those Joys and Delights that hereby will everlastingly fill the Soul,
must needs be inexpressibly great and glorious: And the Reason is this, because
here is a suitableness between the Soul and the Object to which it is united;
and Suitableness always produces Love, and where there is Love, there will be
Joy and Delight: And always the more of Suitableness there is between one
Person and another, or between a Person and an Object, still the more of Love;
and the more of Love, the more of Joy and Delight. Thus now it is between God
and the Soul; no Object so suitable unto the Soul as God; no Object so loved
and desired by the Soul as God; and consequently, no greater Joy and Delight
can befall the Soul, than in the eternal Enjoyment of God. And this shall be the
Happiness of the Saints in Heaven for ever.

Fourthly, God is an All-sufficient Good; and therefore the Enjoyment of him
must needs be a great Happiness to the Saints in Heaven. Were it possible for a
Man to live in this World free from all Pain and Suffering, in the Enjoyment of
all outward Abundance, even to the utmost of what there is in all the
Creatures, to make a Man happy; yet if all that Good that he enjoys, be not
enough, if it does not answer all his Wants, and fill all his Desires to the
full, so that he can crave nothing more; this Man notwithstanding all his
Enjoyments, has not attained unto Happiness. It is true, he is in a happier
condition than most men are, in regard whereof, possibly he is become the Envy
of his Neighbors; but yet is he not completely happy; because there is an
Insufficiency in all things here below, to make a Man happy.

The Philosopher tells us, that Happiness is a State wherein there is an
aggregation, or meeting together of all good things whatsoever: So that
according to this Definition of Happiness, if a Man could be supposed to enjoy
all good things, and yet want but one, that Man could not be a happy Man. But
God is an All-sufficient Good, and in the Enjoyment of him, we enjoy all that
is good. He is Self-sufficient for himself, and All-sufficient to his
Creatures. This Title he gives himself, Genesis 17.1. I am, says he to Abraham,
God all-sufficient. There is in him a Sufficiency of all that is desirable, an
immense Fullness, an Ocean of Goodness; all that Good that is in all other
things whatsoever, is in him, with the addition of an incomprehensible
Overplus. Whatever Good any have found in Relations, Friends, Health, in
Learning, Wisdom, Wealth, and Honors; all this, and much more is to be found
in the enjoyment of one God. The whole World, and God put together, are not at
all more excellent than God alone; for whatever Excellency there is in the
Creature, it is more eminently and transcendently in God already; all Additions
to him therefore signify nothing! Nay, let me add, all the Creatures in the
World, if they stand by themselves, are but so many Ciphers, that signify
nothing, unless the great God, as a Solid Number, be added to them. Set God
aside, and in the whole Creation there is not an All Sufficiency to be found
for one Soul: But that Soul that enjoys God, has an All Sufficiency; such an
one may say with the Apostle, I have all, I abound, I am full; and with Holy
David, The Lord is my Portion, I shall not want. For having him who is all, to
be ours, we have All. And this now is the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven,
that there God shall be all in all unto them.

Fifthly, God is a satisfying Good, and therefore the Enjoyment of him, must
needs be a great Happiness to the Saints in Heaven. Pleasure and Delight is of
the Essence of Happiness, and flows from that satisfaction that our Desires
receive in the enjoyment of a Good we possess. And whatever it be that we
enjoy, if it be not enough to fill and satisfy our Appetites from craving
more, we are still short of Happiness, let our Enjoyments be what they will.
Such a Good now is God; a Good beyond whom there is nothing imaginable to be
conceived; and therefore it is impossible there should or can be any thing
desired: But nothing else is so; if we leave God out, whatever we take in, the
Heart will still be capable of desiring more. All the World, and all the
Creatures that it is stocked withal, should they conspire, and meet together,
to make up a Happiness for one Soul, they could not do it. God has not given a
Commission to any thing here below; no, nor to all of them put together, to
give us Contentment and Satisfaction; he has commidionated the things of the
World to feed us, to cloth us, to strengthen us, and to refresh us in the
House of our Pilgrimage; but it is only himself that can give us Contentment
and Satisfaction. Worldly Things are so far from giving us Contentment, that
there is this Curse of God upon them all, that whoever sets his Heart and
Affections inordinately upon them, shall never be satisfied with them; for as
the Wise Man says, Eccles. 5.10. He that loves Silver, shall not be satisfied
with Silver; nor he that loves Abundance, with Increase. Now the true Reason
why nothing here below can give Satisfaction and Contentment unto the Soul, is,
because none of these Things are so good as the Soul; nor none of them are so
great as to be able to fill up the vast capacity of the Soul: The Soul of Man
is like unto a bottomless Gulf; throw in what you will of worldly things; nay,
throw in the whole World it self, yet is there a Vacuity and Hollowness, that
cannot be filled up thereby. Moreover, the Soul of man is of a Noble and
Excellent Being, and next to Angels, the Top and Flower of the Creation, and
all Things here below are inferior to it; nay, they are Dregs and Lees
compared to it. Now that which is our Happiness, must not be something below,
but something better than our selves, because it must perfect us; but all
Things in the World are worse than our selves; and the Soul, in cleaving to
them, is secretly conscious to it self, that it does both debase and disparage
is own Excellency in adhering to them; and therefore it meets with no
Satisfaction in them: For so long as all Things here below are both less than
the Soul, and worse than the Soul, it is impossible the Soul should receive
Satisfaction and Contentment in them. But now God is infinitely great, and
therefore he can fill the Soul; and God is also infinitely good, and therefore
he can satisfy the Soul, so that it shall not desire any thing above him, or
besides him. As nothing can be the Perfection, so nothing can be the
Satisfaction of the Soul, but he that made it. The Soul is never at rest till
it return unto God, who is its Rest and Center; therefore says David, Psalm.
116.7. Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul; for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee. When God deals so bountifully and graciously with the Soul, as to
bestow himself upon it, then the Soul has Rest and Satisfaction indeed, and
never till then. The Enjoyment of God is that ultimate End, and perfect Good
that is only able to fix the Spirit of Man; which, otherwise not meeting with
its Match, is tossed to and from laboring under perpetual Disquietments, and
restless Fluctuations. God is that Almighty Goodness, and Sweetness, who alone
is able to draw out all the Appetites of the Soul unto himself, satisfy all
its Cravings, charm all its restless Motions, and cause all its Faculties, in
the purest and most complacential manner to conspire together how to give up
themselves wholly and entirely to himself. The Enjoyment of no Good, short of
the highest and the chiefest Good, can satisfy the Soul of Man; now this Good
is only God himself, and the Enjoyment of him in Heaven, is that which only
gives full contentment to the Soul in all its Capacities and Desires. The
Happiness of the Saints in Heaven shall be the same which God himself enjoys:
Now the infinite Blessedness of God consists in the Fruition and Enjoyment of
himself; for himself is his own Happiness: Now this also is to be the Happiness
of the Saints in Heaven, even an intimate and immediate Enjoyment of God; and
surely this must needs be infinitely satisfactory to them. Enlarge therefore, O
holy Soul; make room for thine own Glory and Happiness, spread forth thy self
wide; yea, stretch out thy Desires as large as Heaven it self; for the God of
Heaven will fill and satisfy them.

Sixthly and Lastly, God is a permanent and everlasting Good; and therefore the
enjoyment of him must needs be a great, yea the greatest Happiness of the
Saints in Heaven.

Were God an universal Good, as he is; and did the Saints, in the enjoying of
him, enjoy all Good in Him; Were God, as he is, a pure and unmixed Good, and in
the Enjoyment of him, were there no mixture of any thing that is Evil, as there
is not; Were God the most suitable Good unto all our desires, as he is; Were he
also an All-sufficient Good, able to relieve and supply all our Wants and
Necessities, as he is; Were God also a satifying Good, that could give full
Contentment to the Soul, as he can: Yet if he were not a permanent and an
abiding Good, the Soul could not be Happy in the Enjoyment of him; for the
Thoughts of losing so great a Good, though it were after Millions of Years
Enjoyment thereof, is that which would fill the Soul with Bitterness and
Sorrow, while it does enjoy it. O how would the Soul sigh and say; It is true
in the Enjoyment of God, I now partake of a great Happiness, yea, the greatest
that I can possibly enjoy: But alas, there is a Time a coming when I must part
with this my Happiness. O my Soul thou shall not be always thus Happy; thy
Blessedness is every moment wearing away; thy Happiness grows less and less
daily, because the Time of enjoying it grows shorter and shorter. And must not,
yea can it be otherwise, but that the Thoughts of losing so great a Happiness
shortly, must abate much of the Comfort and Delight that otherwise the Soul
would take in it.

But now on the other side, when a Godly Man considers with himself, It is true
the Enjoyments of this World, whereof I have a large share, and wherewith I
have been often refreshed and delighted, are of a perishing Nature, and but of
a short continuance; if not long before, (as is the Case of many,) yet to be
sure at Death they and I must take our eternal leaves one of another: But this
is my Comfort, I have an Interest in that God, between whom and me Death shall
never part; nay, between whom and me Death shall be so far from making a
Separation, that it shall bring us the sooner and nearer together; in whom I
shall enjoy every thing that is good; not only universally, unmixedly,
suitably, sufficiently, and satisfactorily; but perpetually and everlastingly;
and never shall I be separated from the Enjoyment of him, nor from the
Enjoyment of all that is Good in him; for in his Presence is Fullness of Joy,
and at his right Hand are Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16. ult. These Things
now put together, make it very evident, that the Saints seeing and enjoying of
God in Heaven, is a great Happiness.

CHAP. III.
Further Discoveries of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, manifested in their
being freed, (1.) From all Afflictions. (2.) From all Temptations, both from
Satan and the World. (3.) In a perfect Freedom from all Sin. (4.) In the
Perfection of Grace and Holiness. (5.) In partaking of Fullness of joy; which is
pure, spiritual, full, and everlasting. (6.) In excellent Glory and Honor,
that shall then be put upon them.

THough much has been already said concerning Heaven and the Happiness of the
Saints there, yet is there much more of that Happiness still to be explained;
in the Reading and contemplating whereof, holy Souls cannot but be much
delighted: As,

First, In Heaven the Godly shall enjoy a perfect freedom from all that is
troublesome and afflictive. In this Life the People of God are always subject
to Afflictions; they are their Lot and Portion, while they are here. The Legacy
our blessed Lord has bequeathed to all his Followers to the end of the World,
in Luke 14.27. He that takes not up his Cross, and follows me, cannot be my
Disciple. John 16, 33. In the World you shall have Tribulation. What is said of
Man in general, that he is born unto Troubles, as the Sparks fly upward, being
but of few days continuance here, and those full of Trouble; is much more true
of the Godly in particular. Afflictions are the daily Diet-drink of a
Christian, the Pathway in which he walks to Heaven, Acts 14.22. Through many
Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God. 2 Timothy 3.12. All that will
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer Persecution. They who are not of the
world, but chosen by God out of the world, are sure to meet with the World's
Hatred; so our Lord tells us, John 15.19 John 17.14. A Saint's Peaceable and
quiet State is yet to come. In this Life they receive all their evil things
from God, from Men, and from Devils; and when they arrive at Heaven, their
afflicted, persecuted State is over; and instead thereof, they shall for ever
be partakers of Peace and Joy. O all ye Saints and People of God, that now can
set upon no Work or Service for God, but you meet with Opposition; yea, and if
you will go through with it, are sure, not only to lose the Love of the World,
and to part with many of your outward Comforts and Enjoyments in so doing, but
also to meet with many Enemies that will afflict and persecute you in the
discharge of your Duty; yet be not affrighted at it, but persevere therein; and
for your Encouragement, know, that while you do so, you are secure of the Love
and Favor of God to you; and the Time is almost come, when you shall see an
End of all your Persecutors; yea, and of their Persecutions also. How quickly
will Death come in to your Relief, and put you out of the reach of all their
Malice to harm you for ever: For in Heaven you shall never meet with any
company that shall discourage your Hearts, or weaken your Hands, but such only
as will gladly further you in your holy Work, by joining Hearts and Voices with
you in everlasting Joys and Praises. And until that Time does come, let Faith
and Hope support and bear you up, that you may always in Patience possess your
Souls: And whatever Reproaches you meet with for well doing, bind them as so
many Crowns upon your Heads; value them, with Moses, as greater Riches to you
than all the Treasures of the world; yea, as the blessed Apostle says, in Jam.
1.2. Let it be all joy unto you, when you fall into diverse Temptations;
remembering God can deliver you from them; however, he will quickly deliver you
out of them, recompensing Tribulation to them that trouble you; but unto you
who are troubled, Rest and Peace for ever.

In this Life also the People of God suffer many Losses, meet with many
Disappointments: But in Heaven there are no such things. All Treasures laid up
on Earth are subject to the Moth, to the Rust, and to the Thief. Inward
Corruption, or outward Violences do often deprive us of them; or if we lose
them not so, Death to be sure will put an end to our Enjoyment of them: But it
is not so in Heaven; Treasure laid up there is safe and secure; there is no Moth
nor Rust to corrupt it, nor no Thieves to rob and spoil us of it. A Saint's
Happiness in Heaven cannot be lost, nor shall a Godly Man ever meet with any
Disappointments there, unless it be by finding a Happiness far greater than
ever he imagined. All in Heaven is like unto the God of Heaven, permanent and
abiding. It shall not be with a Saint there, as it is with him here: Now his
Condition is subject to Change and Alteration; sometimes he is high, and
sometimes low; sometimes rich, and sometimes poor; sometimes in peace and
liberty, and sometimes under restraint and imprisonment: But the Happiness of
Heaven is always one and the same, subject to no Changes or Vicissitudes. And
as for the loss of Friends and Relations, a great Affliction unto many in this
World, it shall not be so with us in Heaven; for whoever of them we meet with
there, they and we shall never be parted. Saints in Heaven have not only the
best Company; but they have that Society with the greatest Advantage, being
such as shall never be broken, but continue everlastingly. Here the People of
God greatly love and delight in the Society of one another as they are Saints;
but because they are also Sinners, Death will make a separation between them:
But when once Sin is extirpated out of them, as it shall be in Heaven; then as
they shall be the best Company, so they shall be a perpetual Society. Here the
Fear of losing our Friends and Relations is a great Disquietment to us while we
enjoy them; but in Heaven all such Fears are abolished. Let but Husband and
Wife, let but Parents and Children, let but Friends and Relations make Heaven
sure to their own Souls; let them but clear up to themselves their Title unto
that Happiness that is to be enjoyed in Heaven through the great and blessed
Redeemer; and then though Death will part them one from another for a Time, yet
it shall certainly bring them together again in Heaven; and though some of them
are more Happy than others, because by dying before them, they get to Heaven
sooner than they, yet shall they all come thither in their appointed Time, and
then shall they be freed from all Fears of ever being parted asunder any more:
And instead thereof they shall know themselves to be confirmed in the Happy and
Everlasting Enjoyment of one another in Glory.

In this Life also the People of God are often afflicted with many Weaknesses
and Distempers of Body, in respect whereof their Lives may be called a Dying
Life: Oh! what wearisome Days, what tiresome Nights do they sigh and groan away
by Reason hereof? Oh! what mournful Complaints are there made by them upon this
Account; some daily crying out, Oh, my Head! Oh, my Stomach! others, Oh, my
Side! Oh, my Bowels! seldom are they free two days together from some Distemper
or other; yea, so racked and tormented are they with Extremity of Pain, that
their Lives are little better almost than a continual Burden to them. But now
in Heaven all these Complaints shall cease; they are only the Effects of Sin;
and therefore to accompany us only in our sinful State; and when Sin shall be
expelled out of the Soul, as it shall be in Heaven, Sickness and Distempers
shall never more annoy these Bodies of ours. As Job speaks of the Grave, there
the weary are at rest; that is, those who now are wearied with labors and
pains, when they come to lie down in their Graves, shall be at Rest: And if it
be thus in the Grave, how much more shall it be so in Heaven, and that not by
insensibleness and want of feeling as it is with those that are dead; but
because the Happiness of that State is so great, as is not only exclusive of,
but cannot possibly admit of any such thing as Pain and Sorrow; being a State
made up of perfect Joy and Delight, in an eternal Perpetuity; for they obtain
joy and gladness, and Sorrow and sighing flee away, Esai. 35.10.

Secondly, in Heaven the Saints shall enjoy a perfect Freedom from all
Temptations.

In this World Temptations make the Lives of God's People very uncomfortable to
themselves, and very disquieting unto others. Now as to the Temptations that
most afflict the People of God in this Life, they are such as either come from
the World and the Flesh, or such as come from the Devil. As for those
Temptations that come from the World and the Flesh; as their Numbers cannot be
expressed so their Burden cannot be born without the Assistance of Divine
Grace: While we are in this World, we walk in the midst of Snares, Temptations
lie in wait for us in all our Ways, attend us in all our Enjoyments, follow us
into all Societies, keep us company in all our Solitarinesses; we can scarce
cast our Eyes any where, but we are in danger by something or other to be drawn
away from God. Every Condition, every Place, every Duty, every Mercy, and every
Relation administer matter for a Temptation. When we behold those that are much
above us, then a Temptation to Envy assaults us. When we behold those that are
low in the World, and much our Inferiors, then a Temptation to Scorn and
Contempt presents its self to us. Has God blessed us in the World, that we
grow rich, and become Men of great Estates, how strong, and almost invincible
are our Temptations to be proud, and to forget, yea to deny God? If God lay us
low in the World, O how hard is it to be Poor, and not to be Discontented; nor
to make use of unlawful means for our Relief, rather than to wait patiently
God's time for the Supply of our Necessities? When we are in our Health and
Strength, O how stupid, how careless are we as to the Concerns of our Souls!
How few Thoughts have we of, and how little Preparation do we make for, our
Eternal State? If God deprive us of our Health and Strength, and by Sickness
warns us that Death is making haste toward us, then the sudden Approach of
that King of Terrors distracts us with such Fears and Horrors, as overwhelms
and sinks us into Despair, so that we give up all for lost.

But now when by Death a Saint comes to take his leave of this World in his
flight toward Heaven, his Soul is escaped out of all these Dangers and
Temptations; all these Snares are then broken in pieces for ever: For whither
he is gone, none of them can come after him. In Heaven there is nothing but what
tends to the advancing of our Joy, and the promoting our Eternal Happiness.

And as in Heaven Saints shall be free from the Temptations of the World; so
shall they be free from the Temptations of Satan, the grand Enemy of their
Souls, and the continual Disturber of their Peace. The Apostle tells us, he is
always going up and doum, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet. 5 8. And because he cannot destroy the People of God, nor hinder them from
Heaven hereafter, therefore he will do what he can to disturb and disquiet them
here.

And, Oh how does it make a godly Man inwardly to figh and mourn, that he can
never set about any thing that is good, but the Evil One is working against him
with his Temptations, either to dissuade him from doing of it, or to disturb
him in the doing of it; filling his Mind, not only with vain and foolish, but
with wicked and sinful thoughts, that continually indispose to, and distract
him in it! And, if notwithstanding all this, a godly Man will persevere, and go
through his Work, till he has finished what he is about; then to find the
Wicked One discouraging him after his Performance; telling him, that because of
those Wanderings and Distractings, which himself has been the cause of in a
great measure, therefore God will not own nor accept what he has done: This
certainly must needs be a great Disquietment to a gracious Heart. And yet these
are the daily Temptations and Discouragements that a godly Man is striving
with, and contending against, by reason of that Evil One.

This, if any thing, will bring a Saint upon his knees, and make him, with the
Apostle, to pray again and again; yea, to besiege Heaven day and night with
Prayers and Tears, that he may be delivered from that cruel and bloody
Hell-hound, and from all his wicked Solicitations.

Well, be patient, O all ye Tempted holy Souls; for though the Temptations you
meet with, be so black and horrid, that nothing can match them but the
Blackness of Hell it self, from whence at first they came; though you are at
present engaged in a very unequal Match; for what can Flesh and Blood do to
contend with Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places? Yet remember, stronger is he that is in you, than he that is in the
World. And in this hour of your Temptation, and Contest with the Powers of
Darkness, there are these Two Things, among others, that may comfort you; the
one is, Let the Temptations be as black and dismal as Hell can make them, yet
if a godly Man yields not his consent to them, they are none of his Sins, nor
shall they be charged upon him as such. The other is this; That the God of
Peace will shortly tread Satan under his feet; nay, he himself shall shortly
trample him under his own feet. The Time is hastening apace, and it cannot be
long before Death will come in to thy relief, and set thee beyond the reach of
all his Temptations. It is true, while we are in the Wilderness of this World,
the Devil will never let us be quiet; but will be continually casting his fiery
darts at us, following us with one Temptation after another; and when at any
time, in the strength of our great Lord, we have worsted him in one Temptation,
yet are we sure to be vexed by him in some other.

But yet be not discouraged, O Believing Soul! notwithstanding all the Assaults
of this Evil One; But maintain thy Conflict, keep thy Ground; yield not basely
and cowardly unto any of his Temptations; but continue to resist him steadfastly
in the Faith; for the Time of thy wrestling and contending with him, cannot
last longer than thy short and transitory Life; and remember for thy Support,
that as now thou neither stand nor fightest in thine own strength, but in
the strength of another; so certainly shall thou in that strength overcome;
yea, obtain an everlasting Conquest over all Satan's Temptations. The Time of
thy Death will be the Time of thy eternal Deliverance, not only from all his
Temptations, but from all his Malice and Envy, that put him upon those
Temptations. O what a Happiness will this be! And O how greatly should a
Believer long for the accomplishment of it! for then shall the Devil be as
unlikely to tempt, as our Hearts to close with his Temptations, and both alike
impossible.

Thirdly, In Heaven Saints shall enjoy a perfect Freedom from all Sin.

There is no Evil in the World the People of God complain of with greater Grief
and Sorrow, than they do of Sin; this makes them go bowing down greatly; yea,
to sigh and mourn continually. What says holy David, Psalm 38.3, 4, 5, 6? There
is no soundness in my Flesh because of thine Anger; neither is there any rest
in my Bones by reason of my Sin. Mine Iniquities are gone over my head, as a
Burden too heavy for me to bear. My Wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my
Foolishness. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day
long. Thus holy Paul complains also, in Romans 7.14. I am carnal, and sold under
sin. Verse 21. I find a Law, that when I would do good, Evil is present with
me. And, 23 I see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my
Mind, and bridging me into captivity to the Law of Sin that is in my Members.
In the sense whereof, he cries out as a Man greatly oppressed, in the next
Words; Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this
Death? In-dwelling Sin renders the Lives of God's People very bitter and
uncomfortable: And how can it be otherwise? For Sin is the constant Source and
Fountain of all their Miseries. There is no Distress, or Trouble befalls a
Godly Man, but Sin is the meritorious procuring Cause of it. Sometimes Sin
disturbs his Peace, sometimes it impairs his Grace, sometimes it breaks his
Bones, but it always pollutes and defiles his Soul. Oh what sad work does Sin
make continually! and the best it can end in, is Repentance and godly Sorrow. A
Christian in this Life is always in a Conflict with Corruptions. Sin and Lust
are continually warring against the Soul: So says the Apostle, Gal. 5.17. The
Flesh iusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these
two are contrary the one unto the other, so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would. Sin draws a godly Man one way, and Grace draws him another; Sin in
him will not yield, and Grace in him cannot yield: And though through the
strength of the Spirit; enabling him to exercise Grace, he is daily getting
ground of his Corruptions; yet is it very slowly; what he gains, is as it were,
by Inches; every step he takes through his Enemies Country, he is fain to force
his way; and he never obtains a Victory over Sin, but it is with great
struggling and wrestling. He is always standing upon his Guard; and if he chance
to slumber never so little, or be negligent in his spiritual watch, he is
presently furprized by a diligent Enemy, that always lies in wait, and observes
him. This now is the constant Life of a Christian, always to be maintaining a
Warfare with Sin, that is continually stirring in him, and ever ready to put
forth it self one way or other to do him Mischief.

Sin is continually making the Life of a godly Man uncomfortable; and while Sin
is in him, it will not be otherwise: Now Sin will always be in him while he is
in this World; and therefore he will always have some Troubles, some
Perplexities, to afflict and disquiet him. But when Death, that Friend of the
Saints (for so Death is to them, and to none but them) comes, they shall be
perfectly free from all that which now afflicts and troubles them; because they
shall be perfectly free from Sin, that is the Cause of it. And therefore, that
I may note it by the way, With what rejoicing of Soul should a godly Man, upon
this account, entertain the thoughts of Death? How welcome should the approach
of this Friend of his be unto him? For certainly a Saint has not a better
Friend in all the World; for next unto Jesus Christ, who has made satisfaction
for a Believer's Sins, and obtained Life and Salvation for his Soul, Death must
needs be his best Friend; because it frees him from all Sin. He that frees us
from the Evil of our Sins, and from suffering eternal Punishments due to us
because of them, by satisfying the Justice of God for them, must needs be our
best and chiefest Friend; and next unto him, he that frees us from the being of
Sin, that we may no more offend God thereby, and that is Death. And indeed none
in the World can be kinder to a Saint, or do such an Office of Love for him as
Death does; for at once it sets him not only out of the reach of all his
Enemies, but perfectly frees him from that which caused them to be so, and that
is Sin; and herein the Goodness of God is greatly to be observed, that Death,
which is a Punishment for Sin, should be turned into the destruction of the
very Being of Sin; and so it is to every Believer: For after Death, Sin shall
not only cease to act, but shall cease to be.

Two Things commend Death, and ought to make it desirable to every Believer:
One is, That it frees him from all Sin; and the other is, That it brings him to
the everlasting enjoyment of God; and the latter depends upon the former; for
till a Believer is perfectly freed from all Sin, he can have no entrance into
Heaven, where God, the Fountain of all Bliss and Happiness, is seen and
enjoyed. And certainly where Sin is felt as a heavy Burden, by any Soul, and
where God is the Delight of that Soul, Death must needs have an amiable Aspect;
and so it will, if the Soul act as it ought to do. Should God ask one Godly Man
after another, What is it that you most desire; tell me, and it shall be given
you? would they not all with one consent, say, Lord, that we might be freed
from Sin? Oh that we might be delivered from our Corruptions, that we might
never offend and displease God; Lord, thou that know our hearts, know
that nothing in all the world is so great a Burden to us, as these sinful
Hearts and Natures of ours, whereby we are necessitated to offend thee; this is
the constant Language of their Prayers, of their Cries, of their Tears day and
night, that they might be rid of Sin. Would it not be the most welcome News in
the world to them, that the Time were come, wherein they should sin no more?
Certainly were it offered to their choice, there is no godly Man in all the
World, but would rather choose to be freed from Sin, than to be made the Heir,
yea, than to be the Possessor of the whole World. What good, says a Godly Man,
would the World do me, so long as Sin, and a naughty Heart inhabit in me?
These, Lord, says a gracious Soul, would do me more hurt in one day, than the
Enjoyment of the whole World to Eternity, can do me good: O Lord; therefore
whatever thou do with me, or whatever thou do for me, deliver me from this
Body of Sin and Death that I continually carry about with me.

Why, know, all ye holy and gracious Souls, whoever you are, that thus go up
and down mourning and complaining by reason of Sin, know for your eternal
Comfort, that when you have continued waiting but a few days longes, God will
grant your Desires; for when you come to Heaven, whither Death will certainly
and suddenly bring you, Sin, an unholy Heart and Nature shall never more
afflict or trouble you; for Sin, that was here your Burden to feel, shall
there be your Delight to be for ever without; that impenitent, unbelieving
Heart, those vain, yea, sinful Thoughts, which were wont to lie down, and rise
up with you, which did use to follow you to every Duty, and accompany you in
every Place and Service, and which you could no more leave behind you when you
went to Pray, to Hear, to Read, or to Meditate, than you could leave your
selves behind you, shall all be left behind you, when you come to die; they
did, and would keep you company while you lived, but they shall not go one step
with you beyond Death; then you take your leave of them, bidding an eternal
Farewell to all Sin. O my Soul, when shall that blessed day come that thou shall
thus take thy leave of Sin, never to wound thy Conscience, never to defile thy
Soul, nor never to displease thy God thereby any more! O what a blessed state
will that be, when Death shall send a godly Man to Heaven, perfectly free from
all Sin, not only as to the Power of it, but also as to the vexing and
disquieting Presence of it, where he shall spend ars Eternity in serving and
praising of God without the least interruption, imperfection, or weariness of
Soul for ever. And does not Death in this appear a Believer's great Friend, in
that what Prayers and Tears, Sighs and Groans, together with the assistance of
the Spirit of God did gradually, that is mortify and destroy Sin; that Death
does for a Believer at one blow, perfectly freeing him from the Burden and
Being of Sin for ever?

Fourthly, In Heaven the People of God shall arrive unto a Perfection of Grace
and Holiness.

As all that the Saints have here, is but mean, compared to what they shall
attain to hereafter; so all that the Saints do here, is but mean, compared to
what they shall be enabled to do hereafter. Grace in a godly Man in this Life,
is in its minority, and therefore the acting of Grace must needs be
accordingly. The Excellency and Beauty of a Saint lies inward, in the hidden
Man of the Heart; or as the Psalmist speaks, he is one that is all glorious
within. And because Grace in him is inward, therefore its Excellency is not so
visible and apparent. Grace in a godly Man, neither does, nor can shine forth
in its Glory and Beauty here, because Sin in him eclipses the splendour of its
appearance. The imperfection of Grace is discernable here; but the Perfection
and Beauty of Grace is neither known nor attainable here. The highest degrees
of Grace and Holiness that the best of God's People reach unto here, comes
infinitely short to what they shall attain to in Heaven. It is true, a little
Grace in a Saint now, makes him glorious in the eyes of those who have a Spirit
of discerning to behold it; in respect whereof, the Saints are called the
excellent ones of the Earth, Psalm. 16.3. Now if the weakness and imperfection
of Grace (for that which the People of God attain to of Grace here, it no more
compared with what they shall attain to in Heaven,) if this weakness and
imperfection of Grace be so excellent and glorious, O how exceeding glorious
will the perfection and beauty of Grace be hereafter? How glorious have some of
the Saints of God of old appeared, when their Excellency has chiefly appeared
in the Oriency and sparkling Beauty but of some one particular Grace; as for
instance, How glorious was Abraham for his Faith; Moses, for his meekness and
self-denial; Nehemiah for his zeal for God and his Glory; David, for his Love
to God and his Ordinances; Job, for his Patience; S. Paul, for his unwearied
Industry and Laboriousness in the Work of God, and the Service of Souls? O how
eminently glorious have the particular actings of these particular Graces in
these Servants of God made them in all Ages; insomuch that the Spirit of God
has thought good to record their Excellencies in the holy Scriptures; and
their Praise shall be in all the Churches of God to the end of the World. Now
if the Saints Eminency in some particular Graces. have made them so glorious,
notwithstanding their Imperfections other ways, how glorious and excellent will
they appear, when all that Grace and Holiness that shall accompany them to
Heaven, and is there necessary unto their Happiness, that they may see and
enjoy God to eternity, shall be fully and completely perfected, having nothing
of the least allay of any spot or imperfection in their Graces, or in their
Persons, to take off from the Beauty and Glory of the one or of the other for
ever? In Heaven Grace in a Saint is in its excellency, and in its visibility,
there is Grace, and nothing but Grace; there is Grace, and all Grace; yea,
there is all Grace shining forth in its fullness, and utmost perfection of Glory
to eternity. In this Life Grace in the People of God is never perfect; in some
things they are always defective, in other things always wanting; they are
continually aiming at, and going on unto Perfection, though while they are here
they do not attain unto it. In the Work of Regeneration, they are truly
sanctified and made holy; but it is in Heaven only that they are perfectly
sanctified. The Lord Jesus Christ now loves his Church, and he has abundantly
manifested that he does so, in giving himself for it, that he might sanctify
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, as the Apostle speaks:
But he never presents it to himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle till he brings it to Heaven. By a work of Sanctification he is now
daily cleansing and purifying of it; but the full Perfection and Beauty of
Holiness is not put upon it, till the Marriage between him and his Church be
consummated in Glory. Here in this Life there is much Imperfection in the
Righteousness and Holiness of the Saints, many Faults and Infirmities they
have, that others may censure and condemn, and themselves ought to bewail and
mourn for; but in Heaven they shall be Faultless, so says the Apostle, Jude
24. Whilst the Church is Militant upon Earth, though she is black, and has her
spots, yet is she comely; but when she comes to be Triumphant in Heaven, then
will she be as a beautiful Bride, adorned with fullness and perfection of Grace
and Holiness, fitted and prepared for her Lord and Husband's Company, Rev.
22.2. where every Saint shall behold and love the Blessed and Holy God, and
their dear Lord Jesus, with a Love equal to Angels and Cherubims, satiating and
delighting their Souls in him, with a Joy far exceeding the highest Joys that
any of the People of God ever were acquainted with here, continually singing
Praises and Hallelujahs unto the great God, and to the Lamb that sits upon the
Throne, and be no more weary thereof than the Angels themselves are;
understanding perfectly the Will of God, and readily obeying it, without so
much as one vain Thought passing thorough their Minds, or one idle Word
dropping from their Mouths, or one wry Look in their Countenances, to Eternity.
O what a blessed Frame is here! What would not a Gracious Soul give or do that
he could attain to it now! How would he rejoice to find a connaturality or
perfect suitableness and agreement in himself unto Divine and Heavenly
Employments! O how happy would he think himself, were his heart always as holy
as his work! Unto this tend all his Duties and performances, even unto the
perfecting of him in Grace and Holiness; it is for this that he so often fasts
and prays; it is for this that he so often hears, reads, and meditates upon the
Word of God; for this it is he so often partakes of the Supper of the Lord, and
is so frequent in the Communion of Saints, even for the destroying of Sin and
Corruption, and the increasing and perfecting of Grace in his Soul. Oh how full
of longing Desires is he after that Day and Time! Oh, how earnestly does he
cry! when, when will the shadows flee away, when will Days and Nights be at an
end, when will Time be spent, when shall the Curtains be drawn, that he may not
only look at, but eternally possess that blessed Place, where Sin shall be for
ever excluded both out of him and it, where Grace and Holiness shall be
perfected in him, and where he shall always behold it shining in its ravishing
Beauty and Glory? Well, be of good Cheer, O all ye Holy and Gracious Souls
whose Desires are thus bent; for in Mount Sion there shall be both a
Deliverance from Sin, and a Perfection of Holiness. In Heaven the Spirits of
just Men are made perfect. Let the Thoughts therefore of your perfect Holiness
in Heaven support you against all your natural Infirmities and Failings here on
Earth: Yea, let all those that have a real Love to Holiness, and a Hatred unto
Sin; long for Heaven, and be desirous to die, that they may sin no more, but be
for ever perfect in Grace and Holiness.

Fifthly, The Saints in Heaven shall be Partakers of Fullness of Joy. Joy is the
peculiar Privilege of a Saint: None in all the World, notwithstanding all their
great Possessions, have that Cause of rejoicing that a godly Man has. That
which makes a wicked Man rejoice, is something that delights his Senses,
something that pleases his Fancy; all which is vain and vanishing. But that
which delights a Godly Man is that which is solid and substantial, something
within that reaches the very Soul and Conscience, and that is God reconciled
to him in Jesus Christ, evidenced to his Soul upon Scripture grounds, followed
with the Testimony of the blessed Spirit in his Conscience, witnessing with his
Spirit, that he is among the number of the Children of God; upon which follows
the Love of God, shed abroad in his Heart by the same Spirit, filling him with
that Joy and Peace by Believing that is unspeakable and glorious. Now though
this be the Privilege of a godly Man, yet has he not always the sense and
feeling of this Joy; but though he has not always the Comfort of it, yet has
he always the ground of this Joy: for Light is always sown for the Righteous,
and Gladness for the Upright in Heart, Psalm 97.11. Though it does not
presently spring up and break sorth, yet the Seed of it is there. None in all
the World do, or might lead such a pleasant, joyful Life as the People of God,
were it not their own Fault, they giving way to the omission of some Duty, or
the commission of some Sin, and this mars all their Joy. It is true, the Devil
does what he can to disquiet them, and the Wicked of the World give them
molestation and trouble; sometimes they are tempted with the Allurements of
Profit and Advantage; and sometimes they are awed with Fears and Threatenings:
But if they would put forth their Grace into Exercise, and by Prayer implore
Divine Assistance, they would be enabled not only to stand up against all the
Enemies of their Peace; but with a holy Joy and Triumph to vanquish and over
come them. This is that Life a godly Man might lead, were he so watchful as he
ought. But Experience tells us, it is not so; for there are many Clouds of
Discontent and Trouble, that darken the Sunshine of a Believer's Joy. O the
Complaints of past Sorrows! O the Sense of present Evils, and the Fears of
worse for the future! these in a great measure share our Lives among them. But
in Heaven it shall not be so; there is no Sorrow, no Troubles, no Evils, no
Dangers, no nor so much as any Fears of them; for all is Peace; there is nothing
but Joy, nothing but Pleasure and Sweetness: Nor can it be otherwise, with a
godly Man in Heaven; because that which was the Cause of all his Grief and
Sorrow, which is Sin is now perfectly taken away.

Now in the Joys of Heaven there are these four Properties; they are pure, they
are spiritual, they are full, they are everlasting Joys.

First, The Joys of a Saint in Heaven are pure Joys, and pure they are in
respect of the Object of them, and in their being free from any Mixture.

First, They are pure in respect of the Object of them. The Joy of the Wicked
is terminated upon some carnal Object: His Joy is in the Flesh, not in the
Spirit. When he rejoiceth, it is among his wicked Companions; his Delight is
commonly in something that is sinful or sensual, in Chambring and Wantonness,
or at best in Corn, Wine and Oil. But now the Joy of a Saint is in God; he now
cries out with Holy David, Psalm 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee: Thy Favor, O Lord, is
Life, and thy Loving Kindness is better than Life. And with how much greater
Joy and Delight does a Saint say so of God, and of the Enjoyment of him in
Heaven? It is true, Saints in Heaven enjoy the Blessedness of Peace and Rest
from all their former Troubles and Sorrows, which they remember with Delight
and Praise unto their Deliverer; but though this eternal Peace and Rest be a
great Blessing, and that which passes all Understanding; yet is it the least
part of the Saints Happiness in Heaven; for their greatest Satisfaction and
Contentment arises from the Joy and Delight which proceeds from beholding the
Face of God in Heaven: This is that which fills and satifies; yea, ravisheth
the Soul of a Saint, when enlarged to its utmost Capacity, with that Joy and
Delight that is unexpressibly great and glorious.

Secondly, The Joys of Heaven are pure Joys in regard they are free from any
Mixtures. The Joys of the Wicked are always mixed with Fear and Sorrow, and so
are oftentimes the Joys of the Saints also: And herein God manifests great
Wisdom and Goodness to his People thus to temper their Joys. Even as it is with
Men of weak Constitutions, who must have their Wine mingled with Water, for
fear of distempering their Bodies. And so must the Godly in this Life (such is
their Weakness) have their Joys mingled with Fears and Sorrows, lest they
should grow proud or wanton. Sometimes their Joys are mixed with Fear: Hence it
is, Psalm 2.11. that we are commanded to serve the Lord with fear, and to
rejoice with trembling. And thus we read of the two Women, Matthew. 28.8. who
though assured by Angels that Christ was risen; yet it is said, they departed
from the Sepulcher with fear and great joy. And so is it with a godly Man,
though by an Eye of Faith he beholds the Death and Sufferings of Christ, and
looking into his Grave, is assured that he is risen from thence, for his
Justification and Salvation; yet cannot but have his heart filled with a
fearful trembling kind of Joy. And as a Saint's Joy here is mixed with Fear, so
is it also sometimes mixed with Sorrow; for when a Believer by Faith looks upon
Christ crucified, and considers that a person so infinitely great and glorious
should die such a painful, shameful, cursed Death, for so vile a Sinner, and so
great an Enemy unto God as he was, the consideration of this so great, and
incomprehensible a Love manifested toward him, in reconciling God and him
together, in delivering him from Wrath and Hell, and in obtaining Eternal Life
for him in Heaven: Though this Love of Christ in doing all this for him, cannot
but affect him with great Joy; yet the Consideration of his Sins that pierced
and wounded; yea, crucified the Lord of Life and Glory, cannot but break his
Heart with godly Sorrow.

But now in Heaven the Joy of a Saint will be free from all mixtures both of
Sorrow and Fear; there shall be no Sorrow for present Troubles, nor any Fears
of future Dangers; all their Sorrows will then be turned into Joy. The sight of
their Eyes will then affect their Hearts, that is, the sight and knowledge of
the great God, the Supreme and Insinite Good, whom the Saints shall always have
with them in Heaven, is that which will fill and ravish their Souls with
unspeakable Joy.

Secondly, the Joys of a Saint in Heaven are spiritual Joys. Now spiritual
things are things both of the greatest Reality, and of the greatest Excellency:
Spiritual things are things of the greatest Reality, all other things
comparatively are not, they are such things as have no Being, no Subsistence;
therefore says the Wise Man, Why will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is
not? speaking of the admired things of the World. We do but abusively call Men
that abound with worldly Enjoyments, rich, substantial Men; for Substance is no
where but with God; he only is the true, substantial Good, the things of this
World are no more than a shadow. If a Man were hungry, would painted Bread
satisfy him; if a Man were starving with Cold, would painted Fire warm him?
No, why truly all the things of this World will appear no better to a Man when
he comes to die; there is no Comfort nor Satisfaction to be fetched from them:
The Reality and Substantialness of Good is only laid up in God, and in the
Enjoyment of him, who is the Saint's Happiness both on Earth and in Heaven
There is a Vanity, as in all the Troubles of the World; so also in all the
Comforts of the World. There is a Vanity in the Troubles that the Saints
endure, they are but skindeep, a varnish of Trouble; so says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 6.10. as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, yet possessing all things. And as it is with the Troubles of
the World, so is it with the Comforts of the World; all that sense looks at, it
is merely outside and appearing; all the Enjoyments of the World are but a
shadow, an appearance of that which is Good: God and Heaven are Realities; but
whatever else is Good, is but appearingly so. The things of the World are not
when they are; they are not in Reality when they are in Appearance. It is a
very great mistake to think nothing to be real, but what we can touch and
handle with our hands, or what we can see with our Eyes, such as Gold, Silver,
Houses, Lands; these are not really, substantially good things; they make a
fair show outwardly; they have a Gaudery and Excellency as to Sense, but
nothing of real Excellency as to the Soul. Nothing is real but what is
spiritual, though the Body be more seen than the Soul, yet the Soul is a more
real Good, because it is a spiritual Good, and comes nearest to God who is a
Spirit, and who only is; so says the Prophet, speaking concerning God, Isai.
43.11. who only art, and there is none besides thee. God, Christ, Grace, and
Heaven, these are spiritually and substantially good; and therefore it is said
of Christ, I cause them that love me to inherit Substance, Prove. 8.21. And the
Apostle tells the believing Hebrews, Heb. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling
of your Goods, knowing that in Heaven you have a better and an enduring
Substance. The Joys and Delights of Heaven they are real, because they are
spiritual.

But this is not all; for the Saints Joys in Heaven, because they are spiritual
they are therefore excellent, yea the most excellent. There is nothing that is
earthy in Heaven, but all of a spiritual and refined Nature, and therefore the
more real and the more excellent; and by how much the more spiritual, by so
much the more real, and the more excellent also. All Joy and Delight placed
upon any thing below God, is carnal and earthly, that which has dregs in it,
and comes not up to the Excellency of the Soul, it may refresh the Senses and
delight the outward Man, but it reaches not the Soul and Conscience: it must
be something that is spiritual for its Nature, and refined for its Excellency,
that must suit with, and be the Delight of a Soul that is spiritual, and such
is Heaven, and the Joys and Delights that are there superlatively excellent and
spiritual, flowing into the noblest and most excellent part of Man, his Soul
and Spirit, from God who is a Spirit.

Thirdly, The Joys of Heaven are full Joys. The Psalmist calls them Fulnesses
of Joy, and Rivers of Pleasures, for the abundance of them, Psalm. 116.11. And
the Apostle speaking of Believers, tells us, 1 Pet. 1.8. That though now they
see him not, yet believing, they rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of
Glory. If now the Joy of Faith in the Promises of God, from some small
experience of his Love and Favor to the Soul, be above expression, what will
be the Joy of the Beatifical Vision of God in Heaven? If now the believing Soul
does so greatly rejoice in hearing from its Lord and Savior in preaching and
reading of his Word, wherein there are such secret Messages of Love sent down
from Heaven unto it; O what will be the Joy of such a Soul in seeing him, and
dwelling with him for ever? It shall never be said unto the Saints in Heaven,
what our Lord said unto his Disciples, Hitherto you have asked nothing, ask,
and you shall receive, that your Joy may be full. No, the Joys of the Blessed
in Heaven, are always perfect and full: For how can it be otherwise, when there
is nothing in Heaven but what is Matter of Joy to the Saints? They are there in
their Father's House, come to the Inheritance and Possession of Children in an
everlasting glorious Kingdom, where they continually behold the Face of God,
and of the Lamb. The Joys of Heaven far exceed, not only all earthly Joys, such
as the Joy of Marriage, the Joy of Harvest; but the Joy of Ordinances, the Joy
of Faith; yea, the Joy of the Holy Ghost: All these Joys are swallowed up in
Heaven, and are almost as no Joys, compared with the Joys thereof; for in that
holy Place, there is nothing to disturb, or to diminish the Joys of the Saints
for ever: O why then do not the People of God more fetch their Joys and
Delights from Heaven while they are here! This, if any thing. should comfort
their Hearts, and support their Spirits under all the Troubles they meet with
here; for though this World he a Valley of Tears, yet in Heaven there will be
Fullness of Joy, and Rivers of Pleasures, of which they may drink as deep, and
take in as much as their Hearts can hold, though enlarged to their utmost
capacity.

Fourthly, The Joys of Heaven are permanent and everlasting; and this makes it
full Consolation indeed. When our Lord told his Disciples he was to leave them,
and to return to Heaven unto his Father, their Hearts were filled with Sorrow
thereupon; what course now does our Lord take to comfort them? Why, he tells
them, John 16.20. Their Sorrow should be turned into Joy; But when was this to
be? Why, it was when he should come again, and receive them to himself. Not
that they were to be without comfort until then; no, for he tells them when he
departed he would send the Comforter to them, who was to continue with them
while they continued in the World. But the Fullness and Perfection of their Joy
they were to wait for till they come to Heaven; and then when he shall come for
that end and purpose, to receive them to himself, their Hearts should rejoice,
and their Joy no Man should take from them; for at God's right hand there are
Pleasures for evermore. A Believer has always cause of Rejoicing in God; but
by reason of many sharp Trials that God sees good to lay upon his People, there
are some sad interruptions of his Joy for a time.

The Joy that the People of God partake of in this Life, is like the Joy of the
Husbandman in time of Harvest; which though it be great for the present, yet is
it soon over; and if he expect to partake of any more of the same nature, he
must first be at the pains and trouble of a Seeds-time. So after the People of
God have had their Joys here, they again sow in Tears before they receive
another crop of Comfort. It is in Heaven only that our Joy will be everlasting;
there is fullness of Joy without any mixture of Sorrow, a continual Feast, a Joy
that is ever in fullness and perfection, even as the Fruits are in time of
Harvest. A Believer shall never sow in Tears there, but have a perpetual Joy
without weariness, because there shall continually arise infinite variety of
fresh Delights in God, which shall fill the Soul with a continual Festival of
Joy for ever.

Sixthly, In Heaven the Saints shall partake of excellent Glory and Honor.
Heaven is the Palace of the great King of Glory, the Presence Chamber where he
unvails himself, and manifests his Glory both to Saints and Angels; and this
indeed is the most glorious Sight in Heaven, and that which makes Heaven to be
the most glorious Place. We read in Acts 6.15. That when Stephen stood before
the Council, his Face did shine with an Angelical Brightness. This was a
glorious Sight, to see the Face of a Man to shine as the Face of an Angel. But
this is nothing, compared with that Glory with which the Saints shall shine
when they shall stand before the great God of Heaven, seeing him face to face.

The Scripture describing to us this part of the Saints Happiness in Heaven,
abounds with variety of Expressions, that discover the Greatness and Excellency
thereof: Thus the Saints Glory there is set forth by the Glory of Kings at
their Coronation, and taking possession of their Kingdoms, which is the
greatest and highest of all worldly Glory. Every Saint in Heaven is a Crowned
King, having taken possession of a glorious Kingdom, prepared for them before
the foundations of the world; when also they receive a Crown of Glory that
fades not away. Sometimes it is described by the Glory of the Sun; Thus our
Lord tells us, Matthew. 13.43. The Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. Sometimes it is compared to the Glory of the Angels,
who, as they excel in strength, so do they also excel in Glory all the Princes
of the Earth: Hence we read, the Saints in Heaven shall not only he like unto,
but equal with the Angels, Luke 22.36. Sometimes also this Glory of the Saints
is set forth by the Glory of Christ himself, who is the Lord of Glory, which is
the highest pitch of Glory that can be. Thus we read, that when Christ shall
come at the last Day, to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in them
that believe, the Saints also shall then appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.4.
Shining gloriously, by reason of his Glory that he will put upon them; for then
shall they be made like unto him for ever, seeing him as he is; so says the
Apostle, 1 John 3.12. Sometimes the Glory of Heaven is called a weight of
Glory; so we read, 2 Cor. 4.17. An exceeding, excessive, eternal weight of
Glory. High Expressions setting forth the Glory of Heaven and almost to an
Hyperbole, but that Christ and Heaven can never be Hyperbolically expressed.
Sometimes again this glorious State of Believers is called Eternal Glory, 2 Timothy
2.10. That they may attain that Salvation that is in Christ, with eternal
Glory. So, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace, who has called you to his
eternal Glory. Worldly Honor and Glory is transitory, inconstant, and
vanishing: The Fashion of the World passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. And the Glory of
Man, says St. Peter, is as the Flower of the Grass, which flourishes for a
while, but is soon withered and gone, 1 Pet. 1.24. But the heavenly Glory is
permanent, and perpetual; a Flower that never withers. Saints shall receive a
Crown that fades not away.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Resurrection of the Body, in order to the Saints Happiness in Heaven. A
more particular Description of the Happiness of the Bodies of the Saints in
Heaven; which shall there be, (1.) Incorruptible. (2.) Spiritual. (3.)
Powerful. (4.) Beautiful. Of the Happiness of the Soul in Heaven; which
consists, (1.) In having its Understanding enlarged. (2.) In its being
perfected in Holiness. (3.) In having its Affections brought into a perfect
Regularity. Of the Eternity of the Saints Happiness in Heaven.

A Discourse of the Happiness of Heaven, is like the breaking of the Bread by
our Savior, in his miraculous feeding so many Thousands with a few Loaves, and
a few small Fishes, which multiplied and increased by being broken. And so does
the Happiness of Heaven by being searched into; for the more we look into it,
the more we discover of its Excellency and Perfection. In this blessed Search,
much of Sweetness and Delightfulness has been found out already; but upon
farther Enquiry into what the Scripture reveals concerning it, we shall find
much more than what has hitherto been discovered.

Now that which presents it self to us, as the Matter of our Discourse in this
Chapter, is the Consideration of the Subject of this Happiness in Heaven, and
that is, the Bodies and Souls of the Righteous.

I begin with the First of these; and that is, to show, That the Bodies of the
Righteous shall be the Subject of the Happiness of Heaven. Now, before the Body
can be a partaker of this Biessedness, it must first have a Resurrection from
the Grave; for till that be done, it is not capable of enjoying the Glory and
Happiness of Heaven.

Now, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Body out of the Dust,
notwithstanding the seeming difficulties, yea, impossibilities also, unto Sense
and carnal Reason, is very clear from the Scripture; which, though it be not
against Reason; yet is it in many things above Reason, as it seems to be in
this particular case; and therefore though a Christian is not here wholly to
lay aside his Reason; yet must he chiefly make use of his Faith in this Point;
yet were it my Employment to treat of this Subject, I doubt not but it might be
demonstratively proved, That the Resurrection of the Body is a great Truth, not
only by Scripture, but by Reason also; though when all that is or can be said,
our chief Light and Knowledge into this great Truth, must and does come from
Divine Revelation. But this is not my Work at present; being only discoursing
of it, as a necessary Introduction to the Happiness that the Body shall be a
partaker of hereafter in Heaven; which, that it may, it must of necessity first
be raised from the dead.

Now, the Resurrection of the Body is that which is the Inlet, as it were, to
all its future Happiness and Glory. The Bodies of the Saints are, as the
Apostle speaks, sacred Temples, wherein the Holy Ghost dwells; and therefore
God will not suffer them to lie buried always in forgetfulness. It is true,
their Bodies do dissolve into dust in their Graves, but it is as true, they
perish not there; God takes notice of them then, and even at that time is their
Dust precious in his sight; and so it will appear at the last Day, when by his
All-powerful voice, he shall call them forth out of their Graves, and raise
them up thence, shining with such excellent Beauty and Glory as shall exceed
the Sun in its Brightness and Glory.

It is a very difficult thing to believe that the Bodies of Men, some whereof
have lain rotting in the Grave Thousands of Years, and others, whose Bodies
have been eaten up of wild Beasts, or burnt and consumed to Ashes by Fire, and
those Ashes blown up and down the Earth, or into the Water by the Wind; or that
when so many Multitudes of Ages and Generations of Men dying one after another,
and their Dust mingled one with another, should all of them rise again, and the
same several Parcels of Dust come together again, to make up the same Bodies of
Men as once they were before; O how impossible is it that such a thing as this
is, says carnal Reason, should ever come to pass?

Were this great and wonderful Work to be effected by the combined strength and
power of all the Saints and Angels in Heaven, we might despair of its
accomplishment; but when we consider who is the Undertaker of this great Work,
even the Great and Almighty God; this may well silence all Objections that can
be made against it: For he has undertaken it for whom nothing is impossible.
And as none of us know what God is in himself; so none of us know what this
great God can do. As it is with the sowing of Seed, when Men cast it into the
ground; they sow not, as the Apostle says, that Body that shall be; and if the
Seed sown did spring up by chance, it might possibly bear Wheat, or some other
Grain; but says he, God gives it a Body, as it pleases him, and to every Seed
his own Body. And so shall it be in the Resurrection at the last Day: God
raises up all Men's Bodies out of their Graves; but this is not all; but that
every Man may have his own Body, he gives unto every Body its own Dust. And
what reason is there that any should doubt of the Truth hereof? For if a
Gardener, that has a hundred several Seeds in his hand at once, is able to
distinguish between Seed and Seed: Or if a skilful Chemist is able to extract
one Metal out of another; yea, to take all the four Elements out of one and the
same thing; shall not the Almighty, Omnipotent God be much more able to
distinguish and separate one Man's Dust from another, and give to every Man his
own Dust? Why then, O why should it be thought a thing incredible that God
should thus raise the Dead? Consider a little who this God is; one that is of
infinite Power, and able to do whatsoever he pleases both in Heaven and in
Earth; it is he that at first made the World out of nothing; and cannot he
rally together our lifeless Dust, and scattered Bones, and make them stand up
and live? surely he can. Is he able to raise up Children unto Abraham out of
stones, as our Lord tells the Jews, and can he not raise up our Bodies out of
the same Dust into which they were dissolved? Nay, does he not every day do as
great Wonders as this is? What is every Night but the Burial, or Grave of the
Light of the Day? And what is every Morning, but the Resurrection of the Day?
Again, what is the cold Winter, but the Death of the Fruits of the Earth? And
what is the Spring, but the Resurrection of them again unto a new Life? And
what is Death unto us, but a pulling down of these Clay Houses of our Bodies
into the Dust? And what is the Resurrection, but a raising or rebuilding of the
same Houses of our Bodies out of the same Dust again? And this shall as
certainly be accomplished by God, as any of the former have been. Moreover, God
has given great Encouragement to our Faith, to believe the Truth hereof, by
raising many from the Dead already, both in the Old Testament, and in the New;
as the Shunamite's and the Widow of Naim's Sons, with Tabitha, and Lazarus, who
had lain four days in the Grave, together with many others, that at the Death
of Christ arose out of their Graves, and went into the Holy City, and were seen
of many. Now what God has already done to some, he can and will do unto all at
the last Day. For, as our Lord says, The hour is coming wherein all that are
in their Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done
good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil, unto the
Resurrection of Damnation, John 5.28, 29. And O what great encouragement is
here unto Believers, both against their own Death, and the Death of their Godly
Friends and Relations? How sweet, upon this account, may the Thoughts of Death
be unto Believers themselves? Therefore may thou, O believing Soul,
cheerfully yield unto the stroke of Death; for though by it thou art carried
unto the Grave, that Place of silence, where thou shall moulder away into Dust
and Rottenness; yet may thou die in the assured Belief of this great Truth,
That as certainly as now by Death thou go down intothe Grave, so certainly
shall thou ere long be raisedr up out of it again; and then shall thy Soul and
Body have a comfortable meeting together again, never to be parted any more,
but be made happy together in an eternal Enjoyment of God in Glory.

Here is also matter of great Comfort against the Death of our godly Friends
and Relations. What a blessed Support is this to a Believer, when Death comes
and takes away any such from him? How comfortably may he take his leave of
them, delivering them up unto Death and the Grave, knowing assuredly that they
shall rise again unto Glory and Happiness? Those that die in Christ, and sleep
in Jesus, them he will certainly raise out of their Graves, and bring with him
unto Judgment. Cease therefore thy immoderate Grief, drown not thy self in
Tears for those whose Souls are at present triumphing in Glory, and whose
Bodies shall shortly be raised up unto a participation of the same Glory and
Happiness.

Whenever therefore, O believing Soul, either thou thy self shall come to lie
upon a Deathbed, taking thy last Farewell of thy godly Friends and Relations
in this World; or when any such godly Friends and Relations shall, upon their
Deathbeds, take their last Farewell of thee; let this great Truth of the
Resurrection of the Body teach thee how thou should do it; not as one without
hope, but as it becomes a Christian; and that is willingly and cheerfully; not
because thou art thereby rid of a Trouble or Charge, or because by their Death
thou shall be a gainer in thy worldly Concerns; this shows a very evil, sinful
frame of Spirit, and is no way becoming a Christian; but let let thy
willingness herein proceed from a more excellent Motive; even this comfortable
consideration, that there is but a little short space of Time between thy Death
and theirs, as also between all your Deaths and the Time of your Resurrections,
which will quickly shde away, whilst you and they are sleeping quietly in your
Graves, and then shall both you and they be raised up together thence with
great Joy and Rejoicing; so says the Prophet, Isa. 26.19. Awake and sing ye
that dwell in the Dust; for then shall there be everlasting Joy upon your
Heads. But I must not forget, that this is not the Subject I am treating upon,
it being that which comes in here only as a necessary Introduction unto that
Happiness which the Bodies of the Saints shall partake of in Heaven, unto which
I now come to treat more particularly.

Now in speaking unto this, I shall reduce all that I have to say unto these
four Heads, the Incorruptability, the Spirituality, the Power or Agility, and
the Glory and Beauty of the Body.

First, The Bodies of the Saints in Heaven shall be incorruptible. Their Souls
are always immortal; for when they leave their Bodies, which by Death drops
from them into the Grave, yet they die not; but returning unto God, are
adjudged to and initated in an everlasting state of Blessedness: But now in
Heaven, the very Bodies of the Saints shall be as immortal as their Souls. In
this World the best carry up and down with them weak, frail, dying Bodies,
always yielding to Decays, exercised with Pains and Aches, that insensibly
waste and wear them away, till at length Death by some incurable Disease lays
them from the Second Death, yet have they thereby no exemption from the First
Death; but they as well as others must taste thereof, because; they as well as
others have sinned. It is true, the Sting of Death shall never reach them, that
they are delivered from, and gain Victory over by Jesus Christ; but the stroke
of Death must and will reach them. Death cannot hurt them, that is certain,
because it has no Poison in it, but Death will have Dominion over them for a
time. But though Death play the Tyrant here on Earth, sparing none either for
their Greatness, or their Goodness, yet has it no admittance into Heaven: For
when the Saints shall be clothed upon with their House, which is from Heaven,
then shall Death and Mortality be swallowed up of Life; and the Life of the
Body, as well as the Life of the Soul, shall then be everlasting. The Apostle,
1 Corinthians. 15.42. speaking of the Body, tells us it is sown in Corruption, but
it is raised in Incorruption: So in verse 52. in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye, at the last Trump the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, and this
Mortal must put on Immortality. And O how comfortable must the Thoughts hereof
needs be to the Saints, to think, that though now they have sickly, diseased;
yea, dying Bodies: yet there is a time coming, when they shall have Bodies free
from all manner of Aches and Pains, not subjected to Decays nor Death, but
always lively and vigorous. The Resurrection will do more for the Bodies of the
Saints than a College of the ablest Physicians ever could do; for it will at
once perfectly cure them of all their Infirmities and Distempers; which all the
Physicians here on Earth could never do: Alas, they could only give some case
and relief under some particular Distempers, and that but for a little time,
but they soon returned again; or others came in their room, which proved
incurable, and terminated in Death. But when the Bodies of the Saints shall be
raised out of their Graves at the general Resurrection, they shall perfectly be
healed of all their Distempers, and shall die no more; for then shall be
brought to pass that saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory,
1 Cr. 15.54.

Secondly, In Heaven the Bodies of the Saints shall become spiritual; not that
they shall be changed into spiritual Substances, and so become absolutely
spiritual; for then they must cease to be Bodies; but yet they shall become
spiritual, because they shall be endowed with spiritual Qualities. Now
concerning this Spirituality of the Body, the Apostle speaks very clearly in 1
Cor. 15.44 it is sown, says he, a natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body.
Now the Bodies of the Saints in Heaven are said to be spiritual in these
respects.

First, Because in Heaven they shall be in a condition that is spiritual: Their
Bodies shall then stand in no more need of Meat or Drink Sleep or Apparel, the
now necessary and appointed means for its supportation: In Heaven there is no
eating or drinking, no marrying or giving in Marriage; but we shall there be as
the Angels of God; so says our Lord, Matthew. 22.30. If Moses in this state of
Mortality, whilst he was with God in the Mount forty Days and forty nights, did
neither eat Bread nor drink Water, as we read, Exodus 34 28. how much more shall
the Saints be enabled to live without the use of these things when they come to
Heaven, where they shall always live in the Presence of God?

Secondly, The Spirituality of the Saints Bodies in Heaven consists in that
entire and absolute Subjection they shall then be in unto their Spirits. In
this Life the Soul is debased, made to stoop, and become serviceable to the
Flesh; and when it is at the best with the Saints, there is still a contention
and strife between the Spirit and the Flesh; so that when the Spirit is
willing, the Flesh is weak; nay, often refractary: But in Heaven there shall be
an absolute Subjection of the Body to the Spirit. What a great Happiness would
a godly Man now count it, to have a Body every way serviceable to his Soul,
that whenever the Soul moves God ward and Heavenward in any holy Duty, the
Body might willingly and readily comply with it? How delightful would this make
a godly Man's Life to be? Why, in Heaven it shall be so; in that state of Glory
and Happiness the Soul shall not depend upon the Body, but the Body upon the
Soul; for the Body shall then become spiritual, because it shall be perfectly
serviceable to the Spirit. This certainly will be a blessed time: Saints
therefore should long for its approach.

Thirdly, The Bodies of the Saints in Heaven shall be spiritual, in regard they
will then be more capable of, and more fitted for spiritual Uses and Services.
Nothing that is of an earthy, dreggy, Nature shall then cleave to them; all
carnal, sordid employments are greatly below them; their Work is altogether
heavenly and spiritual; formerly their time and strength was laid out upon
Employments that were earthly, suitable unto their then earthly Bodies. But now
that their Bodies are changed, and of earthly become spiritual, their
Employment is changed and become spiritual also. And because there is such a
change in the Employment of their Bodies, it is an evident Demonstration that
there is a change made in their Bodies also. Heretofore the World was the
Habitation in which their Bodies dwelt, and their Designs then were worldly
also: But now that they are removed from Earth to Heaven, the Habitation of
Spirits, their Bodies are refined and made spiritual, suitable unto the
Habitation, to the Inhabitants, to the Employments and Enjoyments that are
there; which are altogether spiritual.

Thirdly, The Bodies of the Saints in Heaven shall be full of Power and
Agility: They are sown (says the Apostle) in Weakness; they are frail, sinful
Bodies, and therefore they must die; yet shall they be raised in Power. Now
this Power and Agility that shall be bestowed upon Glorified Bodies, is very
wonderful, being that whereby they shall be able to move to and fro in Heaven,
according as the Will shall command it, without difficulty or weariness; and
possibly so, as to be able to keep pace even with Angels themselves in their
Motion. And considering the spaciousness of Heaven, that place where God,
Christ, and those multitudes of glorious Saints and Angels do inhabit, this
Agility of Body may be very necessary.

Now there are two Reasons why it is so necessary that the Bodies of the Saints
should be thus strong and powerful.

First, That hereby they may be able to attend the Operations of their Souls,
and become fit for such Work as in Heaven they must be employed in. Were their
Bodies as weak and feeble in Heaven as they now are on Earth, they could never
undergo such work and motions as they must be employed in there, but they would
soon tire and faint Scripture and Experience tells us this, that when the Soul
is exercised about any high and glorious Object, the Body presently sinks and
fails: So it was in the Ecstasies of the Prophet, when God did reveal himself
in an extraordinary manner unto Daniel, his Body failed, he fainted, and was
sick many Days, Dan. 8.27. But now in Heaven the Bodies of the Saints shall be
so strong and powerful, that they shall become serviceable to their Souls in
their highest and most glorious Operations. Here the People of God have Souls
willing to serve the Lord, that would fain attend upon him in his Ordinances,
and never be weary or drowsy; but though the Spirit be willing, yet the Flesh
is Weak; their frail Bodies cannot keep pace with their Souls in Duty; thus is
it continually with them here; but in Heaven it shall be otherwise; their
Bodies shall then be as good Companions for their Souls as they can desire, and
both together shall praise God with eternal Hallelujahs, and never be weary.

Secondly, It is necessary that the Bodies of the Saints in Heaven should be
strong and powerful; because otherwise they are not able to bear that weight of
Glory and Happiness that there they shall be Partakers of. We are easily
persuaded to believe that a Man may be so miserable that he cannot bear it; but
it is as true that Man's highest Happiness cannot be born by the strength he
now has: Extraordinary Joy will overcome and destroy as well as extraordinary
Sorrow. I have heard of one whom a great King in this Nation caused to be
imprisoned, and thrown into a Dungeon, where lying hourly in expectation of
losing his Life, being suddenly surprised with News of a Pardon, his Joy was so
great, that it overwhelmed his Spirit, and he died immediately. The Condition
of our Bodies here, is a Condition of Weakness and Frallty: And the Glory and
Happiness of Heaven is by the Apostle called an excessive weight of Glory: Now
it is not possible for a weak Head to bear an excessive weight of Glory. What
the Saints shall there see with their bodily Eyes, is so excellent and
glorious, that it would now sink and overwhelm their weak Bodies to behold it.
Those ravishing Transports of Joy and Delight, which glorified Souls shall have
in the Vision of God, will crack, yea, break a weak Vessel into pieces. The
Bodies of the Saints therefore must be made strong to bear the Glory of that
Place; otherwise, the Excellency of the Object will destroy the Faculty. When
the Sun in the Firmament shines in its full strength, the Glory of it is so
great, that the strongest Eye is not able to behold it, but is soon overcome by
its dazzling Brightness. O how much more unable then is any mortal Eye to see
God, and to behold his infinite Glory. The Scripture therefore tells us, He
dwells in Light that is unapproachable, 1 Timothy 6.16. And, says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 15. and 50. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. Now by
Flesh and Blood, he does not mean Sin and Corruption, though that is very true;
but he means a Natural Body, a Body as it is in this irail State, so it cannot
enter into Glory. No, the Soul must be purified, and the Body must be
spiritualized, made powerful and strong before it can enter into Glory; for
otherwise it is not able to behold God, and to enjoy the Glory and Happiness of
Heaven. Moreover the Bodies of the Saints must endure to all Eternity in
Heaven; and that without Reparation, by Meats, or Drinks, or Sleep: Doubtless
therefore their Bodies at the Resurrection, entering into a Place of so great
Glory and Happiness as Heaven is, shall be raised to a high and eminent degree
of Power and Strength, that they may be able to bear that weight of Glory that
shall then be put upon them.

Fourthly, The Bodies of the Saints in Heaven, shall be Beautiful and Glorious.

The Words of the Apostle are very clear, 1 Cor. 15.33. Speaking of the Body,
and that disgrace that it is brought under when thrown into the Grave; it is
sown, says he, in dishonor: This indeed is but poor comfort to a Believer, to
think that his Body shall be vilified and disgraced in the Grave, where it
shall turn to corruption and rottenness. But, as if the Apostle had said, Let
not this trouble you, for there will be a Time when the Body shall have a
blessed Resurrection from that contempt and Disgrace that it now suffered
under; for though it be sown in dishonor, yet, it shall be raised in Glory,
and become a far more glorious and beautiful Body than ever it was here on
Earth. Some Glory and Majesty there is put upon the Bodies of Men now, above
the Bodies of all other Creatures, in respect whereof, our Bodies are said to
be God's Workmanship: Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me, says Job. Yea,
they are said to be fearfully and wonderfully made, and to be curiously wrought
by God himself; so we read, Psalm. 139.14, 15. But yet that Glory which the
Bodies of the Saints now have, is no Glory, compared with that Glory that their
Bodies shall be clothed with in Heaven. There is a vast difference between
Celestial Bodies and Terrestrial Bodies: How glorious is the Body of the Sun,
compared with the Body of a Worm or a Fly? But there is a far greater
difference between the Bodies of the Saints on Earth, and the same Bodies when
glorified in Heaven; for then they shall become celestial and Heavenly Bodies,
shining with a Glory and Beauty that shall transcend the Stars; yea, the Sun in
the Firmament. The Apostle gives us the Sum of it in a few words, Phil. 3.21.
he tells us our Body of Christ. They are now vile Bodies, as he calls them;
made so by Sin, being Instruments thereunto; and they are Earthy, because they
bear the Image of the Earthly Adam; but they shall be made Glorious Bodies;
because they shall for ever bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam, the Lord Jesus
Christ. Exodus 34.29. We read, when Moses had been in the Mount with God forty
days, and came down among the Israelites again, his Face did shine so
gloriously that they were not able to behold it. Now if Moses's Body, that was
but a frail mortal Body, and was shortly to lie in the Dust, did, by being with
God for a little time, shine so gloriously, Oh with what Glory and Beauty shall
the Bodies of the Saints shine in Heaven, when they shall become immortal, and
enjoy the Presence of God with them to all eternity?

Secondly, As the Body shall be a great sharer in the Glory and Happiness of
Heaven, so shall the Soul be also.

Not only the Excellency, but the Capaciousness of the Soul renders it an
Object of greater Happiness and Glory than the Body. As the Soul is the more
excellent part of a Saint, than the Body; so shall it have a more excellent
Glory put upon it than the Body. In Genesis 48.19. When Jacob was blessing the Two
Sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, Jacob tells Joseph, that Manasseh the
firstborn, should be a great Man, but his Brother should be greater than he;
the same may be said of the Bodies and Souls of the Saints in Heaven: It is
true, their Bodies shall be very beautiful and glorious; but truly their Souls
shall far excel them in Glory.

In Heaven the Bodies of the Saints shall be suited to, and capacitated for
that Glory and Happiness that is designed for, and to be enjoyed by them there,
which now they are not: But their Souls, as they shall then take in more of the
Glory and Happiness of Heaven than their Bodies; so are they now in some
measure, but shall then be much more capacitated both to receive and bear the
greatness of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, than the Body can or will be;
for the Happiness of Heaven being of a spiritual and refined Nature, it is most
suitable unto the spiritual part of Man, which is his Soul. And this is the
Reason why we understand so little of the Happiness of the Soul in Heaven;
because it is spiritual. Here we understand little what our Souls are, and
therefore can understand but little what that Happiness is that they shall
attain to hereafter. The Scripture calls it a Glory that shall be revealed,
Romans 8.18. The Sufferings of this present Life are not to be compared to the
Glory that shall be revealed in us; that is, in the Soul. A Glory and Happiness
there is that waits for Believers in the other World; but it is not yet
revealed what, or how great it shall be. No, says the Apostle, It does not yet
appear what we shall be; but when Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, we
shall be like him. The Beauty of the Soul will then be excellent and glorious,
because the perfect Lineaments of Christ will then be drawn upon it. A weak and
small measure of Grace, which is the highest attainment that any Saint reaches
to here, compared with what we shall do hereafter, and is also the Image of
Christ upon the Soul of a Believer; yet even this imperfect Grace and Holiness,
makes the Soul to shine gloriously here; how much more then shall Glory, that
is the Perfection of Grace, and the perfecting of the Image of Christ upon the
Soul, make the Soul of a believer to exceed in Glory? Not that the Saints in
Heaven shall be continually receiving new additions to their Grace or Glory,
and so be made more and more like unto Christ by the Vision they shall there
have of him: No, this is a Saint's Work and Employment here on Earth, whilst he
beholds Christ only by an eye of Faith, in the Glass of Duties and Ordinances,
thus to be changed into his Image from Glory to Glory: But this Sight of Christ
shall vanish away in Heaven, and the Saints shall have an immediate Vision of
God and Christ, and their Souls shall thereby be changed into an exact and
perfect conformity unto the Image of Christ. It shall not then be from Glory to
Glory, from one degree of Grace to another, as it is now; but Grace and
Holiness in Heaven shall be always in them in its height and perfection. The
Souls of Believers upon their entrance into that Holy Place become perfectly
and completely glorious, having the perfection of Grace and Holiness in them,
without the least remainders of Sin and Corruption, which in this World the
holiest Persons are not totally freed from But to speak a little more
particularly concerning the Happiness of the Souls of Believers in Heaven, and
here.

First, In Heaven the Understandings of the Saints shall be enlarged. Knowledge
is a necessary Engredient unto the Soul's Happiness in Heaven; and the more
enlarged the Understanding of a Saint is, the greater is his Happiness. An
ignorant Soul cannot be a happy Soul, neither on Earth, nor in Heaven: Ignorant
Persons are looked upon with pity and contempt; That the Soul be without
knowledge, says the Wise Man, is not, nor cannot be good, Prove. 19.2. Knowledge
is a great Ornament in any Man, but much more in a Christian. It is a great
Commendation to have an insight into the Secrets of Nature, to be skilled in
Arts and Sciences, to understand Logic, Philosophy, Metaphysics, and the
like; but the Excellency of Knowledge lies not in these things, but in the
knowledge of the Highest and Chief Good of all; and that is God and Christ:
This the Scripture calls the Excellency of Knowledge: So says the Apostle,
Philip. 3.9. I count all things but Loss and Dung for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; and John 17.2. This is Life eternal to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. This is excellent
Knowledge indeed, to know God, to know the Lord Jesus Christ, to understand the
wonderful Work of Man's Redemption, to be acquainted with the Mysteries of
Divine Providence: This is a knowledge wherein Angels may delightfully busy
themselves in the contemplation of, and not stoop below the Excellency and
Dignity of their Natures: Something of Light and Knowledge they have into these
Objects now. But alas, it is little we know of God, of Christ, of the Mysteries
of Redemption and Providence, to what shall be known in Heaven. Some of these
blessed Objects are far above out of our sight; others are far above the reach
of our Understanding, to comprehend the depth of those Mysteries of Wisdom,
Grace, and Love that are contained in them. But in Heaven our Capacities shall
be enlarged to take in the Knowledge of these high and glorious Objects. In
Heaven God will take off the Vail from his Face, that we may see him Face to
Face; and not only so, but will strengthen us that we may be able to look upon,
and behold his Glory and Excellency; which otherwise would astonish and
confound us. There shall we see the blessed Lord Jesus, who for our sakes was
for a little while made a little lower than the Angels, crowned with Glory and
Honor. All the wonderful and astonishing Mysteries of our Redemption shall be
there unfolded to us; There it is that we shall see all the glorious Attributes
of God, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Holiness, Faithfulness, and Truth; sweetly
reconciled, and fully satisfied and contented in the contrivance of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ. There we shall with great satisfaction understand
the deep and obscure Mysteries of Religion, which here the most profound
Scholars were never able fully to comprehend. There shall the most dark and
difficult Passages of that divine and heavenly Book, the Scriptures, be made
clear and plain to our Understanding. There it shall be given us to discern how
exquisitely the several parts of Holy Writ, were by the All wise and Fore
seeing Author of them, God, fitted and adapted unto the several Times, Places,
Persons, and Occurrences, for which they were intended chiefly to be used. We
shall then plainly see, not only a Reconcileableness, but a Friendship, and
perfect Harmony between those Sacred Texts in Holy Writ, that seemed most to
jarr and be at greatest variance: Yea, there shall we discover, not only the
meaning of the most dark and obscure Passages of that Sacred Book; but how fit
it was that they should be so; together with the infinite Wisdom of the great
God that caused them to be written so obscurely. There it is that those Riddles
of Divine Providence shall be expounded, and laid open before us; which have
made not only wicked Men to deny, but tempted even good Men themselves
sometimes to call in question the infinite and unerring Wisdom of the great God
in his Government of the World, when they behold wicked and ungodly Men to
prosper, grow rich and great, having all their Hearts can wish; whilst upright
and righteous ones are continually exposed to Poverty, Reproach, and Contempt.
There shall we be fully convinced, that all these seeming Irregularities, are
not only consistent with God's Justice and Goodness, but are the wise
productions of them. And though the Belief hereof does to wise and
understanding Persons seem to be a piece of great Self-denial; yet when we come
to Heaven, it will appear to be as highly rational, as now we find it to be
hard and difficult. Man of himself is no fit Judge of the Providence of God at
any time; but especially not in this World; because he cannot see the whole of
his Providential Workings at once: His Days, as Job speaks, are but as a shadow
upon Earth, and they fly away: So that he can see but little of what God is
doing. But when we come to Heaven, the whole Conduct of God's Providence in the
Administration of Affairs in the World, shall be laid open to our view. Then
shall all the Revolutions and Occurrences of Empires, States, Families, and
particular Persons; which peevish Men were wont here to find fault with, be all
disclosed, and made appear to be so just and righteous; yea, so necessary and
seasonable, that those very things which here were a Temptation to us to deny
God, shall in Heaven prove a powerful Engagement for us to praise God: And then
shall we not so properly be satisfied with what his Providence has brought
about, as ravished with the Wisdom and Beauty that we shall behold in it. But
in a more especial manner shall we be transported with Admiration and
Gratitude, when the great God shall vouchsafe to discover to each particular
glorified Soul in Heaven the reasonableness of all his Dispensations toward
them, making visible to them, not only how necessary and righteous; but how
merciful and gracious he was in bringing those very Afflictions upon them,
which they usually accounted severe Dispensations; there being no Rod that ever
God took into his hand to chastise them withal, that ever came sooner, fell
heavier, or abode longer upon them, than the Occasion that extorted it from him
did require it should: And though sometimes their Expectations were
disappointed, yet was it always a happy Disappointment for them; because
intended by God to secure their Title unto far better things, which now they
enjoy, than any they could hope for here.

And who is there, that has tasted the pleasurable and delightful Life that a
Holy Soul leads, whose Mind is frequently taken up in the Study and
Contemplation of those two excellent Theams, the Word of God, and the
Providence of God; but must profess, as a Great, Noble, and Learned Person
does, both very ingeniously and piously also; that though there be something of
Difficulty in a studious employment of our Thoughts, in the Contemplation of
these things; yet are they also so pleasing and inviting; That (to give you his
own Words) should Heaven, says he, afford me no greater Blessing than a clear
account of the abstruse Mysteries of Divinity and Providence, I should value
the having my Understanding gratified and enriched with Truths of so noble and
precious a Nature, enough to court Heaven, at the rate of renouncing for it all
those unmanly Sensualities, and trifling Vanities; for which, inconsiderate
Mortals are wont to forfeit that Interest their Savior so dearly bought them
in it? But I must not dwell upon this part of the Soul's Happiness in Heaven,
though a most pleasing and delightful Subject.

Secondly, In Heaven the Souls of Believers shall be perfected in Holiness.
Here the People of God are truly sanctified, but not thoroughly. Sanctified they
are in every Part, though but in part sanctified, still there are the Relics
of Sin, the Remains of the Old Man in them while they are here. The Truth of
Grace they have, but not the Perfection of Grace: An absolute State of
Perfection, is rather to be wished for than enjoyed in this Life. The utmost
that a godly Man can attain to here, is not to commit great Sins, nor to allow
himself in little Sins, when thorough daily Infirmity he does commit them.

Now the People of God have the first Fruits of the Spirit; but yet they have
the remainders of the Old Man in them. Now the Spirit of God helps them to
mortify Sin, and to keep it under; but it does not enable them perfectly to
destroy it, as it shall be in Heaven. Here the Righteous are delivered from the
prevalency of their Corruptions; for so is God's gracious Promise to his
People, that Sin shall not have Dominion over them; and blessed be God for
this: But in Heaven they shall be for ever freed from the presence of Sin.
There is a continual mortifying of Sin by Believers here on Earth; but in
Heaven Sin shall be totally abolished: It is in a dying, languishing Condition
now; but in Heaven it shall be dead, for ever cease to be. Perfection of Grace
and Holiness is the aim and endeavor of every godly Man; but it is not his
attainment: So the Apostle tells us concerning himself, who doubtless had as
great a measure of Grace as any have attained to since, Phil. 3.12, 13. Not as
though I had already attained, or were already perfect: No, says he, I count
not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, for getting the
things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before, I
press forward toward the Mark for the prize of the High Calling of God in
Christ Jesus. This is all a godly Man can do here, in the use of Means, to
strive and endeavor after Perfection of Grace, though he cannot attain it. But
in Heaven no godly Man shall be defiled with any Sin, or defective of any
Grace; no, nor yet wanting in any measure or degree of Grace and Holiness as
now he is. The Spirits of just Men made perfect are there; that is, there is a
Perfection of Grace and Holiness in Heaven, that shall beautify the Spirits of
just Men when they come there. In this World, the People of God are partly
carnal, and partly spiritual; partly holy, and partly sinful. But in Heaven
they shall he perfectly holy and spiritual, freed from all sinful Mixtures; no
Dross with their Gold; no Corruption mingling it self with their Holiness.
Their Understandings shall be perfectly holy, without the least Cloud, or Mist
of Ignorance or Error to darken or sully them. That Glorious Sun of
Righteousness, whom they shall always behold in Heaven, shall for ever scatter
all Clouds and Darkness quite away. Their Thoughts shall all be holy; no
blasphemous, unclean, or envious Thoughts shall ever arise in their Souls; no,
nor the least Vanity or Impertinency pass through their Minds to Eternity; but
all shall be holy, being brought into a perfect Obedience unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. Their Memories shall there be holy, being strengthened to retain and
bring forth out of their Treasuries whatever things may tend to feed, and
increase their Love and Joy, and to elevate their Souls in the high Praises of
God. Their Wills shall then be perfectly holy; for there shall they obtain that
which they so often prayed for on Earth; namely, that the Will of God may be
done by them, as the Angels do it in Heaven. O what a delightful Harmony will
there then be for ever between their Wills and the Will of God! Then shall they
always have a perfect compliance in them with that sweet and blessed Law that
they shall then be under, without the least contrariety or opposition. Never
more shall they have any motion or inclination in them to that which is evil
for ever.

Thirdly, Another thing wherein the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven, as to
their Souls does consist, is the Regularity of their Affections, which shall
all be set right for, and continually drawn out after God by an unalterable
Regularity. There the Saints shall in their Hearts and Souls constantly and
perpetually cleave unto God, having always their Love and Delight in him,
without any Satiety or Weariness. Here on Earth they are often starting aside
to the Creature with an inordinate Love and Delight; but in Heaven there shall
be an eternal fixedness of Soul, with infinite Complacency and Delight in God.
Here our Affections are under great Irregularities: To instance in two briefly;
and they are the Affections of Love and Joy. As to the Affection of Love; It is
well known unto all what is a Christian's commanded Duty; namely, To love the
Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, and with
all our strength. And this Love to God, operating by Love to our Neighbors, is
so acceptable a Duty, that it is called by the Apostle the fulfilling of the
Law. But alas, how do the best of God's Servants fall short in this respect;
when all they attain to, is only to love God in Sincerity, and with some degree
of prevalency above all other Enjoyments. But to love God, so as to desire him,
so as to rejoice and delight in him above all other things, with the utmost
extremity of Love and Affection, in Perpetuity and Constancy: Oh, where is the
Soul that can be found, that does sol Vain and foolish, yea, sinful Objects
also, entangle our Affections, and draw away our Hearts from God, to an
over-loving and delighting in them, and to an impairing and weakening of our
Love and Affections toward God. How often do we meet with such Complaints as
these in the mouths of God's People? Oh, that we could love God more! Oh, that
we could love Christ more! but alas we cannot: Their Faith discovers to them a
wonderful Amiableness in God and Christ, which draws out the Desires of their
Souls after them. So says the Apostle, to you that believe he is precious, or
desirable. But yet they find they cannot love God as they ought, nor as they
desire to do; for by reason of that Earthliness that is still in them, their
Hearts and Affections are divided, and carried out after other Objects; so that
as the Apostle complains, they cannot do the things that they would. But now in
Heaven these Complaints shall cease, and all the disorders and Irregularities
of the Affections shall be cured, and the Soul shall perfectly, and
everlastingly love God, and contemplate the Excellencies and Perfections that
are in him with unspeakable Delight and Satisfaction: For where ever there is
the Actings of these Affections, it always carries much Pleasure and Delight
along with it; especially where the Object beloved is deserving, and the
Affections are strong toward it. Now in Heaven the Object is most deserving to
be beloved; for it is the ever blessed God, and the Affections of the Soul will
be strongest; for there Love shall be in its Height and Perfection; and that
which results from hence must be infinite Satisfaction and Delight unto the
Soul, so that it cannot choose but it must love God. There holy Souls shall have
continual views of the perfect Beauty of him, who is altogether lovely; yea,
who is Love it self; the sight of whom will not only wonderfully draw their
Hearts and Affections toward him, but fill their Souls with continual
Ravishments of Love and Joy in him; so that it is impossible they should do
otherwise than rejoice and delight in him. O this Life of Love which Saints
always live in Heaven! It is that which fills them with unspeakable
Satisfaction and Contentment; yea, Love in Heaven is that which will be both
the Work and the Reward of a Saint at once; and that in Constancy and
Perpetuity.

And so for a Saint's Joy, which is another Affection of the Soul. How
irregularly does it frequently act; we rejoice when we should mourn, and we
mourn when we should rejoice; or if not so, yet we often exceed in our Joy and
Delight. Commonly it is with us in our Enjoyments of the World, as it is with
us in our Losses in the World: When we lose the Comforts of the World, we over-
grieve, and are cast down so excessively, as if we had nothing left to take any
Delight or Comfort in. And just so is it with us in our Enjoyments of the
World; when God blesses us with outward Comforts, we over-love and delight in
them; so that that which God gives us to draw our Hearts nearer to himself, by
the Excesses of our Joy and Delight in them, takes away our Hearts more from
him; insomuch that we are more forgetful of God by our inordinate rejoicing in
what he bestows upon us: A very evil and ungrateful return unto God for his
Kindness to us; but yet it is that which we are very inclinable unto. Hence
therefore is it that we are so often cautioned against all excessive Love of,
or Delight in things here below; for Love to, and Joy and Delight in any thing
always go together; the Apostle therefore bids us, 1 John 3.16, Love not the
World, nor the things of the World; if any Man love the World, the Love of the
Father is not in him: Not that it is absolutely unlawful to express any kind of
Love to, or Delight in Worldly Things. But it is as if he had said; so hard and
difficult a thing it is for Christians, in loving and delighting in worldly
Enjoyments, to keep their Affections within their bounds, and to express no
more of Joy and Delight in those things than is due to them; that it is almost
necessary to lay a Command upon them, not to love the World at all; such a
proneness is there in the best of Christians to transgress, when any allowance
is given unto these carnal Hearts and Affections of ours toward worldly
Enjoyments. It is true, a Believer is not only allowed, but commanded to
rejoice; yea, and to rejoice always; and none have more cause so to do than he:
But it is not in the persons or things of this World, but in God; so runs the
Command, 1 These. 5. Rejoice always in the Lord, and again I say rejoice. But
yet all rejoicing in outward Enjoyments is not forbidden him neither. A
Christian, who is accepted of God, may, as the wise Man speaks, eat his Bread
with Joy, and drink his Wine with a merry Heart, Eccles. 4.7. that is, he may
rejoice, and be cheerful in the use of those Comforts and Refreshments that God
bestows upon him. But yet in the greatest abundance of them, his Moderation
ought to be known unto all Men, and still he must rejoice in them as if he
rejoiced not; that is, use them and rejoice in them with a holy kind of
Indifferency of Soul. But now here is the great failing of Christians, they
exceed those bounds and limits that God allows them, letting out their Hearts
and Affections inordinately toward them: But now in Heaven these delightful
Affections of the Soul shall be regulated. A Saint's Joy there shall be always
rightly placed, and duly bounded: God will there be the only Object of our Joy,
and the right bounding of our Joys and Delights in him, will be to joy and
rejoice in him without bounds and limits: Let our rejoicing in him be never so
great, it cannot be so great as he deserves. Were it possible for one glorified
Soul in Heaven to contain in it all the Affections of Love and Delight, that
are scattered up and down in all the Saints and Angels in Heaven, and to put
forth the Extremity of those Affections toward the great and blessed God, in
loving and delighting in him to the utmost of its Capacity; yet when that Soul
has acted with the greatest ardency of all these Affections toward God, still
is there more of Worth and Excellency in God, than all these Affections can
reach unto, and infinitely more does he still deserve to be loved and delighted
in. It is true, a gracious Soul in Heaven shall have other Objects to delight
in, as Saints and Angels, and the glorious place of its Habitation, the highest
Heavens: But whatever Joy or Delight the Soul expresses in or toward any of
these Objects, it is because of the Divine Excellencies and Perfections that
are communicated to them, and do shine forth gloriously in them. But still God
is the chiefest Object of their Joy. Here on Earth a Saint's Joy is chiefly in
God, Hab. 3. I will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation.
Psalm. 34.2. My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord; Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in
the Lord, O ye Righteous. And if it be thus with the People of God here, much
more will it be so with them in Heaven; that which is now their Duty, shall
there be their eternal Reward, always to rejoice in God; for in his presence is
fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. And oh, what
a support may this be to a Soul, that by the excess of its Joy and Delight in
worldly Enjoyments, has provoked God to hide his Face from it; and being
sensible of its Sin, is returning unto God, seeking after him with weeping and
mourning, because of its offending him; though as yet it cannot find God
graciously smiling upon it. Go on still, O Soul, seek him, and mourn after him;
and remember for thy Comfort, though weeping may endure for a night, yet joy
will come in the morning; there is a time coming when thy Sorrow shall be
turned into Joy; yea, when thou shall have fullness and perpetuity of Joy in
Conjunction; for it shall be that in which thou shall bathe thy Soul with
infinite Pleasure and Delight, to all Eternity.

I shall now close this Chapter with a short Discourse of that, which is a
necessary addition unto all that has been said, for the completing the Saints
Happiness in Heaven; and that is the perpetuity or eternity thereof. This is a
Crown unto our Crown of Glory, that it shall be eternal. It is true, God is the
chief Happiness of a Saint in Heaven; but though God be the chief; yea, the only
Happiness of glorified Souls, and Heaven it self were no Happiness to a Saint
without God there; yet if it be not an eternal Enjoyment of God in Heaven, a
Believer's Happiness there would be as it were no Happiness to him; for the
greater the Good is that is enjoyed, if mixed with continual Fears of losing
it, the less Joy and Delight is there unto any in the possessing of it; because
the fear of being deprived of so great a Good abates so much of the Happiness
and Comfort, that otherwise would accrue unto the Soul in the enjoying of it,
that it makes it to be very little comparatively to what it would be. That
which otherwise would be unexpressibly delectable in the Enjoyment, by our
Fears of losing it, gives little Contentment to us while we are possessed of
it. Now though there be just Cause for us to fear the loss of all earthly
Enjoyments; and possibly it may be necessary, that God should suffer such Fears
to prevail upon us, that worldly things may have less of our Hearts and
Affections, and himself the more; yet as to Heaven, and the Happiness thereof,
there is no ground for any such Fears: Nay, though the Happiness of Heaven be
Ten thousand times greater than what we can promise our selves in all worldly
Enjoyments; yet that which adds to the excellency of that Happiness, is this,
that it is a thousand times more certain, and secure than any worldly thing can
be. The Happiness of Heaven is not only a full and complete Happiness, but it
is also a secure Happiness: It is a full Happiness; holy Souls, though they are
never satisfied till then; yet are they then fully satisfied. In Heaven there
is a Cessation of Desire. In the enjoyment of God in that glorious Place, there
is more of Happiness than the Soul is able to receive or bear. And as this
Happiness is full and satisfactory, so is it also secure; it is a Happiness
that cannot be lost: The Gates of the New Jerusalem, that is of Heaven, are
therefore said to stand open, to show there is no fear of any Enemies Approach
to take away the Happiness of a Saint there. God will never take away the
Happiness of a Saint from him; the Devil nor Sin cannot take it away; neither
shall Man himself either lose or throw it away. The Happiness of a Saint in
Heaven, is not like the Happiness of Man in Paradise, which was in his own
keeping, and so was soon lost by him; but it is in God's hands, and so it
cannot be lost. As the Power of God now preserves, and keeps a Saint for the
enjoyment of Heaven; therefore, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.5. You are kept by
the mighty Power of God, through Faith, unto Salvation. So the Love; the Grace,
the Mercy of God, that has bestowed the Happiness of Heaven upon them, will
for ever secure the Enjoyment of it to them. And as the Happiness of Heaven
cannot be lost, so it shall never decay; it is therefore called by the Apostle,
1 Pet. 1.4. An Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away: And
says the same Apostle, chap. 5.4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, you
shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away; neither Moth nor Thief
comes there; neither internal nor external Means of Corruption or Decay. Here
on Earth the sweetest Comforts soonest fade; as the sweetest Rose soonest
withers But in Heaven, there is an eternal Freshness and Greenness upon a
Saint's Blessedness. When glorified Souls have sung the Song of Moses and the
Lamb Millions of Millions of Years, it is a new Song still, and as pleasant and
delightful as ever. And that a Saint's Happiness may be perfect and complete,
it is that which shall never have an end. Heaven is not a Tenement at Will; but
an Inheritance purchased for the Saints by the Blood of Christ, and settled upon
them for ever. We know, says the Apostle, that when this earthly house of our
Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. And says our Lord, My Sheep
hear my Voice, and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal Life. Romans
6.23. The Gift of God is eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Mortality
is the Disgrace of all earthly Enjoyments. To a carnal Eye indeed the things of
this World appear great and glorious; but the brevity and shortness of their
continuance should not only disparage, but render them contemptible to a
gracious Soul. No Man can greatly delight in that which he knows will quickly
be taken from him. It must needs spoil our carnal Mirth and Jollity, when we
find our pleasant and delightful things dying in our hands. No Man can cast a
greater Reproach and Disgrace upon any thing of the greatest Excellency, than
to call it a frail perishing thing. Now such are all worldly Enjoyments, they
will soon be at an end; for as the Apostle speaks, they pass away; yea, they
will quickly not be at all. What says the Psalmist, Psalm. 39.6. Surely every
Man walks in a vain show, he disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up
Riches, and knows not who shall enjoy them? Why, wicked Men reckon that they
themselves shall enjoy them: It is true they do so; but so short and uncertain
is the Life of Man, that the Psalmist does as it were pass by him that is the
gainer of them, as one not fit to be mentioned for an enjoyer of what he has
taken so much pains for; because by that time he has with great toil and
labor; and, it may be, with a great deal of sin and guilt also, obtained what
he desired, his Life is at an end, and he forced to leave it unto others; but
who shall enjoy it, he knows not. O this shortness of our Lives: and the
uncertainty of our Enjoyment of all wordly Things, should put a check to our
eager pursuits after them, for they and we must soon part again. There may be
indeed some ignorant and forgetful Persons, who may have no such sad and
melancholy. Thoughts to disturb them in their carnal Pleasures and Delights;
and such may for the present be outwardly merry and jovial; but what will
become of this Mirth and Jollity, when they come to lie upon a Deathbed? It
will be but a poor relief, that the Thoughts of having enjoyed abundance of
worldly Things, will yield unto any at such a time. It Is a sorry Happiness, and
that which deserves not the Name of it, that consists in an ignorance or
forgetfulness of an approaching Misery. But now in Heaven a Saint's Happiness
is eternal. Once in Heaven, and for ever there. Oh, blessed Eternity! Happy are
those Souls that arrive in that state of perfect Bliss; for none are there
perplexed with any sad and melancholy Thoughts; nor are the Joys of those
blessed ones interrupted with any Fears of the Expiration of their Happiness.
All that enter into that holy Place become Pillars in the Temple of God, where
they abide for ever, Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in
the house of my God, and he shall go out no more. Into that earthly Paradise,
wherein God put our first Parents, there was a way out, but no way in again.
But into the Heavenly Paradise, there is a way in, even a pleasant and
delightful way unto Believers, though a thorny and bloody way unto Christ: But
there is no way out again. What says Abraham to the rich Man in Hell, Luke
16.26. They that would pass from hence unto you, cannot. What a strange kind of
Expression is that? Can it be thought that any would pass from Heaven, a place
of inexpressible Joy and Happiness, unto Hell, a place of inexpressible Misery
and Torment, if they might? Certainly, Hell is not a place so desirable, nor is
Heaven a place so contemptible, that any of those happy Souls that are now in
Glory, should be desirous to make an Exchange of the Bliss and Happiness of the
one, for the Pain and Torment of the other. No, that is not the meaning of the
place; but it is an Expression spoken only to show the impossibility of the
Saints losing the Happiness of Heaven. They may as well be thought to be
covetous of exchanging the Happiness of that blessed place, for the Anguish and
Torment of the Damned in Hell; as it can be supposed that they should ever be
deprived of the Happiness of Heaven; for says Abraham, if it were possible to
suppose this of the Saints in Heaven, that they should be willing to do this,
yet says he, They cannot; that is they cannot, nor shall not to Eternity ever
lose the Happiness they enjoy in Heaven: Misery it self to Eternity may as soon
be desired and embraced by them, as Happiness it self can be supposed to be
parted with and lost by them. For they that would come from us to you cannot.
Oh happy and blessed State, who would not with the greatest diligence contend
to be a partaker of it?

O my Soul, loose then thy hold of the World, and all the Enjoyments thereof.
All thy Pleasures and Delights here below, are but Dreams and Fancies, compared
with what the Saints shall Eternally enjoy in Heaven: Cheerfully therefore quit
thy Interest in what is but appearing and uncertain, for that which has the
greatest Reality and Permanency in it. Let it not grieve thee, that thou
partest with thy dearest Friends and Relations; nay let it not trouble thee,
though thou partest with thy life it self, if thy parting with these, be the way
of God's appointment through which thou must pass to enter upon that State and
Condition, where not only all thy Fears and Troubles shall cease and come to an
end; but where they shall all be changed into an Eternity of Joy and Delight,
as they shall most certainly be in Heaven.

And now O Christian Reader, let me persuade thee for some little time once a
day to withdraw thy self from the World, and the business and affairs thereof,
and seriously consider with thy self of this great Word, or rather State of
Eternity. Does it not highly concern thee; nay is there any thing that can be
of greater moment unto thee, than to know how it shall go with thee to all
Eternity? Holy Souls are sure to enjoy a state of Eternal Happiness in Heaven;
this the Scripture abundantly confirms, and thou thy self do believe to be a
great Truth; but is this state of Eternal Happiness like to be thine? have thou
it made sure unto thee upon such grounds as will not deceive thee another day?
That an Eternal State does abide thee is beyond all doubting, but whether is it
a State of Eternal Happiness or Eternal Misery, is the great question thou art
to be resolved in.

Consider O Soul, it is thy being Eternally in either of these states, that
will make thee Miserable or Happy indeed. It is not thy being among the Damned
in Hell, comparatively, that will make thee miserable, but thy being Eternally
under the Torments of Hell, this is that which makes thee truly miserable. And
on the other hand, it is not thy being in Heaven comparatively that will make
thee Happy, but it is thy being Eternally there that makes thee truly Happy.
This, this is that which Accents thy Misery or thy Happiness, even the Eternity
of it. Oh Eternity, Eternity, thou art the bitterest, and thou art the sweetest
word in all the World; to the Damned thou art the bitterest of all words,
because their Torments are to last to all Eternity. And to the Godly thou art
the sweetest word in all the World, for their Joys and Happiness shall last
unto all Eternity. There is nothing either in Heaven or in Hell but what speaks
Eternity. There is nothing in Hell but what is Eternal. Hell it self that place
of Torment is Eternal. The Sufferings and Torments of the Damned in Hell are
Eternal. The Wrath and Vengeance of God that is the cause of those Torments, in
Eternal. Yea all the Damned themselves, together with the Devil and his Angels,
are all to be sufferers under an Eternity of Torments in Hell. O Eternity,
Eternity, how miserable beyond all expression, do thou make the condition of
the Damned to be! And as there is nothing in Hell but what is Eternal, so
neither is there any thing in Heaven, but what speaks Eternity. There is the
Great and Blessed God, the Father of Eternity, the Sum and Height of the
Saints Happiness in Heaven, to be Eternally enjoyed. It is there that the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Saints great and blessed Redeemer is, whose Meritorious Death
and Sufferings has Deserved and Obtained for them the Eternal Enjoyment of
that Happiness which there they are partakers of. Heaven that place of Bliss
and Happiness, where God manifests and displays all his Glorious Excellencies
and Perfections, is Eternal. The blessed Company and Society of a Saint in
Heaven, the innumerable Company of Glorified Saints and Angels shall Eternally
be their fellow Inhabitants in that Holy place. Yea, both the Happiness of
Heaven, and every Saint that shall participate of that Happiness, shall both
continue in conjunction together Everlastingly. Here, O my Soul, is a Happiness
most worthy of all thy thoughts; a Happiness so great, that it calls for and
deserves all thy Time, all thy Parts; yea, all the Labor and Pains thou can
possibly lay out for the obtaining of it. O Eternity, Eternity, how pleasant,
how delightful a word art thou for Holy Souls to contemplate upon; thou art not
more full of dread and horror to the wicked in Hell, than thou art full of
pleasure and delight unto the Saints in Heaven; thou art the Sweetness, the
Consummation, the Perfection of a Saint's Happiness. God himself, who is the
All of a Saint's Happiness, if he be not enjoyed for ever, cannot make a Saint
always Happy. Unless an Eternity of Enjoyment be added to a Saint's Happiness
in Heaven, he cannot be fully and completely Happy: It is true, whilst he
enjoys the Happiness of Heaven, he is in a Happy state; but if Eternity be not
added to that Enjoyment, a time will come when that Happiness shall cease and
have an end. Take away Eternity from a Saint's Happiness, and there not only
will, but there must come a time, when a Saint must be miserable. O Eternity,
Eternity, thou art not only a Happiness added to a Saint's Happiness in Heaven,
but thou art that blessed Band that unitest and tiest all the scattered parcels
of a Saint's Happiness together, in one bundle for his satisfaction and
security for ever. O my Soul study this word Eternity well, as it is the
Crowning addition unto the Saints Happiness. It is that which will revive and
quicken thee; yea, it is that which will put a new life into thee, in thy
greatest Agonies and Sufferings which thou can undergo here; for they are but
of short continuance: Death at farthest, will come and put an end to them all.
but the Glory and Happiness that remains for thee in Heaven that is Eternal and
Everlasting, and shall never, never, never know an end.

CHAP. V.
Of the Efficient Cause of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, namely the Free
Grace of God. Of the Meritorious Cause of the Saints Happiness, namely the
Death and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ. Of the Final Cause of the Saints
Happiness, namely, the Glory of God. Holiness the Saints great Qualification
for Heaven. Wicked Men unsuitable to the Work of Heaven, and to the Reward of
Heaven; both which are Holy. In Heaven there is both an Eternal Work for Saints
to be Employed in, and an Eternal Reward for Saints to Enjoy.

THat which is next to be discoursed of in the handling of this Subject of the
Saints Happiness, according to my propounded Method, is the consideration of
that Happiness in the several causes of it.

Now in speaking unto this head, I shall discourse a little upon these three
particulars. The Efficient Cause of the Saints Happiness in Heaven. The
Meritorious Cause of that Happiness. And lastly, the Final Cause thereof.

First, The Efficient Fundamental Cause of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, and
that is the Free Grace of God. Now for this the Scripture is very full Ephesians.
2.4, 5, etc. But God who is rich in Mercy; for the great love wherewith he
loved us. Even when we were dead in Sins and Trespasses, has quickened us
together with Christ, (by Grace ye are saved) And has raised us up together,
and made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. That in the Ages
to come, he might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace in his kindness
toward us through Christ Jesus. For by Grace are ye saved through Faith, and
that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. So in Romans 6.23. The Gift of
God is Eternal Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. All is from the free Grace
of God. And though this Happiness of the Saints be the highest that can be
bestowed upon any, yet is it that which is given freely. What says our Lord,
Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give
you the Kingdom. This is to act like a God, to give most bountifully and yet
most freely. To give the highest and best Gifts, and yet to give them freely
and undeservedly. Thus God gives himself, Heaven, Glory, and Eternal Life
freely. All that he does for his people, from their first Conversion on Earth,
unto their Eternal Glorification in Heaven, is all from his own free Grace and
Good Will. Their Conversion is of Grace, James 1.18. Of his own good will begat
he us by the Word of Truth. Their Justification is of Grace, Romans 3.24. Being
justified freely by his Grace. Their Sanctification also is of Grace, Titus
2.11, 12, 13. The Grace of God that has appeared unto all men, teaches us
that denying all ungodliness and worldly lust, we should live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present evil World. Yea, their Glorification
also is of Grace, Romans 9.23. That he might make known the Riches of his Glory
on the Vessels of Mercy, that he had before prepared unto Glory. The work of
Heaven is to Praise and Glorify God for ever; and nothing will draw forth the
Praises and Thanksgivings of the Saints there so much, as the consideration of
the freeness and richness of his Grace and Love. When a Soul is brought to
Heaven merely by the free Grace and Love of God, and sees that Happiness it
there enjoys, and shall do to all Eternity, is bestowed upon it on no other
account, but from the free and undeserved Grace and Mercy of God. Oh how does
this enlarge and fill such a Soul with Praises unto God, and so will do to all
Eternity, because free Grace and Mercy has done it.

Secondly, There is the Meritorious Cause of the Saints Happiness in Heaven,
and that is the Death and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ. Not their Works,
not their Prayers, their Tears, their Fastings, their Alms deeds, no nor their
Sufferings also. To make our Good Works the Purchase of Heaven, is a great
wrong to the Blood of Christ. Who ever thinks by their Doing or Suffering, to
merit Heaven and Salvation, they put their Duties and Services in the place of
Christ; for he, and he only has deserved Heaven and Glory for us. It is true,
Good Works are the Causey or Pathway in which we must walk toward Heaven, but
they are not the Meritorious procuring Cause of our obtaining Heaven, that is
only the Blood of Christ. Our Duty is to be zealous of Good Works, but when we
have abounded most in the practice of them, we must rely on the Merits and
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, for God's acceptance of them, and for our
Happiness and Glorification after them. All that we do of our selves, shows us
to be sinful Servants: and all that we do when assisted by the Grace and Spirit
of God, makes us still to be but unprofitable Servants, because we have done no
more than what was our Duty to do. All our Duties and Services, even the best
of them, are both Defective and Defiled, Defective of the good that God
commands, and Defiled with the Evil that God forbids: now that which is
Defective and Defiled, cannot be Meritorious: that which deserves Eternal Wrath
and Vengeance in the doing of it, cannot by the doing of it, procure
everlasting Grace and Favor. There are none of our Prayers we send up unto
Heaven, but stand in need of the Intercession of Christ to make them prevalent
with God. None of our Tears shed for offending of God by Sin, but wants the
Blood of Christ to wash them, or else they are but puddlewater. None of our
Sighs but must be perfumed with the Incense of Christ, or else they are no
better than howling in the Ears of God. Conscience can pick a thousand holes in
the best Duties that ever any of us tendered unto God, and what then does God
see in them, who is a thousand times greater than our Consciences, and knows
all things. Heaven and Glory accompany Grace and Holiness, not by virtue of any
inherent Worth and Excellency in them to deserve so great a Happiness; but by
virtue of a Promise that God has made that those that do persevere in Grace
and Holiness, shall inherit Eternal Life and Glory. God was a free Promiser,
and he might have chose whether he would have made his People a Promise of
Heaven and Happiness; and if he had not Freely and Graciously done it, it was
not all their Duties, nor all their Sufferings, no nor all their Graces, that
could have deserved or procured that Happiness for them. But since God has so
Freely and Graciously been pleased to make a Promise to his People of Heaven
and Glory, he is now become a Debtor to his own Promise, and he will be True
and Faithful in keeping of his Word. And thus we are to understand those
Scriptures that speak of the Justice and Righteousness of God, as that in 1
John 1.19. If we confess our sins, he is Faithful and Just to forgive us our
sins. So God is not unrighteous to forget your Labor of Love. So 2 These. 1.6.
It is a Righteous thing with God, to recomperse Tribulation to them that
trouble you; but to you who are troubled, rest. So 2 Timothy 4 6. Henceforth is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge,
shall give unto me at that day. In all these places, Justice and Righteousness
is not to be taken for Commutative Righteousness; but for the Righteousness of
God's Promise and Fidelity: and God is said to be a Righteous God in these
places, because he will keep his Word, and make good his Promises made unto his
People. And to note it by the way, what abundant matter of Joy and rejoicing
does this afford unto those who have true Grace; though but in a small degree,
yet if it be in Truth, here is great comfort unto such Souls, because Grace
does not as a Natural Cause produce Glory; but by the Covenant and Promise of
God; and so the weakest Grace may plead this as well as the strongest; and the
lowest Believer may say, I have as good and as faithful a Promise for Heaven
and Happiness, as the strongest. He that gives a Cup of cold water to a Prophet
in the Name of a Prophet, and because he belongs to Christ, he shall not lose
his Reward, no not the Reward of Heaven and Glory. But yet still all a
Believers merit, with respect to the Love and Favor of God here, and the
Eternal enjoyment of him in Heaven, is in Jesus Christ; his Death and
Sufferings is that which obtains all for him. Romans 5.1, 2. Being justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ; and rejoice in
Hope of the Glory of God. So in 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy, has begotten us
again unto a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to
an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us. And the Blessed Apostle St. Paul, who doubtless, (after his
Conversion) was as Holy a man as ever lived, yet all his Glorying and
Rejoicing, all his Faith and Confidence, was only in Christ; I desire to know
nothing among you, but Jesus Christ and him Crucified. Cor. and in Phil. 3.3,
9. I count all things but loss and dung, for the excellency of the Knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord. For whom I suffer the loss of all things; and count them
but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness of God by Faith. This was all St. Paul gloried in,
that upon which he built his Hopes and Expectations of Heaven and Happiness;
not upon any good works he had done, but upon what Christ had done and suffered
for him, though he had whereof to Glory, as himself says, yet he looked upon
all as nothing, and desired only to be found in Christ. And whatever Conceit or
Opinion sinners may have of themselves, and of the Merit of their Duties and
Services, in their Health and Prosperity, when Death and Judgment according to
their Apprehensions, seems to be many years distant from them; or whatever men
may say in the heat of a Dispute concerning the Merit of their good Works; yet
certainly, they will be of another mind, when Death lays hold of them with its
cold hands, and when an awakened Conscience is hurrying them on to make their
appearance before the Tribunal of the great God, the Righteous Judge of Heaven
and Earth. There are few if any that are so bold and presumptuous as to boast
of their Merits upon a Deathbed. No, Death and Judgment convince and alter
men's minds, making them speak quite another Language than what they did
formerly. It is not then, Lord deal with me according to my Deserts, but Lord
deal with me according to thy Mercy. Blot out mine Offenses O Lord, not
according to the Merit of a dying sinner, but according to the Merit of a dying
Savior. This, this is the Language of a sinner upon a Death bed. Then a
Bellarmine will confute himself and cry out, Oh it is safest trusting to the
Merit of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, The final Cause of the Saint's Happiness is the Honor and Glory of
God. We read Luke 2.13, 14. when our Lord Jesus came into the World on this
very Errand, that he might obtain eternal Redemption and Salvation for Sinners;
the Angels those extraordinary Ambassadors of Heaven, proclaim the Tidings
thereof to the Shepherds; saying, Glory to God in the Highest, on Earth Peace,
and good Will toward Man. Not only is Man commanded to do all things for the
Glory of God, but God himself does all he does with respect to his own Glory.
As for Man, God made him for himself; and it is highly rational, that as the
enjoyment of God is Man's highest Happiness, so his Glory should be his chief
end; and unless this be a chief Ingredient into all our Duties and Services,
they are neither acceptable to God, nor comfortable to us. The Scripture
commands this as our great Duty, that we make the Glory of God our supreme End
in all our Actions, Matthew. 5.16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they
may see your Good Works; for what end, that they may glorify your Father that
is in Heaven. So, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do
all to the Glory of God. Yea, in Heaven where the Saints shall be fully and
completely happy; yet shall it be their eternal Exercise, to ascribe Blessing,
Honor, Glory, and Praise unto him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb
for evermore, Rev. 5.13. And not only is Man commanded to do all that he does
to the Glory of God, but God himself does all he does with respect to his own
Glory. The Work of Creation, the Works of Providence, the Work of Redemption;
they are all transacted here in Time, and perfected in Eternity, that God
thereby may be glorified.

Our next Enquiry shall be concerning the great Qualification of the Saints for
Heaven, and that is Holiness.

Now by Holiness, I mean not any one single Grace wrought in the Heart of a
Believer; but the universal Operation or Conjunction of all the Graces of the
Spirit of God, wrought in the Soul of a Saint. Holiness is a real, inward,
thorough Change wrought in the whole Man by the powerful Operation of the
Spirit of God, whereby not only the Heart is purged from the Love of all Sin,
and the Life from the Dominion and Practice thereof; but it is that also
whereby the whole Man is carried out in Ways of Duty and Obedience, in the
daily Exercise of Grace, till it be brought to eternal Glory in Heaven.

Now that Holiness is the great Qualification of a Saint for Heaven, the
Scripture abundantly manifests, Psalm. 15.1. Lord, who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle? Who shall ascend into thy Holy Hill? The next Words tell us, He
that walks uprightly, and works Righteousness, and that speaks the Truth
in His Heart. Matthew. 5.6. Blessed are the Pure in Heart, for they shall see
God. Heb 12.14. Follow Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord.
Heaven is so holy a Place, that no unclean thing shall in any wise enter
therein. Acts 26.18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness
of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are sanctified. Sanctification and
Holiness is the great Qualification of all those that shall partake of the
Happiness of Heaven. Not that Holiness is the meritorious Cause of that
Happiness; no, that is nothing but the Blood of Christ; Holiness is only that
which qualifies, and makes a Believer fit to partake of the Happiness of
Heaven. And this is the meaning of the Apostle, Col. 1.12. Giving Thanks to God
and the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light. There is an absolute necessary connection between Holiness and
Heaven; Holiness is Heaven, and Heaven is Holiness. Holiness is Heaven begun,
and Heaven is Holiness consummated; they are but one and the same thing, though
greatly differing in degrees: Holiness in a Saint here, is mixed with Sin and
Corruption, and so is imperfect in this Life. But now in Heaven, Holiness shall
be without Imperfection; there is nothing to oppose, or hinder the Holiness of
a Saint: Holiness is there come to its full Growth and highest Perfection; for
there is Holiness, and nothing but Holiness. Now Grace and Holiness in a Saint
here, being the same with that Glory that is the expected Consummation of a
Saint's Happiness hereafter; it shows the great necessity that there is, that
all that desire to be happy hereafter, should endeavor to be holy here.

Now how Holiness qualifies for Heaven, and why it is so necessary to the
obtaining of Heaven, will appear in two Particulars: One is, because Holiness
and Heaven are one and the same thing: And the other is, because of the great
unsuitableness between Heaven and an unholy Soul.

First, There is an agreeableness, yea, a sameness between Holiness and Heaven.
The Glory of Heaven lies not in this; that a Saint shall there outshine the
brightness of the Sun; that there he shall not be exposed to Heat, to Cold, to
Nakedness or Want; that there he shall be free from Diseases, Sickness, and
Death it self; that he shall not stand in need of Meat, Drink and Clothing; no,
nor that he shall always be in the hearing of melodious Songs, and Hallilujahs
of Saints and Angels. These Things indeed are in Heaven, and a part of the
Happiness thereof, as every thing that the heart of Man can desire or imagine,
that is truly excellent does make up the Happiness of that blessed State. But
that which chiefly constitutes. Heaven, is Holiness; there is a holy God, there
is a holy Place, there is holy Company and Society; yea, every thing that is
holy, and nothing but what is holy. There it is that holy Souls shall be for
ever united to a holy God, by a continual fervor of holy Love; there it is
that they shall always holily depend upon God, by holy and heavenly Acts of
Faith and Hope. There it is that they shall eternally obey God with a holy Joy
and Delight; and all this with the same holy Love, Faith, Hope and Joy, which
they did put forth toward God here upon Earth; only in Heaven, these Graces
shall be advanced and exalted above all those Imperfections and Frailties that
in this Life did attend them. This now is the Glory of Heaven; and indeed what
greater Glory can there be, than this; Holiness being the Glory of God himself:
Thus Moses styles God in his triumphant Song, Exodus 15.11. Where he tells us,
though he be a God that is fearful in Praises, and infinite in Power; yet that
wherein he is most glorious, is his Holiness: Who is a God like unto thee, O
Lord, amongst the Gods? Who is like unto thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in
Praises doing Wonders? And what is the Glory of the Saints in Heaven, but only
a Reflection of the Glory of God cast upon them? Now as God is in an especial
manner glorious in his Holiness, so are they glorious in their Holiness. And
what then will become of all the hopes of wicked and profane Sinners, whose
Hearts are full of Hatred and Malice, not only against those that are holy, but
against Holiness it self; witness their impious and profane scoffing at
Holiness; their persecuting all those that make a stricter Profession of it
than themselves? What a strange kind of Heaven do these Men hope for? and how
miserably do they deceive themselves? for if Grace and Glory, if Holiness and
Heaven be one and the same thing, as they are; then certainly all the hopes of
such wretched Sinners, are built upon a rotten Foundation: For how can they
that hate and persecute a little Holiness in a Saint on Earth, where it is
mingled with much Sin and Corruption, take delight in Heaven, where there are
greater measures and degrees of Grace and Holiness, than all the Saints that
ever lived here upon Earth did, or could attain to in this World; yea, where
there is nothing else but Grace and Holiness? In vain, O Sinner, do thou wish
or hope for a Heaven, where there is nothing but Ease and Pleasure; a Place
where thou may be above all thy Cares and Fears; where thou may enjoy a
constant Freedom from all thy Pains and Distresses, that now afflict and
torment thee; such a Heaven as this is impossible; God never made any such, nor
can thou in reason expect it; but contrariwise know thou must to thy Terror
and Amazement, that the great God has joined sin and the curse so close
together, that Heaven it self would be no Sanctuary to secure thee, either from
the stinging Horrors of an Evil, and now too late awakened and accusing
Conscience; nor from the ghasty and tormenting Fears of Wrath and Hell, if sin
and guilt should enter with thee into that Holy Place.

Secondly, Holiness is a necessary Qualification for Heaven, because without it
there is no suitableness between us and Heaven. All true Pleasure and Delight
is caused from the suitableness that there is between the Object and the Power
or Faculty in man that receives it. It is therefore a pleasant thing for the
Eyes to behold the Light, and so is it also for the Ears to hear melodious
sounds, because these Objects are suited unto those Senses, which otherwise
would not be delightful to them; as we see in those that are Blind and Deaf;
the one takes no Pleasure in the Light, nor the other in Music. And so it is
with us in reference unto Heaven, there is nothing there would be Pleasant and
Delightful to us, did not God before hand prepare and suit our Souls by his
Grace unto that Glory, that shall there be revealed to us. Hence we find the
Apostle, Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto God, who by a work of Sanctification had
made them meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. To
illustrate this a little further, there is a two fold unsuitableness between
every wicked man and Heaven; he is unsuitable to the work of Heaven, and he is
unsuitable to the Reward of Heaven, both which are Holy.

First, Every wicked man is unsuitable to the work of Heaven. What shall be the
work of Holy Souls in Heaven, but to admire and adore; to Bless and Praise, and
with Pleasure and Delight to Love and Serve God for ever: This is that joyful
work wherein Saints and Angles shall spend an Eternity in. And can thou, O
Profane Sinner, who have all thy life time accustomed thy self to wallow in
sin and uncleanness, impose such a cheat upon thy Soul, as to think thou shall
be able to crowd into the number of that Holy and Blessed Company in Heaven,
and there join with them, in those Holy and Blessed Works, that will be the
Delight of those Holy ones to all Eternity? If Sanctification and Holiness be
the only Qualification that manifests any do belong to that Holy Place, What
shall we then say unto all wicked and profane sinners, who not only take no
Delight in the practice of Holiness; but unto whom the thoughts of it are
grievous and burdensome: who are so far from keeping up in their minds
constant Meditations of Holy things, accompanied with strong and lively
affections toward them; that they know no Task or Burden so heavy upon them,
nor so affictive to them, nor that they undertake so unwillingly, as the Duties
of Holiness and Obedience? Oh what a trouble to them is it sometimes to be
drawn, though but to the external performance of Holy Duties? witness their so
seldom engaging in them, with their so slight and careless management of them.
If I should now enquire what is the reason of all this; why truly, that which
lies at the bottom of all, is, an unholy Heart, an unsanctified Nature: and
what would such as these do in Heaven? would not that Holy place be a Hell
rather than a Heaven to them? a place of Torment rather than a place of
Happiness, it being that place where Saints and Angels spend an Eternity in the
most Holy fixed Contemplations, and most ardent Love of God? And surely they
that cannot bear the weak and imperfect Holiness of the People of God here
without railing at it, as a piece of unnecessary and peevish preciseness, will
never be able to bear that perfect spotless Holiness that is in Heaven. In this
World, wicked men at once both vex and laugh at the Purity and Holiness of the
Saints: inwardly they vex and fret at it, though outwardly in their Speeches
and Countenances, they laugh and deride it. Yea, and to some it is, (though it
be a Devilish) Contentment to them, that they can reproach the Defects of the
Godly. Should such as these enter Heaven, while they are such, Heaven would be
a place of exact Torture and Torment to them, because there they would find
nothing of that Sin and Wickedness which is agreeable to their corrupt Hearts
and Natures, but contrarily, all that Purity and Holiness, which they hate;
yea, and nothing but perfect Purity and Holiness, which has no defects for
them to abuse. O the woeful and deplorable, but withal certain and unavoidable
Misery of all unregenerate, unsanctified persons; for though Heaven be a place of
unconceivable Bliss and Happiness, yet Heaven it self cannot make such as they
are happy. Tell me, O all ye wicked and profane wretches, who think no time
misspent or lost, but what is thrown away in Holy Duties, that grudge at every
word spoken in Prayer, that think much of every sand in the Glass that runs at
a Sermon, and unto whom every Summons to the public Service of God is as
unacceptable as their Passing Bell; that cry, when will the Sabbath be gone,
and the Ordinances be over? What would you do in Heaven, or what can such
unholy hearts as yours do there, where a Sabbath shall not be barely as long as
a day, or a week, or a year, but as long as Eternity it self? where there shall
be nothing but a continual performance of Holy Duties and Services, without so
much as one spare minute, or a vain thought, or an idle word for ever? where
whatsoever you shall hear, see or converse with, shall be all Holy. And let me
add this, by how much the more perfect the Holiness of Heaven is, than what the
Holiness of the Saints here on Earth was; by so much the more irksome and
intolerable will it be to the wicked: for if their sore Eyes cannot endure the
light of a Star, how will they be able to bear the dazzling brightness of the
Sun?

Secondly, Wicked men are not only unsuitable to the Work of Heaven, but they
are unsuitable to the Reward of Heaven. The Work of Heaven is Holy and
Spiritual, and so is the Reward of Heaven a Holy and Spiritual Reward; and it
lies chiefly in two things, both of them unsuitable to a wicked and carnal
heart: one is a clear and constant Vision of the Great and Blessed God; and the
other is an unconceivable entireness of Communion and Fellowship with him. Now
of all things in the World, these are the things, which as unboly Persons are
unacquainted with; so of all things in the World, they cannot endure, to speak
of each of these briefly.

First, For the Reward of Heaven, that consists in a clear constant Vision of
the Great God, this a Sinner cannot bear. Nothing is more terrible to a guilty
Sinner, than the sight of a Righteous and Holy God. The Scripture acquaints us,
that many of God's own People have had dreadful apprehensions of God upon some,
though but restrained discoveries that he has been pleased to make of himself
unto them. Thus Job in Job 42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self and repent in Dust
and Ashes. So the Prophet Esaias cries out, Woe is me for I am undone because I
am a man of unclean lips, and mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts.
And when our Savior put forth his Divine Power in the working of a Miracle,
the Glory of it was so terrible, that Holy Peter cries out Luke 6. Depart from
me O Lord, for I am a sinful man. What was it now that made these Holy Men so
full of fear and trembling upon these discoveries of God? Why, it was only from
a likeness that was in them unto Wicked men, from those remainders of Sin and
Corruption that still abide in them, whereby they too much resemble ungodly
men, which Grace in this life cannot perfectly destroy. Adam in Innocence had
not, nor have the Saints in Heaven any such dreadful apprehensions of God. No,
Adam then did, and the Saints in Heaven shall for ever enjoy the smiles of
God's face beaming forth upon them. If now the faint and weak discoveries of
God, that he has made of himself unto Holy Men, be so astonishing; O what a
confounding sight will it be unto Sinners, to have all the Glorious Attributes
of God break forth in a full flash of Lightning, not only upon the Faces, but
into the Consciences of Sinners, and when particularly among the rest of them,
they shall behold that dreadful Attribute, his provoked Justice, not only sworn
but armed with Power, and bent for their Destruction. Is this such a Sight of
God, (and wicked men shall behold no other) as will make Heaven desirable unto
Sinners? surely it is not. O that such would think of it before it be too late!

Secondly, Another part of the Reward of Heaven stands in that unconceivable
entireness of Communion and Fellowship with God, which the Saints there enjoy.
This is their great Happiness both on Earth and in Heaven; Holy David therefore
tells us, He had none in Heaven but God, and that there was none on Earth that
he desired in comparison of him. And the Apostle speaking of himself and other
Believers, says, Their Fellowship was with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. And O how sweet and delightful are those intercourses, that pass
between God and Holy Souls in the Duties of his Worship and Service! O what
blessed exchanges of Love for Love! what returns of Obedience and Praise for
Grace and Mercy received, which is the sweetness of every Duty, and that which
powerfully draws and engages Holy Souls to the daily performance of them! And
in Heaven in self, the fullness and perfection of the Saints Happiness is, that
there they shall be for ever with the Lord. Now these Spiritual and Heavenly
Enjoyments wicked men are not only unsuitable to, but they are things which
they also hate, they were ever strangers to them here on Earth, and how then
shall they be fit for them in Heaven. Certainly for wicked men to be tied up to
such Spiritualities as these, will make Heaven it self but an uncomfortable
place to them.

But though wicked Men are neither fitted for the Work nor suited to the Reward
of Heaven; yet is there both a Work and a Reward in Heaven, that remains to be
performed and enjoyed by the People of God. That Heaven is a Place of Rest,
Ease, and Refreshment, is the common and received Notion that all Men have of
it; but that is not all that the Happiness of Heaven is made up of: For it is
not only a place of Rest; but it is also a place of Working. It is true, the
Work there is not toilsome and laborious, but sweet and pleasant, and that
makes the Saints delightfully spend an Eternity therein. In Heaven therefore
the Saints are to perform an eternal Work, as they are there to enjoy an
eternal Reward; both go to the making up the Happiness of Heaven.

First, In Heaven there is an eternal Work for the Saints to be employed in.
Much has been said concerning that Happiness, which the Saints shall enjoy in
Heaven, and more is there of Sweetness and Excellency in it, than Words can
express: But yet we are not so to conceive of the Happiness thereof as some
ignorant Persons do grossly imagine and wish to themselves, as if Heaven were a
Place where the blessed Inhabitants thereof were altogether unactive and
unemployed, enjoying only their Ease and Rest; and so, void of Cares and Fears,
passed away an Eternity. This may be the low and brutish Apprehensions that
profane Sinners may have concerning Heaven; but they are such as are no way
becoming the Glory and Dignity, the Honor and Happiness of that holy Place;
for that Rest the People of God shall enjoy in Heaven, is an operative, working
Rest, or it is Rest and Exercise at once; for though in Heaven the Saints do
rest from their labors, yet they do not rest from their working. Now if any
ask what that Work is, in which the Saints shall be employed in Heaven. I
answer, they shall always be blessing and praising of God there, according to
that in Rev. 5.13. Blessing, Honor and Glory unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore. Continually are those blessed ones
beholding, admiring and adoring of God, and burning in Love to each other, and
mutually rejoicing all in God, and in one another. This now is that eternal
Work that a Saint shall be for ever employed about, in his everlasting Rest: a
Work so full of Pleasure and Delight, that it cannot be intermitted or forborne
by the Saints to Eternity.

Secondly, In Heaven there is an eternal Reward that shall be bestowed upon the
Saints. A Reward so great, and so glorious, as is beyond the Thoughts and
Imaginations, much more beyond the Words and Expressions of poor mortal
Creatues to discover. When all has been said of it that can be, still is there
something of Glory and Excellency, of Sweetness and Delight in this glorious
Reward, that exceeds all Expressions and Apprehensions: Rack and torture the
whole Creation; extract the Quintessence of all the Glory, Beauty, Excellency,
and Goodness that is in all the Creatures in the World; and let it be the
Enjoyment of one Man for his Happiness; yet all this is but a shadowy
representation of that Glory and Happiness that the Saints shall enjoy
hereafter. Let the Desires, Thoughts, and Imaginations of Angels and Men; be
bent upon imagining and contriving what it is they could desire, that would
make the condition of any one happy in the Fruition of it; the heavenly Reward
there, shall be a participating of that Happiness, or that which is infinitely
better and beyond it. The Desires of Men's Souls may run out after great
things; which if they can attain, they question not but the Enjoyment of them
will make them happy. But Men's Imaginations can go much farther, even to the
coveting after that in their Thoughts, that they cannot tell how almost to
desire: But let the Desires and Imaginations of Men's Souls be enlarged and
widened never so greatly and insatiably after a Happiness that may satisfieand
content them; yet still they come infinitely short, both in Desire and in
Imagination, of what shall be the heavenly Reward. And if Desires, if Thoughts,
if Imaginations cannot reach the Greatness of this Reward: Surely all Words,
though nttered with the greatest Eloquence, to represent the Greatness: and
Excellency thereof, must fall infinitely short of it. So many good things are
contained in this Reward, that they exceed Number: So great things, that they
exceed Desire; and so precious, that they exceed Estimation. Nay, this Reward
of the Saints is so great and glorious, that it exceeds both the Faith and Hope
of a Christian. The People of God believe, and trust in God for great things;
and God loves to have the Hopes and Expectations of his People greatned and
enlarged toward himself. Of Abraham it is said, that against Hope, he believed
in Hope, or above Hope. But in this great and glorious Reward of the Saints in
Heaven, we cannot believe above Hope; that is, we cannot believe above the
great things that are hoped for. Whatever we believe and hope for in Heaven;
that which the Saints shall enjoy there, will be above it and beyond it. It is
true, at present we know not what these great things are; but when we come to
Heaven, we shall certainly find that they exceed both our Faith and our Hope.
And to add no more, the Greatness and Glory of this Reward, is that which
exceeds all those Expressions, which the Spirit of God, in Scripture, is
pleased to set forth the the Greatness and Glory of it to us by. Great Things
are there spoken concerning this Happiness of the Saints: But there is still
abundantly more to be revealed and enjoyed, than what that Holy Book has
discovered to us; so great shall be the Reward of the Saints in Heaven, that it
exceeds Words, exceeds Thoughts, exceeds Faith, exceeds Hope: It is too great
for Words to express, too great for Thoughts to conceive, too great for Faith
to believe, too great for Hope to expect: For though Faith believes the Truth,
and Hope expects the Certainty of the things promised; yet Faith does not
believe, nor does Hope expect the Greatness and Fullness of what shall be
hereafter enjoyed by the Saints: For says the Evangelical Prophet, from whom
the Apostle makes use of the same Words, Isa. 64.4. and 1 Cor. 2.9. Since the
beginning of the World, Men have not heard, nor perceived by the Ear; neither
has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for them that
love him, and wait for him. So great shall this Happiness of the Saints in
Heaven be, that it can never be known but by Enjoyment. There shall be nothing
to Eternity, that shall be afflictive or troublesome; but an aggregation, or
meeting together of every thing that is pleasing and delightful, with the
continuance of them for ever. That is a sweet Scripture, and gives us the
fullest Description of that State of Blessedness, in so few Words, Rev. 21.17.
He that overcomes, shall inherit all things, and God will be his God. And what
can be said more to make any one happy? For in this Scripture, we have both the
certainty of a Saint's Reward, and the Fullness of it; the certainty of his
Reward, in these Words, He shall inherit, I will be his God: The fullness of it,
in these Words He shall inherit all things, and God will be his God; and who
can tell what God is, or what it is to have this God to be our God; and truly
no more are we able to tell what it is to have the Heaven of God to be ours;
and as God himself, so the Heaven in which God dwells; both which shall be the
Reward of the Saints hereafter, by reason of their infinite Greatness and
Glory, are better known to us by what they are not, than by what they are; and
we may best conceive of that Recompense of Reward that the Saints shall partake
of in Heaven, when we are told there is nothing there that may affright or
afflict us, nothing that may grieve, molest, or trouble us; but an everlasting
Enjoyment of the highest and sweetest Delight, and Satistaction, that the now,
but much more then, vast and capacious Soul of Man can receive, desire, or in
agine. Art thou now. O Soul, oppressed with the grievous and intolerable
burden of thy Sins, those daily, though also unavoidable Infirmities, by which
thou dishonor est God, grievest his Spirit, woundest thy own Conscience; under
which thou criest out, as a Man distracted: O wretched Man that I am, where,
and by whom shall I find Deliverance: Why, assure thy self, the Old Man shall
never more molest thee in Heaven; there is no Entrance for this Body of Sin and
Death into Life: All the motions and stirrings of Sin shall forever cease in
that eternal Rest. Art thou now overwhelmed with Grief and Sorrow; and does the
smart of one Affliction no sooner wear off, but the bitterness of another comes
in the room of it; and is there thus daily a Succession of them one after
another, for the Trial and Exercise of thy Patience: So that thou may say,
thou art continually a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief; as thy Lord
and Master was before thee? Why, in Heaven God shall wipe away all Tears from
thy Eyes, and Sorrow and Sighing shall for ever fly away. Art thou now
continually harassed with Temptations? Will not the Evil One let thee rest Day
nor Night, but is perpetually haunting thee with horrid and blasphemous
Thoughts, as black as Hell it self can invent? In Heaven thou shall not only be
out of the reach of his fiery Darts, but shall have an everliving Fountain
within thy Soul, that shall be eternally springing up in such spiritual
Contemplations and heavenly Raptures, beyond whatever thou were acquainted with
in thy State of Mortality, even when thou were in the most spiritual and
heavenly Frame. Art thou here under Clouds and Desertions? And do thou walk
up and down mournfully and disconsolately for want of the Light of God's
Countenance, and the manifestations of his Love and Favor toward thee? Does
God seem to hide his Face from thee in Anger and Displeasure, so that thou
roarest and criest out by reason of the Disquietness of thy Soul? Why, in
Heaven all those Clouds shall vanish away, and thou shall have such clear and
full Discoveries of God's Love and Favor, and the Light of his Countenance
shall beat so fully and everlastingly upon thee, that it is impossible thou
should be under the least Fears or Doubtings thereof for ever: For thou shall
then no more see him through a Glass darkly, but Face to Face, without any
interruption or obscurity to all Eternity. This now is something of that great
and glorious Reward, that shall be bestowed upon the Saints in Heaven; but the
fullness and perfection of it cannot be known but by Enjoyment.

CHAP. VI.
An Essay toward the Resolution of some Questions; as (1.) Whether the Saints
shall know one another in Heaven. (2.) Whether there are different Degrees of
Glory in Heaven. (3.) How the Saints are said to be equal with, and like unto
the Angels in Heaven. (4) In what respects Heaven is called a Reward or
Recompense. Some Useful and Necessary Inferences from the Consideration of that
Happiness the Saints shall enjoy in Heaven, deduced in order unto Practice, as,
(1.) Hopes of Heaven should make the World contemptible unto Believers. (2.)
None that expect Heaven hereafter, should be offended at any thing they meet
with in their way thither. (3) Expectations of Heaven should make Christians
live as those that are Heirs of so great a Happiness. (4.) Frequent Thoughts
and Meditations of Heaven, should possess the Minds of those that Hope to
partake of the Happiness of Heaven. (5.) The greatness of the Happiness of
Heaven should put Christians upon examining themselves what Right and Title
they have thereunto. (6.) Hopes and Expectations of Heaven hereafter, should
reconcile to Believers the Thoughts of their own Death: and moderate their
Sorrows for the Death of their Godly Friends and Relations. (7.) Hopes of
Heaven should put Christians upon unwearied Diligence that is attended with
such a Reward. (8.) The consideration of so great a Happiness as Heaven is,
should cause in all Believers a Holy longing of Soul after the Enjoyment of it.
The Conclusion.

THat which remains to be Discoursed of before we come to the Conclusion of
this delightful Subject, is to endeavor to give some light into, though not
full Solution of, some Questions, the Answering whereof will tend much to the
further illustration of the greatness of the Saints happiness in Heaven. And
here,

First, Some may be inquisitive, whether the Saints shall know one another in
Heaven or not?

To this I Answer, it is highly probable that the Saints shall know one another
in Heaven. Were Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Hezekiah,
Josiah, Esaias, Jeremiah, Daniel, Paul, Peter, John, with all the rest of the
Apostles, Saints, and Martyrs of God in all Ages, of whom we have either read
in Scripture, or heard of in History, who have been Eminent in Grace and
Holiness, some for their Humility, some for their Meekness, some for Faith,
some for Patience, some for Self-denial, some for Zeal, some for Contempt of
the World, and the like: were all these Blessed Saints of God living together
at one time and in one place here on Earth, as they now are in Heaven; would
not every Godly man be greatly desirous if it were possible, to see them and to
live with them, especially if there were none but such among them, that they
might be particularly and distinctly acquainted with them, and would not this
Knowledge tend much to their Delight and Satisfaction? surely it would. And is
it Irrational to suppose, that when all the Saints that have lived from the
beginning of the World unto the end of it, shall all meet together in Heaven,
that they might be desirous of a particular Knowledge of one another then? Or
was it so Delightful, and therefore so desirable a thing, to be acquainted with
the Saints of God, particularly when they lived here on Earth, when they were
men of like Passions and Infirmities, as we now are? And will it not be a much
more desirable thing to have a particular acquaintance with them in Heaven,
when all their Sins and Imperfections shall be done away, and they have nothing
in them but the fullness and perfection of that Grace and Holiness, the Initials
and Beginnings whereof, makes the Knowledge and Society of them so desirable
here on Earth? Now certainly if this be a thing desirable in Heaven, as I
humbly conceive it is a thing very probable; why, then it will follow, that
Satisfaction and Contentment herein shall not be wanting in Heaven, for in
Heaven there shall be no desire in Holy Souls, that are Holy and Regular, (and
in Heaven there shall be none but such) that shall be unanswered or unsatisfied.

But further the Scripture seems enclining this way, that the Saints in Heaven
shall know one another; and that not only those who lived together here on
Earth, but all those who ever did, or shall live upon God's Earth, may be known
to one another in Heaven: When God had created Adam he threw him into a deep
sleep, and of one of his Ribs which he then took out of him, he formed Eve and
brings her unto Adam, who as soon as he saw her, presently knew her and what
manner of Creature she was, and therefore says of her, she is bone of my bone,
and flesh of my flesh; and how came Adam by this Knowledge? why, it was by
being filled with the Holy Ghost, by which he understood in an extraordinary
manner who she was. Why, now after the same manner, say some, shall the Saints
be renewed by Christ in Heaven, and thereby come to know their Godly Friends
and Relations; yea, and all the Saints of God in Heaven, much more perfectly
than Adam did know Eve. So in Luke 16. which some take to be a History, others
only a Parable: if it be a History, it is plainly said there of Abraham, that
he knew Lazarus, and of Lazarus that he knew Abraham, and yet they lived near
two thousand years distance in time one from the other, so that they could not
know one another on Earth, and yet are they said to know one another in Heaven.
If it be only a Parable, yet by it Abraham the Father of the Faithful, is
represented as one that had Knowledge, both of the person and happy condition
in which Lazarus was: by which some say is represented the Knowledge Saints
shall have of one another in Heave. We read also Matt. 17.4. that when the
three Disciples were with Christ at his Transfiguration, there appeared unto
him Moses and Elias, whom the Apostles knew, for they say unto him, Let us
build here three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias:
and yet it is very apparent that the Apostles never saw Moses, non Elias in the
Flesh.

Again, If the Saints shall not know one another in Heaven, why is it made by
our Lord a part of the Saints Happiness hereafter, that they shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven? Matt. 11. Memory in
Heaven shall not be abolished but perfected; neither shall our Knowledge there
be impared, much less extinguished, but greatly enlarged and increased.

In Heaven Saints enjoy every good thing, and partake of every good gift that
may add to their Joy and Felicity; will now the meeting with and knowing of our
former near Acquaintance, and dear Relations, together with all the Glorious
Inhabitants of that Heavenly Place, tend to the increasing of that Joy and
Delight that shall there fill and ravish the Souls of the Blessed; surely it
will; Society being nothing so Comfortable, without intimacy of Familiarity and
Acquaintance. It being thus now, it is very probable there shall be a Knowledge
in the Saints of one another hereafter.

Certainly now from all that has been said, and more that might be added, we
may conclude it highly probable, that the Saints in Heaven shall have a
distinct Knowledge of one another Persons, since nothing requisite unto the
Happiness of that Blissful place shall or can be wanting to the Inhabitants
thereof.

To conclude this head, though a Saint's chief desire to be in Heaven, should
be, and always is, that he may see God, and that he may be with the Lord Jesus
Christ; and therefore with his Soul he cries out as the Psalmist, He has none
in Heaven but God; and with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, which is best of all: yet this may add a little to the quickening
of his desires Heavenward, the consideration of his being admitted into the
blessed Society of all the Saints and People of God from the beginning of the
World unto the end of it; even those who were once the excellent ones of the
Earth; and now next unto God and Christ, are the most Excellent and Delightful
Company in Heaven, who shall there be particularly and distinctly known,
beloved and delighted in by him to all Eternity.

Secondly, Another Question is this, Whether there shall be different Degrees
of Glory in Heaven or not? Now in Answer unto this Question, I find Holy and
Learned Men have different apprehensions, some positively affirming it, others
strongly denying it; and both pleading Scripture to maintain their Assertions.
Those that affirm there shall be different Degrees of Glory in Heaven, urge
such Scriptures as these in the defense of it. Daniel 12.3. where it is said,
Some shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and others as the Stars
for ever and ever. So Matthew. 25.28, 29. We read that he that received five
Talents and made a good improvement of them, received a greater Reward than he
that received but two, though he improved them also. So, Corinth. 15.41. The
Apostle tells us, That one Star differs from another Star in Glory, and adds
withal, that, So it shall be in the Resurrection of the Dead. So in Matt. 5.11,
12. our Savior bids those that were persecuted wrongfully for his Names sake,
to Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great should be their Reward in Heaven.
Those now that are against different Degrees of Glory, they urge such
Sctiptures as these in the defense of their Opinion, Matt. 13.43. where our
Lord speaking indefinitely of the Righteous, tells us, That they shall shine
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, without mentioning any
different Degrees of Glory that some shall partake of more than others. So in
Luke 20.36. Our Lord speaking concerning the happy State of the Godly after the
Resurrection, tells us, that they shall die no more, but shall be equal unto
the Angels, and how can they in that State of Bliss. he equai to the Angeis,
and yet unequal among themselves. So again in that place Matt. 20. where the
Laborers in the Vineyard are all said to receive a like Reward, though for
different Work and Labor; for so we read, at evening when the Lord of the
Vineyard came to reckon with his Servants, he gave them every one a Penny,
making those that camt in at the last hour, equal with those that had born the
heat and burden of the day: rendering this as a Reason for what he had done,
that he was free and might do what he would with his own.

These now are some of those Scriptures that are made use of for and against
this assertion of the Saints having different Degrees of Glory in Heaven. Which
is the Truth I shall not affirm. I am inclinable to believe, that there shall
be different Degrees of Glory in Heaven: But withal let me add, though it is
possible that some may have greater Degrees of Glory than others, yet all shall
partake of the same Happiness; nay, all shall have as much of Glory and
Happiness as they can contain; though one Vessel may hold more than another,
yet all shall be as full as they can hold; nay further, which is yet more, all
the Saints in Glory shall enjoy the Happiness of Heaven, in the same perpetuity
one as well as another, for Eternity shall be the measure of all their
Happiness. But whether there shall be different Degrees of Glory in Heaven
hereafter or not, yet may the People of God at present. make this double
improvement of it.

First, If there shall be different Degrees of Glory in Heaven, then the
consideration hereof, should exite Christians to labor after the highest
Degree of Grace that is attainable in this life; because this is the way to
increase their Glory in Heaven. And surely to be ambitiously covetous after the
highest place in Heaven, is very commendable in any. Who would not be desirous
to have his Seat in that Heavenly Jerusalem, next to Cherubims and Seraphims
shall Isay; nay, if it were possible to possess that very place in Heaven that
the Beloved Disciple St. John held here upon Earth, when he lay in the Bosom
Embraces of our Lord Jesus Christ? If our growth and increase in Grace shall
certainly be the increase of our Glory and Happiness hereafter, who is there
then that would be so ill a Husband to himself, as not to stir up and put forth
the Grace of God that is in him, which will prove so greatly advantageous to
him in the life to come? If to be found in the daily exercise of Grace, a
Christian is thereby doing that which will adorn and enrich that Crown of Glory
that shall hereafter be set upon his own head; who then would be so sloathful
and negligent as not to promote and heighten what in him lay, his own Happiness
and Glory?

Secondly, If there shall be no different Degrees of Glory in Heaven, but all
the Saints shall there be of the same Pitch and Stature; Oh then what matter of
Joy and Consolation may it be unto thee O weak Believer to consider, that
though now thy Grace be poor and weak, thy Fears and Doubts be many, thy
Corruptions restless and importunate, thy Temptations strong and potent, and
almost irresistible; though thou see thy self outdone by many in the ways of
Holiness, whom thou greatly admirest, and would with all thy Soul imitate and
follow; yea, overtake and equal in their pace to Heaven, but thou can not:
yet know for thy Comfort, that at the last Day, the same Sentence of Absolution
that is pronounced upon others, shall acquit and Absolve thee also. The same
Heaven that shall be opened unto others for their Eternal Blessedness, shall be
opened to receive thee into that Blessed State with them. Yea the same Crown of
Glory that is set upon their heads, shall for ever Crown thy head also. So that
there shall be no difference between thee and all the Holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Saints of God in all Ages of the World, but thou shall shine in
Glory as a Star of the same Magnitude, and with the same Brightness for ever.

Thirdly, Some upon the reading of those words of our Savior, Luke 20.36.
Where he tells us, that at the Resurrection of the Saints, which he there
calls, the Children of God, and the Children of the Resurrection, shall be
equal unto the Angels; may be desirous to know how, or in what respects shall
the Godly then be like unto, or equal with the Angels.

To this I Answer, they shall be like the Angels in these following particulars.

First, Saints in Heaven shall enjoy the same Glory and Happiness which Angels
do. The Great and Blessed God who is the Delight and Happiness of Angels, shall
be the Delight and Happiness of the Saints also: in one and the same place
shall they both partake of one and the same Blessedness, and that is in Heaven,
and in the same Work and Employment shall they both spend an Eternity together,
namely in Blessing and Praising, in Magnitying and Adoring the infinitely Great
and Blessed God. See for this, Revel. 7.9, 11, 12. where the Saints are said,
to stand before the Throne of God, crying with a loud voice, Salvation unto God
and to the Lamb. And the Angels also standing round about the Throne of God
crying Amen, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power be unto God for ever and ever,
Amen.

Secondly, The Saints in Heaven shall be like unto the Angels in their Fitness
to serve God, and in their Readiness, Cheerfulness, and Vnweariedness in so
doing. This is one of the great requests our Lord has taught us to offer up
unto Heaven in our Prayers, That the Will of God may be done by us on Earth, as
it is done in Heaven, that is as the Angels do it in Heaven, who do it Readily,
Cheerfully, Universally, and Constantly: And thus shall the Saints serve God
and do his Will when they come to Heaven. Here the People of God often
complain, that their Spirits are held down by the Flesh, so that though they
have a willing mind, yet how to perform that which is good as they would, they
find not: the Spirit indeed in them is willing, but the Flesh is weak: Oh how
do they therefore mourn under the impediments of Nature, with which they are
loaded and oppressed! And if at any time they do attain to a more than ordinary
height and frame of Spirit, that their Souls are a little lifted up in the ways
of God, yet is it with great difficulty that they arrive thereunto, and with
much more difficulty that they preserve and keep themselves in it. But in
Heaven the Saints shall be freed from all Infirmities of the Flesh, and shall
Glorify God as the Angels do with Readiness and Activity, with Constancy and
Unweariedness, and with all perfections of Soul and Body, that may render their
Services acceptable to God, and delightful to themselves.

Thirdly, The Saints in Heaven shall be like unto the Argels in their way of
living: What that is our Lord himself tells us, Luke 20.36. Where speaking of
the State of the People of God after the Resurrection, he says, They neither
Marry nor are given in Marriage, neither can they die any more. By which
expressions our Savior gives us to understand, what kind of Life the Saints
shall live in Heaven, a life like unto that of the Angels, who have no manner
of Converse with, live not on the use of or in dependence upon any
Creature Comforts or Enjoyments; but solely and entirely live upon God,
maintaining constant Converse with Him, everlastingly beholding his Glory, and
with infinite Joy and Delight, solace themselves for ever in him. And thus
shall Glorified Saints also live for ever in Heaven, their Bodies shall no more
stand in need, or make use of any Earthly supplies, as Food, Physic, Raiment,
nor shall their Souls express any more Desires to, or Longings after any
Created things; but as the Angels they shall be for ever possessed of God, being
filled with that fullness that is in him. All the Powers and Faculties of their
Souls shall then be Refined and Spiritualized, and with unspeakable Joy and
Delight, shall they Please and Solace themselves in the Contemplation and
Participation of the Infinite and Supreme Good. And thus it appears, that the
Saints in that Happiness which they enjoy in Heaven, shall be like unto the
Angels.

Fourthly. Another thing to be enquired into, is, In what respect Heaven is
called a Reward or Recompense?

To this I Answer, It is true, the Scripture does in many places hold forth
Heaven to us as a Reward or Recompense, that shall be bestowed upon the People
of God after they have done and suffered the Will of God here; but, First, not
by way of Merit: Heaven and Eternal Life shall be given unto those who now are
diligent and laborious in the Work and Service of God; but yet that labor and
diligence in the Work and Service of God, does not deserve Heaven and Eternal
Glory, nor shall they as such be bestowed. God indeed will not be served by any
without a Reward, neither shall those that do sincerely, zealously, and
perseveringly Serve and Glorify him, miss of the Reward of Eternal Life, but
yet it is not therefore bestowed upon them, because by those Services they
deserve it at the hands of God. Even natural Conscience in Man, would blush and
be ashamed to think of demanding Heaven as a Reward for any work done by him.
To make Works Meritorious of Reward from another, there are four things
requisite. They must be first, a Man's own Works, done by himself. Secondly,
Such as are not due from him by whom they are performed. Thirdly, They must be
such as are beneficial. And Lastly, Such Works as bear a proportion to the
Reward bestowed upon the doing of them. Now in all these Respects, the Duties
and Services that the People of God perform unto him, are wanting, and
therefore cannot be meritorious of an eternal Reward.

First, Works that are meritorious, must be our own; that is, such Works as are
performed by our selves, and with our own strength and ability. What we are
enabled to do by the Assistance of another, by that we cannot properly be said
to merit any thing from him by whom we are so assisted. Now all the good Works
that any of the Saints perform unto God, and are followed by him with the
Reward of eternal Life, they are such as are not performed in their own
strength, but by those assistances which God by his Spirit is graciously
pleased to vouchsafe to enable them thereunto. All our Sufficiency the
Scripture attributes unto God: Without me, says Christ to his Disciples, you
can do nothing, John. 15.5. And it is God that works in us both to will and
to do of his own good Pleasure, Phil. 13. And 2 Cor. 5.3. We are not sufficient
as of our selves to think any thing, but all our Sufficiency is of God. Now if
in all that we do, we are enabled by God unto the performance of it, we cannot
by so doing (and we cannot do any thing that is good any other ways) merit the
eternal Recompense of Reward.

Secondly, Works that are meritorious, must be such as are not due from him by
whom they are performed unto him from whom he expects to merit. All Works or
Actions that are not above Duty, are always below Merit. What says our Lord,
Luke 17.10. Say when you have done all those things that are commanded you, We
are but unprofitable Servants, and we have done but that which was our Dnty to
do. He that owes a Debt to another Man, by making payment of that Debt,
discharges indeed his Obligation to that Man; but he does not thereby put an
Obligation upon that Man unto whom he pays what he owed, because it was no more
than what was his due. The Case is the same between God and us, all that we do;
nay all that we can possibly do, is all due unto God; and therefore by giving
him any Work of Obedience, we cannot oblige God to bestow upon us eternal
Recompenses. Nay further, in all we do, we come infinitely short of what is our
Duty to give unto God; and how then can we by doing what we ought to do; nay,
by coming infinitely short of what we ought to do, deserve that Heaven should
be bestowed upon us? Now that all that we can do is due unto God, the Scripture
is very plain and clear; for he is the Fountain of all our Lives and Beings: In
him, says the Apostle, we live, we move, and have our Beings. Now we being
God's, not only by Creation, as we are his Creatures, receiving our very Lives
and Being from him; but being his also by Redemption, receiving from him our
spiritual Life and Strength for all that we either are or can do: Whatever we
do therefore cannot be meritorious or deserving from him; much more not
meritorious of Heaven and Happiness.

Thirdly, Works that are meriterious, must be such as are beneficial unto him
to whom they are performed. All Actions that do not bring in some Advantage
unto him to whom they are performed, cannot be meritorious. Now upon this
Account, it is impossible that any Creature should merit at the hands of God;
for as Job speaks, Job 23.2, 3. No Man can be profitable unto God, neither is
it gain unto him that any Man's Ways are perfect Our Righteousness, as the
Psalmist speaks, extends not unto him, Psalm. 16.3. By all our Services God
receives nothing. He is not worshipped, as the Apostle speaks, by any of his
Creatures, as if he needed any thing, Acts 17.25. The Sun in the Firmament
receives nothing by our looking upon it, nor the Fountain by the thirsty
Passengers drinking of it. We indeed receive benefit by both; for by looking on
the Sun, we receive Light and Warmth; and by drinking of the Fountain, we are
cooled and refreshed; but neither of them receive any Advantage by us. And so
it is in the present Case; our Benefit and Advantage in serving of God is
great, much Peace, much Joy, much Strength comes thereby, Scripture and the
Experience of Saints abundantly confirm it. Great Peace have they that love thy
Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119.165. God always is, and will be a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek and serve him, Heb. 11.6. But none of our
Services are advantageous unto God. He is infinitely above all the Praises and
Services of Men or Angels. Who has given unto God, and it shall be recompensed
unto him again? The Apostle speaks it by way of challenge unto all the
Creatures, from the highest Angel in Heaven, to the meanest Creature on Earth,
Romans 11.25. The Notion of a God and Creatures, cuts off all Obligation that can
be thought of by any Service that Creatures can tender unto him. God is
infinite in Happiness by and from himself, and therefore stands not in need of
our Services, nor can we merit any thing of him, much more not eternal Life;
because we cannot do any thing that may profit or advantage him.

Fourthly, Works that are meritorious must bear some proportion to the Reward
or Recompense that is bestowed upon the doing of them. Now in this respect
also, nothing that the people of God do in this World, can be Meritorious of
Heaven and Eternal Happiness; because there is no comparison between the best
of their Services, and the Happiness-of Heaven, which God bestows upon them
after the performance of them. I reckon, says the Apostle, Romans 8.18. That the
Sufferings of this present Life, and truly the Sufferings of a Christian as
they are his most painful and laborious Works, so are they the most deserving
Works, or part of a Christian's Life; and yet says the Apostle, I reckon that
the Sufferings of this present Life, are not worthy to be compared to the Glory
that shall be revealed: And if the Apostle had put in all the Duties and
Services, yea and all the Graces of the People of God into the Account, his
Reckoning had been true: for all of them put together, are not worthy to be
compared to, nor Meritorious of, the Glory that shall be Revealed. Remarkable
is that Expression of the Apostle, Romans 6.23. The wages of Sin is Death, but
the Gift of God is Eternal Life. Sin merits and deserves Death, but Eternal
Life is the Gift of God; yea, such a Gift as excludes all pretense of Merit,
for says the Apostle, it is the Free Gift of God, and not only so, but it is
the Free Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. By Voluntary Constitution
and Designation of God, Eternal Life is the Reward of Holiness; Death is the
Reward of Sin as it merits and deserves it; but Eternal Life is the Reward of
Holiness, merely by the bountiful Liberality of God. Hence we read in the 21.
Verse of the Epistle of Jude, that the People of God are said, to look for the
Mercy of God unto Eternal Life. Heaven and Glory shall be dispensed to the
Saints at the last day by the Mercy of God. It was free Grace and Mercy that
implanted Grace in the Hearts of the People of God at the first; and it shall
be Free Grace that shall put the Crown of Glory upon their heads at the last.
Without the Mercy of God there is no expectation of the least Degree of
Happiness in Heaven. Hence therefore we read that the Apostle St Paul 2 Timothy
1.17, 18. when under restraints and straits, and Onesiphorus finding him out
and relieving him, to testify his Gratitude for his Kindness, he prays for
Onesiphorus, that he may find mercy with God at the last day. And surely this
Prayer of the Apostle was not in vain, but will be answered to the Honor and
Advantage of Onesiphorus another day. That which I quote this Scripture for, is
those words in the Prayer of the Apostle for Onesiphorus, that God would grant
he might find Mercy of the Lord in that day. Some would have thought this
Prayer of the Apostle had been more proper for Onesiphorus, if he had been some
notorious Malefactor, or Persecutor of the People of God, as himself once was,
some common Drunkard or Unclean Person; if then he had Prayed that he might
have found Mercy of the Lord at the last day, this had been a Prayer suitable
both to his Sin and Misery. But the Apostle knew very well, that even a good
man, a Diligent Worker, a Liberal Benefactor to the Servants of God, as
Onesiphorus was, stands in need of Mercy from God, as well as others: And that
it is the Free Grace and Mercy of God, and not the Duties, the Prayers, the
Alms of any, that must save them: and therefore says the Apostle, The Lord
grant unto Onesiphorus that he may find Mercy of the Lord at that day. Mercy
must save the Holiest man to all Eternity, as well as Convert the greatest
Sinner. There is considerable in Heaven, not only the Glory of it in opposition
to our Misery, but the Mercy of God in bestowing of it, in opposition to our
unworthiness; and without the Mercy of God there is no Expectation of Heaven;
and evermore where Mercy is, there is an Exclusion of all Merit.

Now from all these Considerations put together, it is clear that God's
bestowing of Eternal Life and Glory upon the Saints in Heaven, is not the
rewarding of their Good Works by way of Merit and Desert.

Secondly, Heaven and Eternal Life is called a Reward, because it is given to
the People of God as a Sequel, or Consequence upon, or rather after their
performance of the Works of Holy Obedience. And this is plain and evident,
because Good Works are the antecedent dispositions and preparations wrought in
us for the fitting and qualifying of us to partake of the Reward of Eternal
Life and Glory; for it is inconsistent with the Holiness and Justice of God to
give Heaven unto any that are not Holy. Should God take an unholy Creature, and
Reward him at the last day with Eternal Life, this would pollute Heaven it
self. But God has provided another place for such, a Hell, where they shall
for ever receive the Reward and Wages of their Works in Eternal Pain and
Misery. In the destribution of Rewards among Men, usually respect is had,
either to some past Merit, or to some present previous Qualifications in those
on whom such Rewards are bestowed: The former of these cannot be applied unto
God, because there can be no such thing as Merit or Desert in the Creature,
that can oblige the Great God to bestow the Heavenly Reward upon any. But yet
in the latter sense, there are always previous qualifications of Grace and
Holiness in all those on whom God bestows the Reward of the Heavenly
Inheritance. H nce therefore the Apostle tells us, Heb. 12.14. That without
Holiness no man shall see the Lord. Grace and Holiness in a Saint, is his
preparation, or qualification for Heaven; and all that are so qualified, need
not fear but the Reward of Heaven shall be bestowed upon them: for Heaven is
prepared for such, and it shall certainly be given to those for whom it is
prepared. And indeed, Glory in Heaven is the same with Grace here upon Earth,
and as Grace here is the Reward of Grace, that is to whom soever God has given
some Grace, upon the improving of that Grace, he gives more: So Glory hereafter
shall be the Reward of a longer and continued perseverance and improvement of
Grace here. For Grace and Glory are one and the same thing, and differ only in
degree; the Scripture therefore gives it the same Name, changed, (2 Corinthians.
3.18.) from Glory unto Glory, that is from one degree of Grace unto another.
And as there is the same nature in a spark, as there is in the Body of the
fire, in a drop of water, as in the Ocean; so there is the same Nature in
Holiness, that is in Happiness. Now indeed is the Infancy of Grace, and then is
the Mature Age. Now the Twy-light, then the Noontide Glory of it. But still
Grace and Glory differ only in degree. And therefore it is suitable to the
Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness of God, to reward Good and Holy Works with Glory,
because they are the Dispositions and Preparations for it.

Now before I put a period to my Discourse concerning this sweet and delightful
Subject of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, I shall from what has been said,
draw some useful and necessary inferences, in order unto Practice, and so
conclude. And,

First, If there be such a State of Happiness to be enjoyed hereafter, How are
they then to be blamed, that let out their Hearts and Affections inordinately
toward any Worldly Enjoyments? O how many low, base Spirited persons are there
to be found, who seek no greater, nor higher good, than to enjoy the Comforts
and Delights that the World affords them! could they but attain so many
hundreds or thousands, could they compass such an Earthly Possession or
Enjoyment, O this would be enough to make them Happy; the things of the World
is all the Portion they crave for themselves. But surely such Noble Affections
as God has endowed Man withal, should not be so lavishly laid out upon such
vile and contemptible things as all Worldly Enjoyments are. An Earthly
Conversation is very unsuitable to a Spiritual and Heavenly Hope and
Expectation. Have thou O Christian, laid up thy Treasure above, what then do
thy Heart and Affections so much here below? Is thy Life hid with Christ in
God, whence then is it that thy Converse is so much with Creature Enjoyments,
as if thy Life and Happiness lay in them and not in God? If thou look for a
State of Bliss only in Heaven, what is the reason then, that thy Conversation
is no more there? do thou believe and count upon it as thy Blessedness, that
thou shall one day with the pure in Heart, for ever see and enjoy God in
Heaven, how comes it to pass then, that thy Desires and Inclinations go out so
eagerly after the Perishing Enjoyments of this World now? For shame O
Christian, let thy Hopes of Heaven moderate thy Affections toward the World
You that look for so much from God in another World, may very well be content,
if he cuts you short here, giving you but a little of this.

Nothing is more unbecoming a Heavenly Hope, than an Earthly Heart.

It was an Observation that I once heard from a Holy Man of God now in Heaven,
whereof I have since read other where, that though there are many Spots and
Blemishes charged upon the Saints and Servants of God, in Scripture, as
instances of humane frailty, yet there is not one Godly man to be found in all
the Book of God, the Story of whose Life is blotted with the sin of
Covetousness. If this be a Truth as some affirm, may it not well be matter of
great astonishment unto us in these days of the Gospel, wherein Knowledge does
so much abound, that this should be called the Professors Sin? so that profane
men have nothing to lay more commonly unto the charge of those that are strict
in the ways of God, than this, That they are a company of Covetous persons, and
that none are more eager in their pursuits after the World than those that make
the greatest shows and pretenses for Heaven: for shame, O Christian, wipe off
this Reproach from Religion; let not wicked men by beholding thy scandalous
practices herein, blacken the Names of those that are really Godly with such
reproachful Aspersions, as if to be Covetous, were a necessary consequent unto
the Profession of Religion. Make it appear that thy hopes of Heaven can enable
thee to live above the World; yea, to contemn and despise all its Enjoyments.
Surely thou may well be content with a little here, who expectest so much
hereafter. If the Hopes and Expectations of what is laid up for a Believer in
Heaven, does not take off his Heart and Affections from inordinate pursuits of
the things of this World, nothing will.

Secondly, Has God provided a Heaven for Believers hereafter? Surely then they
have no cause to be offended at any thing they meet withal in their way to it.
Has the faithful God, for whom it is impossible to lie, promised to bestow
Heaven and eternal Happiness upon a Believer; though not for, yet in the way of
Duty and holy Obedience? this should certainly take him off from being
scandalized at the Cross. No Christian, but should walk cheerfully in that way
in which he is sure he shall find Heaven at the end, though he meet with
Afflictions and Troubles in his passage to it. The Cross should never cause a
Believer to stumble in, much less to turn out of that way that leads to Heaven.
No Man should think much to do, or suffer any thing to partake of so great a
Happiness, as the Enjoyment of Heaven speaks. That Man knows little what Heaven
means, that can think or speak hardly of any way of God that leads to it. It is
a great Discouragement unto many when they are looking Heavenward, that they
meet with so many Troubles and Afflictions in the Way; especially if they be
great, and of long continuance; but know thou not, O Christian, that thou
ought not to be troubled at any Afflictions that befall thee in thy Way to
Heaven, knowing that thereunto thou art appointed, as the Apostle speaks, I
These. 3.3. And though thou can not conclude that Heaven belongs to thee
because thou art afflicted; for in an evil Way thou may justly expect to
meet with Sufferings: Yet this thou may assure thy self of, that if thou
leave the Ways of God and holy Obedience, because of Sufferings, thou art for
the present turned out of the Way that leads to Heaven; and if God has any
Love for thy Soul, and intends to bestow Heaven and Happiness upon thee, he
will reduce thee back, though by some Affliction, and probably by some smart
and severe one too. But why, O Christian, should Afflictions and Sufferings
discourage thee? Will not Heaven make amends for all thou endurest here? What
says the blessed Apostle St. Paul, who doubtless under-went as many Sufferings
as any we read of in Scripture? And yet, says he, Romans 8.18. I reckon (and his
reckoning was according to Truth) that the Sufferings of this present Life, are
not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed. And in 2 Cor.
4.17. Our light Afflictions that are but for a moment, work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. Here are great and glorious Expressions,
that may well raise the Spirits of Christians above all Discouragements, let
their Afflictions and Sufferings be what they will: For here are Afflictions;
and to balance it, here is Glory put in Opposition to it; here are light
Afflictions, and here is a Weight of Glory; here is light Afflictions for a
moment, and here is an eternal Weight of Glory; yea, here is more; for here is
a far more exceeding, and eternal Weight of Glory. It is very observable, when
the Apostle speaks of Afflictions the People of God may meet with in the World,
he soon gets over them; they are Afflictions, says he, but they are but light
Afflictions, and but of short continuance; for they last but for a moment: But
when he comes to speak of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, which he sets in
Opposition to them, he heaps up one Expression upon another, as if he labored
under the want of Words, to set forth the greatness of that Happiness he was
about to mention; and therefore, says he, there shall be a far more exceeding,
and eternal Weight of Glory. Words they are of such great Importance and
Signification, that our English Tongue will not reach the Elegancy and Fullness
of them. O who would not then with Moses choose to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, rather than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, who,
with him by an Eye of Faith beholds the eternal Recompense of Reward?

Thirdly, Have thou, O Christian, a Right and Title to this heavenly
Inheritance, live then as one that is an Heir to, and Expectant of so great a
Happiness? Let thy practice, O Christian, be suitable to thy Profession, thy
Conversation on Earth unto thy Hopes of Heaven. There is a comely Behavior
required of Christians, which if they are not careful to observe in their
Actings before Men, they betray their high and holy Calling, and the greatness
of their Hopes and Expectations unto scorn, and contempt. Art thou, O
Christian, an Heir of Heaven? Live as such an one. The Scripture is frequent in
pressing of this Exhortation: Sometimes Christians are called upon to live as
it becomes Saints, Ephesians. 2.3. To have their Conversations as it becomes the
Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.21. To walk as it becomes those that profess
Godliness with good Works, 1 Timothy 2.10. And sometimes, which is very high
indeed, To walk worthy of God, who has called them to his Kingdom and Glory, 1
These. 2.11, 12. Expressions fully comprehensive, both of a Christian's
Privilege, and also of his Duty in the sense of that Privilege; and the Apostle
in joining these two together, seems to intimate to us, that no other Words
could express the Duty of a Christian to the height, but what expresses the
height and perfection of his Blessedness. Now the height of a Christian's
Blessedness, is to enjoy God, and to enjoy him there, where his Enjoyment shall
be most full and most lasting, and that is in Heaven; which the Apostle here
calls his Kingdom and Glory, Now upon the Hopes of a Christian's Enjoyment of
this great Blessedness the Apostle calls him to the performance of as great a
Duty; and that is, to walk worthy of God, who has called him to his Kingdom
and Glory. And to how great and glorious things Christians are hereby called to
the performance of, few understand; and fewer live in the practice of. And here
I cannot but take occasion to show my detestation of that great Sin, which is
too frequent in this Age of abominable Licentiousness, I mean the Sin, of
condemning shall I say; nay, of scoffing and deriding at that which is called
Strictness and Preciseness in the Ways of God; as if any could be too
circumspect in avoiding of Sin, too strict in the discharge of his Duty, too
careful in his Endeavors to serve and please God; or could have too much of
Grace and Holiness, in which a Christian is bound to grow and increase all his
Days; as if a Man could be too like unto God in that which is his highest
Excellency and Glory, I mean his Holiness; for he is called a God glorious in
Holiness.

In Heaven there is the greatest exactness that can be; for there is Holiness,
and nothing but Holiness; yea, there is nothing but Holiness in the utmost
Perfection of it. And how can thou then, O profane Sinner, who now scoffest
at Holiness in the People of God, expect to be admitted into that holy Place
hereafter? Heavenly Hopes and Expectations require a heavenly Conversation,
which thou art perfectly void of, whilst thou art a Derider at Holiness in
others.

Those therefore whose Hopes and Expectations are set upon Heaven, must
manifest it by a Conversation and Deportment suitable thereunto: Now this in
the general may imply Two Things, Holiness of Conversation, and Cheerfulness of
Conversation.

First, It implies a Holy Conversation, the Apostle 2 Pet. 3.11. Speaking unto
those who lived in expectation of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven; What
manner of Persons (says he) ought you to be in all Holy Conversation and
Godliness? A Holiness even unto Wonder and Admiration, should shine forth and
adorn the Conversations of those who expect: such a blessed Day as this is.
Christians Hopes are to be like unto Angels in Glory and Happiness; and
therefore they should now as far as is possible, live like Angels in the Flesh
in the practice of Holiness. In 2. Cor. 7.1. says the Apostle, having these
Promises; what Promises? why he tells us in the foregoing Chapter, Promises of
being the Sons and Daughters of God by Adoption and Regeneration, and so come
to have a Right and Title to the Heavenly Inheritance in Glory: having, such
Promises as these, it becomes us to carry our selves, as those that look for
such great things, by cleansing our selves from all Pollution of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. And most clear is that in 1
John 3.3. where the Apostle having a little before set forth the greatness of
God's Love to himself and others, an instance whereof he gives us in these
words, That they should be called the Sons of God, which though it be a great
Privilege, yet is there more to come still; something that is great and
extraordinary we are looking for, and though we know not what we shall be, for
it does not yet appear, yet this we do know, That when he shall appear we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Now follows the Apostle's Inference
from all this, which should be the Practice of every Christian that has the
same hope that he had, of being like unto Christ, and of seeing God as he is,
which is only in Heaven. Why, he that has this Hope in him, Purifieth himself
as God is Pure. Do thou, O Christian, look for Heaven and Glory hereafter?
say now unto sin and Satan, and all Temptations unto that which is Evil, I will
have nothing to do with you any more, all whose designs are to render me unfit
for that Blessed and Holy State, I am continually waiting in expectation of.

Secondly, As Purity and Holiness of Life, are a deportment suitable unto a
Christian's Heavenly Expectation; So also is, a Holy Cheerfulness and Joy. A
Christian's Hope of Heaven should be matter of the greatest Joy and Delight to
him that can be: And indeed all true Joy and Delight is the Privilege and
Portion only of a Godly Man. It is his Privilege to Enjoy it above others, and
it is his Portion that he enjoys it above others. Sinners have no peace, either
with God, or with themselves; and how then is it possible that they should be
Joyful? What Joy and Delight they seem to have, is only in outward appearance,
for in the midst of their mad laughter, (and the Joy of the Wicked is no more)
their hearts are sorrowful, Prove. 14.13. In Esaias 57.20. We read the Wicked are
like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
There is always filth and pollution in the Consciences of wicked men, which
makes them travail with pain all their days, Job 15.21. And hence God tells us,
That there is no Peace unto the Wicked. Esaias. 57.21. A wicked man's ways and
courses will yield him no Peace, because they are sinful, and sin never was a
ground of Peace, because they are sinful, and sin never was a ground of Peace
unto any, but of trouble unto all, sometime or other. And where there is no
Peace, how can there be any true Joy? Alas a wicked man's fears of Hell and
Wrath to come, which his unrepented of sin deserve and call for, mar all that
Joy and Delight, that otherwise he might take in the Hopes or Heaven. But now a
Godly man, one that walks in the Integrity of his Heart, he is one whose Peace
is made with God through Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace, and therefore he
may, yea he ought to rejoice in hopes of the Glory of God. And if the men of
the World whose Portion is in this Life, and whose Names are written in the
Earth, can rejoice in their Riches and outward Greatness; how much more may a
Christian rejoice, whose Name is written in the Book of Life, who has God for
his Portion, and Heaven for his Inheritance? Lift up therefore thine head and
heart O Christian, Earthy Bread with cheerfulness, and drink thy Wine, yea thy
Water, if thou have no better, with a merry Heart; Enjoy thy outward Comforts
with Delight; take a Holy Pleasure and Joy, not only when thou art walking in
the ways of Holiness and Obedience, but also when thou art suffering under
troubles and afflictions from the World; Refresh thy Soul, Recreate thy
Spirits, and let thy Heart solace it self with great Joy; yea, with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, in the hopes thou have of Heaven and Happiness.
And indeed a Christian cannot do God more or better Service, nor bring more
Credit to Religion, than by expressing a Holy Cheerfulness and Joy of Soul, in
every State and Condition that befalls him. What Jonadab said unto Amnon, Why
art thou lean from day to day, seeing thou art the King's Son? The same may be
said upon a much better account, unto every Holy and Gracious Soul; Why art
thou so troubled? Why walk thou so dumpishly and dejectedly in the ways of
God from day to day, art not thou the King of Heaven's Son? Shall not Heaven be
thine Inheritance; nay, shall not the God of Heaven be thy Portion for ever?
Let me reason the case with thee a little, O disconsolate Soul, as Holy David,
when he was under some disquietment of mind, does with his Soul, with a little
variation of his words, in Psalm 42.11. Why art thou cast down O my Soul, why
art thou disquieted within me, Hope thou in God, for I shall yet Praise him,
who is the Health of my Countenance and my God? So say I unto every Gracious
Soul; why art thou cast down? what is the reason of thy disquietness and
trouble? Is not thy hope in God? Do thou not expect to Bless and Praise him
for ever in Heaven? And have thou received such everlasting Consolation and
good hope through Grace as this, to have God to be thy God? O manifest it unto
others in the cheerfulness of thy Countenance, and in the Joy of thy Soul, even
now before thou come to the Enjoyment of him in Heaven. A bare possibility of
Heaven, and the Enjoyment of God there, is enough to take away the sting of
every Affliction; but the having such sure and certain grounds to build our
hopes of Heaven and Happiness upon, as the Scripture holds forth unto us, this
should take away even the sense and feeling of Afflictions; at least so far
forth as that they should be no way disturbing of that Peace and Joy that a
Christians hopes of Heaven does afford him whilst he is walking in the way
thither. Should but such a message be carried to the Damned, as might give them
any hope, (though never so little) of Happiness and Salvation, it were enough,
to make even Hell it self a lightsome place, and cause those miserable Souls to
rejoice in the midst of their present exquisite Torments. O what shame and
blushing then should fill the Faces of poor drooping Saints, that a few thin
Clouds of some short Afflictions coming over their heads, should wrap and
swallow them up in darkness, and so overwhelm their Spirits with sorrow, that
the hopes of Heaven, whither they expect shortly to be brought, should not be
able to dissipate and scatter, yea to turn their troubles and sorrows into
ravishments of Joy and Comfort.

Fourthly, Is there such a State of Glory and Happiness to be enjoyed by the
People of God hereafter? Let thy Thoughts and Meditations then, O Christian, be
daily employed in Contemplating upon it. Heaven in reference unto Man, was made
for these two ends, Contemplation and Enjoyment. Now the Enjoyment of Heaven is
a Happiness too great for man, in this state of Mortality; it is therefore
reserved as the peculiar Happiness of a Saint when he comes to die: But to
Contemplate of Heaven, is man's Duty and Privilege while he lives; and truly a
sweeter and more delightful work Christians cannot exercise their Meditations
about, nor a more profitable and advantageous Subject can they let out their
Thoughts upon; for this is to live a life altogether made up of Pleasure and
Advantage. Now it being undoubtedly thus, we may very well wonder Christians
should no more acquaint themselves with this Heavenly Life. Whoever thou art
therefore that shall peruse what is here written, if thou professest thy self a
Christian, I charg thee, as thou hopest for any part in this Glorious
Inheritance, that thou take thy Heart aside from the World, and call it to an
account, for that great estrangedness that is in it unto God, and a Heavenly
Life, and for time to come, leave off thy pursuits of Vanity, and bend thy Soul
with all seriousness to the Study of what thy Eternal State and Condition shall
be; busily employ thy Thoughts about the Happiness of a Life to come, inure thy
self to a Life of Divine and Heavenly Contemplation, and let not the thoughts
of Heaven be seldom, slight, and cursory, but accustom thy self to them, let
them be fixed and abiding in thee; dwell in thy Thoughts upon such
Contemplations; let thy Soul recreate it self with these Heavenly Delights. And
whenver thou find thy Heart begin to flag and draw back, or thy Thoughts to
take liberty to fly out and ramble toward other things, speedily call them
back, and keep them close to this pleasurable Employment; let them not wander
from their work; indulge not thy self in Sloathfulness; be quick and smart upon
thy Soul for the least neglect that may be; and for thy encouragement herein,
know, that when once thou have conquered the Difficulties, and overcome the
Obstructions that would hinder thee from experiencing so sweet and comfortable
a Life, and got the Mastery over thy Thoughts and Affections, by an accustomed
Obedience and Conformity unto the Practice of this Heavenly Duty; thou will
then find abundance of Sweetness and Delight therein, and thy experience will
confirm this to be a Truth of great Verity, that the Life of Christianity, is a
Life of Joy, that therein is to be found such abundant strong Consolations, as
will lift up thy Soul even into the very Suburbs of Heaven it self; so that
thou will seem to be as it were in a new World, through the sense and feeling
of those Joys, which the Apostle tells us, are unspeakable and full of Glory.

Now although the bare proposing of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven unto the
Thoughts and Meditations of a Christian, should be Argument strong enough to
put him upon the practice of a Duty that is accompanied with so much Pleasure
and Delight: for certainly a more sweet delightful and desirable Life a
Christian cannot live, for this way of living is to bring down Heaven unto us
before we are taken up thither; it is to begin to live that life on Earth, that
we shall for ever live in Heaven, and how then can there be any need of
Arguments to press Christians to live such a life as this is? Yet because, sad
experience tells us, how hardly the best Christians are drawn to a daily
practice of this Heavenly Duty, I shall lay down some Arguments to excite and
quicken them hereunto; as,

First, A Soul that, lives in the believing views and contemplations of the
Glory and Happiness of Heaven, makes use of one of the strongest Cordials to
support it self under Troubles and Afflictions, that can be. This will sustain
a Christian's Spirit under Sufferings, make them more easy to be born; this
keeps the Soul from murmuring and repining under the Hand of God, makes it
patient under all its Tribulations; yea, these believing views of Heaven and
Glory will uphold and strengthen a Christian's Resolutions for God, and holy
Obedience, and keep him from forsaking Christ and Religion for fear of Trouble
and Persecution.

Alas, will such a Soul say, what, if the Way be rough and unpleasant unto the
Flesh; yea, what if it should be thorough Mud and Blood, yet Heaven is at the
end, and that will make more than a thousandfold amends for all the Sufferings
that I can endure in the Way. O sweet Pains and Torments! O blessed Woes and
Distresses! O rich Poverty and Reproaches! O happy Restraint and Imprisonment!
but much more happy Death, however it comes, that is accompanied with the
joyful foretastes of a future Happiness in Heaven, as no Bolts nor Bars, no
Restraints or Distresses can shut out, or exclude the Joys and Consolations of
Heaven from coming into the Soul. Our Flesh, that is, these frail Bodies of
ours, may be confined within Walls of Stone, or Bars of Iron; but the Faith,
the Hope, the Thoughts and Meditations of a Christian cannot; still the Soul
has liberty in its flight toward Heaven, from whence it fetches strong
Consolations for its Support and Joy, notwithstanding all the Severities that
lie upon the outward Man. Christ, Faith, and the Joys and Delights of Heaven
are all spiritual; and therefore it is not in the Power of any Prisons, nor
what the most malicious Persecutors can do, to hinder a Soul that is a Spirit
from sweet Intercourse and Commerce with them, in John 20.19. when the
Persecutions of the Jews were so hot against the Disciples that they were
forced to meet privately, and to shut the doors upon themselves for fear of the
Jews; yet even then Jesus came, and stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace
be unto you. And when those two blessed Servants of God, Paul and Silas were
kept close Prisoners, (to speak in the Language of our Times,) after their
Bodies had been abused by Scourging, being locked up in the Inner Prison, and
their Feet made fast in the Stocks; yet notwithstanding, when they were
suffering thus as to their Bodies, they had a Heaven in their Souls, and their
Work and Employment was the same with what the Saints are taken up in Heaven,
even to sing Praises unto God; and so they did; for so we read, Acts 16.24, 25.
At Midnight they prayed, and sang Praises unto God. They had more Joy in
undergoing their Sufferings, than their Enemies had in inflicting them: Yea, so
great were the Consolations of Heaven in their Souls, that their Enemies were
more desirous to free them from their Sufferings, than they were desirous to
come out of them; for when they sent their Officers to fetch them out of
Prison, they refused to go out, and made their very Persecutors themselves to
beg and entreat them to come out. Oh, what wonderful strong Joys and
Consolations had ravished their Souls, that made them so unwilling to come out
of Prison, not to be punished, but to be set at liberty!

How come those Worthies of whom we read in Heb. 11. to endure such sore Trials
as are there recorded of them, being exposed to the Violence of the Flames,
having Trials of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, being stoned, sawn asunder,
destitute, afflicted and tormented? And yet notwithstanding all, would not
accept of Deliverance: Whence was it that they came to suffer so courageously?
Why, the Reason is given us in Verse 35. it was, That they might obtain a
better Resurrection. They saw not only to an end of their Sufferings, but they
looked also unto the Glory that was to be revealed; and this made them so bold
and courageous. It is no wonder that Afflictions and Sufferings should be
painful and grievous unto that Man who cannot see to the end of them. And
whatever Death is unto others, it must needs be the King of Terrors unto him,
who cannot behold Immortality and Eternal Life beyond it. He that cannot look
upon Heaven as belonging unto him at the end of his Sufferings, as well as
behold the Sufferings that himself endures, loses that Joy and Consolation that
should be his support under Sufferings. Where there is no Expectation of the
peaceable Fruit of Righteousness by them who are exercised with Afflictions,
there Afflictions cannot be joyous but grievous. This is the peculiar
Excellency and Advantage of the Grace of Faith, and therein it is like unto God
himself, who is the Author of it, that it can at one and the same time behold
the End and the Means together; and if a Christian did always act in this way
and manner under Afflictions; and were the Eye of his Faith so brightned, that
he could as clearly see his Right and Title unto Heaven, as he does feel his
present Sufferings, what a Life of Peace and Joy might he live notwithstanding
all those Afflictions that lie upon him!

Doubtless when our Lord Jesus suffered on the Cross, there were many standing
by, and gazing at his Sufferings, who, when they saw him dying there, and after
that laid in the Grave, did shake their Heads at him, looking upon him as one
that was lost and gone, never more to be heard of, condemning him as a foolish
and indiscreet Person, to throw away his Life in that Way and Manner as he did;
because they were ignorant what he was doing, and what was to follow upon his
Sufferings. But surely they who now behold him dying, buried, rising, ascended,
glorified. and interceding at God's Right Hand, as Believers do, they see great
Cause to admire, as the infinite Wisdom of God in contriving, so the infinite
Grace and Love of Jesus Christ in this Way and Manner of accomplishing the
Redemption and Salvation of Sinners. Were but Heaven, and the fitting
Christians for that glorious Inheritance, apprehended by them as the end that
God designs in all his dealings with them, none of them would seem grievous and
afflictive to them. He that has learned this way to Heaven, that is, he, whose
Soul has gained Acquaintance with the Glory and Happiness that is above by
frequent and daily Contemplations thereon, has a rich Cordial to revive and
cheer his Spirits in every Affliction. There are none of us know what Trials we
may yet meet withal before we are called hence; and if God should exempt us
from Public and Private Calamities and Distresses while we live; yet all of us
know there is a time a coming when we must be sick and die, and then we shall
find that nothing but what we can draw down from Heaven into our Hearts, will
be Consolation strong enough to support our then departing Souls. If therefore,
O Christian, thou would either live peaceably, or die comfortably, inure thy
self daily unto a Life of Divine and Heavenly Contemplation.

Secondly, Consider A Heart taken up much with Heaven, will make a Christian
lively and fervent in Duty. It is the Heavenly Christian that is the lively and
zealous Christian. Where there is a strangeness in any Soul unto Heaven, there
will be a dullness and heaviness in Duty. Frequent thoughtfulness of Heaven,
unto which Duties have a tendency, make a Christian lively and vigorous in the
performance of them: And the stronger the Consolations are, that flow into a
Christian from his daily Contemplations of Heaven and Glory, the more lively
and vigorous will that Christian evermore be in the performance of Duty. A full
and clear Apprehension of Heaven, and of our Right and Title thereunto, how
does it lift up the Soul in Duty, and make it run with the greatest activity
and cheerfulness that can be in the Ways of God? It is strange to see what the
Hopes of Gain and Advantage in the World will carry Men unto; how will they
compass Sea and Land, break their Rest in the Night, hazard their Health in the
Day, rise early, go to Bed late? And shall the empty perishing things of this
World animate and put Life and Vigor into these Men's Designs, so that they
shall stick at no difficulties or dangers for the attaining of them? And shall
not the fore-thoughts of Heaven, and the Contemplations of the Glory and
Happiness that is there to be eternally enjoyed, put Life and Vigor, Zeal and
Activity, into the Soul of a Christian in all his Duties? Surely it will, and
that in so great a measure as shall enable him to mount up with Wings like
Eagles, to run and not be weary, and to walk and not faint in the Ways of God,
the Joys and Consolations of Heaven, and of the God of Heaven being his
continual Strength and Support. The Reason of all that sloathfulness and
deadness that is to be found in Christians, in the performance of their Duties,
is because they are such Strangers unto Heaven, have so little knowledge of it,
dwell so little in their Thoughts and Contemplations upon that Glory and
Happiness that there is to be enjoyed. How fervent will that Man be in Prayer,
how attentive in Hearing, how zealous in opposing Sin, how watchful against
Temptation, how careful to lay hold of all opportunities of doing Good, who
considers, that all this is done in order unto Heaven and Happiness? Take a
Christian, one whose Life is spent much in Heaven, one that has (as the
Apostle says of himself and others) his Conversation in Heaven; how easily may
he be differenced from other Men? he that has a Spirit of discerning will
quickly observe something of that which his Soul is taken with in Heaven, to
appear in his Duties and Conversation, that will distinguish him from the
careless and negligent Christian; yea, take the same Man, when he has been
conversing with Heaven, and solacing his Soul with Divine and Heavenly
Contemplations; and how does he excel, not others only, but himself also? O
what a difference is there between what he is then, and what he is in his
common and ordinary Conversation? for doubtless it may be averred of such a
Soul's return from its contemplating views of that blissful State, that there
are such Heavenly Impressions made upon it, as cause it to ascend in frequent
Thoughts and Ejaculations toward Heaven, in the midst of its Earthly
Employments; and to intermingle that which is Heavenly with its Earthly
Speeches and Discourses among others. Whereas a Christian that is careless and
negligent of himself, gives way to Earthliness and Vanity, abates and lessens
the exercising of his Soul in the Contemplations of Heaven and Heavenly Things;
he soon becomes as weak, as vain, and sometimes as profane also as another
Man, who is altogether estranged unto this Life of Heavenly Contemplation. The
way therefore for Christians to shake off their deadness and dullness in Duty,
and to be rid of their sloathfulness and heaviness in the Ways of God, is to
betake themselves to Heaven, where Christ who is their Life and Strength is,
and from whence alone all their quickening and enlivening influences do come.
Frequently therefore, O Christian, have recourse unto Heaven; dwell much there
in thy Thoughts and Contemplations; this will inflame thy Soul with Love to
God, this will make thee pray with Zeal and Fervor, hear with earnestness and
attention, and perform all the Duties God requires of thee with activity and
liveliness.

Thirdly, A Heart set upon Heaven will make a Christian live the most joyful
and comfortable Life in the World. A Heavenly Mind will be a joyful Mind. A
Saint on Earth has the same ground of Joy that a Saint in Heaven has; he
derives his Joy and Peace from the Apprehensions he has of God's being his God
and Father in Jesus Christ, and from the sense and enjoyment of his Love and
Favor manifested to his Soul: And so does a Saint in Heaven; only he has a
clearer knowledge and discovery, as also a larger and fuller enjoyment thereof,
at present, than a Saint on Earth has; but what he wants in Enjoyment he has
in the Promise; and the Promises to a Saint on Earth, are as certain and as
true, as the performance of them to a Saint in Heaven; for God is never worse,
but usually better than his Word to his People here; but to be sure they always
find it so when they come to Heaven. Now they that are Rich in Promises, (as
all the People of God are,) and can act Faith upon them, may very well live a
Life of Peace and Joy; for whatever they have not in possession, they have in
reversion: And when a Believer's Faith and Hope is entertained above with the
delightful Views and Contemplations of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, which
he shall ere long be in the possession of, what should make him walk
uncomfortably and sadly here below? In Heaven all is Peace and Joy, and most of
Peace and Joy here below resides with those that live most in Heaven while they
are here on Earth; an instance of this we have in the Holy Apostle; none ever
lived a more Heavenly Life on this side Heaven than Blessed St. Paul did, and
none also ever lived a more Peaceable and Joyful Life than he did: How full of
Joy does he express himself upon all Occasions, I Joy and Rejoice with you all,
says he, Philip. 2.17. I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding Joyful in all
our Tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. So in Romans 5.1, 2. Being justified by Faith, we
have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and Rejoice in Hope of the
Glory of God: And not only so, but we Glory in Tribulation. And Verse 11. We
also Joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the
Atonement. So in 2 Timothy 4.8. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my
Course, I have kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give unto me at that
Day. Now he that could say all this, must needs be full of Joy and Comfort; and
being thus filled with Joy and Peace in believing, though he knew that Bonds
and Imprisonments did abide him in every place; yet could he say, that none of
these things moved him, neither counted he his Life dear unto him, so he might
finish his Course with Joy, as himself speaks, Acts 20.23, 24. And this Joy of
the Lord being his strength; how earnestly and passionately does he expostulate
and chide with those Friends of his, that would have dissuaded him from
Suffering? Acts 21.13. What mean ye to weep and break mine Heart? I am ready
not only to be bound, but to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus at Jerusalem.
From whence now came all this Courage and Boldness? from whence did he receive
and draw all this Joy and Consolation? why it came from thence where his Hope,
his Heart, his Life, and Conversation was, and that is from Heaven; for so
himself tells us, Philip. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ. O this Hope of Eternal Life laid
up for the Saints in Heaven, as the Scripture calls it! This laying hold of the
blessed Hope set before us, as it is called, Heb. 6.18, 19. This, this was that
which the Aposile had, as an Anchor to his Soul, sure and steadfast, being that
which enters into that within the Vail, that is into Heaven. This made him
not only to be content in every State and Condition, but to rejoice in the
worst that did befall him; witness that strange Triumphant Speech of his, 2 Cor.
12.3. I take pleasure, says he, in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities,
in persecutions, in disiresses. Now this peaceable joyful Life that this
Blessed Apostle lived, was not a Privilege granted only unto him, by way of
special Grace and Favor, because he was so eminent an Apostle and Servant of
God; but it is a Privilege that is extended more commonly also unto other
Believers, it being that of which the Kingdom consists, as the Apostle himself
tells us, Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. And therefore, as a Duty
incumbent upon Christians, he urges the practice of it in several Scriptures.
So we read Philip. 3.1. Finally my Brethren rejoice in the Lord; and in 1 Thessalonians. 5.10. Rejoice evermore. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice always in the Lord, and again
I say rejoice. Now the way for Christians to attain unto a Life of Peace and
Joy, is to be much conversant above, to live a Heavenly Life, to exercise his
Thoughts and Contemplations daily upon Heaven, and that State of Bliss and
Happiness that is to be eternally enjoyed there. Heaven is a place full of
Peace and Joy; yea, a place where there is nothing else; and the more of Heaven
comes down into any Soul in this Life, or the more any Soul ascends up into
Heaven in Divine Contemplations, the more comfortable and joyful Life does that
Soul lead, while it is here upon Earth.

Fifthly, Is there such a State of Bliss and Happiness to be enjoyed by the
People of God hereafter, let every one then examine themselves what Right and
Title they have thereunto, whether they are such as are qualified for the
enjoyment of that blessed State.

First, Examine thy self whether ever thou did experience a work of
Sanctification and Holiness wrought upon thy Soul; if not whatever thy
pretenses for Heaven may be, they are false and groundless, and will end in
Horror and Vexation of Soul. The Command of God is, that we should be Holy in
all manner of Conversation, that we should be Holy as God is Holy: and the
great Pattern and Exemplar of our Holiness, is the Lord Jesus Christ, who, as
the Apostle tells us, was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separated from Sin, and
from all pollution and defilement both from Sin and Sinners; Here now is both a
Christian's Rule, and a Christian's Example: Now though a Christian cannot
reach the exactness and perfection of either; for he cannot be so Holy as the
Rule requires, neither can he be so Holy as the Pattern which his Lord has set
him; this is only attainable in Heaven, where the People of God shall be as
Holy as God will desire, and as they can desire. But though a Christian cannot
be perfectly Holy, yet he may be truly Holy, and so he must be in some measure
and proportion, before he can be admitted into Heaven, that place of perfect
Purity and Holiness; for unto such only is Heaven promised, and by such only
shall it be enjoyed who are Holy. Holiness, it is the Saints beaten Road unto
Heaven, it is the good old way through which the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, and Holy Men of God in all Ages of the World, have traveled in unto
Glory. No Grace, no Glory, no Holiness here, no Happiness hereafter. As many as
are Sanctified, so many are Justified; and as many as are Justified shall be
also Glorified, and no more. Therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. Follow
after Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. Holiness, it is the
Comeliness and Ornament; yea, the Beauty and Glory of a Christian; it is God's
Beauty and Comeliness stamped upon the Soul; for a Christian is Beautiful and
Comely, through God's Comeliness put upon him, as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel.
16.14. Thou were Comely through my Comeliness that I put upon thee. And though
the Great God has many various Titles and Attributes, by which he has been
pleased to make discoveries of himself unto his People; yet that wherein he
chiefly Glories, is his Holiness: hence therefore it is that though the Power
of God be called his Arm, and the Wisdom of God his Eye, and the Love of God
his Heart, yet is it the Holiness of God only that is his Face, his Beauty, his
Glory: And as the Face of a Man is the Beauty of a Man, so is Holiness the
Beauty of God himself; upon this account therefore we read more than once of
the Beauty of Holiness, and of God's being Glorious in Holiness, Expressions
which serve greatly to Illustrate to us, the Excellency of Holiness, and may
very well enamour the Creature to be in Love with it; for that which is the
Glory of the infinitely wise God, namely his Holiness, cannot but be the
highest Excellency and Glory of Man.

As Sin is the greatest Reproach and Disgrace, the greatest Degradation and
Debasement of the Glory and Excellency of Man; so Holiness is the highest
Advancement and Exaltation, the highest Dignity and Promotion the Humane Nature
is capable of for it is participation of the Supreme Excellency of the Divine
Nature it self, and that indeed in which as we ought to be like God, so is it
that in which we can only be said truly and properly to imitate him; and
therefore we never meet with any Command in Scripture requiring us to be as
Great, as Wise, or as Powerful as God is; but to be Holy as God is Holy, to be
Perfect as our Heavenly Father is Perfect, and to Purify our selves as God is
Pure, these we do; yea, all the Commands, Threatenings and Promises, both of the
Law, and of the Gospel, have a tendency unto this, to engage us unto Purity of
Heart, and unto Holiness of Life.

Would thou therefore know O Christian, whether thy Right and Title unto
Heaven be true, examine thy self what Influence and Operation the Word of God,
the Ordinances of God, the Providence of God, have had upon thy Heart and
Life, to Sanctify and make thee Holy in both, and know for certain, if they
have had such an effect upon thee, this is as sure an Evidence of Heaven, as
any thou can have, and that which cannot deceive thee, for it is an earnest
thereof given into thy Soul before hand; it is Heaven begun in thee on Earth:
for Holiness and Happiness, Grace and Glory are but one and the same thing,
differing only in their Measures and Degrees; and wherever there is a work of
Grace begun in any Soul, God will carry it on unto perfection in Heaven. But
now on the contrary, if thou art one that wallowest in the Pollution and
Defilement of Sin, know O Sinner, while thou continuest in thy uncleanness and
filthiness, thou have no Right and Title unto Heaven; neither as continuing
such, shall thou ever have admission into it, for into that Holy place no
unclean thing shall ever enter.

Again, Secondly, Would thou know whether thou can justly lay any claim
unto Heaven, Examine what thy Thoughts and Apprehensions of Heaven are. When
thou have read or heard a Discourse concerning Heaven, and the Glory and
Happiness that there is to be enjoyed; What kind of thoughts have thou then of
that State and Place: seems it unto thee to be a place only of freedom from
Pain and Sickness, from Trouble and Sorrow, a place of Ease and Rest, where
thou shall enjoy thy fill of what is Pleasurable and Delightful to thee, and
all this in an infinite duration that shall never know an end? Now though in
Heaven there is the enjoyment of all these things; for there is no Sickness nor
Diseases, no Pains nor Sorrows, but a perfect freedom from all that is Evil,
and an eternal Enjoyment of what is Pleasant and Delightful; yet these things
are the least and meanest part of the Happiness of Heaven. It is true, were
there nothing more, nothing greater, nor better to be enjoyed than what these
things amount unto, an Eternity of Health without Sickness, of Pleasure without
Pain, of Delights without Sorrow, were a very great Happiness: But when all
these things are compared with the infinitely Great and Blessed God, with the
Enjoyment of his Love, and Presence, the seeing of his Face, perfection of
Grace and Holiness, freedom from Sin, a Heart, Mind, Will and Affections in all
the Desires and Inclinations of them bent toward God; and all of them not only
Delighted in, but abundantly Satisfied and filled with the Communications of
the Divine Goodness: They are then but a small and inconsiderable part of
Heaven's Happiness, and not worthy to be compared with what a Gracious Soul
both desires and shall enjoy for its Happiness.

Wherefore, O Christian, if thou would know whether thou can upon good
grounds put in thy Claim unto Heaven, call thy self to an account what thy.
Thoughts and Apprehensions of Heaven are; if thou art doubtful in thy mind,
whether there be such a place and State of Happiness or no, or at best the
highest Notions and Apprehensions thou have of that Glorious place and State,
is, that there thou shall live at thy ease, enjoy nothing but Carnal and
Sensual Objects and Delights: But find no Spiritual Joy and Delight in thy
Soul, in the believing Thoughts and Apprehensions of thy Enjoyment of God and
Christ, and the Hopes and Expectations that thy Soul shall there not only be
free from all Sin and Pollution, but be made a partaker of the fullness and
perfection of all Grace and Holiness, where thy Employment shall always be in
Holy and Spiritual Delights and Exercises unto all Eternity: If thou have no
believing Hopes and Expectations of such a Heaven as this is, certainly thou
have no Right and Title unto that Inheritance that is incorruptible, undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for Believers.

Nothing so plainly demonstrates what men are, whither they are going, and unto
whom they belong, as the daily course of their Lives and Conversation. The
Apostle therefore in Galat. 5.19, 20. reckoning up the Works of the Flesh,
which are manifest, As Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Murder,
and such like, of the which, says he, I tell you before, as I have also told
you in times past, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. And in 1 Corinthians. 6.9, 10. he speaks the same thing again, Know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Idolaters, nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And on the
contrary, He that does Righteousness is of God, says the Apostle, 1 John 2.29.
And blessed is he that does Righteousness at all times, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 106.3. For the Grace of God that has appeared in the Gospel, having
taught them to deny all ungodliness and Worldly Lust, and to live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World. Tit. 2.12, 13. Looking for the
Blessed Hope and the Glorious appearance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
These are they and only they who according to Scripture. Warrant, can lay any
claim unto Heaven: And these may, for they that are made free from Sin, and are
become the Servants of God, they have their Eruit unto Holiness, and their end
shall be Everlasting Life. Romans 6.23.

Would thou therefore know, O Christian, without deluding thy own Soul,
whether thou art one that have a Right and Title unto Heaven, call thy self to
an account what thy Works and Actions are. The matter is not so difficult to be
resolved; it may be as thou imaginest. What says the Apostle, Gal. 6.7, 8. He
that sows unto the Flesh, shall of the Flest reap Corruption. And he that
sows unto the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. And the same
Apostle tells us, Romans 8.13. If we live after the Flesh, we shall die; but if
we through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, we shall live. What
now is thy way and course? what is thy general carriage and practice? is it
earthly and vain? is it sensual and wicked, according to the course of the
World, and after the manner of the men of the World? If vain and sinful Society
be thy delightful Companions, if wicked and ungodly ways be thy daily practice,
thou art not of an Heavenly Extraction, nor can thou upon Scripture grounds
have any expectations of the Heavenly Glory, for unto such only does it belong,
who by their lives and actions, declare their opposition of, and contrariety
unto the ways and courses of the men of this World. Show me thy Faith by thy
Works, says the Apostle, James 2 18. Thou art one that professest to believe a
Heaven and a State of blessedness to be enjoyed there, and hopest thou art one
that shall be a partaker thereof hereafter, show me now thy Faith herein by thy
Works; and assure thy self of this, That all thy Faith in, and all thy Hopes of
Heaven and Glory, will fill thee with nothing but shame and disappointment
hereafter, unless they evidence themselves by Works and Actions suitable
thereunto; for as the Apostle says, James 2.26. As the body without the Spirit
is dead, so all Faith in, and Hope of Heaven without Works and Actions
corresponding thereunto, is dead also, and will leave the Soul short of Heaven
and Happiness.

Sixthly, Is there such a State of Bliss and Happiness, provided for and
assured unto Believers in Heaven hereafter, let then the consideration hereof,
Reconcile to them the thoughts of their own Death; and moderate their sorrows
for the Death of their Godly Friends and Relations.

First, Let the consideration of the Glory and Happiness of Heaven, Reconcile
to a Believer the thoughts of his own Death. It is no strange thing that
Heathens, who have only the Light of Nature to be their Instructor, should not
be able to overcome the Fears of Death, though indeed some of them have not
only expressed great Courage in contempt of, but great confidence in, and
desire after Death; though notwithstanding all their boasting, we may well
imagine that they speak greater things than they lived up unto, much more than
they died under; for it is said of one of the chief of them, that Eloquent
Orator Cicero, that a little before his Death he did ingeniously confess, That
those Remedies he had prepared against this Enemy Death, proved he knew not
how, too weak and feeble to support and strengthen him in its near approach
unto him. And indeed it is no wonder that thus it should be with them, because
they were greatly in the dark, as to the reality of a future State of
Happiness, and much more at a loss how to find the right way to attain the
enjoyment thereof. Nor is it any strange thing to see a wicked Man under the
light of the Gospel to be afraid of Death, and to lead a Life accompanied with
Fears and Terrors under the thoughts of it; no, the wonder rather is, that
such a one can have any case and quietness, any freedom from horrors and
perplexities of Mind, that he is not a Magormissabib, continually every moment
of his Life encompassed about with fears and terrors: And indeed, did he
rightly understand himself, and his dangerous state and condition, it would be
thus always with him, and the greatness of his Fears and Horrors would make
him go mourning all his Days. But though Heathens and profane Sinners may and
have cause to be afraid of Death, yet it becomes not any of the People of God,
who have a well grounded Hope of Heaven to be affrighted at it, there being no
way for them to attain unto that State of Blessedness, but by Dying. I have
read concerning the Turks, (who are not only Strangers but Enemies to the
Christian Religion,) that they say they do not think Heaven to be a place of
that Bliss and Happiness, as Christians do profess to believe it is; because
they see so many, that call themselves by the Name of Christian, so backward
and unwilling to go to it. O what a disgrace is this unto Christianity; and how
should it concern Christians, to labor with great industry, to overcome all
inordinate fears of Death, that they may wipe off this reproach that is cast
upon the most excellent Religion in the World, and that which only can enable
any to Die comfortably and joyfully upon the Hopes of a future State of
Happiness.

All a Believer's fears of Death arise from his Ignorance of what Death is in
it self, and of what it will be unto him; and this makes him walk so
uncomfortably under the thoughts of it: And yet the worst that Death is, and
the worst it can do unto him, is only to make a Separation between those two
old loving. Acquaintance, his Soul and Body; whereby the viler part, the Body,
consumes and rots in the Grave, being fed upon by Worms, till it turns to Dust
and Ashes for some little time; after which it shall arise again a glorious,
refined, purified Body, from all its dross and corruption, and made like unto
the Glorious Body of Jesus Christ, to be again united unto that Soul, which
during the time of its silent sleeping in the dust, was rejoicing with Saints
and Angels; yea, with God and Christ in a state of infinite and unconceivable
Happiness; unto which the Body, after its re union with the Soul, shall ascend
with it to partake of the same Blessedness in Heaven to all Eternity. Surely,
such a Soul, instead of being timorous and fearful, should rather say with the
Apostle, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all,
Phil. 1.21.

Secondly, The Consideration of so great a Happiness provided in Heaven for
Believers, should moderate their Sorrows for the Death of their Godly Friends
and Relations. It is true, when such are taken away by Death, the loss is great
unto those that survive them; and therefore the God of Bowels and Mercy allows
us to mourn, when by his Providence he makes such breaches among us: Abraham
mourned for Sarah his Wife; Joseph wept for his Father Jacob; the Israelites
made great lamentations for the loss of Moses; and both Mary and her Sister
Martha mourned for their Brother Lazarus, and our Lord does not reprove them,
but sympathizeth with them in their loss, and testifies it by his weeping also.
But though we are allowed to mourn at the Death of our Godly Friends and
Relations, yet are we to set bounds to our mourning; for we are not to sorrow
as those that have no Hope, nor are we so to grieve and afflict our selves as
to refuse to be comforted. Friends use to rejoice in the advancement of one
another in the World, though it be in the enjoyment of that which is but
Temporary, and therein they show their Love to one another: And will not,
should not you much more rejoice, when your Friends and Acquaintance are by
Death preferred to the enjoyment of a Happiness, that is Spiritual and Eternal?
Shall a Natural and contracted Relation, either by Blood, Cohabitation, or
Friendship, engage to greater Love and Affection, than a Spiritual and
Supernatural Relation by Grace and Adoption shall do? Believers are all nearly
and intimately related to one another, they are all Members of one and the same
Body, they have all one and the same Father, they have all one and the same
Redeemer, they have all one and the same Sanctifier and Comforter, they have
all one Faith, one Hope, and shall all one day enjoy one and the same Heaven,
though they go thither in different ways and at different times. Grieve not,
mourn not then, O Believer, that thy Friends and Relations are gone to Heaven a
little before thee. Time was, it may be, when you and they did take sweet
Counsel together, and walked to the House and Ordinances of God in company, and
very sweet and delightful was your Society one with another; but now Death has
made a Separation between you, so that the sweetness of that Friendship is at
an end, and they are not, as to your enjoyment of them; and this makes you
passionately cry out, Oh my loss! my loss! my Friends and Relations are dead
and gone, and what shall I now do! But where, O Believing Soul, is thy love to
thy dead Friends and Relations? Is it at an end, and all buried in the Grave
with them? Be patient for a while, and Death will quickly open thee a passage
into that place of Bliss where they now are, and in the mean time show thy Love
to them by thy rejoicing in their present real, though unseen Blessedness; and
if you cannot do this, your Love to your self is great, but your Love to your
Friends is but little. None of our Relations that die in the Lord are lost,
they are only gone to Heaven a little before others, whither the rest of all
the Faithful shall ere long be called also: And while any Believers are left
here behind in the World, they have a God to live upon, that will never leave
them nor forsake them; the enjoyment of whose presence, and the manifestations
of whose Love and Favor, will abundantly more than recompense for the absence
and loss of all our Friends. We read in 1 Samuel 1.8. that Hannah was greatly
afflicted because of her barrenness, insomuch that she refused to eat; what
course does Elkanah her Husband take to comfort her? O why, says he, art thou
troubled, and why do thou not eat, Am not I better to thee than ten Sons.
Truly it may be much more said unto any Believer, from whom God has taken any
dear and pious Relations, why are you cast down? why do you grieve and mourn?
is not God better than many; yea, than all your Friends and Relations put
together, and he lives still though your Friends and Relations be dead. And
truly this is that God expects at a Believer's hands, that when he has taken
from him the comfort of near and dear Friends and Relations, he should bear up
himself cheerfully with this Consideration, That having God to be his God does
infinitely more than countervail for the loss of all. Stay up thy self
therefore, O desponding Christian; yea, solace thy Soul under all thy losses
with this Consideration, that God is thy God: And say therefore, with Holy
David, The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my Salvation
be exalted.

Seventhly, Is there such a place of Bliss and Happiness provided for and
assured unto Believers, let the consideration hereof put them upon unwearied
Diligence and Constancy in the Work and Service of God, that is attended with
so great a Reward. The Scripture abounds with Exhortations and Commands to
press this Duty upon Christians, Josh. 22.5. Take diligent heed to do all the
Commandments of the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul:
And in Phil. 3.11, 12, 13, 14. the Apostle gives us his own Example and
Practice, I have not already attained, says he, nor am I already perfect; but I
follow after, if I may apprehend that for which I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I
do, forgetting the things that are behind, I reach forth unto those things that
are before, pressing toward the mark, for the prize of the High Calling of God
in Christ Jesus, if by any means I may attain unto the Resurrection of the
Dead; that is, unto that State of Blessedness, that the Saints shall arrive
unto at the Resurrection from the Dead: And the same Apostle in 1 Cor. 15.58.
having discoursed concerning the Resurrection of Christ, and thereupon proved
the Resurrection of the Dead, and the great Happiness of the Saints thereupon;
he concludes his Discourse with this Exhortation, Wherefore my beloved Brethren
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord, for as much
as you know your labor is not in vain in the Lord: Whatever any do or suffer
for God, they shall be no loosers by it in the end: Heaven will abundantly
recompense a Christian for all the Labor and Pains, yea for all the cost and
charge he can be at in his way thither. When our Lord had wrought a great
Miracle, in feeding so many thousand with a few Barley Loaves and two small
Fishes, he bids his Disciples, Gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost,
Joh. 8.12. There is nothing that a Believer does for God now that shall be
lost, his Tears are all bottled, his Sighs are all numbered, his Prayers are all
filed in Heaven, and a day of reckoning will come, when all shall be brought
forth and recompensed, not with a thousand fold, as in this Life with
Persecution, but with eternal Gains that shall never have an end. It is not
only an unsuitable thing, but highly disingenious for any to be niggardly and
pinching in the Service of God, to give him as little as they can of Duty and
Obedience, who expect so Magnificent and Glorious a State of Happiness from him
hereafter. What a shameful thing is it, and how unbecoming a Christian, to
think any measure of Duty enough for God, who looks for a promised as well as a
purchased Reward from him that shall be without measure? Why should thou set
bounds to thy Work, when God has set none to thy Wages? how unreasonable a
thing is it that any measure of Duty, though never so short and scanty, should
be thought enough by thee; when the Happiness thou hopest for, and God has
promised, is without all measure? Surely, a Christian should be always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, who will always make him Happy; Alas, how
little, how inconsiderable is our always of Working, to Gods always of
Rewarding? Suppose we were always abounding in the Work and Service of God, in
which God knows we are greatly wanting, yet all our Obedience, extended unto
the utmost, can reach no longer than to the end of a short Life; but Gods
Reward and our Happiness thereby runs parallel with an endless Eternity: Why
then should a little time spent in the serving and honoring of God here, seem
too much and too long, when an Eternity spent in the enjoyment of God will
never be too much. Were there nothing of a Reward to be expected hereafter, yet
a Godly Man would love and serve God; for the New Nature not only enclines him
to it, but makes him delight in the doing of it. It is true, the great God, the
Supreme Sovereign Lord of all his Creatures, might have made a Law, if he had
pleased, to bind Man to Obedience without the encouragement of a promised
Reward; but he has not thought good to deal with Man in so strict a way and
manner; but in a way of condescending Grace and Mercy; and so out of his
immense Bounty and Goodness has been pleased to sweeten and facilitate Man's
Obedience, with a promise of no meaner importance, than the enjoyment of the
Eternal Inheritance with himself in Glory. O how much should this affect our
Hearts? and how strongly should it oblige us to abound in the Work and Service
of such a Lord and Master? Were it possible for the Saints in Heaven to
communicate the Experiences and Enjoyments, which they now are partaking of in
Glory, What a Confirmation and Encouragement would this be thought, to spirit
and quicken us in the ways of Duty and Obedience? Why the Word of God, that
holds forth the promised Reward, is as true, shall I say; nay, much more true
than such a Communication can be; for in that our Senses may be deceived and we
imposed upon; but by the Word of God we cannot; for that is Truth it self, and
cannot lie: Wherefore the Word of God holding forth the promised Reward of
Heaven, should be the greatest encouragement in the World to put Christians
upon the utmost diligence imaginable in the Work and Service of God.

And the Truth of it is, as we can never begin too soon, so we can never hold
out too long in the ways of Duty and Obedience. None ever repented when they
came to Die, that they had spent too much of their time in the Service of God;
Who ever read or heard of any that did thus repent? very many upon a Deathbed
have bitterly lamented that they have done no more for God, that they have
idled and wasted away so much of their precious time upon impertinent Vanities
and Trifles; and that what they have done for God has been so poor, so mean,
so defective and so defiled: These things have been a great grief and trouble
unto many; yea, the best of God's Servants, who have been most eminent for
Grace, whose usefulness in their Generation others have admired, have yet
themselves complained of their barrenness and unprofitableness, and mourned for
their deficiency and falling short of what they should have done. Thus that
eminently laborious Servant of Jesus Christ, Bishop Usher, cries out against
himself upon his Death bed, begging Pardon for his Sins of omission, and yet
his constant Labors and Diligence, both in Preaching and Writing, was greatly
and justly applauded by all. And if any one should think this a strange
assertion, that the People of God should at a dying hour be thus sensible of
their great deficiencies; I humbly conceive this may be rendered as a Reason
thereof, because the Saints and Servants of God at such a time, standing upon
the brink of Eternity, and being ready to lanch forth into that vast Ocean,
have then enlarged and widened apprehensions, both of the infinite Majesty and
Holiness of God, and of the unspeakable greatness of the Glory and Happiness of
Heaven; and this makes not only their Persons, but the best of their Services
appear inconsiderable in their own Eyes; but causes in them an Holy blushing
and shame, that all their time they have done so little for that God who has
laid up so much for them; that they have glorified him so little here on Earth,
unto whom they are now a going to enjoy a state of Eternal Glory and Happiness
in Heaven.

Eighthly and Lastly, Is there such a place of Bliss and Happiness provided for
and assured unto Believers hereafter, as Heaven is; Let the consideration
hereof cause in them a Holy longing of Soul after the enjoyment of it. If there
be enough in any Object, or in any Place, to draw forth the Love and Desires,
the Pantings and Breathings of any Soul after them; certainly that Object is
God, and that Place is Heaven, where God is fully and eternally to be enjoyed,
and in the enjoyment of whom there is not only nothing but what is lovely and
desirable, but where there is every thing that is lovely and desirable also. We
read frequently of the Expressions of many Holy Men, that set forth the
greatness of their Love and Affection toward God; but there is none, that we
meet with in Sacred Writ, whose Soul did more delightfully vent it self in
pathetical expressions of this Nature, than Holy David. The Book of Psalms
abounds with them, Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the Water Brooks,
so pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul is athirst for God, for the
living God, when shall I come and appear before God. Psalm. 84.1, 2. How amiable
are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my Soul longs; yea, even faints for
the Courts of the Lord, my Heart and my Flesh cries out for the living God. A
day in thy Courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a Doorkeeper in
the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. Psalm. 63.1, 2,
3. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for thee,
my Flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land where no water is, that I
may see thy Power and thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Now
all these expressions of this Holy Man, are but the streamings forth of the
Love and Affection of his Soul, at several times and upon several occasions
after the enjoyment of God in his House and Ordinances which he was then
deprived of: And if the mediate presence of God and the comnications of his
Grace and Love to a Soul in Holy Duties be so much to be defired; because
therein it enjoys God, and has thereby the manifestations of his Love and
Favor sealed and confirmed to it: Is not then the immediate presence of God in
Heaven much more to be desired, where the Soul shall stand in no need of any
Duties or Ordinances to confirm the Love of God unto it; because there shall be
no Sin in it to provoke God to hide his Face from it, or to interrupt the Peace
and Joy of the Soul's delighting it self in him to Eternity?

To be in such a frame, as to be able to say, though I experience not those
ravishing Joys in the Hopes of Heaven, that some Servants of God attain unto,
though I am a Stranger unto those vehement longings and holy pantings of Soul
after God and Heaven, that some are acquainted with, whereby they are ardently
desirous of a dissolution; yet to be able to say, I bless God I am very well
content to submit to his Will, the thoughts of Death are not terrible and
amazing to me, but I am willing to yield my self up unto the good pleasure of
God, when he sees good to call me hence. This indeed is something of the temper
of a good Christian, and that which God takes well at the hands of any, if it
be done upon good grounds: But this is not all that God expects, nor is it all
that the Christian Religion teaches and requires; the certain and sure
Principles of Christianity, founded on the Divine Oracles, will enable a
Believer to go further; for it discovers an unbodied State of Happiness to be
enjoyed by Holy Souls in another World, after which there should be such strong
Workings and earnest Groanings, as should carry forth the Soul in Holy Longings
and Desires after the participation thereof: And this now is not a frame of
Soul to be found in a Believer upon a Death bed only; but it is that which
should be the joyful Companion of his Life in the time of his Health and
Strength; and the Reason is this, because God and Heaven have the same
loveliness and desireableness in them at one time that they have at another, in
Health that they have in Sickness, in Life as they have in Death; and therefore
they call for and deserve the same height of Love and Affection, and the same
strength of Joy and Delight to be exercised toward them, when a Believer has
the greatest enlargements of outward Prosperity, as when he is under the
greatest confinement of Adversity or Sickness. Live therefore, O Believer, with
a Holy Longing and Desire of Soul, springing up in thee continually after
Heaven, be earnestly desirous after thy departure hence that thou may be
with God: This was that Blessed Frame Holy Souls of old lived in; so the
Apostle speaks of himself and others in that excellent Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.2,
4, 8. We, says he, that are in this Tabernacle, do groan earnestly that we may
be clothed upon with our House, that is from Heaven. And we groan being
burdened that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life. And yet again says he,
We are always confident, or we do always with confidence expect and desire to
be absent from the Body; But why so? Oh there is good Reason for it, because
says he, Whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent, or we are kept at
too great a distance from the Lord. To be content to Die is a good temper of
Soul, and that which is rarely found in any wicked man, to be sure not upon
good grounds; but truly when I consider how much farther a Christian might go,
and what he is yet short of that might tend to the Glory of God, the Credit of
the Christian Religion, and the Peace and Comfort of his own Soul; methinks his
present attainment compared with what is his Duty to Labor after, is no
extraordinary great thing: For consider a little what a strange kind of
expression is it, and how harshly does it sound, to say concerning a Believer,
that he is content to be Happy: As to Worldly enjoyments, it is not usual to
say of any Man, that he is Content to have them; who says concerning Silver and
Gold, that a Man is Content to be enriched with them? No, the common expression
in this case is, not that Men are Content to be Rich, but that they are
Covetous after Riches. And so for Honor and outward Greatness, we say not that
Men are Willing to be Honored and Advanced above their Neighbors, but they
are Ambitious in seeking after Promotion. And why then should it be said of a
Christian only, that he is Content to be Happy, Content to be with God in
Heaven? Now if Worldly Men's desires work thus strongly after Earthly and
Temporal Enjoyments which cannot make them Happy when attained; surely the
desires of a Christian should work as strongly after Heavenly and Eternal
Enjoyments, which when attained, can and will make them truly and really Happy.
And here I will add one thing, let the whole Creation be ransackt, let Earth
and Heaven be searched, there is nothing, no Person, no Object to be found in
either that can make up a Satisfactory Bliss and Happiness for an Immortal
Soul, but what is Supreamly, Superlatively, Perfectively and Eternally good,
and that is the Blessed God himself; the Enjoyment of whom in Heaven can only
make the Soul perfectly and completely Happy.

Were I to persuade wicked men, I will not say long for Death, but only to be
willing to Die, my task were not only difficult, but impossible; for who can by
any Arguments prevail upon a Rational Creature, willingly to run himself into
Miseries and Torments, though but of a short continuance, much more to rush
upon those Miseries and Torments that shall be everlasting, into which every
wicked man, when he comes to Die, shall fall? And this Sinners know not only
from Scripture Revelation, but from the Terrors and Accusations of their own
Consciences before hand. Unto such therefore all persuasions of this nature are
vain and to no purpose, such stand in need of the most powerful Exhortations,
backed with the strongest Arguments that can be, to stir them up to a speedy
preparation for their approaching Dissolution, lest thereby they fall into a
State of Misery that is unalterable for ever.

But when I am speaking to the People of God, unto whom Death will be of such
infinite Gain and Advantage, methinks my Work should be easy, though my
Exhortation runs much higher, for unto such I am not now speaking, by way of
persuasion unto a fitness for Death, because I take it for granted that this
Work in the main of it is already done with them; nor yet am I stirring up in
such a bare willingness to Die, but I would press them unto something further
still, and that is, that they would entertain the thoughts of Death in their
Meditations with Holy Longings and Desires of Soul after it; and certainly
there is no need of any other Arguments to urge this Duty upon such, than
barely to tell them that Heaven stands open ready to receive them: and all the
hurt Death will do unto such, is to give them admission into such a State of
Bliss and Happiness, as shall extend it self unto the Satisfaction of all their
Desires unto the utmost, both as to the Nature and Quality of them, and also as
to the duration and continuance of them. The Happiness of Heaven being so
great, that it requires the Capacities of the Soul should be enlarged to take
in the fullness thereof, it being impossible the Soul of Man should now receive
or bear up under the oppressing weight of so great a Happiness as is there to
be enjoyed. Rest not thy self therefore satisfied, O believing Soul, with a
bare Contentment of mind, that when thou die, thou shall certainly go to
Heaven; but let thy frequent Thoughts hereof fill thee with Holy Longings and
Pantings of Soul after that blessed State.

The Miseries of this Life, and the uncomfortableness of a Christian's manner
of living while he is here, in respect of Sin, Sorrow, Doubts, Fears,
Ignorance, and Temptations, which are in a great measure the daily and
afflictive Companions of his life, are Arguments strong enough to make such a
one willing to Die; but in Conjunction with these a Believer has a Prospect of
the Glory and Happiness of Heaven in the Eye of his Faith, unto which he knows
Death will carry him, this should fill the desires of his Soul with Holy
Longings after the Enjoyment of it. Open therefore O believing Soul, the Eye of
thy Faith, and look upward and see if thou can not espy a Glory and Happiness
in the highest Heavens, that is worthy of the most earnest Breathings and
Desires of thy Soul after it. Can thou in the whole Universe, find out better
Society in conversing with whom thou can enjoy such Soul-satisfying pleasure;
yea, such ravishing Joys and Delights as are there to be found? There are Holy
Angels that never sinned, whose Nature as well as whose Happiness in this State
of Mortality, is beyond the reach of thy understanding to fathom. There are
Glorified Saints, advanced to that perfection of Grace and Holiness, that they
shall never sin more. There is the Blessed and never to be sufficiently admired
Savior and Redeemer of Sinners, the Lord Jesus Christ, who as he once in our
Natures, shed his Blood here on Earth, to purchase Heaven for Believers, so is
he now residing in the same Nature, there preparing places for them, ready to
receive them into the Embraces of his Love and Favor. Yea, in that Glorious
place there is that which should much more excite the Desires of Believers
after it, for there is the infinitely Great and Glorious God, whose
Excellencies and Perfections are such, that as none can understand, none can
make known; so none can bear the discoveries of them. Such dazzling Excellencies
of Glory and Beauty are there in the Face of God, that Angels themselves are
not able to behold them; and yet so lovely and desirable an Object is he, that
Angels cannot refrain from looking on him: and certainly if the Great and Holy
God should display but a little of himself in his Glory and Beauty unto the
Soul of a Believer, should he open though but a little of the infinite
Treasures of his goodness unto the view of the Soul, O with what Ravishments of
Joy would that Soul press into the presence of God, and with what a Holy kind
of impatience would it throw it self into his Arms! what need would there be of
setting bounds to the Mount to keep such a Soul from breaking through unto the
Lord! The Happiness of Heaven is so great, that had not God mercifully
concealed from us the infinite Excellencies and Glory thereof in a great
measure, our Desires would be so vehemently bent upon it, that we should be
under such an impatiency of Spirit after the enjoyment of it, as would render
us unfit for any Employment that God calls us to in this World. Some therefore
upon this account have taken notice of the infinite Wisdom of God, in engaging
the Soul in so near and dear a Union with the Body, that it might have such a
care for, and Love toward it as might tend to its preservation, and not be
desirous of quitting its habitation with it; yea, some of the Heathens
themselves have observed the Wisdom of God in concealing the Happiness of
Separate Souls, that Men might be contented to live out that time God has
allotted to them in this World. Alas, the most and the best of us see and know
but little of these things, and what we do see is but through a Glass darkly,
and that is the reason our Affections go not out more earnestly after them; did
we know and understand more of Heaven and the Glory and Happiness thereof, we
should with a Holy impatiency of Desire, long after it: for is it not in Heaven
that we shall never sin more, never offend God more, never wound our
Consciences more, never do any thing that shall either break our Peace, disturb
our Joy, or endanger our Salvation? Is it not there that we shall be for ever
out of the reach of Satan's Temptations, with which a Believer is so assaulted
and harassed here, as renders his Life not only uncomfortable, but even
burdensome to himself? Is it not there that our frail Bodies, which now are
subject to Pains and Diseases, because defiled with Sin, shall be for ever
loosed from all Weaknesses and Infirmities, being made like unto the Glorious
Body of Jesus Christ, perfectly freed from Mortality and Corruption, and from
all Sin and Defilement? Is it not there that all the People of God shall be of
one Heart and of one Mind, that being taken away both from within and from
without, which was the cause of all their Divisions and Contentions here on
Earth; and instead thereof, there shall be a sweet union of Hearts and
Affections, all of them abundantly delighting and satisfying themselves in one
God, as the Object of their Happiness, without the least jarring or discord
among them to all Eternity? While the People of God are in this Vail of Tears,
they labor under much Blindness and Ignorance about the Mysteries of Salvation
as revealed in the Gospel; but in Heaven these Mysteries shall all be fully and
perfectly made known to us. In this Life we take in our Knowledge of God, of
Heaven, and of the Gospel, by which we are savingly enlightened in either, by
little and little, as a Man that desires to know what is contained in a Book
before it is exposed to public view, reads it Sheet by Sheet from the Press,
and so understands a little and a little of it by Degrees: And truly so do
Christians concerning the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, now they hear a
Sermon, and by that they gain a little light; and in some short time they hear
another Sermon, and by that they increase their light a little more; and thus
their Stock of Divine Knowledge increases a little and a little at time by the
help of means and opportunities that they enjoy: But now in Heaven all is done
without travail or trouble, for though it is true, Glorified Saints there cease
not from working, yet is it as true that they cease from labor. Here our
Passions are strong and prevalent; by reason whereof our minds are blinded, and
we easily mistake Error for Truth, and Truth for Error; but hereafter all these
Clouds shall be blown away, and we shall see things nakedly and truly as they
are in themselves. Here the weakness and smallness of many men's Natural Parts
keeps them in the dark, and renders them incapable of apprehending some Truths
of God, which others of greater abilities, can search into with pleasure and
delight; But then as the Apostle, speaking concerning the day of Judgment,
tells us, They that are alive then, shall not prevent those that are asleep: So
in Heaven, they that are strong shall not prevent those that are weak, but the
Scholar shall there know as much as his Master, and the People understand as
much as their Minister. In this World Contentions and Quarrellings among Holy
and Learned Men, leave the Weak and Ignorant at great uncertainties, what to
Judge concerning many Gospel Truths: But in Heaven there shall be a perfect
Reconciliation and Agreement among them all: yea, while we are here, it often
falls out, that in our most diligent searching after Truth, we meet with many
hindrances and disturbances; sometimes the necessary Affairs of this World
cause us to lay aside our Enquiries; at other times many Distempers that attend
our infirm Bodies, divert and hinder us in our most serious Inquisitions. But
in Heaven, our Bodies will be above all these things; we shall there no more be
liable to, nor annoyed with any Weaknesses and Infirmities. In that Glorious
place we shall not need to provide either Raiment for the back, or Food for the
belly. O what a Happiness have Believers by dying, who are thereby at once
eased of all the aches of their Bodies, and of all the conflicts of their
Souls: how comfortably may they look Death in the Face, who is the only
Physician that cures them of all their Distempers at once: O when that blessed
hour comes, how joyfully may they lift up their heads, for as soon as they are
passed through that dark and gloomy Valley, they shall be brought into a place
of unconceivable Bliss and Happiness, where they shall behold him whom their
Souls so much loved and longed to see, even their Blessed Redeemer the Lord
Jesus Christ, not at a distance or afar off, as they were wont to do by an Eye
of Faith, through the Glass of an Ordinance or Promise; but with a Glorified
Eye draw near to him and look upon his blessed Person, the Glorious sight of
whom they shall never more lose, to all Eternity. When a Believer shall not, as
here he has, now and then some little glimpses of his Face, and some small
tastes of his Love in a little Sacramental Bread and Wine, but he shall lay his
Mouth to the Fountain head, and from his Bosom drink full and large draughts of
those Rivers of the Waters of Life that proceed out of the Throne of God, and
of the Lamb for evermore. He shall then no more have any descriptions of
Heaven, by fear say, as he was wont to have it described to him here by the
sorry Rhetoric of a Mortal Man, either by Preaching or Writing of that which
he himself had little Love to, and less Knowledge and Acquaintance with; but
shall himself walk up and down and view the Streets of that Glorious City: And
O with what Wonder and Astonishment will a Believer bless himself there, when
he reflects back upon those poor and low thoughts that himself and the best of
Preachers also had thereof when on Earth he did Meditate, and they did Preach
or Write upon that Subject. One moment's sight of that Glory will give the Soul
a thousand times better Information and Satisfaction what Heaven is, than all
the Discourses that it ever heard, or all the Books it ever read here on Earth
were ever able to do.

And can thou, O Believer, hear all this concerning Heaven, and thy Faith
tell thee that all this is true, and add also that Heaven is ten thousand times
more and better than what all the Men in the World can imagine concerning it,
and yet not feel some springings up of Holy Joy and Delight in thee, followed
with earnest longings of Soul after the Enjoyment of it; O whence does this
dullness and backwardness proceed? this is not a temper of Soul suitable unto
the Hopes of so great a Happiness as Heaven will be? Why do thou not O
Believing Soul, cry out with Holy Longings and Desires, How long O Lord most
Holy and True, shall it be before thou bring me into the Possession of this
most Blissful State; Every moment whilst thou art kept at a distance from it,
should seem to thee a Day, and every Day a Month, and every Month as a Year;
yea, as an Age until that blessed time does come. But O how little of this Holy
Longing of Soul after Christ and Heaven, is there to be found among Christians
now? Most of those that call themselves by that Name, resting upon Hopes and
Probabilities of their interest in that State of Blessedness, never seeking to
attain unto the Riches of the full Assurance of Hope accompanied with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. But sure I am such a frame of Spirit has not
always been enough to satisfy some Christians in their pursuits after Heaven.
Oh with what Ravishments of Joy and Delight have I both heard and read some
Holy Souls expressing their longing Desires after Christ and Heaven.

There was a certain Noble Person, whom I well knew, from under whose own hand
writing, I Copied out this following Relation concerning her self. Being
employed in Holy Meditation, ( which was both her daily Practice, as also her
daily Delight and Solace) and Contemplating of the Joys of Heaven, and how to
secure her Interest in that State of Blessedness, she did with great Desire of
Soul, as her own words are, strive to take the Kingdom above with a Holy
Violence, and to Storm Heaven by importunate Prayer; and God was pleased, as
she adds, (Blessing his Name) to carry her up as it were unto Mount Nebo, and
from thence to give her a Prospect of the Heavenly Canaan, by the sight whereof
as one in an Ecstasy of Joy, she cried out, Lord I would not live here always;
for I am now convinced, it is better for me to die than to live: It is
therefore, O Lord, the great Desire of my Soul, that as Elias was, so I might
instantly be taken up into Heaven, without returning any more, to bid them
farewell of my own House, or ever seeing the Faces of any Mortal Relations more
here on Earth. Prayer and Meditation had, as her Expression is, Associated her
Spirit to such Company, that I rather thought, says she, I had a Body too much
with me, than found a want of it. After which shedding plentiful Tears of Joy,
and the offering up of many Sighs and Groans, accompanied with earnest Desires
and Longings after Heaven, with fervent Prayers to be a partaker of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; she returned from her Devotions Blessing
and Praising of God, who had so refreshed and comforted her Soul with Divine
and Heavenly Consolations.

There was also a very Eminently Godly Person, some of whose Relations are yet
living, who lying upon his Deathbed, there came one to Visit him, who told
him, he hoped it would please God to restore him to his Health again; says the
good Man to him, Do you think to please me with such a Discourse as this? know
O Friend, you are much mistaken in me, if you apprehend the thoughts of Life
and Health are pleasing to me. Alas! the World has quite lost its Excellency;
in my Judgment, it is but a poor contemptible thing in all its Glory, compared
with the Glory of the invisible World, which I now live in the sight of: it
would be a far more Pleasant and Delightful thing to me, if you could tell me
for certain, that I am no Man for this World long, and that before to morrow, I
should be in Eternity; for I do so long to be with Christ, that I could be
content to be cut in pieces and put to the most exquisite Torments, might I but
die and be with Christ. Death through Grace is nothing to me, it has lost its
terribleness, and therefore may do its worst, I fear it not, I can as easily
Die as shut my Eyes, or turn my head and Sleep; yea, I long to Die that I may
be with Christ; come therefore, O Lord Jesus, come quickly; why, O why are thy
Chariot Wheels so long a coming?

O says another, How cold is thy kindness, O Death, in being so slow and
backward to come and loose a poor tired Prisoner from his Bonds? I live a
dwindling Life, with much Pain and much Love-Sickness for my sweet Lord Jesus.
O what would I give to have a Bed made for my wearied Soul in my Dear Lord's
Bosom. I cannot express what pains and delightsome Torments there are in his
Love. O Fairest among the Children of Men; yea, thou who art Fairer than all
the Children of Men, why stayest thou so long? The Fire of Love burns so hot
in my heart toward Jesus Christ, that neither Hell nor Earth can cast water
enough to quench or extinguish it. O Time, Time, how do thou torment the
Souls of those that would be swallowed up in Christ's Love, because thou movest
so slowly. O how am I pained with the Love of Christ, he has left an Arrow in
my Heart, which has wounded me, that I am swallowed up with desires after him,
so that I am to be pitied for want of real possession of him; my greatest pain
is the want of Christ, not of his Joys and Comforts, but of a nearer Union and
Communion with him. O Heavens, move fast, O Time, run, run, and hasten the
Marriage Day, for Love is tormented with delay. Hope and Love woven through one
another, make Christ's absence a Spiritual Torment. It is a pain to my Soul to
wait for him, but Hope that makes not ashamed, but ends in Enjoyment,
swalloweth up the pain. O Lord, when will thou fold the Heavens together like
an old Cloak, and Shovel Time and Days out of the way, and make ready in haste
the Bride for her Husband. What do we here but sin and suffer? O when shall the
Night be gone, and the Shadows fly away, and the Morning of that long long Day
without Clouds or Night, dawn? The Spirit and the Bride say come: O when shall
the Lamb's Wife be ready, and the Bridegroom say, I come also? Even so come,
Lord Jesus, come quickly.

I do not mention these things, as if I thought these Holy Pantings and
Longings of Soul, after God and Heaven, were the stated frame which is commonly
attained by all Christians; much less do I not think that none are truly Godly,
but such as attain to this frame of Spirit; for I believe there are a great
Number of Holy Souls that daily go to Heaven without them. But yet is it a
State that has been attained by some, and may be attained still by others. And
truly such a Heaven upon Earth, as is hereby enjoyed by such Holy Souls, should
be motive sufficient to excite and provoke Christians to a diligent pursuit
hereof, the Effect whereof is Joy unspeakable and Glorious.

To conclude this whole Discourse, I have been long in treating concerning the
Glorious State of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, and much larger than at first
I intended; but the excellency and deliciousness of the matter herein
contained, has drawn out my Meditations to so great a length, and the truth of
it is, in contemplating upon so delightful a Subject, it is very hard and
difficult, when the Heart and Affections are engaged with pleasure and delight,
suddenly to recall them off again. But I need not attempt to make any Apology
for the length of my Discourse, concerning this Subject, for certainly to those
unto whom an Eternity of enjoyment of this State of Blessedness will never seem
too long; the spending of some few hours; nay, of many Days or Months, either
in writing upon, or in reading of what can be written thereon, cannot seem
tedious or irksome. To pass by therefore any thing of that Nature, I shall
conclude all with a few Words.

I have, Christian Reader, in discoursing upon this Subject, followed those who
by Maps describe to us Places and Countries, not only that they themselves
never saw, but which are also unknown unto others, because not inhabited: Now
these Countries and Places, though they may be pleasurable and delightful
Habitations, and the Accommodations and Commodities with which they abound,
exceed what we enjoy in some other Places; yet being unknown there cannot be
any exact Descriptions given of them. Truly this is the State of the Heavenly
Country in a great measure, to which Believers are now traveling, and unto
which they expect to be brought when Death has done its last work upon them:
It is true, it is not an un-inhabited Place, but yet it is a Place, a Region or
Country of Spirits, whose Natures and Beings, as also whose way of living we
are unacquainted withal, the Language they speak is Foreign and strange to us,
and such as we cannot understand in this State of Mortality. And though there
are many Holy Souls, that leaving their impure and vile Bodies, return to
corruption and rottenness for a time in the Grave, do daily ascend unto this
Heavenly Country, yet are there none among the innumerable multitudes of those
Heavenly Inhabitants, that ever returned to take up their dwelling here on
Earth again, to give us an exact account of that most glorious and blissful
place. It is true, the Blessed Apostle St. Paul was herein privileged above all
Men that ever lived, being taken up into Heaven, by extraordinary favor, for a
time, and vouchsafed some little more knowledge of that Heavenly Place, than
what we poor Mortals know, by what he there heard and saw; which when he
returned to Earth again, himself tells us the Happiness thereof was so great,
that Words could not express it: for, says he, I heard unspeakable Words, even
such, as are not possible for a Man to utter. And if one that had been in
Heaven could not express what the Happiness of Heaven is; how then can any one
do it that always lived here upon Earth. If St. Paul, that was by Divine Grace
and Favor admitted among those Heavenly Inhabitants, could not describe to us
what Heaven is, well may we be at a loss in giving a description thereof, who
were never there. When we attempt to say all we can concerning Heaven, alas, it
is but like the lisping and stammering of a Child, that is not arrived to its
perfect Speech; and therefore all that we can say of it, is but in a broken and
imperfect way and manner.

While we are in this World, we shall always be Children in understanding what
Heaven means; and therefore whatever we speak concerning the Happiness thereof
must be proportionable thereunto. As no Man has seen God himself, so no Man
has seen the Heaven of God, the Habitation of his Holiness and Glory: Our Lord
tells us, so expressly concerning both, John 1.18. No Man has seen God at any
time. And in Joh. 3.13. No Man has ascended up into Heaven. Our knowledge of
both is chiefly by Divine Revelation. It is true, much of God is and may be
known, by the Works of Creation and Providence; but the true saving knowledge
of God is only made known to us by Divine Revelation. And in the same way and
manner comes in our knowledge of Heaven also, that is by what the Scripture
makes known to us thereof. Now according to what those divinely inspired
Oracles discover to us what Heaven is, has the preceding Discourse concerning
that Blessed State and Place, both its Foundation and Building: What influence
it will have upon the Hearts and Lives of those that shall be the Readers
thereof, I know not; but assure thy self whoever thou art, into whose hands it
shall fall, that all these Words have not been heaped up together, to entertain
thee with a relation of some strange and fabulous story; nor are the many
particular instances of Happiness, which are so largely treated of in the
foregoing Discourse, things which may have a probability of credit among sober
and serious Persons; but they are things of the greatest certainty and of the
most undoubted reality that possible can be, whether they be believed or not.

It is true, Heaven and the Glory and Happiness there to be enjoyed, which are
the subject matter of this Discourse, are things that are invisible and out of
sight; but they are so only to an Eye of Sense; for to an Eye of Faith they are
the greatest realities in all the World. The heavenly Glory indeed is that
which is Spiritual, but it is not therefore that which is not Real; but because
it is Spiritual, therefore is it the more Real; yea, and being Spiritual, and
so the more Real, therefore also should it be received and entertained by
Christians, not only with the greatest seriousness and earnestness, but also
with the strongest Faith, and firmest affiance that possible can be. I must
therefore take the boldness to tell thee, whoever thou art that shall read
these lines, that the concernment that lies before thee, in the present case,
is not slight, small, nor inconsiderable; but a matter of the greatest weight
and moment that can possibly be proposed to thy consideration. It is true, as
thou art a Man, and as thou art a Christian also, there are many particular
Works and Actions, which thou art called to the performance of; but yet the
making sure of Heaven and a Blessed Immortality, is and ought to be the chief
of thy Works and Employments, and that to which all thy other actings should
have a tendency, and in the attaining of which they should all issue and
terminate.

If a Man have many things to do in the World, common Prudence will put him
upon doing of that first, which is of greatest moment and concernment to him;
especially if he has but a little time to do it in, and the neglect thereof
will be his utter ruin: Whoever heard of a Man in his Wits, that preferred the
enjoyment of a little pleasure and pastime, before the ensuring of an Estate of
a thousand pound a year to him and his, which might and could be done in that
short space of time and in no other? Who ever preferred the curing of a slight
cut in his Finger, before the healing of some dangerous Wound received in his
Head or Heart, which if not taken in time would prove his Death? Or was it ever
known that a Man, who had the use of his Reason and Understanding, and had
forfeited his Life to his Prince by some Treasonable Act, for which he was
condemned to Die, and had his Life proferred him, if on such a Day he would
come and submit himself to his Sovereign, and ask his Pardon; and instead of so
doing, he should rather choose to spend that Day among his sinful and riotous
Companions, in Drinking and Gaming, and so lose the opportunity of saving of
his Life? Such Acts of Folly as these are, committed by any Men, would make
them unpitied and unlamented, under the extremity of Miseries and Sorrows that
should befall them thereupon: But the generality of Men in these cases are more
wise and considerative, than thus to ruin and undo themselves. O then let it
not lie any longer as a reproach upon Christians, that the Men of the World are
wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light: Why should not thou, O
Christian, be as careful and prudent in thy Spiritual Concerns as the Men of
the World are in their Temporal Concerns? Is not Heaven of as much worth and
value as Earth? Is not thy Right and Title to an Eternal Inheritance above, of
as great moment to thee, as a Title to an Earthly Inheritance here below, is
unto them? Is not the Love and Favor of God as much to be prized and
endeavored after, as the Favor of an Earthly Prince? Is not the Salvation and
Happiness of thy Soul in Heaven, to all Eternity, of as great importance, as
the saving of a short Temporal Life of the Body, which with the improvement of
the utmost care and diligence that can be used, cannot long be kept from
falling into corruption and rottenness? What then can thou render as a Reason
of thy carelessness and negligence herein: Surely thy Folly is as much greater
than theirs, as Heaven is better than Earth, and the enjoyment of God to
Eternity, is better than the enjoyment of the World for a short moment of time.
The Blessedness and Happiness therefore propounded to thy consideration, being
of the greatest concernment that ever was or can be proposed unto any; the
despising, yea, the slighting and neglecting of an offer of such rich Grace and
Bounty, is that which shall be punished with infinitely far greater misery and
torment, than ever yet was inflicted upon any; yea, or upon all Mankind in the
World put together. Were it possible to make up a Misery and Torment of all the
Rage and Malice, that ever Men or Devils since the Creation invented or
executed upon any; yea, and add to it the sum, the quintessence and extremity
of all those Pains and Diseases both of Body and Mind, that the Justice of the
Holy and Righteous God, has justly and righteously inflicted upon any; yea,
upon the whole Race of Mankind from the beginning of the World unto this Day,
and let all this be laid upon one Man, and he strengthened and enabled to live
under all those Pains and Torments, in the extremity of them, for a thousand
years: Who would not say this Man were a miserable Man indeed? Why truly, such;
nay, ten thousand times far greater shall be the Eternal, never-ending Misery
and Torment of that Man, who finally persists in his contempt and slighting of
Heaven and Eternal Happiness; and so do all those whose pains and care is not
with diligence and industry laid out in securing to themselves an interest in
the Heavenly Inheritance: For certainly the utmost extremity of Desires and
Endeavors, is due unto, and ought to be laid out in the pursuit of an
extremity of Bliss and Happiness; and such is Heaven and the Blessedness there
to be enjoyed, it being that which will fill and satisfy the Desires and
Cravings of the Soul, unto the utmost, to all Eternity.

I have no more to say to thee, O Christian Reader, than this, if neither the
greatest extremity of misery that can be endured; yea, the enduring of all
Miseries and Torments heaped up together, not for Thousands or Millions of
years, but to an endless duration never to expire, will not move thee to look
after Heaven; nor yet the Happiness and Blessedness; yea, the Eternity of an
inexpressible and unconceivable Happiness and Blessedness, that there is and
shall be for ever enjoyed by the Saints in Glory, and may be also enjoyed by
thee, if thou art wise and prudent, if thou art diligent and careful in
improving thy time and opportunities. If I say thine own Interest, thine own
Misery or Happiness, will not move nor work upon thee to bestir thy self to
make sure of Heaven and Eternal Life, I know not what will, neither do I know
what to say more unto thee. However I shall turn my Advice and Counsel to thee,
into Prayer unto God for thee, whoever thou art that shall read this Discourse,
that God would graciously be pleased to open thine Eyes, and show thee
convincingly and powerfully, by a Work of his own Spirit, on thy Heart, thy
great Misery if thou persist in thy neglect of Heaven, and thy great Happiness
and Blessedness if thou embrace and close with the offers thereof before it be
too late: Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, unto all those that shall read
this Discourse, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, who by his Death and
Sufferings has purchased this Heaven and this Happiness; and is thereby become
the Author of Eternal Salvation, to all those that believe in him and obey him.
Amen,

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the King's- Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
PRactical Preparation for Death. The Wisdom and Interest of Christians. The
Folly and Misery of those that are negligent therein. The great benefits of a
Life spent in a daily Preparation for our latter end; with Motives and
Directions for the performance thereof.

Discourses, or Sermons, on several Scriptures: By Ezekiel Hopkins late Lord
Bishop of Londonderry. In Octavo.

An Exposition on the Ten Commandments, with other Sermons: By Ezekiel Hopkins,
late Lord Bishop of Londonderry. In Quarto.

The Holy Life of Mrs. Elizabeth Walker, late Wife of Dr. Walker of Fyfield in
Essex, giving an Account of her exemplary Piety and Charity; with some useful
Papers and Letters written by her self, upon several occasions.

The Naked Gospel: Discovering, 1. What was the Gospel which our Lord and his
Apostles Preached. 2. What Additions and Alterations latter Ages have made in
it. 3. What Advantages and Damages have thereupon ensued. Of Faith. Of the
Trinity. The Incarnation of our Blessed Savior. And the Resurrection of the
Body. Published by Arthur Bury, D. D. Rector of Exeter College in Oxford.

The Virtuous Woman: Or, the Life of the most excellent Lady, Mary, late
Countess of Warwick: To which are annexed some of her Ladyships pious and
useful Meditations.

Aurea Legenda: Or, Apophthegms, Sentences, and Sayings of many Wise and
Learned Men, useful for all Persons: Collected out of many Authors, by Samuel
Clerk. In Twelves.

Redemption of Time, the Duty and Wisdom of Christians. Or, a practical
Discourse, showing what special Opportunities ought to be redeemed; what
mis-spendings of time are to be avoided; with convincing Reasons, quickening
Motives, and proper Directions for the right improvement of precious Time. By
John Wade. In Octavo.

The Danger of Delaying Repentance: A Sermon Preached to the University, at St.
Mary's in Oxford: By Arthur Bury, D. D. Rector of Exeter College in Oxford. In
Quarto.

An earnest and compassionate suit for forbearance to the Learned Writers of
some Controversies at present: By the Bishop of Cork and Rosse. In Quarto.

The End.

