William Richardson's CASE against George Durdant, for Lands in Stains and
Stanwell, in the County of Middlesex.
RObert Durdant, the Father of George Durdant, who now brings this Writ, did at
first sell the Lands in question to the Defendant Richardson, only during the
Life of the said Robert Durdant; but the said Robert Durdant afterward being
in great want of Moneys; and having then a Wife and several Children to
maintain, did importune the Defendant William Richardson to buy the Inheritance
of the said Lands. And Mr. Higdon who was a Trustee for the said Robert Durdant
for these and other Lands, and the said Durdant's near Kinsman, likewise
informed the said Richardson, that the said Robert Durdant had a good Title to
the said Lands, and a lawful Right to sell the same, by virtue of the last Will
and Testament of one Henry Wicks Esquire deceased. And that the reason why the name
of the said Mr. Higdon was used in Trust in the said Will was (and so intended
by the said Mr. Wicks) to the intent, that the said Mr. Higdon might (as he saw
cause or should think fit) either enable the said Durdant to sell the
Inheritance of the said Lands, or obstruct his sale thereof, and the said Mr.
Higdon affirmed to the said Richardson, that there was a necessity the said
Robert Durdant should sell the said Lands, to some Body for the maintenance of
Him, his Wife and Children. And that the said Durdant had several other Lands
to keep and suffer to descend to his Son. Thereupon the said Richardson advised
with several Counselors at Law upon the said Will, the words whereof are as
follows, viz.

Item. I give and bequeath to my Cousin John Higdon and his Heirs, during the
Life only of Robert Durdant my Kinsman, Eldest Son of my Nephew Andrew Durdant,
deceased. All th^se my Messuages Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in
Stains and Stanwell in the County of Middlesex; upon this trust and confidence
that he the said John Higdon, and his Heirs, shall permit, and suffer him the
said Robert Durdant, from time to time, during the Term of his Life, to have,
receive, and take the Rents and Profits thereof. And from and after the Decease
of the said Robert Durdant: then I do give, and devise the said last mentioned
Lands in Stains and Stanwell, unto the Heirs Males of the Body of him the said
Robert Durdant now living, and such other Heirs Males, or Females, as he shall
hereafter happen to have of his Body; and for want of such Heirs, then to the
use and behoof of my Cousin Gideon Durdant, and the Heirs of his Body; and for
want of such Heirs, the same to be and remain to the right Heirs of me the said
Henry Wicks.

And the said Richardson being advised by his Counsel that the said Robert
Durdant, together with the said Mr. Higdon, and the said Gideon Durdant, the
remainder man, had a lawful power to sell and convey the Inheritance of the
said Lands; he the said Richardson purchased the same of the said Robert
Durdant and Gideon Durdant, and paid for the Estate, for Life and the
Inheritance in all above 600 l. the Lands being since Let for not above 34 l.
per annum; but never had any quiet Enjoyment thereof, since the death of the
said Robert Durdant; but shortly after his death, which happened near 18 years,
since the Friends and Kindred of the now complainant George Durdant, in his
Minority brought a Suit in Chancery against the said Richardson to set aside
his Purchase; whereupon after examination of Witnesses, and a full hearing, his
Purchase was allowed good, and their Bill dismissed upon the merits of the
Cause; whereupon they acquiesced and never appeared, or brought any Bill of
Review upon the said dismission, whereby to bring the Merits of the Cause again
in question; but since the said Georgre Durdan^ coming to Age, has brought
this Suit and put the said Richardson to great expenses, and levied 30 l. upon
his Goods, and above 50 l. by mean Profits and cutting down of Timber, having
obtained a Judgdment thereupon, by the Judgment of three of the Judges of his
Majesty's Court of King Bench. But the said William Richardson thereupon
brought a Writ of Error returnable in the Exchequer Chamber, before the Judges
of the Common Pleas and Barons of the Exchequer; and by the Judgment of seven
Judges, then present, the said William Richardson's Title was declared to be
good and the former Judgment reversed. And the said William Richardson was to
be restored to what he had lost by the former Judgments and accordingly was
restored to the possession but never had restitution of the said 30 l. Costs
and 50 l. for mean Profits: this Reversal was the 10th day of February in the
32 year year of his late Majesty's Reign, and the Writ of Error now in question
is Test the 4th. day of November in the said 32. year of his said late
Majesty's Reign, since which time not only the Eejctment Lease, in the Record
mentioned is expired but before the said George Durdant the lesser therein
named, is dead and the lessee John James is reported to be dead, so that the
said Richardson can have no Restitution of the said 30 l. for Costs, and 50 l.
for mean Profits; nevertheless some other Persons carry on the said Writ of
Error.


