REASONS FOR THE East India Company's sending out Twelve SHIPS to INDIA about
the 15th of January next.
THE East India Company had Four Ships arrived from India in September. 1691. and
in October they delivered into the Honorable House of Commons a Paper said to
contain a true Account of all their Stock both at home and abroad, wherein they
make their Estate then in England to amount to about Thirty Nine Thousand
Pounds: And in that they value their Dead Stock at about Ten Thousand Five
Hundred Pounds, for their Buildings and Equipage for a Troop of Horse.

Now to pass over all Reflections on the many Notorious Falsities in that
Paper, It may suffice here to observe, That were this Article true, It Is yet
inconsiderable, even to a Scandal; For that our East India Company should have
Four great Ships from India: whose Cargoes they valued in their aforesaid
Account at Three Hundred and Seventy Thousand Pounds, and that all that,
conjoined with every thing they could possibly pretend to here before, should
yet altogether, according to their own accompting, make the Total of their
Quick Stock in England, no more than Twenty Eight Thousand Five Hundred Pounds,
Is too plain a Discovery of their ill Condition.

But tho they were, by their own Confession, thus utterly destitute of a
sufficient Stock to carry on the Trade, yet they obtained leave to send out
Five Ships in the Spring, wherein, if they adventured any thing for account of
the General Joynt-Stock, It must be borrow d; For the foresaid small Sum was as
little as they could reserve for incident Charges and Secret Service. But it is
well known, that a great part of the Effects laden on those Ships, were for the
particular Accounts of a few ruling Gentlemen amongst them, with such Friends
as they pleased to admit into the Concern; together with the Armenians, whom,
to the great Dishonor and Detriment of the Nation, they have of late
introduced into the Trade. And to cover these private Concerns from public
Notice, so that they might pass as the Company's own Goods, the Proprietors
were obliged to let them go under the Company's Mark, and be entered at the
Custom-House in their Name.

Since this, they have had no more than One Ship from India, which is the
Kempthorn, lately arrived, and after she had been detained above Two Years in
the Country, and the Commander at last forced to protest for his Dispatch, she
is now returned about a Hundred and Fifty Tuns Dead Freighted. Neither were the
Goods she brings provided by the Company's own Stock; For, by the Confession of
a Principal Member of their Commit, their Servants have, for this occasion,
made use of the Moneys of particular Merchants of London remaining in their
hands, to the amount of Fifteen Thousand Pounds, for which they have drawn
Bills on the Company; And that is at least one half of the Cost of her Cargo.

This is the best Face they themselves can put upon their Affairs here at home:
And as to their Condition abroad, if the Evidence in the last Session of
Parliament were not sufficient, There is now come by the foresaid Ship
Kempthorn a further Confirmation of the whole Matter, in a Letter from one of
their principal Factors, to an Honorable Member of the House of Commons,
Declaring, That the English had lost their Esteem in all Places, That the
Companies Servants were kept as Prisoners in the City of Suratt, And that the
Natives were so Incensed against them for their late Hostilities, That they
could scarce refrain from treating them at present after a more severe Manner,
tho their own Interest required it till they had recovered satisfaction for
those Injuries: Which, if not complied with, 'twas feared their Rage would
drive them to Extremities: And moreover that there was so great a Debt upon the
Company at that Place, as would demand a large Stock to be sent out to
discharge it.

And now, Tho their Affairs labor under all these dismal Circumstances, which
render them wholly Incapable to act as a Company, according to the true Intent
of their Charter; and make it apparent, that this valuable Trade will be
entirely lost to the Nation, if any longer continued in their Hands: Yet those
Gentlemen who preside in the present Management, are Masters of so great
Assurance, To Petition the King in Council, for leave to send no less than
Twelve Ships to India this Season; And they were so successful on Thursday
last, to obtain a Grant for half that Number. But

IT IS humbly Hoped and Prayed, That our Honorable Representatives, who are now
(in pursuance of His Gracious Majesty's Message to them) Considering of the
most proper Methods to Preserve, Improve, and Establish this Trade to a
National Advantage, Will be pleased to Interpose with their prevalent
Applications to His Majesty, to prevent so great a Prejudice to the Public, as
must unavoidably be the Consequence of permitting these Ships to proceed; At
least until it be first effectually Provided, That they shall carry out no
Effects but what are entirely for Account of their General Ioynt-Stock, And
give sufficient Security to discharge all Debts and Demands on them in India.

LONDON: December 7. 1692.


