The Second SPIRA: Being a fearful Example of An Atheist,

Who had Apostatized from the Christian Religion, and died in Despair at
Westminster, December. 8. 1692.

With an Account of his Sickness, Convictions, Discourses with Friends and
Ministers; and of his dreadful Expressions and Blasphemies when he left the
World.

As also a Letter from an Atheist of his Acquaintance, with his Answer to it.

Published for an Example to others, and recommended to all young Persons, to
settle them in their Religion.

By I. S. a Minister of the Church of England, a frequent Visitor of him during
his whole Sickness.

The Fifth Edition.

London, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry. 1693.

Imprimatur,

January 6th. 1692/3. Edm. Bohun.

The Preface.
BEing often importuned by several of my nearer Acquaintance, to publish the
following Relation, as an account that might be very useful to the Public,
particularly against Profaneness and Atheism; and finding my Business at
present very urgent upon me, I have at last yielded to give the Papers and
Notes which I took during the whole Visitation, to a Friend of mine, to put 'em
in some kind of Method and Order for the Press: And having examined the Piece,
now it is perfected, with the Original Notes and Papers which I drew my self, I
find the Substance and material Part very faithfully done.

It cannot be expected by the Reader that the Style and Words are verbatim the
same as delivered, especially the two Letters, which are in the following
Tract, but as far as I remember, and as my Notes will assist me, (in taking of
which I used all the Sincerity and Care I could) I dare affirm that there is
nothing material left out, nor is there any interpolations which are not
genuine, I mean such as do not add to the Sense, but only expatiate ' in order
to give a plainer Notion and Idea of the Matter: But as to what that Miserable
Gentleman delivered himself (who is the Subject of this Relation) both I and
the METHODIZER of my Notes have been superstitiously Critical to give them as
near the Truth, and very Expressions, as we could, believing the Reader would
not be displeased to have as Nice and Exact Account of that part of the
Treatise as possibly could be met with.

There Is another thing which the Reader will not be sorry to find, which is;
That whereas in dreadful, surprising Relations, the Bookseller, Author, or both
together, do usually clog the Matter of Fact with long and tedious
Observations, impertinent Reflections and such like Stuff, only to make the
Volume swell; here he will find no needless or trifling Digressions, but unmixt
Relation, barely and purely delivered, so that the Reader all the while he
reads, will be upon his Subject, and not perplexed with an Expectation of it.

I Have no more to add but this, That I Am willing to hope and believe this
Treatise may be a means to startle some that are Atheistically Inclined; and
perhaps reclaim others, who by seeing this, may conclude it their Interest,
Rather to be a thoughtful Reader of such an History, than to be such an History
themselves. And as for other Young People, whose Converse in the World has not
yet given them the unhappy Acquaintance of our Modern Atheists or their
Principles, this may be a Spur to their Diligence, and a Warning to keep them
from the dreadful Sin of APOSTATISING.

J. S.

The Methodizer's Apology.
I Am sensible enough that this Age has a deal of Curiosity and little Charity
in it, not but that every one, who by Imprudence, Accident, or otkerwise, gives
any just Occasion for others to be Uncharitable, is obliged in Justice to
remove it, or be content to bear it.

I shall therefore, so far as I am concerned, give that Account to the World
which I have done to several Eminent Divines and Gentlemen, who have been with
me for satisfaction in this Affair, viz.

The Divine, whom I believe to be a Person of Integrity, and from whom I
received the Minutes, (which I have thus Methodiz'd) having mentioned 'em to
me, I became Importunate for their Publication, which he declined several
times, urging his Dependence upon the Family, and the Ill Consequence it might
have, in respect of his Fortunes, perhaps of his Life. At last he consented,
upon my Solemn Promise not to discover him, and upon assuring him, that only
the two first Letters of his Name should be printed; all this time retaining
from me a knowledge of the Family. So soon as I had put the Original Papers in
that little Order the World now finds them, he desired he might have all back,
to compare the finished Piece with the Original Notes; which he did, and wrote
the Preface, acquitting me of any Additions, Interpolations, etc. With this
Preface, amongst other things, he sent me a Letter (which afterward he told me
he designed to send by it self, and therefore it was sealed up). The Letter is
as follows: (The Original may be seen at the Booksellers.)

SIR,
I Had Yours, with the Manuscript, and having compard it with the Memoirs I
took, I think you have done Me, and the Case of that miserable Man, a rigid
Justice.

As to the Preface you mentioned in Yours, if the following will be any
Service to you, you are free to it. Let only the two first Letters of my Name
be printed at the latter end of the Preface. In the Title Page you may also
say, By J. S. a Minister of the Church of England, a frequent Visitor during
the whole Sickness, or something like it. I Am going down into Essex, and as
soon as I return, I Will see your Bookseller, of whom I expect to receive half a
dozen Books.

December. 26. 1692. Your real Friend and Servant, J. S.


The Book being printed, several Divines and others, who were very willing to
have a good Attestation, came to enquire of the Bookseller and of me about it,
and I also being very desirous the World might be fully satisfied in it, (the
Relation beginning to make such an unexpected Noise) pursued my Author, at his
return out of Essex, with continual Importunities of Publishing all he knew of
the whole Matter, with the Circumstances of Persons and Place, pressing the
Concern of Religion, my own Reputation, and the Bookseller's, (who is hereby
sufficiently acquitted from any unfair dealing in the Case) to which (as near
as I can remember, and as I have told some in Town, whose Friendship I most
value) he answered, That he was coldly received at his return, and loaded with
the Epithets of Ungrateful Promise-breaker, etc. For he had promised them not
to make the Concern public, (which indeed he has not in the most material
Points): Besides, he tells me of some private Threats that he has heard, in
case he betrays the Family to the Public Ignomy of such a Relation; and he
says he is sufficiently assured, that those Divines and Doctors he saw with the
sick Person, have been dealt with underhand, or else the Business must
certainly have come to light before now. I told him, that I believed his
dependence on the Family (which he told me had many Branches, and this
Gentleman was unknown to him before that time) was not absolutely necessary,
since I doubted not (for I have heard it promised) but that he would meet with
a Patron, in case he should be expelled. He answered to this, That if all other
Testimonies were taken off but his, he might reasonably fear, being unjustly
degraded, or Eternal Imprisonment, and such an Action of Scandal, that would
ruin (or at least inconvenience) several Patrons with him; how good this
Argument is I know not, having very little Acquaintance in Law Matters: I told
him, That several things looked suspiciously in it, as that it should come out
by none of all those that were present, besides him. To which he answered as
before, That he was confident they were all adjur'd silence, by Promises,
Threats, or some other Methods suitable to their Qualities. I told him, That
many suspect, that Mr. F -- N -- was the Person: He protested he was not. Here
were other things of this nature that past betwixt us, in all which I
discovered him mighty uneasy and apprehensive of further Mischief, continually
renewing his Injunction and my Promise of not revealing any thing, if by any
fortuitous or unguarded Expression, I had discovered the Family.

As for my particular, I know well enough, that my own Integrity and Reputation
is the Hinge upon which the Relation chiefly moves, and I am very willing that
any Divine, Gentleman, or other Person whatever, should have the Liberty of
Examining who and what I am, of all my acquaintance, and if my Credit hither to
appears unspotted and free, and not stained with base, little and dishonorable
Actions, I hope I shall have that common Charity in this Affair which every one
would be unwilling to be denied, were he in my circumstances. The Bookseller
will give any one an account of my Lodgings, where they may have means for
further satisfaction upon this last Head. So that I think there is no necessity
of subscribing my Name to this Apology.

This is the fullest Account the World is to expect from what I at present know
in this Affair, and if I receive any further light into it hereafter, I shall
soon make it public, for my own credit, and the satisfaction of others.

THe Methodizer of this History, being a Person of great Integrity, the Reader
has no reason to question the truth of this printed Attestation he has here
given concerning it; and what commendation I shall give of it, will be
serviceable no longer than till thou have perused it through; Thou will find
such Wine in it as needs no Bush. This only I shall say, it well deserves thy
serious and frequent Perusal; and I heartily wish those pious Gentlemen that
have Estates would be instrumental in dispersing of it throughout the whole
Kingdom, that so all ranks of Men, especially the Youth of this Nation, might
reap some advantage by this extraordinary and amazing Instance. This is the
Sentiment and hearty Desire of thy cordial Friend in the Lord,

R. Wolley, M. A.

February the 1st. 1692/3.
A Gentlewoman came into Mr. Dunton's Shop, between three and four a Clock, and
said, She knew the Second Spira, and was acquainted with the Family to which he
belonged.

Witness my Hand, Joseph Poole.

February the 1st. 1692/3.
A Gentlewoman came into Mr. Dunton's Shop, in Company with another Person, and
said, She knew the Second Spira, and was acquainted with the Family; and when
he importunately urged her to tell him who the Person was, she said, she would
not discover the Person or Family, but that the Truth of it would be
acknowledged in a little time.

Witness my Hand, Ananias Hodges.

Those two Persons live in Crutched Friars near the Pump.

The second SPIRA.
THat Examples prevail above Precepts can be no Surprise to any one that
considers the rarity of them, or that most of the Senses being at once employed
they should make so strong an Impression upon the Brain, and so upon the
Understanding, according to the manner of Human Perception.

The present Instance, whose Relation I have undertaken, having made so deep an
Impression upon my own Mind, I could not think, but that if all Men participate
of the same Nature as I do, but that they must be equally affected with it,
some Allowance being made for this, That what I my self saw and heard actually,
I communicate by way of Relation to others.

I am obliged, out of Tenderness and Reputation, to conceal the Name of the
Family of this Gentleman, who is the Subject of the following Discourse, and
could heartily wish that my concealing it would make so many as do know it, to
forget every thing but the Example itself, that being only useful, the rest
Ignominious: But I am afraid my Wishes will prove successless, there being four
more Divines, besides my self, who were very frequently there, at the beginning
of his Sickness, besides several Gentlement and others, whose Acquaintance, or
Design of doing Good might lead them thither.

This unhappy Gentleman, who made so direful an Exit the eighth of this instant
December, had in his youth Time the Advantage of a Religious and Virtuous
Education; in which it was observable, That he made a more considerable
Progress than was usual for such Years, being very warm and active in all
Religious Exercises: Besides, he was a great proficient in Learning, being sent
up to the University from the School where he was educated, very perfect in his
Latin and Greek Tongues at sixteen Years of Age, where he continued five Years:
His Behavior and Deportment being such that all his Friends and Acquaintance
looked upon him as an uncommon Blessing, an Ornament to his Family. At the Age
of twenty one he came up to Town, and entered himself into the Inns of Court,
designing to study the Law; his Friends and he concluding it necessary, That
those that have Estates should have at least so much insight in the Law at to
know how to preserve them.

Oh that I could proceed with my Character, or at least abruptly break off, and
say, Here he dyed, ignorant of the Town and its Vices! But alas, the Scene is
changed, and here we bring another Person upon the Stage, laughed and ridiculed
out of his Innocence and Virtue, by new Acquaintance, and for a long Time
together playing the Hypocrite, assuming unto himself a degree of that
Profaneness and Impiety he was innocent of, appearing more vile and base than
he could suddenly bring himself to be, only to secure his Reputation with his
Companions, and avoid the uneasiness of being a Common Jest. But this was not
the only nor chief Method whereby he was brought to his Apostasy, for he had
too much Judgment, and too well grounded to be shocked and altered with a bare
Laughter, or a ridiculous Grin. He would often say, Gentlemen, those that
pretend to Reason cannot be so bewitched with the Charms of Mirth as to think
Laughing a good Argument to confute whatever may be said; if Religion be so
unreasonable a thing as you would persuade me, by laughing at it, why don't ye give
me some fair Reasons against it? Hereupon some of the oldest standing would
suggest, That Mahomet has more Votaries than Christ: That that Religion is not
without its Martyrs and Confessors; That the wild Indians dare bravely dye for
their Religion: That there is no Nation, be it never so Barbarous, that gives us
not some fine Examples of Doing and Suffering; that therefore its not the
Excellency of any one Religion, but the Prejudices of all, that produces these
Effects: That it is the Habit and Custom of Education that creates the
formidable Notions of Conscience, Heaven, Hell, Futurity and the Immortality of
the Soul, all which are but the politic Inventions of Priests and cunning
Magistrates, to enrich themselves and keep the Vulgar in Awe, who are naturally
Superstitious and Fearful: With a deal more to the same purpose. Such
Haranguesas these did by little and little poison the Principles of this poor
Gentleman, and mould him into the same Leaven with themselves, not only into
the same Judgment, but liberty of all Profaneness, Debauchery and Injustice, as
far as he could act without the Cognizance of the Law. It will not be amiss to
add, That this Gentleman was one of that CLUB which within these last seven
Years met together constantly, To lay down such Rules and Methods as that they
might be critically wicked in every thing that they could, without the Laws
taking hold of them; and therefore the Law itself was more particularly
examined, What Fallacies might be put upon it; Where and in what Cases it did
not provide against unheard of Villainies; What Subterfuges and Evasions there
might be in its Exposition; with many more like horrid Instances, which were
all noted down as very useful Discoveries for the new Candidates of improved
Impiety.

But to proceed, This Gentleman's Sense and Education had furnished him with
too much Prudence to lay open himself to every Body; he commonly kept a very
fair Correspondence with his Friends, and in all strange Places was very sober
and reserved, Prudence obliging him not to discover all he believed, to every
Body. Thus he lived several Years, being as secretly wicked as all Temptations,
and the Advantages of a good Estate, would suffer him: But as the Wicked do not
live out half their Days by reason of their Intemperance and Debaucheries, so
this Gentleman hastened his dismal Period by the like Courses, falling
desperately ill on the thirtieth of November last, continuing so till the
eighth of this instant December, as we said above.

As soon as he found himself precipitated by his ill Courses into such a
dangerous Sickness, he began to be extremely startled and amazed at the
Apprehensions of Death (for he believed he should dye) and in spite of all he
could do, he could not forbear reflecting upon another Life; and
notwithstanding all his Fortifications to the contrary, he could not confute
nor rid himself of the Expectation of a Future Retribution. Being thus
distracted with his Distemper and Fears, he threw himself upon the Bed, and
discoursed with himself after this manner. Oh! what is the meaning of this
Tumultuous War in my Breast? what Argnment is there now to assist me against
Matter of Fact? Do I assert, that there is no Hell at all, and yet I feel one in
my Bosom? Am I certain, that there is no Heaven, when I am so sure that there is
a Hell? That there is no After-retributions when I feel a present Judgment? Do
I affirm my Soul to be as Mortal as my Body, when this Languishes, and that is
as Vigorous as ever? O that any one could restore to me my Ancient Guard of
Piety and Innocence! But it is too late. Wretch that I am, whither shall I fly
from this Breast, or what will become of me?

He had no sooner ended, but in comes one of his old Companions, to pay him a
Visit, for he had heard that he was not well: How now Brother (says he) why
this Melancholy Look and Posture, you seem to be more concerned in your Mind
than Body? pray tell me what is the Matter? The Matter? replied the other,
fixing a pair of ghastly Eyes upon him, It Is you, and the rest of my
Companions, that have instilled those Principles into me, which now having most
need of them, leave me in the Agonies of Despair and Confusion. What Advice or
Comfort have you now to fortify me against my fearful Expectations of another
Life? Are you certain that my Soul is Material and Mortal? And that it will
dissolve with the Body? I Am so certain, replied the other, that I venture my
Whole upon it. Here I interrupted them by coming into the Room, and applying my
self to the Sick Person, I told him, That I was a Stranger to him, yet hearing
of his Distemper, I thought it my Duty to pay him a Visit, and give him what
Christian Comfort and Advice I was capable of. I Thank you, replied the Sick
Person, and would desire you then to engage that Gentleman that sits there
(meaning his Friend) and prove unto him that the Soul is not Matter, nor
Mortal. That the Soul is not Matter (said I) Descartes has proved in his
Method, by showing that the Soul is independent of Matter. That Matter itself
cannot think, neither in the Whole nor its Parts, is evident enough from Mr.
Lock of HUMAN UNDERSTANDING. But after all we perhaps can best prove it thus;
Matter is by every Philosopher granted to be in its own Nature indifferent to
Motion or Rest: That if it be in Rest, it will lie eternally so, unless
something else moves it; and that if any thing puts it in Motion, it will
eternally move, were it not for the Opposition of other Matter which clogs and
retards its Motion. But those that would have the Soul to be a pure fine
Matter, say, that it first moves the Animal Spirits, they the Nerves, and these
a Leg, an Arm, etc. mechanically, as Matter moves Matter. Now those that make
the Soul the first Agent and Mover, make Matter to move itself, which is
impossible, according to the above cited Thesis, which will have Matter to rest
eternally, unless it be moved by something. But the Soul does move the Body
independent of Matter, and Matter cannot move unless it be first moved:
Therefore the Soul is not Matter, and consequently not perishable by Attrition,
Transinutation, etc. But, Gentlemen, added I, I hope there is no need of a
Lecture of this Nature to either of you; for you look like Creatures that have
a share in Human Nature, which has the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul
innate with it. The sick person made no other Answer than a dismal Groan, as if
his Heart had broke, and his Friend also made haste out of the Room, without
bidding us God b'w'e. I was surprised at such an Effect, and desired the sick
Party to know the Reason of his Discontent, offering my Assistance to remove
it, if possible, by Counsel, Prayers, Advice, or any way that lay in my Power.

Alas, Sir, replied he, you have undeceived me, now its too late; I was afraid of
nothing so much as the Immortality of my Soul; now you have assured me of that
you have ascertained me of a Hell, of a fearful Expectation of Judgment, of a
Portion among those that have apostatized from their Religion, of the Lot of
Atheists, and Denyers of Christ: You have now sealed my Damnation, by giving me
an Earnest of it, I mean an awakened Conscience, that brings my Sins into my
Remembrance, reckoning up the numerous Catalogue for which I must go and give
an Account. Oh Apostate Wretch, from how great Hopes am I fallen! Oh that I had
never known what Religion had been, then had I never denied my Savior, nor
been so black an Heir of Perdition. I was so surprised at such kind of
Expressions that I stood speechless for a considerable Time, for having
received the Character of a Person that had imbibed some atheistical
Principles; I little expected such a desperate Change, but rather that I should
have an hard Task of it to make him consider seriously of a future Life: But so
soon as I could recollect my self, I said, Sir, I would desire you to take heed
how you violate the Mercy of God, and think so slightly of the Sufferings of
Christ, as if they were not sufficient for the Redemption of the greatest
Sinner. This may be a Delusion of the Devil, who would now hinder you from
Repentance and Faith in Christ. I hope, if I have convinced you of the
Immortality of the Soul, it is to a good End; for the way to cure a Distemper is
first to know it; if you had died ignorant of it, you had been miserably
undecived in another World, whereas knowing it now, you have an Opportunity and
some time left to prepare for your welfare. To which he replied,

As to the Mercy of God, in Christ, I once knew and tasted what they are, which
is now part of my Curse, in that I am more sensible of the loss of them. They
are, I will grant you, sufficient to those that have any share in them; but
what is that to me, who have denied Christ? Who have daily Crucified him afresh,
and put him to open shame? The Devil has nothing to do with the Torture I
undergo; it is no Delusion of his, but the just Judgment of God upon me; and
your Convictions are also part of my heavy Judgment, in that you have given me
a sensible Horror of my Sin, by proving my Soul immortal, whereas had I gone
straight to Hell in my old Damnable Opinions, I had endured but one Hell,
whereas I now feel two: I mean not only an inexpressible Torture which I carry
in my Breast, but an Expectation of I know not what a Change. Oh that I were in
Hell, that I might feel the worst! And yet I dread to Die, because that worst
will never have an end.

All that he spoke, was with an Air of such horror and eagerness as can scarce
be imagined; indeed it had such Effects upon me, that I knew not what to
answer: I trembled at the Judgment of, and I remember I wished within my self
that one or two of the loosest Atheists in the Age had been there, verily
believing it would have put a stop to their Impiety. The Gentleman was got to
Bed, refusing all Sustenance, and sweating through Violence of his Torments, in
the most prodigious manner that ever I saw or heard of. As soon as he was got
to Bed, I desired to pray by him before I took my Leave, which with much
Reluctance he consented to. In the midst of Prayer he groaned extremely,
tossing and turning himself as if he had been under the deepest Agonies of
Death: When Prayer was over, I asked him how he did, and why he groaned after
such a rate in Prayer-time? To which he answered, As the Damned in Hell, which
lift up their Eyes in Torments, and behold afar off the Saints in Abraham's
Bosom, have their Torments thereby doubly enhansed, first by reflecting on
their own Misery, and then taking a prospect of the Beatifick Vision they have
lost; even so, I, who know my self to be hardened, and sealed unto Damnation,
hearing the Prayers of the Righteous, to which God Almighty's Ears are always
open, granting their Requests, this increases my Torments, to think how I am
excluded from such a privilege, and have no other Portion left me, but
Blaspheming, Weeping, aad Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, for ever. Pray Sir,
said I, Consider, that there is a vast deal of difference betwixt you and those
that are in Hell; they are lost irrevocably for ever-more, without any
opportunity of Reprieve, or hopes of Pardon; but you are yet alive, and have
Promises belonging to you in common, with other Sinners; Christ died for
Sinners, and God has Sworn by himself, that he delights not in the Death of a
Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his Wickedness and Live; and that
at what time soever a Sinner returns from the Evil of his Ways, he shall
receive Pardon. To which he replied with his usual earnestness, I Will grant you
as much difference betwixt me and those that are in Hell, as betwixt a Common
Devil, and a Devil Incarnate. If these are irrevocably lost without opportunity
of Reprieve, or hopes of Pardon, and I am yet alive, what then? what is the
Consequence? not that the Promises belong to me in common with other Sinners,
nor to any Sinners but such as Repent and Believe: If Christ died for Sinners,
it is for such as Repent and Believe; but though I would, I can do neither, I have
outstood my Day of Grace, and am hardened, and turned Reprobate; If God delights
not in the Death of Sinners, it is of such Sinners as repent and return unto
him; but his Justice will vindicate it self upon such obstinate perverse
Sinners as I, who have denied his Power and Providence both in my Words and
Actions, and now he has met with me for it; and oh it is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. If God was not against me, I should not value
it, though all the Legions of Hell engaged me, though all the Power and Malice of
Men joined in one Complicated Body to study and exercise the utmost Barbarities
that Flesh and Blood could inflict upon me; but when an Angry Irreconcilable
God looks upon his Creature in Wrath, and consigns him over to his Eternal
Vengeance and Fury, this is intolerable, inexpressibly, afflicting, and
grievous: Ah who can dwell in everlasting Burnings? Oh ye that have any hope,
and have not yet past your Day of Grace, Cry mightily to God, Day and Night;
think no labor too much which secures you from the Wrath of God: Oh who can
stand before him when he is Angry, what Stubble can resist such a Consuming
Fire? This, and more to the same purpose, he spoke with so deep a Concern, the
Tears trickling all the while down his Cheeks, that no Body in the Room could
refrain Weeping, which he perceiving said, And can ye Weep at the image and
bare relation of the effects of Gods Wrath, what then do you think I suffer,
who actually lie under the very weight of his Fury? Refrain your Tears for me,
it is in vain; Pity is no Debt to me, nothing is so proper for me as some Course
to complete my Misery, and free me from the Torments of my Expectation. Here he
paused a little, when looking toward the Fire, he said, Oh that I was to lie
and broil upon that Fire for a Hundred Thousand Years to purchase the Favor of
God, and be Reconciled to him again. But it is a fruitless vain Wish, Millions
of Millions of Years will bring me no nearer the ends of my Tortures than one
Poor Hour: O Eternity, Eternity, who can discover the Abyss of Eternity; who
can properly Paraphrase upon the Words for Ever and Ever!

I could not forbear reflecting on that passage of broiling upon the Fire a
Hundred Thousand Years to purchase the Favor of God, and be again Reconciled
to him; how unproportionable was this Poor Man's Concern to that of the Common
Practice of the World, a great part of which will allow no time in Days, Weeks,
Years, to seek the Face and Favor of God? And amongst those that pretend to
Religion? How cooly and indifferently do they spend that time they set apart
for Private or Public Devotion, Were they sensible but for one Minute of what
this Wretched Person endured, what a Spur would it be to their Devotion, and
how careful would they be to make their Calling and Election sure, how fearful,
lest having a Promise made them of entering into Rest, any of them should fall
short through unbelief, and so be frustrated of their share and hopes of that
Glory which is to be revealed?

It began to grow late, so I took my leave of him for that Night, promising to
renew my Visit, (if it pleased God,) the next Day, when I found him still in
the same Condition, as to his Mind; but his Body was much weakened by his
continual Sweats, caused by the Agonies he lay under. I found Three or Four
Divines with him who had been at Prayer, which they told me, had the same
uneasy effect upon him, as when I Prayed with him the Night before. One of the
Divines desired him to consider the Example of St. Peter, who had denied his
Master with Oaths and Curses, and yet was received again into his Favor. To
which he replied, (officiously against himself, as he had done all the Day
before,) It Is true, St. Peter did deny his Master, as I have done, but what
then? his Master had Prayed for him, that his Faith should not fail, and being
willing that he should Repent, he looked him into a Repentance, and assisted
him by his Holy Spirit to perfect it; now if Christ would assist me to Repent,
I should do so too, but he has justly withdrawn his Intercessions from me: I
have so often Crucified him a fresh, and put him to open shame, so often
grieved that Holy Spirit, that God has taken it away from me, and in the room
thereof has left me the Spirit of Impenitence and Reprobation, and given me a
certain Earnest of a fearful Inheritance in another Life.

He spoke little more that Day, for a deal of Company pressing in, it became
troublesome to him, and toward Night Orders were taken for the avoiding such
an Inconvenience. There were four more Divines in the Room besides, at six a
Clock; we all looked upon one another, not knowing what course to take, no Text
being offered in his favor, but what he readily turned another way; whilst we
were thus Musing, he Cried out in a vehement affecting Passion, How long, oh
Lord! shall thy Wrath burn for ever against me, shall thy Eternal Justice for
ever exact upon a poor despicable Worm? What is my Value or Worth that thou
should pour out full Vials of Wrath upon me? Oh that thou would let go thy
Hand, for ever forget me, and let me fall into my first nothingness again; as
my Righteousness could have profited thee nothing, so my Impieties have done
thee no hurt, therefore Annihilate me, and let me Perish to nothing; be not
Angate with me that I thus Expostulate with thee; 'twill be but a little time
but thy Wrath will force the Dreadfullest Blasphemies from me, except thou
prevent them: Oh that thou would take away my Being, and my Misery; neither
of them can add to, or diminish from thy Happiness, therefore let them both
cease, and let my Name be known no more; or if I must still be, and be
Immortal, and thou will Punish me, because I have Despised thee, let it suffice
to be a Privation of thy Self, and let me pass my Eternity in a Dream, without
ever being awakned by the pangs of Torment, without ever being disturbed by the
Gnawing of the Worm that Dies not. But Oh what fruitless Desires are these, for
I am Expostulating with a God that has closed his Ears, and will not hear, with
a God that has for ever shut out my Prayers, and only protracts my Breath a
little longer to be an Example unto others! Oh ye Rocks and Mountains, that ye
would hide me from the presence of an Incensed God!But there is no flying from
his presence, what he has begun he will finish, he will extend his Wrath
against me for ever and ever. Here some Body knocked at the Door, and it proved
to be a Penny-Post-Man with a Letter to this Gentleman; which being told him,
How (says he) a Letter for me? A little longer, and I expect another sort of a
Messenger, I am (added he) very quickly to give up my Accounts of every secret
Action) that I have done, and I have a mind to make an Experiment of something
of the same Nature, to see how I can bear it; and looking about the Room he
espied me; pray Sir, said he, do me the favor as to open and read this Letter,
the Contents I know not, but I suspect it to come from some of my old
Acquaintance. I desired to be excused, alleging, that possibly there might be
something in it that might be improper to divulge. Nothing, nothing, replied,
he, can affect me now; I have no Honor, no Reputation, and what is yet worse,
no Heaven to lose, by this or any other Act, therefore pray Sir oblige me, or I
must trouble some Body else. Upon this I broke open the Letter, designing first
to take a Cursory View of it, and then to proceed, or desist, according as I
found the Contents, which upon perusal, I thought not impertinent to the
present Case, and therefore Read as follows,

Dearest Sir,
UNderstanding you are fallen dangerously ill, and that it had a Melancholy
Effect upon you, I could not, (considering our stricter Friendship) but
endeavor at least the removal of those Evils your Mind may lie under, which
perhaps is an Office no less grateful, than making your Body Sound and
Vigorous. Sickness and Death are the common Lot of Mankind, and to Repine and
Grieve at the bearing of this Lot, is to Combat the Laws of Nature, and Fight
against Impossibilities; what Wise Man Repines at the Heat in Summer, or Cold
in Winter, or troubles himself, that the Sun ever goes out of our Hemisphere
all the Nightime? a common Evil that every Body bears, ceases to be an Evil,
because there is no one has a better Fortune to compare with it, and without
comparison, nothing can be said to be better or worse; thus also a Good made
common Palls into Indifferency from the same Reasons. But perhaps your
Melancholy suggests unto you, that it is a dismal thing to Launch out into an
unknown Abyss, to be you know not where, nor what. I Answer, I dream sometimes
of frightful things, and the Idea's that I have of them, impress as afflicting
Resentments upon my Spirits, as if they were real, but when I awake all
vanishes. Thus, if we will examine Death, and its supposed Consequences, by the
Prejudices of a Melancholy and Distracted Brain, we may be Miserable,
proportionable to the height of our Folly; but if by our Reason we take a View
of these Formidable Monsters, they grow tame and familiar to us. I would demand
of him that asks me, What Estate I shall be in after Death, What Estate he was
in before Life? Pain and Pleasure will leave their Impressions upon a Human
Spirit; it is as natural as Wax to receive the Impression of that Seal by which
it is Sealed. Therefore if I was either Happy or Miserable before I commenced
Humanity, I must still reatin some Impression of it, but I now do neither,
therefore shall do neither hereafter. I came out of a State of Nothingness, and
shall return into the same again; as the Flame of an extinguished Candle
dissolves and loses it self in the Circumambient Air, even so the Taper of
Life vanishes into pure Ether, and is no more, when the Laws of the Union of
the Soul and Body are violated and broken. Death it self is nothing; and after
Death there is nothing; and why should I be afraid of nothing? Take Courage,
Man, and either Die like your self, Master of your Fate and Happiness, so long
as it is to be kept; or Recover, and Live Worthy the Character of a Person that
knows how either to Live, or Die. So wishes

Your real Friend and Servant, A. B.


I had no sooner read this Letter through, but he surpised us all with
repeated dismal Groans, as if his Soul had been struggling under the last Throws
of Separation: We thought it not convenient to press for the Reason of it,
considering that Human Nature feels, or at least supposes an Ease by
complaining of the Evil it suffers, and it happened according to our
Expectations, for at length he broke out into these afflicting Imprecations:
Cursed be the Day wherein I commenced such a fatal Friendship: Oh unhappy Time,
when first I imbibed these Atheistical Principles! When first I exchanged the
Christian Faith for the Creed of Spinoza and the Leviathan! When first I
relinquished all revealed Religion for the natural one, and the last for none
at all. When casting his Eyes upon me, he said, I am not able to write an
Answer to that Letter, though I earnestly desire there should be one, nor is it
worth my while to get an Emanuensis for that purpose, for I suppose I shall
have no occasion to write any more. I Am also sensible that you might be better
able to answer such a Letter than I, and yet my present Circumstances are such
(I being not only a Party, but the dismal subject a Matter my self) that what
comes from me may make a deeper impression upon the Spirit of my Friend, than
what comes from a strange Hand; therefore you will oblige me, if you will only
lend me your Hand, and let me dictate; which I freely offering, he ordered a
Chair to be set on the other Side of the Bed, thinking it convenient to be as
secret and free from Noise and Diversion as possibly he could: And then he
proceeded.

SIR,
BEing not able to use my own, I have borrowed another Hand to answer yours,
possibly I may subscribe my self. You say well, Its a gratefuller Office to
endeavor to remove the Evils of the Mind than of the Body. What you urge of
the common Lot of Mankind, as Death and Sickness: I could wish it were my Case,
but mine alas is a discovery that I pay dearly for, viz. That Despair and Hell
is the common lot of Atheists. Now your Arguments cannot reach my Case, unless
you first prove that Atheism is as inevitable as Death and Sickness, and that
therefore the effects of it are to be born patiently, unless a Man will combat
Necessity and fight against the Laws of Fate. Your way of arguing is such as I
have used my self formerly; and I cannot but wonder now bow I could think it
conclusive: Perhaps I never indeed thought of that, but was pleased with it,
because I wished it to be true, and because I saw it my Interest that it should
be so. If you please I Will just make a Reflection or two upon what you have
writ, and then give you my Sentiments of the whole matter. You say, That if we
examine Death and its supposed Consequences by our Reason, those formidable
Monsters grow tame and familiar: If by our Reason you mean either the peculiar
Creed of Atheists, or the common Reason of Human Nature; I am sure those
Monsters will be less tame and familiar the more you think of them, for since
no Reason discovers what an unexperienced death is, or the unknown change
consequent thereupon, how can we judge of things that we know not? Reason as
long as you please upon things that you are ignorant of, and at last you will
be as far from Truth and Satisfaction, if not farther, than when you first
began; like him that demanded a considerable Time to tell what God was; and
when that was expired he demanded yet a greater; and being asked why he did so,
he replied, the more he thought, the less he knew of him. It might have been
retorted on him, though the same History gives no account of it; Why then did
he petition for means of greater Ignorance and Confusion? Your Argument is
extreme weak about a pre-existent and future State; viz. I retain no impression
of Happiness or Misery that I had in a pre-existent State, therefore shall
retain none in a future State. How that is a consequence in any Rules of Logic
I see not. Next, you would have me believe upon your bare Word, That Death is
nothing, and that after Death there is nothing. Pray how do you know either,
having not yet tried? there are a great many that say the contrary. I have only
concerned my self as to the rationality of your Letter, that I might induce you
to believe I am not melancholy, distracted, or prejudiced in my beason, and I
would desire you to believe it, That what I am going to say may not have the
less credit, because it comes from one under my circumstances; Its Truth, and
whether you will believe me or no, you will at last find it to be so.


Here he groaned, and desired a little intermission, being not only weary with
repeating so much, but at present dejected and confused with the unhappy Truths
he was about to tell his Friend, and so he rested himself for about half an
Hour; when calling to me again, he desired we might proceed: Which we did as
follows.

If I could force you to believe me I would; all I can do is to deal with you
as a reasonable Creature, by opening my Breast to you, and then leaving you at
your liberty to act as you please. Whilst we are in Health and Business we may
seem to act contrary to our Intentions, and plead for things we believe not;
but when we come to dye the Vizard is taken off, and the Man appears as he is,
open and plain. This is my Condition therefore I can have neither Interest nor
any other Motive in imposing upon my Friends.

Religion (I mean the Christian) is no fictitious Imposture; Heaven and Hell
are real, and the immortality of the Soul is as certain as the existence of the
Body; for a Time we have officiously deluded and cheated one another of our
Religion and Happiness, and God, who will not always be despised by his
Creatures without taking notice of it, has chosen me out as an example to you
all, and as a Warning to the lazy indifferent Christian: But who, alas, can
write their own Tragedy without Tears, or copy out the Seal of their Damnation,
without the extremity of Horror? That there is a God I know, because I
continually feel the effects of his Wrath: That there is a Hell, I am as
certain, having received the earnest of my Inheritance there, in my Breast,
where my Tortures are infinitely short of any Expression: That there is a
natural Conscience, which is not the effect of a prejudiced Education, I now
feel with Horror and Amazement, being continually upbraided by it with the
Registry of my Impieties, and a bringing of all my Sins fresh into my
remembrance; why God has marked me out for an example of his Wrath and Vengeance
rather than you, or any of our Acquaintance, I presume is, because I am the
greatest Apostate, having been more religiously educated than any of you, and
therefore done greater despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and been the greatest
Scandal to Religion. Oh what a presumptuous, egregious piece of Folly is it for
Dust and Ashes to contend with their Creator, to question his Justice, his
Power, nay his very Being, when at the same Time without this infinite wise
God, every such vile Wretch would immediately fall into its Chaos again, being
not able to exist one moment without him? What a vile ingratitude is it
scurrilously to reflect upon the Christian Religion, when the Author of it dyed
to reconcile such Reflectors to himself? And if after all that be has done and
suffered to make such Fools happy, they will still deny him and despise the
Benefits of his Redemption, what can be expected but that this Intercessor
become an angry Judge and consign his Enemies over to the Reward of their
Demeries? Don't mistake your self, its not a light Matter to question and
contend with the God of Nature, to abuse Religion and deny the Author of it,
and what is yet the worst of all, to apostatize and leave the way of
Righteousness, as I have done; behold, God has met with me for it, after a
long Forbearance of several Years in inveterate Impiety and Profaneness: Let me
entreat you, by my Example, to leave off your Sins by Repentance; who knows
but God may yet receive you, and by me preach such a Lecture as may stop you in
your Course of Wickedness? I speak not this out of any Love to Virtue or Hatred
of Vice, for I am hardened and impenitently reprobate, only herein I imitate
Dives, who was unwilling his Brethren should come into the same place of
Torment with him: Make what use you please of this, only remember that if it
does not reclaim you, it will double your Condemnation, and enhance your Guilt,
possibly to be overtaken (...) present World as I am, with the just Judgment of
God; if not, be sure you will be light on hereafter: Which is all, and I wish I
could say enough. From

Yours, etc.


As soon as he subscribed his Name and the Letter was sealed, he desired a
Porter might be called and sent, for fear of a Miscarriage; which was done
accordingly. And the Night being far worn, we all took our Leaves and left him,
wishing him good Rest and a happier Condition the next Day: To which he
replied, Gentlemen, I thank you, but my Happiness is at an end, and as for my
Rest to Night, all the Ease I expect will be in wishing for the Day, as in the
Day time I wish for the Night; thus spending the little remainder of my
miserable Moments in a fearful expectation of my Dissolution, and the dismal
Account I am to make upon it. But Gentlemen a good Night to you, and remember
my Example, to confirm you in that Religion I have disowned, that ye may stand
more cautiously by my Fall, and secure the Happiness I have forfeited.

The next day came several of his Friends out of the Country, having had an
account of his Sickness and Distractions. When they came into the Room, one of
them applied himself to him, telling him, That he and several more of his
Relations were come on purpose to Town to see him, and were extreme sorry to
find him in such a weak Condition as he appeared (for now he was almost nothing
but Skin and Bones, the Agonies that he lay under doing the Office of the
quickest Consumption.) To which he answered, I am obliged, out of common
Civility, to thank you all; but who are my Relations? Our Savior said, That
such only as did the Will of his Heavenly Father were his Relations: I may also
properly say, That none but the Atheist, the Reprobate, and all such as do the
Work of the Devil are my Relations; this little Tie of Flesh and Blood will be
dissolved in a Moment, but the Relation I have to the damsame is permanent and
lasting, the ned Lot, the same Place of Torments, the same Exercises of
Blasphemy, and the same Eternity of Horror will be common to us all; so that
similitude of Torments, Place and Duration will join us in a very strict Union.
His Friends, who had only had some Report of a kind of Distraction, were
surprised to hear him deliver himself in such Terms, and began to enquire of
some of us what was the matter that he talked at such a rate; who replied, We
could wish it were Frenzy or Distraction, but we were afraid of a much sadder
Cause, viz. the Sense of Hell, and God's Wrath upon him, which was so violent
as to drive him into Despair, and the utmost Agonies and Horror of Mind,
begging, if it might please God, the case might be altered before his Death,
which they were sure could not be far off, if he proceeded as he had begun. He
hearing them whisper, and imagining the Cause of it, called them all unto him,
and said; You may imagine me distracted or melancholy, I wish I were either; but
it is part of my Judgment, that I am not; no, my Apprehension of Persons and
Things is rather more vigorous and quick than it was when I was in perfect
Health: And it is my Curse, because I am thereby more sensible of my
Unhappiness and the Condition I am fallen into. Would you be informed why I am
become a Skeleton in three or four Days? Why, my Grief does continually extort
some unhappy Expressions from me: Know then that I have sinned against the Holy
Ghost, and done despite to the Spirit of Grace; that I have despised my Maker,
and denied my Redeemer; that in short I have apostatized from the Christian
Religion, and joined my self to the Atheist and Profane, and continued this
Course under many Convictions, till my Iniquity was ripe for Vengeance, and the
just Judgment of God overtook me, when my Security was the greatest and the
Checks of my Conscience the least. Since I denied that Salvation that comes by
Christ Jesus, there is no other Mediator or Intercessor for Sinners; if there
be, who is he that can redeem my Soul from Hell, or give a Ransom for my Life?
No, no, the Scripture is certainly true, and that says, That if we sin
wilfully, after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no
more Sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation, which shall consume the Adversary. There remains no more
Sacrifice for Sin, that is the Wound that pierces my Soul: Christ Jesus was the
only expiatory Sacrifice for Sinners that God would accept of; and I not
accepting (I would say,) and I despising this, there now remains no other for
me to accept of, no other to make an Atonement and Satisfaction for me,
There Is no other Name under Heaven given whereby we may be saved, but by the
Name of Jesus; and it is this Jesus that I have Reproached, Ridiculed, and
Abused, in his Members here; nor is this all, I have not been content to do
this my self, but by my Example have induced others to do the same. Methinks
your Breasts are all open to me, and in the midst o^ your Pity and Surprizals,
yo^ would bid me Hope, Believe, an^ Return and Supplicate that Mercy I have
abused; that Jesus came to save Sinners, and to bring them to Repentance, with
other things o^ this nature. I know that these are your thoughts, and by
mentioning them I have saved you the Labor: Alas, how fain would (...) Hope
and Believe! Can a Man in Torments not desire to be freed from them? No, assure
your selves, I would upon any Terms, but the Displeasure and Wrath of God,
obstruct the Power of Hoping and Believing; and though I would, I can do
neither, nor do I know what some Divines mean, that say, He that desires to
Hope, Repent, and Believe, in some measures does it: I experience the contrary;
a fruitless Wishing that comes not to Act, is no more but a Conviction, which
shall bring such Persons under greater Damnation. Would you have me to Return
and Supplicate that Mercy I have Abused? Alas! how sad is my Case, that have no
other hopes but what depend upon Abused Mercy? But why said I hopes? When I
have no hopes at all, my hopes are frustrate, and my expectations are cut off,
and what remains behind? why, I am bid to Hope and Believe; Oh what Satyr, what
Mockery and Abuse is this upon me, to find me in Misery, and bid me be Happy,
without affording me some power of being so! Indeed should Jesus Christ say so
much to me, it would be some Comfort; but for you to do it, is the same thing,
as to bid a Malefactor shake his off Chains and Fetters, and assume his
Liberty; or to call upon the Dead to arise out of their Graves and Challenge
their Estates and Honors again. How idle is it to bid the Fire not to burn,
when Fuel is administered; to comman^ the Seas to be Smooth and Calm i^ the
midst of Storms, such is m^ Case, and such are the Comfort of my Friends: But
I Am spent, an^ can Complain no more; would (...) God the Cause of my Complain
would also cease; the Cause of m^ Complaints! This renews m^ Grief, and summons
up the litt^ strength I have left to Complai^ again, like an extinguishing
Flam^ that recollects at once all its Al^mentary Matter for one gre^ Blaze
before it expires. It Is ju^ so with me: But whether am I g^ing? As he said
this, he faint away, and lay in a sort of Swou^ for a considerable time, but by
t^ help of some Spirits we brought hi^ to himself again, and as soon as (...)
opened his Eyes, he said, Oh cruel and unkind Friends, to awake me from a Dream
in which I had a Cessation from my Tortures, but now they return again, and
Prey upon my Soul like so many Furies. This he spoke with so feeling and lively
Concern, that not one of his Relations could refrain from Tears, none of them
being able to speak to him for a considerable time before; You weep, says he,
but your very Years come too late; was I like another Person that goes out of
the World, it would be one of my greatest Troubles to see you Weep, or at
least, it would add much to my pains; for he must be unnatural and senseless
that could not be moved and troubled at the affliction of others, especially
his Friends and Relations; but the Case is otherwise with me, my Cup is full,
and already runs over, the bitterness of my Soul is as great as possible it can
be in this World, and my Heart is full of Horror and Anguish, and no Grief can
add unto mine, being already so great, that it is incapable of receiving any
more. Perhaps, this may seem a Paradox to you at first, but what think you of
Time and Eternity? Can one add an Hour to Eternity, which comprehends and
swallows all Time? Can one add any thing to the Wrath of God, which includes
the Fury of Devils and Men, this being derivative and dependent on that, and
can any one add to my Grief and Tortures, who am fallen into the hands of the
living God? No, no, reserve your Tears for your Sins, and cast them not away so
fruitlesly upon one that is neither the better nor worse for them.

You may easily imagine what impressions such Sayings as these made upon the
Spirits of his Friends, who were almost overwhelmed with Grief and Amazement,
with Grief, at the lamentable State of their Kinsman, and with Amazement at the
dreadful Judgment of God upon him. But in the midst of their Sorrows they had
the Prudence to think of the Reputation of their Family, and to provide for as
much Secrecy as they possibly could in such a Case; for the Rumor of a Man in
Despair beginning to spread, they conveyed him by Night to other Lodgings; but
he was grown so very weak, that notwithstanding the Care of those who conveyed
him in the Chair, it had like to have proved fatal to him; for he fainted away
several Times, but they got him into his Chamber and to Bed as soon as they
could: After a little Rest he yet found so much strength as to express himself
thus: I am not concerned to enquire whither you have brought me, or your
Reasons for so doing; it had been something if you had brought my Person hither
without my Horrors and accusing Conscience, or if you had changed my unhappy
State with my Lodgings; but my Torments are rather the greater than before, for
I see that dismal Hour is approaching and just at hand, when I shall bid you
all a sad Farewell. The Doctors that had been with him in the beginning of his
Sickness were again sent for, and they yet declared they could do nothing, so
long as the Disturbance of his Mind was the Cause of his Weakness, only they
ordered him some Cordial Julips, which they said might perhaps strengthen his
Nature, so that he might live two or three Days longer. My Business called me
away for a Day or two, and I came again upon Thursday Morning pretty early, the
Day of his Death. When I came into the Room I enquired of his Friends how he
had spent his Time? who had been with him, what Discourse or Expressions had
dropped from him? And they told me in general, he had little Company, and that
his Expressions were much shorter than before, being now unable to speak many
words together; yet that what he did speak, seemed to have more Horror and
Despair in it than formerly. Afterward I went to his Bedside, and saw perfect
death in his Face, mixed with such Amazement and Anguish, that it was the
saddest Spectacle I ever saw in all my Lifetime. I asked him how he did? To
which he replied, Damned and lost for ever. I desired him not to entertain such
a Thought; the Decrees of God were secret, and God might punish him thus, in
this life, to make him fit for a better. They are not (said he) secret to me,
but discovered for my greater Torment; and my Punishment here is for an Example
to others, and for an Earnest to me of my own Damnation. Oh that there was no
God, or that this God could cease to be; for I am sure he will never have Mercy
upon me. Alas, said I, there is no contending with our Creator, therefore
forbear such words as may provoke him more. True (replied he) there is no
contending; I wish there were a possibility of getting above God, that would be
a Heaven to me. I entreated him not to entertain such a Blasphemy, for -- Here
he interrupted me, saying, Read we not in the Revelations, of those that
blasphemed God because of their pains? I am now of that number. Oh how do I
envy the happiness of Cain and Judas! But (replied I) you are yet alive, and do
not feel the Torments of those that are actually in Hell. To which he answered,
This is either true or false; if it be true, what are my expectations, and how
heavy will my Torments be, if I yet not feel the uttermost? But I know that
it is false, and that I now endure more than the Spirits of the damned in Hell;
for I have the very same Tortures upon my Spirit, as they have, besides the
Torments I endure in my Body. I believe that at the day of Judgment, the
Torments of my Mind and Body will be both of 'em more intense; but as I am now,
no Spirit in Hell endures what I do: How gladly would I change my condition for
Hell! And how earnestly would I entreat of my angry Judge to send me thither,
if I was not afraid that he would out of vengeance deny me? Here he closed his
Eyes a little, and began to talk idly and besides himself, every now and then
groaning and gnashing his Teeth; but when he opened his Eyes and looked about,
he grew sensible again, and felt for his own Pulse, saying, How lazily my
Minutes pass on! When will be the last Breath, the last Pulse, that shall beat
my Spirit out of this decayed Mansion into those desired Regions of Death and
Hell? Oh! I find it is just at hand; and what shall I now say? I Am now afraid
again to die. Ah the forlorn Hope, the destitute State of an Atheist that has
no God to go to, nothing to fly to for Peace or Comfort! Here his Speech failed
him again; and we all believing him to be just a leaving the World went to
Prayer, which threw him into an Agony, in which, though he could not speak
perfectly, he made what noise he could to hinder himself from hearing, and
turned away his Face that he might not see the Action; which we perceiving, we
recommended him to the Mercy of God, and gave over. His Speech returned not
again for a considerable time, but he fixed his Ghastly Eyes upon us, and by the
Air of his Countenance showed, that we had not a little disobliged him: And as
soon as he could speak, he said, Tigers and Monsters, are ye also become Devils
to Torment me, and give me a Prospect of Heaven, to make my Hell the more
intolerable? Alas, Sir, replied I, what Interest can we have in making you
miserable? It Is our desire of your recovery and reconciliation with God, that
casts us down at the Throne of Grace; if we must not seek assistance at the
hand of God, where else should we seek it? If God denies; who else can give it?
If he will not have Mercy; whether must we go for it? To which he replied, Ay
that is the Wound, God is become my Enemy, and there is none so strong as he to
deliver me out of his Hand; he consigns me over to his Eternal Wrath and
Vengeance, and there is none that is able to Redeem me. Was there another God
as Mighty as he who would Patronize my Cause, or was I above, or Independent of
God, then I could Act and Dispose of my self as I pleased, then would my
Horrors cease, and the Expectation and Designs of my Formidable Enemy be
frustrate; but this cannot be, for I -- Here his Voice failed him again, and he
began to struggle and gasp for a little Breath, which having recovered, with a
Groan so Dreadful and Loud, as if it had not been Humane, he Cried out, Oh the
insufferable Pangs of Hell and Damnation! and so he Died, Death settling the
Visage of his Face in such a Form, as if the Body, though Dead, was sensible of
the Extremity of Torments. How God disposed of him we know not; Secret things
belong to the Lord, to us Charity and Hope; yet not so much as to make this no
Example to us, for such Instances are signalized on purpose to Teach us Fear
and Reverence, to Judge our selves, and use the utmost Diligence and Care to
make our Calling and Election sure.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton.
THE late Trials of several Witches, Published by Cotton Mather.

The Fourth Edition of the new Martyrology, or Bloody Assizes, with Additions
so large, as renders it a new Secret History of the late Times.

The sense of the United Nonconforming Ministers, against some of Mr. Davies
Erroneous Opinions.

Casuistical Morning Exercises, the Fourth Volume.

Heads of Agreement assented to by the United Ministers.

The Country's Concurrence with the London Ministers, by S. Chandler.

The Second Edition of Gospel Truth stated.

A Defense of Gospel Truth, being a Reply to Mr. Chancy's First Part.

A Discourse showing what Repentance of National Sins God requires, etc.

The Vanity of Childhood and Youth; these Four last written by Dan. Williams.

The Life of Mr. Tho. Brand, by Dr. Annesley.

The Mourners Companion, by J. Shower.

A Practical Discourse on Sickness and Recovery.

Early Religion, or a Discourse of the Duty of Youth.

Fall not out by the way, or a persuasion to a Friendly Correspondence between
Brethren of the same Faith, all Three by T. Rogers, M. A.

The Life and Death of the Reverend Mr. Eliot, by Cotton Mather.

Mr. Barker's Flores Intellectuales, both Parts.

Mr. Increase Mather's Sermon to a Condemned Malefactor.

Mr. Quick's Young Man's Claim to the Sacrament.

A Practical Discourse on the late Earthquakes.

Mr. Crow's Vanity of Judicial Astrology.

Mr. Oaks Funeral Sermon.

Mr. Kent's Funeral Sermon, both by Mr. Sam. Slater.

Mr. Barlow's Treatise of Fornication, being a Penitentiary Sermon.

The Celestial Race, by Mr. Bush.

Mr. Bush's Sermon on a Person that died suddenly.

The Eighth Volume of the Athenian Gazette, with a general Title, Preface, and
Index to it.

The First Volume of the Complete Library, with Two Alphabetical Tables.

A Mourning Ring, in memory of your departed Friend, the Second Edition.

The Young Student's Library, Published by the Athenian Society.

-- A Schene of Inquiries, Published by the Athenian Society.

-- An Ode to the Athenian Society.

-- The Visions of the Soul, by a Member of the Athenian Society.

The Entire Set of the Athenian Gazettes for the Year 1691, or single Mercuries
to this time.

The History of the Athenian Society.

An Account of the Divisions amongst the Quakers in Pensilvania.

-- A further Account of the Divisions of the Quakers in Pensilvania.

The Principles, Doctrines, Laws, and Orders of the Quakers.

The Character of a Williamite, by a Divine of the Church of England, Price 6 d.

The Character of a Jacobite, by a Person of Quality, Price 6 d.

Religio Bibliopolae, in imitation of Dr. Brown's Religio Medici.

A Complete History of all the Remarkable Penitents that have been Executed at
Tyburne for these last Thirty Years.

The Double Descent, a Poem.

The Divine Captain, by Mr. Hickeringil.

Infant Baptism stated, in an Essay to vindicate its Lawfulness from the
Testimony of holy Scripture; with an account of a Conference publicly held
with an Antipedobaptist of no small fame: By J. R. a Presbyter of the Church of
England.

A CONFERENCE Betwixt a Modern Atheist, AND HIS FRIEND.

BY THE METHODIZER OF THE Second Spira.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry. 1693.


