SEVERAL SERMONS: Some PREACHED in ENGLAND, And some in the Island of BARBADOS
IN AMERICA Upon several Occasions.

By Robert Scamler M. A. and Rector of Taverham in the County of Norfolk.

Lord, whilst I Preach unto others, let not my self be a cast away. Printed by
Nathaniel Thompson for the Author 1685.

TO HER Grace MARY Duchess OF BEUFORT.
Madam,
HAd I been affected with that Itching Humor of Ambition to raise an Obelisk
to my Memory, and leave behind me some Tokens, that I once Lived, and had a
Being and Existence upon Earth: How could I have contrived a more Glorious
method for the Erecting this Eternal Monument, than by fixing Your Graces Name
to these my poor weak Endeavors? For, who (seeing Your Honored Name set
before the Book,) will not be invited (by the Fairness of such a Frontispiece)
to look into the Sermons, and even practice the Duties intimated therein?

Madam, I confess it high Presumption, and I humbly beg your Graces Pardon for
borrowing your Name and Patronage, because it looks like a design in me, that
if there be no other worth in the Discourses, yet at least they may have the
Virtues and Advantages of a Burning-Glass, which borrowing a Flame from the
Great Eye of Heaven, Shines and Burns, not of it self, but by the Rays and
Emanations of its Bright Patron and Benefactor: I will not pretend to vindicate
my self from so Holy a Suspicion, though something more Enobled my Desires to
present Your Grace with this humble Dedication: For I do confidently avow (not
to Affront the Modesty so Innate to Your Temper, or come within the Sphere of
Flattery, so repugnant to my Genius,) that the Noble Perfections wherewith
Heaven has Accomplished You, have rendered You so Publicly Acquainted to the
World, that he must not only be a Stranger to himself, but even to all Humane
Society and Converse, who converse, who have not been sensibly surpised in the
Admiration of Your Virtues: Virtues which you Suckled in even with Your Milk,
and have Thrived with so daily an Increase in the Sequel of Your Life, that
they might Justly Challenge Shrines and Altars from us, if Your Humility did
not signify unto us a Reprimand. These are such Truths, that I dare not
proceed to say any thing further concerning your Graces Perfections, because it
is impossible for me (had I the Tongue of Angels) to express my self in a
method proportionable to my Theme. I might, it is possible, suggest and hint to
present and future Ages, that Your Natural and Particular Inclinations are
those Virtues; yes, and in a much more Eminent Degree, which Deified far less
Deserving Persons: Nay further, if some most Sweet and Angelical Tongue does
not contrive some new Language to Posterity, wherein to Celebrate and Proclaim
Aloud the Embellishments and Graces wherewith Heaven has Endowed You; it must
Silently Content it self to Reverence the Name, and Adore the Memory of the
most Virtuous and Illustrious Lady, MARY Duchess of Beufort, without
presumption of Speech of Your Actions, because they transcend Expression as
well as Imitation.

What need I to repeat the Immortality of Your Augustick Family, the Sun shall
sooner be displaced from its Orb, the Stars forget their Motions, than Mankind
forget to Celebrate the most Heroic, Loyal and Glorious Atchievments of the
most Generous and Honorable Capel? And Madam, You being one of the Noble
Branches proceeding from that Loyal Stem, to whom can I Address my self more
properly in a Sermon on the Thirtieth of January, then unto Your Grace? For not
only Charles the First, but likewise the Honorable Capel fell Sacrifices to a
Usurping Power, and both died Glorious Martyrs in Defense of Church and State.

May it please Your Grace then to accept these Discourses, though presented by
a mean Hand, for they are intended for no other purpose; then to convince
unreasonable and Wicked men of their Damnable and Hellish Practices against the
Church and State, and what Indefatigable Labors they Groan under to effect
their Diabolical Designs: But God grant that all our Nobility may Unanimously
Resolve a perfest Conquest and Subjection of these Engineers of Satan and
Builders of Babel, that the Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion
and Piety may be Established amongst us and all succeeding Generations, which
is Incessantly Prayed for by

Your Graces most Humbly Devoted Servant R. SCAMLER.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle Dedicatory, Page 2. l. 13, and 14. dele who converse. p. 4. l.
5. dele the In the Book, p. 1. l. 2. r. Show, l. 6. r. pearly, p. 4. l. 27. r.
constituted, p. 7. l. 21. dele the, p. 9. l. 13. r. at his own Royal door, l.
18. r. pearly, l. 21. r. more mild and Gentile p. 11. l. 2. r. and a great, p.
12. l. 17. dele the, p. 14. l. 12. r. Feats, p. 15. l. 27. r. contemn, p. 19.
l. 2. r. bgin at, is the House of God, l. 7. r. that Queen, p. 21. l. 28 r. For
were they strict, l. 32. dele of, p. 25. l. 1. r. professing, p. 26. l. 25. r.
as is too, p. 28. l 13. r. conceive, p. 34. l. 13. r. light of, l. 21. dele if,
l. 23. r. attributed to us, p. 36. l. 11. r. sure the polluted, l. 18. r.
ereeps, l. 25. r. is called, p. 43. l. 14. r. as it did, l. 15. r. Massah, l. a
7. r. nothing is more, p. 44. l. 8. r. in excuses and denyals, l. 20. an hour
hence, p 45. l. 3. dele thin, p. 46. l. 1. dele pure, p. 47. l. 25. r. Now, p.
50 l. 2. r. accepted, l. 31. r. but much, p. 51. l. 19. r. seem, p. 54. l. 16.
r. my Wickedness, and be, p. 56. l. 8. r. the next Festival, p. 57, l. 1. r. as
the early, l. 16. dele the, l. 22. r. Zylander, l. 25. r. ten Attick, p. 58. l.
1. r. them one, p. 62. l. 14. r. irrecoverable, l. 25. r. Natural propentions,
p. 64. l. 16. r. Fomes, l. 23. dele the, p. 65. l. 20. dele it, p. 66. l. 4. r.
Flattering, p. 67. l. 12. as a mo. p. 68. l. 19. r. good dwells. p. 79. l. r.
of a Timorous.

A SERMON Preached on the Martyrdom of King CHARLES the I. The Thirtieth of
January.
2 Samuel 1st. 12th. And they Mourned, and Wept, and Fasted until Even for Saul,
and for Jonathan his Son, and for the People of the Lord, and for the House of
Israel, because they were fallen by the Sword.


THey Mourned -- And where is that sullen Stoic? Show me the Man that can
condemn this their Pious Mourning? Who can deny a Tear at such a sad Solemnity?
Where is that flinty breast that can forbear to Sorrow in such a case? No Loyal
Subject to the Thron of Saul can be so base, as to deny a yearly Subsidy, when
Princes Hearses claim it as its due? Natural Affection will break forth into
Sighs and Tears at the Corruption of what we Love; when that grim Sergeant of
Nature, Death, has snatched from us any, linked unto us by the ties of
Friendship; How do we dissolve into Tears! How great are our Griefs and Sorrows!

Now if we be judged insensible, for our not relenting the loss of Friends?
What brand of shame and Infamy do they deserve, who neither Mourn, Weep, or
Fast when a Cypress Vail has overspread the Royal Diadem? Shall we not be
Dejected and Sorrowful, when the Sword of Death has cut off Him in whose Hand
alone rested the Sword of Justice? Shall not We Fast and Weep at the Fatal
Catastrophe of Saul and Jonathan? Are not our Souls Elemented, as it were, of
nothing but Sadness, when our Ears are pierced with the lamentable news of the
fall of the People of the Lord, accompanied with the sad misfortune of the
House of Israel. Moses's Death may justly command a Brinish shower, but much
more if accompanied with that of Aaron; if King and Priest, Nobles and
Subjects, Lords and Commons be involved in the same misfortune, then certainly
we must want words, to express the bitterness of our Griefs. Niobe found a vent
for her Passion, when made unhappy by the loss of one, or two, of her little
Babes; but when robbed of all, she became Insensible. Curae leves loquuntur.
They are Inferior Evils admit of Tears, but those of a Superior Nature are
unexpressible. When Church and State, King and Priest are partakers of one and
the same Calamity; what moderation can be expected in our Elegiack Threnes and
Mournful Lamentations? For where can we find words to express the Conflicts and
Agonies of our Souls? Yet still the misfortunes are far greater, which give
occasion to this lamentation in the House of David, for when the Amalikite had
told them the pitiful and fatal overthrow of Saul and Jonathan by the
Philistines Army, then the Text tells us, They Mourned, and Wept, and Fasted,
etc.

Mourning, Weeping and Fasting were the Dutiful, as well as Holy Performances
of all pertaining to the Family of David, and ought not that to be this days
chief work in the Houses of us all? For God has commanded me to acquaint you,
that every Master of a Family, and all that are under his Protection, should by
Fasting serve the Lord; and the neglect thereof will be justly imputed to the
Masters Charge at the great and solemn day of Account.

The Hebrew word for Mourning, which the Vulgar Latin render Plangentes,
signifies Funebri ritu Lugere, a Funeral Mourning; and does not this days Duty
command the same: David and his Family bemoaned the Effusion of Royal Blood,
and is not That the dismal occasion of this days Lamentation; Lace befits not a
Mourning Suit, expect not then Flourishes of Rhetoric in a Mourning Sermon. On
such a Day, and Text, as this, the Preachers words should be Sighs, his Accents
Groans, and the Auditors Tears the best Commendation of the Discourse: For this
end I appear amongst you this day, though (not as my Savior in another case)
to send fire, but as the Woman at the Well to draw water, that the Kingdom of
England may become like that where the Angel of the Lord delivered his doleful
Message to the Israelites, Bochin, a place of Weepers! And oh! how happy will
it be, if, as when all Israel were gathered together at Mizpeth, so when all
Subjects pertaining to the Crown of England, being Assembled together in the
House of God, may draw water, and pour forth their Prayers before the Lord, for
the Royal Blood, which as on this day was poured out, and spilt as water upon
the ground; that so we may imitate the example of the Royal Prophet, and his
Domestics, Who Mourned, and Wept, and Fasted, etc.

The Text may afford us many Particulars, but least I seem tedious, I shall
contract my Meditations into these Two.

The Persons Mourning, and the persons Mourned for.
Consider we the first.
And it were needless to dwell upon a Theme obvious to all who consult this
Chapter; For who are they? But David and his Family, and those who are of his
Retinue, at the first accosting the Amalikites, that Condoled the hard Fate of
Saul and Jonathan? For though he was disaffected to David, an adversary who
hunted after his Life, and from whom he had escaped, as a bird from the hand of
the Fowler: Nevertheless David forgets not to commiserate His, and his Nobles
condition: Nay, though God himself had rent the Kingdom from Saul, and conveyed
it over unto David; yet still he Song his Elegy, that he might not go to the
Grave unlamented; and he gives the reason of this, in his Tenderness and Pity
to Saul, who was so Cruel unto him, why he was so troubled for his Death; who
should be no sooner dead, then his own Head should be incircled with the Royal
Diadem; and that was, because he was Anointed with Oil. None that are Anointed
with Oil, but ought to have a Tribute of Salt Tears paid unto their Hearse. By
the Laws of Friendship, he was obliged to be concerned for the Death of
Jonathan; but as for Saul, who studied his destruction, and labored his ruin;
who was his inveterate Enemy, and wholly bent to do him mischief; whence could
it proceed, but from an unfeigned Respect, and untainted Loyalty to his Prince?
an Obedience and Love to him, whom God had instituted his Vicegerent over
Israel, and it is on that account we read, they Mourned, etc.

2. I descend to the Persons Mourned for.
And who are they? But King, Priest, and Commons; and indeed, all of us are
equally concerned to Mourn and Weep for their Readiness and Jonathan, for their
Priest, the People of the Lord, and for their Brethren, the whole House of
Israel, when they are cropped by the Seyth of an immature and sudden death; we
have a Duty incumbent on us to Mourn, and Fast, and Humble our selves, when God
punishes Kings for the sakes of our Sins by an unripe and untimely Death.
Common reason will teach nature to pay a more than ordinary Tribute of Sighs
and Tears at the last Obsequies of them who move in the highest Sphere; public
Persons Hearses may justly challenge the Distillation of private Persons Eyes;
all Rivulets and little Torrents empty themselves into the main Ocean: Can any
man forbid, or fault this Holy Water? Who would not be Baptized in such a
Fountain? Dethroned Princes have had this paid them by their Enslaved Subjects.
Cum nil nisi flere relictum. When they were not capacitated to do more, their
grateful and generous Spirits disdained to do less. Eminent persons, in all
Ages have been thus bemoaned by the Church of God; not only those who have been
blasted in the greenness and tenderness of their Age, in their most precious
days, but those also who have dropped away with Age, and been gathered to their
Fathers, by the long Rake of silent Time; Thus the Sons o^ Jacob bewailed their
Aged Father seven days, with great and sore Lamentation. Thus when Moses the
Faithful Prince and Ruler of his People fell asleep, all Israel mourned for him
thirty days in the Plains of Moab. Thus Judah and Jerusalem bemoaned the death
of their King Josiah; And thus David and his Family Wept and Fasted for the
death of Saul and Jonathan. That Light shining in the dark Lanthorn of our
Bodies, (I mean the the Light of Nature wherewith we are invested,) has taught
all Nations to Reverence their Kings whilst Living, and to Condole them being
Dead, Thus the Romans erected Funeral Piles and Massy Columns in Memory of
their Caesar's. Jus gentium est obedire Regibus, The Law of Nations has
consented, that Homage and Obedience is due to them who sit at the Helm of
State; And what is the Law of Nations, but the Law of God Engraven in the
Heart? And what is the Law of Christians, but the Will of God written not only
in the Heart, but also expressed unto us in the most lively Characters of Holy
Writ. As then none better instructed in the Principles of governing Subjects,
then Christian Kings; so none more, and clearly convinced of the Fealty due to
Kings, then Subjects Professing Christianity; And therefore They should better
understand the value of a King, and consequently be more nearly touched for his
loss. Whatsoever the Babylonians did for Nebuchadnezar, or the Persians for
their Cyrus; That did David and his Family for Saul and Jonathan. Peace and
Happiness, Prosperity and Safety, are so strictly tied to Sovereignty, and
entailed upon the Crown, that a Churches Glory and Nations Safety depend upon
the strict maintaining the Royal Prerogative. For all our Felicity is held in
Capite, and where a Princes Honor is but faintly miantain'd, and begins to
languish, the Subjects Property must decay and perish.

The King of Poets relates concerning those Illustrious Creatures Bees, Rege
incolumi, men's omnibus una est -- Amisso Rupere fidem -- When their King is
lost, instead of Honey they have nothing but Gall; their pretty contrived waxen
Fabrics are easily demolished, and Drones devour and run away with the Fruits
of all their pains and care: After the same manner it fares with Men, if the
King be gone, what can we expect but Factions, and Fractions, Sects and
Schisms; then Armed Swarms encounter, and fall down dead together, as though
they agreed in nothing but a resolution how to disagree among themselves. When
the Head is ill, all the Members are out of Temper, and complain of smart: So
ominious is the Death of a King to a whole Nation, that well may David and his
Family Mourn, and Fast for Saul, and Jonathan his Son.

By how much Kings excel in Virtue, by so much the more their Corruption from
us increase our Floods of Grief, making our Tears to swell beyond its margent;
But be they never so bad or wicked, they must not go to their long home
un-attended with a weeping Eye, and a bleeding Heart. Let them be Josia's or
Saul's, we have still an Injunction on us to Fast and Mourn, which calls to
remembrance that old Woman Hymaera, who seldom failed a day to Pray to God to
prolong the Life of that Tyrant Dionisius, which expressed her not only more
Loyal, but far Wiser than those, whose Hearts and Heads are ever given to
Change, with whom it is the Advice of the wisest of men to have nothing to do:
The event and consequence of every Change is dubious and un-intelligible; a
Kings translation often proves as a Prologue to a Nations Tragedy, that the
World may understand there is a genuine Sympathy between King and People, as
well as between the Head and Body natural.

It Is not the Sun, but the Sublunary Creatures suffer by the Suns Eclipse; He
must be more than blind, that reads not Gods anger in the loss of a good King,
when he himself has given us to understand, it is none of the highest of his
Judgments to constitute a bad one to Rule over us, I gave thee a King in my
anger, and I took him away in my wrath: Nay we may observe how Holy David
discerned Gods anger against the Land in Saul's overthrow, and how sensible he
was of it, insomuch that he not only Mourns and Fasts, but he even curses the
place where the Armies of Saul and the Philistines Forces disputed their
Valor. Ye mountains of Gilbo^, let there be no Dew nor Rain upon you, nor
Fields of Offerings, for there the Shield of the Mighty was vilely cast away,
the Shield of Saul, as though he had not been Anointed with Oil, verse 21. For
so much is a Nation concerned to bewail the fall of a Prince, though of a Saul,
and rejected of God; for thus did David and his Family.

They Mourned, and Wept, and Fasted, etc.
I have now finished the Text, and I am still to begin my Sermon; For if David
thus Mourned and Fasted for Saul and Jonathan, what Groans and Sighs may thou
expect, O blessed Martyr, whose Blood on this day we Traitorously shed? How
shall we expiate this our Offense? If David lamented the Death of Saul
occasioned by the accidents of War, how ought We to Mourn bitterly, who
contrived thy Murder? and Confederated against thee? David took not up Arms
against Saul, yet still he Wept, and Mourned, much more then ought We, who not
only Rebelled against thee: But O damnable Impiety! Even Betrayed, Bought, and
Sold Thee? Who pretended a Law, and erected a Scaffold to Butcher thee, making
thy Royal Palace an Akeldama, or field of Blood: No, what an Amalekite did,
the Royal Prophet lamented, Bathing his Hearse with Tears, and embalming his
memory with a set form of Lamentation, for they Mourned, and Wept, and Fasted,
etc.

But our case is more deplorable than that of Saul's, and has the nearest
relation to that of the Blessed Jesus, who inter malitiam and avaritiam,
between the Malice of some, and Ambition of others (as Christ between the
Thieves) was Crucified. Here a Judas come from that cursed Clymate the North
with a Quantum dabitis, what shall be the Reward of my Treason, and I will
betray and Sell him? There a Temporizing Courtier who Eat his Bread at his
Table, lifted up his Heel against him. O! that our Heads for these things were
Rivers of Water, and our Eyes a Fountain of Tears, for the Beauty of England is
slain, and he who clothed us in Scarlet, cut off by an Ax wheted at Geneva,
and sharpened at Amsterdam. But oh wretched Stupidity! How unwilling are we to
credit these Reports! Being ambitious as it were to run the same risque of
Confusion! Will it not appear strange, and unparalled in Story, that a Nation
should be twice ruined, twice undone, by the selfsame ways and means? How! Weep
for the King? The very pronounciation of such a word not many years since,
would have cost a man his Life; to Rail, Revile, or Blaspheme him, call him
Papistical Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, Plunder and undo all that stand up for
him, lay Hands on him, Imprison and Arraign him as a Malefactor, Condemn him,
and carry him in triumph to his Execution. Though to the affront of Heaven, and
him that dwells therein; yea, Murder him at his Royal Door, though contrary
to all Examples of Story, Precepts of God and Law of Nations; no matter for
Religion or President, This is the Heir, come let us Kill him, and seize on the
Inheritance. Quis talia fando temperat a laerymis? Where is thy Eye, O flint
hearted Stoic, whose Limbeck will refuse to pay a yearly Tribute at this
Sacred Shrine, who was the Glory of Europe, and shame of his own degenerate
People? Born it is true in Scotland, but he breathed more Gentile Gales than
those of Northern Blasts: Nay had he not been Born there, I would have said,
and as properly, as Nathanael did of Nazereth, Can any good thing come from
thence? Joh. 1.46. Nay, may we not read the Characters of Divine Wrath
imprinted on those Cursed Judas's and Hellish Varlets to avenge the Blood of
this Righteous Abel, for as the Offense was equal to that of Cain's; so travail
the World and you will read the Punishment shall be the same, Vagabonds and
Wanderers shall they be: He was a King who was an absolute Conqueror over
himself, to whom his Passions, (those attendants on Humane Nature,) yielded a
more entire Obedience, than the Kingdoms he Ruled over; For those did never
Mutiny, but his Kingdoms Loyalty, let this day witness.

Should I conduct you into that large field of Divine Fancies, manifested in
his Books, you would absolutely conclude the Coal which the Seraphim laid on
Esays's lips, was bestowed on his Pen, for they consist of such Ravishing and
Eloquent strains, that none can read them but with Wonder and Reverence; some
accurate Pencel might give some faint and weak resemblances of his Personage,
but who can delineate the Complexion of his Soul, so Faithfully as he has
copyed out Himself unto Us in his Writings, where we may read his zeal truly
balanced, with deep and profound Knowledge, Piety and Modesty, his Grief for
the Ruins of the Church, and Miseries of his People, his Care for his Friends,
and Charity for his Enemies, his Commiseration of others, and Courage in his
own Afflictions; and in all so even a Temper, that he resembled none but him
who at his Cross did say, Father forgive them, they know not what they do.

In short, he was a true Beuclerk, as much a Scholar as a Prince, and more a
Christian than either; He was, and is, not only to this Nation, but all
Christendom; a Mirror to think how he Lived, and a Grief to consider how he
Died.

Thus fell that shining Star, whose Light overspread the whole Earth, and the
Royal Dignity Suffered an Eclipse in the Greatest King that ever was.

Let us then Weep and Fast, to think how we have rendered our selves guilty of
Innocent Blood; if the guilt of a Brothers Blood cried to Heaven for Vengeance;
how much more the Blood of a Father, the common Father of three Christian
Kingdoms? If Saul's death was so deplorable, (yet he a wicked Person, and the
Phylistines none of his Subjects) then how much more in this case, where wicked
Subjects, Subjects said I? Nay rather the dung of the Earth, like Baanah and
Rhechab, have Murdered a Righteous Man, and their most Gracious King.

How ought this to afflict us? Know you not that there is a Prince, a great man
fallen this day in our Israel -- He is fallen, and his fall accompanied with
that of the Nobility and Gentry, Laws and Justice, with the fall of Church and
Religion, Doctrine and Discipline, Piety and Morality; let us Mourn then that
our sins of Scarlet may be made white by the Blood of Christ. I am charitably
persuaded, all in this Assembly did detest this Bloody Action with the greatest
Horror and Indignation: Nevertheless we must all acknowledge our selves guilty
of his Blood, because they were our sins, the sins of the whole Nation, which
provoked God to thunder down Vengeance on us in the Person of our Shepherd,
that so we, the sheep might be smitten. It was of thy Mercy, O Lord, thy Mercy
alone, O praised be that Mercy! That we were not utterly consumed, when for
many years together, our Cornutes were turned into Fifes, our Dances into
Marches, and our Banquets into want of Bread, and our Livery-Gowns into
Buff-Coats, and our Suits of Gold into Glittering Armor, and our Beavers into
Hemlets? How was the Pride of our Cupboard, and our Fingers Glory, turned into
Soldiers Sallaries, and the price of Blood? How were our Girdles turned into
Belts, and our Gowns and Cassocks, into Coats of Mail? Our Lofty Houses into
Garrisons, and our stately Edifices into Prisons, our Temples into Stables, and
the House the Lord, the House of Prayer, into a Den of Thieves?

So soon as the Lords Anointed was slain, the whole Nation went disorderly, and
proved out of Course; when our Prince of Peace, Charles the First, was taken
from among us, then presently sprung up Briars and Brambles, more Cruel than
Tigers, that rifled from Drams of Silver into the Bowels of their own flesh,
and would either Kill, or Die, for a days Wages; no sooner was Sovereignty
dethroned, and Majesty destroyed, but Desolation and Woe, with the whole retinue
of Miseries fell upon us; Insomuch, we no sooner sat down to Meat, but we
expected the intrusion of Armed Guests; how often were men dragged from their
Beds to the Prison, and from thence to an untimely and violent Death? And as it
fared with the State, so also with the Church? How did their little Disputes
and Divisions hinder the building of Jerusalem? They contended so long about
the Windows, they had almost lost the foundation for Sion, how did a pretense
of inward Sanctity in some, devour their outward Decency! Pretending the Glory
of God by such means as you would think your selves Villified and affronted!
How was Charity banished to fetch home Truth, and a Coal from the Altar to set
the Temple it self on Fire? When men pretended to be Enlightened by the Spirit,
yet lived after the Lusts of the Flesh? Were not thousands made naked to keep
the Surplice off from a few men's backs? How were the Churches defaced for the
little Piques men conceited at the Windows, every minuit difference made a
quarrel, and did not Disputes raised about a Pin or Nail of the Temple, shake
and endanger the whole Fabric thereof? Men took up the Weapons of the Devil
under a show of the Lords Cause; and pretending to fight the Battles of the
Lord, they entered a Solemn League and Covenant, and Swore Allegiance to the
Prince of Darkness! How was Christian Religion at once violated and defamed?
Not only by violating her Precepts, but by falsely aspersing her, to own, and
countenance such vicious practices: These with many more Miseries did our
Nation groan under so soon as we had committed that horrid crime of Regicide;
and what could we expect less! Shall Zimri have Peace, who slew his Master? The
King is Gods Vicegerent and Representative on Earth, and therefore every
Contempt of him is no less an affront to God himself? We read in the 2 Samuel
21.1. That when the Land of Israel was smitten three years together with
Famine, the Oracle of God declared, That it was for Saul and his bloody house,
because he slew the Gibeonites. Now, I pray tell me, was not our National sin,
far greater than that of Israel's! There, it is true, the King slew the slaves,
but here the slaves slew the King; there one of the worst of Kings, contrary to
a National Oath slew the basest of the People; but here the basest of the
People, contrary to many Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, Protestations and
Covenants, slew the best of Kings?

And will not God visit for these things? Will our sins be less importunate for
Vengeance than that of the Israelites? Shall the Gibeonites Blood cry unto God
from the ground, and will not the Blood of this days Martyr cry under the
Altar? How long, O Lord, how long before thou avengest my Blood! Yes verily,
and I am afraid, that besides these many Plagues and Mischiefs we have groaned
under, there be severer Vengeance hanging over us, his hand will be stretched
out still, unless we prevent it by a serious Confession, and a sincere
Repentance of our Sins; when we were in the dregs of Misery, and lying under
the bitterness of Death, Heaven smiled upon us, and the great and all-seeing
Eye gave us a taste of his Mercies, by Restoring unto us our Dread Sovereign;
But examine your Consciences, and enquire of your Hearts, what Gratitude you
express for this Mercy? What returns have we made for so astonishing a
Blessing? We entertained the Change with a Joy too profuse, but was it enough
Religious? We saw the great things were done for us, whereof we were glad, but
did we so much consider, the Lord had done them, and were we not more affected
with the variety and profitableness, than with the Mercy and kindness of the
Dispensation? Have we seriously humbled our selves before God for this days
Wickedness? Have we Repented of it, have we dispatched our Tears and Sighs as
Ambassadors from Heaven to plead in our behalf, and to Sue out our Pardon? That
you and I, and all of us are Guilty of the Sin, is sufficiently notorious,
though after diverse manners and circumstances; as then the Distemper is
Epidemical, so let our Sorrow be Universal; let us unanimously cry unto God,
that he would forgive us not only this, but all the sins we have since
committed, for God has applied the Sunshine of his Mercies to melt us into
Repentance, as well as the Thunder of his Judgments to ruffle us into
Obedience; but let us seriously reflect, if the Oil of his Mercy has not made
us rather wanton and nimble in Feasts of Impiety, than Active in his Service?
And as we have abused his Favors, so neither has his Judgments instructed us
to learn Righteousness.

O cursed Impenitency for this days Murder! I fear it is Thou that have undone
us, I fear it is Thou that still causest us to lie under the Rod of Gods Anger;
how have thou labored our ruin, and still study our Destruction? Look down
from Heaven, and speak, O Royal Charles; was it not for thy Blood that God has
vexed us with Plagues, and beaten us in pieces like a Potters Vessel? Was it
not thy Blood which caused the Destroying Angel to fill our Air with such an
horrid Infection, that in less than nine Months above an Hundred Thousand
Inhabitants were cut off from one City?

Speak, O Royal Charles, Was it not thy Blood which brought the most
flourishing and famous City in the World to Ruin and Desolation, overthrowing
it, as Sodom and Gomorrha were overthrown; and have we yet made an Atonement
to thy Hearse? Are we not still insensible of our Wickedness? Have we watered
our Couch with Tears for this our Disloyalty? Have we paid double Honor unto
the Son for the great Dishonor done unto the Father? It Is true we have
Sanctified a Fast, and called a Solemn Assembly; but have we Fasted from our
Sins? Is there not as much Rebellion in our Hearts, as before we expressed in our
Actions? Are we not daily Contriving and Plotting the Subversion of our
Government? How do we make our selves a Prey to our Adversaries by the
Divisions amongst us; by our Heading of Factions, and Espousing little Parties
and Interests? Do we not daily Speak Evil of Dignities, and Despise
Principalities and Powers? Though, God himself has said, Who shall say unto a
King, what do thou? And thou shall not Speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People;
do we not contemn his Laws, and refuse the Dictates of his Precepts, and will
not the Noise of Blood pull Vengeance upon our Heads, if we prove no better
Penitents. Yes verily, and I am afraid the Calamitous Distractions which at
this day Infect our Nation, proceeds from our little respect to this days
Solemnity: Many, instead of Fasting and Praying, are Hectoring and Ranting; and
if this be the Religion of Saints, tell me, O good God! what is the Impiety of
Devils? Is it Comely thus to Mourn in Colored Taffaty? Will such a wrestling
with God force him to a Blessing, or rather will it not provoke Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven, utterly to undo us? I will up, I will up, says the
Lord, and ease my self of my Adversaries, making my Sword like that of Saul, or
Gideon, laden with the Blood of the slain, and Fat of the mighty: Yet still as
if God only spoke big Words, and all his Threats were mere Bravadoes of Heaven,
we slight and condemn both his Golden Scepter and Iron Rod.

Alas! was ever People so Prodigiously besotted, as to think, God will be thus
infinitely provoked? Let us begin then now to fear our God, and to pay all
Honor and respect to the Defender of his Faith; are you not acquainted that
our Nation is almost ruined and destroyed; does not Church and State lie a
Bleeding? are not your Estates wasted? and your Trading decayed? Your Splendour
Eclipsed? Your Families broken and scattered; yea, and your Dignities trampled
on: Is it not high time then that we fall on our knees, and beg of God that the
Blood of his Son, may cleanse us from that of our Sovereign? Turn ye, turn ye,
why will ye die? If we seek unto God by Repentance, he will repent of the Evil
he intended to inflict upon us: Oh! blessed Repentance, it is Thou alone that
can save us! It was Thou alone, O Repentance, that saved Eight Persons from
the Flood. Nineveh had fallen, had not you supported it, it had fallen, had not
you protected it; it was the want of Thee that caused the Destruction of Egypt:
If Thou had been present, Sodom had not been destroyed: Come thou then to our
succor, O potent Repentance, help us, O help us! Thou Joy of Angels and Crown
of Nations, stand up in defense of a no longer Rebellious, but Penitent People;
let a poor Bleeding Church, let a poor Perishing Nation take shelter under thy
Wings: Turn in unto us O Repentance, and be Thou visible in this Nation, who
art only able to repair the mischiefs thereof: Make us perfect Ninevites, that
the cry of Blood may not be laid to our Charge; give us from henceforth Loyally
affected Hearts, that we may be subject not only for Wrath, but for Conscience
sake; Cloth us with Sackcloth, that we may not be stripped of our Gorgeous
Apparel; Sprinkle us with Ashes that the Smell of Fire may be no longer in our
Dwellings; Enjoin us to Fast for Saul and for Jonathan, that we may live in
Peace, and enjoy the Fruits of our Labor in all Godliness and Honesty; make us
to Cry mightily, that no other Cry may be heard in our Streets than those of
Devotion; for Blessed are the People that are in such a Case; yea, Blessed are
the People who have the Lord for their God. For then shall Peace be within our
Walls, and Plentiousness within our Palaces, then shall there be no
complaining nor leading into Captivity in our Streets.

Oh! the Happiness we might enjoy if we were thus industrious for our own good;
and if not now, when shall we be Happy? When we live under so Gracious a
Prince, that for Virtue and Piety he is Second to none but Charles the First,
but none but Apelles can draw Alexander's Picture. I shall conclude therefore,
Humbly beseeching God to grant Him a long and Prosperous Reign over us, to
Confound the subtle Conspiracies of His Enemies, and that as he has expressed
His Grace and Clemency to us, so may we blot out the Infamy of this Day, by
plentiful returns of our Sincere Loyalty and Affection to Him; and let all
Loyal and Well Affected Subjects say, from the bottom of their Hearts,

God Save King Charles the Second, Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. Michael a Plea April 21st. 1684. at the General
Assembly of the Clergy, held there by the Archdeacon of Norwich, etc.
Luke 19th. v. 46th. It is written, my House is the House of Prayer, but ye
have made it a Den of Thieves.


THe most convenient Place for Judgment, to begin at the House of God; for
there is no danger of miscarriages in the Commonwealth, when there is a
concurrence of all things to promote the Beauty and Glory of the Temple: For
wherein consists the Glory of a Kingdom? But in the due Execution of Justice:
And what is it that Maintains the Queen upon her Throne? But the Power of
Religion.

When Religion then begins to faulter, no marvail if Justice begins to swerve;
and what can that presage, but he eminent peril and downfall of a State?

To prevent therefore the ruins and devastations of both, God has entrusted
the Royal Office with an Absolute Supreme Power, and deposited the Court Rolls
of Heaven into his Hands: For the same Divine Providence that Anoints Him King,
Proclaims Him also Defender of the Faith, and great Nursing Father of the
Church.

Thus Solomon built the Temple of the Lord and his own Palace both together,
but he first Perfected the goodly Fabric of the former, before he began to
Erect the latter, to hint to us that it is the Temple which fastens the Royal
Diadem upon the Princes Brows.

Though we urge not therefore the great Aid and Assistance to the Crown by
those weapons of the Church, Praeces and lacrimae. Yet Heaven has so provided,
that Caesar is as much obliged out of kindness to Himself, (as a Religious
respect to promote the Splendor of Religion;) to take special regard that the
House of Prayer be not converted into a den of Thieves.

For he who will abuse the House of God, will even dare to Affront Majesty to
His Face.

If Aaron be disturbed in his Office, how can Moses be secure in his Throne, or
how can Aaron be a Co-adjutor and Prophet unto Moses, if he be not a Shield and
Defense unto his Brother? The Interest of the Crown and Miter, Scepter and
Crosier is mutually to assist each other; for, like Twins, they thrive and
fade, live and die together: And as the Prosperity of a Kingdom, depend on the
flourishing of Religion; so likewise Religion must use the Rules of Discipline
to make it more vigorous and Powerful.

The Primitive Fathers, as well as those of a younger birth, employed all their
Industry and Care for the maintenance of it. It Is all one, like the Edomite,
to race and demolish the Church, as with Separatists to inveigh against the
Discipline thereof. The Apostolical Cannons largely evince the Pains and
Industry the Apostles used to maintain its Honor and Glory; they therefore
Decreed that Episcopal Assemblies should be held twice every year; which
Constitutions were afterward reinforced by the Decrees of several Councils:
For what was more Powerful to preserve Sanctity, maintain Purity of Doctrine,
hinder Heresy and Schism, and to encourage the Dispencers of Gods Word, to
contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints?

It Is therefore a Duty incumbent on the Bishop, to provide that Discipline be
preserved in the Church, and to Actuate those Laws, which otherwise would die
Abortive They therefore who declaim against Hierarchy of Bishops, strike at the
very ground and Foundation of the Church. For let us but remove Prelacy, and
tell me where shall we find Discipline; and that being gone, what will become
of Religion? When Anarchy reigned in Israel, then every man did what seemed
good in his own eyes; and where there is no Prelate, are there not diversity of
Doctrines, variety of Judgments, and every man professing what Religion he
pleases? But seeing there are Bishops in our Church, if there be not a
Religious and Orthodox Clergy, where lies the fault but in the Prelate; and if
there be not a Devout and Conformable People, where lies the Fault but in the
Priest? For where they are strict and careful in performing the Duties
incumbent on them, the People would or must of necessity do theirs?

It was upon this account, therefore the Blessed Jesus in this Chapter, When he
saw the City he wept of over it; but being come into the Temple, he cast out
them who Sold therein.

In all his time of Converse with mankind on Earth, he never executed the
Office of a Magistrate till now; and indeed, what place more fit for
Reformation to begin in? Were all Erroneous, Whiggish and half-Conforming
persons weeded out of all Ecclesiastical Courts and Employments, we should soon
find Religion would have a greater Influence on the Conformity and Lives of
Men. May we not well presume Jerusalem to be out of Course, and Order, when
there were such great Disorders in the House of God? When Thieves and Robbers
had taken the House of God in Possession, and Sacrilege installed in the House
of Prayer? Here then our Savior begins, passing by the Sins and Divisions of
the City, only weeping over it, and pitying it; but punishing the sins of the
Temple, for he Whipped and Scourged them who had Profaned it; saying, My House
shall be called the House of Prayer. The words present to us the Institution,
and Profanation of the Church of God, My House, etc, The Institution will
entertain your Meditations with three Particulars. What it must be, For whom,
And for what end.

We resume the First, It must be an House.
First, Though the Earth is the Lords, and the Fullness thereof: Though God be
the Supreme Governor of all the World, and cannot be circumscribed, but
replenish every Corner and part thereof with his Presence; yet still he has
ever confined himself to some one particular place, set apart for his Adoration
and Worship.

Though as St. Paul speaks, Men ought to Pray continually, and in every
place: Nevertheless in all Ages of the World, God has appointed some more
peculiar Place for his Royal Court, and Refidence on Earth, where Men shall
offer Sacrifices of Prayer, and Praises to him.

Thus when Religion was but in its Infancy, God was resorted to in a remote
Mountain, or some neighboring Grove, where being absent from the noises of the
World, men might elevate their Souls in the most pleasant Contemplations of
Eternity; where they may be freed from all Avocations, having no encumbrances
to Indispose their Minds from setting their Affections on things above.

It was in this Melancholy Solitude and Holy Retirement from the World that
Abraham, Solicited God by Invocation. Genesis 21.33.

But when Religion began to flourish, these Groves being abused by Gentile
Superstition, God removed himself into a Tabernacle, and journey'd along with
Moses and the Children of Israel, and would not be publicly spoke withal
until Solomon's time. When these Pilgrims had completed their Travels, God no
longer dwelt in a Tabernacle or Traveling Temple, but had an House Erected,
that He and the Ark of his Strength might enter therein; and Solomon was the
first who built this House where Men should make their Addresses to the Throne
of Grace.

Nor ever read I any denying him a place to rest in, till there started up a
late Generation of men, who would make God but their In-mate, and out of Civil
Courtesy grant him a Lodging, like the poor Levite in Micha's House, or the
man of God in the Shunamites little Chamber. But Sirs, God commands me to
declare, That he who provides us an House to secure us against the ruggedness
of the Air, and fierceness of Beasts, will have an House Dedicated to himself,
that he may dwell therein; yea, and Blessed be God we have found out an
Habitation for the Lord of Hosts, But Thanks to the Devotion of our
Forefathers. For we are more ready to pull down than to build; and if so, how
great is our backwardness to Beautify and Adorn; good Works are even
Antiquated; and that Religion adjudged most acceptable to God. which is the
least chargable to man It Is strange men should be so basely nigardly in
promoting the Glory of God? Either there must be less Religion in the World, or
not the same Obligation; the last is impossible, for the Glory of God which
prompted our Forefathers, has the same force and Argument upon us; it must
therefore proceed from our low esteem of an Omnipotent Being, that we imagine a
Granary or Stable, or some Spiritual Weavers Parlour, spacious enough to
entertain the King of Glory, and all his retinue of Celestial Courtiers.

We are censured Superstitious, if we be not direct Antipodes to the Pious
Sense of former Ages: We are presently concluded devoted to the Sea of Rome, if
we be but so Curious as to make Gods House Handsomer than our own; But if this
be Superstition, I wish from the bottom of my Soul, all men were thus
Superstitious, and zealous of good Works; If this be Superstition, how had it
overspread and corrupted Primitive Christianity? For they thought no Service
so acceptable, as to do something for Gods House? For what is more plain, men
have but small respect for Religion, who adorn their Houses with Marble and
Ivory, Cedar and Tapestry, and see Gods House lie unprovided for, and
neglected? Whatever men think, the Royal Prophet I am sure was of another
Judgment and Persuasion: For (says he to Nathan) see now I dwell in a House
of Ceder, but the Ark of God rests within Curtains. He thought it great
Ir-religion and Impiety, that even the Kings Palace should be more Glorious
than Gods House: This was the primary reason Antiquity Christened their
Churches by the Name of Basilicae, not because they there Sacrificed to the
King of Heaven and Earth, but because of their Beauty and Frame. How
Magnificent and Noble was the Temple which Constantine Erected; and yet how far
surpassed, by that vast one Constantius his Son built at Alexandria? He
succeeded his Father, not only in possessing the same Religion, but also in his
great Care and Reverence for the House of God: For they two are inseparable
Companions; he cannot have any high regard for Religion, who dis-regarded the
House of the Lord; let that fall, and Religion cannot stand; let that decay,
and will not Religion perish? He who has any respect for his Master, cannot
patiently behold his House surmounted by an Hospital, or Almes-House, for
Beauty and Ornament? Can my Devotions be Elevated and Pure, when I see the
place where he dwells, more like a Bridewel, or Pesthouse, than the Palace of
my God? Can we conceive it the Presence Chamber of Heaven, where God and his
whole train of Blessed Spirits are more immediately present to hear and observe
us when we see it more like a Stye, or a Stable, rather than the Mansion of so
Glorious a Being; And this I fear, is no small occasion, men demean themselves
so unhandsomsly and rudely therein, because an ordinary Cottage out-vies it in
Spruceness, and Neatness. But indeed the most Graceful Ornament of an House, is
the Peace and Unity therein; And for this Cause, I presume the Church is not
styled Curia, but Domus; not a Court where Divisions and Envy are nourished,
but an House where Righteousness and Truth meet together, and Love and Peace
even Kiss each other. It Is no easy Province to maintain perfect Unity in a
State, but is it so laborious to preserve it in an House? The Disturbances and
Commotions of a Kingdom, may prove Dangerous, and Fatal, but are not the
Divisions of an House far more opprobrious and shameful? When men are not of
one mind in an House, but the Father opposing the Son, and the Son studious to
control the Father. The Church ought to be an House in respect of the Unity
and Order maintained therein, but not an House divided against it self, where
the Pastor is against the People, and the People endeavoring to oppose the
Shepherd, and both join hand in hand to oppugn their Bishop and Ordinary. They
who consented to the persuasion of Pythagoras, were of opinion, that there was
but one God, and two Devils, because he first separated from Unity. I shall not
trouble my self with the Arguments they alleged to prove their Assertion, but
I am verily persuaded, the Devil was the first Whigg, (in its proper sense,)
Who not only by his saucy Affectation of a Parity with God, caused a Division
and Tumult in Heaven; but also, he still has his Agents and Factors to create
the like differences upon Earth; he cannot, it is true, now stain the Glories of
unblemished Saints, or set Heaven it self at odds: Yet alas! How Prosperous is
he, in somenting Enmities, Animosities and Divisions upon Earth: Was it not the
Devil, who caused the Schism of Corah, Dathan and Abiram? Did not he breed the
separation of the Eustasians, who occasioned the Council at Gangra? Was it not
he, who Enkindled that Schismatical Fire of the Donatists? Did not he blow it
into such dismal and raging Flames, that they had almost consumed and burnt
the whole Church? Yea, even turned it into Ashes? Had not that Council at
Africa been Assembled to quench and allay its fury; And tell me, I beseech you,
are not these Embers revived afresh? If we reflect on those, who at this day
disturb our Jerusalem, are they not of the same dye and Complexion (herein only
differing) that those of this Age have scraped the shreds of all old and
out-worn Heresies to patch them up in a Scotch Tump, or Geneva Frock; but God
grant, all the Tantivy-men (as they maliciously call us) and Obedient Sons of
the Church, may unanimously concur to whip and scourge out all them, who foment
and cherish the Divisions of Church or State; that the House of Prayer may no
longer be a Den, but an House, and that for God too, which is the next
particular.

Secondly, My House, and upon this account it was styled (...) in the Council
at Laodicea, where they Condemned even the Feasts of Charity celebrated
therein; for though they were good convincing Arguments of Christian Unity and
Love; and held the Authority of Apostolical Custom, yet still it was thought
great Profanation of the Temple, because it was (...), proper only to God, and
not to be employed to uses of our own. God gives us a right and propriety to
all others, but this is Gods House, and we may not make bold with it? For as it
has a special Holiness, so in like manner, a special Honor pertaining
thereunto: We don't, it is true, consider it as Holy in respect of it self, yet
is it not Holy by reason of its use, and special dedication unto God? And if
so, how Erroneous are they, who dispute against it, and maintain any other
place as much his, and as much Holy? Which, if true, to what end is that strict
Command, Make not my Fathers House an House of Merchandise? Or how could our
Savior lay Sacrilege to the Jews charge, because they Traded and Traficked
there?

What more evident, than that the Churches are to be used only for the Services
of God? And that ought to be the principle, yea only end of our coming thither,
and not to dispatch Worldly concerns, to make Compacts and Bargains, as too
frequent amongst us.

The Consecration and Dedication of Churches is no new nor unheard of thing, no
nor yet Superstitious; they who censure it so, cast dirt upon all Holy
Antiquity: Ah! of Holy Antiquity, said I; in the very face of God himself, who
has ever Honored and Accepted it.

It Is the Consecration thereof, makes it Holy; yea, and causes God so to judge
of it: For though Stone and Mortar are incapable of Grace; yet by their
Consecration, they receive a Spiritual Power, whereby they are made fit for
Gods Worship and Service. Now being Consecrated, tell me, O tell me the danger
of Attributing Holiness thereto? I am confident there is none, if we will not
run contrary in Opinion to the whole stream and current of the Ancient Fathers,
who declared it as their Judgment? Whence, O whence, comes that rude and
unhandsom Behavior in the Church (that he must have a piercing judgment indeed
who can discern a difference between the Temple and the Theater) but from that
Heretical Opinion condemned in the Messalian Heretics, that there is no more
Holiness in the one than in the other? Does not the Profane Usage proceed from
the Profane Opinion thereof? And he that conceived thus, what can he be styled
less than Atheist or Heretic? For let us have but an Honorable Opinion of
God, and from the Hem of such a Garment will flow a Virtuous and Honorable
Opinion of his House: Let us but Honor him, and I declare it impossible to
have no Veneration or Reverence for the Temple.

Let others style it Superstitious, but O my Soul come not thou into their
Secrets, but mount up thy self, and imitate the Devotions of Primitive
Christians, who Worshipped God toward the East, both Priest and People as soon
as they presented themselves in his House: All the time they were there, with
what Modesty and Silence, with what Reverence and Attention did they demean
themselves? That it justly merited the Phraise of the House of God, and they of
a Choire of Angels rather than Men: Were they not all upon their Knees at the
Prayers? All upon their Feet at the Sermon; none presuming to Sit, as being too
bold and laisy a Posture in the House of God? Nay, were there not some, who,
Audipedes incedebant in Templum. In imitation of Moses they would not have
their Shoes on their Feet in the Temple. May not this shame; yea, God grant it
rise not up in Judegment against them who Snort a Sleep in his House, as if
they had not a Cabin to rest in? Who have their Hatts on their Heads, when God
and his Angels more immediately behold them? And what O ye Watchmen of Israel,
and Prophets of the Lord, shall we see our Master thus Dishonored in his
House, and shall we wink at the Abuses? Let us not be so faint-hearted and
tame, as if we were afraid to Speak; but let us labor to maintain the Glory of
his House? Ought there to be no difference between the Temple of the Lord and
an House accustomed to Revelling? Shall a common Meeting place in the Market,
and that of Angels and Archangels be one and the same? Of Angels said I? yea,
the very Presence Chamber of the King of Heaven.

This is a Duty especially incumbent on the Priest to Correct such Abuses and
miscarriages in the Church; that it may not be a Den, but ever continue an
House of Prayer.

Which is the next Particular.
Thirdly, Though there be many Religious Duties to be exercised in the House of
God, yet Prayer is the principal; yea, no other is mentioned. Gods House is the
House of Prayer, not of Preaching; not that Preaching is excluded, but Prayer
must have the pre-eminence and upper-hand. Preaching and Prayer are both good,
but of the two the the latter is the most worthy; it is pity two such fair
Sisters should vie Beauty; but indeed God has commanded me to declare that
Prayer must have the most eminent, nay only place, My House is the House of
Prayer. This was the Apostles judgment, when there was the highest necessity
for Preaching, for then the Gospel was to be planted in all the World;
nevertheless though it was then most useful, yet Prayer was preferred before
it, for say the Apostles, But we will give our selves continually unto Prayer,
and to the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6.4. First Prayer, then the Ministry of
the Word; now if it was so in their days, the Argument is more forcible in
ours, because the Gospel is propagated, and Christianity fully settled among
us; God forbid that I should in the least derogate from that Honorable
Employment of Preaching the Word, yet I am more then convinced we must more
strictly account for the neglect of Prayer than of Preaching: Yet alas! we
think we may be remiss in our Duty of coming to Church, if our Ears be not
first alarmed with the loud noises of a Sermon Bell, as if Religion consisted
in this only, and went no higher than aurium Tenus.

To what end serves Preaching, and all Learned Discourses, but as Instruments
and means to instruct us to Pray; Thus you may hear St. Paul, How shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? So
that Preaching is the means to direct us to call upon him: And I pray tell me,
if the means ought to be magnified beyond the end?

The Fathers, it is true, were very frequent in such Pious Orations, but this
did not make Prayer more compendious; for in the days of Chrysostom, when
Preaching was most used, there was no part of the Liturgy omitted, but now
Prayer is slenderly respected; we seem desirous of nothing but Preaching. Many
men's dislike to that incomparable Common Prayer practiced in the Church, Pardon
me Gentlemen if I impute it to those of our Function; for how can we presume
the Laity to have Reverence for it, when we our selves seem to disown it, by
cutting it into little shreds and parts, either to oblige a Faction, or ease
our selves; But did we all unanimously agree to be obedient to our Rubric, as
our Oath requires us, men would soon have a greater respect for It and Us; for
what can create greater Distractions in the minds of men, whilst they observe
me exactly conformable to the Rules of the Church, and another little or
nothing regarding it, for the same Obligation commands it from him, which
enjoins it as my Duty. The Roman Devotionals ('it is true) retain a great part of
our Liturgy, and do they not also the same Bible, Sacraments, and other Holy
Duties, and shall I deny that which is good, because it has sometimes been
mixed with Evil? The Vessels of the Temple were carried to Babylon, and
Profaned by Belshazzar, yet were they not restored, and Consecrated by Ezra to
the Service of God? The Common Prayer Book in like manner was most collected
from the Roman Mass Book, but what of this? There were Liturgies extant in the
Church before the Mass had Name, or Being; and Rome Christian, was much Elder
than that of Papal: When therefore the Mystery of Iniquity began to play its
Cards, the Old or First Common Prayer was not Abolished, only mixed with Errors
and Corruptions; which blemishes being taken away, is it not as Beautiful as
ever? This then was the Pious Care of our first Reformers to refine it from its
Dross, and bring it to its Primitive Purity, retaining nothing but what is pure
Scripture, or deducted therefrom by the Judegment of our Holy Mother the
Church. But alas! we so much degenerate from their Worthyness, that we will not
follow the form prescribed by them; we are for new Lights and Inventions to
guide us to Heaven, we deny Common Prayer, and magnify the sudden Raptures of
men, as the Illuminations of the Spirit; when really what are they better, than
an heap of Nonsense in Crampt words, only glazed with the Saint-like Varnishes
of a cast up Eye, and Canting Tone.

Their chief Objections against the Liturgy, are because it is a Form, and
enforced by Authority, which are so ridiculous, they are not worthy
Confutation: For what Prayers I pray best adorn the Beauty of Holiness, those
which are shuffled together by Chance, or such as be Refined and Polished, who
Pray most Believingly, he who digesteth what he Prays for? or he who utters his
first Sense and Thoughts? Who Prays with fullest assurance to have his Prayers
heard and Crowned with Success? He who weighs and ponders his Petitions? Or he
who either by implicit Devotion gives assent to all that proceed from the
mouth of a Gifted Brother, or else suspend his Amen, when he hears things
inconsistent with his reason, or rule of Faith? So that it cannot be because it
is a Form, but because commanded by Authority; yet that very command lays the
highest Obligation for our Obedience thereto. Obedience (says Samuel) is better
than Sacrifice. The Levitical Law Commanded, That the Firstlings of an Ass
should be redeemed with a Lamb: Now, shall we in contempt of this Law, break
the Lambs neck, and think an Ass a more proper Offering for the Temple?

Return then O Shunamite, return, return into the Embraces of thy Holy Mother
the Church, for she is all Fair, there is no Spot in her; she looked forth as
the Morning, Fair as the Moon, Clear as the Sun, and Terrible as an Army with
Banners. The Profanation of the Church, Ye have made it, etc.

That which was before phraised the Perfection of Beauty, the Joy of the whole
Earth; whether the Tribes ascended, as to the Pattern of Heaven: When Christ
came to visit it, it was neither like Heaven nor an House, the very Sacrifices
therein had need of an Expiation; the Sanctuary it self could not be safe from
Sacrilegious Cruelty, God and Prayer were both driven out by Thieves. The
Temple was not barely Profaned, but Profaned in the most heinous nature; the
greatness of the Offense, may be measured by the harshness of the Term, in that
he calls not an House, but a Den, Ye have made, etc.

Where I shall consider, When the Church is made a Den: And then secondly, Who
are the Thieves.
First, An House, receive the first peeping forth of Light, all little Rays
and Glimmering will pierce themselves in: But as for a Den, it is a place of
Horror and Darkness; and the Church may well be compared to it, if there be
wanting in it, the Light of Ceremonies, the Light of Doctrine, and the Light of
Life and Conversation in the Priest.

For First, If the Light of Ceremonies be taken out of the Church, we blow out
the Light that is shining therein; Romans 1.20.
is not Sense the guide to the Understanding! Do not Visible things direct us
to those that are Invisible? Can an Internal Worship be manifested better than
by an External Deportment? All Nations, not only Jews but Gentiles, had Rites
in the Adorations of their supposed Deities. All meeting in this, as a
Principle of Nature, that Divine Worship cannot be rightly Celebrated without
some Outward Solemnity.

Did not God command the use of Ceremonies unto the Jews? Now the Moral and
Ceremonial Law were not promulgated at different times, but both together, And
those whom God has joined, let no man put asunder. Will it not cause a
Dis-respect to hear the Service of God hudl'd over, as a Scrivener reads a Bond
or an Indenture: Are we so great Enemies to Innocence, that a Surplice should
afright us from attending the Ordinances of God? That the Priest should (...),
was so general a practice in all Ages of the Church, that none did Officiate in
Holy Offices, but he was clad in Raiment White as Snow.

They are not the Embroideries of Religion I so admire, as to have its Garment
too heavy and weighty, nor such a plainness, as to abhor all Decency and
Comeliness; For let us suppose the worst, that there are some Spots which may be
spared, could they be handsomely taken out, yet what? Because of this must I
rend my Garment in pieces and be naked? Or shall I suffer rude Hands to cut and
tear it in pieces, as they please, to the great injury and Perturbation of the
Church, Ceremoniae tanquam Cerei, They are as Lights which give Luster and
Brightness to Gods House, and the Services performed there, and one way to make
it a Den, is to extinguish this Light, that it may not give Light to them
entering the House of Prayer.

Secondly, As the Church cannot but be dark without Ceremonies, so if the Life
of Doctrine required in the Priest, be not a Lamp unto our Feet, and Light unto
our Paths, to guide us into the ways of Peace.

The Blessed Jesus himself has styled the Preachers of the Word, not only the
Lights of the World, but also, the Salt of the Earth, a City set upon a Hill;
they are not only Stars, but Angels, chosen Vessels, men of a thousand; their
Feet are styled Beautiful, and they themselves the Glory of Christ; good reason
then if our Lights should shine before men, for seeing we are called to this
Eminent Function, having the Title of Light attributed us; we cannot think it
sufficient we have Lamps unless furnished with Oil, that our Doctrine may
promote the Glory of God, and save both our own, and the Souls of them
committed to our Care.

The House of Prayer may be a Den, if the Flames therein be not real, but
Painted.

Thus St. Paul charge Timothy, To take heed unto himself, and his Doctrine,
and put them in remembrance to stir up the Gift of God. It Is not enough to fill
the Golden Candlestick of the Temple, unless they give Light to those that
enter in; otherwise what are they more than prettily contrived Antickes under a
Building, who seem to groan under the oppression of that which does support
them.

'Twas our Saviors Command, That we should always have our Loins girt, (that
is) with the Girdle of Sincerity and Truth, or with other Expositors, by
External Conformity in our Habits; we must be Pillars of Fire to guide others
out of the night of Ignorance and wilderness of Error: For are not the Priests
Lips to preserve Knowledge, and are not we to enquire of them what concerns our
Souls, for they are the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts. I shall conclude this,
only minding you of that Solemn Oath at our Installment into this Sacred
Office, That we would give Faithful diligence to Minister the Doctrine and
Discipline of Christ: For if the Lights of the Church be darkened, how great is
that Darkness! And what will be the House of Prayer but a Den, etc.

Thirdly, As there must be the Light of Doctrine, so also of Conversation in
the Priest; yes, and it must be Perspicuous too, that Religion and the Doctors
thereof may have a good Report amongst all men of whatever Sect or Persuasion,
that they may find no occasion to Revile, or Blaspheme us; Blaspheme us I say,
for in doing it unto us, they do it unto Christ; we have Motives sufficient to
incite us to a circumspect walking; For, waving the express command of our
Savior, let us consider how many Enemies we have in the World, who watch for
our Halting, and are so quick-sighted, that they discern the least Lint hanging
on a Black-Gown: No Cloth so subject to be discolored, as that of ours. Men
are not like that Pious Emperor, who would cover the Nakedness of his Clergy
with his own Royal Robe, but joyful to embrace every little occasion to render
us Contemptible.

This then should awaken us; but if this will not do, let us consider, how
absurd it is to undo that on the Weekday which we Preached on the Lords? Shall
we be diligent in Instructing of others, and we our selves remain Ignorant and
Foolish? Shall we speak brave flourishing words in commendation of Religion,
and reclaim Rhetorically against Vice; yet make it our Trade and Practice. The
Vrim and Thummim were both put into Aaron's Breast Plate, that he might be a
Living Sermon, as well as a Preacher of Sound Doctrine.

He who wanted an Eye, Hand, Foot, or had any blemish in his Body, was
forbidden by God to attend at his Altar; then much more sure polluted in Soul?
They who bear the Vessels of the Lord, must be Clean: Ye have made it a Den of
Thieves, was a great aggravation of the Churches Profanation.

Secondly, I descend to the Thieves, or Persons defiling Gods House: The first
of them, is he who crept into the Ministry without Commission; thus the Savior
of the World tells us, He who creeps into an House by the Window, the same is a
Thief and a Robber: And if so, what can he be styled less who thrusts himself
into the Priesthood, and not by the door of Lawful Authority? Thus to run
without Commission, is an Usurpation of that which none should take upon him,
but he that was called of God as was Aaron, by an External, as well as Internal
call. The Apostles were trained up a long time before Christ sent them on that
Employ; they were not sent to Preach the Word so soon as they were Enrolled
into the number of his Disciples, like hasty Births with Shells upon their
Heads, but they attended and waited for a full Authority and Commission: But
alas! Authority is now so much slighted and trampled on, that men fancy, if
they can but spare so much time from their Shops, they have Authority enough to
skip into the Office of the Priest; but are they not Thieves and Robbers, who
force themselves into the Ministry without License, or Abilities? they pretend
indeed to a large share of Spiritual Influences, which they resume will supply
all other Defects, and adapt them fit Ministers of the Gospel; which if true,
the House of Prayer would soon be made a Den of Thieves, for men would soon get
the knack and Cunning, to pretend a Call; and then by tedious Discourses of
Gods Grace, so Insinuate themselves into the Bosoms of men, that they would
easily be Deluded by them; others excuse their Illiterate rudeness by the
Honest, Plainness and Simplicity of the Apostles; but can they manifest such
Miraculous endowments, such Power, and Anointing from above as they were
furnished withal.

St. Paul in reference to this Holy Function, asked with trembling, Who is
sufficient for such Offices? But they invert the question, and cry, who is
insufficient? I leave it to your selves, is it probable that Farriers should
turn Expeperienc'd Physicians; much less that they who come from sordid
Mechanic Offices, can provide for men's Souls? All accomplishments of Reason,
Learning and Judgment are decry'd as Carnal, and Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, which makes me commend to you the Story of the Apes in the Fable, Who
because they had no Tails themselves, would have persuaded those who enjoyed
that Ornament to cut it off as troublesome and superfluous; your selves may
make the Application, and so I pass from the first to the second sort of
Thieves who trouble the House of God.

Secondly, They are those who rob God of his Titles, for it is a gross mistake
to think it is unto Us; no, it is unto God, they refuse to render the things
which are Gods; Thus you may hear God himself declare it, Will a man rob God?
yet ye have robbed me; But you say wherein have we robbed Thee, in Tithes and
Offerings? God takes the wrong wholly unto Himself, and the reason why he made
the Heavens Brass, and would not suffer Rain to descend upon the Earth, was
because they had given him no Tithes of the Fruits wherewith he had Blessed
them.

Thirdly, But as the People rob the Priest of his Tithes, so also the Priests
rob the People in not affording them Divine Service: That the Priest should
reap men's Worldly things, is unquestionable; so it is also required that they
should reap our Spiritual things; If therefore we either omit the reading these
Prayers commanded by the Church, or shrink them into a lesser compass, we
deserve no better Appellation than that of Thieves. As then, we are earnest for
all our Tithes, so let us be careful that God may have all his Prayers; for he
that will cut God short of them, will not fear to cut him short of any thing
else whatever.

Fourthly, There are many other Thieves which very much abuse the House of
Prayer; but I shall conclude all in naming the Churchwardens, and other
Officers, who are the Guardians of the Church; you are persons in whom the
Church repose her Confidence, that you will deal Faithfully with her in
presenting all Abuses, but how you discharge your Trust passes my
understanding; for none are ignorant many things are Presentable, but nothing
Presented, so that from hence especially, the Church is made a Den of Thieves;
For would men dare to separate from our Solemn Assemblies, if you were not so
remiss in your respective Duties? Will it not be a most piercing Wound to your
Consciences at the General Audit of God, that by your omitting to execute the
Laws of the Church our Holy Mother (as Medea did her Children) is rent into
several Limbs, Bitts, and Pieces? What can be more terrible to you, then to
consider, that through the neglect of You, the House of Prayer is made a Den of
Thieves.

Let me then beseech all who are entrusted with the Concernments of the Church,
to think they hear God speaking unto them, as he did unto Joshua, Wherefore lie
you on your Faces, up and be doing, take away the accursed Errors from amongst
you? Let the Laws be put in a severe Execution against all Dissenters from the
Church, for obstinacy must be Forced, not Courted by Peswasions, it is an Happy
Violence that pull men out of the Fire: They are Blessed Bonds, which tie men
to Christ, Comfortable Fetters, which keep our Feet in the ways of Peace; let
them style it Persecution, Persecution, God, I am sure, will take it well at
your hands, for it is his own method, to afflict the Body, that he may save the
Soul, which if we do, we shall see God will arise, and his Enemies be
scattered, then will the Glory of God be Exalted, Religion Flourish, and the
House of Prayer no longer a Den, but an House at Unity in it self; which that
it may, God Enlighten the Hearts of all in Authority Ecclesiastical and Civil,
that they may not be negligent in their Duties, but Strong and of good Courage
to Fight against them, who Fight against God, that there may be an advancement
of Religion, a composure of all Christian Animosities, that Peace and
Righteousness, Religion and Piety, may be Established among us for all
Generations, and let all who seek the Prosperity of Jerusalem, say, Amen, Amen.

A SERMON PROVING A Late, or Deathbed Repentance, no Repentance.
Psalm xcv. V. viii. To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts
--


SElf-Interest and Prudence, oblige and command us to guard and fortify our
selves, before the approaching Incursions of our mortal and malignant Enemy;
that we may the more effectually oppose, and briskly resist their forces.

He, who would not be constrained Cowardly to fly at the first Encounter of an
Invading Adversary, must be ready to Assail him before he has Entrenched
himself; least, when his Canons are placed, his Battering-pieces displayed, he
meet with a more vigorous and easy Repulse: That subtle Serpent the Devil, is
the Arch-enemy of all Mankind, if therefore we do not valiantly oppose, and
courageously bid defyance to all his Temptations at the first onset, by more
lessening Circumstances he will quickly become more Victorious over us, and
lead us into the strongholds of Sin.

He then, who is earnest to avoid this Slavery and be perfectly released from
such a Servitude, must in the Morning of his Age, grapple with the Old Man, and
expel him put of this flesh wherein he has so strongly Encamp himself, and
whilst we have the Recruits of Vigor and Strength to reinforce us. For it is a
Cessation of Arms that gives the Conquest to our Enemy, and if we do not repel
him in the Spring, and Flower of our Youth, in our greenest years; Oh! the
difficulty and hardness, we shall find to rally our decaying Spirits, in the
Winter of our Age when Snow is on our Heads, and Frost within our Veins!

Now then is the accepted time, This is the day wherein we must proclaim open
Wars-against that Inveterate Enemy of Mankind. For that Warrior of Hell
watches for Opportunities to lullaby us a sleep on the downy Beds of Sloth and
Security, thereby to gain those great advantages of a surprise; because he
knows, if we don't cheerfully attend upon the Ordinances of God, and make a
continued Progress in Holiness, we do certainly yield our selves Servants to
Sin, and are ensnared by these Nets he has privately laid to entrap men. For
when God perceives I make no good use of those Talents of Grace committed to my
Trust; not to my Trust as to keep them enwrapped in a Napkin, but to improve to
a further growing in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ;
which, if I don't, he then will most justly withdraw these his Graces, which I
have so foolishly mis-imployed; and harden my heart, as well to punish me for
my Wickedness, as also for my Folly; that then when I might have made use of
his supporting Grace to assist me, I did wilfully slight and neglect these
opportunities of growing from Grace to Grace; For to day if you will hear his
Voice harden not your Hearts.

In this Psalm the Sweet Singer of Israel insinuates an earnest Exhortation to
Laud and Magnify the Providence of God, in his Wise conduct of the World;
together with that Infinite Wisdom in contriving and managing the Illustrious
Fabric and economy of the Church both Triumphant and Militant; and then he
descends in v. 8. to exhort and admonish us not to Irritate and provoke him to
Anger, by our Impenitent Course, and persisting in Wickedness; but embrace
every opportunity of Obedience to his Voice, and of a perfect resignation to
his Service and Pleasure; least by a contempt and hardening our Hearts, we tire
and weary out the Patience of Heaven, till it punish us (as did those of Messah
and Meribah) by a Sclemn Protestation and Oath, We shall not enter into the
Land of Roast, or Heavenly Canaan.

The words are naturally so pregnant, I need not urge any thing therefrom, but
what presents of its own accord: I shall not then enlarge my Meditations
further, then to entertain you with this short Proposition.

That we must not in the least defer our Repentance, but instantly comply with
Obedience to that Voice which requires it of us, For to day if you will hear,
etc.

Solomon seriously considering the hard Province of a man to relinquish
habituated Vices, advises all in his Book of Ecclesiastes, To remember their
Creator in the days of their youth: For evident it is, nothing more difficult
for a man, when he has once set his Teeth on edge with the unwholesome Viands
of Sin, than to relish the Savoury Meats of Righteousness.

For Sin and Pleasure leave such a Tang and Hogoe in the mouths of Carnal men,
it renders so pleasant a gust to the Infirmities of Humane Nature, that a Camel
may as easily rush through the Eye of a Needle, as such a person be capacitated
for the Kingdom of Glory; to which sense are those excellent words of the
Prophet, Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots, Then may
you also do good, who are accustomed to do evil?

He therefore that defers his Repentance in the Summer of his Age, and will not
acknowledge his Sins whilst he has Strength, and Vigor, To resist the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, but involved them in the excuses and denial, and
clouds of Hypocrisy. He will not find it a slender task, when all Diseases and
the Evils of Age, shall muster up their forces in his Crazy-bones, when all his
wasting pleasures shall present their Items to his Bed rid view to find the
Comforts of Repentance then.

Many Doctors pertaining to the Roman Conclave, answering to the question, At
what time precisely a Sinner is obliged to Repent, affirm, At what time soever;
(for say they) the Precept of Repentance is of the same nature with that of
Baptism and Prayer; Nor this day, nor to morrow, is it absolutely necessary to
be Baptized, but sometime or other; and if I Pray an hour or half hence, the
duty of Prayer is performed as fully, as if I fell upon my Knees at the very
instant of the Proclamation. But with submission to better Judgments, I dare
boldly affirm, this assertion can neither be confirmed by Holy Writ, or any
Author, who Preach nothing but the Sineere Word of God. It Is true, I dare not
conceal it, God desires not the Death of a Sinner, but abundantly rather, that
he turn and Live: Yet if one, who has had the grand Blessing of Heaven to be
born in the Pale of his Church, who has the Sun shine of the Gospel always
beaming on him (whose Life engendring Rays are sufficient to warm and soften a
stony Heart; yes, And out of such stones to raise up Children unto Abraham) if
he will consume his Youth and Beauty in the Service of sin, wearing out the
gloss of his Life in open Hostility against God, and Rallying his Forces to
Bandy against the Almighty, neither will he accept of his Services, when he is
worn out with years, and has nothing to present him but the thin Furrows and
Wrinkles of Old Age.

I appeal to your selves, how just and reasonable it is for an Earthly
Potentate, who promise me, if I will submit to his Commands, and render an
entire Obedience to all his Precepts for the space of one year; at his
expiration, he will load me with Honors, and burden me with Riches; how just
is it for him to refuse me those Honors, and deny me those Riches, if I walk
contrary to his ways, and will not be obedient to the Dictates of his Laws? May
not then the Creator of Mankind, in like manner, withdraw the Graces we have so
foolishly imbezelled and misimploy'd.

For is it reasonable for me, professing Christianity to Ravel out the little
moment of this Life, in Sensual Pleasures and Delights, never taking a turn in
the Melancholy Shades of a Penitent Soul, to imagine God will reward my
Deathbed Sorrow, as a Godly Sorrow, when I have Prodigally spent all my
Sprightly Strength, in ranging the by-ways of Sin, and completing the Kingdom
of Satan; because he who expects a consummation of future Bliss, must have his
whole Life, and all his Actions free from every imputation and appearance of
Evil.

The great Shepherd of our Souls loves not a Spotted or Ring streaked Flock;
but our whole Lives must be an unchequered, and entire Holiness.

So soon as we have taken our Military Oath, and are Enrolled under Christ's
Banner, we must begin our Warfare against the World, Flesh and the Devil; not
having the most little and inconsiderable passage of our Life stained, or
sullyed by the dishonours of a dirty and unworthy Action; I mean not, that all
the circumstances of our Life, or whole retinue of our Actions can be as
uncorrupted as the Rays of the Sun, or as pure as the pure Sparklings of the
Whitestone, and Heavenly Jerusalem; no, but yet we may in some measure resemble
the Moon, in which Philosophers acquaint us, there are certain Macule, or
Spots, but no Deformities.

Whilst we are in this state of Imperfection, we cannot be so Clarified, as to
be free from all Indiscretions, Errors and Mistakes: Flesh and Blood are daily
attended by a numerous train of Sensual Objects, which causes us to dwell in
the neighborhood of Ungodliness; but then so soon as I am sensible of this
Defilement, or that Weakness, I must wash it away in the Tears of Repentance:
But if I persevere in my Wickedness, and never inquire of my Conscience what I
have done, I wilfully incur my own Damnation, because I am positively and
directly bound for to repent so soon as I know I have offended, For to day if
you will hear his Voice, etc.

Thus you see, if we would be Happy hereafter, we must not in the least defer
our Repentance, but that is further urged by these following Reasons.

First, The first Reason is drawn from the end and intention of God, in
commissioning the Dispensors of his Word, To lift up their Voices like
Trumpets, to declare to Jerusalem their Sins, and to Judah their
Transgressions: For wherefore is all this, if not to Alarm us into a present
actual Obedience? For does God authorize those who attend at his Altar, to
Thunder against our Sins, and incite us to Repent, and does he not intend we
should repent on that day he calls for it? Dare the Prophets and Ministers of
Righteousness, bid us repent next year? Have they any Commission will warrant
them to say, It is very well and expedient to repent to day, but you incur no
danger to defer it to a longer time, or more convenient season, till you are
well stricken in years, and your Heads Crowned with a Silver Crown of Hoary
Hairs? If it be thus, to what end do we Preach? If this be the drift of Pulpit
Discourses, wherefore are they made? Does not God require our exact Obedience?
Does not he expect my Morning and Evening Sacrifices of Prayer and
Thanksgiving? And can I offer this unto him, unless I seriously Repent? No
certainly; so long then as I remain Impenitent, I deny my self the Honorable
Title of being the Servant of God, To day therefore, etc.

Secondly, But then secondly, does not God every day dart some Beams of his
Grace upon me? Do not he incessantly knock at the door of my heart, so long as
the day of Salvation begins not to decline? Does not he send his Spirit to
Invite, his Arguments to persuade, and his Mercies to Enamour me of the Beauty
of Holiness? And are these things to be Played withal, or set light by? Is it
not a Sin, once to resist the Holy Spirit, and don't I resist it, who remember
I have sinned, and know it does incense my God, yet I continue so presumptuous
as not to repent at the pleading guilty in my Conscience? Now is not he who
resists the Grace of God, ten, twenty, or thirty years, a much more Notorious
Offender, than he who opposed it twenty days, and so on to twenty hours, and
twenty minuits? The longer God has patiently waited for our Repentance, much
more infinitely disobliged is he, if we don't Repent: How can I senselesly
imagine his Anger would increase, if our sins were not multiplied? Besides,
must not I repent of my resisting Gods Grace, of my refusing to Hear, of my
none-Attendance and neglect of the means of Salvation? Must not I give
diligence to make my Calling and Election sure? Must not I strive to enter in
at the strait Gate? And why all these Exhortations and Incitements to Holiness,
if there be no Duty to be performed? To what intent serve all the Terrors and
Asrightments of Hell, if not to persuade men to avoid all the dismal Horrors
and Consequences thereof? Wherefore are all the Promises of Eternal Life, and
Crowns of Glory, if not to encourage, as well as to reward Obedience? And what
can be reckoned a Contempt of Heaven, if this be not, that when God by his
Preventing, his Exciting, his Encouraging, and his Assisting Graces to invite
us to Repentance. We, notwithstanding all, will not Mourn for our Sins, nor be
Sorrowful for our Offenses.

This is that wherewith God upbraided the Obstinacy of his People, Because I
have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my Hand, and no man regarded;
but ye have set at naught all my Councils, and would have none of my Reproof; I
will therefore laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes, Prove.
1.25, 26, 27. Tell me now, is not every Calling of great moment and concern,
and consequently is not every slighting of it Criminal and dangerous, and does
not God Call upon us daily? Let us put these things together, and then we may
derive this Natural consequence, that he who Sins and does not speedily Repent,
at least Sin twice; and every day we defer it, is a more completed Provocation
to urge the Lord of Hosts, to enter into the Armoury of his Wrath, and utterly
consume us, to which sense are those excellent words of St. Paul,

Despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and long
Suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance,
Romans 2.3. That is,

Every Action of Gods Loving Kindness, and forbearing to punish our Sinful
Courses, is an Argument for, and a Motive to Repentance; and our not stretching
forth our Hand to lay hold on this Tree of Life, our refusing to wash in this
River Jordan, our not being Reformed or made better by it, is styled by the
Apostle, A despising his Goodness, and every non-repented day, a Treasuring up
Wrath, against the day of Wrath: For, if we wilsully persist in our obdurate
resisting all these methods of Divine Mercy, it will certainly add greater
weight to our ruin, when God shall punish or reward according to our Actions;
To day therefore if you will hear his, etc.

Yet Oh! the stupidity of Mankind! So dull and careless, are we to apprehend
our future good and advantage, that we wax Old in Sin, and Gray in Iniquity; we
judge the hours of our Life glide and vanish away too nimbly for the acting of
our Sin, but comes too fast for our Repentance. In my private Meditations and
close Retirements into my own Breast, I have Christianly commiserated; yea, my
heart has even bled, at a man Rightly Principled in Religion, able to
Administer Sage Council to others, Discreet enough to conduct the various
Intrigues of a Family, Prudently resolved concerning the Interests of this
Life; entering Gods-House every Sunday or Festival, giving great Attention to
the Dispensors of Gods word, the Sermons of the Gospel, and the soft murmurings
of the Holy Spirit: Men who understand the woeful Estate of them, who die
without Absolution and Remission of their Sins, who are not insensible, that
the Wrath of God, like the Punishment of Cain, is greater than we can bear, yet
inevitably incident on all them who prevent it not by opportune Repentance.

Is it not a lamentable and doleful sight, to observe men, so well qualified
for Virtue, and a Pious Life, daily Sinning against God, entering into all
Temptations, and as it were, Ornare Diabolum, Become Learned Spoils to the
Enemy of our Salvation, yet never think on Repentance, but resolves to venture
for it till the last Breath, and for its acceptance too at so untimely a Season.

For, it is first a great hazard whether God will then assist me with so much
Grace as to Repent; which if he do, I then secondly, run the venture of an
After game, whether that Repentance will be acceptable by him; because without
Controversy it cannot be perfected. For if Holy Writ, by a true Repentance,
understand and mean an Amendment and Reformation of Life, as certainly it does:
Then tell me, what difference is there, not to Repent at all, or not to begin
it, till the last Thread of Life be a Spinning: For, how can I Amend, Reform,
or lead a new course of Life; when alas! poor Creature that I am! I am no
longer to be! To day therefore, etc.

Thirdly, Are not all the Leaves of the Book of Life Exhortatory Persuasions to
a speedy Repentance? For where God commands me to Pray, there he urges to
Repentance; because otherwise, my Prayer would be defective, and render no
sweet smelling Savor in the Nostrils of God.

Nay without Repentance, I pronounce it impossible to Pray to God with that
Ardour and Zeal we are obliged: For, to Pray aright, is to cast away all
Affections to Sin, the least Glances to Temptations, to be Sorry we have
Sinned, with a full Resolution never to be Guilty of the like Transgression, or
the same Madness; and thereupon Solomon declared, The Prayer of the Wicked is
an abomination to the Lord: Yea, consult Truth it self, and you may hear it
declaring, I hate your Burnt Offerings, my Soul loathes your Solemn Assemblies;
bring me no more vain Oblations: They are adjudged vain and loathsome, because
not perfumed with the sweet Incense of Repentance. Thus you may hear the man in
the Gospel declaring, God hears not Sinners, John 9.31. (that is) Those who
have sinned, and have not yet repented; being unhappy in their hasty Sin, much
more miserable in their slow Repentance.

An Impenitent person Soiles and Discolours every otherwise well approved
Action, he Envenomes and Poisons even the very Mercy of God: For, if such a man
Pray, what is it esteemed more, than Howling? If he Mourn, what is it more,
than hanging down the Head like a Bullrush? If he Sacrifice, what is it, but
the cutting off a Dogs neck? If he rejoice, what is such mirth, But a Blaze and
Crackling of Thorns under the Pot? For God regards and gives ear to none but
the Penitent, on which account you may observe, Christ commanding us to Pray,
and instructing us what we should Pray for, enjoins us every day, To Pray for
the remission of our Sins; Mat. 6.10, 11. We cannot request our daily Bread,
unless we beg a daily forgiveness of our Sins. So likewise Holy David in the
Text, and St. Paul from the Psalmist in his Epistle to the Hebrews, To day if
you will hear, etc. Not only strictly commanding us, not to put off our
Repentance one day, but also affirming, every such delay is an act of
Obduration, and so a new sin is added to the old. So often then as I meditate on
those Melodious Words, and Charming Eloquence, of the Son of Syrach, I seemed
to hear all the bright morning Stars and Sons of Glory, calling to us below, to
make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and to put not off from day to day, for
sudainly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shall
be destroyed, and perish in the day of Vengeance, Ecclesiasticus 5.7.

For every day of our Life, may probably be adjudged the day of our Burial; for
what is it more than the Life of Roses, which in the Evening make a Tomb, of
that Scarlet which was its morning Ornament and Glory? What reason therefore
can be more prevalent than this, to provide the best Arguments we can for our
Justification before Death; because God frequently smites Sinners in their
Confidences, he strikes them in their Securities, in their Delays, they may
meet with a Surprise; in their Procrastinations, they may be frustrated of
their Hopes, and Death may rob them of the Benefits and Advantages of to
morrow. For what is bold man, (as some confidently speak) to resolve not to
Repent till Christmas, Easter, Whitsontide, next Communion, or such prefixed
Festival and Seasons: Alas! poor Dust and Ashes that we are! How probable is it
whilst we revolve such Thoughts in our mind, an Imposthume, Swelling in our
Head or Breast, may make us big with Death?

How probable is it, some popular Disease raging in our Streets, may slay him
in three days time? May not to morrows Dinner breed a Surfeit, or this nights
Intemperance a Fever, How often do we see Death riding Triumphant in our
Dwellings, and Crowned with the Spoils of many numbers of Men? Alas! it is
impossible to enumerate all the possibilities of dying Suddenly, or the
Probabilities how soon our Lives may be ravel'd out to its utmost Thread: For
though we flatter our selves in the Plentiful-lest hopes of a Gaudy Fortune,
Death may meet every one of us, with a Thou Fool, this night shall thy Soul be
taken from thee. Let any one therefore, who has any thing besides the Shape
and Lineament of a Man, but really acknowledge, that he is Mortal; let him but
confess himself to be a man, and subject to the Accidents of Mortality; and
that very Confession, must be a confutation of them who defer their Repentance.
For, I appeal to your selves, Is it reasonable for me, who confess my self a
Sinner, and am persuaded of a Supreme Existence, and believe, that he knows I
am a Sinner, and will Infallibly punish me for my Sins, if not washed away with
the Tears of Repentance; can I be thought Rational, and in my Wits, if I defer
it, unless upon the confidence of a long Life? And grant my Supposition, should
the promising my self many days promote a Life and state of Impenitency? Is it
so intolerable to live Virtuously? Is the Yoke of Christ so uneasy? Are the
Commandments of God so Grievous? Will to live Righteously, Soberly and Godly in
this present World, quite strip us of our pleasant days, and make us wast our
Hours in a Moross Austerity or Sullen Gravity? Or are the hopes of Life
intended for no other purpose than to delay our Sin, and defer our Repentance;
God forbid, for such premises cannot be guilty of a worse Conclusion. However,
he that seriously meditates on those many numbers of men; who, like little
Blossoms, are Cropped by the Scythe of Death in the Tenderness of their Age, will
have but small reason to consent to these evil purposes from such weak and
contingent Principles.

I cannot tell the precise Minuit of my Death, or take an exact measure of this
Span of Life; and then, to defer my Repentance, is a Sham put upon my own Soul,
and a contempt of all the Divine Revelations of Heaven and Hell.

(...), make no League of Confederacy with time, because there is nothing more
like to to deceive Humane Nature, then such a fickle uncertainty; and therefore
God threatened the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, saying, Repent for I will
come unto you qui^kly, and remove the Candlestick out of its place, unless you
do Repent; that is, unless you Repent quickly, I will come quickly, and who
knows how soon that may be to me Preaching, or you Hearing? Is it not therefore
great Prudence, as well as Charity to our Souls, to be Providently Industrious,
that his coming to us prevent not our return to him; for which we can never
enjoy good security, unless we embrace a speedy Repentance. And Oh! the mighty
Influence! it would have upon our Lives, if the consideration might sink into
our Hearts of those many numbers of Persons, as Good, as Wise, as Daring and
Confident: Yes, and by the circumstances of Health, as likely to Live as we;
yet have been snatched away, by a Death so sudden, that their very deferring
their Repentance but one day, nay but one hour, may have proved their Eternal
ruin.

Had they but Repented the day before, it would have looked like a design of
Grace, and an act of Election, and have rendered their condition Hopeful.

If we seriously weigh such considerations in our breast, we shall conclude it
necessary, in the highest degree, that we make neither loitering, nor stay in
our being reconciled unto God; because one hours, nay minuits stay, may not
only by a peradventure, but in a real and true event of things, prove to be one
of these Sins, called the Sins against the Holy Ghost, I mean, final
Impenitency.

For, as I who die young, and in the prime of my strength and vigor, am as
really dead, as he who dies after an Age of 40, 50, or 60 years Travel; so is
that Impenitency final, under which I am Arrested by Death in the very birth,
and infancy of my Crimes, as much as if I had laid Bedridden in my Repentance, be
snatched from hence to die Eternally in Hell.

The Evil is not of so black a dye, the Judgment is not of so severe a stamp,
but equally as Fatal, equally as irreversible, as the Decrees and Sentences of
Damnation on those who are held in Chains until the Judgment of the great day.

Moreover, may we not observe the stupid foolishness of man, to slight and
neglect those best opportunities of Repenting, whilst the Marrow swells in our
Bones, our Blood be hot, and boils within our Vains, when we are best capable
of performing the several Duties of it, then to put it off till we grow Crazy
and Infirm; for are Dim Eyes, Deaf Ears, Pale Visage, Decayed Teeth, Withered
Skin, Stinking Breath, Furred Pipes, Trembling Knees, Fumbling Hands, Falling
Feet, a Stammering Tongue, and a Rattling Throat; fit Qualifications and
suitable Embelishments for one rendering an Account to the Impartial Judge of
Heaven and Earth? To day therefore if you will hear his Voice, etc.

Fourthly and Lastly, When a man warps from the direct path of Virtue, it is
obvious and common to rebuke him; for every Sober, and Honest person is
covetous and desirous, that his unhappy Friend or Acquaintance should forsake
his pursuit in Wickedness, and leave off his course in Impiety: We therefore
require him to be sorry for his Sin, to detest and hate his Crime, resolving
for the future never to be guilty of the like Enormity.

Now, I pray consider, wherefore is all this, if not upon the same account that
God does it; because to persist in it, cannot possibly be good, but to
relinquish it, very advantageous; to dwell or tarry therein is dangerous, and a
state of Evil; and to choose to dwell there, what is it, but an Act of Love to
that state, and consequently impossible to be free and void of offense? And not
to Repent, when by good Admonitions I am forewarned of my danger, is a desire
to abide there; and when I consider, and know that I have Sinned, and am not
absolved of mine Iniquities, then does Gods Spirit, and the Principles of our
Religion mind me of my danger, and threaten my Ruin, if I perversely venture
my self on such dangerous Precipices; so that the Conclusion is undeniable, no
man can so much as remember he has sinned (and remain Impenitent) without an
Addition, or at least a Repetition of the same Sin.

But then is not our Natural and Inbred disposition to incite others, a potent
Argument, that the same obligation binding them, commands it of every one of us
in our own particular?

Seeing we all pretend to flatter our selves, as capable of giving good
Council, will it not stain our Wisdom, if our selves refuse to follow the
Dictates of our own Sage Advices? Now then is the accepted time, this is the
day of Salvation.

Thus a famous Champion of Christianity piously confirmed his Resolutions, and
at last fixed on such a present actual Obedience; for nothing could end his
questions, and compose the rufflings of his Conscience, but to interpret the
Precept of Repentance in the (...), the very present juncture, and at no time
else.

Differens dicebam modo, ecce mode, sine Paululum, sed modo and modo non
habuerat modum.

I would Anon, and against the next Week, against the next Communion, or
against the Festival, but there was no end of this; Subfico igitur me stravi
flens, Quamdiu, quamdiu, Cras, and Cras, quare non modo, quare non hac hora
finis Turpitudinis mei?

I Wept, and said, how long shall I say to morrow? How long shall I say till
the next Communion? Why not now? Why should I not by an immediate Repentance
put a close and period to my Crime? If not till to morrow, or the next
Festival, there is as great an Argument for every day of our Life in which we
can say to morrow.

There is enough that can determine us to day, but there is nothing that can
determine us to morrow! If it be not necessary now, it will not be convenient
then, or ever likely to be expedient, so long as there be a Morrow-morning to
our Life.

He therefore, who desires the welcome of a Faithful and diligent Servant, must
be early at his Work, and begin forthwith to do the Will of his Father which is
in Heaven. To which purpose, I have somewhere read one advising us to imitate
the Example of the Thief upon the Cross. To do as he did.

Yes, we are easily decoyed by the Subtilty of our Enemy to do as he did; I
mean defer our Repentance unto the last gasp of breath, having the great
Encouragements of his happy success. Alas! no we don't follow his steps! Thrice
Happy men were we! If we did resemble Him in his Repentance. For, I will dare
to aver, he did not defer his Repentance until the last, for so soon as early
Beams of the Sun of Righteousness peeped through the Curtains of his
Infidelity, and shined in his Heart, he embraced his Savior with the Arms of
Faith, believed on him, and was really Converted; so soon as he heard of a
Christ, he confessed him a Savior, and without the least hesitation, or delay,
Repented him of his former misspent Actions. And if we Transcribe his Copy, we
must Repent so soon as we hear Christ Preached unto us, and then our Repentance
is unreprovable, but otherwise our Damnation is unavoidable.

Why art thou so dull and drowsy then, O sinful Creature? What phrensey
possesses thee, thus to defer thy Repentance? Can this delay consist with any
Christian Grace? With Faith, Hope and Charity? With Prudence or Piety? With the
Love of God, or of our own Souls? Thus to withstand the shock of the Thunder,
to oppose the mouth of the Canon, and dare the Omnipotents Anger? All which are
the dreadful effects of an Impenitent Heart, for God hates him, who grows fat
in his Sin, and waxes Lusty in his Transgressions; And is it so idle, so
indifferent a concern, to be detested by the Fountain of Love and Goodness?

When the little Son of Alexander saw a Company of Thieves Pilfering his
Fathers House, and carrying away the Rich Vessels of Gold, and Attick Talents,
the Child Smiled and Whipped his Top; But when a Boy, who accompanied the
Thieves, robbed him of his little Instrument for Sport, he could then cry out,
raising the Neighborhood, and discovering the Thieves.

Thus, and much more Childish is he, who Plays and Sports himself in the
Caresses of Sin, and in the Interim his Soul is stolen away by that Goliath of
Hell, who gives us Toys and Pebbles, the more easily to Delude, and Cosen us
of this our most precious Jewel. How would such a man be transported with Fury,
and Rage, at the loss of his Goods? Is he not too Jealous of his Fortunes to
commend one hour to the Pidelity of Thieves? Would he venture his Body two
Minuits in the reach of an Enraged Lion? Yet, how unconcernedly! does he permit
his Soul to be snatched away by that Roaring Lion, who goes about seeking what
Souls he may devour! He leaves it in pawn to that great Tyrant, Months and
Years, in a danger so amazing, it would even Stagger and Distract, all the
Reason of Mankind could it possibly be understood but half so great as in
reality it is.

It Is reported, the Emperor Augustus wondered how a Roman Gentleman could have
his Senses so strongly bound by the Silken Chains of Sleep, having contracted
so great Debts, as he had not wherewith to satisfy his Creditors; having
therefore exposed his House-hold-stuff to Sale, the Emperor would needs buy
the Pillow yielding so Sweet Repose and Rest.

How then may we admire the Supine negligence of them, who usually go to Bed,
expecting a soft Slumber to steal upon their Eyes, when they are Infinitely
Indebted to God by their Sins, yet seldom or never examine their Accounts, or
prove Supplicants to the Throne of Grace, that God would Pardon their Sins, and
do away their Offenses.

What is it then, O dull and and finful Soul, which makes thee thus confident
in thy State? What Evasion can thou make for thy Non-repentance? What excuse
for this Progress in Sin, and little regard of its Remission? Do thou say,

Thou confessest thy self a Sinner of no small degree, but God is Merciful and
you hope for Salvation through that Mercy, and the Merits of Jesus Christ?
These, though the common, yet are but weak Arguments for Christians
expectation; for though without Controversy, God is a God of Mercy, and easily
entreated; still he is a God of Justice, expecting to be feared: As he is my
Father, he will be compassionate, but as he is my Sovereign, he must be obeyed.
Christ, I acknowledge, has abundantly satisfied for the Redemption of all
descending from the loins of Adam; But must we therefore neglect the means of
Salvation, and the end of our Hopes, Eternal Life?

Come, tell me I beseech you, wherefore did Christ die and shed his Blood, was
it only for your and my Pardon; did He bear the Cross, that We might bear none?
Or was it the design of his Death to get us a Dispensation from Holy Living? Or
rather, was not this his end and purpose, by keeping us from dying, to make us
alive to God? By denying himself, to invite us to take up our Cross, and follow
him, and not to procure us a Liberty to execute our Will and Pleasure?

St. Peter confirms this Doctrine, For he died, that we being dead to Sin
should live unto Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. So that unless we live to
Righteousness, his Scourges will not save us from the Lash: His Crucifixion
will be insignificant unto us, if we do not Crucify our Carnal Appetites; nor
will his Death ransom us from dying, if our Sins still live.

For can we think so dishonorable of Christ, as to make him a Cherisher of
such Traitors? Does he take care for their Protection, and set up a Sanctuary
to which they may boldly flee? Is the Altar of the Cross an Asylum, or Refuge,
for those who gather themselves together against the Lord, and against his
Anointed. Are the unmanly Sensualities of the World so highly favored by God,
that he will send his Legate, a Latere, Son from his Bosom to die in defense,
and behalf of them? How gross a mistake is this! when the Pardon and
Forgiveness of our Sins, was not so much intended by the Death of Christ, as
the Purifying of our Hearts and Lives; and therefore St. Paul (as well as the
other mentioned place of St. Peter) tells us, That Christ gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from this present World, (that is) By showing his
willingness to pass by our Faults, he would even melt and win us to acknowledge
our Trespasses, to repent of them, and for the future to become more Dutiful
and Obedient.

Up then quickly, O Elijah, Eat and Drink, for thou have a great Journey to go:
Let us up Sirs, and be doing, and not Prorogue so weighty a business any
longer, endeavoring only to Reform; when alas! frail Creatures! We must cease
to be! -- 'Twill be too late to say, Father I have Sinned, when it will be only
Seasonable to cry, Corruption thou art my Father?

For, they are not a few Death bed Sighs will waft us over to these Elysium
Fields: They are not a few Momentary Groans and Mournful Lamentations will
Capacitate us fit Candidates for the new Jerusalem. Oh! the Horror and
Amazement! which will benum our Senses, when Death shall make its sudden
Addresses to us, and summon us from our Beds of Security to appear before God
at the Tribunal of Justice!

Will it not be too late to say then, Lord I Repent, when an Impartial and
Severe Judge is ready to pronounce, A go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire? Oh!
Consider this all ye that forget God! Oh! Consider this, all ye who forget your
Souls are Immortal! And now, Before the Night comes when no man can Work; Let
us earnestly and humbly beseech him, whose Nature and Property is always to
have Mercy, and to Forgive, to receive our Humble Petitions: And though we be
tied and bound with the Chain of our Sins, yet let the Pitifulness of thy great
Mercy loose us, O Lord, for the Honor of Jesus Christ our Mediator and
Advocate. Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED ON Romans vii. V. xv. last words. -- What I hate, that do I.
SO great and fatal was the overthrow of the Sons of men in their Original
Apostasy from their God, that the whole Creation even Sigh and Groan under it.

For, though it is true, God first raising the Structure of Mankind out of
nothing built it most completely and proportionably, there were no Errata's to
be found, nothing of Imperfection, but all Fair and Lovely.

What an Accurate Harmony! what an Immaculate Beauty was found in him! A just
and Regular Tendency, without the least Swerving or Deviation; for he had no
inclination or proness to Evil: For though his Body was not Beautified equally
with those, which are Glorified, yet it was Dutyful and Obedient, and never
remiss in paying its due Homage to the Soul.

The very Sensitive Powers were neither Factious or Seditious, but willingly
subject to the Higher Powers, the Intellectual; there were no violent motions
or perturbations, which since have bred such Phantacisms and Insurrections in
the Soul; In a word, no Passion which had any tendency to Sin: May we not then
stand amazed, may we not then admire? How so Beautiful a Creature should be
soon withered? How that fragrant Breath God breathed into Adam should be so
soon corrupted? Shall I censure the untowardness of his Will for this defect?
Would not that be unjust, when it yielded so entire an observance to all the
Dictates of his understanding? Or what? Shall I fault the understanding? Would
not this suppose him maliciously, and on purpose to sin against God contrary to
the sense of his own Judgment? And shall I entertain a thought so
dishonorable to the first root, from whence I derive my Being? shall I make
his Offense nothing inferior to that of the Apostate Angels thrown into Misery
irrevocable? -- Let us rather presume, that this understanding was defective in
its office by a negligent Non-attendance; for though the Eye was clear enough,
yet it was not sufficiently vigilant; though the Balance was not deceitful,
yet Adam forgot to weigh things therein, and so was despoiled, not only in all
those Supernatural Endowments, but even wounded in all those Natural Capacities
he had, to remain in an Innocent and Sinless state. Yes, and those sower Grapes
he Eat, have so edged his Childrens Teeth, that they cannot perform what they
would, but in an impulsive manner are driven and spurred on by propentions, To
do what they hate.

With how great Virtue soever a Soul is fortified, Humane Nature has
Weaknesses it cannot disavow; and how great resistance soever it make, through
Principles of Virtue against irregular motions, yet if it be not supported by
an especial Endowment and Providence, it must at sometimes yield and give most
visible marks of Frailty; for the passions have got such an Empire over us,
that we cannot shake them off, so long as we remain in a state of Nature, and
not of Grace; and therefore the Author of our Text speaking of the Imbecilities
of men, he means as they are Naturally descended from Adam, and not as they are
Enobled by the Favors of Heaven through Jesus Christ.

For, though it is true, so long, as I am a mere man, Unbaptized, and in a
state of Carnality, I dwell in the Regions of Death, so that I cannot act
according to Grace, but sense. Yet when I am redeemed by the Blood of Christ, I
am no longer in the Dominions of Sin; I am no longer a slave, but Christ's freed
man, he has Manumiz'd me, and set me at Liberty, so that I cannot then
Complain, What I hate, that do I.

In the Prosecution of my Discourse, I shall first show you the true and
genuine Cause of man's Imbecility; That he cannot do, but what he hates.
Secondly, A possibility, yea absolute necessity of his Conquest over these
Enemies of his Salvation. Thirdly, I shall answer an Enquiry. And lastly make
Application.

First, We begin with the Causes of Humane Imbecilities, and though they are
many, such as bad Education, evil Habits, Customs and the like; yet I shall
bend my Discourse to the Primary one, Natural Corruption.

For such is the Imbecility of our Nature, ever since Adam, either to gratify
his Sensual Appetite, or (as I rather persuade my self) out of a complacent
humor toward his young Mistress in the Garden, tasted of the forbidden Fruit,
that we are incapacitated to give Life and Birth so much as to one good
Thought: Holy David was very sensible thereof, when he cries out, I was
conceived in Sin, Psalm. 51.5.

From the first instant of my Conception, Sin seized on me; and though that
Lineal stain was cleared by Circumcision under the Law, and now by Baptism
under Dispensation of the Gospel; yet there still remains a Propensity to Sin,
which grows up with me, gaining strength through the whole course of my
Adolescence.

For many years of my Age slide away, before I arrive at that ripeness to
distinguish between Good and Evil; in the Series of which time I follow without
stop, or hesitation the Dictamens of Sense; so that at the first unclasping the
Windows of my Understanding, at the first peeping forth of any Rays of Light to
dispel the Darkness had overspread my Intellectuals I discover a Law
Anathematizing all my former Practices, the which by many re-iterated and
continued Acts are so wrought into Habit, that to break them, I must (as it
were) mould my self into another Nature. This considered, together with the
Dreggs and Relics of Corruption Original Sin leaves behind, I wonder not our
Apostle declare, What I hate, that do I.

For this Fumes, or scattered Seed of Original Sin has a double Effect; one,
an Inclination to that which is Evil, the other a backwardness to, or a
declining from that which is good: And therefore St. Paul tells us, He found a
Law in his Body contradicting that of his Reason.

For though without Controversy Sin may be washed away by the Sprinkling of
Water, and the Holy Ghost: Nevertheless to perfect a Cure, that I feel neither
the Spice nor Itching thereof, is, in a manner impossible; at least, it
requires a long course of Remedies by a constant exercise and trial in Virtuous
Actions. For what is Sin, but

An Inordinate and Habitual Concupiscence in the Sensitive part; so radicated,
that it becomes, as it were, a Portion of Nature? Whence Seneca did affirm,
Virtues are rarely, or never acquired without a Master, but we quickly grow
expert in Vice without the help of any Teacher. All which proclaims the
pernicious consequences of our first Parents Offense.

Nay further, let us look into our Breasts, and tell me I Pray, are not you,
and I, sensible, that many Actions we do are highly Offensive to the God whom
we Worship, and injurious to our own Souls; yet still we are hurried on by that
violent vehemence of Natural Inclinations we cannot but Act them.

Thus the Poet brings in Medea speaking, I understand, says she, that the
(utting, or Tearing my little Babes into bitts and pieces, is a most horrid
Crime, and I ought not to commit it, but my Passion overcomes my Reason. Thus
he in the Tragedy did confess, I am not ignorant of those things thou
Admonishest me against, I am satisfied I ought not to be guilty of them, but my
Nature forces me contrary to my Opinion. And what was this smart Doom, a
proness to do Evil, but a just retaliation for our Disobedience! For since the
Soul had been Disobedient to her Creator, what higher Justice could there be,
than that the Body in requital should rise up in Rebellion against the Soul,
and punish her by the same Engines she had made use of in her prevarication.

Flesh and Blood may censure it hard and severe, but it is not most just, that
God should punish Millions of men, for the Transgression of one?

For seeing (if Adam had been Obedient) that transcendant Happiness promised to
him, had been Entailed on you, and me, and all his Posterity; why should not I,
and you, and all that descend from that Fountain, share (by his Fall) in the
Pain due to his Transgression? It may indeed fill us full of doubts and
perplexities to consider man in this tottering condition, that he cannot do the
good he desires, or flee from the Evil he hates and abominates; because we know
not by what strange bewitching means our Will (impaired by sin) is hampered in
a kind of necessity; yes, and in such a manner, as neither the necessity,
(because voluntary) can plead excuse for our consent; nor can the Will being
allured, scarce break through the necessity, because this necessity is in a
sort voluntary. How can I resemble it better, than to a kind of Amorous
Violence working by Flattery, and Flattery by Force; Whence the Will, having
once consented to Sin, can hardly dis-engage her self, nor yet find Arguments
enough to excuse what she has done. No marvail then that Job complains, Lord I
suffer Violence, it is only you who impose, the necessity can Answer for me.
And a little after he cries, O thou Ruler of men, why have thou set me against
thee?

I have read Philo the Jew speaking of Original Sin, gives it a term of
Infinity, That being once set on a flame, can never be extinguished; it is an
Immortal Evil, by no Death or Desolation to be destroyed.

Search I pray into your selves, and there you will find the truth of this
Philosophy: For though Baptism has cleared the Channel, so as the streams of
Grace may run, yet there are certain Exhalations issuing from that Corruption,
always ready to fall and Embody with the Current; so that, if there be not a
continual care and sifting, it will be morally impossible to preserve our Souls
pure and unspotted.

How plentifully are we furnished with the Examples of those, who conceited
themselves like Cedars, elevated to an high pitch of Virtue (by a presumption
of their own strength) engaging themselves in hazardous Trials, have been
ignominiously blasted, and reduced to the poor fate of a weak shrub? Lucifer
enamoured of his own Perfections, and by his saucy Affectation of a Parity with
God, became the most Abject of Creatures. Did you never read St. Peter,
promising wonders of his constant Fidelity to his Master, yet he sufficiently
testified (by that shameful denial of him) what man is void and destitute of
the supports and aids of Grace?

The Charms of Dalilah, the Powers of Bathesba, or the Conquering Eyes of the
Daughters of Egypt, could not be resisted by that Triumvirate of Holy Worthies,
Sampson, David or Solomon.

How sensible was Holy Job, that Prodigy of Humane Constancy, of the Proclivity
of Humane Nature to that which is evil, insomuch he falls with bitterness upon
the very day in which he was born, Wishing it might perish, and never be
reckoned among days in the course of the Zodiac.

Nay, may not that Royal Prophet come in for a sad example, may not his
Confession, I was conceived in Sin, serve a monument to Posterity, that they
may reflect, what man is, from the first instant of his Conception, and though
he may be raised and enobled by Gods Favor; yet he tells us, what we must
trust to when left to our selves, Upon the substraction of thy Spirit, O Lord,
we sink and resolve into the dust, from whence we came all covered, and besme
ared with the stains of Sin.

Now judge, what higher Justice can there be, that because man in Paradise did
not do, what he could, and might have done, he should now out of Paradise have
a desire to do that he is not able to perform?

It Is nothing strange then, St. Paul cries, Like a Captive, (...); What I hate,
that do I,

An Expression, which might terrify the most daring of the Sons of men, was it
not sweetened by that Confession of his, That there is a Power of Grace
contradicting this Predominancy of Nature, and therefore he warns us, (...),
Romans 6.12. Not to let Sin reign in our Mortal Bodies, intimating, That though
there be Seeds of Tumults and Seditions sowed within us, yet we have Arms and
Strength sufficient (if we adhere to God) to crush and frustrate all their
insolences.

Which is the second Particular.
Secondly, The Favourite-Disciple has declared, He that says he has not
sinned, is a Liar; But what of all this? Cannot Sin be avoided? Must we commit
it always? Cannot the Works of the Devil be destroyed? Have thou sinned, do so
no more, was the Aphorism of Ben-Sirah; And said Christ, Behold thou art made
whole, sin no more, John 5.14.

Now what idle? what Impertinent Admonitions are they, if we cannot suppress
those Traitors which labor to undo us? Why do we solemnly Assemble our selves
together? Why are we attentive to the Preachings of the Gospel? Why do we, who
are styled the Watchmen of Israel, spend our Breath, and our Lungs? Is it only
to tickle our Ears and exhort us to Impossibilities? Or rather, is it not to
inform us, that strong Resolutions; and serious Promises of Amendment, may
baffle the Temptations of the Devil, and rout a whole Army of such
Uncircumcised Philistines, as have set themselves in Battle Array against our
Happiness? For, as in the state of Nature, nothing of God dwells in us, so when
Christ reigns and rules in our Hearts, none other shall be Lord over us.

The Ark, and Dagon cannot stand together, neither can I serve God and Belial;
But he that is born of God overcomes the World. This is impossible to them who
remain in a state of Nature, but what Nature cannot do, will be effected by the
Blessed Influence of the Holy Spirit; what we cannot do for our selves, God can
do for us, and with us. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens
me, not of my self, but by the Grace of God cooperating with me; God and man
can do it together; So that if it can be accomplished by any of those means God
has put into my Power, will not the Natural conclusion be this, that my good
will, and intentions will not be taken in commutation, for the zeal and actual
mortification of my Sins?

He that sins, and flatters himself to sin contrary to his Will, and against
his Inclination; may justly conclude his Heart to be Treacherous and False; for
is it possible for me to Pray for a Deliverance, and not have the event of my
Petitions, unless I ask amiss? Shall a man Labor, and his Labors not Crowned
with a Prosperous Success, unless he Labors Deceitfully? It is therefore gross
absurdity, for a man to Hugg and Cokes himself with the fond conceit, his Heart
is good, his Intentions Honest, and though he sometimes fall, it is a slip of
Nature, Weakness, and Infirmity, yea he could no ways help it; because, if I do
not perform what I desire, and ought to do, I confess my self to sin against
the Dictates of my own Conscience: And, will that extenuate, or rather is it
not an Aggravation of my Crime, that the checks of my Conscience could not
deter me from the Commission of it?

What a poor Plea! what a sad Apology! will it be, at the Great and Dreadful
Tribunal of Heaven, for me to confess, I know the Acting, or Living thus, and
thus, so, and so, was notoriously bad, offending my God, and prejudicing my
Soul, but the pleasantness of the Company, the Humouring a Friend, the
greatness of the Temptation could not be withstood, for were it not for
Temptations, how could we maintain our Warfare against the three Cardinal
Enemies of man's Salvation, Sin, the World, and the Devil?

These are our Enemies, we are the Soldiers must fight the Battles of the
Lord; our meaning cannot be good, if we do not valiantly withstand all
oppositions. For it is not enough that I speak like an Angel, Pray with great
zeal and vehemence of Spirit; if (my Devotions Consummated) I prove as
Passionate as ever, as Waspish as an amazed or disturbed Fly, if I be
Refractory to the Government of my Country; if I Censure the Actions of my
Prince, or ridicule the Demeanours of them placed in Authority under him; if I
be Unjust to my Neighbor, Cruel in my Bargains, or proud like a little Indian
Prince.

What signify all the flourishes of Religion, the gay expressions of Devotion,
my lifted up Eyes and Hands to Heaven, if I continue regardless of Reproof,
Covetous, high, unbridled Passions! All that Purity and Saintship, all that
Spiritual Life I pride my self in, is nothing more, than Spiritual Fancy and
Illusion, whilst I am under the Power of my unruly Desires, so that I
contentedly follow and am led by them!

I pray tell me, do not we censure it difficult, and uneasy to be guilty of
the madness of those who talk splendidly of Religion, yet practice nothing less.

The common Swearer cannot forbear his habituated and accustomed sin, yet if he
Discourses of the Authority of the Bible, and Principles of Religion, one would
think him a Saint; and those persons themselves, who speak so bravely, imagine
they cannot Act, so much as they Discourse; yet both of them are under the
Power of their respective Sins, and are equally deceived, for neither are the
Servants of God; yet there is no necessity to do this, because we are obliged,
yes, and (God has commanded me to tell you also) it is in our Power to do
better if we please: Thus you may hear the Apostle.

Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, for the
Spirit lusts against the Flesh, and Flesh against the Spirit, Gal. 5.16, and
17. Where he means,

That as there is a State of Carnality (before Baptism or Regeneration) in the
which, a man cannot but be in Awe and Subjection to the Flesh; so there is a
state of Spirituality (after Regeneration) when Sin is dead, and Righteousness
is alive, and in this state the Flesh can no more get the Conquest, then the
Spirit could be Victor in the other.

I dare not deny it, such is the sad condition of some men, that they cannot
but Sin, because the Apostle has told me, The Carnal mind is not subject to
God, nor can be, Romans 8.7.

There are others, in like manner, who cannot endure the least tendency to Sin;
to a mild and peaceable disposition, how disagreeable is the Nature of a
Contentious, wrangling person, to a Sober and Temperate person, how tedious is
the Company of Hectoring Debauchees, To a Chaste and Modest person? how shameful
are Prostitutions and Beastialities of Lust? Consider this, and tell me, is it
impossible for a person whose mind is built upon Righteousness to resist those
snares and direct Treasons against the Soul? Thus you may hear the
bosom-Disciple breathing it out, He that is born of God does not commit sin,
nor can he, because he is born of God.

Can a corrupt Tree have good, or a good Evil Fruit flourishing thereon? Things
most nauseous and disgusting to the Palate, or the sharpest punctures to the
Pupil of the Eye, cannot be so offensive, and irksome, as Sin to one Regenerate
and born anew.

For where is the Person, show me a man but of common Prudence, and Ordinary
Reputation in the World, would be tempted upon the Padd: What price would
purchase him to Murder his Brother, or the Dearest of his Friends?

May not our daily converse with the World acquaint us, that men, who are none
of the great Sages, and eminent Hero's for Parts and Understanding, yet have
Power sufficient to Conquer the greatest Sins? And what? Shall I be Crowned
with the Olive Branches and Palms, shall I erect Trophies for my Victory over
Goliath? Can I conquer the Sons of the Giant, and stoutest of the Sons of Anack?
And shall I at last be captivated by the weak Forces of the little Children of
Gath? I remember I have read of Achilles, Falling into the River Xanthus, that
he was not so much terrified at the grim Countenance of Death, as the manner of
it; Had Hector slain him in the Field, he had died with the satisfaction of its
Glory; but to be drowned in the River like a little Boy, was a Fate more
becoming a smooth faced Narcissus, then a Warlike Achilles.

How unworthy then is it for a Christian, to prefer an easy, and entire
Conquest over the Greatest, and at last be enslaved by the subtle Artifices of
a less Temptation? Could the poor possessed man, who lived in the Tombs, by the
Powers of the Devil, break his Iron Chains in pieces? and cannot I, assisted
with the Influences from above, break the Chains of Sin, and cast away its
Cords from me? If the Lord of Hosts be on my part, who dare offend, who can
oppose me? For were we so Wise and Valiant, as not to afright our selves with
our own shadows, we should find, by the Encouragements of Gods Spirit, that he
who is with us, is mightier, than they who are against us; Michael and his
Angels are not only more Powerful and numerous, than the old Dragon and his
supposed Strengths, but also more loving and careful to do us good: Did we not
therefore look through the discolored Mediums of our own polluted Nature? Was
not the Eye of our Souls tinctured by the suffusions of Lust, we should soon
find our Strengths greater, then we imagine? For did we seriously weigh things
in their proper balance, we might observe an Heroic Vigor in all Goodness,
and an Imbecility in Evil only.

Furthermore, if by the assistance of Grace, I cannot prove my self more than
Conqueror over Temptations, why should I rejoice, when I fall into a variety
and abundance of them? Or, can I imagine, that God, who remembers I am but
Dust, and knows whereof I am made; who is better acquainted with my Form and
Figure than I my self am, would he impose any thing upon me, but what he knows
is absolutely in my Power to perform?

Now you may observe both God and his Church, bind every Christian at his first
Admission into Covenant, by the most Solemn Tie to resist Temptations.

The Substance of which Oath in Baptism, is,

I. N. or M. do here in the presenee of God the Father, our Lord Jesus Christ,
and all the Heavenly Host, devote my self to the Services of my God; I call
Heaven and Earth, Angels and Saints, the Church Militant and Triumphant, to
bear witness, that I renounce the World, Flesh, and the Devil, and that I will
resist their Temptations unto my last breath: This I avow to be my Resolution;
and upon this account, and this only, I now desire to enter into Covenant with
my God, and be Initiated and Admitted a Member of his Church; and I call my
Conscience to Record this day, that I will never repent of this Promise, nor
revoke it, but continue Christ's Faithful Soldier and Servant unto my Lives
end. So help me O my God. Amen.

Now this being the form of our Oath in Baptism, which we renew at our
Confirmation, and repeat every time we Communicate at the Lords Table; we can
certainly conclude it is to be performed; for can we fancy to our selves, God
and his Church would urge us to Impossibilities, and engage us to what cannot
be effected? No certainly, for if men be persuaded the Sins they commit, are
irresistible, why do they Sorrow and Repent, for what is past? Why do they
contradict themselves, and put a mock upon Heaven by promising Amendment for
the future? Instead of Confessing, why do they not rather Expostulate with God,
and say,

It Is true, O Lord, I have done many things amiss as I have been Informed by
the Parson, who calls himself thy Minister, and trouble the World by thy
Authority; which if they be offensive, I protest, O my God, I could not help
them, I had not Power to resist them: If therefore thou would have me for the
future perform thy express Words and Commandments, and practice those Duties
our Preachers inculcate; thou must asist me with a greater stock of Grace, than
hitherto thou have furnished me withal.

Now can I presume any so horribly Profane, so ridiculously Wicked to Pray
after this method, and utterly confound those two absolutely necessary parts of
Repentance, Confession and Contrition.

If it be thus, I dare boldly affirm it, the greatest Sins we are tempted to
commit, are no Sins at all? But indeed God will be justified in his sayings,
and found clear when he is judged, for there is no thinking circumspect man (if
he applies the Grace of God) can be over matched by any Trial, or meet a
Temptation, that is irresistible: For if I can conquer Sin in the Mountains and
Strong holds, I need not doubt but to baffle him in the Plains and Valleys; if
I can overcome those great and Gigantick Sins of Idolatry, Adultery, Felony
Treason and the like, why may I not escape those of a lesser magnitude, such as
Pamphleting the Government, and Libelling Authority, such as Lying and
Slandering, Cheating and Cousening, Back biting and Speaking evil one of
another? Shall a Pigmye subdue the Crane? or a Dwarf prove Conqueror of a
Giant? Can I go upon the Lion and the Adder, and shall a Frog or a Worm
^lisorder me? Did not Christ come to redeem to himself a Church, and to present
it, without Spot or Blemish, before the Throne of Grace? Now, how can We be of
this number, and not under that qualification, Void of Offense toward God, and
toward Man.

Thirdly. Some may enquire, how far we must proceed in Righteousness that we
may get a Conquest and Mastery over our Nature; and be free from those
Imbecilities, in saying, What I hate, that do I.

To which I answer, There is no set or determinate degree of Endeavor, but
even as much as we can, or are able: There is no size or Standard, the Excess
of which would appear Monstrous; But Religion is like unto the flawless
Diamond, where bigness taxes the value, and the unusual bulk both rates, and
Enhances the Luster and the Price: To give God all that I can is the great
command both of the Law, and of the Gospel.

For so noble is the nature of Religion, that it admits of failings but by one
of the Extremes, that of Defect. Mediocrity, which in other Passions is an
Excellency, is here an Imperfection.

It being therefore impossible for us to be too Loyal and Obedient, too
Religious and Dutyful, we must make it the business of our Lives, the Care of
our Thoughts, our only Concern and greatest Employment in the World, To be Holy
as God is Holy; abstaining from all things whatever that can impede or hinder
the promotion and growth of an Holy Life; for what is our chiefest
righteousness better then Menstruous Rags, if the Lord was extreme to mark
what we have done amiss? After our very Innocence (which otherwise would appear
stained) may through the merits of Christ prove acceptable unto God; whatsoever
thou find in thy Heart to do, perform it with all thy might and vigor. He
that will live according to the exact Rules of Christianity, must bend his
Nerves and Sinews, do his utmost toward the demolishing all the Strongholds
of Satan. For we can never be clean and free from all Sin, until we have done
our best and utmost toward the Mortification of it, for until that be done,
how can we be satisfied where the blame and fault rests, or whether it can be
effected, or not?

If any man can profess, that Purity of Life, and strictness of Conversation,
as to assert, that he has endeavored to husband and employ his Talent of
Grace to the most proper and best advantage; that he has Endured as much as is
possible to be Endured, that he has Loved as much as he could Love, that he
has Watched till he can Watch no longer; my Soul for his, that Man is
blameless in the sight of God, because God has commanded me to tell you, he
does not expect Brick, where he does not afford Straw; he accepts of what a
man has, requiring nothing which he is not able to perform.

For God looks into my Heart, and enquires, if That be right, if I have no
Rebellion in Thought, as well as Act, if I have no affections to Sin, no
glances to Temptations? If I have liquorish desires after the Onyons and
Garlic, or Fleshpots of Egypt; if I apply all prudent and effectual methods
to Mortify my Sins; In a word, if I be sincere and real in my Actions and
Intentions: For, unless God (at his coming) find us in this Sinless state, we
must never expect the Blessing of his Kingdom; But if he does, my Soul for
yours, we shall undoubtedly be saved by the Blood of Christ.

For consult the Histories of all the most vile and wicked men that ever had a
Being upon Earth, and as you will find few or none, but sometimes or other
performing some good Action; and yet that Action did not interrupt, or put stop
to their courses of Impiety; so the most Religious of Pious Souls in like
manner, have their Indiscretions and Mistakes, Failings and Errors; sometimes
doing that which is Wicked and Sinful: Nevertheless, because their Hearts stand
most firm and right toward God, He in Mercy will not impute those over sights
to Eternal Condemnation. The sweet Singer of Israel is a Royal Instance to
confirm this Doctrine, He was a man after Gods own Heart; Nay the Text tells
you, He was blameless, save only in the matter of Uriah.

Nevertheless, did you never read, how he numbered the People; and can you not
plainly read the Characters of Divine Wrath in that severe Judgment wherewith
he Plagued his People for this his Transgression; Yet still because David was a
good man, serving God with an upright Heart, not intending to disoblige him,
but committing this Sin through inadvertency, it was not imputed to him. In
short,

If I endeavor all that I can to arrive at the Perfection I am capacitated
for, and do what lies in me to inherit the Promise; if I Labor and Hope for
it, using the most ready and probable means, (not being deluded by the cunning
Arts of a false and treacherous Heart) I shall stand upright in the
Congregation of the Just; and though I cannot, with the Romanist, challenge
Heaven by Merit, yet I shall find it as my Savior has told me, My Fathers
good pleasure to give me a Kingdom.

The Conclusion.
Fourthly, Thus you have the Imbecilities of Man natural, together with a
Possibility, as well as absolute Necessity of their Conquest by man Spiritual
and Regenerate: For the Devil, as Potent and Crafty as he is, cannot ravish our
Wills, nor force our Inclinations; the worst he can do, is to prompt and
persuade, to watch Advantages, and administer suitable Solicitations, but
cannot compel us to entertain them.

No man is undone or ruined Eternally, but himself is the Cause of it; he that
would not, cannot be overcome, provided he keep his Resolutions fixed and
steadfast. This is the true way of Conquest and Victory over Satan, Resist the
Devil, and he will flee from you, Jam. 4.7. If we do but make good our ground,
his Temptations will vanish and disappear. What remains? but that we be strong
in the Lord, and in the Power of his might; that we take unto our selves the
whole Armor of God, and be thereby enabled to stand against the Wiles of the
Devil?

Let us Reverence the Greatness and Nobility of our Natures, being born anew,
they are of too Divine a Frame and Temper, than to be Prostituted and Defiled:
Let all opportunities and occasions of Vice be avoided, with a quick and
jealous care: A Temptation is easilier prevented, than removed, when once it
has thrust it self upon the Sinner. We should frequently review our Lives, and
call our Actions to a severe and impartial Account and Examination, that we may
know what is their Spring and Fountain, what their Tendency and Inclination,
and what will be the Consequence and Issue of them; and that if the Politic
Enemy of ours have conveyed in a Suggestion in disguise, we may pull off the
Mask and resent it in its proper Form and Figure. And this reckoning ought to
be inquired into, so soon as ever we have sinned, or we know that he has
gotten the upper-hand over us; for the less Sin has prevailed, the easier the
Fight, and Conquest more certain; But if he have had much better of us, the
Argument is more forcible, because we have the more to do, and therefore we
must begin by times. The longer our Journey, the more early we must set out; we
must not defer this Labor till it be rendered more difficult by Age, or
impossible by Death. Nothing more true, than short Tarryings create long
Journeys; if we neglect the Duties of our Sprightly years, our Journey will be
more tedious, when our Vigor is decaying, and we are weakened by Age. Oh!
Blessed Pythagoreans! who were taught every night to call themselves to an
Account for the Actions of the preceding day!

Sextius the Philosopher, never used to go to Bed, 'till he had first
Expostulated with himself, saying,

What Evil Habit have I Cured to day? What Vice have I resisted? Wherein am I
better than I was before? Oh! let Us imitate those brave Examples, and accustom
our selves to this excellent course, and then we shall quickly find our Victory
over sin far more easy and feazable. That then which we do, let us do quickly,
whilst the Marrow swells in our Bones, and our Blood be hot, and boils within
our Veins, before Evil days come, and we be snatched away, and there be none to
deliver us. I Pray tell me, are not You and I, and all the Members of the
Catholic Church, desirous to end our days in Religion and Piety? To die in the
Arms and Embraces of our Holy Mother the Church? To expire and breath out our
last under the safe care and conduct of some Godly and Religious Minister? When
we are Sick and returning our Souls to him, who lent them, then nothing but
Prayers and doleful Complaints? The Groans of Timorous Repentance; and the
faint Labors of an almost impossible Mortification? Yes, and least your Souls
should miscarry, we presently dispatch a little Mercury or Messenger for the
despised Parson. Then, and only Then, we look upon our Priest, (so much laughed
at in our Plays, and made the May game of our Stage) as a Barnabas, or Son of
Consolation; then we adjudge him as a Messenger or Physician sent from God to
heal our Plague-Sores; what are his Words, but Oracles? Religion, but Truth?
Sin, but a burden, and most uneasy to be born? And the Sinner more foolish
than the Beasts that perish?

But I Pray Sirs, as you prize your Souls, as you value Heaven, as you expect
Eternal Life, or dread the Terrors of Everlasting Burnings, seriously to
consider with me, whether the Doctrines we Preach, the words we deliver, the
Councels we give, are they not as True; now whilst ye live and enjoy the Happy
Privileges of Health, as they be, when ye approach the Paths of Death? Why
should they not then have the same Powerful Influence, and make that impression
on our Lives now, they commonly do then? Let us then Mortify our Sins betimes,
least we never Mortify them at all; the Fable will tell you, The Snail
out-went the Eagle, and won the Race, because she set out betimes. Let us
begin our Warfare, whilst it is called to day, resolving to die unto the World,
that we may be found alive unto God: Let us grow in Grace, going on to
Perfection till we arrive at the full measures of the stature of Christ, and
into the perfect Liberty of the Sons of God; so that we shall not complain in
the Text, What I hate, that do I; but hate what God hates, doing nothing that
is forbidden, not by virtue of our own Strength or Power, but because Christ is
our Strength, and he dwells in us, and we in him: Grant us Grace therefore we
beseech thee, O Lord, to withstand the Temptations of World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, and with pure Hearts and Minds to follow thee the only God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

