A SECOND LETTER to HILTON, The Grand Informer Against RELIGIOUS MEETINGS:
Wherein his Threatenings against CONSTABLES are Demonstrated to be Vain; and the
Whole Duty of those Officers, in Reference to that Business, stated.
Noble Captain!
AFter my Love to you remembered, hoping you are in Good Health, as I am at this
present Writing, etc. [For I know you are a great Admirer of Set-Forms] This is
to let you understand, That I am now got as far as the Second Page of your
first Conventicle Courant, where you begin the Journal of your Successless
Knight-Errantry, against the supposed Fanatic Painims, with the Names of those
Magistrates that granted your Warrants: Whether those Gentlemen will Con you
any Thanks for this Publication, I know not; But according to your Account, the
first Warrant that issued was from the Judicious Sir John Peak, the next the
Eminent Sir Geerge Waterman gave out; Then Sir James Smith five more; Sir Henry
Tulse five more; Sir Robert Jefferies four; Sir Jonathan Raymond five; Sir Tho.
Beckford five; and Sir Tho. Orby and Mr. Justice Ball four more, for
Westminster.

All these Warrants were it seems made out before the Meetings supposed, were
in the least Actually Congregated; upon your Worships bare suggestion, that
perhaps for ought you knew (for sure you did not swear for Futurity) there
might be Meetings there next Sunday: How far this is Justifiable by the Act, or
indeed agreeable to Common Sense, may be a question. Or when Justices and
Constables shall be at quiet, if such loose Allegations from every Vagrant
shall be sufficient? Nay, there were no such Places in Rerum Natura, as are
mentioned for Conventicles in some of your Warrants.

Being now brisk in your Geers, it seems Captain, you fell into an Ambuscade;
The Philistin-Boys set upon the Church of England's Sampson; The Rabble, the
Mobile, the Beast with Ten Thousand Heads, began to poster you worse than Flies
do a galled Jade in August. I confess Dirt upon Dirt was false Heraldry: But
whereas you complain, They Defaced You, it is an Errant Whisker, for all the
World knows you have still a very substantial Brazen-F^ce of your own; and for
your Clothes it is no matter, those that bestowed these upon you, can easily
Equip you with another New Suit, rather than you shall be disabled to carry on
the Blessed Work.

But Heaven Shield us from Crabsticks and leaden Ten^is-Balls, Here Is no less
than a Plot against thy sweet Life, and discovered first, by some Sagacious
Aldermen; and next, by an Angel. O Sacred Incomparable Hil^on! from being a
Prey to Vermin; Spunging in Nine-pin yards, and Scouring of Jails, how
suddenly art thou become the Peculiar Care of both Worlds! Court and City join
to Study thy Safety! and both Whitehall and Heaven are obliged to give thee
Items of thy dangers -- The Gentleman [by which is always to be understood
thine own precious self] being at Whitehall, See Convent. Courant, Numb. 1.
page 3.
was there told by some Aldermen, that he should take heed to himself, That his
Life was Threatened, and Advised him to come to their Houses for fear of Danger.
-- Here Is first a bouncing Information that our Informer is a great Body at
Court, and has much business at Whitehall; and next, how Intimate he is with no
Body knows what Aldermen, who yet methinks were a little wanting since they so
well knew his Life was threatened, that they did not Seize those that Threatened
it. But what follows? -- Next day came a Person to the Gentleman's house who
leads him into a Room, Ibidem
and Civilities passed -- and what then? Nay hold, you must first have a Notion
of Divinity -- And certainly no man that has any Sentiment of a Providence,
Ibidem.
but must reasonably Conclude, That there are Tutelary Angels, whose Care of
our Welfare and Concern for our Dangers are always Exhibited, and who Infuse
those Divine Whispers which Inform our secure Minds of ANY Impendent Evil to be
avoided, or Succeeding Good to be Embraced, As this following Occurrence is an
evident Instance -- Now Beloved, prick up your Ears, and Attend the Miracle! --
This Visitant had a Crab-Tree-stick and a THONG at the end, to which was tied a
Ball of Lead about the Bigness of a Tennis Ball; which the Gentleman (that is
still thy self) spying, was immediately seized with a suspicious Fear. ('It Is a
quality the Captain is very subject too, and Brandy it self cannot Cure him
on it) another man comes in, and you Civilly dismiss the said Person (who you
say, was no doubt your designed Murderer) forbidding him any Future Access.

Now was there ever a more Ridiculous Story Recorded in Popish Legend, or told
at a Gossipping? What designs should any body have against such a Pitiful
Scoundrel? Was Noonday and thy own House (as thou call'st it) a fit time and
place to murder thee? No, no, Sir! do but Swear the Peace against Jack Ketch,
and thou art Safe against all the World: For though thou art miscalled A
Captain, if ever thou dyest in the Field, it must be of a Surfeit of Hemp Seed.
But besides the Hellish Malice of this Romance, in Suggesting as if the
Dissenters had set some body to Murder thee; there is hereby slily advanced a
common Popish Tenet (which shows plainly whose Fingers have been in this
Goose-pye) for the Papists hold that every man has a Tutelary or Guardian
Angel, unto whom they daily; Say Prayers, The Forms of which you may find in
the Ingenious Mr. Patrick's Book, Entitled, Devotions of the Roman Church,
page 417. Whereas, though Protestants acknowledge Angels to be Ministering
Spirits, and that they are always ready to assist good men and punish the
wicked, when God shall Command them; yet we do not allow of any such Special
appropriated Angel to every Individual as they dream, much less such as does
Inform our minds of every Evil to be avoided, or Good to be embraced, as your
Popish Coxcombship affirms; For that was utterly to make void the Holy
Scripture and all kind of Moral Precepts, and to give oneself up blindfold to
the Conduct of ones own irregular F^ncies, as the Divine Whispers fosooth of
our Tutelary Angel.

This Brunt being over, you next tell us, how several Constables, when you
offered them your Warrants doubted of the Truth of them and indeed they would
reason so to do on several Accounts: For 1. They had not heard of any such
Prosecut^on for several years, and knew the Grand Council of the Nation had
Voted the p^tting those Laws in Execution at this Juncture to be Inexpedient;
Nor could they imagine any extraordinary Cause on the D^ssen^ers part, which
should Exasperate Authority against them now, more than for diverse years past.
Secondly, The Warrants running to suppress Meetings not in Being, and
consequently such as it is impossible to know, whether contrary to the Liturgy
and Practice of the Church of England, or not, might in their Apprehensions
seem not to be Legal and according to the Tenor of the Act, and therefore they
might justly doubt whether such judicious Magistrates, as it is well known this
City is furnished with, would grant any such; Thirdly, They might the rather
question it, because brought by a Fellow altogether unknown, and unable to
give any good account of himself, a Person sine Re, sine Spe, sine Sede, sine
Fide, (As our Law-Book speaks in a like Case) so that they could not Act more
prudently than in desiring to be Ascertained of the Reality of such Warrants,
that they were not Forged and Counterfeited; Before they Adventured to Act
thereupon; since otherwise they might incur at once many hundred Actions of
Trespass or False-Imprisonment, to the Ruin of themselves and Families. For
it is certain, If any Meeting not Prohibited by the Act be disturbed, or any
persons taken into Custody where the Statutes do not Empower and justify it, or
where the Officers have not a sufficient Warrant, every one of the persons
grieved has his separate Remedy by Law against every such Officer.

It Is true you impudently and no less falsely have libeil'd many Constables by
name, and Threaten them and others with Neglect of their Duty, which is in
Effect to charge so many worthy Loyal Citizens with Perjury and Disloyalty,
merely for not dancing after your foolish Extravagant Pipe; for which Scandals
no doubt they will not be wanting to seek Legal Amends, if your contemptible
Condition do not discourage them with the Proverb of -- Suing a Beggar, and
Catching, etc.

For (notwithstanding all your Babbling) It does not appear that they have
neglected their Duty in any one Point. For,

First, Have you proved or can you ever prove any one of those Assemblies that
you would have had disturbed to be a Seditious Conventicle, Or held in other
manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England? And
yet till this were proved, by two sufficient Witnesses, neither the Justices
nor Constables had any thing to do with them. And how is it possible to prove
an Exercise of Religion at any Meeting, is in other manner than according to
the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, a week, or a Month, or any
time before such Meeting is held! Nor indeed can the same be proved, when a
Meeting is actually Assembled, unless the Informers can Swear that they were at
such Meeting from the Beginning to the End thereof.

Secondly, It Is undeniable, That the Justices Warrants ^an neither Force,
Empower or Justify the Constables to do any thing in R^lation to E^ecuting he
Statute of the 22 Car. 2. Which they are not by that S^^tute Empowered and
Enjoined to do. But it is plain, that all that that Statute Enjoins Constables to
do, Is,

1. To Leavy the Penalties upon Warrants after Convictions Sect. 2. Paragraph 3.

2. Where they know or are cre^^^y Informed of any Conventicle within their
Respective Limits, to Inform some Justice or the Chief-Magistrate thereof.
Sect. 11. Parag^. 1. -- It does not say, they shall run and disturb it, or send
presently for a E^le of Musketeers, and take their honest Neighbors
Prisoners, but that they shall endeavor the Conviction of the Parties
according to their Duty, that is, by Informing the Justice or Chief Magistrate
thereof, as aforesaid; -- And as to this part of the Constables Duty, the
Justices have (in our present Case) Discharged them thereof, for what need the
Constables Inform the Justices of that, which the Justices under their Hands
and Seals do declare they are sufficiently Informed of already?

3. Where any Conventicle shall be kept Close, and Entrance denied, there the
Constables are required and Empowered to break open the doors, if they have a
Warrant from a Justice to that purpose, and not without -- Sect. 9. Paragr.
(For it is supposed in such places dangerous Practices may be carried on, where
they are so private) And there, and there, ONLY, viz. In Case of having been
refused Entrance and breaking of doors, the Act does Authorize the Constables
to take into Custody the persons there Assembled; Sect. 9. Paragsaph 2.

But that they may, or shall take into Custody any Persons present at any
Peceable open Religious Meeting, there is not one word in the Act, and
therefore I have often admired at the Blind and rash Confidence of some
Constables, That have presumed to do it; And surely it concerns all Officers to
be wary what they do, lest they be called to an Account hereafter on Actions of
false Imprisonments. In which case a Justices Warrant, unless Warranted by the
Act, will be no sufficient Plea. Some other particulars there are, fit to be
spoken to, and an Objection or two, though of no great weight, to be Answered
-- But these shall serve for a Third Course; In the mean time, Noble Captain!
Farewell and be Hanged, an extraordinary Complement, which in the new Academy
signifies, twice Good-bouy.

Aug. 28. 1682. From your Old Acquaintance, Philoeusebias Misonebulonides
Postscript.
YOur Land-Lady in Aldersgate Street remembers her to you, and desires that you
would please at least to pay for Washing the Bewrayed Sheet; which you hid in
an hole; when you Retreated thence in disorder, (though ten thousand strong)
without paying your Quarters.



LONDON, Printed for R. Lee, and are to be Sold by most Booksellers.


