THE Sovereignty and Goodness OF GOD, Together, With the Faithfulness of His
Promises Displayed; Being a NARRATIVE Of the Captivity and Restoration of Mrs.
Mary Rowlandson.

Commended by her, to all that desires to know the Lords doings to, and
dealings with Her.

Especially to her dear Children and Relations,

The second Addition Corrected and amended.

Written by Her own Hand for Her private Use, and now made Public at the
earnest Desire of some Friends, and for the benefit of the Afflicted.

Deuteronomy. 32.29, See now that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me: I kill
and I make alive, I wound and I heal neither is there any can deliver out of my
hand.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Samuel Green, 1682.

The Preface to the READER.
IT was on Tuesday, Feb. 1. 1675. in the afternoon, when the Narrhagansets
quarters (in or toward the Nipmug Country, whither they are now retired for
fear of the English Army lying in their own Country) were the second time
beaten up by the Forces of the united Colonies, who thereupon soon betook
themselves to flight, and were all the next day pursued by the English, some
overtaken and destroyed, But on Thursday, Feb. 3. The English having now been
six days on their march, from their he^d quarters, at Wickford, in the
Narrhaganset Country, toward, and after the Enemy, and provision grown
exceeding short, insomuch that they were fain to kill some Horses for the
supply, especially of their Indian friends, they were necessitated to consider
what was best to be done: And about noon (having hitherto followed the chase as
hard as they might) a Council was called, and though some few were of another
mind, yet it was concluded by far the greater part of the Council of War, that
the Army should desist the pursuit, and retire: the Forces of Plymouth and the
Bay to the next Town of the Bay, and Connecticut Forces to their own next
Towns: Which determination was immediately put in execution. The consequent
whereof, as it was not difficult to be foreseen by those that knew the causless
enmity of these Barbarians, against the English, and the malicious and
revengefull spirit of these Heathen: so it soon proved dismal.

The Narrhagansets were now driven quite from their own Country, and all their
provisions there hoarded up, to which they durst not at present return, and
being so numerous as they were, soon devoured those to whom they went, whereby
both the one and other were now reduced to extreme straits, and so necessitated
to take the first and best opportunity for supply, and very glad, no doubt of
such an opportunity as this, to provide for themselves, and make spoil of the
English at once; and seeing themselves thus discharged of their pursuers, and a
little refreshed after their flight, the very next week on Thurseday, Feb. 10.
they fell with mighty force and fury upon Lancaster: which small Town, remote
from aid of others, and not being Gerisoned as it might, the Army being now
come in, and as the time indeed required (the design of the Indians against
that place being known to the English some time before) was not able to make
effectual resistance: but notwithstanding utmost endeavor of the Inhabitants,
most of the buildings were turned into ashes; many People (Men, Women and
Children) slain, and others captivated. The most solemn and remarkable part of
this Trajedy, may that justly be reputed, which fell upon the Family of that
reverend Servant of God, Mr. Joseph Rolandson, the faithful Pastor of Christ
in that place, who being gone down to the Council of the M^ssachusets to seek
aid for the defense of the place, at his return found the Town in flames, or
smoke, his own house being ser on fire by the Enemy, through the disadvantage
of a defective Fortification, and all in it consumed: his precious yoke fellow,
and dear Children, wounded and captivated (as the issue evidenced, and
following Narrative declares) by these cruel and barbarous Salvages. A sad
Catestrophe! Thus all things come alike to all: None knows either love or
hatred by all that is before him. It is no new thing for Gods precions ones to
drink as deep as others, of the Cup of common Calamity: Take just Lot (yet
captivated) for instance beside others. But it is not my business to dilate on
these things, but only in few words introductively to preface to the following
script, which is a Narrative of the wonderfully awful, wise, holy, powerful,
and gracious providence of God, toward that worthy and precious Gentle woman,
the dear Consort of the said Reverend Mr. Rowlandson, and her Children with
her, as in casting of her into such a waterless pit, so in preserving,
supporting, and carrying through so many such extreme hazards, unspeakable
difficulties and disconsolateness, and at last delivering her out of them all,
and her surviving Children also. It was a strange and amazing dispensation,
that the Lord should so afflict his precious Servant, and Hand maid: It was as
strange, if not more, that he should so bear up the spirits of his Servant
under such bereavments, and or his handmaid under such captivity, travels and
hardships (much too hard for flesh and blood) as he did, and at length deliver
and restore But he was their Savior, who has said, When thou passest through
the Waters, I will be with thee, and thorough the Rivers, they shall not
overflow thee: When thou walk through the fire, thou shall no^ ^e burnt, nor
shall the flame kindle upon thee, Isa. 93. ver. 2. and again. He wounds and
his hands make whole. He shall deliver thee in (...) troubles, yea in seven
there shall no evil touch thee: In Famine he shall redeem thee from Death, and
in War from the power if the sword, Job 5.18, 19, 20. Methinks this
dispensation does bear some resemblance to those of Joseph, David and Daniel;
yea, and of the three Children too, the Stories whereof do represent us with
the excellent textures of divine providence, curious pieces of divine work: and
truly so does this, and therefore not to be forgotten, but worthy to be
exhibited to, and viewed, and pondered by all, that disdain not to consider the
operation of his hands.

The works of the Lord (not only of Creation, but of Province also, especially
those that do more peculiarly concern his dear ones, that are as the Apple of
his Eye, as the Signet upon Hi Hand, the Delight of his Eyes, and the Object of
his tenderest Care) and great, sought out of all those that have pleasure
therein. And of these verily this is none of the least.

This Narrative was penned by the Gentlewoman her self, to be to her a
memorandum of Gods dealing with her, that she might never forget, but remember
the same, and the several circumstances thereof, all the days of her life. A
pious scope which deserves both commendation and imitation: Some friends having
obtained a sight of it, could not but be so much affected with the many
passages of working providence discovered therein, as to judge it worthy of
public view, and altogether unmeet that such works of God should be hid from
present and future Generations: And therefore though this Gentlewomans modesty
would not thrust it into the Press, yet her gratitude unto God made her not
hardly perswadable to let it pass, that God might have his due glory, and
others benefit by it as well as her self. I hope by this time none will cast
any reflection upon this Gentlewoman, on the score of this publication of her
affliction and deliverance. If any should, doubtless they may be reckoned with
the nine lepers, of whom it is said, Were there not ten cleansed, where are the
nine? but one returning to give God thanks. Let such further know that this was
a dispensation of public note, and of universal concernment, and so much the
more, by how much the nearer this Gentlewoman stood related to that faithful
Servant of God, whose capacity and employment was public in the house of God,
and his name on that account of a very sweet savor in the Churches of Christ,
who is there of a true Christian spirit, that did not look upon himself much
concerned in this bereavment, this Captivity in the time thereof, and in his
deliverance when it came, yea more then in many others; and how many are there,
to whom so concerned, it will doubtless be a very acceptable thing to see the
way of God with this Gentlewoman in the aforesaid dispensation, thus laid out
and pourtrayed before their eyes.

To conclude whatever any coy fantasies may deem, yet it highly concerns those
that have so deeply tasted, how good the Lord is, to enquire with David, What
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits to me. Psalm. 116.12. He thinks
nothing too great; yea, being sensible of his own disproportion to the due
praises of God he calls in help. Oh, magnify the Lord with me, let us exalt his
Name together, Psalm. 34.3 And it is but reason, that out praises should hold
proportion with our prayers: and that as many has helped together by prayer
for the obtaining of his Mercy, so praises should be returned by many on this
behalf; And forasmuch as not the general but particular knowledge of things
makes deepest impression upon the affections, this Narrative particularizing
the several passages of this providence will nor a little conduce thereunto.
And therefore holy David in order to the attainment of that end, accounts
himself concerned to declare what God had done for his soul, Psalm. 66.16. Come
and hear, a^l ye that fear God, and I will declare what God has done for my
soul, i. e. for his life, see v. 9, 10. He holds our soul in life, and
suffers not our feet to be moved, for thou our God have proved us, thou have
tried us, as silver is tried. Life-mercies, are heart-affecting-mercies, of
great impression and force, to enlarge pious hearts in the praises of God, so
that such know not how but to talk of Gods acts, and to speak of and publish
his wonderful works. Deep troubles, when the waters come in unto thy soul, are
wont to produce vows: vows must be paid, It is better not vow, than vow and
not to pay. I may say, that as none knows what it is to fight and pursue such
an enemy as this, but they that have fought and pursued them: so none can
imagine what it is to be captivated, and enslaved to such atheistical proud,
wild, cruel, barbarous, brutish (in one word) diabolical creatures as these,
the worst of the heathen; nor what difficulties, hardships, hazards, sorrows,
anxieties and perplexities do unavoidably wait upon such a condition, but those
that have tried it. No serieus spirit then (especialiy knowing any thing of
this Gentlewomans piety) can imagine but that the vows of God are upon her.
Excuse her then if she come thus into public, to pay those vows. Come and hear
what she has to say.

I am confident that no Friend of divine Providence will ever repent his time
and pains, spent in reading over these sheets, but will judge them worth
perusing again and again.

Hear Reader, you may see an instance of the Sovereignty of God, who does what
he will with his own as well as others; and who may say to him, What dofl thou?
Here you may see an instance of the faith and patience of the Saints, under the
most heart-sinking trials; here you may see, the promises are breasts full of
consolation, when all the world besides is empty, and gives nothing but sorrow.
That God is indeed the supreme Lord of the world, ruling the most unruly,
weakening the most cruel and salvage, granting her People mercy in the sight of
the unmercifull, curbing the lusts of the most filthy, holding the hands of the
violent, delivering the prey from the mighty, and gathering together the out
casts of Israel. Once and again you have heard, but hear you may see, that
power belongs unto God; that our God is the God of Salvation, and to him
belong the issues from Death. That our God is in the Heavens, and does what
ever pleases him. Here you have Sampson Riddle examplified, and that great
promise, Romans 8.28. verified, Out of the Eater comes forth meat, and sweetness
out of the strong; The worst of evils working together for the best good. How
evident is it that the Lord has made this Gentlewoman a gainer by all this
affliction, that she can say, it is good for her, yea better that she has been,
then that she should not have been, thus afflicted.

Ob how does God shine forth in such things as these;* Reader, if thou gettest
no good by such a Declaration as this, the fault must needs be tbine own. Read
therefore, Peruse, Ponder, and from hence lay up something from the experience
of another, against thine own turn comes, that so thou also through patience
and consolation of the Scripture may have hope.

PER AMICAM.

A Narrative of the CAPTIVITY AND REST AVRATION OF Mrs. Mary Rowlandson.
ON the tenth of February 1675. Came the Indians with great numbers upon
Lancaster: Their first coming was about Sunrising; hearing the noise of some
Guns, we looked out; several Houses were burning, and the Smoke ascending to
Heaven. There were five persons taken in one house, the Father, and the Mother
and a sucking Child, they knocked on the head; the other two they took and
carried away alive. Their were two others, who being out of their Garrison upon
some occasion were set upon; one was knocked on the head, the other escaped:
Another their was who running a^ong was shot and wounded, and sell down; he
pegged of them his life, promising them Money (as they told me) but they would
not hearken to him but knocked him in head, and stripped him naked, and split open
his Bowels. Another seeing many of the Indians about his Barn, ventured and
went out, but was quickly shot down. There were three others belonging to the
same Garrison who were killed; the Indians getting up upon the roof of the Barn,
had advantage to shoot down upon them over their Fortification. Thus these
murtherous wretches went on, burning, and destroying before them,

At length they came and beset our own house, and quickly it was the
dolefullest day that ever mine eyes saw. The House stood upon the edg of a
hill; some of the Indians got behind the hill, others into the Barn, and others
behind any thing that could shelter them; from all which places they shot
against the House, so that the Bullets seemed to fly like hail; and quickly
they wounded one man among us, then another, and then a third, About two hours
(according to my observation, in that amazing time) they had been about the
house before they prevailed to fire it (which they did with Flax and Hemp,
which they brought out of the Barn, and there being no desence about the House,
only two Flankers at two opposite corners, and one of them not finished) they
fired it once, and one ventured out and quenched it, but they quickly fired it
again, and that took. Now is that dreadful hour come, that I have often heard
of (in time of War, as it was the case of others) but now mine eyes see it.
Some in our house were fighting for their lives, others wallowing in their
blood, the House on fire over our heads, and the bloody Heathen ready to knock
us on the head, if we stired our: Now might we hear Mothers and Children crying
out for themselves, and one another, Lord, What shall we do? Then I took my
Children (and one of my sisters, hers) to go forth and leave the house: but as
soon as we came to the door and appeared, the Indians shot so thick that the
bulletts rattled against the House, as if one had taken an handful of stones
and threw them, so that we were fain to give back. We had six stout Dogs
belonging to our Garrison, but none of them would stir, though another time, if
any Indian had come to the door, they were ready to fly upon him and tear him
down. The Lord hereby would make us the more to acknowledge his hand, and to
see that our help is always in him. But out we must go, the fire increasing,
and coming along behind us, roaring, and the Indians gaping before us with
their Guns, Spears and Hatchets to devour us. No sooner were we out of the
House, but my Brother in Law (being before wounded, in defending the house, in
or near the throat) fell down dead, whereat the Indians scornfully shouted, and
hallowed, and were presently upon him, stripping off his clothes, the bulletts
flying thick, one went through my side, and the same (as would seem) through
the bowels and hand of my dear Child in my arms. One of my elder Sisters
Children, named William, had then his Leg broken, which the Indians perceiving,
they knocked him on head. Thus were we butchered by those merciless Heathen,
standing amazed, with the blood running down to our heels. My eldest Sister
being yet in the House, and seeing those woeful sights, the Infidels haling
Mothers one way, and Children another, and some wallowing in their blood: and
her elder Son telling her that her Son William was dead, and my self was
wounded, she said, And, Lord let medy with them; which was no sooner said, but
she was struck with a Bullet, and sell down dead over the threshold. I hope she
is reaping the fruit of her good labors, being faithful to the service of God
in her place. In her younger years she lay under much trouble upon spiritual
accounts, till it pleased God to make that precious Scripture take hold of her
heart, 2 Cor. 12.9. And be said unto me my Grace is sufficient for thee. More
then twenty years after I have heard her tell how sweet and comfortable that
place was to her, But to return: The Indians laid hold of us, pulling me on
way, and the Children another, and said, Come go along with us; I told them
they would kill me: they answered, If I were willing to go along with them,
they would not hurt me.

Oh the doleful sight that now was to behold at this House! Come, behold the
works of the Lord, what dissolations he has made in the Earth. Of thirty seven
persons who were in this one House, none escaped either present death, or a
bitter captivity, save only one, who might say as he. Job 1.15. And I only am
escaped alone to tell the News. There were twelve killed, some shot, some
stabbed with their Spears, some knocked down with their Hatchets. When we are in
prosperity, Oh the little that we think of such dreadful sights, and to see
our dear Friends, and Relations ly bleeding out their heart-blood upon the
ground. There was one who was chopped into the head with a Hatchet, and stripped
naked, and yet was crawling up and down. It is a solemn sight to see so many
Christians lying in their blood, some here, and some there, like a company of
Sherp torn by Wolves. All of them stripped naked by a company of hell hounds,
roaring, singing, ranting and insulting, as if they would have torn our very
hearts out; yet the Lord by his Almighty power preserved a number of us from
death, for there were twenty-four of us taken alive and carried Captive.

I had of ten before this said, that if the Indians should come, I should choose
rather to be killed by them then taken alive but when it came to the trial my
mind changed; their glittering weapons so daunted my spirit, that I chose
rather to go along with those (as I may say) ravenous Beats, then that moment
to end my days; and that I may the better declare what happened to me during
that grievous Captivity I shall particularly speak of the several Removes we
had up and down the Wilderness.

The first Remove.
Now away we must go with those Barbarous Creatures, with our bodies wounded
and bleeding, and our hearts no less than our bodies. About a mile we went that
night, up upon a hill within sight of the Town where they intended to lodge.
There was hard by a vacant house (deserted by the English before, for fear of
the Indians] I asked them whither I might not lodge in the house that night? to
which they answered, what will you love English men still? this was the
dolefullest night that ever my eyes saw. Oh the roaring, and singing and
danceing, and yelling of those black creatures in the night, which made the
place a lively resemblance of hell. And as miserable was the wast that was
there made, of Horses, Cuttle, Sheep, Swine, Galves, Lambs, Roasting Pigs, and
Fowls [which they bad plundered in the Town] some roasting, some lying and
burning, and some boiling to feed our merciless Enemles; who were joyful
enough though we were disconsolate. To add to the dolefulness of the former
day, and the dismalness of the present night: my thoughts ran upon my losses
and sad bereaved condition. All was gone, my Husband gone (at least separated
from me, he being in the Bay; and to add to my grief, the Indians told me they
would kill him as he came homeward) my Children gone, my Relations and Friends
gone, our House and home and all our comforts within door, and without, all was
gone, (except my life) and I knew not but the next moment that might go too.
There remained nothing to me but one poor wounded (...) and it seemed at
present worse than death that it was in such a pitiful condition, bespeaking,
Compassion, and I had an refreshing for it, nor suitable things to revive it,
Little do many think what is the savageness and bruitishness of this barbarous
Enemy! even those that seem to profess more than others among them, when the
English have fallen into their hands.

Those seven that were killed at Lancaster the summer before upon a Sabbath
day, and the one that was afterward killed upon a week day, were stain and
mangled in a barbarous manner, by one-ey'd John, and Marlborough's Praying
Indians, which Capt. Mosely brought to Boston, as the Indians told me.

The second Remove.
But now, the next morning, I must turn my back upon the Town, and travel with
them into the vast and isolate Wilderness, I knew not whether. It is not (...)
tongue, or pen can express the sorrows of my heart, and bitterness of my
spirit, that I had at this departure: but God was with me, in a wonderful
manner, carrying me along, and bearing up my spirit, that it did not quite fail
One of the indians carried my poor wounded Babe upon a horse, it went moaning
all along, I shall die, I shall die. (...) went on foot after it, with sorrow
that cannot be expressed. At length I took it off the horse, and ^^^^ed it in my
arms till my strength sailed, and I fell down with it: Then they set me upon a
horse with my wounded Child in my lap, and there being no furnitunre upon the
horse back; as we were going down a steep hill, we both fell over the horses
head, at which they like inhumane creatures laughed, and rejoiced to see it,
though I thought we should there have ended our days, as overcome with so many
difficulties. But the Lord renewed my strength still, and carried me along,
that I might see more of his Power; yea, so much that I could never have
thought of, had I not experienced it.

After this it quickly began to snow, and when night came on, they stopped: and
now down I must sit in the snow, by a little fire, and a few boughs behind me,
with my sick Child in my lap; and calling much for water, being now (through
the wound) fallen into a violent Fever. My own wound also growing so stiff,
that I could scarce sit down or rise up; yet so it must be, that I must sit all
this cold winter night upon the cold snowy ground, with my sick Child in my
arms, looking that every hour would be the last of its life; and having no
Christian friend near me, either to comfort or help me. Oh, I may see the
wonderful power of God, that my Spirit did not utterly sink under my
affliction: still the Lord upheld me with his gracious and merciful Spirit,
and we were both alive to see the light of the next morning.

The third remove.
The morning being come, they prepared to go their way: One of the Indians got
up upon a horse, and they set me up behind him, with my poor sick Babe in my
lap. A very wearisome and tedious day I had of it; what with my own wound, and
my Child's being so exceeding sick, and in a lamentable condition with her
wound. It may be easily judged what a poor feeble condition we were in, there
being not the least crumb of refreshing that came within either of our mouths,
from Wednesday night to Saturday night, except only a little cold water. This
day in the afternoon, about an hour by Sun, we came to the place where they
intendded, viz. an Indian Town, called Wenimesset, Norward of Quabaug. When we
were come, Oh the number of Pagans (now merciless enemies) that there came
about me, that I may say as David, Psalm. 27.13, I had fainted, unless I had
believed, etc. The next day was the Sabbath: I then remembered how careless I
had been of Gods holy time: how many Sabbaths I had lost and misspent, and how
evily I had walked in Gods sight; which lay so closs unto my spirit, that it
was easy for me to see how righteous it was with God to cut off the thread of
my life, and cast me out of his presence for ever. Yet the Lord still showed
mercy to me, and upheld me; and as he wounded me with one hand, so he healed me
with the other. This day there came to me one Robbert Pepper (a man belonging
to Roxbury) who was taken in Captain Beers his Fight, and had been now a
considerable time with the Indians; and up with them almost as far as Albany to
see king Philip, as he told me, and was now very lately come into these parts.
Hearing, I say, that I was in this Indian Town, he obtained leave to come and
see me. He told me, he himself was wounded in the leg at Captain Beers his
Fight; and was not able some time to go, but as they carried him, and as he
took Oaken leaves and laid to his wound, and through the blessing of God he was
able to travel again. Then I took Oaken leaves and laid to my side, and with
the blessing of God it cured me also; yet before the cure was wrought, I may
say, as it is in Psalm. 38.5, 6. My wounds stink and are corrupt, I am troubled,
I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long. I sat much alone with
a poor wounded Child in my lap, which moaned night and day, having nothing to
revive the body, or cheer the spirits of her, but in stead of that, sometimes
one Indian would come and tell me one hour, that your Master will knock your
Child in the head, and then a second, and then a third, your Master will
quickly knock your Child in the head.

This was the comfort I had from them, miserable comforters are ye all, as he
said. Thus nine days I sat upon my knees, with my Babe in my lap, till my
flesh was raw again; my Child being even ready to depart this sorrowful world,
they bade me carry it out to another Wigwam (I suppose because they would not
be troubled with such spectacles) Whither I went with a very heavy heart, and
down I sat with the picture of death in my lap. About two houtes in the night,
my sweet Babe, like a Lamb departed this life, on Feb. 18. 1675. It being
about six years, and five months old. It was nine days from the first
wounding, in this miserable condition, without any refreshing of one nature or
other, except a little cold water. I cannot but take notice, how at another
time I could not bear to be in the room where any dead person was, but now the
case is changed; I must and couldly down by my dead Babe, side by side all the
night after. I have thought since of the wonderful goodness of God to me, in
preserving me in the use of my reason and senses, in that distressed time, that
I did not use wicked and violent means to end my own miserable life. In the
morning, when they understood that my child was dead they sent for me home to
my Masters Wigwam: (by my Master in this writing, must be understood Quanopin,
who was a Saggamore, and married King Phillips wives Sister; not that be first
took me, but I was sold to him by another Narrhaganset Indian, who took me when
first I came out of the Garrison I went to take up my dead child in my arms to
carry it with me, but they bid me let it alone: there was no resisting, but go
I must and leave it. When I had been at my masters wigwam, I took the first
opportunity I could get, to go look after my dead child: when I came I asked
them what they had done with it? then they told me it was upon the hill: then
they went and showed me where it was, where I saw the ground was newly dug,
and there they told me they had buried it: There I left that Child in the
Wilderness, and must commit it, and my self also in this Wilderness-condition,
to him who is above all. God having taken away this dear Child, I went to see
my daughter Mary, who was at this same Indian Town, at a Wigwam not very far
off, though we had little liberty or opportunity to see one another: she was
about ten years old, and taken from the door at first by a Praying Ind and
afterward sold for a gun. When I came in sight, she would fall a weeping; at
which they were provoked, and would not let me come near her, but bade me be
gone; which was a heart-cutting word to me. I had one Child dead, another in
the Wilderness, I knew not where, the third they would not let me come near to:
Me (as he said) have ye bereaved of my Children, Joseph is not, and Simeon is
not, and ye will take Benjamin also, all these things are against me. I could
not for still in this condition, but kept, walking from one place to another.
And as I was going along, my heart was ^^^n overwhelmed with the thoughts of my
condition, and that I should have Children, and a Nation which I knew not ruled
over them. Whereupon learnestly entreated the Lord, that he would consider my
low estate, and show me a token for good, and if it were his blessed will, some
sign and hope of some relief. And indeed quickly the Lord answered, in some
measure, my poor prayers: For as I was going up and down mourning and lamenting
my condition, my Son came to me, and asked me how I did; I had not seen him
before, since the destruction of the Town, and I knew not where he was, till I
was informed by himself, that he was amongst a smaller percel of Indians, whose
place was about six miles off; with tears in his eyes, he asked me whether his
Sister Sarah was dead; and told me he had seen his Sister Mary; and prayed me,
that I would not be troubled in reserence to himself. The occasion of his
coming to see me at this time, was this: There was, as I said, about six miles
from us, a small Plantation of Indians, where it seems he had been during his
Captivity: and at this time, there were some Forces of the Ind. gathered out of
our company, and some also from them (among whom was my Sons master) to go to
assault and burn Medfield: In this time of the absence of his master, his dame
brought him to see me. I took this to be some gracious answer to my earnest and
unfeigned desire. The next day, viz. to this, the Indians returned from
Medfield, all the company, for those that belonged to the other small company,
came thorough the Town that now we were at But before they came to us, Oh! the
outrageous roaring and hooping that there was: They began their din about a
mile before they came to us. By their noise and hooping they signified how many
they had destroyed (which was at that time twenty three) Those that were with
us at home, were gathered together as soon as they heard the hooping, and every
time that the other went over their number, these at home gave a shout, that
the very Earth rung again: And thus they coutinned till those that had been
upon the expedition were come up to the Sagamores Wigwam; and then, Oh, the
hideous insulting and triumphing that there was over some English men's scalps
that they had taken (as their manner it) and brought with them. I cannot but
take notice of the wonderful mercy of God to me in those afflictions, in
sending me a Bible One of the Indians that came from Medfield fight, had
brought some plunder, came to me, and asked me, if I would have a Bible, he had
got one in his Basket, I was glad of it, and asked him, whether be thought the
Indians would let me read? he answered, yes; so I took the Bible, and in that
melancholy time, it came into my mind to read first the 28. Chap. of Deuteronomy.
which I did, and when I had read it, my dark heart wrought on this manner, That
there was no mercy for me, that the blessings were gone, and the Curses Came in
their room, and that I bad lost my opportunity. But the Lord helped me still to
go one reading till I came to Chap. 30 the seven first verses, where I sound,
There was mercy promised again, if we would return to him by reportance; and
though we were scartered from one end of the Earth to the other, yet the Lord
would gather (...) together, and turn all those curses upon our Enemies, I do
not desire to live to forget this Scripture, and what comfort it was to me.

Now the Ind. began to talk of removing from this place, some one way, and some
another. There were now besides my self nine, English Captives in this place
(all of them Children, except one Woman) I got an opportunity to go and take my
leave of them; they being to go one way, and I another, I asked them whether
they were earnest with God for deliverance, they told me, they did as they were
able, and it was some comfort to me, that the Lord stirred up Children to look
to him. The Woman viz. Goodwife Jostin told me, she should never see me again,
and that she could find in her heart to run away; I wished her not to tun away
by any means, for we were near thirty miles from any English Town, and she very
big with Child, and had but one week to reckon; and another Child in her Arms,
two years old, and bad Rivers there were to go over, and we were feeble, with
our poor and course entertainment. I had my Bible with me, I pulled it out, and
asked her whether she would read; we opened the Bible and lighted on Psalm. 27.
in which Psalm we especially took notice of that, ver. alt, Wait no the Lord,
Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine Heart, wait I say on the Lord.

The fourth Remove.
And now I must part with that little Company I had. Here I parted from my
Daughter Mary, (whom I never saw again till I saw her in Dorcester, returned
from Captivity, and from four little Cousins and Neighbors, some of which I
never saw afterward: the Lord only knows the end of them. Amongst them also was
that poor Woman before mentioned, who came to a sad end, as some of the company
told me in my travel: She having much grief upon her Spirit, about her
miserable condition, being so near her time, she would be often asking the
Indians to let her go home; they not being willing to that, and yet vexed with
her importunity, gathered a great company together about her, and stripped her
naked, and set her in the midst of them; and when they had sung and danced
about her (in their hellish manner) as long as they pleased, they knocked her on
head, and the child in her arms with her: when they had done that, they made a
fire and put them both into it, and told the other Children that were with
them, that if they attempted to go home, they would serve them in like manner:
The Children said, she did not shed one tear, but prayed all the while. But to
return to my own Journey; we traveled about half a day or little more, and
came to a desolate place in the Wilderness, where there were no Wigwams or
Inhabitants before; we came about the middle of the afternoon to this place;
cold and wet, and snowy, and hungry, and weary, and no refreshing, for man, but
the cold ground to sit on, and our poor Indian cheer.

Heart-aking thoughts here I had about my poor Children, who were scattered up
and down among the wild beasts of the forest: My head was light and dissey
(either through hunger or hard lodging, or trouble or altogether) my knees
feeble, my body raw by sitting double night and day, that I cannot express to
man the affliction that lay upon my Spirit, but the Lord helped me at that time
to express it to himself. I opened my Bible to read, and the Lord brought that
precious Scripture to me, Jer. 31.16. Thus says the Lord, refrain thy voice
from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded, and
they shall come again from the land of the Enemy. This was a sweet Cordial to
me, when I sat down, and weept sweetly over this Scripture. At this place we
continued about four days.

The fifth Remove.
The occasion (as I thought) of their moving at this time, was, the English
Army it being near and following them: For they went, as if they had gone for
their lives, for some considerable way, and then they made a stop, and chose
some of their stoutest men, and sent them back to hold the English Army in play
whilst the rest escaped: And then, like Jehu, they marched on furiously, with
their old, and with their young: some carried their old decrepit mothers, some
carried one, and some another. Four of them carried a great Indian upon a Bier;
but going through a thick Wood with him, they were hindered, and could make no
have; whereupon they took him upon their backs, and carried him, one at a time,
till they came to Bacquaug River. Upon a Friday, a little after noon we came to
this River. When all the company was come up, and were gathered together, I
thought to count the number of them, but they were so many, and being somewhat
in motion, it was beyond my skill. In this travel, because of my wound, I was
somewhat favored in my load; I carried only my knitting work and two quarts of
parched meal: Being very faint I asked my mistress to give me one spoonful of
the meal, but she would not give me a taste. They quickly sell to cutting dry
trees, to make Rafts to carry them over the river: and soon my turn came to go
over: By the advantage of some brush which they had laid upon the Raft to sit
upon, I did not wet my foot (which many of themselves at the other end were
mid-leg deep) which cannot but be acknowledged as a favor of God to my weakened
body, it being a very cold time. I was not before acquainted with such kind of
doings or dangers. When thou passst through the water I will be with thee, and
through the Rivers th^^ (...) overflow thee, Isai. 43.2. A certain number of us
got over the River that night, but it was the night after the Sabbath before
all the company was got over. On the Saturday they boiled an old Horses leg
which they had got) and so we drank of the broth, ^s soon as they thought it
was ready, and when it (...) almost all gone, they filled it up again.

The first week of my being among them, I hardly ate any thing; the second
week, I found my stomach grow very faint for want of something; and yet it was
very hard to get down their filthy trash: but the third week, though I could
think how formerly my stomach would turn against this or that, and I could
starve and die before I could eat such things, yet they were sweet and savoury
to my taste. I was at this time knitting a pair of white cotton stockins for my
mistress: and had not yet wrought upon a Sabbath day; when the Sabbath came
they bade me go to work; I told them it was the Sabbath Day, and desired them
to let me rest, and told them I would do as much more to morrow; to which they
answered me, they would break my face. And here I cannot but take notice of the
strange providence of God in preserving the heathen: They were many hundreds,
old and young, some sick, and some lame many had Papooses at their backs, the
greatest number at this time with us, were Squams, and they traveled with all
they had, bag and baggage, and yet they got over this River aforesaid; and on
Monday they set their Wigwams on fire, and away they went: On that very day
came the English Army after them to this River, and saw the smoke of their
Wigwams, and yet this River put a stop to them. God did not give them courage
or activity to go over after us; we were not ready for so great a mercy as
victory and deliverance; if we had been, God would have sound out a way for the
English to have passed this River, as well as for the Indians with their Squaws
and Children, and all their Luggage: Oh that my People had hearkened to me, and
Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and
turned my hand against their Adversaries, Psalm. 81.13.14.

The sixth Remove.
On Monday ( as I said) they set their Wigwams on fire, and went away. It was a
cold morning, and before us there was a great Brook with ice on it; some waded
through it, up to the knees and higher, but others went till they came to a
Beaver-dam, and I amongst them, where through the good providence of God, I did
not wet my foot. I went along that day mourning and lamenting, leaving farther
my own Country, and traveling into the vast and howling Wilderness, and I
understood something of Lot's Wife's Temptation, when she looked back: we came
that day to a great Swamp, by the side of which we took up our lodging that
night. When I came to the brow of the hill, that looked toward the Swamp, I
thought we had been come to a great Indian Town (though there were none but our
own Company) The Indians were as thick as the trees: it seemd as if there had
been a thousand Hatchets going at once: if one looked before one, there was
nothing but Indians, and behind one, nothing but Indians, and so on either
hand, I my self in the midst, and no Christian soul near me, and yet how has
the Lord preserved me insafety? Oh the experience that I have had of the
goodness of God, to me and mine!

The seventh Remove.
After a restless and hungry night there, we had a wearisome time of it the
next day. The Swamp by which we lay, was, as it were, a deep Dungeon, and an
exceeding high and steep hill before it. Before I got to the top of the hill, I
thought my heart and legs, and all would have broken, and failed me. What
through faintness, and soreness of body, it was a grievous day of travel to me.
As we went along, I saw a place where English Cattle had been: that was comfort
to me, such as it was: quickly after that we came to an English Path, which so
took with me, that I thought I could have freely lyan down and dyed. That day,
a little after noon, we came to Squaukheag, where the Indians quickly spread
themselves over the deserted English Fields, gleaning what they could find;
some picked up ears of Wheat that were crickled down, some found ears of Indian
Corn, some found Ground-nuts, and others sheaves of Wheat that were frozen
together in the shock, and went to threshing of them out My self got two ears
of Indian Corn, and whilst I did but turn my back, one of them was stolen from
(...), which much troubled me There came an Indian to them at that time, with a
basket of Horse-liver; I asked him to give me a piece: What, says (...), can
you eat Horse-liver? I told him, I would try, if he would give a piece, which
he did, and I laid it on the coals to roast; but before it was half ready, they
got half of it away from me, so that I was fain to take the rest and eat it as
it was, with the blood about my mouth, and yet a savoury bit it was to me: For
to the hungry Soul every bitter thing is sweet. A solemn sight methought it
was, to see Fields of wheat and Indian Corn forsaken and spoiled: and the
remainders of them to be food for our merciless Enemies. That night we had a
mess of wheat for our Supper.

The eight Remove.
On the morrow morning we must go over the River, i. e. Connecticot, to meet
with King Philip, two Cannoos full, they had carried over, the next Turn j my
self was to go; but as my foot was upon the Cannoo to step in, there was a
sudden outcry among them, and j must step back; and instead of going over the
River, j must go four or five miles up the River farther Northward. Some of the
jndians ran one way, and some another. The cause of this rout was, as j
thought, their espying some English Scouts, who were thereabout. In this travel
up the River; about noon the Company made a stop, and sat down; some to eat,
and others to rest them. As I sat amongst them, musing of things past, my Son
Joseph unexpectedly came to me: we asked of each others welfare* bemoaning our
doleful condition, and the change that had come upon us: We had Husbands and

Father, and Children, and Sisters, and Friends, and Relations, and House, and
Home, and many Comforts of this Life: but now we may say, as Job, Naked came I
out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return: The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. I asked him whither he would
read; he told me, he earnestly desired it, J gave him my Bible, and he lighted
upon that comfortable Scripture, Psalm. 18.17, 18. I shall not die but live, and
declare the works of the Lord: the Lord has chastened me sore, yet he has not
given me over to death. Look here, Mother (says he) did you read this? And
here I may take occasion to mention one principal ground of my setting forth
these Lines: even as the Psalmist says, To dealare the Works of the Lord, and
his wonderful Power in carrying us along, preserving us in the Wilderness,
while under the Enemies hand, and returning of us in safety again. And His
goodness in bringing to my hand so many comfortable and suitable Scriptures in
my distress. But to Return, We traveled on till night; and in the morning, we
must go over the River to Philip's Crew. When I was in the Cannoo, I could not
but be amazed at the numerous crew of Pagans that were on the Bank on the other
side. When J came ashore, they gathered all about me, I sitting alone in the
midst: I observed they asked one another questions, and laughed, and rejoiced
over their Gains and Victories.

Then my heart began to fail: and I fell a weeping; which was the first time to
my remembrance, that J wept before them. Although J had met with so much
Affliction, and my heart was many times ready to break, yet could J not shed
one tear in their sight: but rather had been all this while in a maze, and like
one astonished: but now J may say as, Psalm 137.1. By the Rivers of Babylon,
there we sat down: yea, we wept when we remembered Zion. There one of them
asked me, why J wept, J could hardly tell what to say: yet J answered, they
would kill me: No, said he, none will hurt you. Then came one of them and gave
me two spoon-fulls of Meal to comfort me, and another gave me half a pint of
Pease; which was more worth than many Bushels at another time. Then J went to
see King Philip, he bade me come in and sit down, and asked me whether J would
smoke it (a usual Complement now adays amongst Saints and Sinners) but this no
way suited me. For though I had formerly used Tobacco, yet I had left it ever
since I was first taken. It seems to be a Bait, the Devil lays to make men
loose their precious time: J remember with shame, how formerly, when J had
taken two or three pipes, J was presently ready for another, such a bewitching
thing it is: But J thank God, he has now given me power over it: surely there
are many who may be better employed than to ly sucking a stinking Tobacco-pipe.

Now the Indians gather their Forces to go against North-Hampton: overnight
one went about yelling and hooting to give notice of the design. Whereupon they
fell to boiling of Ground-nuts, and parching of Corn (as many as had it) for
their Provision: and in the morning away they went: During my abode in this
place, Philip spoke to me to make a shirt for his boy, which I did, for which
he gave me a shilling: I offered the money to my master, but he bade me keep it:
and with it J bought a piece of Horse flesh. Afterward he asked me to make a
Cap for his boy, for which he invited me to Dinner. J went, and he gave me a
Pancake, about as big as two fingers; it was made of parched wheat, beaten, and
fried in Bears grease, but I though I never tasted pleasanter meat in my life.
There was a Squaw who spoke to me to make a shirt for her Sannup, for which she
gave me a piece of Bear. Another asked me to knit a pair of Stockins, for which
she gave me a quart of Pease: J boiled my Pease and Bear together, and invited
my master and mistress to dinner, but the proud Gossip, be cause J served them
both in one Dish, would eat nothing, except on bit that he gave her upon the
point of his knife. Hearing that my son was come to this place, J went to see
him, and found him lying flat upon the ground: J asked him how he could sleep
so? he answered me, That he was not asleep, but at Prayer; and lay so that they
might not observe what he was doing. J pray God he may remember these things
now he is returned in safety. At this Place (the Sun now getting higher) what
with the beams and heat of the Sun, and the smoke of the Wigwams, J thought I
should have been blind, I could scarce discern one Wigwam from another, There
was here one Mary Thurston of Medfield, who seeing how it was with me, lent me
a Hat to wear: but as soon as I was gone, the Squaw who owned that Mary
Thurston) came running after me, and got it away again. Here was the Squaw that
gave me one spoonful of Meal. I put it in my Pocket to keep it safe: yet
notwithstanding some body stole it, but put five Indian Corns in the room of
it: which Corns were the greatest Provisions J had in my travel for one day.

The Indians returning from North-Hamptom, brought with them some Horses, and
Sheep, and other things which they had taken: J desired them, that they would
carry me to Albany, upon one of those Horses, and sell me for Powder: for so
they had sometimes discoursed. J was utterly hopless of getting home on foot,
the way that I came. I could hardly bear to think of the many weary sheps J had
taken, to come to this place.

The ninth Remove.
But in stead of going either to Albany or homeward, we must go five miles up
the River, and then go over it. Here we abode a while. Here lived a sorry
Indian, who spoke to me to make him a shirt, when I had done it, he would pay
we nothing. But he living by the River side, where I often went to setch water,
I would often be putting of him in mind, and calling for my pay: at last he
told me, if I would make another shirt, for a Papoos not yet born, he would
give me a knife, which he did when I had done it. I carried the knife in, and
my master asked me to give it him, and I was not a little glad that I had any
thing that they would accept of, and be pleased with. When we were at this
place, my Masters maid came home, she had been gone three weeks into the
Narrhaganset Country, to fetch Corn, where they had stored up some in the
ground: she brought home about a peck and half of Corn. This was about the time
that their great Captain, Naananto, was killed in the Narrhaganset Country. My
Son being now about a mile from me, I asked liberty to go and see him, they
bade me go, and away I went: but quickly lost my self, traveling over Hills
and thorough Swamps, and could not find the way to him. And I cannot but admire
at the wonderful power and goodness of God to me, in that, though I was gone
from home, and met with all sorts of Indian, and those I had no knowledge of,
and there being no Christian soul near me; yet not one of them offered the
least imaginable miscarriage to me. I turned homeward again, and met with my
master, he showed me the way to my Son: When I came to him I found him not
well; and withal he had a boil on his side, which much troubled him: We
bemoaned one another while, as the Lord helped us, and then I returned again.
When I was returned, I found my self as unsatisfied as I was before. I went up
and down mourning and lamenting: and my spirit was ready to sink, with the
thoughts of my poor Children: my Son was ill, and I could not but think of his
mournful looks, and no Christian-Friend was near him, to do any office of love
for him, either for Soul or Body. And my poor Girl, I knew not where she was,
nor whither she was sick, or well, or alive, or dead. J repaired under these
thoughts to my Bible (my great comfort in that time) and that Scripture came to
my hand, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and He shall sustain thee, Psalm. 55.22.

But I was fain to go and look after something to fatisfie my hunger, and going
among the Wigwams, J went into one, and there found a Squaw who, showed her
self very kind to me, and gave me a piece of Bear. J put it into my pocket, and
came home, but could not find an opportunity to broil it, for fear they would
get it from me, and there it lay all that day and night in my stinking pocket.
In the morning J went to the same Squaw, who had a Kettle of Ground nuts
boiling; J asked her to let me boil my piece of Bear in her Kettle, which she
did, and gave me some Ground-nuts to eat with it: and J cannot but think how
pleasant it was to me. J have sometime seen Bear bake very handsomely among the
English, and some liked it, but the thoughts that it was Bear, made me tremble:
but now that was savoury to me that one would think was enough to turn the
stomacn of a bruit Creature.

One bitter cold day, j could find no room to sit down before the fire: I went
out, and could not tell what to do, but I went in to another Wigwam, where they
were also sitting round the fire, but the Squaw laid a skin for me, and bid me
sit down, and gave me some Ground-nuts, and bade me come again: and told me
they would buy me, if they were able, and yet these were strangers to me that I
never saw before.

The tenth Remove.
That day a small part of the Company removed about three quarters of a mile,
intending further the next day. When they came to the place where they intended
to lodge, and bad pitched their wigwams; being hungry J went again back to the
place we were before at, to get something to eat: being encouraged by the
Squaws kindness, who bade me come again; when J was there, there came an Indian
to look after me, who when he had found me, kicked me all along: J went home and
found Venison roasting that night, but they would not give me one bit of it.
Sometimes J met with favor, and sometimes with nothing but frowns.

The eleventh Remove.
The next day in the morning they took their Travel, intending a days journey
up the River, j took my load at my back, and quickly we came to wade over the
River: and passed over tiresome and we arisome hills. One hill was so steep
that J was fain to creep up upon my knees, and to hold by the twiggs and bushes
to keep my self from falling backward. My head also was so light, that J
usually reeled as J went; but J hope all these wearisome steps that j have
taken, are but a forewarning of me to the heavenly rest. I know, O Lord, that
thy Judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness ^ast afflicted me,
Psalm. 119 71.

The twelfth Remove.
It was upon a Sabbath-day-morning, that they prepared for their Travel. This
morning j asked my master whither he would sell me to my Husband; he answered
me Nux, which did much rejoice my spirit. My mistress, before we went, was gone
to the burial of a Papoos, and returning, she found me sitting and reading in
my Bible; she snatched it hastily out of my hand, and threw it out of doors; I
ran out and caught it up, and put it into my pocket, and never let her see it
afterward. Then they packed up their things to be gone, and gave me my load: I
complained it was too heavy, whereupon she gave me a slap in the face, and bade
me go; I lifted up my heart to God, hoping that Redemption was not far off: and
the rather because their insolency grew worse and worse.

But the thoughts of my going homeward (for we bent our course) much cheared my
Spirit, and made my burden seem light, and almost nothing at all. But (to my
amazment and great perplexity) the scale was soon turned: for when we had gone
a little way, on a sudden my mistress gives out, she would go no further, but
turn back again, and said. I must go back again with her, and she called her
Sannup, and would have had him gone back also, but he would not, but said, He
would go on, and come to us again in three days. My Spirit was upon this, I
confess, very impatient, and almost outrageous. I thought I could as well have
dyed as went back: I cannot declare the trouble that I was in about it; but yet
back again I must go. As soon as I had an opportunity, I took my Bible to read,
and that quieting Scripture came to my hand, Psalm. 46.10. Be still, and know
that I am God. Which stilled my spirit for the present: But a sore time of
trial, I concluded, J had to go through. My master being gone, who seemed to me
the best, friend that I had of an Indian, both in cold and hunger, and quickly
so it proved. Down I sat, with my heart as full as it could hold, and yet so
hungry that I could not sit neither: but going out to see what I could find,
and walking among the Trees, I found six Acrons, and two Ches-nuts, which were
some refreshment to me. Toward Night I gathered me some sticks for my own
comfort, that I might not ly a-cold: but when we came to ly down they bade me
go out, and ly some-where-else, for they had company (they said) come in more
than their own: I told them, I could not tell where to go, they bade me go
look; I told them, if I went to another Wigwam they would be angry, and send m^
home again. Then one of the Company drew his sword, and told me he would run me
thorough if I did not go presently. Then was I fain to stoop to this ^ude
fellow, and to go out in the night, J knew not whither. Mine eyes have seen
that fellow afterward walking up and down Boston, under the appearance of a
Friend-Indian, and several others of the like Cut. I went to one Wigwam, and
they told me they had no room. Then I went to another, and they said the same;
at last an old Indian bade me come to him, and his Squaw give me some
Ground-nuts; she gave me also something to lay under my head, and a good fire
we had: and through the good providence of God, I had a comfortable lodging
that night. In the morning, another Indian bade me come at night, and he would
give me six Ground nuts, which I did. We were at this place and time about two
miles from Connecticut River. We went in the morning to gather Ground nuts, to
the River, and went back again that night. I went with a good load at my back
for they when they went, though but a little way, would carry all their
trumpery with them) I told them the skin was off my back, but J had no other
comforting answer from them than this, That i^ would be no matter if myhead
were off too.

The thirteenth Remove.
Instead of going toward the Bay, which was that I desired, I must go with them
five or six miles down the River into a mighty Thicket of Brush: where we abode
almost a fortnight. Here one asked me to make a shirt for her Papoos, for which
she gave me a mess of Broth, which was thickened with meal made of the Bark of
a Tree, and to make it the better, she had put into it about a handful of
Pease, and a sew roasted Ground-nuts, J had not seen my son a pretty while, and
here was an Indian of whom J made inquiry after him, and asked him when he saw
him: he answered me, that such a time his master roasted him, and that himself
did eat a piece of him, as big as his two fingers, and that he was very good
meat: But the Lord upheld my Spirit, under this discouragement; and I
considered their horrible addictedness to lying, and that there is not one of
them that makes the least conscience of speaking of truth. In this place, on a
cold night, as I lay by the fire, J removed a stick that kept the heat from me,
a Squaw moved it down again, at which I looked up, and she threw a handful of
ashes in mine eyes; J thought J should have been quite blinded, and have never
seen more: but lying down, the water run out of my eyes, and carried the dirt
with it, that by the morning, I recovered my sight again. Yet upon this, and
the like occasions, I hope it is not too much to say with Job, Have pity upon
me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the Hand of the Lord has touched
me. And here I cannot but remember how many times sitting in their Wigwams, and
musing on things past, I should suddenly leap up and run out, as if I had been
at home, forgetting where I was, and what my condition was: But when I was
without, and saw nothing but Wilderness, and Woods, and a company of barbarous
heathens: my mind quickly returned to me, which made me think of that, spoken
concerning Sampson, who said, I will go out and shake myself as at other times,
but he wist not that the Lord was departed from him. About this time I began to
think that all my hopes of Restoration would come to nothing. I thought of the
English Army, and hoped for their coming, and being taken by them, but that
failed. I hoped to be carried to Albany, at the Indians had discoursed before,
but that failed also. I thought of being sold to my Husband, as my master
spoke, but in stead of that, my master himself was gone, and j left behind, so
that my Spirit was now quite ready to sink. J asked them to let me go out and
pick up some sticks, that j might get alone, And pour out my heart unto the
Lord. Then also j took my Bible to read, but j found no comfort here neither:
which many times j was went to find: So easy a thing it is with God to dry up
the Streams of Scripture-comfort from us. Yet j can say, that in all my
sorrows and afflictions, God did not leave me to have my impatience work
toward himself, as if his ways were unrighteous. But I knew that he laid upon
me less then j deserved Afterward, before this doleful time ended with me, I
was turning the leaves of my Bible, and the Lord brought to me some Scriptures,
which did a little revive me, as that Isai. 55.8 For my thoughts are not your
thougts, neither are your ways my ways says the Lord. And also that, Psalm.
37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass. About this time they came yelping from Hadly, where they had killed three
English men, and brought one Captive with them, viz. Thomas Read. They all
gathered about the poor Man, asking him many Questions. I desired-also to go
and see him; and when I came, he was crying bitterly: supposing they would
quickly kill him. Whereupon j asked one of them, whether they intended to kill
him; he answered me, they would not: He being a little cheared with that, I
asked him about the welfare of my Husthand, he told me he saw him such a time
in the Bay, and he was well, but very melancholy. By which I certainly
understood (though I suspected it before) that whatsoever the Indians told me
respecting him was vanity and lies. Some of them told me, he was dead, and they
had killed him: some said he was Married again, and that the Governor wished
him to Marry; and told him he should have his choice, and that all persuaded I
was dead. So like were these barbarous creatures to him who was a liar from the
beginning.

As I was sitting once in the Wigwam here, Phillps Maid came in with the Child
in her arms, and asked me to give het a piece of my Apron, to make a flap for
it, I told her I would not: then my Mist: riss bad me give it, but still I said
no: the maid told me if I would not give her a piece, she would tear a piece
off it: I told her I would tear her Coat then with that my Mistress rises up,
and takes up a stick big enough to have killed me, and struck at me with it,
but J stepped out, and she struck the stick into the Mat of the Wigwam. But while
she was pulling of it out, j ran to the Maid and gave her all my Apron, and so
that storm went over.

Hearing that my Son was come to this place, I went to see him, and told him
his Father was well, but very melancholy: he told me he was as much grieved
for his Father as for himself; I wondered at his speech, for I thought I had
enough upon my spirit in reference to my self, to make me mindless of my
Husband and every one else: they being safe among their Friends. He told me
also, that a while before, his Master (together with other Indians) where going
to the French for Powder; but by the way the Mohawks met with them, and killed
four of their Company which made the rest turn back again, for which I desire
that myself and he may bless the Lord; for it might have been worse with him,
had he been sold to the French, than it proved to be in his remaining with the
Indians

I went to see an English Youth in this place, one John Gilberd of Spring field
J found him lying without doors, upon to ground; j asked him how he did? he
told me he was very sick of a flux, with eating so much blood: They had turned
him out of the Wigwam, and with him an indian Papoos, almost dead, (whose
Parents had been killed) in a bitter cold day, without fire or clothes: the
young man himself had nothing on, but his shirt and wastcoat. This sight was
enough to melt a heart of flint. There they lay quivering in the Cold, the
youth round like a dog; the Papoos stretched out, with his eyes and nose and
mouth full of dirt, and yet alive, and groaning. j advised John to go and get
to some fire: he told me he could not stand, but ^ persuaded him still, left he
shouldly there and die: and with much ado j got him to a fire, and went my
self home. As soon as j was got home, his Masters Daughter came after me, to
know what j had done with the English man, j told her j had got him to a fire
in such a place. Now had j need to pray Paul's Prayer, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. That we may
be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. For her satisfaction j went
along with her, and brought her to him; but before j got home again, it was
noised about, that j was running away and getting the English youth: along with
me: that as soon as I came in, they began to rant and domineer: asking me where
j had been, and what j had been doing? and saying they would knock him on the
head: I told them, j had been seeing the English Youth, and that I would not
run away, they told me I lied, and taking up a Hatchet, they came to me, and
said they would knock me down if I stirred out again; and so confined me to the
Wigwam. Now may J say with David, 2 Samuel 24.14. I am in a great strait. If I
keep in, I must die with hunger, and if I go out, I must be knocked in head. This
distressed condition held that day, and half the next; And then the Lord
remembered me, whose mercyes are great. Then came an Indian to me with a pair of
stockings that were too big for him, and he would have me ravel them out, and
knit them fit for him. I showed my self willing, and bid him ask my mistress if
I might go along with him a little way; she said yes, J might, but J was not a
little refresht with that news, that J had my liberty again. Then J went along
with him, and he gave me some roasted Ground-nuts, which did again revive my
feeble stomach.

Being got out of her sight: J had time and liberty again to look into my
Bible: Which was my Guide by day, and my Pillow by night. Now that comfortable
Scripture presonted it self to me, Isa. 54.7. For a small moment have I forsaken
thee* but with great mercies will I gather thee. Thus the Lord carried me along
from one time to another, and made good to me this precious promise, and many
others. Then my Son came to see me, and J asked his master to let him stay a
while with me, that J might comb his head, and look over him, for he was almost
over come with lice. He told me, when I had done, that he was very hungry, but
I had nothing to relieve him; but bid him go into the Wigwams as he went along,
and see if he could get any thing among them. Which he did, and it seems
tarried a little too long; for his Master was angry with him, and beat him, and
then sold him. Then he came running to tell me he had a new Master. and that he
had given him some Groundouts already. Then I went along with him to his new
Master who told me he loved him: and he should not want. So his Master carried
him away, and j never saw him afterward. till j saw him at Pascataqua in
Portsmouth.

That night they bade me go out of the Wigwam again: my Mistrisses Papoos was
sick, and it died that night, and there was one benefit in it, that there was
more room. J went to a Wigwam, and they bade me come in, and gave me a skin to
ly upon, and a mess of Venson and Ground-nuts, which was a choice Dish among
them. On the morrow they burried the Papoos, and afterward, both morning and
evening, there came a company to mourn and howl with her: though j confess, j
could not much condole with them. Many sorrowful days j had in this place:
often getting alone; like a Crane, or a Swallow so did I chatter: I did mourn
as a Dove, mine eyes fail with looking upward Oh, Lord j am oppressed,
undertake for me, Isa. 38 14 I could tell the Lord as Hezeakiah, ver. 3.
Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, kow I have walked before thee in truth.
Now had I time to examine al my ways: my Conscience did not accuse me of
un-righteousness toward one or other: yet I saw how in m y walk with God, I had
been a careless creature. As David said, Against thee, thee only have I sinned:
and I might say with the poor Publican, God be mereiful unto me a sinner. On
the Sabbath-dayes, I could look upon the Sun and think how People were going to
the house of God, to have their Souls refresht; and then home, and their bodies
also: but I was destitute of both; and might say as the poor Prodigal, he would
fain have filled his belly with the husks that the Swine did eat, and no man
gave unto him, Luke 15.16 For I must say with him, Father I have sinned against
Heaven, and in thy sight, ver 21. I remembered how on the night before and after
the Sabbath, when my Family was about me, and Relations and Neighbors with us,
we could pray and sing, and then refresh our bodies with the good creatures of
God; and then have a comfortable Bed to ly down on: but in stead of all this, I
had only a little Swill for the body, and then like a Swine, must ly down on
the ground. I cannot express to man the sorrow that lay upon my Spirit, the
Lord knows it. Yet that comfortable Scripture would often come to my mind, For
a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee.

The fourteenth Remove.
Now must we pack up and be gone from this Thicket, bending our course toward
the Bay-towns I having nothing to eat by the way this day, but a few crumbs of
Cake, that an Indian gave my girl the same day we were taken. She gave it me,
and I put it in my pocket: there it lay, till it was so moldy (for want of
good baking) that one could not tell what it was made of; it fell all to
crumbs, and grew so dry and hard, that it was like little flints; and this
refreshed me many times, when I was ready to faint. It was in my thoughts when
I put it into my mouth; that if ever I returned, I would tell the World what a
blessing the Lord gave to such mean sood. As we went along, they killed a Deer,
with a young one in her, they gave me a piece of the Fawn, and it was so young
and tender, that one might eat the bones as well as the flesh, and yet I
thought it very good. When night came on we sat down; it rained, but they
quickly got up a Bark Wigwam, where I lay dry that night. I looked out in the
morning, and many of them had line in the rain all night, I saw by their
Reaking. Thus the Lord dealt mercifully with me many times, and I fared, better
than many of them. In the morning they took the blood of the Deer, and put it
into the Paunch, and so boiled (...)* I could eat nothing of that, though they
ate it ^we^^tly. And yet they were so nice in other things, that when I had
fetched water, and had put the Dish I dipped the water with, into the Kettle of
water which I brought, they would say, they would knock me down; for they said,
it was a sluttish trick.

The fifteenth Remove.
We went on our Travel. I having got one handful of Ground-nuts, for my
support that day they gave me my load, and j went on cheerfully [with the
thoughts of going homeward] having my burden more on my back than my spirit:
we came to Baquang River again that day, near which we abode a few days
Sometimes one of them would give me a Pipe, another a little Tobacco, another a
little Salt: which I would change for a little Victuals. I cannot but think
what a Wolvish appetite persons have in a starving condition: for many times
when they gave me that which was hot, I was so greedy, that I should burn my
mouth, that it would trouble me hours after, and yet I should quickly do the
same again. And after I was thorougly hungry, I was never again satisfied. For
though sometimes it fell out, that I got enough, and did eat till I could eat
no more, yet I was as unsatisfied as J was when I began. And now could J see
that Scripture verified (there being many Scriptures which we do not take
notice of, or understand till we are afflianded) Mic. 6.14. Thou shall eat and
not be satisfied. Now might I see more than ever before, the miseries that sin
has brought upon us: Many times I should be ready to run out against the
Heathen, but the Scripture would quiet me again, Amos, 3 6. Shall there be evil
in the City, and the Lord has not done it? The Lord help me to make a right
improvement of His Word, and that I might learn that great lesson, Mic. 6.8, 9.
He has showed thee (Oh Man) what is good, and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? Hear ye
the rod, and who has appointed it.

The sixteenth Remove.
We began this Remove with wading over Baquag River: the water was up to the
knees, and the stream very swift, and so cold that I thought it would have cut
me in sunder. j was so weak and seeble, that j reeled as I went along, and
thought there I must end my days at last, after my bearing and getting
thorough so many difficulties; the Indians stood laughing to see me staggering
along: but in my distress the Lord gave me experience of the truth, and
goodness of that promise, Isai. 43.2. When thou passest thorough the Waters, I
will be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. Then I
sat down to put on my stockins and shoos, with the tears running down mine
eyes, and many sorrowful thoughts in my heart, but I gat up to go along with
them. Quickly there came up to us an Indian, who informed them, that I must go
to Wachuset to my master, for there was a Letter come from the Council to the
Saggamores, about redeeming the Captives, and that there would be another in
fourteen days, and that I must be there ready. My heart was so heavy before
that I could scarce speak or go in the path; and yet now so light, that J could
run. My strength seemed to come again, and recruit my feeble knees, and aching
heart: yet it pleased them to go but one mile that night, and there we stayed
two days. In that time came a company of Indians to us, near thirty, all on
horseback. My heart skipt within me, thinking they had been English men at the
first sigbt of them, for they were dressed in English Apparel, with Hats, white
Neckcloths,, and Sashes about their wastes, and Ribbonds upon their shoulders:
but when they came near, their was a vaft difference between the lovely faces
of Christians, and the foul looks of those Heathens, which much damped my
spirit again.

The seventeenth Remove.
A comfortable Remove it was to me, because of my hopes. They gave me a pack,
and along we went cheerfully; but quickly my will proved more than my strength;
having little or no refreshing my strength failed me, and my spirit were almost
quite gone. Now may I say with David, Psalm. I 19.22, 23, 24. I am poor and
needy, and my heart is wounded within me. I am gone like the shadow when it
dec^ineth: I am tossed up and down like the locusts: my knees are weak through
fasting, and my flish fails offainess. At night we came to an Indian Town,
and the Indians sat down by a Wigwam discoursing, but J was almost spent, and
could scarce speak. I laid down my load, and went into the Wigwam, and there
sat an Indian boiling of Horses feet (they being wont to eat the flesh first,
and when the feet were old and dried, and they had nothing else, they would cut
off the feet and use them) I asked him to give me a little of his Broth, or
Water they were boiling in; he took a dish, and gave me one spoonful of Samp,
and bid me take as much of the Broth as I would. Then I put some of the hot
water to the Samp, and drank it up, and my spirit came again. He gave me also a
piece of the Ruff or Ridding of the small Guts, and I broiled it on the coals;
and now may I say with Jonathan, See, I pray you, how mine eyes have been
enlightened, because j tasted a little of this honey, 1 Samuel 14.29. Now is my
Spirit revived again, though means be never so inconsiderable, yet if the Lord
bestow his blessing upon them, they shall refresh both Soul and Body.

The eighteenth Remove.
We took up our packs and along we went, but a wearisome day I had of it. As we
went along I saw an Englishman stripped naked, and lying dead upon the ground,
but knew not who it was. Then we came to another Indian Town, where we stayed
all night. In this Town there were four English Children, Captives; and one of
them my own Sisters. I went to see how she did, and she was well, considering
her Captive-condition. I would have tarried that night with her, but they that
owned her would not suffer it. Then I went into another Wigwam, where they were
boiling Corn and Beant, which was alovely sight to see, but J could not get a
taste thereof. Then I went to another Wigwam, where there were two of the
English Children; the Squaw was boiling Horses feet, then she cut me off a
little piece, and gave one of the English Children a piece also. Being very
hungry I had quickly eat up mine, but the Child could not bite it, it was so
tough and sinewy, but lay sucking, gnawing, chewing and slabbering of it in the
moutb and band, then I took it of the Child, and eat it my self, and favoury it
was to my taste. Then I may say as Job Chap. 6.7. The things that my soul
refused to touch, are as my sorrowful meat. Thus the Lord made that pleasant
refreshing, which another time would have been an abomination. Then I went home
to my mistresses Wigwam; and they told me I disgraced my master with begging,
and if I did so any more, they would knock me in head: I told them, they had as
good knock me in head as starve me to death.

The ninteenth Remove.
They said, when we went out, that we must travel to Wachuset this day. But a
bitter weary day I had of it, traveling now three days to gether, without
resting any day between. At last, after many weary steps, I saw Wachuset hills,
but many miles off. Then we came to a great Swamp, through which we traveled
up to the knees, in mud and water, which was heavy going to one tired before.
Being almost spent, I thought I should have sunk down at last, and never gat
out; but I may say, as in Psalm. 94.18. When my foot slipped, thy mercy, O Lord
held me up. Going along, having indeed my life, but little spirit, Philip, who
was in the Company, came up and took me by the hand, and said, Two weeks more
and you shall be Mistress again. I asked him, if he spoke true? he answered,
Yes, and quickly you shall come to your master again; who had been gone from us
three weeks. After many weary steps we came to Wachuset, where he was: and glad
I was to see him. He asked me, When J washed me? J told him not this month, then
he fetched me some water himself, and bid me wash, and gave me the Glass to see
how j looked; and bid his Squaw give me something to eat: so she gave me a mess
of Beans and meat, and a little Ground-nut Cake. I was wonderfully revived with
this favor showed me, Psalm. 106.46 He made them also to be pitied, of all
those that carried them Captives.

My master had three Squaws, living sometimes with one, and sometimes with
another one, this old Squaw, at whose Wigwan j was, and with whom my Master had
been those three weeks. Another was Wettimore, with whom I had lived and served
all this while: A severe and proud Dame she was; bestowing every day in
dressing her self neat as much time as any of the Gentry of the land: powdering
her hair, and painting her face, going with Neck-laces, with Jewels in her
ears, and Bracelets upon her hands: When she had dressed her self, her work was
to make Girdles of Wampom and Biads. The third Squaw was a younger one, by whom
he had two Papooses. By that time I was refresht by the old Squaw, with whom my
master was, Wettimores Maid came to call me home, at which I fell a weeping.
Then the old Squaw told me, to encourage me, that if I wanted victuals, j
should come to her, and that j shouldly there in her Wigwam. Then j went with
the maid, and quickly came again and lodged there. The Squaw laid a Mat under
me, and a good Rugg over me; the first time J had any such kindness showed me.
J understood that Wettimore thought, that if she should let me go and serve
with the old Squaw, she would be in danger to loose, not only my service, but
the redemptionpay also. And j was not a little glad to hear this; being by it
raised in my hopes, that in Gods due time there would be an end of this
sorrowful hour. Then came an Indians and asked me to knit him three pair of
Stockins, for which j had a Hat, and a silk handkerchief. Then another asked me
to make her a shift, for which she gave me an Apron.

Then came Tom and Peter, with the second Letter from the Council, about the
Captives. Though they were Indians, j gat them by the hand, and burst out into
tears; my heart was so full that J could not speak to them; but recovering my
self, j asked them how my husband did, and all my friends and acquainiance?
they said, They are all very well but melancohly. They brought me two Biskets,
and a pound of Tobacco. The Tobacco j quickly gave away; when it was all gone,
one asked me to give him a pipe of Tobacco, I told him it was all gone; then
began be to rant and threaten. I told him when my Husband camel would give him
some: Hang him Rogne (says be) I will knock out his brains, if he comes here.
And then again, in the same breath they would say, That if there should come an
hunddred without Guns, they would do them no hurt. So unstable and like mad men
they were. So that fearing the worst, I durst not send to my Husband, though
there were some thoughts of his coming to Redeem and setch me, not knowing what
might follow; For there was little more trust to them then to the master they
served. When the Letter was come, the Saggamores met to consult about the
Captives, and called me to them to enquire how much my husband would give to
redeem me, when I came I sat down among them, as J was wont to do, as their
manner is: Then they bade me stand up, and said, they were the General Court.
They bid me speak what I thought he would give, Now knowing that all we had was
destroyed by the Indians, I was in a great strait: I thought if I should speak
of but a little, it would be slighted, and hinder the matter; if of a great
sum, I knew not where is would be procured: yet at a venture, I said Twenty
pounds, yet desired them to take less; but they would not hear of that, but
sent that message to Boston, that for Twenty pound. I should be redeemed. It
was a Praying- Indian that wrote their Letter for them. There was another
Praying Indian, who told me, that he had a brother, that would not eat Horse;
his conscience was so tender and scrupulous (though as large as hell, forth
dedestruction of poor Christians) Then he said, he read that Scripture to him,
2 Kings, 6.25. There was a samine in Samatia, and behold they besieged it,
until an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth
part of a Kab of Doves dung, for five pieces of silver. He expounded this place
to his brother, and showed him that it was lawful to eat that in a Famine
which is not at another time. And now, says he, he will eat Horse with any
Indian of them all. There was another Praying- Indian, who when he bad done all
the mischief that he could, betrayed his own Father into the English hands,
thereby to purchase his own life. Another Praying- Indian was at Sudbury-fight,
though, as he deserved, he was afterward hanged for it, There was another
Praying Indian, so wicked and cruel, as to wear a string about his neck, strung
with Christians fingers. Another Praying- Indian, when they went to
Sudbury-fight, went with them, and his Squaw also with him, with her Papoos at
her back: Before they went to that fight, they got a company together to Powaw;
the manner was as follows. There was one that kneeled upon a Deer-skin, with
the company round him in a ring who kneeled, and striking upon the ground with
their hands, and with sticks; and muttering or humming with their mouths,
besides him who kneeled in the ring, there also stood one with a Gun in his
hand: Then he one the Deer-skin made a speech, and all manifested assent to it:
and so they did many times together. Then they bade him with the Gun go out of
the ring, which he did, but when he was out, they called him in again; but he
seemed to make a stand, then they called the more earnestly, till he returned
again: Then they all sang. Then they gave him two Guns, in either hand one: And
so he on the Deer-skin began again; and at the end of every sentence in his
speaking, they all assented, humming or muttering with their mouths, and
striking upon the ground with their hands. Then they bade him with the two Guns
go out of the ring again; which he did, a little way. Then they called him in
again, but he made a stand; so they called him with greater earnestness; but he
stood reeling and wavering as if he knew not whither he should stand or fall,
or which way to go. Then they called him with exceeding great vehemence, all of
them, one and another: after a little while he turned in, staggering as he
went, with his Arms stretched out, in either hand a Gun. As soon as he came
in, they all sang and rejoiced exceedingly a while. And then he opened the
Deer-skin, made another speech unto which they all assented in a rejoicing
manner: and so they ended their business, and forthwith went to Sudbury fight.
To my thinking they went without any scruple, but that they should prosper, and
gain the victory: And they went out not so rejoicing, but they came home with
as great a Victory. For they said they had killed two Captains, and almost an
hundred men. One Englishman they brought along with them: and he said, it was
too true, for they had made sad work at Sudbury, as indeed it proved. Yet they
came home without that rejoicing and triumphing over their victory, which they
were wont to show at other times: but rather like Dogs (as they say) which have
lost their cars. Yet I could not pereceive that it was for their own loss of
men: They said, they had not lost above five or six: and I missed none, excep
in one Wigwam. When they went, they acted as if the Devil had told them that
they should gain the victory: and now they acted, as if the Devil had told them
they should have a fall. Whither it were so or no, I cannot tell, but so it
proved, for quickly they began to fall, and so held on that Summer, till they
came to utter ruin. They came home on a Sabbath day, and the Powaw that
kneeled upon the Deer-skin came home (I may say, without abule) as black as the
Devil. When my master came home, be came to me and bid me make a shirt for his
Papoos, of a hollandlaced Pillowbeer. About that time there came an Indian to
me and bid me come to his Wigwam, at night, and he would give me some Pork and
Ground nuts. Which I did, and as I was eating, another Indian said to me, he
seems to be your good Friend, but he killed two Englishmen at Sudbury, and
there ly their Clothes behind you: I looked behind me, and there I saw bloody
Clothes, with Bullet holes in them; yet the Lord suffered not this wretch to do
me any hurt; Yea, instead of that, he many times refresht me: five or six times
did he and his Squaw refresh my feeble carcass. If J went to their Wigwam a^
any time, they would always give me something, and yet they were strangers
that I never saw before. Another Squaw gave me a piece of fresh Pork, and a
little Salt with it, and lent me her Panto Fry it in; and I cannot but remember
what a sweet, pleasant and delightful relish that bit had to me, to this day.
So little do we prize common mercies when we have them to the full.

The twentieth Remove.
It was their usual manner to remove, when they bad done any mischief, lest
they should be found out: and so they did at this time. We went about three or
four miles, and there they built a great Wigwam, big enough to hold an hundred
Indians, which they did in preparation to a great day of Dancing. They would
say now amongst themselves, that the Governor would be so angry for his loss
at Sudbury, that he would send no more about the Captives, which made me grieve
and tremble. My Sister being not sar from the place where we now were: and
hearing that I was here, desired her master to let her come and see me, and he
was willing to it, and would go with her: but she being ready before him, told
him she wonld go before, and was come within a Mile or two of the place; Then
he overtook her, and began to rant as if he had been mad; and made her go back
again in the Rain; so that I never saw her till j saw her in Charlestown. But
the Lord requited many of their ill doings, for this Indian her Master, was
hanged afterward at Boston. The Indians now began to come from all quarters,
against their merry dancing day. Among some of them came one Good wife Kettle:
I told her my heart was so heavy that it was ready to break: so is mine too
said she, but yet said, I hope we shall hear some good news shortly. I could
hear how earnestly my Sister desired to see me, and I as earnestly desired to
see her: and yet neither of us could get an opportunity. My Daughter was also
now about a mile off, and I had not seen her in nine or ten weeks, as I had not
seen my Sister since our first taking. I earnestly desired them to let me go
and see them: yea, I entreated, begged, and persuaded them, but to let me see
my Daughter; and yet so hard hearred were they, that they would not suffer it.
They made use of their tyrannical power whilst they had it: but through the
Lords wonderful mercy, their time was now but short.

On a Sabbath day, the Sun being about an hour high in the afternoon; came Mr.
John Hoar ( the Council permitting him, and his own foreward spirit inclining
him) together with the two forementioned Indians, Tom and Peter with their
third Letter from the Council When they came near, I was abroad. though I saw
them not, they presently called me in, and bade me sit down and not stir. Then
they catched up their Guns, and away they ran, as if an Enemy had been at hand;
and the Guns went off apace I manifested some great trouble, and they asked me
what was the matter? I told them, I thought they had killed the Englishman
(for they had in the mean time informed me that an Englishman was come) they
said, No; They shot over his Horse and under, and before his Horse; and they
pusht him this way and that way, at their pleasure: showing what they conld do:
Then they let them come to their Wigwams. I begged of them to let me see the
English man, but they would not. But there was I fain to sit their pleasure.
When they had talked their fill with him, they suffered me to go to him. We
asked each other of our welfare, and how my Husband did, and all my Friends? He
told me they were all well, and would be glad to see me. Amongst other things
which my Husband sent me, there came a pound of Tobacco: which I sold for nine
shillings in Money: for many of the Indians for want of Tobacco, smoaked
Hemlock, and Ground Ivy. it was a great mistake in any, who thought I sent for
Tobacco: for through the savor of God, that desire was overcome. I now asked
them, whither I should go home with Mr. Hoar? They answered No, one and another
of them: and it being night, we lay down with that answer; in the morning, Mr
Hoar invited the Saggamores to Dinner; but when we went to get it ready, we
fond that they had stolen the greatest part of the Provision Mr. Hoar had
brought, our of his Bags, in the night: And we may see the wonderful power of
God, in that one passage, in that when there was such a great number of the
Indians together, and so greedy of a little good food; and no English there,
but Mr. Hoar and my self: that there they did not knock us in the bead, and
take what we had: there being not only some Provision, but also Trading-cloth,
a part of the twenty pounds agreed upon: But instead of doing us any mischief,
they seemed to be ashamed of the fact, and said, it were some Matchit Indian
that did it. Oh, that we could believe that there is no thing too hard for God!
God showed his Power over the Heathen in this, as he did ever the hungry Lions
when Daniel was cast into the Den. Mr. Hoar called them betime to Dinner, but
they are very little, they being so busy in dressing themselves, and getting
ready for their Dance: which was carried one by eight of them; four Men and
four Squaws: My master and mistress being two. He was dressed in his Holland
shirt, with great Laces sewed at the cail of it, he had his silver Buttons, his
white Stockins, his Garters were hung round with Shillings, and he had Girdles
of Wampom upon his head and shoulders. She had a Kersey Coat, and covered with
Girdles of Wampom from the Loins upward: her arms from her elbows to her hands
were covered with Bracelets; there were handfulls of Neck-laces about her neck,
and several sorts of Jewels in her ears. She had fine red Stokins, and white
Shoos, her hair powdered and face painted Red, that was always before Black.
And all the Dancers were after the same manner. There were two other singing
and knocking on a Kettle for their music. They keept hopping up and down one
after another, with a Kettle of water in the midst, standing warm upon some
Embers, to drink of when they were dry. They held on till it was almost night,
throwing out Wampom to the standers by. At night I asked them again, if I
should go home? They all as one said No, except my Husband would come for me.
When we were lain down, my Master went out of the Wigwam, and by and by sent in
an Indian called James the Printer, who told Mr. Hoar, that my Master would let
me go home to morrow, if he would let him have one pint of Liquors. Then Mr.
Hoar called his own Indians, Tom and Peter, and bid the and go and see whither
he would promise it before them three: and if he would, he should have it;
which he did, and he had it. Then Philip smeling the business called me to him,
and asked me what I would give him, to tell me some good news, and speak a good
word for me, J told him, I could not tell what to give him, I would anothing I
had, and asked him what he would have? He said, two Coats and twenty shillings
in Money, and half a bushel of seed Corn, and some Tobacco. I thanked him for
his love: but I knew the good news as well as the crafty Fox. My Master after
he had had his drink, quickly came ranting into the Wigwam again, and called
for Mr. Hoar, drinking to him, and saying, He was a good man: and then again he
would say, Hang him Rogue: Being almost drunk, he would drink to him, and yet
presently say he should be hanged. Then he called for me, I trembled to hear
him, yet I was sain to go to him, and he drank to me, showing no incivility. He
was the first Indian I saw drunk all the while that I was amongst them. At last
his Squaw ran out, and he after her, round the Wigwam, with his money jingling
at his knees: But she escaped him: But having an old Squaw he ran to her: and
so throngh the Lords mercy, we were no more troubled that night. Yet I had not
a comfortable nights rest: for I think J can say, j did not sleep for three
nights together. The night before the Letter came from the Council, J could not
rest. J was so full of fears and troubles, God many times leaving us most in
the dark, when deliverance is nearest: yea, at this time I could not rest,
night nor day. The next night I was overjoyed, Mr. Hoar being come, and that
with such good tidings. The third night I was even swallowed up with the
thoughts of things, viz. that ever I should go home again; and that I must go,
leaving my Children behind me in the Wilderness; so that ^eep was now almost
departed from mine eyes.

On Tuesday morning they called their General Court (as they call it) to
consult and determine, whether I should go home or no: And they all as one man
did seemingly consent to it, that I should go home; except Philip, ^^ho would
not come among them.

But before I go any further, I would take leave to mention a few remarkable
passages of providence, which I took special notice of in my afflicted time.

1. Of the fair opportunity lost in the long March, a little after the
Fort-fight, when our English Army was so numerous, and in pursuit of the Enemy,
and so near as to take several and destroy them: and the Enemy in such distriss
for food, that our men might track them by their rooting in the earth for
Groundnuts, whilst they were ^^ying for their lives. I say, that then our Army
should want Provision, and be forced to leave their pursuit and return
homeward: and the very next week the Enemy came upon our Town, like Bears
bereft of their whelps, or so many ravenous Wolves, rending us and our Lambs to
death. But what shall I say? God seemed to leave his People to themselves, and
order all things for his own holy ends. Shall there be evil in the City and the
Lord has not done it? They are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph,
therefore shall they go Captive, with the first that go Captive. It is the Lords
doing, and it should be marvelous in our eyes.

2. I cannot but remember how the Indians derided the slowness, and dullness of
the English Army, in its setting out. For after the desolations at Lancaster
and Medfield, as I went along with them, they asked me when I thought the
English Army would come after them? I told them I could not tell: It may be
they will come in May, said they. Thus did they scoff at us, as if the English
would be a quatter of a year getting ready

3. Which also I have hinted before, when the English Army with new supplies
were sent forth to pursue after the enemy, and they understanding it: fled
before them till they came to Baquaug River, where they forthwith went over
safely: that that River should be impassable to the English. I can but admire
to see the wonderful providence of God in preserving the heathen for farther
affliction to our poor Country. They could go in great numbers over, but the
English must stop: God had an overruling hand in all those things.

4. It was thought, if their Corn were cut down, they would starve and die with
hunger: and all their Corn that could be found, was destroyed, and they driven
from that little they had in store, into the Woods in the midst of Winter; and
yet how to admiration did the Lord preserve them for his holy ends, and the
destruction of many still amongst the English! strangely did the Lord provide
for them; that I did not see (all the time I was among them) one Man, Woman, or
Child, die with hunger.

Though many times they would eat that, that a Hog or a Dog would hardly touch;
yet by that God strengthened them to be a securge to his People.

The chief and commonest food was Ground-nuts: They eat also Nuts and Acorns,
Hearty choaks, Lilly roots, Ground beans, and several other weeds and roots,
that I know nor.

They would pick up old bones, and cut them to pieces at the joints, and if
they were full of worms and magots, they would scald them over the fire to
make the vermin come out, and then boil them, and drink up the Liquor, and
then beat the great end, of them in a Mortar, and so eat them. They would eat
Horses guts, and ears, and all sorts of wild Birds which they could catch: also
Bear, Venmson, Beaver, Tortois, Frogs, Squirrels, Dogs, Skunks, Rattle-snakes;
yea, the very Bark of Trecs; besides all sorts of creatures, and provision
which they plundered from the English. I can but stand in admiration to see the
wonderful power of God, in providing for such a vast number of our Enemies in
the Wilderness, where there was nothing to be seen, but from hand to mouth.
Many times in a morning, the generality of them, would eat up all they had, and
yet have some further supply against they wanted. It is said, Psalm. 81.13, 14.
Oh, that my People bad hearkened to me, and Israel had walked in my ways, I
should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my hand against their
Adversaries. But now our perverse and evil carriages in the sight of the Lord,
have so offended him, that instead of turning his hand against them, the Lord
feeds and nourishes them up to be a scourge to the whole Land.

5. Another thing that I would observe is, the strange providence of God in
turning things about when the Indians was at the highest, and the English at
the lowest. I was with the Enemy eleven weeks and five days, and not one Week
passed without the fury of the Enemy, and some desolation by fire and sword
upon one place or other. They mourned (with their black faces) for their own
losses: yet triumphed and rejoiced in their inhumane, and many times devilish
eruelty to the English. They would boast much of their Victories; saying, that
in two hours time they had destroyed such a Captain, and his Company at such a
place; and such a Captain and his Company in such a place; and such a Captain
and his Company in such a place: and boast how many Towns they had destroyed,
and then scoff, and say, They had done them a good turn, to send them to
Heaven so soon. Again, they would say, This Summer that they would knock all
the Rogues in the head, or drive them into the Sea, or make them fly the
Country: thinking surely, Agag-like, The bitterness of Death is past. Now the
Heathen begins to think all is their own, and the poor Christians hopes to fail
(as to man) and now their eyes are more to God, and their hearts sigh
heavenward: and to say in good earnest, Help Lord, or we perish: When the Lord
had brought his people to this, that they saw no help in any thing but himself;
then be takes the quarrel into his own hand: and though they had made a pit, in
their own imaginations, as deep as hell for the Christians that Summer, yet the
Lord hurll'd them selves into it. And the Lord had not so many ways before to
preserve them, but now he has as many to destroy them.

But to return again to my going home, where we may see a remarkable change of
Providence: At first they were all against it, except my Hu band would come for
me; but afterward they assented to it, and seemed much to rejoice in it; some
asked me to send them some Bread, others some Tobacco, others shaking me by the
hand, offering me a Hood and Scarf to ride in; not one moving hand or tongue
against it. Thus has the Lord answered my poor desire, and the many earnest
requests of others put up unto God for me. In my travels an Indian came to me,
and told me, if I were willing, he and his Squaw would run away, and go home
along with me: I told him No: I was not willing to run away, but desired to
wait Gods time, that I might go home quietly, and without fear. And now God
has granted me my desire. O the wonderful power of God that I have seen, and
the experience that I have had: I have been in the midst of those roaring
Lions, and Salvage Bears, that feared neither God, nor Man, nor the Devil, by
night and day, alone and in company: sleeping all sorts together, and yet not
one of them ever offered me the least abuse of unchastity to me, in word or
action. Though some are ready to say, J speak it for my own credit; But I speak
it in the presence of God, and to his Glory. Gods Power is as great now, and as
sufficient to save, as when he preserved Daniel in the Lions Den; or the three
Children ^u the fiery Furnace. I may well say as his Psalm. 107.12 Oh give
thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. Let the
Redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the Enemy,
especially that I should come away in the midst of so many hundreds of Enemies
quietly and peacably, and not a Dog moving hi: tougue. So I took my leave of
them, and in coming along my heart melted into tears, more then all the while I
was with them, and I was almost swallowed up with the thoughts that ever I
should go home again. About the Sun going down, Mr. Hoar, and my self, and the
two Indians came to Lancaster, and a solemn sight it was to me. There had I
lived many comfortable years amongst my Relations and Neighbors, and now not
one Christian to be seen, nor one house lest standing. We went on to a Farm
house that was yet standing, where we lay all night: and a comfortable lodging
we had, though nothing but straw to ly on The Lord preserved us in safety that
night, and raised us up again in the morning, and carried us along, that before
noon, we came to Concord. Now was I full of joy, and yet not without sorrow:
joy to see such a lovely sight, so many Christians together, and some of them
my Neighbors: There I met with my Brother, and my Brother in Law, who asked
me, if I knew where his Wife was? Poor heart! he had helped to bury her, and
knew it not; she being shot down by the house was partly burnt: so that those
who were at Boston at the desolation of the Town, and came back afterward, and
buried the dead, did not know her. Yet I ws not without sorrow, to think how
many were looking and longing, and my own Chilren amongst the rest, to enjoy
that deliverance that I had now received: and I did not know whither ever I
should see them again. Being recruited with food and raiment, we went to Boston
that day, where I met with my dear Husband, but the thoughts of our dear
Children, one being dead, and the other we could not ^^ll where, abated our
comfort each to other. I was not before so much hemmed in with the merciless and
cruel Heathen, but now as much with pitiful, sender-hearted, and compssionate
Christians. In that poor, and destressed, and beggarly condition I was received
in, I was kindly entertained in several Houses: so much love I received from
several (some of whom I knew, and others I knew not] that I am not capable to
declare it. But the Lord knows them all by name: The Lord reward them seven
fold into their bosoms of his spirituals, for their temporals. The twenty
pounds the price of my redemption was raised by some Boston Gentlemen, and Ms.
Usher, whose bounty and religious charity, I would not forget to make mention
of. Then Mr. Thomas Shepard of Charlstown received us into his House, where we
continued eleven weeks; and a Father and Mother they were to us. And many more
tenderhearted Friends we met with in that place. We were now in the midst of
love, yet not without much and frequent heaviness of heart for our poor
Children, and other Relations, who were still in affliction. The week
following, after my coming in, the Governor and Gouncil sent forth to the
Indians again; and that not without saccess; for they brought in my Sister, and
Good-wife Kectle: Their not knowing where our Children were, was a sore trial
to us still, and yet we were not without secret hopes that we should see them
again. That which was dead lay heavier upon my spirit, than those which were
alive and amongst the Heathen; thinking how it suffered with its wounds, and I
was no way able to relieve it; and how it was buried by the Heathen in the
Wilderness from among all Christians. We were hurried up and down in our
thoughts, sometime we should hear a report that they were gone this way, and
sometimes that; and that they were come in, in this place or that: We kept
enquiring and listening to hear concerning them, but no certain news as yet.
About this time the Council had ordered a day of public Thanksgiving: though
I thought I had still cause of mourning, and being unsettled in our minds, we
thought we would ride toward the Eastward, to see if we could hear any thing
concerning our Children. And as we were riding along [God is the wise disposer
of all things] between Ipswich and Rowly we met with Mr. William Hubbard, who
told us that our Son Joseph was come in to Major Waldrens, and another with
him, which was my Sisters Son. I asked him how he knew it? He said, the Major
himself told him so. So along we went till we came to Newbury; and their
Minister being absent, they desired my Husband to Preach the Thanks giving for
them; but he was not willing to stay there that night, but would go over to
Salisbury, to hear further, and come again in the morning; which he did, and
Preached there that day. At night, when he had done, one came and told him that
his Daughter was come in at Providence: Here was mercy on both hands. Now has
God fulsiled that precious Scripture which was such a comfort to me in my
distressed condition, When my heart was ready to sink into the Earth [my
Children being gone I could not tell whither] and my knees trembled under me,
And I was walking thorough the valley of the shadow of Death: Then the Lord
brought, and now has fulsilled that reviving word unto me: Thus says the Lord,
Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears. for thy Work shall
be rewarded, says the Lord, and they shall come again from the Land of the
Enemy. Now we were between them, the one on the East, and the other on the
West: Our Son being nearest, we went to him first, to Portsmouth, where we met
with him, and with the Major also: who told us he had done what he could, but
could not redeem him under siven ponnds; which the good People thereabouts were
pleased to pay. The Lord reward the Major, and all the rest, though unknown so
me, for their labor of Love. My Sitters Son was redeemed for four pounds,
which the Council gave order for the payment of Having now received one of our
Children, we hastened toward the other: going back through Newbury, my Husband
Preached there on the Sabbath Day: for which they rewarded him many fold.

On Mund ay we came to Charlstown, where we heard that the Governor of
Road-Island had sent over for our Daughter, to take care of her, being now
within his Jurisdiction: which should not pass without our acknowledgments. But
she being nearer Rehoboth than Road-Island, Mr. Newman went over, and took care
of her, and brought her to his own House. And the goodness of God was admirable
to us in our low estate, in that he raised up passionate Friends on every side
to us, when we had nothing to recompance any for their love. The Indians were
now gone that way, that it was apprehended dangerous to go to her: But the
Carts which carried Provision to the English Army, being guarded, brought her
with them to Dorchester, where we received her safe: blessed be the Lord sor
it, For great is his Power, and he can do whatsoever seems him good. Her
coming in was aster this manner: She was traveling one day with the Indians,
with her basket at her back; the company of Indians were got before her, and
gone out of sight, all except one Squaw; she followed the Squaw till night, and
then both of them lay down, having nothing over them but the heavens, and under
them but the earth. Thus she traveled three days together, not knowing
whither she was going: having nothing to eat or drink but water, and green
Hirtle-berries. At last they came into Providence, where she was kindly
entertained by several of that Town. The Indians often said, that I should
never have her under twenty pounds: But now the Lord has brought her in upon
free-cost, and given her to me the second time. The Lord make us a blessing
indeed, each to others. Now have I seen that Scripture also fulfilled, Deuteronomy.
30: 4, 7. If any of thine be driven out to the outmost parts of heaven, from
thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee.
And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on them
which hate thee, which persecuted thee. Thus has the Lord brought me and mine
out of that horrible pit, and has set us in the midst of tenderhearted and
compassionate Christians. It is the desire of my soul, that we may walk worthy
of the mercies received, and which we are receiving.

Our Family being now gathered together (those of us that were living) the
South Church in Boston hired an House for us: Then were moved from Mr.
Shepards, those cordial Friends, and went to Boston, where we continued about
three quarters of a year: Still the Lord went along with us, and provided
graciously for us. I thought it somewhat strange to fet up House keeping with
bare walls; but as Solomon says, Money answers all things; and that we had
through the benevolence of Christianfriends, some in this Town, and some in
that, and others: And some from England, that in a little time we might look,
and see the House furnished with love. The Lord has been exceeding good ^o us
in our low estate, in that when we had neither house nor home, nor other
necessaries; the Lord so moved the hearts of these and those to wards us, that
we wanted neither food, nor raiment for our selves or ours, Prove. 18.24. There
is a Friend which sticks closer than a Brother. And how many such Friends
have we found, and now living amongst? And truly such a Friend have we found
him to be unto us, in whose house we lived, viz. Mr. James Whitcomb, a Friend
unto us near hand, and afar off.

I can remember the time, when I used to sleep quietly without workings in my
thoughts, whole nights together, but now it is other ways with me. When all
are fast about me, and no eye open, but his who ever waketh, my thoughts are
upon things past, upon the awful dispensation of the Lord toward us; upon his
wonderful power and might, in carrying of us through so many difficulties, in
returning us in safety, and suffering none to hurt us. I remember in the night
season, how the other day I was in the midst of thousands of enemies, and
nothing but death before me: It (...) then hard work to persuade my self, that
ever I should be satisfied with bread again. But now we are fed with the finest
of the Wheat, and, as I may say, With honey out of the rcok: In stead of the
Husk, we have the fatted Calf: The thoughts of these things in the particulars
of them, and of the love and goodness of God toward us, make it true of me,
what David said of himself, Psalm. 6.6. I watered my Couch with my tears. Oh!
the wonderful power of God that mine eyes have seen, affording matter enough
for my thoughts to run in, that when others are sleeping mine eyes are weeping.

I have seen the extrem vanity of this World: One hour I have been in health,
and wealth, wanting nothing: But the next hour in sickness and wounds, and
death, having nothing but sorrow and affliction.

Before I knew what affliction meant, I was ready sometimes to wish for it.
When I lived in prosperity; having the comforts of the World about me, my
relations by me, my Heart cheerful: and taking little care for any thing; and
yet seeing many, whom I preferred before my self, under many trials and
afflictions, in sickness, weakness, poverty, losses, crosses, and cares of the
World, I should be sometimes jealous least I should have my portion in this
life, and that Scripture would come to my mind, Heb. 12.6. For whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. But now I see
the Lord had his time to scourge and chasten me. The portion of some is to have
their afflictions by drops, now one drop and then another; but the dregs of the
Cup, the Wine of astonishment: like a sweeping rain that leaves no food, did
the Lord prepare to be my portion Affliction I wanted, and affliction I had,
full measure (I thought) pressed down and running over: yet I see, when God
calls a Person to any thing, and through never so many difficulties yet he is
fully able to carry them through and make them see, and say they have been
gainers thereby. And I hope I can say in some measure, As David did, It is good
for me that I have been afflicted: The Lord has showed me the vanity of these
outward things. That they are the Vanity of vanities, and vexation of spirit;
that they are but a shadow, a blast, a bubble, and things of no continuance.
That we must rely on God himself, and our whole dependence must be upon him. If
trouble from smallar matters begin to arise in me, I have something at hand to
check my self with, and say, why am I troubled? It was but the other day that
if I had had the world, I would have given it for my freedom, or to have been a
Servant to a Christian. I have learned to look beyond present and smaller
troubles, and to be quieted under them, as Mosis said, Exodus 14.13. Stand still
and ses the salvation of the Lord.

FINIS.

