WHEREAS a Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the Three and Twentieth day of August now last past, has been
directed unto Me, and diverse others in the said Commission nominated,
Authorizing the said Commissioners, or any Four or more of them, by such Ways
and Means as therein is directed, to enquire within the City and Diocese of
Canterbury in the County of Kent, as well within Liberties as without, for the
due Execution of the Statute made in the Three and Fortieth year of the Reign
of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, what Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Annuities, Profits, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels. Money, and Stocks of Money,
have been heretofore given by any well-disposed Person or Persons for Relief of
Aged, Impotent, and Poor People, Maintenance of Sick and Maimed Soldiers and
Mariners, Schools of Learning, Free-Schools, and Scholars of Universities,
Repair of Bridges, Ports, Havens, Causeways, Churches, Sea-Banks, and
Highways, for Education and Preferment of Orphans, for or toward the Relief,
Stock or Maintenance for Houses of Correction, Marriage of Poor Maids,
Supportation, Aid and Help of young Tradesmen, Handycrafts-men, and Persons
decayed, Release and Redemption of Captives, Aid or Ease of any Poor
Inhabitants, concerning Payment of Fifteens, Setting out of Soldiers, and other
Taxes, and of the Abuses, Breaches of Trust, Negligences, Misimployment, not
Employing, Concealing, Defrauding, Misconverting and Misgoverning of the same
Lands, Tenements, Stocks of Money, and other Things given to any of the
Charitable Uses aforesaid, and to set down such Orders, Judgments and Decrees,
as that the same Lands, Tenements, Money, and other things may be duly employed
to and for such of the Charitable Uses aforesaid for which they were given,
limited or appointed by the Donors and Founders thereof:

These are therefore to Will and Require you, the next Lords Day after the
receipt of this Order, in your Parish Church after the Nicene Creed, publicly
to Read the same; to the end that all Persons may know it, and have the benefit
thereof. And that all due Proceedings may be had for Recovery and Settlement
for the future of such Charitable Uses as have been misconverted and
misimployed, I have appointed Tho. Bourchier Doctor of Laws, our Commissary of
Canterbury, George Thorpe Doctor in Divinity, one of the Prebendaries of
Canterbury, and William Man Esquire, or any one of them, to receive all such
Complaints as shall be made. And that all Persons concerned may come fully
prepared, they are to produce to the Persons abovesaid, or some one of them,
all such Wills, Charters, Evidences, and other Writings, whereby the respective
Charities were given, limited and appointed, who will then give them such
further direction as shall be necessary for the due Prosecution of such
Complaints.

Given under my Hand this fourth day of September, in the Year of our Lord
1683. W. Cant.


