A Word to the Wise: OR, Considerations Humbly Offered to our Representatives
who are to sit in the Ensuing Parliament.
THAT it is the Privilege of Freeborn English Men to Choose their
Representatives to sit in Parliament; and their Representatives Duty to act for
them; and the Peoples Right to have free access unto them, to make their
Grievances Known (as was worthily observed by Sir Bar. Showers, in his Speech
to the People when he was cho^ at Exon): But considering the Great Concerns
that lie upon them in Parliament-time, ^^d how unfit it is then to trouble
them, it is therefore absolutely necessary for them to ^^ert the Peoples Right
(that, as in Ancient Times, so now they may have a Committee ^^ting in time of
Parliament, to hear the Peoples Grievances, and, if sit, to report ^^em to the
House. And that they should be chosen out of such Members as have not Pla^^ in
Public Offices; for it is not to be expected that the Peoples Complaints should
be ^^ard and redrest by such as are complained against, or by those as may be
Guilty of the same ^^imes in other Offices; it having been of late seen, that
the Complainants have been by ^^se Witnesses, for promises of Reward,
confronted, and thereby rejected. and some of ^^em starved, or ruined, and in
danger of being murdered; and the Offenders thereby couraged.

And to consider the great Distress the People of England many Years past, and
still do ^^our under, by not having such a Committee, to whom the People may
without charge ^^ply themselves: and that for want thereof many Abuses in the
Government have not ^^en inspected, and the Offenders detected; and which would
not only do the People Justice ^^giving them their Right herein, but it would
also be a great Ease to the House of Commons, in the preventing of many
frivilous Petitions, which the whole House is now so often ^oubled with, which
causes so many Committees on purpose to hear particular Grievances, ^se the
Subject of the charge of getting Committees together, and of Clerks Fees, which
oftentimes too heavy for their Pockets, and infallibly prevent the mutinous
appearing of many persons at the Parliament Door, which looks more like a Mob
than petitioning. And considering how earnest and willing Gentlemen are to take
the great trouble and care ^on them to be the Peoples Representatives, and what
Promises they make when they are ^osen, and how the Eyes of the Nation is so
much fixed on the ensuing Parliament at this ^ncture of time, in which the
People's good is so much depending, surely it can no ways be ^oubted, but their
Representatives will answer their Expectations herein, and with all Canon hear
their Grievances, and promote such Bills as make for the Peoples good.

Humbly putting you in mind of two Bills (which to the Everlasting Praise of
the most Honorable House of Peers) was sent down by them to the House of
Commons the last Sessi^n, and to the great grief of many good men, by them
rejected.

The one was for shortning Suits in Law and Equity, the length of (...) such a
bur^^en to the people, that they cannot long endure.

The other was entitled Solvent and Insolvent, by which the Solvent wh^ lie in
Prison, and ^^^re able to pay their Debts, or by their Estates able to make
satisfaction to their Creditors, should be compelled thereunto, and the
Insolvent, who are not able to pay their Debts, or ^^y their Estates could not
make satisfaction to their Creditors, should not lie in Prison and ^erish, with
such Cautions and Restrictions in the said Bill expressed, that the Creditor
could ^ot be injured thereby.

The Jews had Years of Jubilee, other Nations places of Relief; the English
Nation has neither.

Doing Justice, hearing the Peoples Grievances, and Redressing them, punishing
the Offenders, and Encouraging well-doing. In Divine Writ, and in all Ages has
been accounted the best Government, and the happiest People that do enjoy it;
and such Governments as do deny it to the People, deemed to the greatest
Judgments the Scripture any where do pronounce.

Trajan, A Heathen Emperor, when he was dying, called his Subjects to witness
for him, that his Ear was always open to hear the Complaints of his Subjects,
his heart ready to redress their Grievances, and his hands open to punish
Offenders.

It Was by the fair pretense of doing Justice, and hearing the Peoples Grievances
that Abs^lom raised a Rebellion, and endeavored to dethrone his Father, and
the best of Kings.

It Was under pretense of King Charles's denying the People their Rights of
Parliament, and not hearing the Peoples Complaints, and redressing Grievances,
that Arms was (...) up against him, and caused some of his Subjects to consent
to his Murder, by which King Charles the Second was so long kept out of the
Throne.

It Was by Invading the Peoples Right, and not doing them Justice, King James the
Second was Abdicated.

It Was by Oliver Cromwells pretending to hear the Peoples Grievances, and (...)
Justice to be Administered to all Men, he Usurped the Power of a Protector.

It Was by his hearing the meanest Man's Complaint, tho against the chiefest
Ministers of State, and keeping them from imbezling the Nations Treasure; and
when he (...) out any for Evil Practices, he never suffered them to go
unpublished, or took (...) their places, by which he wanted not Money to carry
on his Design, which caused (...) Power to last to his Lives end.

It Was by his preferring Men for their Merits, and not for Favor, Affection, or
Money, that made his Officers true to him.

It Was by hearing the Complaints of the meanest Soldier and Seamen against their
Superior Officers (if Just) and paying them well, that made his Soldiers, and
Seamen stand by him, that with a handful of Men he made the World dread him.

It Was his not heaping up the Nations Treasure, to exalt his own Family, that
caused so many of the Nation to love and stand by him, and that which makes his
Government so much talked of, now we are under the best of Kings, is occasioned
by not punishing Offenders, who waste the Nations Substance, and defraud the
King.

It Was his subduing the Corruption of the Lawyers, and causing the Poor Man's
Cause to be heard, as well as the Rich, and bringing our Laws as well as our
Religion into our own Mother Tongue, by which the People could not be ruined by
whole sale, that caused the meanest sort to love him.

It Was Admiral Blakes doing Justice to the Seamen, and loving them, and not
studying his own interest, that to England's Glory, with a small Fleet he
Commanded the Seas, and to his praise be it spoken, when he died (though a
Frugal Man) he left his Executor but 1300 l. besides his Paternal Estate.

It Was by the Lord Chancellor Jeffreys shortning Causes in Law and Equity, and
by Correcting the Evil Practices of Attorneys, Sollicitors, and Bailiffs, that
he has wiped off the stain of his Failings, for which the Mobb was like to
Murder him, and is now so much applauded for what he did when he was
Chancellor.

So that some who were good Men, and acted good things for the Government,
under a bad Government, and thereby esteemed for their good Actions, some of
them, and some of their Children, since we have been under a good Government
and the best of Kings, by acting bad things, have made themselves of no esteem.

The mentioning of all which, is not to vindicate any Usurping Power but to
excite such as are under a Lawful Government, and the best of Princes, in good
Actions, and making good Laws, to out-doe them that acted under an Usurping
Power.

To Conclude, By doing Justice to all Men, hearing the Complaints of the
Oppressed, and redressing their Grievances, punishing Offenders, making
Lawsuits short and easy, whereby the Poor may have Right done them as well as
the Rich, is that which alone can make the Government lasting, and the People
happy; and will certainly bring God's Blessing upon our Representatives, and
People whom they do present; and make our Children's Children praise God that
such a Parliament ever did Sit.

God Bless KING WILLIAM, and Prosper the good Proceedings of our
Representatives. T. S.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick Lane.


