ACT of PARLIAMENT For Repressing the Depredations in the Highlands, September
10. 1690.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Lady, the King and Queens Majesty's, Considering the
several good and laudable Laws made by Their Majesty's Royal Progenitors, for
Repressing the Depredations and Robberies, Committed by Sorners, Robbers, and
Broken-men in the Highlands, and the Shires next adjacent thereto, which have
not hitherto taken full effect: And that the late Meeting of the Estates Did
humbly Represent the samine to Their Majesty's, to be Redressed, and that the
said Robberies and Depredations are much encouraged and increased, by reason
of the present Rebellion, chiefly to the prejudice of such of Their Majesty's
Subjects, who are most peaceable, and best affected to Their Majesty's Laws and
Government; Wherethrough it is necessar, that not only the former Laws made
thereanent should be revived; But likeways a further remedy should be provided
thereto, by this present Act: Therefore Their Majesty's, with Advice and
Consent of the Estates of Parliament, Do hereby, not only Revive, Ratify and
Approve the said whole Laws and Acts made for Repressing Sornings, Robberies
and Depredations, in so far as they are not altered or innovat by this present
Act: But further, Do Statute, Ordain, and Enact, That where any Sornings,
Robberies, or Depredations are committed in the Shires following, viz. The
Shires of Argyle, Bute, Dumbriton, Striviling, Clackmannan, Kinross, Perth,
Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdene, Bamff, Elgine, Nairn, Inverness, Ross, Cromerty,
Sutherland and Caithness, the whole Heretors, Liferenters, and proper
Wodsetters within the particular Paroch, where such Depredations, Sornings, and
Robberies are committed, and within the whole Paroches adjacent to, and
marching with the said particular Paroch, shall be liable to refound to the
party damnified, through the said Sornings, Depredations, and Robberies, the
loss to be sustained thereby, proportionally according to their valued Rent
within the said Paroches, Providing the Damnages sustained be in Horse, Nolt,
Sheep, Goats, or other Cattle and Corns allanerly, and no otherways; And the
said Heretors are hereby Authorized and Empowered to exact and uplift from
their respective Tennents, and others dwelling on their Lands for their relief,
the just and equal half of their ^aids respective proportions, and to divide
the samine amongst them, as they find just, the said Relief not exceeding the
just and equal half of their respective proportions, as said is* And it is
hereby Statute and Ordained, that the Damnages and losses to be sustained by
such Depredations, may, and shall be liquidat by the Commissioners of Supply,
within the respective Shires, where the said whole Paroches do ly, or any
three of the said Commissioners, who are hereby Authorized to be a sufficient
Quorum, for making this Act effectual, and that upon a Citation of fifteen
days, to be executed at the Market Crosses of the Head-Burghs of the
respective Shires on a Market Day, betwixt ten and twelve a Clock in the
Forenoon, and whole Paroch Kirks liable by this Act respective, on a Sabbath
Day, betwixt ten a Clock in the Forenoon, and two a Clock in the Afternoon, and
that providing there be tutus accessus, for making the said Intimations,
Summoning all parties having interest to appear at such places, as the said
Commissioners, or Quorum of them, hereby Authorized, shall appoint, with power
to them after Liquidation of the said Damnage, to divide the samine among the
respective Heretors, according to their respective Valuations within the said
Paroches, and to give out Precepts for Poynding, and Orders for Quartering, as
for Their Majesty's Supply. And it is further Enacted and Ordained, that where
a Harship or Depredation shall be carried through any other Lands, the Paroches
which are hereby liable, shall have proportional Relief from the Heretors and
Tennents of these Lands, through which they pass, or re-pass, as if the said
Lands were within the said Paroches where the Damnages is sustained, albeit
the Depredators do not rest upon these Lands, unless the Heretors, Tennents and
Inhabitants in these Lands, through which the Depredators pass, both raise the
Hue and Cry after them, and rise in Arms to concur for recovering the Goods,
and Seizing the persons of the said Depredators, Sorners and Robbers. And it
is also hereby Declared, that this present Act is without prejudice of former
Acts against Depredations, and that whatsoever Sums shall be paid by any
Paroches, by virtue of this Act, the Paroch or Paroches so paying, shall have
relief thereof against these liable, conform to former Laws. As also, it is
hereby specially Provided and Declared, that the persons upon whom the
Depredations and Robberies shall be committed, shall have no benefit of Relief
competent to them, unless they raise the Hue and Cry to their Neighbors, that
they may pursue after the said Depredators, Sorners and Robbers, and so from
Paroch to Paroch; and that these Neighbors, who shall not follow the Hue and
Cry, may, Besides their being liable conform to this Act, be further punished
as Their Majesty's Privy Council shall think fit; And sicklike, it is Provided
and Declared, that such Landlords and Heretors, who shall after committing of
the Depredations, Reset, Converse, or Intercommune with the Depredators,
Sorners or Robbers, shall have neither Action nor Relief competent to them by
this present Act; And for the more speedy and punctual execution hereof,
Ordains this present Act immediately to be Printed, and Published at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh, and at the Market Crosses of the Head Burghs of the said
whole respective Shires, and whole Paroch Churches therein, to which there is
tutus accessus for the present; and that the samine shall take effect within
forty eight hours after the samine be is Published at the respective Market
Crosses, as said is, notwithstanding of any Law or Act of Parliament,
suspending the effect of Laws for a longer time, after Enacting or Publication
thereof. It is always hereby Provided and Declared, that this present Act, in
so far as the famine does import any Innovation, alteration, or addition to the
former Laws against Depredations and Robberies, shall only endure, have
strength and effect till the first of January 1692. years. Extracted forth of
the Records of Parliament by,

(...)


