AN EPISTLE Written (dated the 30th of the 11th Month 1659,) and sent from
LONDON INTO THE COUNTRY.

By a Friend to the Glorious (though at this Day despised) CAUSE OF CHRIST, in
Answer to a Letter sent up to him [Dated the 16th of the same Month] Wherein
the following Things are Treated of, (viz.)

1. The FIFTH KINGDOM it self, which the God of Heaven sets up in the latter
Days. 2. The KINGDOM of the BEAST which is to be destroyed. 3. The Instruments
that are to be used in destroying the one and erecting the other; with the way
or manner how they are to be used. 4. The Time of the beginning of this Work.
First, Before Christ's Personal coming. Secondly, Before the Call of the Jews.
Thirdly, That it is already begun, and has taken place in this Nation and that
Cromwell with the Army, has Apostatized from it, and that all the Powers, or
Governments that have been set up since that time, have been, and still are
upon the Foundation of the Apostasy.

AS ALSO, Several of the Particular Evils which the Army, and others abetting
the Apostasy are guilty of.

Together with, Some CONSIDERATIONS tendered to the Favorers of CHRIST'S
RIGHTEOUS CAUSE, wherein is laid down, their duty of Separation from BABYLON,
and from all the Parts and Branches (both in Church and State) of the
forementioned Apostasy.

Psalm. 145.11. They shall speak of the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy
Power.

Hos. 6.3. Then shall ye know, if you follow on to know the Lord.

Rev. 18.14. Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her Plagues.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1660.

An Epistle written dated the 30th of the 11th Month 1659. and sent from London
into the Country, by a Friend to the Glorious (though at this day despised)
Cause of Christ, in Answer to a Letter sent up to him, dated the 16th of the
same Month, etc.
My Dear Brother,
THine of the 16th instant, I have received, with thy earnest desires of my
giving thee some account of my judgment about the matters of the Fifth Kingdom;
I am glad that any of the Saints are enquiring after those glorious Truths that
appertain to the exaltation of Zions King in the latter days; It is no small
matter of grief, that those things which are so high in the Fathers esteem and
purchased by Christ his precious blood, should be so much despised and trampled
under Foot by the Professors of this Generation and that those which own, and
witness for it, should be so much reproached, yea dealt with as transgressors,
as it is at this day. But for my self, I have been through grace made to
rejoice, and to count it no small honor, to have my name and reputation
offered up yea buried with the precious Cause of Christ, and am contented in
the hopes of a share in the Resurrection of that Cause; But that I may come to
answer thy desires, I shall lay down two things by way of entrance.

First, That the Matters of this Fifth Kingdom are very Deep and Mysterious,
Mark 4.11. and the coming of it, not with observation, but as a Thief, Luke
17.20. 1 These. 5. 2. Luke 18.8. And the Antichristian State, (which is to be
destroyed by, and so way made for this Fifth Kingdom to take place) is very
Deep and Mysterious also; It is called the Mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
Rev. 17.5.7.

Secondly, The understanding of these Mysteries, are not attained by the humane
Arts, Parts or Wit of Men, no nor by any holiness or virtue of ours but is a
free gift of God, effected by the Leadings and Teachings of his holy Spirit in
whomsoever he pleases, Mark 4.11. Joh. 16.13. Math. 11, 25, 26. Rev. 17.3.
Chap. 21.10. Joh. 3.8. And as to my self, I have been brought under so much
sense of my ignorance and darkness in those deep Mysteries, that I have been
sometimes ashamed to appear in public to speak of them, fearing that I might
rather Eclipse then open those blessed truths, yet I dare not say that I have
been left without a measure of the leadings of the Spirit in these things, but
it has been in such untrodden paths, and attended with such great difficulties
both from within, and from not only the World, but many of my dear friends
(whom for holiness and understanding I have preferred above many) that I have
been ready to say with Joshua Chap. 7.7. Would to God I had been content, and
dwelt on the other side; And with Jeremiah Chap. 15.10. Woe is me my Mother,
that thou have borne me a Man of strife, and a man of contention to the whole
earth; But I dare not allow my self in such Complaints, least I should offend
the Lord.

Though my darkness and weakness would discourage me in this undertaking, yet
the consideration of the many false reports and mistakes that have been, and
still are among the Churches about those Principles, which both my self and
diverse others have been helped to own in this evil day and the consideration of
the many stumbling blocks that has been by those reports cast in the way of
several of the Lords Children and the endeavors to possess them with prejudice
against the Righteous Cause of Jesus Christ, does help me over all the
discouragements to present unto thee (not only for thy self, but the rest of my
dear friends with thee) in all plainness, what my understanding is;

First, Of the Fifth Kingdom it self. Secondly, of the Kingdom of the Beast,
which is to be destroyed. Thirdly, Of the Instruments, with the Way or Manner
of the destroying the one, and setting up of the other. Fourthly, Of the Time
that it is to be begun, viz. First, Before Christ's Personal coming. Secondly,
That it must be before the Call of the Jews. Thirdly, That it is already
begun, and has taken place in this Nation, and that Cromwell with the Army,
have Apostatized from that Work, and all the Powers that have been up in this
Nation since that time, have been, and still are upon the foundation of the
Apostasy.

To the first, to wit, of the fifth Kingdom it self; I shall lay down this
general Assertion, That there is an outward visible Kingdom of the Father,
which is given to Christ the Son, and is to take place over the whole world.
Some of the Scriptures upon which my satisfaction is grounded in this truth
are, Mat. 6.10. Thy Kingdom come, which word must needs be understood of this
visible Kingdom. First, from the words that are joined to it, viz. That the
Will of God might be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, which cannot so be till
that Fifth Kingdom be set up over the Kingdoms of this World.

Secondly, This word Thy Kingdom come, etc. cannot be meant of Gods
providential Kingdom mentioned Dan. 4.25. that having been in the world from
the beginning: Neither can it be understood of the Kingdom of the Gospel of
Grace, because it is a Prayer to be made even whilst that Kingdom is in being:
Neither can it be restrained to the Spiritual Kingdom that is within the
Saints, because those that truly pray this Prayer (being Children) do already
enjoy that Kingdom: Neither can it be restrained to the Kingdom of Heaven in
the ultimat Glory, because that is not to come to the Saints, but they are to
go or be taken up to it: therefore seeing it cannot be taken in either of these
four senses, and there being no other Kingdom of God that I read of, but the
forementioned visible Kingdom, this word must be referred to it.

The second Scripture is Luke 21.31. When you see these things come to pass,
Know ye that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand. By these things, is meant the
Signs of the latter day, or of Christ's second coming; and this Kingdom being
nigh at hand, when the latter day signs are upon us, must needs be understood
of this fifth Kingdom, which they have special relation to, and is known to be
nigh at hand by them.

The third Scripture is Dan. 2.44. And in the days of those Kings, shall the
God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, etc. This compared with Chap. 7.14. must be
understood of this visible Kingdom.

The fourth Scripture is Dan. 7.27. And the greatness of the Kingdom under the
whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of the Most High, etc.
and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. This compared with Rev. 11.15. The
Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, etc. must needs
refer to this visible Kingdom, which has the Authority, Power, and Rule, in
and over the whole World.

First, It is called the Fathers Kingdom, as it is Originally from him who is
the Creator, Former, and Disposer of all things.

2ly, As he does in a special Manner erect or set up this Kingdom, The God of
Heaven shall set it up, Dan. 2.44.

3ly. As he is the Donor or Giver of it to the Son, Luke 1.32. The Lord God
shall give him the Throne, etc.

This Kingdom also belongs to Christ the Son.

First, As he is the Son of God, and so the true Heir, Heb. 1.2. Psalm. 2.7, 8.

Secondly, As he is, the Son of Man, the true Son of David, the seed of Abraham.

1. As he is the Son of Man, John 5.27. He has Authority to execute Judgment,
because he is the Son of Man.

2. As he is the true Son of David, Luke 1.32.69. The Lord God shall give him
the Throne of his Father David. so Acts 2.30. Of the Fruit of his Loins
according to the Flesh, God has sworn with an Oath, that he would raise up
Christ to sit on his Throne.

3. As he is the Seed of Abraham, Genesis 22.17, 18. Thy Seed shall possess the
Gate of his Enemies; By Seed is meant Christ, Gal. 3.16. and by possessing the
Gate, is to be understood, of possessing the Government, and execution of
Judgment, Amos 5.10.12.15. Zech. 8.16.

Thirdly, It is Christ's Right by Promise, Isa. 9.7. and by Covenant and Oath,
Psa. 89.28, 29.34, 35, 36. Acts 2.30. and by the Anointing, Isa. 11.2. Psa.
89.27.20. And by peculiar choice, Psa. 89.19. Isa. 42.1. compared with Matthew.
12.18. And by Decree, Psa. 2.7.

Fourthly, It is Christ's by the free gift of the Father, Psalm. 2.8. I will give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth
for thy possession. Luke 1.32. The Lord God shall give unto him the Throne,
etc. Dan. 7.14. There was given him Dominion, etc. Matthew. 28.18. All power is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, etc.

Fifthly, It is Christ's by desert and purchase upon the account of his
suffering, Rev. 5.12.13. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power,
etc. Isa. 53.12. Because he has poured out his soul unto death, etc. The Lord
will divide him a portion with the Great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong.

Sixthly, It is Christ's in answer to the Great end of Creation Col. 1.16. All
things were created for him. so Psalm. 8.6. Compare Heb. 2.5, 6, 7, 8, The World
to come is put in subjection to Christ as may appear from Verse the 5th. This
World to come, must needs be understood of the Fifth Kingdom, which belongs
unto, and is put under Christ the Son, Ephesians. 1.21, 22. This world to come cannot
be understood of the Ultimate Glory in Heaven, because that State is not to be
put under Christ as the Son, but, as Son, he himself must become subject in it,
1 Cor. 15.28. But this World to come, is noted in an especial manner to be
under Christ's Feet, and this is that State, or World to come, in which there
shall be forgiveness, or blotting out of sin, as is clearly employed from Matthew.
12.32. which compared with Acts 3.19. That your sins may be blotted out when
the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall
send Jesus, etc. does clearly demonstrate the World to come, to be this fifth
Kingdom.

Lastly, It is and shall be Christ's by Conquest, Rev. 17.14. The Lamb shall
overcome them, etc. Comp. Chap. 6.2. and upon these grounds, this fifth Kingdom
being Christ's he is called King of Nations, Jer. 10.7. Prince of Peace, Isa.
9.6. And the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. And King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, Rev. 17.14. Chap. 19.16. The blessed and only Potentate, 1 Timothy
6.15. with diverse such like Titles, which in the Scriptures of truth are given
to him.

The next thing that I would speak to is, That this fifth Kingdom is outward
and visible, as well as glorious and spiritual.

First, From the time and manner of its rising, mentioned Dan. 2.34. Thou
saw till that a Stone was cut out, etc. If it were only spiritual, it might
have been seen as well before the Image was, as after, but the Stone, or
Kingdom does not appear till after the Image is seen, and then appears as
visible as the Image, which Image holds forth the four great Kingdoms, or
Monarchies of the World which have been and are visible in their times. Now the
Stone, being as visible as the Image, and not seen till some time after the
Image was seen, it must needs be a visible Kingdom and not the spiritual and
invisible Kingdom, which was in being long before the Image appeared.

Secondly, It must be outward and visible if we consider the work that this
Kingdom is to do, it smites and breaks the Image, Dan. 2.34.44. which compared
with other Scriptures will appear to be an outward visible breaking, as Dan.
7.18.26. Rev. 17.14, The ten Horns, or ten Toes makes war with the Lamb, and
the Lamb shall overcome them. Now, if the Work be an outward and visible
smiting, the Stone or Kingdom must needs be visible also.

Thirdly, The Rule or Dominion of this Kingdom is taken from and fills up the
room of the fourth Kingdom, Dan. 2.35. The Stone became a great Mountain, and
filled the whole Earth, so Dan. 7.17, 18. The four Beasts are four Kings, which
are the four great Monarchies, but the Saints shall take the Kingdom, See verse
26. they shall take away his Dominion, and in verse 27. The Kingdom under the
whole Heaven shall be given to the Saints, etc. Now the fourth Kingdom being
visible, this fifth Kingdom that fills up the room of the fourth must needs be
visible also.

Fourthly, The Throne of this Kingdom is the Throne of David, Luke 1.32. which
is an outward visible Throne; and in Rev. 3.21. there are two Thrones
mentioned, one is called, the Fathers Throne, being the Throne where Christ now
is, the other Christ calls his own Throne, which is the Throne of his Father
David, wherefore the Throne being visible, the Kingdom must likewise be visible.

Fifthly, The Laws, Government, and Governors under Christ, are outward and
visible, and take place upon the Bodies, Lives, Liberties and Estates of men,
Ezra 7.26. the Scriptures which are outward and visible, are the Laws, which
God the only Lawgiver (Isa. 33.22. James 4.12.) has left, Exodus 18.16. Neh.
9.13. Esther 3.8. Psalm. 119.9. Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7, 8. 2. Tim. 3.16, 17. Deuteronomy.
17.18.19.20. 2 Kings 11.12. The visible Saints are to be the visible Governors
under Christ the King, Psa. 45.16. 1 Cor. 6.2. Isa. 14.2. Chap. 32. 1. Psa.
49.14. Dan. 7.18.22.27. 2 Timothy 2.12. Rev. 2.26.27. Chap. 3.21. Chap. 5.10.
Chap. 20.4.6. Jer. 30.21. These things being visible the Kingdom must needs be
visible also; and thus much to the first particular of the fifth Kingdom it
self.

The Second thing which I propounded to speak to, is the Kingdom of the Beast,
and in the entering upon that, Consider in the first place the Image spoken of
in Dan. 2.31, 32. which Image does comprehend and hold forth the four great
Monarchies, which were to take place and have their time in the world, and they
are described in Dan. 7.3. by four great Beasts, and the three last of these
four Monarchies are described in Dan. 8. the first by a Ram, the Second by a
Hee-Goate, the last, which is the fourth Monarchy, by a little Horn, which are
also spoken of Dan. 11.

The first of these four Monarchies was that of the Chaldees, Dan. 2.38. He was
that Head of Gold, and had his beginning as a part of the Image about the year
3362 from the Creation, and continued till about the year 3422, in all about 60
years.

The second Monarchy was that of the Medes and Persians, which Dan. 2.32. is
the Breast and Arms of Silver, and took place of the Chaldees, Dan. 5.30, 31.
and continued till about the year 3620, in all about 198 years.

The third Monarchy was that of the Graecians, which Dan. 2.32. is set forth by
the Belly and Thighs of Brass, and in Dan, 8 21. by the rough Goat, which is
there called, the King of Graecia, and succeeds the Medes and Persians, which
is set forth by the Ram with two Horns, verse 20. This Monarchy of the
Graecians, continued till about the year 3902 in all about 282 years.

The fourth Monarchy was that of the Romans, which in Dan. 2.33. is set forth
by the Legs of Iron, and Feet part of Iron and part of Clay; and by the little
Horn, (in Dan. 8.9.11.12.) which takes away the daily sacrifice, and casts down
the truth, And by the vild person in Dan. 11.21. which in verse 31. takes away
the daily sacrifice, and sets up the abomination that makes desolate; This
Monarchy took place as part of the Image in Dan. 2. about forty two years
before the Birth of Christ and was divided into two parts, which I understand
to be held forth by the two Legs of the Image, and continued in its Pagan or
Heathenish State till about 360 years after Christ before it was interrupted by
and mixed with the Man of Sin, or Antichristian State.

To the first three Monarchies and the first part of the fourth I shall say
little, but specially insist upon the Latter part of the fourth or Roman
Monarchy it being the last part of the Image, and the only part which does at
this day remain in the world.

First it is evident that the Roman Monarchy is of two sorts, the first is held
forth by the Legs of Iron; The second by the feet, and toes of Iron and clay,
Daniel 2.33. and in Daniel 7. The first part of it is held forth by the fourth
Beast with the ten Horns and the other by the little Horn; In Revel. 12, 3. The
first part of the Monarchy is held forth by the Red Dragon with seven heads and
ten Horns, and seven Crowns upon his heads; The second part in Revel. 13.1. is
held forth by a Beast that rises out of the Sea. with seven Heads and ten
Horns, and upon his Horns ten Crowns and as in verse the fifth, is to continue
forty and two Months. By the ten Horns I understand the ten Kings or Kingdoms
in Europe which had their dependence upon the Roman Empire, and are called in
Dan. 7.24. Ten Kings and so in Rev. 17.12. And by the seven Heads I understand
the seven Provinces that had their dependence upon the Roman Empire, and before
the rise of the Antichristian state, the Crowns or the Power and Glory of the
Government were upon the seven Heads or Provinces; And the Horns were as
servants under the Emperor that had received no Kingdom till the Antichristian
Beast came up Revel. 17.12. but at his coming up they receive power as Kings
one hour with him, and then the Crowns are upon the Horns, and answers to
Revel. 13.1. distinguished from Revel. 12.3.

The first part of this Roman state was a lawful Power and to be obeyed as an
Ordinance of God and the Lord Christ Mat. 17.27. pays Tribute to them, and
Chap. 22.21. commands to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, etc. And
the Apostle says Romans 13.1. the Powers that are, speaking of them that were
then in being are ordained of God, and gives special charge to the Saints to
obey them, Titus 3.1. And the Spirit of the Lord in the Apostles foreseeing
that the Man of sin would get up to the Throne, by speaking evil of Dignities
and despising Dominion as Pet. 2.10. Compare Jude 8. Rebelling against, yea
casting down the Civil Powers that so himself might obtain the Throne to Reign
both over Church and State, which he did at length accomplish, the Spirit (I
say) foreseeing this, does forewarn the Saints and charge them to be obedient
to Magistrates with many cautions and Exhortations which stand in force to all
true Magistrates to the end of the world.

The second part of this Roman State is from Satan, and rises out of of the
Bottomless Pit, as Rev. 13.2. Chap. 17.8. and is Antichristian, and therefore
it is a great sin to own it as the Ordinance of God, it being wicked and sinful
not only in its Reign or exercise of Power, but in its very Rise and
Foundation, and to own it as Gods Ordinance, would be to charge him as the
Author of sin, and to set up the Man of sin, and Mystery of iniquity as Gods
Ordinance, and those that so do may be found equally guilty with those that at
this day cry up the Ministry of Antichrist as the Ordinance and Ministry of
Christ, and all that will not allow them this and therein fall down to them are
charged as being against Ministry, but many will now grant that the
Antichristian Ministry are sinful, and Antichristian both in their Rise and
Foundation, and to own them as the Ministry of Christ would be a very great
evil, and why not the same in the Antichristian Magistracy.

The Assertion that I shall lay down in this particular about the Kingdom of
the Beast, is, That there is an Antichristian Beast, or a wicked Power that
rises out of the Bottomless pit, and is permitted by the Lord to take place in
the world in the latter part of the Image Government.

1. This Beast, is described Dan. 7.5. by a Little Horn, and in verse the 11.
it is called the Beast, This Horn or Beast is the last part of the Image
Government, and that which is to be taken away and destroyed by the Saints,
after the judgment sits as in verse 26; and in verse 24. another shall arise
after the ten Horns in the first or Pagan State withour the Crowns as Revel.
12.3. And although there are but three of the Horns or Kings subdued or brought
down by the force and Power of this Little Horn, yet by the fair words,
flattery and great proffers made by him to the rest of them (to wit) that he
would Crown and make them free states if they will stand by him, they all at
last fall in and receive Power as Kings one hour with him, Revel. 17.12. and so
this Horn or last Beast comes to have the ten Horns upon him with the Crowns
upon them.

2. This last part of the Roman State, mentioned Rev. 17.8. and chap. 11.7. is
described by a Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, and is the same
with the Little Horn before mentioned, and is distinguished from the first part
of the Roman State, First in its Rise, it comes from the Bottomless pit;
Secondly by his carrying the Whore or Antichristian Church, Rev. 17.3.7.
Thirdly by the time of his Reign which is forty and two Months, and agrees
with the time of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth, Revel. 11.3. and with
the time of the Woman or Churches being in the wilderness, Rev. 12.6; Fourthly,
by the Crowns being upon his Horns, which in the First State were upon the
Heads compare Revel. 13.1. with Rev. 12.3. Fifthly by his Horns making War with
the Lamb and being overcome by him, Revel. 17.14. Lastly by his going into
perdition, Revel. 17.14.8.

That this Beast which Ascends from the bottomless pit is the same with the
Little Horn in Dan. 7. consider, First, this Beast is the last part of the
Image Government and so is the Horn; Secondly this Beast sets himself against
God in great words and blasphemy, so does the Horn, Revel. 13.6. Compare with
Dan.. 20.25. Thirdly this Beast has Power to make War with the Saints and for
a time to overcome them, so has the Horn, Revel. 13.7. Compare with Dan.
7.21.25. Fourthly this Beast and his Horns are overcome and have their Power
taken away by the Lamb and they that are on his side, which must be the Lamb by
his Spirit in the Saints (for it cannot be thought that if the ten Horns should
be in being when Christ comes in person, they should be able to begin or make
War with him) the Saints do also take away to destroy and consume, the Power of
the Little Horn, Revel. 17.14. Compare Dan. 7.26.3. Fifthly this Beast goes
into perditon, or to Hell, So the Horn is given to the burning flame, Rev.
17.8. Compare with Dan. 7.11.

Thirdly this Beast or Horn before mentioned, is described in Dan. 2.41. by the
Feet and Toes of the Image which appears to be the same with the Beast, or
Horn, First as it is the last part of the Image Government; Secondly the Toes
agrees with the Horns of this Beast in Revel. 17.12. Thirdly the Beast or Horn,
is destroyed by the Saints or by Christ in them; The feet and toes of the Image
are smitten and broken by the stone, Dan. 2.34. which stone must either be the
world or Christ in person, or Christ by his Spirit in his Saints; It cannot be
meant of the world, first, because it is the Kingdom, that in a peculiar manner
is set up by the God of Heaven as in verse 44. Secondly because it breaks down
the worldly Government and fills the whole Earth, 3ly. Because it is cut out
without hands, (to wit) without worldly Powers, or the might of Man; In the
next place, it cannot be Christ in Person, First because Christ is not cut out
of the mountain, whether the mountain be understood of the Church or world, for
it must be one of them; Secondly the Stone does the work gradually, but Christ's
coming will be on a sudden as the Lightning that will effect his work at once;
Thirdly Christ is no where called a Kingdom, But this stone is so called verse.
44. Fourthly this stone is not cut out or seen till the last part of the Image
Government appears, thou saw till that a stone was cut out verse 34. But if
Christ in Person were cut out of the mountain, it must be long before the feet
of the Image was in being, now seeing this stone cannot be understood of the
world, or of Christ in Person, it must needs be Christ by his Spirit in the
Saints which Zech. 12.3. are called a Burdensome stone, and so is the same
with the Saints that destroy the Beast and the Little Horn.

Fourthly, This Horn, Beast, or feet of the Image, is the same with that Man of
sin, Son of perdition, Mystery of iniquity, and that Wicked mentioned 2 These.
2.3.7.8. First this man of sin agrees with Antichrist or the Beast in its rise,
the Beast rises through the change of the Roman Empire from its Pagan State or
rather through the ruin of it as Rev. 13.2. The Dragon gave him his Power,
etc. By the Dragon I understand the Devil, who Reigned by his Spirit in the
wicked Pagan Emperors, who though their Authority was an Ordinance of God, as
Romans 13.1.2. yet they were swayed by the Devil to abuse their Power and turn it
against the Lord and his faithful followers; a Cloud of witnesses to this, we
have from the ten first Persecutions carried on by the Pagan Emperors, in
which the Devil did appear like a Dragon, but when Antichrist comes up, the
Devil or Dragon quits his hold of the Pagan State, having a more subtle way to
carry on his work under a pretense of Christianity by this last Beast, he
readily gives to this Beast his Power, Seat, and great Authority, and upon this
the Pagan State falls, and therein him that did let, 2 These. 2.7. was removed
out of the way, and so the wicked comes to be revealed or made visible to be
the Antichrist.

Secondly, the Beast and the wicked, or Man of sin agrees in their Reign, or
exercise of Power, both setting themselves against God, appearing with Power,
Signs, and Lying Wonders, 2 These. 2.4.9.10. comp. Rev. 13.5, 6.13.14. also
with Dan. 7.25.

Thirdly, this Man of Sin is the last Power upon Earth that precedes the
coming, and Kingdom of Christ, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of
his mouth and destroy with the brightness of his coming, 2 These. 2.8. By the
Spirit of his Mouth, I understand the Anointing, which being given down
thorough the word of the Lord upon the Saints, is called, the Spirit of his
Mouth, by which the Antichristian Power is to be consumed, and so agrees with
the breaking work of the Stone in Dan. 2. and with the Saints taking away and
consuming the Power of the little Horn in Dan. 7. and that the Feet of the
Image, the little Horn, and the Beast that comes from the Bottomless Pit are
the last part of the Image Government and stands next to Christ's Kingdom, has
been already cleared.

Fourthly, They agree in their ruin or destruction, as to Time, Instruments,
and the Place into which they are Cast; this man of sin, is called the Son of
Perdition, which does not only denote his hellish Rise, and Reign, but also
that he must go into Perdition or Hell, the Beast also goes into Perdition, or
Hell, The man of sin or Little Horn is also given to the burning flame, 2 These.
2.3. Comp. with Rev. 17.8. and Dan. 7.11. That they agree as to time and
Instruments has been already showed, in these and several other particulars
(which for brevity sake I shall not insist upon) Thus the feet and toes of the
Image Dan. 2. The Little Horn, Dan. 7. The Beast, Rev. 17. The Man of sin, 2
The^. 2. do agree and appear to be one and the same though given under various
Names, and Titles, and the comparing of them may through the blessing of the
Lord help to a very full and clear description of the Antichrist that was to
come and take place in the world in the latter day; only this is to be noted,
that the Spirit in describing Antichrist in the four forementioned places, does
sometimes insist chiefly upon the Civil or Beastly Power, and sometime does
take in and insist upon both the Civil, and Ecclesiastical or false Church part
as they are twisted together; As in the feet of Iron, and Clay, and the Man of
Sin revealed, when he who did let should be taken out of the way, but I shall
speak more to that in the next particular.

The next thing I shall lay down and endeavor to clear is, That the
Antichrist, or last part of the Image Government does consist, or is made up of
two sorts, to wit, Civil and Ecclesiastical, both twisted or mixed together,
the Magisterial, or Civil Government being united to and involved in the
Ecclesiastical or false Church State.

This appears, First, From the Feet, and Toes of the Image that are of Iron
mixed with Clay, Dan. 2.41. by the Iron I understand the Civil State as Verse
33. The Roman Power in its Civil Sat, is set forth by Iron Legs; and by Clay,
I understand the earthy false Church, which is set forth by a Beast coming up
out of the Earth, Rev. 13.11. The Civil Power espousing and joining in affinity
with the Whore, she being not of God but brought forth by Man, or rather by the
Devil in man, is called the seed of Men, Dan. 2.43. This Espousal, or joining
in affinity, I understand to be the mingling with the seed of Men, and by this
mingling the Imperial Power was not strengthened, but indeed weakened, as Verse
42. The false Church may also upon several other accounts, be fitly set forth
by Clay, as in its Rise, Brittleness, Foulness, and its Nature of cleaving or
sticking to other things that comes nigh unto it.

This may appear, Secondly, From the revealing of the wicked, by removing of
him that did let (which was as I understand the Roman Emperor) out of the way,
2 These. 2.7.8. Him that did let, must either be God, or the Devil, or Man, It
could not be God, because, him that did let, was to be removed out of the way,
which would be blasphemy in any to refer to God. Secondly, It could not be the
Devil, for he that did let, appears to stand in the way to hinder the Devils
Kingdom taking place, which would be Satan against Satan, or a Kingdom divided
against it self, Mark 3.23.24.26. and if it can be neither God nor Satan, then
it must be Man, and can be referred to no other Man but the Roman Emperor who
in the exercise of his Civil or Heathenish Power, did for some hundreds of
years after Paul's days hinder the Mystery of iniquity appearing in the false
Church from coming to his desired Throne; The Bishops of Rome grew very high
and sought long to get the Seat of Civil Judicatory over the State, as they had
over the Church, but they could not obtain the Throne, till the Emperor was
brought down to their foot and (as to his Imperial Power) was taken out of the
way, and when this was effected Antichrist assumed the Throne, and so the
wicked came to be revealed; who though he had the Ecclesiastical Seat before,
yet was not so revealed to be that wicked mentioned 2 These. 2.8. till he got
the Civil Seat also, and this does further clear, that the wicked Antichrist in
his Throne must be made up of Civil, and Ecclesiastical Power.

Thirdly, This may further appear by the two Beasts mentioned, Revel. 13. the
first comes out of the Sea, verse 1. which I understand to be the Civil Roman
Power in its last State that rises by the Rebellions, and Sea-like rageing
tumults of the people, being encouraged and promoted by Satan in the false
Church, (though not yet mounted upon the Beast;) By these tumults, the Roman
Power, in its Pagan or Heathenish and first State (that was very glorious
before) comes to be wasted and at last destroyed, and so the Power brought
under the Beast that comes out of the Sea, and the Devil or Dragon, being very
willing to make a change of the Power from the Pagan State, that he might Mount
the Whore readily gives his Power, Seat, and great Authority to this Beast. The
Second Beast is mentioned in verse the 11. of this 13. Chapter and described as
coming up out of the Earth, and in verse 12. is said to exercise all the Power
of the First Beast (to wit the Beast that comes out of the Sea) and verse.
13.14. does great Wonders, and works Miracles before him, etc. and is called
the false Prophet, Revel. 19.20. This Beast must be understood of the false
Church which comes not from Heaven as does the true Church, but from Earth or
Hell, and in his first appearance his Horns or Power, are like a Lamb verse 11.
or like Christ, for so this false Church would be accounted, but his words are
like the devil, he spoke as a Dragon verse 11; and this false Church joining
her self to, and riding upon the Beast comes to sway or exercise the Civil
Power, and so is said verse. 12. to exercise all the Power of the first Beast,
not that the first Beast is destroyed, for this Whore causes him to be
worshipped and does great things before him v. 12. 14. Since the false Church
has been mixed with, and mounted upon the civil Power, (for her own ends,) she
cries up this wicked Beast, as the Ordinance of God, though in truth it comes
from the Devil, yea and she can bring Scripture (though abused and wrested) as
the Devil did to Christ, and cries up obedience to it, condemning all that will
not fall down to the Beast, as being those that disobey Magistrates, despise
Dominion, and speak evil of dignities, which Scriptures indeed were spoken of,
and much fulfilled by this false Church till this Beast on which she rides came
up.

Fourthly, The mixture of this Antichristian State may further appear by the
Beast, and the Whore mentioned, Rev. 17. The Beast that was and is not and yet
is, verse 8. holds forth the Civil Power in its two fold State; First, In its
Pagan State, before the visible rise of Antichrist. Secondly, In its
Antichristian State, when it carries the Whore; The Beast that was, which word
was, respects him in the glory of the Pagan State, in which he was a Beast, and
like a Beast rather then like a Man, he carried it in the ten first
Persecutions, and this word, Is not, respects him in his Antichristian State as
carrying the Whore, which was not in being in John's days who was the Penman
of this word; And this word, and yet is, respects the Pagan State which was in
being in John's day; And this word shall ascend out of the bottomless pit,
respects his Antichristian State which comes from Hell, and in this State, I
understand he is called the eighth Head, ver. 11; The other Seven Heads being
brought down for, and their Power divolved upon this Beast, he is called the
eighth, and yet is said to be of the Seventh, and the ten Horns ver. 12.
receive Power as Kings one hour with him, being all thereby fitted for, and
engaged to Mount the Whore; The Whore, ver. 1. holds forth the false Church,
that would be counted the spouse of Christ, but commits whoredom with Idols,
and fornication with the Kings of the earth, and is not built upon Christ as
the foundation, But verse 15. sits upon peoples, and multitudes, and
Nations, and Tongues, that being the strength of the false Church, who by her
sorceries and VVhoredoms as the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the
earth, obtains the Power and Reigns over the Kings of the earth. ver. 18.

Fithly, This mixed State of the Antichrist in the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Power, is further held forth, by the Beast and false Prophet. Rev. 19.20, 21.
which place speaks of them in the last and final stroke that comes upon them,
for though the fifth Vial, Rev. 16.10. is poured out upon the Seat of the
Beast, and the Judgment and fall of the Whore is set forth in Chap. ^8. and
beginning of the 19th yet some Relics of both the Beast, and Whore remaining
till very near or unto the personal Coming of Christ, the Devil having but a
short time to reign, gathers up all his forces and engages the Kings of the
Earth to come up with him against Christ and his Saints, and then the last
Vial comes upon them at Christ's personal appearing and compleats their ruin
and so both these parts of Antichrist by this stroke are destroyed together,
compare Rev. 19.20, 21. with Chap. 16. Ver. 13, 14, 16, 17. Having spoken of
this Beast and false Prophet held forth by the two Beasts in Chap. 13. I shall
speak no more of them in this place.

Lastly, If we consult the Histories and also what we have seen of the
Antichrian State in our day, it has been made up of these two parts, viz.
Civil and Ecclesiastical, which like Twins, have gone together in all their
wickedness, one crying up the other and calling for obedience; The false Church
and her Ministry, being propped up by the false Magistracy, calls for and
preaches up obedience to it as Gods ordinance, and they must be killed that
will not worship the Beast, Rev. 13.15. The false Magistracy does the like for
the false Church and her Ministry, crying them up as the true Church and
Ministry of Christ, and all that will not fall down to this Whore in paying of
Tithes, Church-Rates, following her Assemblies, and such like abominations must
be imprisoned, banished or killed, and thus the Beast bears, yea is said to
carry the Whore, Rev. 17.7. and is the Whores drudge or slave to do her wicked
service; these two have been in conjunction in and are guilty of the blood of
the Saints, and the several persecutions, since Antichrist came to the Throne,
have been on this wise carried on, the Ecclesiastical Power have adjudged and
condemned and so delivered over to the Civil Power, who have executed and
killed them with much rage and greediness, and after a most cruel manner, and
although the Civil Power would at this day when the Lord is coming to make
inquisition for blood, slip out their Necks and excuse themselves as if they
were free and had done no wrong to, nor shed the blood of the Saints and may
have many Advocates pleading at a high rate on their behalf, and saying that
Judgment shall not fall upon them and further to evince this, do give them the
title of Christian Magistrates, and that many of them are good men, yet all
this will not excuse them from the stroke, when the Lord according to Rev.
16.5, 6. comes to avenge the blood of his Saints and Prophets, and Psalm. 9.16.
shall be known by the judgment which he executes, for no doubt the guilt of
much blood will be found in the skirts of the Civil Power and their sin will
find them out, and though good men be in the place of Power, it will not save
from the Judgment, for Gods controversy is not so much with the Persons as
with the Beastly Powers, and the title of Christian Magistrates will not
excuse, but rather condemn them as the Antichristian Power, and the Fountains
and Rivers of waters, upon which the third Vial comes, Rev. 16.4. does not
exclude but include this Civil Power; Having thus laid down my understanding of
the fifth Kingdom, or Kingdom of Christ, which should be erected or set up in
the latter day, and of the Kingdom of the Beast, which is to be destroyed; I
shall now come to speak to the third thing which is the great question at this
day.

How shall these things be brought forth? by what Instruments and in what way?

In Answer to this Question, First, this Work belongs to God who has promised
to accomplish it. As first, the destroying the Kingdom of the Beast, the
beating down of Christ's foes before him, making them his footstool, clothing
them with shame, and avenging the blood of the Saints upon Antichrist, Psalm.
89.23. Psa. 110.1. and 132.18. Rev. 6.10. Chap. 19.2. Secondly, the setting up
of the fifth Kingdom also belongs to God, Dan. 2.44. Psalm. 89, 27.

Secondly, Though God be the main Agent in this Work yet he does it by
Instruments, and the Instruments are his Saints, whom he will call to and
anoint for this Work, and so God is said to do it because it is done by his
Spirit in the Saints whom he shall choose.

That the Saints shall be the Instruments in destroying the Kingdom of the
Beast, and so in setting up the fifth Kingdom which does immediately Succeed,
Take the place, and Fill up the room of the fourth, consider the following
Scriptures, Dan. 2.34. the Stone (which is the Saints, anointed for and called
to the Work as I have before showed) smites the Image on his feet, (which has
also been showed to be the Antichristian State) and breaks them in pieces, So
Dan. 7.18. The Saints shall take the Kingdom; Now though the Kingdom is given
to them by promise, and obtained for them by the Power of God, yet they are
said to take it, which must be understood of their being used as Instruments in
taking the Power, Rule and Government from the Image, or that part of it which
stands next before Christ's Kingdom, which must be done by destroying, or
breaking in pieces that part of the Image which is in being when this Fifth
Kingdom comes to take place Dan. 7.26. They (that is the Saints whom he wears
out verse 25.) shall take away his, (that is the Little Horn verse. 8. and 24.
which have been already showed to be the Antichristian State) Dominion (that is
his Power, Rule, or Government) to consume, and to destroy it unto the end. In
Dan. 11.31. The Angel is speaking of the Roman or Fourth Kingdom, which took
away, the daily sacrifice, and verse. 32. says, But the people that do know
their God shall be strong and do exploits; The people that do know their God,
are the Saints, and by their being strong and doing exploits, I understand to
be the service that the Saints shall do in the destroying this Fourth Kingdom,
also Number. 24.14. I will advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people
in the latter days, and Isai. 14.2. They shall take them captives, etc. So
Isai. 41.14.15. Fear not thou worm Jacob (to wit the Saints in a low condition)
I will make thee a new sharp threshing Instrument, etc. thou shall thresh,
(that is break in pieces or destroy) the mountains, (to wit the great worldly
Powers Isai. 2.2.) and beat them small, and shall make the Hills, (which also
intends the worldly Powers) as Chaff, etc. Isai. 52.2. Shake thy self from the
dust loose thy self from the bonds of thy neck O captive Daughter of Zion; by
the bonds of thy neck, and the dust, I understand the Government, and wicked
Tyranny, that Babylon has had and exercised over Zion, and by shaking and
loosing her self, must needs be understood to be the breaking off, or
destroying that Power and Government of Antichrist, and this must be done by
Zion her self, to wit, the People of God, Cha. 51.16. Jeremiah Cha. 50.45.
Speaking of Babylon, says, surely the least of the flock shall draw them out,
by the Flock, is meant the People of God, Acts 20.28. and by draw them out, I
understand the rewarding and destroying of Babylon, and this Scripture must be
applied to spiritual Babylon, because it was not the Saints but the Medes that
drew out litteral Babylon, as the same Chapter compared with Dan. 5. does
manifest; In Micha. 4.13. Zion (to wit the Lords People) is fitted for and
called to arise and thresh the Nations. Isa. 13.3, Mal. 4.2.3. Job. 17.8. Zech.
2.7. So Zech. 9.13. Zion must deliver her self, and her sons must be raised up
against the sons of Greece; Rev. 18.4.6. the peculiar People of God are
commanded to reward Babylon, Rev. 15.6. and 16.1. the Angels with the Viols
comes out of the Temple; the Vials, do contain the seven last plagues, or the
judgments of God that are to accomplish the destruction of Antichrist, and
avenging the blood of the Saints; the Temple is the Church, or the Saints of
God, 2 Cor. 6.16. and by the Angels, I understand those Saints, that are
chosen, and called of God as Ministers or servants employed in that honorable
work to execute his judgments; these with many other Scriptures do make it
very evident, that the Saints or people of God, must be used by him in this
great and glorious work; and the Fifth Kingdom taking place, and filling up the
room of the Fourth; Dan. 2.35. The Stone, or Kingdom became a great mountain
and filled the whole Earth. the like in Dan. 7.27. it will appear from the
Scriptures before mentioned that the Saints must be used both in the
destroying, and building work.

But I know it is further queried, How shall the Saints be used in this work,
and by what means shall they accomplish it?

In answer to which, I shall lay down these particulars;

First, That they which shall be used in the work, must be such whom the Lord
shall choose, and call in to it. The Lambs Army are called and chosen, Rev.
17.14. It is not whom Man will choose, but whom the Lord shall choose: Samuel
would have chosen Eliab, but he must not stand, because God had refused him,
and it was David that was Gods chosen. 1 Samuel 16.7. This has been the evil of
many in our days, to presume to put themselves and others upon the Lords
Work, Some because they are men of great wit and parts; Others, because they
are men of great estates and high in the World; Others, because they are tried
Soldiers, Men of valor and courage; yea, and many like Samuel, have been
crying such up as the Lords anointed, and have not first made diligent search,
whether the Lord had chosen them, and this has proved like Uzzahs touching the
Ark, they have stumbled, fallen, and come to nothing.

Secondly, That the Instruments must not only be such as are called and chosen,
but such as have received the anointing for the work: by which anointing,
they are not only made faithful, but do obtain light in, and love unto it, with
wisdom, faith and courage for the managing of it. This work, though done by the
Saints, must not be by their, or the might or power of men, but by this
anointing, Zech. 4.6. Isa. 10.27. and Chap. 59.19. Haggai, 2.5. Isa. 28.6.
Being thus called, chosen, and anointed, they shall be used; First, by faith
and prayer, with praises, as Joshua, Gideon, and diverse others were in the
Typical part of this work and how much more in the Antitype, which does far
exceed it in spirituality, shall the Instruments be so used; Psalm. 2.8. Ask of
me, and I will give thee. etc. which must respect Christ as King in his
members, Heb. 11.30, 32, 33. Who through faith subdued Kingdoms, etc. Psalm.
72.15. and Psalm. 149.6. Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, etc.
Rev. 6.10. Chap. 8.3.4.5. Secondly, by the word of their Testimony, which they
bear for Christ against Antichrist, Rev. 12.11, 17. Lastly, by Material
weapons, in a military way, Christ being the Captain General, and chief leader
of this Army, Rev. 17. The Lamb shall overcome them, and they that are on his
side, are called, chosen and faithful. Psalm. 110.3. In the day of the
assembling of thy Army, (for so some read the words) Thy people (speaking to
Christ) shall be willing. This Psalm does in an especial manner relate to the
work of the later day. Rev. 19.14. The Armies followed Christ, which Armies
must respect the Saints, as being them that are arrayed in fine linen, Verse.
8. That the Saints shall be used with material weapons, consider,

First, That the War cannot be restrained to that spiritual War, mentioned 2
Cor. 10.4. Ephesians. 6.12. which war required spiritual weapons only, but this is an
outward visible war, as smiting, and breaking the visible Image Government,
taking away the visible Power of the last Beast, Dan. 2. and Chapter the 7th.
and a visible overcoming, and breaking the Horns, or visible Power of the Ten
Kingdoms, that received their Power with the Beast; which Horns do begin a
visible War with Christ and his Cause, as it is owned, and carried on by his
Saints, who are the Members of his Body, Rev. 17.

Secondly, That they shall be used with Material Weapons, may appear from Joel,
3.10. Beat your Plow-shares into swords, and your pruning hooks into spears,
let the weak say I am strong. In which Scripture, I would note three things,
First, That it is a prophecy of the latter day work, when Multitudes shall
appear in the valley of decision, which has never yet been fulfilled, as is
most evident, if the scope of the Prophecy be consulted. Secondly, This 10th.
Verse is spoken to the Saints, or people of God, the scope of the words leads
to the Saints, and the 11th. verse is a Call to the Heathen, for God will
gather the Heathen as well as his own people, to the valley of decision,
according to Zeph. 3.8. and this word of encouragement, Let the weak say I am
strong, is not spoken to the enemies of God, but is a blessed word for his own
people, and by it the whole verse appears to be directed to them. Lastly, the
swords and spears are not spiritual, but material weapons, because they are
made of plow-shares and pruning hooks, and are to be used in the Lords great
Controversy with the Heathen, and the enemies of his Church. This Truth may
further appear, from Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8. Let a two-edged sword be in their
hands, to execute vengeance, etc. This Psalm must also respect the latter day,
when the meek shallbe beautified with salvation, ver. 4. and this prophecy
has never been fulfilled since this Psalm was penned, but must be fulfilled
in the execution of the judgment that is to come upon the World in this latter
day; This must be a material sword. First, because the work that the Saints are
to do with it, is outward, visible work, viz. to bind Kings and Nobles, and to
execute the judgment written, verse. 8.9. 2dly. This sword is to be in their
hands, and therefore must be a material sword; if it were spiritual, it would
be in their hearts, or in their mouths and included in the joy and praises
before spoken of; this may further appear from Luke 22.36. He that has no
sword, let him sell his garment and buy one. That this Sword relates to the
latter day, must needs be granted, because it is spoken in the latter day; for
the whole day from Christ's coming into the flesh, to the end of the world, is
called the latter days or time, Acts 2.17. Heb. 1.2. 1 John 2.18. This latter
day, or last times, must be considered under a twofold dispensation, the one
of Suffering, the other of Action. In the first, the Saints must be bound with
chains, and killed, and countted as sheep for the slaughter, Romans 8.36. comp.
Luke 21.12, 16. And in the second, the Saints shall bind with chains, and take
them captives, whose captives they were, Isa. 14.2 comp. Psalm. 149. In the
first, the Beast or Little Horn shall wear out the Saints; In the second, the
Saints shall take away his Dominion, Dan. 7. In the first, the Saints must
Suffer in Babylon, under yokes and bonds, and so be hanging down the head; In
the second, Zion (or the Saints) must deliver her self, and put on her
Beautiful Garments, and lift up her head, and loose her self from the bands of
her neck, or the Government of Antichrist that is upon her, and shake her self
from the dust. In the first, Babylon is exercising Cruelty, and Tyranny over
the Saints, and they are patiently to bear it, and if they be smitten on the
one cheek, they must turn the other, and if any man will sue them at the Law,
and take away their coat, (which must be whilst the wicked Antichristian, Law
is in force) they must let him have their Cloak also: But in the Second, the
Saints must render to Babylon double. Compare these following Scriptures Dan.
7.25. with verse. 26. Rev. 13.7. with Chap. 17.14. Isa. 52.1.2. Zech. 2.7. Luke
21.28. Matthew. 5.39.40. Rev. 18.6. This Scripture Luke 22.36. does clearly hold
forth this twofold dispensation, for it cannot be applied to the day when
Christ and his Apostles were upon the Earth, which was a day of suffering,
wherein they were not to resist, as Math. 5.39. with many other Scriptures to
this purpose, both in the Evangelists and the Epistles; and Christ tells them
at the same time, that two swords were enough, verse. 38. and therefore could
not be the time in which he that had no sword, must sell his garment and buy
one, but holds forth another dispensation, in which the Saints must be called
to Action for Christ, in the setting up of his Kingdom; and though the words
were spoken to the disciples that were then with Christ in the suffering day,
yet he delivers it to them as they represented the whole body of Gospel
Believers, that were, or should come over to faith in him to the end of the
world; and so the Ordinances, Rules, and Work that the Saints were to observe
and do till Christ's Second coming, are delivered unto, and received by the
disciples that were with him in that day; Christ in the opening the extent of
his prayer, John. 17.20. cleares this, and also in his general exhortation,
Math. 13.37. What I say unto you, I say unto all, etc. and so the disciples
received from Christ the work that is to be done by the Saints in this last
part of the latter days. Much more might be urged to clear this matter, if it
were expedient in this place; by all which it may appear, that there is a
twofold Dispensation in the Gospel-day, and that this word of buying a sword,
must refer to the latter; this cannot be a Spiritual sword, it being to be
bought by selling of a garment; It was the error of Sym^n, in Acts the 8th. to
think that the Gifts of the Spirit might be bought: and further, this must
needs refer to a time when the Saints must use a Material sword, because they
must rather want their garments (though very needful and useful) then want a
sword. The next Sc ipture that does imply this truth is John 18.36. If my
Kingdom were of this world, or from hence, Then would my servants fight that I
should not be delivered to the Jews. This must needs be meant a fighting with
material weapons, which should rescue Christ from the Jews; and Christ
speaking of that time, says, Now is my Kingdom not from hence; which words do
imply, that there is a time when his Kingdom shall be from hence, and though
it be a Heavenly and Glorious Kingdom, yet it shall be set up, in, and over the
world, Dan. 7.27. The dominion under the whole heaven shall be given etc. Rev.
11.15. The Kingdoms of this world are become, etc. and so the Kingdom of
Christ may be said to be from hence, and when so it shall be, His servants will
fight. The next Scripture that may clear this, is Jer. 48.10. Cursed be he that
withholdeth his sword from blood. This word relates to a time when Gods
judgments are to be executed upon his Enemies, and is spoken to the Instruments
whom he will use, (as in the beginning of the verse.) Now the Instruments that
God will use in the Execution of his Judgments in the latter day, I understand
to be his Saints, as I have already showed, and so this word is spoken to them,
and proves that they must be employed with material weapons; I shall not cite
more scriptures to this, but speak to some principal objections that are made
against this truth of the Saints being used (with material weapons) in the
destruction of Antichrist.

Obj. 1st. The Ten Horns must hate the Whore, and burn her flesh with fire,
Rev. 17.16.

Answ, That the Ten Horns shall be employed in this work, none can deny that
own the Authority of Scripture, but that the Ten Horns do first make War with
the Lamb, and are overcome by Him before they do this Work upon the Whore, is
also clear from ver. 14. It may not be supposed, that while the ten Horns do
remain upon the Beast that carries the Whore, as they appear in verse 7.
should do this Work, for that would be Satan against himself; The ten Horns do
hold forth the Power or Dominion of the ten Kingdoms or Nations in Europe,
which had dependence upon the Roman Empire, and they are first seen upon the
Dragon (Rev. 12.) without Crowns, which do hold forth (as has been showed) the
Roman Empire in its Civil, Pagan, or Heathenish State. Secondly, The ten Horns
are seen in the Roman Antichristian State, upon the Beast that carries the
Whore, and that continues forty and two Months, and in that State they have
the Crowns upon them, having received Power as Kings one hour with the Beast,
Rev. 13. 1. Chap. 17.12. In this State they make war with the Lamb, and being
by him and those that are on his side, overcome and so broken off from the
Beast, the ten Horns viz. the Power and Dominion of those Nations is given to
the Saints upon the account of Christ, and so is divolved into the Kingdom of
the Stone that broke them off from the Image, and so are brought to their true
station to be under the King of Nations, who has on his Vesture, and on his
Thigh a name written, KING of KINGS and LORD of LORDS; and in this State I
understand the ten Horns, viz. the Power of those Nations in the hands of the
Saints is set against the Whore (or false Church) to execute the vengeance for
the blood of the Prophets, and Saints that is found in her, thereby to
accomplish his destruction; and this I understand by the ten Horns hating the
Whore, and burning her flesh with fire, Rev. 17.16.

Object. 2. That the destroying of Babylon is not work fit for Saints to be
employed in, being ravishing of Women, dashing children against the Walls, etc.
Isa. 13.16.

Answ. First, This is spoken of litterall Babylon, the Glory of the Chaldees,
ver. 19. which was to be destroyed by the Medes, ver. 17. And if we may credit
Histories, they tell us, that such things were fulfilled by the Medes upon
Babylon of the Chaldees, who had done the like upon Jerusalem, which Jeremiah
complains of in the Book of Lamentations, And though this Babylon did Type out
spiritual Babylon, yet it may not be expected that every circumstance should
be accomplished and that literally upon spiritual Babylon: For if it should be
kept to, as a Rule, that every circumstance must literally be fulfilled in the
Antitype, We should run upon many mistakes about Christ, and his Work in Gospel
days; Also Ravishing of Women, and dashing of Children, may agree with other
Scriptures to be applied spiritually; upon the whole it may not be gathered,
that there is any Work to be done in the rewarding of Mystical Babylon, which
may not become Gods sanctified Ones, especially considering that it is the
Lords controversy, and the execution of his Righteous Judgment, and vengeance
upon her.

Object. 3. That because the Medes destroyed litterall Babylon, the like may be
expected for the Nations to destroy Spiritual Babylon, and that the Earth shall
help the Woman, Rev. 12.16. And the Saints being engaged by their Faith and
Prayers, the Work is sometimes attributed to them.

Answ. First, It is clear from Scripture, that there is a Babylon which the
Saints must destroy, (as has been already showed) and it was not litteral
Babylon, for the Medes destroyed that, Therefore it must be the Babylon in the
New Testament day. Secondly, Though the Earth helps the Woman, whilst in her
suffering State to prevent the Devils destroying her; yet it is not said,
neither will it follow, that the Earth must reward Babylon. And thirdly, (as
has been already showed, the Saints shall be used by Faith and Prayer, and
also in a Hostile way with material weapons; and therefore I shall add no more
to this Objection.

There are several other Objections that I meet with at this day, As that the
Work must be done by the Spirit only, and God needs not to use Instruments;
And that this is a bloody work not meet for Gospel Saints; And that this was
the Munster Principle; And those that are of this mind are carnal and neglect
Soul work; and leave the ways of God; And neglect the Conversion of sinners,
and the building up such as are converted; And that they are such as are
against Magistracy, etc. But it would be too large to speak to all these
things, and to show, how in the building of the First and Second Temple, and
many other things which God did by his Spirit, yet conferred that honor upon
his Servants to use them as Instruments in his hand, though he had no need of
them, but as in the Creation might do all by the word of his Power. He had no
need of Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, and many others, he could have done his
work alone, yet it was and is his pleasure to use them. And as for the High
Charges that are brought against this Truth and the Professors of it, I shall
not undertake to vindicate and plead for all that go under the name of owners
of these things. I know there was a Judas amongst the twelve Disciples, yea and
Peter who was very eminent did miscarry, and the best of Saints here do stand
by Faith, yet this I may say that the Principles teach no such things, but 2
Pet. 3. if we look for such things, we are from thence instructed to be holy in
all manner of conversation. But I hope as I have not received these things
either with respect to Persons or things, but as it might appear to be the mind
of the Lord, so I would not reject, or entertain hard thoughts of any of the
Truths of Christ, because many of the Professors thereof walk unsuitable to
their profession; And to what is falsely charged upon the Persons, or
Principles, is no more then has been upon other truths of Christ, and upon his
followers in former ages; Caleb, and Joshua, because they were faithful, and
declared the truth, the whole Congregation of professing Israel bade stone them
with stones. Number. 14. Jeremiah for declaring the truth was not only reproached
by false reports, but cast into the Dungeon for his faithfulness, by the very
Princes of Israel, and he received more favor from the Heathens, then he did
from the Professors, as from Ebedmelech, the Blackmore, and from the King of
Babylon Jer. 15.10. chap. 20.10. chap. 38.4.6.7-11.12. Chap. 39.11.12. and to
our Lord Christ himself his friends said he was beside himself, Mark 3.21. The
strict sort of the Jews did contemn him, and his followers, and said he was a
Samaritane and had a Devil. Yea that Sect was every where spoken against Acts
28.22. and Paul was charged to be a pestilent fellow, and that he Preached that
men should do evil that good might come; Considering this cloud of witnesses
and how much Satan is engaged against the Righteous Cause of Christ, and how
truth in all ages has been first branded for error, and then opposed and
persecuted, and the Professors thereof Imprisoned, Banished, and killed, I am
(through Grace) helped with comfort and cheerfulness to bear these sore
reproaches as a part of Christ's, and Truths livery, and leave it till the day
of Decision when the Lord will show who was for Christ and his Truth and who
were the opposers of them. And as to that part of the charge that we are
against Magistracy, the Lord in his own time will clear his despised Remnant of
that with other false charges, and will make it manifest, that through rich
Grace, we do own, Reverence, and witness for, the true Magistracy which is
according to the Word of God, in opposition to the false Magistracy of
Antichrist, and of the Apostasy at this day; and if to be for the House, and
Kingdom of David, against wicked Saul, as was the House of Judah and diverse
others, 2 Samuel 2.10. cha. 3.2. or for David against Absalom as 2 Samuel 15. or
for Solomon against Adonijah as was Nathan and others see 1 King. 1. or with
Ehud against Eglou as Judge. 3.14. or for Joash against Athaliah as was Jehoiada
and others see 2 Kin. 11. or to be for the Lord and his Truth against Amaziah
when he turned from following the Lord; in a word, if to be for Christ and his
Kingdom, against the Devil, Antichrist, and the Apostasy, be to be Vile and to
be Transgressors, we are such, and I desire the Lord may keep us so to the end;
But if these things be justifiable by Scripture and owned by the Lord, let
those that reproach us take heed least they become fighters against God.

The Fourth general head that I propounded to speak to, is the Time of this
works taking place in the world, (to wit) of the Setting up the fifth and the
destroying of the Fourth Kingdom. As for the day or year, the Lord in wisdom
has reserved to himself, and what is written of it in the Scriptures, may
through our ignorance admit of many doubts and various apprehensions; I do
Judge it has been the failing of some, (whom I have much honored in the Lord)
to fix the day and year, and I have desired to be always waiting for it, but
not so fix the time, only in general, That this Kingdom of Christ shall be set
up in the world before his Personal Coming, though it shall not come to its
perfect Glory and Beauty till he comes with his glorified Saints.

The First Argument to clear this is Dan. 2.44. In the days of these Kings
shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom. first that this Kingdom is the Fifth
Kingdom has been already showed. Secondly, by these Kings I understand the
Toes of the Image which in Revel. 17. are called Horns, and explained to be
Kings; Now it must be granted by all, that those Kings do either refer to those
Kings, mentioned Dan. 7.17. which are (as has been showed) the four Monarchies
of the world and are held forth by the several parts of the Image, Dan. 2. or
to the ten Horns (or Kings) before mentioned. First it cannot be the four
Monarchies, for then the Fifth Kingdom must take place in the world betwixt the
time of Isreal's going into the 70. years Captivity in Babylon, and their return
to Jerusalem for the Chaldean Monarchy (viz.) the Head of Gold (which was the
first of the four Kings) had not its beginning as part of the Image, till about
the time of their going into the captivity, and was taken away or destroyed
several years before the return of the captives as may appear. Dan. 5.
Therefore if it were in the days of those Kings it must begin while the
Chaldean Monarchy was in being; But it is without doubt that the Kingdom of
Christ did not begin in that time, but either long before, or long after;
Secondly if it should be true (as some affirm) that this Fifth Kingdom began
either at Christ's coming in the flesh, or at his Resurrection, or Ascension, or
at the pouring out of the Spirit, Acts 2. Yet it cannot be the days of the
four Kings; For three of these four were come and gone many years before
Christ, and it is evident from Scripture that the Roman or Fourth Kingdom by
which the daily sacrifice was taken away, was in its glory in Christ's day and
had the world under his Dominion. Luke 2.1. Lastly it cannot be the four Kings,
but must be the Toes (or) Horns, because the Cutting out of the Stone, or
setting up the Kingdom is not seen till sometime after the Image in all its
parts did appear; Thou saw till that a Stone was cut out etc. verse. 34. so
that the very Toes viz. the Antichristian Kings (that receive Power as Kings
one hour with the Beast) are up sometime before the Stone, and are them that
the Stone smites or falls upon. verse. 34. and the Stone must smite Imediately
upon its cutting out, because it breaks its way through the last part of the
Image Government and fills up the room of it. And therefore these Kings must
be the Antichristian Kings which are in being when the God of Heaven sets up
the Kingdom; Secondly by the days of these Kings, I understand the time of
their Government, or while their Kingdoms and Power is up in the world, and in
the time that God has permitted them to reign; now Christ's Personal coming
shall not be in their days, but in his own day, when their days are ended,
and there is ground to judge that their days must be ended sometime before
Christ's coming in Person, for we read, Revel. 17. that these Kings make War
with the Lamb and are overcome, and there appears to be the end of the ten
Antichristian Kings, which must be before Christ's Personal coming, for at that
coming it may not be supposed that the ten Horns shall make War with him, but
the War is with the Lamb in his Saints, and in his Cause; Now if the Kingdom
must be set up, or the Stone cut out in the days of the ten Antichristian
Kings, then it could not be set up before, nor at the Ascension of Christ; For
those Kings in that State, were not then in being, the last Beast that comes
from Hell was not up, therefore it must be before Christ's Personal coming from
Heaven because their days are ended before or at that coming.

The Second ground to clear this truth is from Ps. 110.1. The Lord (that is God
the Father) said unto my Lord (that is Christ) set thou at my right hand till I
make thine enemies thy footstool. By Christ's enemies, I unde stand, not only
the Antichristian State, but it includes the whole world, who through the
Instigation of the Devil are against Christ and would not have him to Reign
Psalm. 2.1.2.3. Rev. 11.17.18. Secondly by the enemies, being made his footstool
I understand not a Total destruction of their persons, but a taking away and
destroying of their Government, and Power, and bringing them to the foot of
Christ to be as the Stool for his Government to take place upon, or to bring
them under and in subjection to it. Thirdly, by Christ's sitting at the Right
hand of the Father, I understand his Personal being in Heaven as our Advocate
where he is said to be at the right hand of the Majesty on high, Col. 3.1. Heb.
1.3. cha. 8.1. that so if Christ's enemies must be brought down, and his
Government take place whilst he sits at the Right hand of God, Then the
Kingdom of Christ must be set up before his Personal coming.

The third ground is taken from the time of Babylons destruction, which must be
before Christ's Personal coming; And Babylon being to be destroyed by the
Saints, Stone, or Kingdom, this work must take place before the Personal
coming; That Babylons fall by the Plagues must be before Christ's Personal
coming, consider Rev. 18.4. come out of her my people that ye partake not of
her sins and that ye receive not of her plagues. God here speaks to those that
were not so much his people by visible profe^^ion for they were in Babylon, but
such as by special Grace (as the fruit of Electing love) he calls his people,
and these are such as shall be caught up, 1 These. 4.17. to meet Christ at his
Personal coming, and Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2. Have their vile bodies changed,
and fashioned like unto his Glorious body and so must be out of the reach of
such temporal plagues as must come upon Babylon, but Babylons plagues must come
in a time when Gods own peculiar people may through sin come to partake of
them, and therefore the destruction of Babylon must needs be before Christ's
personal coming; that word, Dan 7.26. speaking of the little Horn, says they
shall take away his Dominion to consume and destroy it unto the end, which end,
must be the end of the fourth Monarchy or of this old world, when Christ shall
come in person and the world to come, (spoken of Heb. 2.5.) take place, so that
Antichrist must be a destroying and consuming as a gradual work till the end of
the fourth Monarchy; The Stone, Dan. 2. that destroye^ the Antichristian State
must do it before Christ comes in person; it does it not at once as it would be
^f it were to be done at Christ's Personal coming who comes as the lightning:
but is done gradually as may appear by the scope of the words.

The fourth Ground is taken from the Way and Instruments that shall be used in
the work, and they (as it has been proved) must be the Saints with Material,
weapons in a Military way, and I suppose I need not take up time to show that
it is inconsistent with a glorified Saint to do this work with Material weapons
in the way that it is to be done, for I never met with any of that persuasion,
to wit, that Glorified Saints might so use Material weapons, and that the
Saints shall be all changed and have glorified bodies is clear from, 1 Cor.
15.51, 52. Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2. So then if the Saints must be the
Instruments, and the work not consistent with their glorified State, the work
must needs take place before the Personal coming of Christ.

The fifth Ground is taken from the Sitting of the Judgment menc. Dan. 7.26. by
the Ju gment cannot be understood the last judgment spoken of Rev. 20. but must
be the Judgment of Antichrist menc. Rev. 17.1. which is the judging, and
passing the sentence against Antichrist, and for the righteous cause of Christ
and this does Imediately precede the vengeance mentioned, Rev. 6, 10. Dan. 7,
26. they shall take away his Dominion. Now this Judgment sits before Christ's
Personal coming, yea and the vengeance executed according to this Judgment is
before that coming; For first, he says, the Judgment shall sit, and then they
shall take away his Dominion to consume it unto the end. Now the sitting of the
Judgment and the executing of the vengance, being the same with the God of
Heaven's setting up the Kingdom, and all this being before Christ's Personal
coming, does further clear this Truth.

The Sixth Ground is taken from the pouring out of the Vialls, Rev. 16. The
Vialls do contain and are called the seven last Plagues, that must accomplish
the destruction of the Anti hristian world, and do much agree with the Work of
the Stone in Daniel 2. Now these Vialls or six of them, must be poured out
before Christ's personal coming. First, because they do the Work gradually,
and therefore are seven Vialls, otherwise one Vial (if it were at Christ's
coming) would do all the Work. Secondly, They do the destroying Work, which (as
has been proved) must be done before Christ's Personal coming, and if the
Vialls do the same Work with the Stone or Kingdom, and six, if not all, must be
poured forth before Christ's Personal coming, then the Work must take place
before that coming. As against all Truths there are several Objections, so
against this.

First, it is objected, and alleged That the Saints must be in a Suffering
state till Christ comes.

Answ. There is a Twofold Suffering; the one by the Antichristian bondage, and
slavery, the other by corruption and inward temptations; From the first, the
Saints shall be delivered before Christ's coming, (as has been showed) the
other may remain till Christ at his coming binds Satan, and changes our vile
bodies. Also there is a twofold coming of Christ in the latter day, the one a
coming by his Spirit in his Saints-to the Work of executing vengeance, and so
Christ is the Stone; and so he overcomes the ten Horns; and so he comes at
midnight when the Virgins sleep; and so he comes as a Thief; and this is the
Coming spoken of Luke 18.7, 8. And shall not God avenge his own Elect?
Nevertheless when the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth?
Till this coming the Saints were to be in a suffering State upon both the
former and the latter Accounts. The second is, his Personal coming with all his
Saints, and all the holy Angels, when every eye shall see him; This shall not
only be a coming in Power, but also with great Glory; before this coming the
Saints shall be in the Posession of the Government upon the account of Christ
who is the rightful King, and the Vialls or Six of them shall be poured forth,
by which much of the vengeance that is to be executed shall be accomplished
upon the Earth; But although the Saints shall be in the Government of the
Nations, under and on the behalf of Christ the King, yet the Devil being not
bound, shall go forth full of Rage, because the time of his binding is near,
and immediately before the Personal coming of Christ shall stir up the Nations
to rebel against Christ in his Saints, and the Nations shall raise War against
the Saints, and shall take the City of Jerusalem, and it shall be a time of
great trouble, and then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those
Nations as when he fought in the day of Battle, and then the Seventh Vial
shall be poured forth into the air, which holds forth the making a full and
perfect end of the Work: my apprehensions in this matter are grounded upon
Eze. 39. Zech. 14.1.2, 3, 4. Revel. 16.16. chap. 19.17.18.19. and several other
Scriptures which relate unto, and must have their fulfilling in this time; In
the understanding of the weighty matters which relate to the latter day, I
would commend two things to consideration, which may through the blessing of
God be very helpful and useful to prevent mistakes.

First, To wait upon God for his Spirit in the search of the Scriptures, for a
right distinction of the several Times, and Seasons: as First, the Time of
Christ's suffering State: the Time of Antichrists Reign: the Time of Christ's
coming by his Spirit, in the Saints to execute the vengeance: the Time of his
Personal coming: the Time of the thousand years Reign: The end of the thousand
years: and the last Judgment, when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to the
Father; And as these times should be distinctly considered, without misplacing
them, or causing the one to clash against the other: so, The Second thing to be
considered, is through the spirit diligently to search the Promises,
Prophesies, and Types of this Latter day work contained in the holy Scriptures,
and before we pass judgment upon any of them, to wait upon the Lord for a
right understanding of the respective Times unto which the Promise, Prophecy
or Type does relate: for if we go to open then and not First understand what
Time they relate unto, we are in danger of very great mistakes: and this, I
judge, is much of the cause of the great differences that are among even those
of the People of God, that Wait for the Kingdom at this day, and through this
mistake the poor Jews stumbled and fell, misplacing those Promises, Prophesies,
and Types that did relate to Christ in that day; if these two things be
diligently observed, it would save much labor in answering several Objections:
some of which not yet spoken to are as follows.

Object. That Christ must be first in the possession of this Glory, he being
the Captain that was first made perfect through suffering, and therefore the
Kingdom must not be set up till his Personal coming.

Ans. This arises mostly from a mistake: for though the Saints shall take and
possess the Kingdom before Christ's Personal appearing: yet Christ shall be
first in the Glory of it, Dan. 7.14. It is given to Christ: and the opening of
it in verse the 18. says, that the Saints shall take the Kingdom: though all
this while Christ in his person is in heaven; for first, Christ must have the
pre-eminence, to be first in the Glory, as the Saints by his Spirit, do obtain
it. Secondly, They do not only obtain it by the Spirit of Christ, but also
upon the Ground of his Authority as he is King of Kings, etc. Thirdly, They do
it by his Command (all which may appear by the foregoing discourse, upon the
Saints being the Instruments in the work) and so the Glory of the Conquest is
to the Lamb Rev. 17.14. The Lamb shall overcome them, etc. Revel. 4.10. The
Crowns are cast before him, and the Saints do take and exercise the Government,
for, and on the behalf of Christ upon whom ( Psalm. 132.18.) his Crown shall
flourish; It is further objected.

Object. 2 Timothy 4.1. His appearing is joined with, yea put before his Kingdom;
even when he shall judge both the quick and the dead, therefore his Kingdom
shall not take place before his appearing.

Answ. Though his Appearing be here joined with, and placed before his Kingdom,
yet the Scripture does not say, neither by the order of words can it be safely
gathered, that his Kingdom shall not begin till his appearing: and those that
consider the Spirits Method in the Scripture, may know, that ofttimes, those
things that are to be performed Last, are placed First; and sometimes words do
respect a thing in its beginning, and sometimes in its perfection, as 2 Pet.
1.10. Make your calling, and Election, etc. those that own Election according
to Scripture: will grant that it takes place before Calling: and yet Calling is
here placed before it. So Acts 3.19. where the Apostle applies the blotting out
of sin, to the time of Christ's Personal coming: when according to other
Scriptures the blotting out, or forgiveness of sin, takes place long before, as
Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 2.13. so that this word must respect the perfecting of it. In
Luke 21.28. you have the like word applied to Redemptions taking place, at the
coming of Christ: the like in Ephesians. 4.13. though by other Scriptures,
Redemption has its beginning long before as Ephesians. 1.7. Gal. 3.13. and if
these things be considered: it may appear that either the Kingdom in this place
of 2 Timothy 4.1. must respect the perfection of its Glory, which shall not be
till Christ's Personal coming: though as has been showed it must have its
beginning before: or if it should respect its first taking place, we may not
build so much upon the order of the words as to make them clash against, yea to
exclude the scope of many Scriptures which do clearly hold forth the Kingdoms
taking place before the Personal appearing of Christ.

The Second thing that I shall lay down with respect to the Time of this
Kingdoms taking place, is. That it must begin, or take place amongst the
Gentile Saints before the Call of the Nation of the Jews (to wit) the Natural
Seed of Abraham.

The First Ground of this: I gather from the Work, Time, and Order of the
Vials, Rev. 16. Six of them are to be poured forth before the Kings of the East
(which I understand to be the Natural Seed of Abraham) have their way prepared.
The Sixth Vial Rev. 16.12. must be poured out upon the great River Euphrates,
that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared; By the River
Euphrates, I understand, not the Material River, for the ships of Tarshish must
bring them over greater Rivers then that: and that River cannot block up their
way, but it is the Power of that people (to wit the Turks) that have their
Situation about that River. By Rivers, and waters is elsewhere to be
understood of Earthly Powers, as in Revel. 16.4. compare with verse. 6. and
Revel. 17.15. and also at this day the Turks do possess the Land of Judea, and
it must be the breaking of their Power that prepares the way for the Kings of
the East; Now the Vials, doing the same work with the Stone, or Kingdom, (to
wit the destroying of Antichrist) and they doing the work or most of it, before
the Call of the Jews: the Kingdom must needs take place also before their Call;
I have not heard of any that denies that the Kings of the East, are to be
understood of Abraham's Natural Seed, and therefore shall speak no further to
this Ground.

The Second Ground, from whence I gather that the Kingdom must take place
before the Jews Call, is this; The Stone or Kingdom smites the Image upon the
Feet, (to wit the Babylonish State) and this smiting must be done by those of
the People of God that were under Babylons yoke, Rev. 18.4.6. Zech. 2.7. They
that are under Babylons yoke in this New Testament day, are not the Jews, but
the Gentile Saints, therefore the work must first take place amongst them: The
Kingdom strikes the first stroke upon the Antichristian State, Dan. 2.44.

The Third Ground of this Assertion is, That the Kingdom or Stone must break
and make way for the Jews before their coming in, therefore it must take place
or be in being, before it breaks the way; The Gentile Saints, must be used as
the Instruments in breaking the way for, and bringing in the Jews, Isa. 49.22.
and Chap. 66.20.

Object. That many of the Scriptures which referr to the Work of the Kingdom,
do speak to the People of God, who are to be used in it, under those Names, and
Titles, that properly relate to the natural Seed of Abraham, as Jacob, Zion,
Jerusalem, Judah, and Israel. etc.

Answ. That although in the Old Covenant day (in which the being one of
Abraham's natural Seed did entitle to Church Membership) the visible Church was
distinguished by those Names, and Titles: yet it may not be always restrained
or applied to them in Gospel days, when their Typical Church State comes to
cease; and as their Church State was Typical: so was the Titles that God gave
to them: and the names of Jacob, Zion, and Jerusalem, etc. do truly and
spiritually relate to the Gospel or New Covenant Church, in which, neither Jew
nor Gentile, have any right by natural Generation, but by Faith in Christ, who
is all and in all, Col. 3.11. and so in him (2 Cor. 1.20.) we come to have a
right to all the Promises that are held forth to Jacob, or Zion, etc. So Psalm.
102.13.16. in which Scripture Zion must respect the Gospel Church, which the
Lord shall build when he appears in his glory. It is the Gospel Church that (
Zech. 2.7.) dwells with the Daughter of Babylon, Gal. 4.26. Chap. 3.29. Ephesians.
2.14. which with many other Scriptures does clearly demonstrate, these Titles
are most truly to be applied to the Gospel Church, and those that deny this,
must exclude the Gospel Church from the benefit of the greatest part of the
Promises in Scripture; and though this may seem to cut off the Jews from their
Privileges: yet it will rather and more truly invest them therein upon a more
Noble account, when they shall come to embrace the Messiah; and thus much to
this Objection.

I shall now come to speak of Two Scriptures, that are specially insisted upon,
by those who expect the Work to begin among the Jews: the one in Micha 4.8.
Unto thee O Tower of the Flock, shall come the first Dominion, etc. If this
should be referred to the Natural Seed of Abraham: it can only respect the two
Tribes, to wit, Judah and Benjamin: and all that may be gathered in this matter
from it, is, that the Kingdom shall come to the two Tribes, before the Ten,
which will much agree with other Scriptures; but it will not follow from the
Scope of the Spirit in the words, that the Kingdom shall not take place, and be
in being among the Gentile Saints before its Dominion comes to the two Tribes,
because they must have the first Dominion, before the other ten Tribes. The
other Scripture is Zech. 12.7. The Lord shall save the Tents of Judah, first,
that the glory of the House of David, and the glory of the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah. By Judah or the Tents of
Judah, I understand the two Tribes: and by the glory of the House of David, and
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Ten Tribes; For the Glory was, to have the
Ten Tribes in conjunction with the Two, abiding with the House of David; but
when the Ten Tribes revolted, the Kingdom was rent, and the Glory of the House
of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem went off; and that the Ten Tribes
might not magnify themselves against the Two Tribes, who ( Hosea. 11.12.) Ruled
with God and was faithful with the Saints long after the revolt of the Ten: the
Lord will (in the Latter day) save the two Tribes first, which is all that can
be gathered in this matter from this Scripture, and it will not prove that the
Kingdom shall first take place or begin amongst the natural Seed of Abraham;
but I shall add no more to this, but come to speak to the third particular
relating to the Time of this Work taking place, and to that I shall lay down
this Position.

Position, That the Work of destroying the Fourth, and setting up the Fifth
Kingdom is begun, and has taken place amongst us in this Isle of great
Britain. And in entering upon the proof of this, I shall for the making way,
present some particular Considerations.

As first, That the Beast with the Seven Heads and Ten Horns, mentioned, Rev.
17. and also the Whore mentioned in the same Chapter, have their Rise, Seat,
Dominion, and Reign, in this part of the World called Europe, where the Roman,
or Fourth Kingdom had its place, before, at, and since the coming of Christ in
the flesh: and though the Rise, and Nature of the Power is changed from the
merely Civil, to the gross Antichristian or Mixed State, yet those that will
search the Histories, may find, that Antichrist has taken and does keep the
same Territories that were belonging to the Civil State.

The Second Consideration is, That this Nation or the Power of this Isle of
Great Britain, has been accounted, and really is, one of the Ten Horns of
the Beast, or Toes of the Image, and was joined with the Antichristian Beast
very soon, receiving Power as a King one hour with him, according to Rev.
17.12. and the Whore or false Church, has been long mounted upon the Civil, or
Beastly Power in this Nation. It is now above one thousand years, as history
relates, since Augustine the Monck was sent over by the Pope into this Nation,
where he found great encouragement from the Civil Powers, which Satan had
fitted for his own design of carrying the Whore; Proud Augustine (for so he is
called) does forthwith settle the National Church, and mounts it upon the Civil
Power, to bear up and maintain it, and many abominable wicked Laws, were made
to Answer the Devils design in the upholding, and maintaining this Whorish
National Church: at the setting up whereof, there are found some Faithful
Christians in the Nation, which so far as we may credit History, were some
remainders of the fruits of the Ministry of Joseph of Arimatheah, who is said,
was the first Preacher of the joyful sound of the Gospel in this Island: and
these Christians not falling down to, but witnessing against the Antichristian
Abominations, which were brought in from Rome, and readily received in this
Nation: Augustine becomes their great enemy, and (being of that Popish stamp,
that Thirsts after, and must be drunk with the blood of the Saints) thirsts
after the blood of those poor Christians, who for their safety fled to the
Mountains in Wales: but Augustine tho ough the help of the Civil or Beastly
Power (as the beginning of the wickedness which God will reward) obtains his
end, and drinks the Blood, or takes away the lives of those Faithful Martyrs
of Jesus, and so in shedding the blood of the Saints, the Beast, and the Whore
were united together in this Nation, and therefore no wonder if they cleave so
close together (as at this day) till the vengeance be accomplished upon them.
This proud Augustine being Ordained and sent by the Pope, (whose power is
derived from Hell) Ordains and Settles, Bishops, and Archbishops, who Ordain
the National Ministry, and settle them in their respective Parishes, and this
by succession, has continued to this day, and is the Ordination so much
pleaded for in this Nation.

The Third Consideration is, That the Toe, or Horn, or that part of the
Beastly Power in Britain which carries the Whore, according to the National
Constitution, was made up with, and did consist of, King, Lords, and Commons.

The Fourth Consideration is, That it is the proper Work of the Stone or
Kingdom, mentioned Dan. 2. to Smite and Break these Toes, or Horns, and so by
its Government to fill up the room thereof. Having laid down these things, I
shall proceed to the proof of the Assertion, to wit, That the Work is begun.

First, The Work that is only proper for the Stone to do (to wit, the breaking
of the Toes, or Horns) has taken place in this Nation; The Horn or Toe of
this Nation (to wit) King, Lords, and Commons, is broken, though not yet
according to Dan. 2.35. made as the Chafe of the Summer threshing Flower. Not
only the King, but Kingship and Peeridge is broken: and not only the Commons,
but the very Foundation of their Constitution from the Nation is broken, and
God has for several years been witnessing against it. I need not speak further
to the proof of this, if we forget not the things which our Eyes have seen,
Deuteronomy. 49. It is Matter of Mourning that this Generation (like Israel of old,
either understood not or else have forgotten the works of God, and it is no
wonder if God destroy them, and not build them up, Psalm. 28.5. Psalm. 106.7.13.
Though the Stone must break the Horn, or Toe: it is not said that it should be
done at one blow, or two: and therefore if God should suffer King, Lords, and
Commons to rally again in this Nation, it may not be said that the Work has
not been among us; for seeing the Stone may not do it at one, or two blows, the
Lord may gather and prepare them for the Second, or rather the Third stroke,
till he make them as the Chafe and they be carried away with the wind.

The Work in this Nation did not end in smiting the Horn, for the Kingdom and
Government of Christ did take place in its room. When the remainder of the Long
Parliament was by the answer of the Faith and Prayers of the Lords People with
an eminent hand of God broken: the undoubted right to the Throne being Christ's
(who had obtained it by his Sword, and Bow, as the fulfilling of many promises,
and Prophesies of Scripture,) the Saints (whose Right under Christ it is) upon
the Account, and on the behalf of Jesus Christ, did not only take, but come
into the possession of the Kingdom: for by a special hand of God, many of the
Saints upon the breach of the Parliament (before mentioned) were sent for from
several parts of this Island, (who found the Lord stirring up their hearts) to
come to Receive, and Possess the Government for Christ their King, and
accordingly, when they were come together at Whitehall, the Government was
delivered to them, and they (or at least many of them) received it upon the
avowed account of the Son of God, as the answer of the Faith, and Prayer, of
many of the Lords enlightened ones, as also by the joint consent of both Armies,
and Navy which God had wonderfully used in his Work, and this word Dan. 2.44.
was then cited in the delivering of the Government to them, the Kingdom shall
not be left to other People: but for a full understanding of these passages and
proceedings, I refer you to Cromwels speech made to the persons above mentioned
at Whitehall, which speech is Printed in A Book called the Fifth Kingdom
asserted in opposition to the Beasts.

Now this people being come together upon Christ's account, the first thing they
do, they keep a day of solemn Prayer to the Lord for his presence with them in
his Work, in which day the Lord was much seen amongst them as a precious
welcome at their coming together: But although they were all Called as men
fearing God, yet there is found several persons amongst them, that either
through ignorance, or wicked craft, prove great obstructers of the Work of the
Lord, and prevail, for the calling that Assembly by the name of a Parliament,
with some other Passages, that were not agreeable to the Kingdom of Christ,
which at this day proves a stumbling Block to some: but by the good hand of
God, Kingdom Light did increase among that Assembly, yea the Spirit of the
Kingdom, grew, and appeared openly, and the false Spirit fell before it; the
Antichristian Ministry were discountenanced and not called in to Pray among
them as they expected; The Lawyers trade also began to fall, for in stead of
the abominable Laws, and Heathenish books, the Bible was looked into, and the
Law of God searched after; A new Body or Model of the Law was Voted, by which
the Old must needs fall; The Court of Chancery was Voted down; A Vote also
passed, tending to the throwing down of Tithes, by which the Antichristian
Ministry was like to fall; The Power of Patrons for presentations to the
livings of the Antichristian Church was taken away; The oppressing craft and
gain of the Lawyers and National Ministry being so like to fall: they bestir
themselves, and endeavor to engage the Corrupt Party in that Assembly, (and
Cromwell with his Officers) to stand by them for the keeping up their Trade:
the spirit of the Apostasy being got into Cromwell and many of his great
Officers (who had forgotten or little minded their Engagements to the Lord at
Dunbar, and Worcester in the day of their streights: when they resolved to
prosecute the very things, which that Assembly were a doing, if the Lord would
own, and deliver them in those difficult hours) they very readily join with the
Zanballats, and Tobiahs of the day, to cause the Work of the Lord to cease, and
as much as in them lay to turn it back. The Lord for gracious ends, and that
the Work might answer the Types, and Prophesies that went before of it, permits
the Apostasy to take place, and Cromwell (Judas like) entertains meetings with
the Priests, Lawyers and Corrupt Party of that Assembly, and communes with them
how he might betray this Righteous Cause, and the proffers of Honor, and
Greatness, like the thirty pieces of silver to Judas, (as his actions have
clearly manifested) did put him upon this abominable Treachery, and forthwith
that wicked Instrument of Government was prepared, and false scandalous
reports, and reproaches raised against, and cast upon the faithful Members of
that Assembly thereby to render them odious to the Army and Nation, yea to
their Brethren, (which was the very way that the Martyrs were formerly brought
to suffering, yea Christ himself by the wickedness of that Generation did thus
suffer) as persons that would destroy Magistracy, Ministry, Laws, and
Propriety; It is true they were for destroying the Magistracy, Ministry, Laws,
and Propriety of Antichrist, but did own, and witness to, the Magistracy
Ministry, and Laws of Christ, with Propriety according to those Laws: which
must be the Salvation of this poor Island, if there be any left for it; upon
these reproaches many were ready to cry out as they did of Paul Acts 22.22.
away with such fellows from the Earth for it is not fit that they should live.

The Spirit of Apostasy having made its Party, and engaged the Corrupt Party of
that Assembly, the day was appointed for breaking them up, and thereby the
crucifying of the dear Cause of Christ; the day being come Cromwell repaires to
the place appointed, (to wit Whitehall) and that Corrupt Party of the Assembly,
to the Place of their sitting at Westminster betimes in the morning before the
usual time of meeting: where being come: One of them begins with prayer or
somewhat like it, fixing his eye upon the door till the Speaker came, and by
that time he came in, (though the design was privately carried, yet) there was
so many of the friends of Christ's precious Cause come in, as that they durst
not venture their Treacherous, and wicked design upon a Vote, but disorderly
and in confusion, took up the Mace, and went away to Whitehall where
pretendedly they delivered up the Government to Cromwell, I say pretendedly.

First, Because in reality the Government was not theirs to deliver up, but
Christ's, upon whose account it was obtained, and received, and so they could
not really deliver it up.

Secondly, If the Assembly who had received it, could have delivered it up,
this act was neither done by Vote in, nor agreement of the Assembly, but by a
company of Rebellious disorderly persons dispossessing and putting themselves
out of that Assembly, (who had received, and did possess the Government for
Christ) and having so put themselves out, had no more Power, or Right of
Government to deliver to Cromwell: then Cromwell or any other persons at that
time had, to deliver to them: yea a company of fellows that had met in the
street, might have gone to Cromwell and delivered as much Authority or Right of
Government to him, as they did: but the undoubted Authority being with Christ
the King of Nations, under him it did rest with those that remained in the
Assembly, keeping the Place and following the Work which the Lord had called
them to, and set them in, who had clearly made an eminent decision betwixt
cattle, and cattle, the corrupt Party of the Assembly going forth, and the
Faithful Friends to Christ and his Cause remaining together; and though Cromwell
and his Officers had owned the Government to rest in that Assembly upon the
Avowed Account of the Son of God; yet so bold and Wicked, were they now become,
as they sent Col. Goffe and Lieut. Col. White, with Soldiers, (presumptuously
setting themselves against the very Son of God, to withstand his Kingdom, and
interrupt the exercise of his Government in the hands of his People whom he had
Called, and by rich Grace separated from the treacherous dealers, and kept
together in the Assembly, after the Corrupt Party, (before mentioned) was gone
forth) which bold Apostates came into the Assembly, and by force of Arms turned
them out: and Cromwell being set up by the Priests, Lawyers, and his treacherous
Army, Assumes (and exalts himself in) the Throne, which before he had declared
did belong to Christ; And thus the Lord did permit a Stop to be put unto, and a
Death to come upon the Glorious Work and Cause of Christ, and the Apostasy
visibly to break forth, and take place in the midst of us, and so a turning
back to Babylon, building again the things which the Lord had destroyed,
wherein he had used some of the Apostates as instruments: Also the many
Flattering Titles, and wicked Addresses that were afterward given and made,
first to Cromwell the great Apostate, and then to his Son, by the Officers and
Soldiers of the (formerly Famous and Victorious, but now Revolting, and
Time-serving) Army, and by many of the Churches and eminent Church Officers and
Members, yea by the generality of all Sorts and Ranks of Men, (except a poor
despised Remnant, that were mourning over, and witnessing for the precious
Cause of Christ) the many printed Books, and Papers that are still extant, do
abundantly show.

I shall forbear to add, but come to the Second Ground, to show, That the Work
of the Fifth Kingdom is begun, and as these Works that have been done: So in
the Second place, the extraordinary way by which it has been effected, may
discover it to be the very Work of the Fifth Kingdom. This Work (according to
Scripture) being to be known by the extraordinary appearances of God in it, It
is called The Kingdom which the God of Heaven shall set up, Dan. 2.44. and
those that speak of the Glory, must also talk of the Power of this Kingdom,
Psa. 145.11. by which Power, I understand the extraordinary appearance of God
in accomplishing the Work of setting up the Kingdom; as in the coming up out of
Egypt: so in this Work God will show, and do, great and marvelous things,
Micha 7.18. Joel 2.21. and very many Scriptures speak after this manner. Now
that the Work in this Island has been so done, even by an extraordinary Hand,
or Power: look back as far as the old Puritant day, in which the Power of God
was eminently seen in preserving them, and owning their Faith, and Prayer, to
the overthrowing that great Mountain of the Bishops, and the rest of that
Antichristian, ^piscopal Train, that were imbodyed with them, and the Calling
of the Parliament upon the coming in of the Scots, and then come down to the
War betwixt the King and Parliament; The King having the greatest part of the
Nobility, Gentry, Wisdom, Riches, old Soldiery, and Commonalty of the Nation
with him, and how inconsiderable the Parliament, and their Forces were to him;
But though the Work of the Kingdom lay as it were under ground (or like a
Wheel within the Wheel, hard to be discerned, or like David whilst in Saul's
Army) yet it being the Work that God was about to do, in this latter day, did
carry the day in Great Power; and though men had their various designs, yet God
had his design also: and both in the same act. Several such instances there are
in the Scripture, as the Selling of Joseph into Egypt, Genesis 45.5. with Chap.
56. 20. So in the Crucifying of Christ, and diverse of the like passages that
might be named. And then come to the New Moddel of the Army in the year 1645.
First, by what an eminent hand was that matter carried in the House against the
very Spirit of both Parliament and Nation. Secondly, how was it carried also
against the very Spirit of the Army, several hundreds of the Officers were
turned out, and some that were very eminent; and in their Rooms, were put poor
Inferior, inconsiderable persons, who were preferred upon the account of their
being such as Feared the Lord, (that being then the received principle, to
employ men in places of trust that feared the Lord) from which day there was a
very eminent and powerful presence of God in and with the Army; Time would
fail me to insist upon the particulars to show how God appeared in an
extraordinary way at Naseby Fight, and the eminent Victories obtained in the
West, and in the North parts of the Nation, after the new Model. Then come to
the Second War when Hambleton came into England with the Scottish Army,
Consisting of near 27000 men; also how God apapeared in an extraordinary way in
the Victories obtained in Kent, and in Wales and at Preston, and Colchester,
at most or all which places the Enemy in number was three to one against us;
Also the Eminent Hand of God in the Service in Ireland, when that Nation was
almost swallowed up by the Enemy, God appeared with an outstretched arm, and
wrought for his holy name; In the next place come to the War with Scotland
which was Stated and undertaken upon Christ's Account, in which War God made
his power to be known; when our Army was brought very low in a strange Nation,
and Compassed in by the Eenemy, with an Army of about 27000 besides the whole
Nation on their side: and we having a poor, weak, sickly Army, scarce Nine
Thousand that were in a Capacity of fighting, then did God appear in the Mount;
and in a short time after the Army, Nation, and Garrisons of the Scots by an
outstretched Arm of the Lord were brought under; I forbear to mention how God
broke the design of the Scots King, and his Army, when they were forced to
quit Scotland, and with high expectations of great things from this Nation,
(who like Israel of old, Sam. 8.6.19. are generally very eager for a King) came
to Worcester and there were overthrown; Then come to the Eminent Hand of God
that was seen (as formerly) in the Garbleing: so now in the Breaking and
Rooting up the Old Parliament with the very Foundation of their Constitution
which was the last part of the Image Government; And though the Work of the
Lord was carried on before under that Parliament, yet it must also break them,
as they were a part of the Horn. David after he was first Anointed did fight
the Battles in Saul's Army, and as the design, so the power of God was
Eminently with him in the work; but afterward David's Kingdom was exalted over
Saul's Kingdom, and brake down his House, for so had God spoken, 2 Samuel 15.28.
that the Kingdom should be taken from Saul; And Saul knew that so long as the
Son of Jesse was upon the ground, his Kingdom could not be established, 1 Samuel
20.31. This is to be noted that David, 1 Samuel 18.7. had the pre-eminence of
Saul in the Battles, even whilst he fought in Saul's Army; Now that Old
Parliament being broken upon the Account of Christ, that his Government might
take place: by this breach an end was put to the National Constitution, or to
any Power or Authority that might arise from the Nation as a Nation, but the
right is brought to Christ, whose indeed it is, for he is King of Nations, and
(under him) it is given to the Saints, who must possess the Kingdom, Dan.
7.27.18. and therefore it is no wonder that all this time of the Apostasy, the
Apostates could make nothing Rise from the National Constitution, or if they
did, could not make it Stand up, but it has been like a man when his life is
gone from him, and the Day of the Lord according to Isa. 2.16. has been upon
all their pleasant Pictures. Then come to the War with Holland, and call over
the Records which do abundantly manifest how eminently God Wrought and made his
Wonders to be known in the Deeps, yea both VVind and Sea obeyed him in that
War. As to the Eminent Hand of God in the Call of that Little Assembly, I
shall not speak of it in this place, having spoken to it in the First Ground;
but upon the whole I may conclude this Second Ground with these Scriptures,
Number. 23.23. According to this time it shall be said of Israel, and Jacob, what
has God wrought? compared with, Psalm. 40.5. Psalm. 78.4. and 107.8. and 111.4.
also Psalm. 75.1. that his name is near his wondrous works declare. And though
this Generation as Deuteronomy. 4.9. have forgot the things that their eyes have seen:
yet God in much mercy makes these Wonderful Works as precious food to a poor
Despised Remnant, that are witnesing to, and waiting for the Resurrection of
the Glorious Cause of Christ. Psalm. 74.14 and 111.2, 3, 4. Compared with v. 5.
Psalm. 46.8. Come behold the works of the Lord, etc: Hos. 14.9. who so is wise,
and he shall understand these things, etc: Isay. 51.9, 10. Awake, Awake O Arm
of the Lord, as in Ancient days, art not thou it, etc.

The Third Ground which may further manifest that the Work of this Kingdom
has taken place, is, from the Cause that was Stated, and Laid in the Bottom
as the Foundation of the Quarrel, upon which the great Works have been
wrought, and Victories obtained: and that has been the Cause of Jesus Christ
in opposition to the Kingdom of Antichrist and as the Day, so the Light has
increased; First, against Popery and Prelacy, not only against their wicked
practices, but against the Foundation of their standing, as Antichristian; and
though there was then but little Light in the visible Kingdom of Christ, yet
there was so much as the Lord saw needful for that day. Secondly, in the
beginning of the Wars, which outwardly to men appeared to be betwixt the King
and Parliament, but in the Bottom (as those who had the Light of that Day may
remember) was betwixt Christ and Antichrist; and many of the people of God took
up Arms in Judgment and Conscience upon the account of Christ, and went to the
help of the Lord against the mighty, although it was but a dark Day, and a day
of small things; But by that time we came to the War with Scotland, there was
a good measure of Kingdom Light given down, and sprung up, though it was not
upon all that were engaged in the War, but only some few to whom the Lord was
pleased to manifest it; and through this Light the Cause came more clearly to
be stated in public view, and then the ground upon which the late King and
his Monarchy was taken off, is publicly asserted by the Army, (who were the
most eminent outward Instruments in the Work) to be upon the account of Christ,
as may appear by a Letter from the Officers of the Army at their march for
Scotland, directed to the rest of the Army that remained at their Quarters in
England; and also by their Declaration when they were come to Muscleborough in
Scotland. This Cause comes yet more clearly to be Stated, and Owned in the
Breach of the Old Parliament, and is laid in the Bottom (by those that were
Anointed for, and had the Light of that day) as the Ground upon which they were
Broken, and also as a farther manifestation of this, the Kingdom of Christ
being to take place next to the Image Government and that being broken, the
Little Assembly was called, and the Government delivered to them upon the
Avowed Account of the Son of God; Also in the Stating and Carrying on the War
with Holland, the Faith, and Prayer for the Success in that War, was (by those
that had the Light) upon the account of the Kingdom of Christ; these things are
evident and may further appear by a Letter from the Officers at Whitehall to
Lt. Genesis Fleetwood, and the rest of the Officers in Ireland upon the Breach of
the Old Parliament, and also by Cromwels Speech to the Little Assembly showing
their Call to be upon the account of Christ; and also the proceedings of the
Assembly, and Council, and the Committee of Admiralty in the managing of that
War with Holland; The Letter to Ireland, and the Letter (before mentioned) to
those of the Army that remained in England, the Muscleborough Declaration, and
Cromwels Speech, are all Printed together in the Book beforementioned called
The Kingdom of Christ, or Fifth Kingdom in opposition to the Kingdom of the
Beast, and is Sold at the Crown in Pope's Head Ally. The Grounds upon which the
enlightened Part of the Little Assembly did Act, and Own their sitting do also
clear the Cause to to be stated for Christ against Antichrist.

The Fourth Ground to clear this Assertion, is from the Anointing, a Measure
whereof has been given down in, and for the accomplishing of the Work and by
which it has been done. And first that there is an Anointing reserved for, and
promised to this Work of the Fifth Kingdom, yea that the Work is to be done by
the Anointing (though not without the use of Instruments) consider Isa. 10.27.
which speaking of the Latter day Work, and of Zions deliverance, says, That
the yoke shall be broken off because of the Anointing also Isai. 28.6. speaking
of this Work says: The Lord shall be for a Spirit of Judgment to them that
sit in Judgment, and for strength to them that turn the Battle to the Gate.
Also Haggai 2.5. My Spirit remains among you fear ye not; though this word in
the Letter may relate to the Building of the Temple; yet that Work being
Typical to this Glorious Work of the Latter day, this promise of the Spirit,
does most properly respect this Latter day Work; So Zech. 4.6. Not by might,
nor by Power but by my Spirit, etc. The word (upon the forementioned ground)
may also be applied to this Work of the Fifth Kingdom, Isai. 59.19.21. when
the enemy shall come in like a flood the Spirit of the Lord shall put him to
flight, etc. These and several other Scriptures do clear it, that this Work
has the promise of the Spirit in a special manner belonging to it; and now
that a measure of this Spirit has been given down for Light, wisdom, strength,
and courage in the Work which has been done amongst us, has been very evident
to, and owned by many who have been employed therein, and also to several
Beholders, yea God has wrested, a Testimony to the truth of this out of the
mouths of the very enemies themselves, and although (through the Apostasy) many
have lost that spirit, the Anointing, being gone of from them, (as it went from
Saul through his wickedness) yet through unspeakable grace, there are some who
(being yet preserved for the King) have still a measure of it remaining with
them; Many things might be instanced to show that there was of this Anointing
given down in the Work which did help the Instruments over the many Mountains
of difficulties, and oppositions that stood in the way, and through this, the
enemy was much daunted and their Wisdom, and Councels confounded and turned
into foolishness, and made to them like the Councels of Achitophel, and this
through poor, weak, and contemptible Instruments; this spirit did not only
rest upon some of the leading Persons and others of the Army: but upon many of
the Churches, and People of God, who were by Faith, and Prayer made as Princes
in the Work; But I shall leave this to the Consciences of those who in the
fear of the Lord may look back to the things that their eyes have seen, and
call to mind the days of old, which may speak much more to them (if their
consciences through the Apostasy be not ceared) then I am able to express.

But it is objected, that if they ever had had the Anointing it would have
remained upon them, but several of them have proved Apostates, and discovered
themselves to be wicked men, yea the most eminent Leaders in the Work; and
this proves a stumbling block to some of the Lords precious People, who are
ready to conclude and say (as to this Work) that the Lord is not among us.

Answ. There is a Twofold Anointing, the one peculiar to true Believers, by
which they are convinced of sin, and enabled to believe on Christ for the
salvation of their souls, as Joh. 16.8. Romans 8.9. and Gal. 5.22. The fruit of
the Spirit is Faith; The Second is proper to those whom the Lord Calls, and
imployes in some peculiar or extraordinary Work, either for Prophecy, as Number
24.2. The Spirit of God came upon Balaam; Or for War as Judge. 6.34. The Spirit
of the Lord came upon or clothed Gideon; The like of Sampson Judge. 14.19. Or
for the execution of Justice, Judgment, and Vengeance upon the enemies of the
Lord, as that of Jehu, 2 King. 9. and tenth Chapters; Or for some special
Building Work as Isai. 45.1. Compare 2 Chronicles. 36.23. Cyrus is called Gods
Anointed, also Exodus 31.3.6. Or for Rule and Government so it was upon Saul,
and through sin (as before was mentioned) came off from him, 1 Samuel 16.13.14.
The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and came upon David, and an evil
spirit was upon Saul.

This Second part of the Anointing under the several Heads of it before
mentioned, may be upon Hypocrites, and men in their natural Estate, as by
Balaam, Saul, Jehu, and others may appear, and this Anointing may either depart
or be taken from them through sin or when the Work for which it was given is
accomplished.

The First part of the Anoineing where ever it is in truth received, though
through sin it may be grieved, quenched, and the operation of it not discerned,
and the comforts of it much taken away, yet it remains as a well of water
springing up into everlasting Life, Joh. 4.14. chap. 14.16. and if this
distinction in the Anointing, be observed, and rightly understood, it will not
be accounted an owning of that corrupt Principle of Falling from grace: to say,
That by the Apostasy, the spirit is departed from such who were anointed for,
and used in the Work which the Lord has done among us; and it is no wonder to
behold at this day, that many of the people of God in the Army and Churches
have lost their strength through the Apostasy, and as Sampson without his
locks, are become like other men, though they themselves cannot see it; yea how
did the Great Men of the Army, (who were formerly very famous for Zeal, and
Courage) manifest themselves to be like men of might who had lost their hands,
and like Princes whose spirits were cut off, (Psalm. 76.5.12.) when the
pretended Old Parliament returned to their Usurpation at Westminster, and if
this distinction in the Anointing be kept to, it may fully answer the
objection; And though it should be concluded that Cromwell, and diverse others
employed in the Work, were without the truth of grace in their souls (which
thing I leave to the Lord) yet it cannot follow from thence that the Work they
were employed in, was not the Work of the Fifth Kingdom, for as has been
showed, God does sometimes Call and Anoint unconverted persons to his Work. It
is said of wicked Jehu 2 Kings 10.30. That he did well, and did that which was
right in Gods eyes, yea and according to all that was in Gods heart; therefore
it may not be said, that the Work was not the Work of the Kingdom, or that
Cromwell was not Anointed for that Work because he so wickedly turned aside,
and dyed in his Apostasy; Nay the Lord may avenge the very blood of the King
with his Nobles, and that wicked Generation, upon the House of Cromwell, and the
Apostates of his Army, together with the very Congregations that have turned
aside with them in, and not Witnessed against the Apostasy; Though this may be
accounted rash Judgment, yet it will be no more then is said in Hosea 1.4.
concerning the House of Jehu and Ahab, For yet a little while says the Lord,
and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel (to wit, the House of Ahab, which were
slain by Jehu in Jezreel, 2 Kings 11.30. and Chap. 10.11.) Upon the House of
Jehu, so that God accounts Jehu guilty of the Blood of Ahabs House, which must
needs be through the wickedness of Jehu: the Judgment of the Lord executed by
him upon the House of Ahab, being righteous. Let the Apostates to whom this may
come, Read, and Tremble, at this Word, and let them not think that they suffer
for Righteousness sa^^e, if God come to avenge the blood (which has been shed
in the late quarrel) upon them that have so turned from and denied the Cause of
Christ, which is the only ground to justify all our proceedings, in knocking
off the Horn of the Beast in this Island; and though Cromwell in all the Work
that he did might seek his own ends, and keep his Idols in his heart, Yet that
will not lessen the force of this Argument (to wit) That the Yoke has been bro
en because of the anointing; if the proceedings of Jehu in the Lords Work be
consulted, we may find much of that in him, to wit, seeking himself, and
keeping his Idols, 2 Kings 10.31. I shall not speak further of that
extraordinary Anointing, which was upon Cromwell and many others, in
Parliament, Army and Navy, by which they were carried forth above, and beyond
their own Spirits in the Work, which makes it very evident that the Work has
been done, not by the Might or Power of Man, but by the Spirit of the Lord,
though all that were employed in the Work had not the Anointing; Not all that
were with David in the Work, but Himself, and his Worthies, with some others
had the Anointing for it; All the Men of Issachar had not the Anointing, to
understand the times, but it rested with the Heads of them who had all their
Brethren at their Command, 1 Chro. 12.32. from these and diverse other
instances, it may appear, that the ordinary way of the Lord has not been to
Anoint all, but only some of them that have been employed in his great Work.

The Fifth Ground to prove that the Work has taken place in this Nation, may
be taken from the many Revolutions and Overturnings that have attended all the
pretended Governments, and Governors, that have been in this Nation, since the
interruption of the exercise of the Government of Christ in the hands of his
People in the Little Assembly before mentioned; It is evident that they have
been such Revolutions as have not been known in former days, though few
considers the Cause of it; There have none come up upon the Stage to Usurp the
Power, that have gone off without a brand upon them of Gods displeasure. Now
that such things must be when the Day of the Lord, or Kingdom of Christ takes
place in the World; Consider, First, that word in Isa. 2. speaking of the Day
in which the Lord alone shall be exalted, which must respect the Day of his
Kingdom, says in Verse 16. The day of the Lord shall be upon every pleasant
picture, which I understand to be those pretended Governments, which shall be
Set up, when the great Powers, or the Image Government is broken; and further
in Verse 18. the Idols shall be utterly abolished; which as I understand
respects the same with Verse 16; It must be granted, that many pleasant
Pictures and Idols have been set up since the Apostasy in this Nation, and it
is most evident that the Day of the Lord has been upon them, and like that in
Isa. 8.9.10. the Apostates have Associated, and Guirded themselves and taken
Counsel, but all has come to nothing except shame and contempt upon
themselves. The Spirit speaking Isa. 27.9. of the Latter day Work when the
Stones of the Altar must be broken a sunder: holds forth, that there must be
Groves, and Images, and endeavors used to make them stand up; there has been
among us many Groves and Images since the Apostasy, but that Word has been
fulfilled, that they shall not stand up, and though the Apostates have been
seeking deep to hide their Councels from the Lord, yet the Wisdom and
Understanding of their Wise Men. has been hid and perished, and their turning
of things upside down, has been esteemed as the Potters Clay, Isa. 29.14, 15,
16. The Throne or Government being given to Christ, is become too heavy for the
Apostates to bear, but they sink and wither under it.

It is not unknown how Cromwell and his Family sunk under it: they were weaker
and weaker from the first day they came to the Throne, till it was taken away
from them; the like of the Relics of the Old Parliament, who though they came
in with a high hand, yet soon withered and came to nothing but scorn and
derision, the like of the Army and their pretended Committee of Safety, and for
these that are now returned, and in the Usurpation of the Throne, and have the
very spirit of the Nation with them, I do not doubt, however they may carry it
with a high hand, but they shall shortly melt like wax before the fire, and
shall be as smoke driven away, and made as Ashes under the Soles of the feet of
those that Favor and Wait in a true spirit for the Resurrection of Christ's
Righteous Cause, though the Lord may for a time suffer them, yea and make them
as the Assyrian Rod to execute the Stroke that is coming upon the Professors
of this Generation for their Disowning, Denying, yea and Crucifying the
Righteous Cause of their dear King, who through the shedding of his Blood for
them, deserved other things at their hands.

I shall present one Scripture more to this Fifth Ground, to wit Dan. 2.44. The
Kingdom shall not be left to other people. The words do hold forth Two things.

First, That other people then Saints shall make attempts upon, and endeavor
to take, and keep this Kingdom after it has taken place in the hands of the
Saints.

Secondly, Though other people may endeavor to take and possess it, yet it
shall not be left to them, or they shall not enjoy or possess it, as the other
Four Monarchies that went before this Kingdom, which were left to other
people.

The Monarchy of the Chaldees was left to the Medes and Persians, and their
Monarchy to the Graecians, and the Graecians to the Romans, and the Romans
shall be left to the Kingdom of Christ, whose Kingdom shall never be destroyed
nor left to other people; and it is manifest that since this Kingdom has taken
place in the hands of the Saints, Other People have endeavored and made great
attempts to Take and Possess it: as Cromwell, the Army, the Relics of the Old
Parliament which God has at several times Cast out, and it is as clear that
the Kingdom has not been, neither is, left to any of them; and though the
Family of the Stuarts whom God has poured Contempt upon and Broken, have also
endeavored to take the Kingdom, and for ought I know may come as near to
Obtain and Possess it as Cromwell or any of the forementioned Usurpers have
done; yet let them know, that the Word of the Lord shall stand, and the
Kingdom shall not be left to Other People then the Saints, who by grace are
kept for Christ the King, and by Faith and Prayer, with the Word of their
Testimony, are helped to undermine, and bring down all the Groves and Images,
which the Treacherous Dealers have set up.

The Sixth Ground to prove that the Work of the Fifth Kingdom has taken
place, is from the Eminent hand of God that has been seen in preserving the
lives of those which have been kept by Grace from the Apostasy, in a Testimony
for Christ against those that have turned aside from, and betrayed his
Righteous Cause. It is not unknown that ever since the First day of the
Apostasy the Lord has had a Remnant which he has kept, and helped to Favor
and Cleave to the Precious though despised Cause of Christ, and by them a
Public Witness has been kept up against the Apostasy, and there has been
many Gins, and Snares laid, and Trappans employed to take them, and Old Acts
revived and published, by which their Testimony should be adjudged Treason,
Several of the Faithful Remnant having been Taken and Imprisoned, and deep
Designs and Plots laid to take away their lives, the Great Apostates having
even been thirsting for their Blood: but such has been the Wisdom and
Over-ruleing hand of God, that to this day all their Plots have been
disappointed, and not one of the Remnant has suffered to the loss of Life by
them: and though those now in Power, or some that may Succeed them may be
permitted to come so high as to take away the Lives of many of Gods people, as
a judgment from the Lord upon them for their turning aside from the Cause of
Christ, and joining in affinity with, and pertaking of the Sins of Babylon, yet
surely the Lord that has hitherto, will still preserve the lives of his
Faithful Remnant whom he shall please to keep for his Son in this evil day; In
former days the lives of Gods faithful ones were taken away by the Enemies,
when according to their own Laws they could not lay so much to their Charge as
may be Charged upon the Remnant at this day, who according to the Wicked Laws
may be adjudged guilty of the Highest Treason in Witnessing for, and
Proclaiming Christ the King, in opposition to the Usurpers, and yet their lives
have been, and still are preserved; and the reason I understand, is not that
these Usurpers are better then the Cruel Persecutors in former days, but they
being in that day when Babylon was filling up her measure, and making her self
Drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and these coming upon an Apostasy after
Babylons Cup was full, and the Vengance of the Lord by the pouring out of his
Vialls being begun upon her, though the former were permitted to persecute the
Faithful People of God to death, yet these are not suffered so to do, because
the Dispensation is altered: and this Work having taken place, though great
Trials and Deaths are come upon it, and a great Apostasy from it: yet the Lord
suffers not the Work to be so far turned back as that Babylon should drink any
more of Zions Blood, the stream being now turned upon Babylon, but if Gods
people abide in, and share of Babylons sins, let them not think that because
they are the People of God they shall escape her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. And though
Zion must reward Babylon, and the Vialls must come forth of the Temple, yet the
Lord for wise ends, and best known to himself may permit the most Wicked and
grosser part of Babylon to execute that part of the Vengance, that is to come
upon such of his Own People, who remain in and partake of Babylons sins, and
thereby prevent his Own People from doing that part of the Work which might be
unpleasant to them.

There are many Objections made against this Truth (to wit) That the Work of
the Fifth Kingdom is begun, some of them I have already occasionally spoken to
in the forementioned Grounds; But the great Stumbling Block that lies in the
way of many, is the Apostasy from, and so the Death that is come upon this
Work which makes them ready to say with the Disciples, Luke 24.21. We trusted
it had been he, etc. When this Cause was publicly owned by the Lord in the
High places of the Field, there were many that would cry Hosanna to the Son of
David; and with much rejoyceing embrace his Cause; but since a Death is come
upon it, the Number of the true Favorers that publicly own it, is become very
Small. When Christ was upon the Earth in the Days of His Flesh, showing and
doing great Signs and Wonders, there were many owned and followed him; but
when he comes to the Judgment, Cross, and Sepulcher, very few continued with
him: several eminent Disciples were stumbled not understanding the Scriptures,
till Christ being risen comes and opens them, Luke 24, 25, 26, 27.45. 46, and
as the Disciples in that, so many of the Professing Generation in this day, are
through ignorance surprised, not understanding, or at least not so considering
that after the Fifth Kingdom has taken place in the world, there must be such
an Apostasy from, and Death upon it; Now if there be an Apostasy from a Work,
the Work must needs take place before the Apostasy, without which there could
be no such Apostasy, That there must be such a Revolting from, and Death upon
the Work of this Fifth Kingdom.

Consider, First, The several Types thereof contained in the Old Testament, as
Isreal's coming out of Egypt to Canaan, in which were many Revoltings, Turnings
back, and Deaths upon the Work: yea Forty Years was the Trial upon them, before
they came to Canaan, and for ought we can find from the Scriptures, the Lord
had not before given them warning, or told them of this Death in the Wilderness,
though he had told them exactly how long they should be in Egypt, and given
them great grounds for sense to say, Is the Lord among us? and many might cry
out (as at this day) What Scripture ground is there to believe, that such a
Death should come upon the Work of the Kingdom? and if we had no more ground
then we find Israel had to expect such a Death; yet as it was theirs, so it
would be our sin, after such wonderful Works of God as he has wrought among
us, to say as in Exodus 17.7. Is the Lord amongst us? or has the Lord begun to
bring us to the promised glory? though God had wrought many wonderful Works in
the sight of Israel of old, yet they understood not his wonders; no doubt but
they knew that such things were done, but they understood not the great Design
of God in them, Psalm. 106.7.

The Second Typical example, is from David's Kingdom, which did clearly Type out
this Fifth Kingdom according to Luke 1.32. If we read 1 Samuel 16. to 2 Samuel 6.
we may find many Deaths upon the Work of David's Kingdom after it was begun;
First whilst he was pursued by Saul, and then after Saul's death he obtains but
one Tribe to follow him for Seven years and six Months, 2 Samuel 2.11. There was
War betwixt him and the House of Saul long after Saul's death, 2 Samuel 3.1. and
in most of the time of that Seven years War, his Kingdom was under a great
Death; also there came a great Death upon his Kingdom, when his son Absalom
conspired against him, and all Israel from Dan to Beersheba followed Absalom,
and David fled from Jerusalem which was the Kings Seat, 2 Samuel 15.16.17.
Chapters.

The Third Typical example, is Isreal's return from the 70. years captivity in
Babylon, to Jerusalem, and their building of the Temple; great Deaths, and
Interruptions did attend that Work, both from the enemies of Judah who
endeavored to block up the way, and from Gods own People who cried the time is
not yet come, though they thought it a time for themselves to dwell in their
cieled houses; and this may be observed by the way, that though the enemies of
Judah by force did cause the Work to cease, yet that does not excuse the
neglects and backwardness of Gods People who ought to be valiant for the Truth.
These things contained in this third Particular, being written at large in the
books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Zechariah, and Haggai, I shall refer you to the reading
and comparing of them, and shall come in the next place to cite some Prophesies
of Scripture which relate to this Fifth Kingdom, and do clearly hold forth that
there must be such an Apostasy from, and Death upon the Work, after it has
taken place. The First Scripture is, Psalm. 2.1.2.3.4.5.6. The Heathen rage, the
Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Council together against
the Lord and against his Anointed, saying, let us break their bands asunder,
and cast away their cords from us, etc. By the Bands and cords: I understand
the Government, and Laws of Christ; and the breaking in sunder, or casting off
its Government and Laws, must needs hold forth a Rebellion against, and a
turning from them after they had taken place in the World, and then the Lord
does vex them by setting his King, etc. and after this as in verse 8.9. Christ
must have the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth
for his possession, and must break them with a Rod of Iron, etc.

The next Scripture is Hab. 3.2. O Lord revive thy Work, etc. if we consult the
Scope of the words, they will appear to be a Prayer for, or a Prophecy of the
Latter day Work, and does clearly hold forth a Death to come upon it after it
has been begun; also he says, O Lord remember mercy, which shows that the
Work and People of God at that time when this Prayer takes place, are very low;
also Psalm. 94.15. But Judgment shall return unto Righteousness, etc. This word
does relate to the time of Gods coming forth in the execution of vengeance, as
the scope of the Psalm does manifest, and to that part of the time when Gods
People are low, and the enemies high, as verse 16. Who will rise up for me
against the evil doers, etc. also verse 20.21. Now Judgment being to be
understood) of Rule and Government, and by its being with Righteousness, (I
understand the Rule and Government to be upon Christ's shoulders, (in whom alone
there is true Righteousness) and in the possession of the Saints for, and under
him; and by this Rule, and Government returning to Christ and his Saints: must
imply, First, that it has already taken place; and Secondly that there is a
turning, or an Apostasy from it.

There is another Great objection or stumbling block that I find is laid in the
Way at this day about the Two VVitnesses mentioned in Rev. 11. which is this.

Obj. That the VVitnesses are not yet slain, and therefore the Work of the
Fifth Kingdom cannot be begun, neither has the Active dispensation taken
place, but the Saints must be, preparing for, and in the expectation of sharp
sufferings, even to Corporal death as the fulfilling of their Staying.

Answ. First, If it should be granted that the Slaying of the VVitnesses must
be accomplished in this Island; yet If there Two following things be
considered, it will rather confirm the Truth, viz. that the Work is begun, then
prove a Stumbling Block in the way of it, And the First thing, is, what the
VVitnesses are, and what their Testimony is; and The Second, what their Slaying
is.

To the first, If the Scriptures be weighed, the VVitnesses cannot be
understood of Two particular Persons (as some have supposed) because they are
to Prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore Days or Years, for the
Days must be Prophetical, a Day for a Year according to Number. 14.34. Ezekiel. 4.6
All must grant that the Latter Number to wit, the Three Days and a Half
mentioned in Rev. 11 9. must be Prophetically understood, and no doubt the
Former must in that agree with the Latter and if they must Prophecy so long,
they cannot be Two Persons, for no such singular extraordinary Persons have yet
been found in the world since John's Days, and there is much ground from the
Scripture to believe that the Beast which in verse the 7. Slaves the VVitnesses
when they have finished the 1260. Days or Years, has not so much time to come
of his Reign; Much more might be spoken Both from the War that is made with
them, and from the Time of their Lying Dead, to show that they cannot be Two
Persons, neither can they be understood of the Church of the Jews, and the
Church of the Gentiles as Two distinct Churches; First, because ever since
John's Days the Church of the Jews, as a Church, have been cut off, and not in
a capacity of bearing VVitness for Christ. Secondly when they shall be Called,
they are not to Come in as a distinct Church; but both Jew, and Gentile, being
all One in Christ, makes but one Gospel Church; but they must be understood of
the Faithful People of God, who through his Spirit are kept alive in a
Testimony for Christ, against Antichrist, during the time of the Beasts Reign;
That the People of God or such of them as are kept alive by him are his
VVitnesses see Isai. 43.10. Chap. 44.8. And they are here called two; First
because two according to Scripture, is a competent Number for VVitness; and
Secondly their Testimony is two fold;, viz. for the Magistracy, and the
Ministry of Christ, against the Civil, and Ecclesiastical Part of Babylon, or
Antichrist, these being the great Truths Witnessed too, and contended for by
those that have been enlightened and kept alive for Christ; and also the Truths
which Antichrist has most struck at, and endeavored ever since his Reign to
Race out (if possible) from the Face of the Earth, that so Himself might Reign
alone; and this agrees with the Two Anointed Ones (to wit) Joshua, and
Zerubbabel, the High Priest and the Governor, Zech. 4.11. To the Second thing
(viz.) the Slaying. It must either be a Spiritual, or a Corporal Slaying; It
cannot be a Corporal Slaying; First, because they were so Slain in the time of
their Prophecy in Sackcloth, but this Slaying being distinguished, and taking
place when they have finished their Testimony, appears to be such a Slaying as
they did not partake of before; 2ly. It cannot be a Corporal Slaying, because
their Dead-Bodies lie in the streets three Days and a Half, which must be
Prophetical Days, a Day for a Year: for the Rejoicing and sending of Gifts to
one another, cannot be Accomplished in so many natural Days, and if it must be
Years, then the Slaying cannot be Corporal, for none may suppose that such Dead
Bodies should lie so long in the streets. 3dly. it cannot be a Corporal
Slaying, If we consider the Resurrection of them, for it is not the natural
life or spirit, that enters into them, but the Spirit of life from God; and if
it be considered that there is a space of Time in which they are Slaying, and
also a Time of their Rising and Standing upon their Feet, before they are
Caught up to Heaven into the Throne of Government, and both may be
distinguished from the Three Years and a Half of their Lying Dead, and that the
Lord who never leaves Himself without Witness will keep a Remnant alive to
Bear up his Name and Truth, even whilst the VVitnesses are said to Lie Dead in
the Streets of the Great City, or Territories of Babylon which in Rev. 17.18.
is Called The Great City, and their Slaying being spiritual, and not Corporal,
is most likely to take place after God has begun to Reward Babylon; If this I
say be considered, why may not this Trial that is Come upon the Work at this
Day, and the spiritual slaughter that is come upon those that have been
VVitnesses for Christ agree with, and in a great measure answer to the Slaying
of the VVitnesses: For as has been showed, the Lord suffers not Babylon to
drink more of Zions Blood, because he has begun to Reward Her. And as to the
extraordinary things that the Witnesses are said to have Power to Do, in
shutting Heaven, and smiting the Earth, etc. I understand that it holds forth
their Prevalency with God through Faith and Prayer, not that we must needs
expect those several things to be done in the Letter, for it is not said that
they shall do them, but they have Power to do them Verse 6, and no doubt but
the Lords People that have been kept Faithful for him, have had Power as
Princes to prevail with him for Great Things, and he has answered them by
terrible things in Righteousness, Psalm. 65.5. But I shall say no more to this
Objection, Though there are several other Objections against the Work of the
Lord, as it has taken place in this Nation, I shall not further insist upon
them, being much persuaded that the Day of the Resurrection of it is very near,
in which God will wonderfully answer the Doubts and Objections of his Own
People, and will stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, and Cloth the Enemies of his
Son with shame, while the Children of Zion shall be rejoicing in their King,
and singing Hosanna to the Son of David, upon whom alone the Crown shall
flourish, Psalm. 132.18.

I shall not add more in this Matter, having spoken to the Several General
Heads; But from what has been laid down of the Work and the Apostasy from it,
The Officers and Soldiers of the Army by keeping their Places under Cromwell
and the rest of the Apostates in the Apostasy, and not openly improving their
Power to the hazard of their all for Christ (who had formerly owned them)
against the Apostates wicked Usurpation, but declaring and improving their
Power for the Apostasy against Christ, (whose Cause they had engaged to own)
they became guilty of Cromwels Abominations and the others that have Succeeded
in the Apostasy: and comparing their Solemn Oaths, Covenants, Engagements and
Declarations, made by them at their first taking up of Arms, and at the New
Model of the Army in 45, and at Naseby, Triplo-Heath, Albanes, Putney and
Windsor: Also at their March to Scotland, when they went to engage in that
War, and at Musclebrough, and Dunbar in Scotland, when they were brought very
low, also at Worcester, and in the late War in Ireland, and after Worcester,
In their Solemn days of Prayer at Jameses, immediately before the breaking up
of the Parliament, with many other Solemn days of Prayer: All these with many
more Engagements, which are best known to God and their Own Souls, being
compared with their late Abominations in turning aside with Cromwell, and
engaging and standing by the Apostasy, and setting up Rich. Cromwell the Son of
the Apostate, it is plain and manifest to all (that are not blinded through
partaking with the Apostasy, or do not wilfully shut their eyes, or through
Carelessness or fearfulness, look not after these things) That the Officers and
Soldiers of the Army, with others who have kept their Places in the Apostasy
are deeply Guilty.

First, Of Treachery in betraying the Cause of Christ, and the Liberty of the
Nation which is abundantly wrapped up therein.

Secondly, Of doing Injury and Violence to Jesus Christ, by withstanding and
interrupting his Government in the Hands of his People, in the Little Assembly.

Thirdly, Of the highest Usurpation, in Owning and Standing by Cromwell, in his
Usurping the very Throne of Christ.

Fourthly, They are Guilty of Theft or Robery, in not only Robbing Christ (as
much as in them lay) of his Throne, and God of his Glory, but the Nation of its
Treasure, by forcing from them Taxes, Excise and Customs, to maintain the
Apostasy: For though it may be lawful in a Lawful Magistracy to Raise Money in
the Nation, to do the Nation service, yet it is Robbery and Oppression for a
Usurper that sets himself both against God and the Nation, to impose Taxes upon
them.

Fifthly, They are guilty of Blood: the Cause and Interest of Jesus Christ
which has been a foot amongst us, being the only Ground to Justify, and clear
the Instruments employed in the War, from the Guilt of the Blood that has been
shed therein, and also of the Blood of the late King and his Nobles, whose
Heads were taken off; the Army and those that have been engaged in the War,
and are since turned aside in the Apostasy, to the Disowning and casting off
the Cause of Christ, must needs bring the Guilt of the Blood upon themselves.

Sixthly, They are guilty of the breach of Oaths, and Covenants, and of Lying
both to God and Man.

Seventhly, They are guilty of the Persecuting, Imprisoning, and Banishing the
People of God, who through free grace have been kept from the Apostasy, and
helped to Witness for the Righteous Cause of Christ against it, and although
Cromwell and his Council, had the greatest hand in the Apostasy: yet the Army in
standing by them, and putting their Commands in Execution, carrying the Saints
to, and keeping them in Prisons, and that with much Height and Rage of Spirit,
are involved in, and become Guilty of, the Evils with Cromwell.

Eighthly, Through this Apostasy, they are fallen into, and have embodyed
themselves with Babylon, or the Antichristian State, and have made themselves
as a Prop to the Whorish false Church, and did manifest this by setting up
Tryers for Babylons Ministers, and Keeping up the Universities or Schools of
Antichrist, and Tithes which is Babylons Maintenance, and also Babylons Laws,
and Courts, and many such like Abominations, have been and are kept up by
Cromwell and those that have succeeded him in the Apostasy, through the Power of
the Apostatising Army, without which they could not stand, and so the Guilt of
these Evils falls upon the Army; these things not being done in a Corner, but
Publiclky transacted in the Face of the Sun, and the most of them being
Published in Print to the World I shall not take up time to insist more upon
Partitulers, in the opening the Sins of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army;
the most of these Great Evils being acted by the Army, as a Compact Body, (how
ever some particular Persons may think to excuse themselves) the Guilt (and
except the Lord gives repentance) the Judgments due to these Abominations, is
like to fall upon the Skirts of those that have gone along in the Sins, though
they have not been the Leaders, but the Followers; When Israel did Sin, and
were Led into it by some particular Persons, yet they as a People embodyed
turning aside, the Judgment was General that came upon them, as in the Matter
of the Molton Calf, Exodus 32. Aaron was the great Transgressor, as Verse 25.
yet all that did not Separate and come to Moses, were in danger of the Stroke,
as Verse 26, 27. When but Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. 32.35. had sinned, Judah and
Jerusalem being embodyed with him, the Wrath comes upon them, as well as on
him; Jehoshaphat was not the Ringleader in going to the Battle at Ramoth-Gilead
with Ahab, neither was the Work in it self unlawful, for Ramoth Gilead did of
right belong to Israel, and was kept from them by the King of Syria, yet but
for joining with Ahab who was turned from the Lord, Jehoshaphat was sharply
reproved by the Prophet, and escaped very narrowly with his Life and wrath from
the Lord was upon him. See 2 Chro. 18.1.31. Chapter 19.2. And though many poor
Creatures have manifested Grief, and Spoke against Cromwell and others that were
the Champions in the Apostasy, and yet have kept their Places either in the
Army or elsewhere under it, and have not Separated from, nor improved their
Power against it, will (as may be feared) be found in the day of Decision,
helpers of the Mighty against the Lord, When [Isa. 31.2, 3.] he that helps
and him that is helped shall fall together, Then shall ye know, Number. 16.30.
that this people have greatly provoked the Lord; If the Congregation observed
not the Command Verse 26. to depart from the Tents of those wicked men, and
touch nothing of theirs, they were like to be consumed with them. And if they
must be Cursed Judges 5.28. that Come not to the help of the Lord against the
Mighty: How shall those escape that help the Mighty against the Lord. And if
Jeremiah Chap. 15. would not sit in the Congregation of Israel, but rather Sit
alone, how shall those think to Escape, that both Sit, and Act in the midst of
those which not only Mock at, but have Betrayed the Cause of Christ, and set
themselves against the Lord?

Having been much larger upon these things then I did expect, I have for
brevity sake, omitted several things that relate to this Latter day Work, as
also the speaking to several Objections, which I desire those that seek for
Knowledge as for hid Treasure, may wait upon the Lord for Answers thereunto;
and as for the Cavillers, I am not careful to Answer them, but shall leave it
to the Day of Decision, and Revivall of the Lords Work.

And now to Conclude the whole, I shall present to the true Favorers of this
Despised Cause of Christ, some Considerations by way of direction, and the Lord
give them an understanding in all things.

The First Thing, is, To be much in Faith and Prayer for the Anointing which as
has been showed is Reserved for, and Promised to this Work, and without which
the Work will not be accomplished, but thorough the Anointing it must be done.

The Second Thing is, to be much in Looking after, Calling to mind, Prizing and
Feeding upon the Works of God, which he has Wrought in the Midst of us, and
comparing those Works with the Promises, Prophesies and Types of the Latter
day.

The Third Thing, is, To be Eying, and Reaching after, the understanding of the
Glory of this Fifth Kingdom, and to be Talking of the Power of God, by which
the Work must be accomplished.

The Fourth Thing, is, To be much in the Consideration, of what Christ has
done for their Souls in the shedding of his Precious Blood to Redeem them from
Hell, and bring them to Glory, and that this Fifth Kingdom is given to Christ
as a Reward to, and the Desert of, what he has Done and Suffered for them.

The Fifth Thing, is, To be giveing unto Christ the Chief Seat in, and Sole
Government over their own Souls, that so in all things they may be Conformable
unto him, having their Conversations in Heaven, as those that are Looking for,
and hastening to, the Glorious Things which are to be brought forth in the
Latter Day, 2 Pet. 11.14.

The Sixth Thing, is, To Come forth of, and Separate from, whole Babylon, in
all the Parts and Branches of it, and all the Parts of the Late Apostasy, upon
which Gods displeasure has been and is eminently Manifested; and O that both
my Self and all that Love Jesus Christ, and have in Days past touched with the
unclean thing, may obtain such Repentance from the Lord, as to be Spared and
Hid in this Day of his feirce Anger, when he is coming forth, and making
himself Known by the Judgments which he Executes: and as Noah found Grace, and
Lot obtained Mercy, by which they were delivered from those Judgments that were
Executed in their Day: so those that must be Saved for the King in this Day,
must be saved thorough Grace and Mercy; and seeing we stand by Faith, let us
not be high-minded, but fear: and in this of Separation, let it not suffice to
Separate from the National False Church, and the Usurpers of the Civil Power,
in all the Parts of their Usurpation, and the Apostatising Army, by which the
Usurpation has been Encouraged and Upheld, and from all Those that have Kept,
and do Keep Places under the Apostasy, or have been Turned out and not Repented
of their Sin; But also from all those Churches or Congregations, that have not
Born their Testimony against, but Contrariwise Fallen in with, and Encouraged
the Apostasy, either by Addressing to, or Standing by Those that have so
Betrayed the Cause of Christ, or by Keeping Communion in the Ordinances of
Christ n the Church with those that have Stood by and Kept Places under the
Apostasy, by which those Churhes have brought upon Themselves the Guilt of, and
are become Partakers with other men's Sins, Contrary to 1 Timothy 5.22. And have
Suffere Sin to lie upon their Brother, contrary to Lev. 19.17. And have deeply
not only Touched, but Embraced the Unclean thing, contrary to 2 Cor. 6.17. And
have not departed from the Tents of those Wicked men, according to Numb. 16.26.
Nor been Valiant for the Truth, as Jer. 9.3. Nor stood up for the Lord against
the evil doers according to Psalm. 94.16. And have not frowned upon those
Members that have made themselves Vild thorough the Apostasy, 1 Samuel 3.13. But
have justified the Transgressors, and said to the Apostates yea are Righteous,
Pro. 17.15. chap. 24.24. They have not Turned away from the Traitors, as the
ought to have done according to 2 Timothy 3, 4, 5. but have had fellowship with
the unfruitful Works of Darkness, and not reproved them, contrary to Ephesians.
5.11. and b^ all these Scriptures those Churches that have so Turned aside wi h
the Apostasy, have greatly Sinned against the Lord; and as a further A dition
to there Evils, several of the Elders and Leading Persons of the Baptized
Congregations in London, have set forth a Very Evil D claration, bearing Date
the 12th of the 10th Month, 1659. which as appears b^ the Title compared with
the ^ostscript, they would have it be understood to comprehend the Ju gment of
the Generality of the Baptized People; and although many Things in that
Declaration is Manifestly contradictory both to the Judgment and Practice, of
not only the Generality of the Baptized People, but even of Several of those
whose Hands are to it, and the Evils of these Persons made Obvious to the
World: yet the Churches to whom they Relate have not Dealt with them, but
rather Justified them in those Evils, by which they become Partakers with them
in those Sins; and now those Churches being Guilty of the Evils before
mentioned, it is the Duty of the Lords Faithful Remnant, whose eyes are open
to see these Evils, after all due means that according to Rule has been Used
for their Recovery, to Withdraw their Communion and Separate from those
Churches, according to 2 These. 3.6.14. Withdraw from every Brother that Walks
Disorderly.

It is not the Church, or the Greater Number of Persons in that Church (if they
Walk Disorderly,) that will exempt them from the Censure due to the Sin; When
the Church of Israel turned aside from the Lord: Jeremiah (though a Single
Person) Seperates from them and Sets alone, chap. 15. 17. and the Lord does so
far approve of that Action of his, as that in Verse 19. he says, Let them
return to thee, but return not thou unto them: Also in Exodus 32.26. When Israel
had sinned and turned aside from the Lord in the Matter of the Molton Calf,
Moses stood in the Gate of the Camp and said, Who is on the Lords side, let him
come unto me. In the forementioned place of 2 Timothy 3.4.5. Timothy though a
single person, is commanded to turn away from the Evil Doers, and no doubt if a
Whole Church come under the Guilt of those Evils there mentioned, Timothy is
not to abide with them because they are a Church, there being no such
Limitation in the Command, but from such he must turn away. I have formerly
thought that a Particular Member might not Separate from a Church, till
thorough sin their Candlestick was taken away, but after waiting upon the Lord
and much searching the Scriptures, and through many Trials bearing my Burden,
I have seen, that according to Rule, as there is a difference betwixt the
VVithdrawing from, and the Cutting off of a Member: so there is a difference
betwixt the Withdrawing from and the Unchurching of a Church; and as a Church
may Withdraw from a Brother without Cutting him off, or Counting him as a
Heathen or a Publican, but still to admonish him as a Brother, 2 These. 3.15. so
a Brother for Sin committed by a Church, may withdraw from them, and yet not
count them as Heathens and Publicans; and though VVithdrawing be an
Authoritative Act, as is alleged, yet the Authority does not of necessity
rest with the Greater Number, but with Truth, and where Truth is there is the
Authority of Christ, Math. 16.18. Christ does not Build his Church upon the
Number, but upon the Truth which was with Peter, when he said, Thou art Christ
the Son of the Living God.

I know it is objected, That in several of the Seven Churches in Asia
(mentioned Rev. 2. and 3. Chapters) though there was a great turning aside, yet
there were some kept faithful even in those Places where the Churches were
turned aside, and we do not find that they were commanded to Separate.

The Answer to this is Twofold. First, That though in Sardis and Thyatyra,
which are (as I think) the only Churches that can be instanced in this Matter,
there were some kept Faithful even in those Places, it will not follow, that
because they were in Sardis and Thyatira, which were the Places, in which those
Churches were, and these Faithful Ones were written to by John, that therefore
they were in Communion with those that had turned aside from the Lord.

And Secondly, Though we do not find they are expressly commanded to Withdraw if
they were in Communion by the Epistles that were written to them, yet it was
sufficient that there were such Rules laid down in the Scripture which Rules
they ought to look to, for there were several Churches that were written to by
the Apostles, and no mention made in the Epistles either of Baptism, Breaking
of Bread, and several other Ordinances; but it will not therefore follow that
those Ordinances ought not strictly to be observed by them, according to other
Scriptures.

The Last thing that I shall present to those that are Waiting for the
Resurrection of the Cause, is, to be giving up Themselves and their All to the
Service of Christ the King, accounting it a very great mercy if he shall Accept
of, and Imbarque them with all their Concernments, in the Bottom with that Dear
Cause, that so they may be Waiting at his Foot, till he shall Arise up to the
prey, and blow the Trumpet giving them the Word of Command to gird on their
Swords and Follow him in the Revival of his Work, and the further Execution of
the Judgments written: in which Day they shall undoubtedly Reap the blessed
Fruit of all their Labor, Service, and Trials, that they either have, or may
yet further undergo for him. In due season we shall reap if we faint not, Gal.
6.9. They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy, Psalm. 126.5. Thine eyes shall
see the King in his Beauty, Isai. 33.17. Let the Children of Zion be joyful in
their King, Psalm. 149.2. Let them shout for joy and be glad, that favor my
Righteteous Cause, Psalm. 35.27. And it shall be said in that day, Lo this our
God we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation, Isai.
25.9.

And thus I have according to the Measure of Light received, Presented unto
Thee, with the rest of my Friends in Communion with thee that are Waiting for
the Coming of Zions King, my Understanding in these Matters of the Fifth
Kingdom: and I desire but so much favor from you as Paul obtained from the
Bereans, and when you have seriously Weighed the several Things contained in
this Epistle, in the Balance of the Sanctuary: wherein I may appear to be in
the Dark or Mistaken about these Great Matters, be Earnest with the Lord for
me, that my Mistakes may be rectified and my Judgment rightly Informed, for I
desire I may not through Error serve the Design of Satan, But that I may by
the Spirit of the Lord be led into all Truth, and so serve my Dear Lord Jesus
Christ who Loved me a Vild Wretch, and shed his Precious Blood for me: and if
you receive any Benefit by these Things, let Christ my King bear the Glory
according to Isai. 22.24. Zech. 6.13. And now I shall Commit you, with these
Things to the Blessing of the Lord, and Close with that Word in 2 Timothy 2.7.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all Things.

I remain through grace thy B^other and Servant in the Kingdom and Patience of
Christ. N. S.

POSTSCRIPT.
SEveral Friends having Knowledge of this Epistle, and earnestly desiring
Copies of it, more then could well be Transcribed; I have for them and Others
of my Friends both in City and Country, Caused several of them to be Printed;
But considering my own Weakness, and the many Books that have been Published
about these Matters, I have not been willing to Publish this to the World, but
only to present it to such of my Acquaintance that Love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, some of them being far Remote in the Countries, that I cannot as yet
visit them, and Others in such Churches, where by Reason of my Judgment, and
Testimony, in these Matters of the Fifth Kingdom, I am debarred of my Liberty
of Preaching to them; and the Lord make this Service (so far as it shall really
appear to be for his Glory and their Good) Acceptable and Successful to them.

The END.

