A SEASONABLE DISCOURSE OF THE Right Use and Abuse OF REASON In MATTERS of
RELIGION.

By PHILOLOGUS.

Ratio recta, est Ratio lumine Spiritus Sancti directa. LONDON, Printed for
Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. 1676.

To the Right Honorable AND Virtuous LADY, the Lady MARCHIONESS OF WORCESTER.
MADAM,
IT IS truly observed, That Worldly Greatness without Virtue and Goodness is
nothing else but the vigor of Vice, having both mind and means to be
uncontrollably vicious: But Nobility joined with Virtue renders the person
truly Honorable; the true stamp of Nobility and Honor being upon the minds of
men, who are not so much to be valued by the grandeur of their outward Estates
or Titles, as by their inward Goodness.

Virtue and seriousness in Religion is commendable in all persons and at all
times, but more especially in persons of Your rank and quality at this time and
in this Nation, wherein alas, Atheism, Skepticism, Drollery, and all manner of
Profaneness abounds amongst those that would be thought to excel all others
in Wit, and Courage, and Gallantry, and who should give a far better Example to
their Inferiors.

This Atheism and Irreligion which now abounds has been partly occasioned by
the uncharitable unchristian heats and animosities of men of contrary Opinions
and Sentiments in matters of Religion; together with those great Scandals
(which we can never sufficiently lament) that have been given by some
Professors of the Gospel in these Nations: Hence men of proud spirits and
corrupt principles have taken occasion to doubt and question all kind of
Religion, and to look on it only as a Political device and invention, which
does no further oblige than the Humane Laws of several Countries do authorize
it. But though these common Scandals have been the occasion, yet the true
ground at the bottom of such men's prejudice and skepticism is the strictness
and purity of the Christian Religion, (which of all Religions is the most holy
and spiritual) and which they find lays too great a restraint upon their
exorbitant Lusts and carnal Passions.

To be good in bad times, to be virtuous and pious in an Age wherein Vice and
Wickedness is so generally countenanced and practiced; This, Madam, adds a
great luster to your Goodness and Virtue; And indeed your greatest Interest and
Happiness (which I doubt not but you are sensible of) consists in being truly
serious and religious; this is the whole Duty of Man, to fear God and keep His
Commandments: Eccles. 12.13. The serious practice of Religion is that which
every considerate person after all his other disquisitions will find to be his
chief Interest, and that which does deserve his utmost care and diligence: This
is the whole of Man, or as the Septuagint reads it, this is all; this indeed
should be the great Design of Man, as being most profitable and advantageous to
him.

Go on, Madam, in the strength of the grace of God, and add Virtue to Virtue,
that your last days and last works may be your best days and best works; and
that you may practically confute the Atheists of our times, who walk and talk,
and live and die as if there were no God in the World, no certainty, no
seriousness in Religion: These persons are under a Judicial Blindness,
desperately rebelling not only against the Light of Gospel-revelation, but
against that Light of Reason which is in them: God has given them Reason and
Understanding, Eyes that they might see, Hearts that they might understand; but
they wilfully shut their Eyes against that Light of Reason, and so by the just
Judgment of God it is taken from them, and they given up to blindness of mind
and hardness of heart, and to the greatest Spiritual Plagues and Judgments.

It Is to be admired, seeing there are such convincing Reasons and
Demonstrations, even from the Light of Nature against Atheism and Infidelity,
that there should be any such Creatures upon the face of the Earth as these
Atheists and Scepticks; when certainly there are none such in Hell, for the
Devils themselves believe and tremble, so that in this respect they are worse
than the Devils; And though they pretend to be the Wits of the Times, yet for
my part I am of opinion with the Noble Mirandula, That there is no Atheist in
the World that is in his wits; the rational Souls of such Monsters being sunk
down into mere sensuality and brutishness. Plutarch that grave Moralist, [Lib.
de Superstit.] styles Irreligion a kind of stupor, whereby men are as it were
deprived of their senses: And that it is an exceeding improper thing to ascribe
true Reason to those who do not acknowledge and adore the Deity. And Cicero
that wise Philosopher and Orator [De Not. Deor. lib. 2.] says he can hardly
think that man to be in his right mind who is destitute of Religion. And again,
why should any one style such an one a Man, who by what he sees in the World is
not convinced of a Deity and a Providence, and of the Adoration which he owes
to that Deity. And the Satyrist Juv. Sat. 15.
speaking of Religion and the sense of divine things, says, -- Separat hoc nos
A grege multorum, atque ideo venerabile soli,
Sortiti ingenium Divinorumque capaces.
It Is this which does distinguish us from brute Creatures, that we have Souls
capable of divine impressions. So that such persons have no just pretense to
Reason who renounce Religion, or turn it into mere Skepticism.

But however some men for a little time may offer violence to their Reason and
Conscience (whilst they prosper in this World) yet when they are once alarmed
by a violent Sickness or some other great affliction, which at one time or
other they shall be exposed unto, then will the sense of a Deity, and of
Eternal Wrath and Punishment seize upon them, with so much the greater force
and power, which they shall never be able to shake off: Hi sunt qui trepidant,
and ad omnia fulgura pallent.

We may truly say of the Atheists of our times as Plato does of Tyrants, If any
person could but see thoroughly into their Souls, he should find them all their
lives full of fear, guilt and torments.

Pectus inuste deformant maculae, vitiisque inolevit Imago. Does now (says an
excellent Author) the conquest of Passions, forgiving of Injuries, doing good,
self-denial, humility, patience under crosses (which are the real expressions
of Piety) speak nothing more noble and generous, than a luxurious, malicious,
proud and impatient Spirit? Is there nothing more becoming and agreeable to the
Soul of Man in exemplary Piety and a holy well-ordered conversation, than in
the lightness and vanity (not to say rudeness and debauchery) of those whom the
World accounts the greatest Gallants? Is there nothing more graceful and
pleasing in the sweetness, candor and ingenuity of a truly Christian temper and
disposition, than in the revengeful implacable Spirit of such whose honor is
fed by the blood of their Enemies? Is it not more truly honorable and glorious
to serve that God who commands the whole World, than to be a slave to those
Passions and Lusts which put men upon continual hard service and torment them
for it, when they have done it? Were there nothing else to commend Religion to
the minds of men, besides the tranquillity and calmness of spirit, that serene
and peaceable temper which follows a good Conscience wheresover it dwells, it
were enough to make men welcome that Guest which brings such good entertainment
with it; Whereas the amazements, horrors and anxieties of mind which at one
time or other haunt such who prostitute their Consciences to a violation of the
Laws of God and the Rules of rectified Reason may be enough to persuade any
rational person that Impiety is the greatest folly, and Irreligion the greatest
madness.

The wisest and greatest of men in all Ages, at or not long before their death,
when freest from worldly designs and sensual delights, have owned that God and
His Truth which they did not embrace and acknowledge as they ought to have done
in their lives; and the nearer death did approach to them the more serious were
they in Religion, and did disclaim and abandon those Atheistical and
irreligious courses wherewith they or some of them had been formerly entangled.

Nimrod the Founder of the Assyrian Monarchy, when carried away by Spirits at
his death (as Annius in his Berosus relates the Story) cried out, Oh one year
more, Oh one year more, before I go into the place from whence I shall not
return!

Ninus that great King next from Nimrod save Belus, at his Death left this
Testimony; Look on this Tomb, and hear where Ninus is; whether thou art an
Assyrian, a Mede, or an Indian, I speak to thee no frivolous nor vain matters:
Formerly I was Ninus, and lived as thou do; I am now no more than a piece of
earth: All the Meat that I have like a Glutton devoured, all the Pleasures that
I like a Beast enjoyed, all the beautiful Women that I so notoriously abused,
all the Riches and Glory that I so proudly possessed, I am now deprived of: And
when I went into the invisible state, I had neither Gold, nor Horse, nor
Chariot; I that wore the rich Crown of Gold, am now poor Dust.

Cyrus the Persian left this Memento behind him to all Mankind, (as Plutarch
and others tell us;) Whosoever thou art, O O Man, and whence-soever thou
come, (for I know thou will come to the same condition that I am in) I am
Cyrus, who brought the Empire to the Persians: Do not, I beseech thee, envy me
this little piece of ground which covers my Body.

Alexander the Great, who conquered the World, was at last (as we find in
Plutarch, Curtius, and others) so possessed with the sense of Religion, that he
was under much trouble and anxiety of spirit, and looked upon every little
matter as portentous and ominous; so dreadful a thing (says Plutarch) is the
contempt of God, which sooner or later fills all men's minds with fears and
terrors.

Julius Caesar who Conquered so many Nations, and at last subdued and possessed
the Roman Empire; could not Conquer himself and his own Conscience, which
troubled him with Dreams and terrified him with Visions, putting him upon
Sacrificing and consulting all sorts of Priests and Augures, though he found
comfort from none; in so much as a little before he died he was as heartless as
the ominous Sacrifice was that he offered, professing to his most intimate
Friends, That since he had made an end of the Wars abroad he had no Peace at
home. The like may be said of Tiberius Caesar, Nero, and other Roman Emperors.

Hadrian the Emperor celebrated his own Funerals, carrying before him his
Coffin in triumph when he lived, and when he was a dying cried out lamentably,
Animula vagula blandula, quae abibis in loca? Ah poor Soul whither will thou
go? what will become of thee? Thus the greatest Princes have (especially near
their latter end) a deep sense of Religion, of the Souls Immortality, and their
Eternal estate in another World. Nor did ever any Prince, Captain or Lawgiver
go about any great matter but at length he was glad to take in the assistance
of a God, as Numa, Lycurgus, Solon, Scipio and others.

Titus and Nerva two Roman Emperors, had such serious thoughts, and were so
sensible of a Deity in the Government of the World, that neither of them (as
the Historian says) was ever seen to smile or play.

Septimius Severus that Victorious Roman Emperor, having had experience of the
vanity of this Worlds Riches and Greatness, said at his Death, I have been all
things, and it profits me nothing.

Charles the Fifth that Famous German Emperor, after twenty three pitched
Battles, six Triumphs, four Kingdoms won, and eight Principalities added to his
other Dominions, resigned all these in his life time to his Son, and betook
himself to a retired life, and to his private Devotions: This great and wise
Prince had his own Funeral Celebrated beforre his face, and left this Testimony
of the Christian Religion, That the sincere profession of it had in it those
sweets and joys which the Courts of Princes were strangers to; grounding his
hope and assurance of Salvation upon the sole Righteousness and Satisfaction of
Christ his Mediator, and not upon his own Works; and to this purpose diverse
little Papers were written by him and found immediately after his Death, as is
Recorded by an Author who wrote the Life of Don Carlos his Grandchild.

Philip the Third King of Spain, lying on his deathbed the last of March 1621,
sent thrice at Midnight for Florentius his Confessor, who gravely exhorting him
patiently to submit to the will of God, the King could not choose but weep,
saying, Lo now my fatal hour is at hand, but shall I obtain eternal felicity?
at which words, great grief and trouble of mind seizing on the King, he said to
his Confessor, You have not hit upon the right way of healing; Is there no
other Remedy? Which words when the Confessor understood of his Body, the King
replied, Ah ah, I am not solicitous for my Body or temporary Disease, but for
my Soul.

Cardinal Wolsey that Great Minister of State, who for some years gave Law to
England and to other Nations, poured out his Soul in these sad words; Had I
been as diligent to serve my God as I have been to please my Prince, He would
not have forsaken me now in my gray Hairs.

Sir Francis Walsingham that great and wise Statesman, toward the latter end
of his Life grew very melancholy, and wrote to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh to
this purpose; We have lived enough to our Country, to our Fortunes, and to our
Sovereign; it is now high time we begin to live to our selves, and to our God:
In the multitude of Affairs which have passed through our Hands there must
needs be great miscarriages, for which a whole Kingdom cannot make our Peace.
Hereupon some Courtiers being sent to divert Sir Francis, Ah, said he, while we
laugh all things are serious round about us; God is serious, when He preserves
us, and has patience toward us; Christ is serious when He dies for us, the
Holy Ghost is serious when He striveth with us, the Holy Scripture is serious
when it is read before us, Sacraments are serious when they are administered
unto us; the whole Creation is serious in serving God and us: They are serious
in Heaven and Hell, and shall a man that has one foot in his Grave jest and
laugh?

Sir Philip Sidney (his Son-in-Law) that brave accomplished Knight whom Queen
Elizabeth called her Philip, and the Prince of Aurange, his Master, whose Death
was lamented in Verse by the then Kings of France and Scotland, and by the two
famous Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, repented at his death of writing
his Pembrokes Arcadia, and would have committed it to the flames himself to
prevent the kindling of unlawful heats in the youthful Readers of it; leaving
this farewell amongst his Friends, Above all things govern your Wills and
Affections by the Will and Word of God; In me behold the end of this World and
all its vanities.

Sir John Mason, Privy Counselor to several Princes, upon his deathbed spoke
thus to some of his Friends, I have seen five Princes, and been Privy
Counselor to four of them; I have observed the most remarkable Occurrences in
Foreign parts, and been present at most transactions for thirty years together;
And I have learned this after so many years Experience, That Seriousness is the
greatest Wisdom, Temperance the best Physic, a good Conscience is the best
Estate; and were I to live again, I would change the Court for a Cloister, my
Privy Counselors Employment for an Hermit 's Retirement, and the whole Life I
lived in the Palace for one Hours Enjoyment of God in the Chapel; all things
else forsake me besides my God and my Duty.

The Lord Henry Howard that Learned Earl of Northampton being troubled with
Atheistical thoughts and suggestions, put them all off with this Consideration,
viz. If I could give any account how my self or any thing else had a being
without God, how there came so uniform and so constant a consent of Mankind, of
all ages, tempers and educations ( otherwise differing so much in their
apprehensions) about the being of God, the Immortality of the Soul, and
Religion, I could then be an Atheist! And when it was urged that Religion was a
State Policy to keep men in awe, he replied, That could not be true, for the
greatest Politicians have sooner or later felt the power of Religion in the
grievous lashes of their Consciences, and the dreadfulness of their
apprehensions about that state wherein they must live for ever.

Cardinal Richlieu that great Politician, after he had governed the Affairs of
Europe many years together, confessed to Peter du Moulin, a Learned Minister of
the Reformed Church in France, That being forced upon many irregularities in
his life time by that which they call Reason of State, he could not tell how to
satsifie his conscience for several things, and therefore had many Temptations
to doubt and disbelieve a God, another World, and the Immortality of the Soul,
and by that distrust to relieve his aching Heart, but in vain; for so strong
(said he) were the apprehensions of God in his Soul, so clear the impressions
of a Deity upon the frame of the World, so unanimous the consent of Mankind, so
powerful the convictions of his Conscience, that he could not but taste the
power of the World to come, and so live as one that must die, and so die as one
that must live for ever. And being asked one day why he was so sad, he
answered, Monsieur Monsieur, the Soul is a serious thing, it must be either sad
here for a moment, or be sad for ever.

Cardinal Mazarine his Successor, who had for several years managed the Crown
of France and the greatest Affairs of Christendom, discoursing one day with a
Sorbon Doctor concerning the Souls Immortality and Man's Eternal estate, he
wept, repeating that Emperors saying, O my poor Soul, whither will thou go?
and immediately calling for his Confessor, he vowed ten Hours of the Day for
Devotion, seven for Rest, four for Repasts, and but three for Business; saying
one day to the Queen Mother, Madam, your favors have undone me, and were I to
live again, I would be a Capuchin rather than a Courtier.

Salmasius that great Scholar, whom the Learned men of his time never mention
without some title of praise and commendation, left this World with these words
in his mouth, Oh I have lost a world of time, that most precious thing in the
World, whereof had I but one year longer to live, it should be spent in David
's Psalms and Paul 's Epistles; Oh Sirs! speaking to his Friends that were
about him, Mind the World less, and God more; all the Learning in the World
without Piety and the true fear of God, is nothing worth: The fear of the Lord
that is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is understanding.

The Learned Grotius after many Public Embassies and Employments managed and
performed by him at home and abroad, and after his many elaborate Writings in
Divinity and other Sciences, having taken an exact Survey of the Hebrew, Greek
and Latin Learning, concluded his life with this Protestation, That he would
give all his Learning and Honor for the plain Integrity and harmless Innocence
of Jean Vrick, who was a devout poor man that spent eight Hours of his time in
Prayer, eight in Labor, and but eight in Sleep and other necessaries. And
complaining to one that admired his astonishing Labors and Industry, he
uttered these words, Ah vitam perdidi operose nihil agendo: And to another
Friend that desired him (according to his great Wisdom and Learning) to show
him briefly what he should do, he gave him only this direction, Be serious.

Persons of great Estate and Dignity in this World must expect nevertheless to
meet with great crosses and disappointments, (of which doubtless your Honor
has had and will have more and more experience in this vale of tears.) Now as
the Sacred Scriptures do abundantly furnish us with grounds and motives of
Patience and submission to the Will and Providence of God in every condition
and under every dispensation; so there are diverse Heathen Moralists who have
from the Light of Reason and moral Prudence propounded many excellent Arguments
and Considerations to persuade us thereunto; Especially Epictetus, who though
lame and old, sickly and deformed, poor and under servitude (being a Slave to
Epaphroditus one of the Roman Courtiers) yet was he an excellent Philosopher,
and a man of a most noble and generous spirit; some of whose excellent Sayings
to this purpose I shall here recite.

This wise Moralist speaking of the unreasonableness of murmuring at any cross
Events whatsoever, has this passage, [Dissertat. lib. 3. cap. 26.] What reason
have I (says he) to fight against God? Why should I desire things not
desirable? He that gave has power to take away, and why should I resist? This
would not only be great folly in me to oppose one that is much stronger, but
great injustice likewise to fight against a Benefactor: We have received all
that we have and our very being from Him, and why should we take it so
heinously if He be pleased to resume something back again?

And speaking further of the reasonableness of men's resigning up themselves to
God's disposal, he says, Quis vero es tu? aut unde venisti? aut quare? Do you
consider what you are, and whence you came, and upon what business? Did not He
give you a being in the World? endue you with such a nature? put you into such
a condition wherein you should be subject to His government and disposal? Did
not He appoint the time, and place, and part which you are to act upon the
Theater of this World? And this is properly your Business, to apply your self
to the fittest means for performing the part allotted to you; and not to take
upon you to murmur or repine against it, for it does not belong to us to choose
our parts, but to act them. Would it not better become us to go off the Stage
with adorations and praises of God, for so much as He has permitted us to hear
and see, rather than mutining against Him because we had no more? And in
another place he suggests this Consideration, That our condition whilst we are
in this World is militant, wherein every one is without reluctance to submit to
the Orders of his great Captain or General in whatever He shall appoint;
whether or no it be to dig in the Trenches, or to stand upon the Watch, or to
fight: Every man cannot be a Commander, and a Common Soldier is to obey, not
to dispute, or offer Counsel; If thou may refuse the condition or work
assigned thee, why may not another do so too? And according to this, what Order
could there be in the World?

And again; If God would have me (says Epictetus) to be sick or poor, I will
be content to be so; whatever Employment he will design for me, I will not
decline it, and whatever He would not have me be or do, I will be against it
likewise. And in another place he has this excellent passage; If I had been
made a Nightingale or a Swan (says he) I should have employed the time of my
life in such a way as is suitable to the condition of those Creatures; but being
made a Man, capable of serving and worshipping that Deity from whom I had my
being, it is but reason I should apply my self to this, as being my proper work
and business; and therefore hereunto will I devote my self, as to that
Employment to which I am chiefly designed: I am now as to the condition of my
Body, lame and old, and under servitude: Yet still he concludes it to be his
Duty wholly to devote himself to the praises and worship of that God who was
the Author of his being.

That must needs be much more desirable (says this Heathen Moralist
Epictetus) which is chosen by the wisdom of God, than that which I choose; A
reluctance against the divine Will is the ground of all irreligion and Atheism
in the World. Why may not a man refuse to obey God in what He commands, as well
as to submit to Him in what He inflicts? and then what ground can there be for
any pretense to Religion? We should all of us (says he) conform our minds to
the Will of Providence, and most willingly follow whithersoever He shall lead
us, as knowing it to proceed from the best and wisest contrivance. I do in my
Judgment more consent to that which God would have, than to that which mine own
inclination does lead unto; I would desire and will just so and no otherwise
than as He does. And in another place; Use me (says he) as Thou please, I do
fully consent and submit to it, and shall refuse nothing which shall seem good
unto Thee: Lead me whither-ever Thou will, put me into what condition Thou
please; Must I be in a private not in a public station, in poverty not in
wealth? I will not only consent to it, but make it my business to Apologize for
it, to justify and maintain before all men, such Thy dealing with me to be
most fitting and advantageous to my condition.

To the same purpose another Heathen Moralist (to mention no more) Antoninus
[Lib. 10. cap. 25.] says, That man is to be esteemed a Fugitive and an
Apostate who runs away from his Master: Now the great Lawgiver who governs the
World is our common Master and Ruler, and His Will is the only Law we are to
submit unto; And therefore for a man to be angry or grieved because things fall
not out according to his desire, what is this but revolting from the supreme
Governor of the World, and declaring enmity against Him? And again; If God
(says he) do not take particular notice of, and care for me and my affairs,
why do I at any time pray to Him? And if He does exercise a special Providence
toward all Events, no doubt but He does consult well and wisely about them;
nor would He suffer any hurt or prejudice to befall me, unless it were for a
greater good upon some other account; and in this I ought to acquiesce. And in
another place; (says the same Author) I refer every thing that befalls me to
God, as the Contriver of it, by whom all Events are disposed in a wise Order.

Now what are these great and excellent Sayings of these two wise Philosophers
and other grave Moralists (that might be mentioned) but the same in effect with
those divine Sayings in the Sacred Scriptures: Psalm. 25.10. Job 1. 15, 17. and
2.10. Exodus 34.6. 1 Samuel 3.18. Lam. 3.22, 39. Job 5.7. and 34.31. and 40.4. and
33.12, 13. Psalm. 39.9. and 8.4. and 94.12. and 118.18. and 119.75. 2 Samuel
15.26. Isa. 45.9. and 64.8. Heb. 12.5, 8, 10, 11. Prove. 19.3. Romans 8.28. and
9.20. 1 Cor. 10.13. and 11.32. 2 Cor. 1.5. Rev. 3.19.

Religion (to use the words of a late Learned Bishop Dr. Wilkins Bishop of
Chester.
) has a firm and deep foundation in the Nature and Reason of Mankind: But yet
we must not so exalt Reason or the Principles of natural Religion, as to
derogate in the least from the necessity and usefulnss of divine Revelation, or
to extenuate the great and unparalled Blessing and Benefit of the Christian
Religion and the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, which though it transcends,
yet it is not contrary to the Dictates and Sentiments of Reason; For it is but
reasonable that we should acquiesce in the Testimony and Authority of God the
supreme Being, who neither can nor will deceive us.

We should not despise any of those Advantages (says the grave Author of The
whole Duty of Man Causes of the Decay of Christianity, cap. 9. page 255.
) which may improve our Reason, exalt the Man and depress the Beast in us; Yet
sure we shall derogate very impiously from Christ's Prophetic Office, if we
allow not Divinity to be the supreme and noblest Science, such as is to be
served and attended, not regulated and governed by those inferior: But that
just order seems now to be inverted, Divine Learning is brought down to Humane,
and the simplicity of Christian Doctrine so perplexed and confounded with
Philosophical Niceties, that Plato and Aristotle are become the Umpires of our
Religion, and we must go ask Heathens how far we shall be Christians. Those
deep things of God, (as the Apostle calls them, 1 Cor. 2.10.) and of which he
pronounces the Natural man an incompetent Judge, are yet brought before that
Tribunal, subjected to be scanned by Rules of Art; but alas our Line is too
short to sound those Depths. Thus far he.

Madam, This Book (which is Dedicated to Your Honor) treats of the Right Use
and Abuse of Reason in Divine matters: There are two extremes which men are apt
to run into; some ascribe too much to Natural Light and Reason in Religious
concernments, and others ascribe too little. As we should give to God the
things that are God's, and to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, (according
to that saying of our Blessed Savior, Matthew. 22.21.) so we should give to
Faith the things that belong to Faith, and to Reason the things that belong to
Reason. And herein, Madam, You may meet with some Passages in this Treatise (if
You please to peruse it) which may by the Blessing of God minister some Light
and Direction to You.

OF THE RIGHT USE and ABUSE OF REASON IN MATTERS of RELIGION.
CHAP. I. Of distinguishing between Faith and Reason.
AS it requires much spiritual skill and judgment rightly to distinguish
between the Law and the Gospel, the Covenant of works and the Covenant of
grace; to give the Law its due and the Gospel its due, whereupon Luther was
wont to say, That he who can thus distinguish is the best Divine: So truly it
requires much spiritual skill and wisdom rightly to distinguish between the
Light of Nature, and the Light of Grace, between Reason and Faith, in matters
of Religion; That as Christ bids us render unto God the things that are Gods,
and to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; So we should give unto Faith the
things that are Faith's, and to Reason the things that are Reason's: To Faith
her full scope and latitude, and to Reason also her just bounds and rights. May
we not wish, that many great Professors of the Gospel did but equalize in their
practice (as to moral Justice and Faithfulness) some Heathens, that were only
endued with the Light of Reason and moral Virtues? Did not these go further
with their Candlelight, than the other do with their Sunbeams? And will they
not rise up in judgment against them that do so grossly abuse the Light of the
Gospel, which infinitely transcends the Light of Nature? Perhaps this may be
the reason, why some vain Scriblers in our days, place Religion chiefly in
natural Improvements and moral Virtues, because there is so little moral
Justice and Honesty amongst Men; yea amongst many forward Professors morality
will go very far: But yet though Men be unjust, and exceeding defective in
their morals, we should not therefore derogate from the Spirit and Grace of
God; we should not confound Nature and Grace, Divinity and Philosophy, Faith
and humane Reason, Christ and Socrates, Paul and Plato; Nor the Church of God
and the Christian Religion with the School of Aristotle: For this sinful
mixture and composition, the Schoolmen are worthily blamed, who by advancing
Aristotle in their Writings, and ascribing too much to moral Virtues, have
exceedingly darkened the purity of the Gospel, and in a manner quite excluded
the righteousness of Christ as Mediator, and the gracious powerful operations
of His Spirit. Erasmus himself, speaking of the Arians, says, Hoc ipso fuere
pestilentiores quod Aristotelicis argutiis essent instructi Erasmus.
That they were the more dangerous and pestilent, because they were so much
acquainted with the Aristotelian Subtilties. The like may be said of some
curious Philosophical Wits and Pens, in this divided Church and Nation, who
have in effect transformed the Gospel of Christ into a mere System of Morality.
Indeed a true sincere Christian is the most just and moral of any man, but it
is not his moral Virtues and Endowments, but his Spiritual union with Christ,
that makes him accepted with God, and puts him into a state of Salvation. Let
Reason be permitted with the Gibeonites to hew wood and draw water for the
Sanctuary, but let it not rush into the Holy of Holies, into the Bosom-secrets
of God, into the deep Mysteries of the Gospel: Reason may not come into these
Seas, except she strike her top-sail; here she must submit and captivate her
self to the obedience of Faith. There is reason indeed for that which faith
believes, Dr. Preston on the Attributes of God.
but yet reason must be helped by faith, and raised up to Spiritual Objects by
divine revelation: As one that has dim Eyes can see better by the help of
Spectacles; and to choose a right Jewel we use the Skill of a Lapidary; so if we
would yield a firm assent to Divine Truths and Principles, we must be helped
with light from above, even with divine and supernatural Revelation: Otherwise
we shall give but a weak and doubtful assent thereunto, which we call Opinion:
The works of Creation, and the light of Natural Reason, enabling us to discern
the Characters of God stamped upon the Creatures, will prove, That there is a
God, or Supreme Being: But as for those Truths that are merely Supernatural, as
the Trinity of Persons, the Hypostatical Union in Christ, and other great
Mysteries of the Gospel, these are only known by revelation, and have no prints
or footsteps in the Creatures to discern them by; of which we shall speak more
fully and particularly in the following part of this Treatise.

CHAP. II. Showing that Reason (though much weakened) is of good use both in
civil and divine things.
LEt it be granted (which will not be denied by any sober Christian) 1. That
the light of Reason is exceedingly darkened and clouded, that the Eye of Reason
is weakened and vitiated, that with Leah she is blear-eyed; That this daughter
of the morning is fallen from her primitive beauty, from her original vigor and
perfection: And so fallen, that she cannot savingly apprehend or comprehend the
things of God. Yea, 2. Reason as it is now corrupted and perverted in man, does
oppose the Gospel of Christ, and wrangle against the mysteries of Salvation,
which it does not understand. 3. That the foulest and blackest Errors, that
ever were broached in the Church of Christ, have shrouded themselves under the
fair disguise of Reason, and men of the greatest reason and parts have often
fallen into and promoted such Errors, and have ensnared many others by their
subtle disputes and reasonings. Let all this be granted, yet still there is a
good use of reason, so she keep her place, and go not beyond her due bounds,
both in matters civil and religious: What though the light of reason shine not
so clearly and brightly as it was wont! shall it therefore be quite
extinguished? If the Picture have lost its former gloss and beauty, the oriency
of its Colors, the elegancy of its Lineaments, the comeliness of its
proportion, must it therefore be totally defaced and broken in pieces? Because
men have not so much Reason as they should, will they therefore resolve to have
none at all? Our Faith and Love, and all our gracious acts and religious
performances are weak and imperfect; Iniquity is mingled with our holy things;
what then! Shall we therefore utterly neglect and reject them? Shall we not own
and bless God for them? The light of reason is the gift of God, which should be
thankfully acknowledged by us: And though it be not so bright and powerful as
to enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum, and pierce within the Veil, yet it may lie
in the Porch and at the Gate of the Temple, and be as a Doorkeeper in the
House of God. Though Reason be not a Jacob's Ladder to climb up to Heaven by,
yet doubtless we may use it as a Staff to walk with upon Earth. If any be so
malapert and presumptuous, as to set Agar above her Mistress, and make Faith
wait like a Serving-man at the elbow of corrupt and distorted Reason, if they
go about to subject and subordinate the glorious Mysteries of Christ (which are
to be adored) to their vain reasonings, and will reject them, because they
cannot by their reason comprehend them; let them bear the blame, as they are
well worthy of their arrogance and presumption.

CHAP. III. How far the light of Reason extends, and what kind of light it is.
THere is a light in man's reason, though far inferior to that of Faith: Both
these lights proceed from God, the Fountain of Light, who has set up the Sun
to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the night: Men's hominis lucerna domini,
the Reason or Understanding of a man is the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27.
This was spoken by Solomon, a man of raised and clear Intellectuals, in whom
this Candle of the Lord did shine with far more brightness than in other
Princes: And though he was looked upon as a Star of the first magnitude, nay as
a Sun shining in the Firmament, in respect of his wisdom and knowledge, yet he
calls it only the Candle of the Lord, using a very humble and modest
expression touching the reason and understanding of man, which as we should not
go about to extinguish or put out, so neither should we extol and magnify the
same above what is written: For, First, this light of Reason (as an ingenious
Writer truly observes) is Nathan. Culverwell Discourse of the Light of Nature.
lumen derivatum, a derivative light. It Is not the fountain of light, but only
a few drops derived from the fountain. Light we know is not originally in the
Candle, which shines only with a borrowed light, and so does the light of
Reason, and all other created Excellencies: Reason is but scintilla divinae
lucis, it is but divinae particula aurae: The rational Immortal Soul of man,
this Intellectual Lamp, was first lighted and set up by God Himself, and has
its total dependence upon Him, both for its being, and for its perpetual
continuation: Nor is this Candle lighted out of the Essence of God Himself, as
if it were a part of His Essence. This (as Calvin says) were to divide and
rend in pieces the Divine Essence, which is indivisible and incommunicable, and
doubtless it were a far more tolerable error, to make the light of a Candle a
piece of the Suns Essence, than to imagine, that this Intellectual Lamp, the
Soul of Man, is a part of the Divine Nature: And therefore Seneca, as wise as
he was, did express much folly and ignorance in deifying the Soul of Man, Quid
aliud vocas animum (says he) quam deum in humano corpore hospitantem. That is,
what less Title or Dignity can you bestow upon Man's Soul, than that of a God
dwelling in a House of Clay. Whereas the Rational Soul and Understanding of
Man, is but a weak and faint resemblance of God Himself, who is infinite in
Knowledge and Understanding, and who sees and knows all things perfectly in an
instant, by His own uncompounded and indivisible Essence: Angels are above
Syllogisms and rational discourses, how much more is God Himself, whose
Knowledge is not in the least improved, by deducing and collecting one thing
out of another, in a way of reasoning, as we do! Cognitio Dei non est
raticinativa, non est discursiva. Secondly, The light of Reason in Man, is but
lumen tenue and diminutum: It Is but a diminutive light. How far distant is the
light of a Candle from the light of a Star? how far from the brightness of the
Sun? This Candle or light of Reason, when it was first set up, before there was
any thief in it, even then it had but a limited and restrained light; God said
unto it, Thus far shall thy light go, and no further: Adam, in the state of
Innocence, was not to crown himself with his own sparks, much less should we
think to save our selves by the Glimmerings of our depraved Reason: God never
intended that the Creature should rest satisfied with its own Candlelight, but
that it should have recourse to Him who is the Fountain of Light, that it might
see light in His Light. Lucifer, that would needs be an independent light, and
shine with his own beams, how is he fallen into perpetual darkness and torment!
yea, and Adam's Candle aspiring to be a Sun has burnt the dimmer ever since:
This Candle of the Lord in the regenerate Soul, and much more in the
unregenerate, knows but little of God and spiritual things, whilst the Soul is
imprisoned in the Body, and absent from the Lord: But when it is taken out of
this dark Lanthorn, in statu separato, or in statu consummato, then it shall
know infinitely more of God and spiritual things than now it does. Thirdly, The
light of Reason, as far as it goes, is lumen tranquillum, it is a quiet and
peaceable light: Certainly the more reason and judgment Men have, the more calm
and serene they are: And if Men were more regulated by reason, there would be
more concord and harmony in the world, yea and in the Church of Christ, than
there is. This Candle would shine more clearly and steadily, were it not for
the boisterous winds of Men's Passions, which disturb and darken it; nor would
there be such ruptures, rents, alienations, animosities, supplantings,
disorders, and inconsistencies amongst us, if the soft and sober voice of
reason were more attended to: Reason would make some differences kiss and be
friends; it would quench many a flame, and bind up many a wound; it would end
many petty personal quarrels, for the good of the whole and the welfare of the
community: The Soul is tossed up and down with passion and groundless
suspicion, but anchors upon judgment and reason. This calmness and quietness of
reason does never commend it self more, than in complying with Faith, in not
opposing those high and transcendent mysteries, which are above its own reach
and capacity; such a modesty and humility our reason should always have and
practice, namely, to submit and subordinate it self to all such Divine
Revelations as are above its own sphere; though it cannot grasp them or pierce
into them, yet it should ever resolve with all humility and gratitude to admire
them, to bow its head and adore them. One light should not oppose another;
lumen fidei and lumen rationis may shine both together, though in several Orbs,
and with far different brightness. This Candle of the Lord should not be
impatient of a superior light, of a brighter Sun: The light of reason should
no more prejudice the light of Faith, than the light of a Candle does prejudice
the light of a Star or the light of the Sun; why should there be any strife
between Faith and Reason, seeing they are brethren, both springing from the
same Father of Lights, though the one be much superior to the other? Indeed
there are such infinite Treasures of Grace and Glory displayed in the Gospel,
as do far transcend Man's Reason, and therefore must be apprehended by Faith,
which is the evidence of things not seen, the substance of things hoped for:
Nature and Reason are not sufficiently proportioned to such high and
transcendent Objects; here are such depths, such pleonasms, such weights of
glory, as do opprimere ingenium humanum. If the Sons of Men could have
extracted all the Spirits of Reason, and made them meet in one head, nay if
Angels and Men could have united and concentricated all their Reason and
Knowledge, yet they would never have been able to find out and discover such
profound and mysterious Excellencies, as the Eye of true Evangelical Faith
beholds in an instant. Revealed Truths shine with their own beams and
brightness, and do not borrow their luster from the dim Candle of our Reason;
whatsoever God, who is Truth it self, reveals must needs be true; Reason is so
modest, that it will not contradict this, for it does acknowledge a Deity, and
the unquestionable Truth of a Deity. In all believing, there is an assent, a
yielding to him that speaks, by virtue of his own authority, though he does not
prove and evince it any other way, than by mere testimony: Reason it self
dictates thus much to us, that we are to believe such a one whom we have no
reason to distrust; for without some faith, there would be no commerce in the
world, there is no trading without some trusting; a general and total
incredulity would threaten a present and fatal dissolution to human society:
Men may deceive us (for none of them are infallible) but God, being Truth it
self, an Eternal, Immutable Truth, and all Revelations flowing from Him being
certain and infallible like Himself; hence it is, that His naked Word is a
sufficient demonstration; and he that will not believe a God, who is Truth it
self, is no better than an Atheist, yea in some respect he is worse than a
Devil, for the Devils believe and tremble. Though there be many things in the
Sacred Scriptures, which are beyond the comprehension of Reason, yet coming to
us in the Name of the God of Truth, and bearing the stamp and signature of
Divine Authority, it is not contrary, but agreeable to Reason, that we should
believe them and assent to them. Some there are that endeavor to maintain this
Opinion, That revealed Truths, though they could not be found out by Reason,
yet when they are once revealed, Reason can evince and demonstrate them; but I
rather incline to the Judgment of Aquinas, That humane Reason, when it has
stretched it self to the uttermost, is not at all proportioned to them, but at
the best only can give some weak adumbrations of them. 'Twill be honor enough
for Reason to submit unto Divine Revelation, and to captivate it self to the
Authority of God in His Word; and withal to make it appear to the Adversaries
of the Gospel, that Faith does not oppose Reason; indeed the way of Faith is a
far more compendious way, longum iter per rationem, breve per fidem; That which
Reason would have been sweating for these many years, Faith sups up the very
quintessence of it in a moment; God has chosen this way of Faith, that he may
stain the pride and glory of Man; that he may confound the wisdom of the flesh,
and maintain in Man great apprehensions of Himself, of His Divine Revelations,
Truth and Goodness; and keep the Creature in a continual posture of dependency
upon Himself, and humble submission to His own Testimony and Authority.
Fourthly, The Light of Reason is lumen Ascendens, an Ascendant light: Reason is
soon weary with fluttering up and down among the Creatures and perishing things
of this life; this Candle does but waste it self to no purpose, in searching
for true happiness here below; after a diligent search, your own Reason will
tell you, that the summum bonum, the chiefest good, lies not in the riches,
honors, pleasures, of this world, no nor in moral virtues and excellencies;
though some Men far above others have snuffed their Candles with more care and
exactness, by improving their intellectuals, and refining their morals, yet at
length they sadly perceived, that when their Candles were at the brightest they
burnt but dimly and blewly, and that for all their snuffing they would relapse
again into their former dimness and obscurity. The Improvements of Nature and
Reason will never make a Man perfectly happy: This Candle of the Lord would
flame and ascend upward toward Heaven, but is much weakened and darkened by
lusts and passions, so that it cannot mount up to God, and attain that glorious
end and reward which is the happiness of Man; Natures eye cannot see it,
Natures hand cannot reach it, nor is there any natural power or operation
proportioned to such a high transcendent Object, as the Blessed Face of God in
Glory: And therefore the Nature and Reason of Man must be advanced above it
self by a supernaturale Auxilium, before it can be blessed with so great a
perfection, as to arrive to the full end of its being; nay God Himself (O
wonderful Mystery!) was pleased to assume the Nature of Man, that He might make
it more capable of this perfection, and by a strict Love-knot and union make it
partaker of the Divine Nature.

CHAP. IV. Showing that the best Heathen Philosophers were sensible of great
defects in Nature and Reason.
THough the Heathen Philosophers and Moralists generally did ascribe too much
to the Light of Nature and Reason, yet the wisest of them (after long
experience) were sadly sensible, that this Candle at the best, after all their
snuffing, did burn but dim. Socrates (than whom there was not a more prudent
virtuous man amongst the Heathens) does so far complain of the weakness of his
Candlelight, i. e. his Intellectuals, as that he tells us his lamp would show
him nothing but his own darkness and ignorance: This only he knew, that he was
ignorant and knew nothing. Other Philosophers besides him were deeply sensible
of, and groaned under these great decays and imperfections of natural light and
reason: You may hear them often complaining of a defluvium pennarum, that the
wings of the Soul flag, and many of the feathers drop away: One will tell you,
that his head his understanding aches; another, that his eye his reason is
dimmed; a third, that his Soul trembles with doubts and uncertainties. As you
heard Socrates, the Master and the wisest man in Greece, complaining of the
languishings and faintings of natural light and reason; so you may see Plato,
his Scholar, sitting down by the waters of Lethe, and weeping because he could
not remember his former notions: You may likewise hear Aristotle, another of
his Scholars, bewailing his condition, that his Abrasa tabula has so few and
such imperfect impressions upon it, and that his Intellectuals are at so low an
ebb, that the motions of Euripus will pose and nonplus him. And as for Zeno,
Epictetus, and other famous Philosophers, they confess ingeniously, that they
had not the right apprehension of things, and that they were entangled with a
spurious and adulterate kind of reason, instead of that which is called right
reason. If you cast your Eye upon the most Eagle eyed Naturalist, you will see
him puzzled with an occult quality; if you take a view of the exactest
Moralist, you will find him bewildred, and at a great loss in his Morals, not
being able to attain to true peace and rest in his Soul by all these Virtues.
Shall these moral Heathens complain of their great defects and behindments, and
shall Christians pride themselves in their natural or moral improvements, and
set up the light and power of Nature and Reason, as much or more than the light
and power of Grace and Divine Revelation? How unbecoming! how unsuitable is this
to the glorious Gospel of Christ, which clearly sets forth the corruption of
Nature, the natural man's subjection to Sin and Satan, and the Curse of the
Law; and an absolute necessity of the new birth and regeneration! Let not this
Candle therefore, which burns but dim, aspire so high, as to make it self equal
with the Sun: Solomon himself, who had made many discoveries with this Candle
of the Lord, and had thereby searched into the several veins of Knowledge, into
the hid Treasures of Wisdom, into the depths of State Affairs, and into the
bowels and mysteries of Nature, yet after much searching, and a diligent
improvement of his intellectual lamp, he could not find the chiefest good in
any of these, or in all of them put together; but as a man sufficiently wearied
and tired out, you may hear him complain, that all is vanity and vexation of
spirit, and that there is no true rest in any thing under the Sun.

CHAP. V. Of them that give too little to the light of Reason.
SOme are so strangely prejudiced against reason without reason, that they
would have no use at all made of it in Religious Concerns, but utterly exclude
it out of the Church of God: Now this is an extreme which we should avoid, and
pray to be delivered from such unreasonable absurd men, as will not in the
least hearken to reason, but fill our ears with noise and clamor to no
purpose, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. First, Those are to be blamed that cannot endure the
name of reason in Discourses of Religion: If you offer to make a Syllogism, or
a rational Discourse, they will presently fall fowl upon you, and cry it down
as carnal reasoning: If one man speak or write more reason than another, if it
cross some men's humors and interests, he shall be termed a Prudentialist, if
not a Conjurer or Magician: He must needs be a dangerous man, if he have better
Intellectuals, and more wisdom and understanding than others in matters Civil
and Religious. Secondly, Such as wholly rely upon dreams and enthusiasms, are
Enemies to Reason, and renounce their Intellectuals and Understandings: Do they
pretend to the Spirit of God! let them know that this Spirit is a sober wise
and serious Spirit, and does not destroy the use of Reason, but elevateth and
raises up the rational faculties to a higher pitch, than mere Nature can mount
up to, in His service. It has been truly observed, both by the Ancient Fathers
and our Modern Writers, as a characteristical difference between the true
prophetical Spirit and the false and counterfeit, that the one leaves men in
the free use and exercise of their reason and faculties, but the other fills
and distracts them with pannick fears, tremblings, and consternations, both of
body and mind. Epiphanius, and others, discovering the folly and madness of
Montanus and his followers, gives this reason why they could be no true
Prophets; because in those that are so, there is a great consistency of sense,
reason, and discourse: The true Prophet (say they) had always the free use of
his reason and faculties, and spoke from the Spirit of God with consistency and
coherence of discourse; whereas it was quite otherwise with the Monatanists,
they were always trembling both in body and mind, and used no consequence of
reason in discourse; their words had no proper sense, but were all dark,
intricate, and obscure. Thirdly, Those also are upon this extreme that hold an
Annihilation or destruction of the Faculties of the Soul in the new spiritual
Birth and Regeneration, as if there were a new will and understanding, not only
for quality but for substance, infused into us, which is to take away our
reason and unman us. If there be any so absurd and irrational, as would
persuade us wholly to lay aside our reasons, judgments, and understandings, in
matters of Religion, and not to make use of, or engage any of these in our
Inquiries after things of a spiritual and supernatural concernment: This is in
effect to render us Brutish, and to extinguish that Candle which the Lord has
set up in our Souls, wherewith we ought to search and try Spirits and
Doctrines, being enabled thereunto by the Spirit of God, which renews,
strengthens and raises the Rational faculties of Man's Soul, but does not
destroy them. Fourthly, When Christians are members of a particular Society,
and will not be regulated by Reason in thing that are not contrary to the Word
of God, but are led more by humor and faction, or by a worldly Interest, than
by Judgment and Reason; when young men despise the grave reasons of those that
are ancient, and experienced in the ways of God; and when private Christians
will not be swayed by the weighty reasons of their Pastors and Church Officers
as to Civil circumstances, order and decency, in reference to the Worship of
God; but are fierce and heady, and disorderly in their actions and proceedings,
and will give no reason thereof, but their own Will and Humor; Truly this is
irrational, and tends to confusion; this is not to act like sober understanding
Christians, nor will it bring Honor to, but Contempt upon the ways and Worship
of God. And as for those persons, whatever they be that will take upon them to
determine Religious or Ecclesiastical matters that are in Controversy, and
thereby impose upon their Brethren without giving sufficient grounds and
Reasons of their Judgment and Opinion; what do they do in effect but blindfold
us, and bid us lay aside our Reason and Understanding, that we may yield
implicit obedience to their partial dictates and determinations? No man's
Opinion in things of this nature should signify any more to us than the
Reasons whereby he confirms it, I speak as to wise men (says the Apostle)
Judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15. Every Party in Religion (however
distinguished) when they have gained a considerable Reputation amongst men,
either for their Piety, or Learning, or Worldly Interest, are too apt to run
into these unbrotherly irrational Impositions, which perhaps they have severely
Condemned in others. If it be expected from the Magistrate, that in these
matters he should give a Reason of his Commands and Injunctions, how much more
should it be expected from them that have not such Authority, nor are they in
such a Public Capacity to impose upon others!

CHAP. VI. Of those that ascribe too much to Reason.
AS there are some that derogate from, so there are others that magnify too
much, and even Idolize the light and power of Nature and Reason, and so make
shipwreck of Faith and the Gospel; when they will have us believe no more in
Divine matters than we can Comprehend by our weak depraved Reason; hereupon the
proud Socinians deny and reject many Articles of the Christian Faith, because
(as they conceive) they are contrary to Reason: The Doctrine of three Persons
in one Essence, of the two Natures in the one Person of Christ; the
Satisfaction of Christ, and his meriting Eternal life and glory for us; the
doctrine of Original Sin, and of Predestination, especially God's decree
touching Reprobation, are all rejected by them as being contrary to reason:
What a horrid saying was that of a Socinian in Foreign parts, That if the
Eternal Godhead and Satisfaction of Christ were asserted in Scripture (as
indeed they are) yet he would not believe them because they are against reason,
that is, against his corrupt Reason and vain Imagination: And a late Writer of
our own Nation is so bold and daring as to tell us in a voluminous Book of his,
That in case any such assurance of the unchangeableness of God's love (as we
maintain according to the Scriptures) were to be found or could regularly be
deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground to any Intelligent and
Considering man to question their Authority, and whether they were from God or
no. This is plain dealing; the divine Authority of the sacred Scriptures must
depend upon their reason or opinion; so far as they can comprehend by their
reason the great and glorious Mysteries of the Gospel to be agreeable to
Reason, neither above it nor contrary to it, so far they will embrace the
Gospel; but if they find it otherwise, they are then in a ready posture to
esteem it no better than a Fable, as that wicked Pope said: No marvel indeed if
the Heathen Philosophers, especially the Stoics, adore and idolize the
supposed power and excellency of Nature and Reason, by their Rhetorical
Hyperbolical praises; when as those that live under the sunshine of the Gospel
are so apt to fall into the same Error, and to attribute that to Nature, which
is only due to the Grace and Spirit of God. What does Pelagius and his
followers (whereof there are too many in our days) but take the Crown from
Christ and set it upon Natures head, and place the Creature in the Throne of
God and grace. A Learned man Ger. Vossius Histor. Pelag.
gives us this brief Character of Pelagius; That he was Humani Arbitrii
decomptor, and divinae Gratiae contemptor; a trimmer of Nature, and a contemner
of Grace. All men are born Pelagians, Nature is predominant in them, and will
not easily subordinate it self to a principle of Grace or that which is
supernatural; and therefore this Doctrine spreads far and near, as Bradwardine
complains in his time, Totus pene mundus post Pelagium abiit in errorem: And
yet Pelagius though he was such an admirer of the power of Nature and Reason,
did not altogether deny the assistance of Grace in the point of Conversion and
Salvation no more than others, who yet at this day ascribe too much to Nature
and Reason: For first, he acknowledged the Assistance of Grace necessary for
enlightening the Understanding; yea secondly, for exciting the Will to determine
it self; but thirdly, he would never acknowledge the supernatural efficacy of
the Grace of God upon the Will of Man, so as to give it a new and spiritual
power and principle, and likewise the Acting of that power toward God, who
gives us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. This he
always bogled at, as being unwilling to Captivate Nature and Reason to the
efficacious Grace of God in the Gospel; and so under a specious presence of the
assistance of Grace he advanced the natural power and reason of man, and
changed grace into nature; as if there were nothing supernatural in the work of
Conversion: Sub laud naturae latent inimici gratiae. If it be by Grace (says
the Apostle Romans 11.6.) then it is no more of work, otherwise Grace is no more
grace: But if it be of works, then is it no more grace; otherwise work is no
more work: Nature and Grace, Reason and Faith must not be thus mingled and
jumbled together; for it is not grace indeed unless it be every way pure and
free Grace. Those that tell us with ignorance and boldness enough, That the
Improvement of nature and reason may merit grace and glory, may as well tell us
(if they please) That a small Candle by its shining may merit to be a Star, yea
to be a Sun: Nor is nature (as much as it is exalted by some men) always
constant to its own light and professed rules and principles; which evidently
appears by the practice of some darlings of nature, whilst they have run into
some unnatural vices that were the very blushes of nature. And if nature cannot
tell how to live upon Earth, surely it will never be able by any of its own
Improvements to climb up to Heaven.

CHAP. VII. Of the use of humane Reason in Civil Government and affairs.
ALthough the wings of Reason be so clipped, that she cannot mount up to Heaven,
yet she is of excellent use in Civil matters and the affairs of this life:
Those men that are most rational, and abound most in moral wisdom and
experience, if withal they are piously and religiously affected, (for it is
Religion that crowns all Moral virtues) are most fit to be Lawmakers, and to
govern and manage affairs under him who is supreme Governor and King of Saints
and Nations: Laws are given to rational Creatures, and are founded in
Intellectuals; such only as are endued with reason are capable of Laws and
Government: What is a Law but a rational restraint and limitation of absolute
liberty? The more reason there is in a Law the better it is: Even the law of
Nature, that universal Law which commands all Nations and Creatures is built
upon reason; yea reason it self is that fixed and unshaken Law which is not
written in perishing Paper by the hand or pen of a Creature, nor graven like a
dead letter upon decaying Pillars, but written with the point of a Diamond, nay
with the finger of God himself in the Heart of Man. First, Then, those persons
that have most Reason and Judgment, and excel others in moral virtues are best
able to devise and constitute Laws for governing the Community, and for the
benefit of the Public; Lex est ordinatio rationis ad bonum commune, etc. Every
law ought to be a rational Constitution for advancing the public good.
Lawgivers should be men of the most sober rational Judgments and of most
Public spirits, that so their laws may be as a staff for the Commonwealth to
rest upon, and not like thorns and briers to pierce it through: Laws should be
cords of love, not nets and snares; and those are the best laws which come
nearest the Law of God himself, and are participations of that Eternal unerring
Law. Aristotle speaks well and wisely upon this subject; A Law (says he,
speaking of such as flow from right reason) is a pure Intellect, a Judgment
without disordered affections; it is impartial, and makes no fractions; it
cannot be bribed, though a Judge may: If you be to take Physic, then indeed
it is ill being determined by a Book, it is dangerous taking a printed Recipe; in
this case you had better leave it to the breast of the Physician, and to his
skill and advice who minds your health and welfare, as being most for his gain
and credit: But in point of Justice the case is very different; here you had
better depend upon a standing rule than leave it to the arbitrary power of a
Judge, who if left to himself is apt to be swayed and biased by several
Interests and Engagements which may incline him to one more than another: Nay,
now that there are fixed Rules and standing Laws which we may have recourse
unto, yet there is too much partiality in the interpretation and application of
them; how much more would it be so, if there were no fixed Rule at all? Wise
men and not fools, grave ancient discreet persons, and not young green-heads
that have little understanding or experience are most fit to make Laws for
others: When young men make Laws for old men, and not old men for young men,
this is exceeding absurd and preposterous. A wise man rules himself according
to Reason in all his actions, and therefore is not much moved or discomposed by
sudden changes, for reason is always peaceable and quiet; Nulla placidior quies
nisi quam ratio composuit, No rest more pleasing than that which reason has
settled: But the fool suffers himself to be transported and carried to and fro
by his own passion and partiality, and is never at rest, but always changing,
mending, readvising, fickle and inconstant in his resolutions and actions; and
therefore a very unfit man to be a Lawmakers. Secondly As the most rational
men, who are guided by reason and not by passion, are most fit to make Laws, so
they are of best capacity to exercise and administer the Laws and Government:
It cannot sink into my mind after serious consideration, that persons of weak
parts, and of little or no experience (if judged to be godly) are more fit to
manage matters of Civil government than others that are far more rational and
prudent, who yet are not thought to be truly godly, but only morally virtuous
and free from open profaneness: I am far from approving of this State-heresie;
especially considering how partial even godly men as we look upon them, are in
their judgments and affections, and how much they are divided into Factions and
Parties, having a great deal of tenderness and charity toward those of their
own Opinion, but very little toward others; that will not cry up and cry down
those persons and things which are either much admired or contemned by
themselves; whereas a just, rational, moral man will be upright and impartial
in the administration of Government and in ways of Justice, and will do to
others as he would be done unto himself; which as it is agreeable to the Law of
God, so it accords with the rule of Reason and the law of Nature; the radical
Principles and Maxims of which law are such as these, Bonum est appetendum,
malum est fugiendum; Beatitudo est quaerenda; Quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne
feceris It was observed of Aristides a Heathen, but yet a moral just wise man,
that it was as easy to turn the Sun out of its course, as him from doing
Justice. And Solon the wise Legislator being asked what City he thought to be
best governed, answered, That City where such as receive no wrong, do as
earnestly defend others to whom wrong is offered, as if wrong were offered to
themselves. Certainly it is a great privilege to be governed by rational wise
persons, and not by fools and Children. How much better is wisdom (says
Solomon) than Gold, and understanding than Silver, Prove. 16.16. Wisdom is
better than strength or weapons of War: The words of wise men are heard in
quiet more than the cry of him that rules among fools, Eccles. 9.16, 17, 18.
Where wisdom is (says the Philosopher) it measures all things by the rule of
reason, and will do nothing but that which is honest and good; and such a
prudent rational person as can rule and govern his own spirit, is much better
than he that takes a City, and is most fit to govern others, Prove. 16.32. This
virtue and endowment of Moral prudence is of such weight and necessity, that
alone and of it self it can do much, and without it in matters of Government
strength and riches signify little or nothing; strength void of counsel
falls to ruin, even of it self: One wise head, and much more many wise heads
(as should be in a Senate or Parliament) overcomes the hands of many: And those
things that are made crooked by power and force mis-employed, are rectified and
made straight by reason and Counsel, rightly weighing the disposition of the
People, and what is practicable as to time, place, persons; and other
circumstances. Noscenda natura vulgi est (says Seneca) and quibus modis
temperantur habeatur; The nature and disposition of the people is to be
prudently observed, and by what means they may be temperately ruled, otherwise
there can be no rational consistency of Government. The wisest men that ever
treated of Civil Governments, have taught us that a State or City where moral
virtue and prudence is banished, and vice and profaneness encouraged, cannot
long continue and prosper; and that it is much better, and more rational to
gain the love and good will of the People by making wholesome Laws, and by the
exercise of wisdom and clemency, which usually confirms and assures the
State, than to keep them in awe by rigor and severity: Although in some Cases
and at some times there is more need of severity, (whereof the most rational
experienced persons are best able to judge) Firmissimum id Imperium, quo
obedientes gaudent, (says the wise Historian Tit. Live. Dec.
) That Empire is most firm where the Subjects so obey, as that they rejoice.
Nor must we judge of the reason and wisdom of Counsels, or of the sufficiency
and capacity of Persons by Success and Events, which oftentimes fall out alike
to wise men and fools, nay, the latter sometimes have more success in their
heady unadvised Enterprises, than the former in their discreet and prudent
Counsels. (Eccl. 9.2.) And therefore it was a wise Answer that was given to
some persons that marvelled and were astonished at the ill success of their
Business, considering with how wise and mature deliberation it was undertaken;
that they were Masters of their deliberations, but not of the success of their
affairs, for that was in the power of the Supreme Cause and Being, which seems
to sport it self with all our fairest Designments and Counsels, overthrowing in
a moment that which has been for a long time projected and deliberated, and in
outward appearance strongly fortified as to future Events.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Exercise of Reason and humane Prudence in Church matters.
LEt it be granted that the Essentials of Worship and Church Government are
Jure divino, and may be evinced and demonstrated from Scripture, yet doubtless
as to the outward Exercise and Administration thereof, the Light of Reason and
Moral Prudence is of excellent use; if we will so manage matters in the Church
of God as to honor the Christian Religion, and derive a due Reverence
thereunto: And indeed whatever the several Parties pretend, (as they are now
distinguished by several names, which is a thing to be much lamented) yet all
of them make use of Reason and humane Prudence in one kind or other in their
several Church Administrations, though some more and others less, according to
their capacities. The Light of Nature and Reason, if attended to and improved
by those that are members of Churches and Christian Societies, will teach them
to walk orderly, and to maintain Peace and Unity, yea in many respects it will
be exceeding helpful unto them. First, Reason it self will suggest unto us, Dr.
Stilling-fleet his Irenicum.
That there must be a Society and joining together for the visible Worship of
God: Genesis 4.26. As the number of Men increased, so they grew into Societies
that they might more conveniently worship the Lord; all men generally agreeing
in some kind of Worship, though differing as to the manner and object of it.
The very Heathens had this from the Light and Law of Nature, that they looked
on a peculiar distinct Society as necessary for the Worship and Honor of that
Deity which they served: They did not only consider themselves in a private
personal relation and capacity, but as members of a Society, engaged to attend
on the Worship of God in that Society: And indeed Man is a sociable creature,
who loves to join and associate himself with those of his own kind; if he had
all other Comforts of life, and wanted Society, he would think himself
miserable: This sociableness of Man's nature is much improved by Religion,
which is that strong ligament that knits and joins Societies together, and
without which no Commonwealth can long subsist. Reason and Experience tells us
that Religion has had and still has a very great Influence upon all Societies
and Governments; and from the Light of Reason we may gather that the more God
is worshipped in Societies, the greater honor redounds unto Him, and certainly
we should worship God in such a way as makes most for His honor and glory.
Secondly, Reason will also tell us, that Societies for the Worship of God
should be maintained and governed in the most convenient manner, so as Truth,
and Peace, and Order may be preserved: There must be some distinction of
persons, and a superiority of Power and Order placed in some persons over
others in a Society, or else it cannot long subsist or be maintained in peace.
Though the form of Church Government, and the manner of Investing Church
Governors in and with their Authority be not determined by the Light of Reason
and Law of Nature, yet that there should be a governing Power in a Society for
the preservation of it, is a dictate of the Law of Nature; if all be Rulers
then every man is sui juris and none will obey, and so there can be no Society,
no Order, no Government; forasmuch as there is no subordination, no superiority
nor inferiority, all being equals. In all Societies, Civil, Military,
Ecclesiastical, yea in Families which are the smallest Societies, there are
Governors and governed, Rulers and ruled; where every one is a Governor there
can be no Government, and where every one is a Ruler there can be no Order, but
Confusion; and therefore in every Society that is regulated by Reason, as there
are some to rule, so there are others to obey: And thus it is in Religious
Societies, for God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion in his Churches.
Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all Teachers, are all Governors! If
the whole Body were an Eye, where were the hearing! if the whole were hearing,
where were the smelling! But God has set the several members every one in
their places in the Body or Society, even as it pleased him. 1 Cor. 12.17, 18,
29. 1 Cor. 14.33. Thirdly, The Light of Reason will also convince us, That the
persons employed in the immediate Service and Worship of God (who administer
Holy things to us, and are entrusted with the power of Office for governing the
Society) should have respect and reverence, yea and maintenance too rendered
unto them by the members of the Society answerable to the nature of their
Employment: This has been generally practiced in all Nations and Countries
where there has beeen any appearance of the face of Religion; and may it not be
feared, that even the Turks and Heathens (many of which do exceedingly
reverence and honor those that administer their religious Rites and Service)
will rise up in judgment against many forward Professors of the Gospel, who do
on the other side as much contemn and despise their Ministers, affording them
neither countenance nor maintenance; which is quite contrary to the Light of
Nature and Reason, whilst they pretend to the Light of the Gospel and
supernatural Revelation: The Apostle plainly shows even by Arguments taken from
the Light of Nature, 1 Cor. 9.7. that the Ministers of the Gospel who labor in
the Lord's Vineyard should have due maintenance and encouragement. As Tyranny
in Church Officers is dangerous and destructive on the one hand, swallowing up
the liberties of Christian Societies, so a Contemptible mendicant Ministry,
such a Ministry as is enslaved to the dictates and humors of the People is as
dangerous and destructive (if not more dangerous and destructive) to Religion
on the other hand, as our own reason and daily experience will tell us.
Fourthly, Societies for the solemn Worship of God, being agreeable to the Light
of Nature and Reason, as well as to the Holy Scriptures, we may hence gather
that every Christian is under an Obligation to join himself to one
Church-society or other where he may solemnly worship God according to his
Judgment and Conscience, and not walk at random without rule and order; for as
he should worship God in secret, so being a member or part of the Church of God
which is a Body politic, he ought to manifest it by being visibly united to
other parts of the Body: And although Churches are much divided and corrupted
at this day, yet seeing there are many true Churches of Christ, and some of
them purer and more agreeable to his own Judgment than others, he is bound by
the Ordinance of God (and this the very light of Nature and Reason will also
suggest unto him) to join and adhere to that Society which he judges to be
most pure and most agreeable to the Rule of Scripture and his own professed
Principles. All Nations throughout the World that acknowledge a Deity are
convinced even by the light of Nature that it is their duty to associate
themselves with others for the participation of those Religious Rites and
Ordinances that belong to the Worship of that Deity which they acknowledge.
Fifthly, It is an irrational absurd thing, and argues an Imposing spirit (as
any rational impartial man may easily judge) to make that to be a ground and
condition of Church Communion which the most holy wise God has not required in
His Word: What, will men be wiser than God? will they lay Burdens on the
Consciences of their Fellow Christians, where God has left them free? As this
practice of theirs opposes the Word of God and the Christian moderation of the
purest Primitive Church, so it rises up with a high hand against the Light of
Reason, which would have us do no more to others in things of this nature, than
we would have them do unto us: What reason can be given why Christians now
should not stand upon the same terms and grounds of Church Communion which they
did in the times of Christ and His Apostles! Or that they should be bound up to
more than Christ has obliged them unto! Or that any should be excluded from
Church Communion who have Communion with Christ, and shall be admitted into His
heavenly Kingdom! Surely this is unreasonable: The question is not whether the
things commanded and required be lawful or no, nor whether Indifferencies may
be determined by the Church, or the Magistrate: But Whether those persons do in
a rational way consult the Advancement of the Protestant Cause, the Churches
Peace and Unity, and the benefit of Brotherly Communion, who suspend it upon
such things as God has not made the Ground of Church Communion, and is
contrary to the Example and Practice of Christ and His Apostles, for they would
lay no other Burden upon the Churches besides the things that were necessary,
Acts 15.29. Doubtless the main Inlet of those Divisions and Confusions that
have been and are yet in the Christian World, was and is by adding other
Conditions of Christian Communion than Christ has appointed: Hereof none are
more guilty (though none more apt to accuse and condem others) than the
Schismatical Church of Rome, who by adding to the Rule of Faith and to the true
Grounds of Church Communion, has caused no small Trouble to the Churches of
Christ; which come to be established in Peace, not by rigorous Impositions, but
by mutual forbearance and condescension in such Indifferencies as are not
determined in Scripture: And this our own reason will tell us, that the Unity
and Peace of the Church lies not so much in a bare Uniformity in Opinion and
Practice touching these things, as in an unity of Love and Affection, and a
prudent forbearance and moderation; for which Christian moderation the
Primitive Church is much commended, and herein we should imitate her: She
judged it (says the Ecclesiastical Historian Sozom. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. cap.
19.
and that very justly, a foolish and frivolous thing, for those that agree in
the weighty matters of Religion to separate from one another Communion for the
sake of some petty Customs and Observations: For Churches agreeing in the same
Faith often differ in their Rites and Customs: And withal he tells us of many
Cities and Villages in Egypt, not only differing from the Customs of the famous
Church of Alexandria, but from all other Churches besides in their public
Assemblies on the Evenings of the Sabbath, and receiving the Eucharist after
Dinner: And thus, they freely allowed liberty unto, and did not rigorously
Impose upon dissenters in matters of this nature; carrying themselves toward
them with much moderation and sweetness of deportment, without making such
observances in Worship (as were disputable and not clearly determined in
Scripture) the Indispensable Conditions of Communion with a particular Church:
And what reason can be alleged for such Injunctions? Is not the Rule of Church
Communion plainly laid down and fixed by Christ himself to the things which he
has Commanded? Matthew. 28.19, 20. After this, when some persons would have
imposed the Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies (for which there was yet more Ground
than for our Impositions) the Apostle bids the Churches stand fast in their
liberty, so as not to be the servants of men in these things; yea and after the
Apostles days, when Victor Bishop of Rome would have imposed on other Churches
in the point of observing Easter, he was worthily condemned by Irenaeus and
others. If it be lawful for any persons or Churches to assign unscriptural
conditions of their Communion, will it not hence follow, That Christ has fixed
no certain Rule of Communion among Christians, which doubtless he has done, as
appears plainly in the Scriptures? And if such persons or Churches may devise
and assign new Rules and Conditions of Church Communion, where shall the bounds
and limits be set? Reason it self will tell us, that there will be no end, no
bottom of it; some men especially being witty to devise a multitude of
Ceremonies and outward Observances, whereof Augustine himself complained in his
days, and which sufficiently appears in the Church of Rome in our days.
Sixthly, The Light of Nature and Reason will also inform us that such as are
admitted into a Church Society, should freely consent to be governed by the
Laws and Rules of it: Nor can those be looked upon rationally as stated members
of a Society that will not submit to the Rules of the Society as they were
constituted at the time of their entrance into it; if they will partake of the
Privileges of a Society, it is but reasonable that they should submit to the
Laws of it, and perform those Duties that are incumbent upon them as members of
it; otherwise they do but weaken and not strengthen the Society whereof they
are members: Yea it is highly rational that in a well ordered Society every
offender should give an account of his Actions to the Governors of it, and
submit to the Censures inflicted upon him by them, that so the Society may be
preserved in peace and order, and the Laws and Ordinances of it administered
with authority and success: And when a Christian is actually joined in Church
Society with others he should not upon slight grounds break off Communion, but
should continue still with them till his Communion become sinful; for there is
nothing in Scripture or Reason that can justify a total separation from such a
Society but the unlawfulness and sinfulness of continuing any longer in it:
Though there be many defects in that Society (as there are in all the visible
Churches of Christ) yet if there be nothing Imposed upon him that is sinful,
but he may partake of the Ordinances of Christ without Sin, he ought not to
withdraw from such a Society. A Christian may easily discern by the light of
reason, That if Church Members will withdraw upon every slight occasion, and
make themselves Judges of the Grounds of their withdrawing, there will be no
end of separation; and withal this practice which is so common will at length
be ruinous and destructive to the peace and order of every Church Society:
Indeed the Case is otherwise where a Church is guilty of great Corruptions both
in Doctrine and Practice which it awoweth and professes, and also requires
the owning them as necessary conditions of Communion with her; in such a case
there ought to be a withdrawing from the Communion of that Church in which we
cannot continue without Sin; this is no Schism, but rather the Duty of every
Christian, who ought to abstain from that Communion by which he will contract
guilt upon his own Soul: The departure therefore of a Christian from a Church
is either lawful or schismatical, according to the reasons and grounds of it,
which ought to be wisely and diligently inquired into before it be undertaken.
So long as we may communicate with a true Church of Christ of which we are
stated members without Sin (though there be some Corruptions tolerated but not
imposed by her) we should not utterly forsake her Communion, but endeavor to
preserve the Society, and in a sober rational way to reform those Corruptions
and Abuses according to our Places and Callings. Seventhly, The Law of Nature
and Reason dictates to us, That all things in a Religious Society should be
administered with much seriousness and gravity, and not in a slight superficial
manner, which causes much lightness and vanity of Spirit in the members of it;
whereas the Governors and Ministers of such Societies should so manage the
Affairs thereof that the Ordinances and ways of God may be rendered awful and
majestical, and not vile and contemptible in the Eyes of the People by their
means: God will be reverenced in Church Assemblies, where nothing should be
done or practiced but what becomes the Majesty of God and his Holy Worship: If
there be much disorder and confusion (neither Ministers nor People duly keeping
their places in a Church Society) this must needs be displeasing unto God, as
being very unsuitable to the nature of his Church and Worship, which requires
the greatest order and seriousness: Here certainly (if if in any Assembly) all
things should be done decently and in order; nor should scandalous vicious
persons be admitted to the participation of the Sacred Mysteries of Christ in
his Churches; for if these things be promiscuously used and made common to good
and bad, they will in a rational way lose their luster and become contemptible;
and so they are at this day in those Church Societies where no Discipline at
all is exercised: What Is the reason that Religion flourished so much, and that
there was so great a veneration of the Mysteries of Christ in the Primitive
times, but because they used much strictness and Christian prudence in their
admission of Church Members, as is fully described by Origin and others, who
tell us that they inquired into the Conversations of the People, to discover
their seriousness in the profession of Christianity, and required of them true
repentance and reformation of life before they were admitted to the
participation of the Sacred Mysteries. And Justin Martyr in his Apology,
speaking of the Celebration of the Lords Supper, tells us, That there was
required of those persons that were admitted to the Lords Supper, a profession
of Faith in the Truths of the Gospel, and a Life answerable thereunto, without
which it was not lawful for them to participate at the Lord's Table. This
causes the Mysteries of God to be reverenced; but where there is a promiscuous
Admission and Administration, and none excluded that will offer themselves,
this will in a short time take away that Majesty and Authority that should
accompany such Holy Administrations in Church Assemblies. Eighthly, The Light
of Nature and Reason will tell us that there must be a way or means to
determine and decide Controversies and differences arising in such a Society,
which immediately tend to the breaking the Peace and Unity thereof, otherwise
there would not be sufficient provision made for the maintenance and
preservation of the Society: Now this must in reason be supposed in all
Societies, That when they are first entered into, it must be upon such terms as
may be sufficient to maintain and keep up those Societies in peace and order:
The Body of Man is furnished by Nature not only with a receptive and concoctive
faculty of what tends to its nourishment, but with an expulsive faculty of what
would tend to the ruin of it: Thus it is also with Civil Societies, they have
not only ways to strengthen them, but likewise a power to expel those noxious
humors and qualities which tend to their dissolution; and doubtless the Church
of Christ which is a Religious Society, is also endowed with a power to
maintain it self in Peace and Purity, which cannot be without some way or other
to decide Controversies and remove Scandals: Now this is agreeable to the light
of Nature and Reason, when such differences arise in the Society, either that
the lesser number should acquiesce in the determination of the greater, for
Pars major jus habet universitatis, The greater part has the power of the
whole; or else (which indeed is founded upon the Law of Nature) there must be a
subordination of powers in Congregations, and a right of Appeal granted to an
injured person, from the lower and subordinate Power to the higher and
superior: And in order to a redress of wrongs and ending Controversies, our
Reason will tell us that Appeals must not be infinite, but there must be some
Power or other from whence there shall be no appeal: And truly it is against
the natural reason and right of every man, for any particular Society (under
what denomination soever) so to ingross all Ecclesiastical power into their own
hands, that no liberty of appeals for redress can be made from them: This is to
usurp upon and invade the Civil and Religious Rights of Christians; for it
leaves men under a causeless Censure without any Authorative vindication of
them from it: And it is not much better in this Case, and more agreeable to
Reason, to have matters in controversy (either as to Doctrine or Practice)
judiciously debated and determined in a grave pious Assembly or Synod, than by
two or three men who perhaps by their parts or Popular interest, without any
sufficient ground from Scripture and Reason, can easily sway those Societies or
Congregations that are of their particular Opinion, and so be it right or
wrong, the supposed Offender must be determined by it? Shall it be thought
rational and fit that every particular Society (though consisting but of a few
persons) shall have power over its own members to determine Controversies
arising between them: But yet if one or many of these particular Societies
shall err and go astray there shall be no Authorative power left for deciding
what shall be done in this Case! Surely if Christ (who is the wise Governor of
His Church) has made sufficient provision for the Cases of particular persons,
he has also made sufficient provision (in a rational way) for the Cases of
particular Societies.

Thus we have briefly showed what use may be made of the Light of Reason both
in Civil and Ecclesiastical Societies; we shall now briefly declare how it may
be proved by Reason, That there is a God or supreme Being, That the Soul of Man
is Immortal, That the Christian Religion is the only true Religion, and That
the Scriptures are the Word of God; which Points you may find proved at large
by Reason, in the Learned Books of Lessius, Morney, Grotius, and Sir Charles
Woseley, a Gentleman, so well qualified and employed, that I could heartily
wish that our English Gentry would Imitate him.

CHAP. IX. The light of Reason proves that there is a God.
THere is no Nation so Barbarous (says the Heathen Orator Cicero de Natura
Deorum.
no people so savage, in whom there rests not this persuasion, That there is
a God. Even those Nations which in other respects seem very little to differ
from bruit Beasts, yet keep up and maintain a kind of Religion and Worship, and
have some sense of the Eternal Godhead impressed upon their Hearts: Yea
Idolatry it self is a substantial proof of this persuasion, for how willingly
does Man abase himself to honor other Creatures above himself, when he will
rather worship a Block, or a Stone, than to have no God at all? Hence it
appears that this imprinted persuasion of the Godhead is of great force, and
impossible to be quite oblitegated and razed out of the mind of Man. To come to
the knowledge of an Eternal Deity there are two ways, namely, by Faith and by
Reason; Faith indeed is the much better and nearer way, for our Reason is much
weakened and depraved, and God Himself (who is the supreme Being) is infinitely
above our Reason. No man can make a perfect demonstration by his Reason in
natural things, he cannot fully demonstrate that his Father is his Father, or
that he is his Son; so that in these and the like things there is a necessity
of some faith or belief: If a man tell you that he has seen such or such a
place, he can make no demonstrative reason of it, for the circumstances are not
capable of demonstration. In this Case there must be belief, and much more in
Religious and Divine matters. Howbeit the Light of Reason so far as it
reaches, (for it is but an inferior derivative Light, like the light of the
Moon and Stars) will prove unto us that there is a God or supreme Being. The
Creatures afford Arguments, and our Reason gathers by the force of those
Arguments that there is a God. First, It may be clearly proved and made evident
to our reason by the Frame of this great Universe, even those things which the
Eye sees and the Ear hears. Romans 1.20. Suppose a man forty years old who had
never seen the beauty of this World before, should now behold it, would not the
sight thereof make him wonder, and inquire after the maker and contriver of it,
and force him to conclude, that Man being not able to perform such a great and
glorious work, it must needs be effected by one that is infinitely wiser and
better, and more able than Man! And who should that be, but God Himself! Who
can cause such a consent and agreement amongst the Creatures so different and
contrary one to another, hot and cold, moist and dry, but this wise and
sovereign Commander! As in a Musical Instrument, on which are twenty dissonant
strings, whence comes the Harmony, but from some excellent skilful Musician
that had the tuning of it? Whence comes the fitting and composing of one thing
to another but from this wise God? As we say he is an Artist that fits the
Wheels of a Watch one to another, and it is the skill of a Joyner or Smith which
makes curious Tools and Works, one fitted to another, the sheath to the knife,
and the scabberd to the sword. Whence comes the dependence of the Creatures one
upon another, and their mutual help and assistance one of another but from God!
Beasts nourish Men, the Grass nourishes them, and the Influence or Dew of
Heaven makes the Grass to grow, and all from God. Hos. 2.21. These things can
no more come to pass by accident, than a multitude of Letters cast together by
chance can without the Art of man make a Poem or History; and therefore they
direct us even by the light of reason to a supreme Providence. Secondly, It is
proved by the Original of all things; whence is this Original but of God? As
for Man, he must needs be made by God, for the Father that begets knows not the
making of him, the Mother that conceives knows it not, nor yet the Formative
virtue whereby all is fashioned; whereas there is no work of Art but it is
known by the Artificer: And if Man himself have his beginning of God, then much
more other things, which are made for Man; nor can they have their being from
themselves, for then they should be gods, it being an inseparable property of
God to have His being from Himself: Besides, if these things had no beginning,
why are there no Monuments of more ancient time concerning them, the antient'st
humane Writers not reaching above four thousand years? Reason as well as
Scripture will tell us that the first Creature was made of nothing; for
otherwise it could not be subject to change and alteration: All Creatures are
finite, compounded, imperfect, unable to make or sustain themselves; no
Creature can be the cause of it self, for then it should be both the cause and
the effect, both before and after it self; and therefore of necessity there
must be a first supreme Cause in power infinite, most perfect in and of it
self, which gives being and continuance unto all things. Amongst things created
we may observe a series of Causes, and an Order in the things themselves; but
order is from one first, and leads us unto one first Cause. We may further add
that all things, even things without life, sense and reason, which cannot move
voluntarily or intend an end, are directed orderly to an end; and therefore
there is one good, wise, chief Director of all things, which is God: And indeed
the greatness, perfection, multitude, variety and concord of things existing,
the form, and order, and continual sustentation of the World, and the Creatures
therein, do plainly show to an Eye of Reason that all things depend upon some
one wise and perfect Good, from whom they have their Being and Preservation.
Thirdly, The Reason of the Philosophers is manifest to prove that there is a
God, a first Mover or first Cause of All; for if this were not so, then there
should be before every mover another mover, and so in infinitum: And if the
Causes were infinite, they should either have infinite motion, and so infinite
time, or else infinite things should move infinite time, both which were
absurd: Seeing also the inferior thing moved does not move without a superior
mover, if there were not a supreme and first Mover of all there would not be at
all any effect or motion of these inferior things. Pythagoras says that there
must needs be an infinite power, or else our Reason should exceed the Maker
thereof; for what finite thing soever there is we can comprehend it; and if the
power be infinite, the subject wherein the power is must needs be infinite, and
that is God. Fourthly, It appears that there is a God by the distinction of
good and evil, which takes place amongst all sorts of men, not only the godly
but the wicked; for those that are evil and wicked would seem to be good, and
though they be evil and blameworthy in themselves, yet will they rebuke evil
in others: Now this is really to distinguish between good and evil; and there
must be some ground of this distinction, which cannot be from man himself, for
then it would follow that every thing at man's appointment should be good or
evil; and therefore the ground of this distinction must be from a higher
nature, and that is God. Fifthly, God has showed forth His Eternal Power and
Deity even in the view of the World, and to an Eye of sense and reason, by
Signs and Wonders and by diverse Miracles: Now what are Miracles but God's
visible works extraordinarily wrought, not only above the ordinary course of
Nature, but simply above the power of Nature, either in respect of the work it
self or the manner of doing it; which miraculous effects do evince that there
is an Infinite glorious Power, that is above all things, and does overruled all
things; for every principal and primary Cause is more excellent than the effect
thereof. Sixthly, That there is a God and supreme Being is evident to Reason by
that gracious, wise and plentiful Provision which is made for all the Creatures
in the World. A little Family cannot be well ordered but by a provident
Householder, much less a Town or Commonwealth; and least of all the Universe or
whole World, wherein are millions of men and other creatures to be daily fed,
sustained and governed, which cannot be done and performed but by an infinite
wise God, who in his singular Providence does so order and govern the
Creatures, that the weak ones go in Herds and Flocks together, and the strong
go alone, and thereby are the less formidable; hoofs, horns and tusks are for
defense, and where these are wanting legs can carry the Creatures away, or dens
can hide them. O how wise and excellent is this God in his government over the
whole Creation! What shall I say of those impressions of Skill and Workmanship
that are upon the Creatures! There is an excellency in Art, but Nature goes far
beyond Art, and much more excellent is the God of Nature: If it be a point of
skill to set a Dial right that shall tell the Hours of the Day, what skill has
he who made and guides the Heavens and the Earth and all the Creatures therein!
That power and skill which shines forth in the Creation does plainly show that
it is of God: And even those wise Naturalists whom Miracles would not move and
persuade, have been astonished at the admirable work of God in the least
things, and forced to acknowledge a divine and sovereign power: Thus Pliny
wonders at the Gnat, so small a creature, yet making so great a buzzing, and so
likewise he wonders at the Butterfly; and Galen (as great an Atheist as he was)
when he had profanely written of the more excellent parts of Man, and came to
one of the least and meanest, stood astonished, and was compelled to
acknowledge God the Creator. Seventhly, The testimony of every man's Conscience
(which is God's deputy) proves that there is a God. Tell me, thou Atheist, why
the wicked should be troubled in Conscience? why Caligula should be terrified
and run under the Bed when it thundered, if there be not a God? Let a wicked man
do some heinous deed in the solitary Wilderness where none sees him, yet he
cannot be quiet, but his Conscience will whip and torment him, so that he will
either reveal the fact himself in his sleep or frenzy, or at least he will be
afraid that the Birds of the air (as sometimes it has happened) will discover
it. The Conscience does register and bear witness of the thoughts, words and
actions of all men, either excusing and comforting them in well doing, against
the disgraces, flanders and perscutions of the World; or else accusing and
terrifying them for Sin committed in secret, which perhaps never did nor ever
shall come to the knowledge of men in this World. Now this is a manifest token
and proof (as may be easily discerned by the Light of Reason) that there is a
supreme Judge who has given a Law that binds the Conscience, and commands
as well the inward thoughts as the words and actions of all men, and who will
call them to a strict account and reckoning. Eighthly, It appears that there is
a God or supreme Being by the Soul of man, which is a spiritual immortal
substance (as shall be evinced by Reason in the next Chapter) and is endued
with power to understand and will: But now the Soul and the power thereof is
not of and from it self, but must proceed from a higher Cause, which is Power,
Wisdom and Understanding it self, and this is God. In the Understanding of man
there are certain principles whereby it discerns truth and falsehood, good and
evil; this gift man has not of himself nor from himself, but it must needs
spring from a supreme and most wise Understanding, as an effect from its
principal Cause, which infinitely excels and transcends it: Nor is the Mind of
man satisfied with the knowledge, nor his Will with the possession of all
things in this Life, but still they seek and earnestly thirst after some higher
good. And hence it is evident even to an Eye of Reason, that there is a
sovereign Truth and chief Good, which being perfectly known and enjoyed will
give full satisfaction to the Soul of man, which seeing it is capable of
happiness, or the chief good, this would be altogether in vain if there were
not such a chief good to be possessed and enjoyed: In our Immortal Souls there
are principles of infallible and demonstrative Truth; as to honor and obey our
Parents, to do as we would be done unto, to defend our selves, to perform our
promises, etc. which Principles hold good in all men more or less, unless they
be horribly profane and wicked: Amongst which fundamental Principles this is
one and the chiefest, That there is a God, and that this God ought to be
Worshipped; and though some other of these principles may fail in men, yet this
never fails, but they will Worship one thing or other as God, unless they be
downright and desperate Atheists. Ninthly, By the continual suggestions and
assaults of the evil Spirit, we conclude that there is a Devil; and hence we
may as certainly conclude that there is a God: Does not Satan by all means
endeavor to extinguish the knowledge of God, and the glorious Light of the
Gospel, and to lead men on in ways of Error and Profaneness, and turn them
out of the path of Truth and Holiness? Now why should the Devil thus war
against God, His Word and Saints? Why should he so earnestly seek the dishonor
of God and the destruction of Men, if there were not a God, a Gospel, and an
Everlasting Life? Why should he and his wicked Instruments with all their
hellish power, malice and policy, labor to extirpate and root out all those
that faithfully call upon the Name of God, and are zealous for His Glory, if
there were not a God or Supreme Being. Tenthly, This great Truth is further
made evident (even to an Eye of Reason) by the Lord's miraculous hiding,
preserving and defending His Church and People from time to time: How
wonderfully has he frustrated the Plots and Devices of the Enemies of His
Church! How has His Church increased and flourished by the very same means
which they designed and made use of to destroy Her! How has God fought from
Heaven against the Persecutors of His Children! Such dreadful Judgments did
overtake many of them, and such Horror fell upon some of them that they were
forced to forsake their great places and power, and betake themselves to a
solitary and private life; which plainly demonstrates that there is a sovereign
God, who is higher than the highest and greater than the greatest of them. And
as for His poor People (whom they persecuted) the Lord has armed them with
invincible Courage and Fortitude to endure disgrace, contempt, poverty,
imprisonment, death, and the most exquisite Torments that Men and Devils could
invent: Yea how has God supported His People under their inward temptations,
conflicts, desertions and troubles of Conscience! and wonderfully refreshed
them beyond their expectation with sweet Peace and Consolation; and by the
power, strength and comforts of the Holy Ghost has enabled them to sing and
rejoice in Prison, and even to exult and triumph in the midst of the flames!
Now this divine assistance, this holy courage, strength and consolation is a
convincing demonstrative Argument of an Omnipotent Deity, especially if we
compare the Heavenly courage and comforts of the People of God in their
sufferings, with that fear, faintness, amazement, unquietness, vexation and
deadness which seiseth on the wicked when they are under Affliction.

Well then, if we reflect upon what has been said with reference to Man
himself and other Creatures, in a way of Reason, we may be fully convinced that
there is an Eternal God: If we look up to the Firmament, the Spheres, the
Planets, the Stars, their greatness, brightness, swiftness, their order,
courses, motions, and forcible effects; if we behold the Sea, so bounded with
the Sand by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass its bounds, though the Waves
thereof rage yet can they not prevail, though they roar never so much yet can
they not pass their bounds; if we behold the Earth, so firm, so round, so
fruitful, so great, yet hanging like a Ball in the Air, and resting on a very
small point: If Man will behold himself a little World, in his Body the several
members, with the harmony, sympathy, functions and uses thereof; and in his
Mind, the inbred principles and seminaries of all Arts and Sciences, and the
difference of good and evil, of honesty and dishonesty, from which all Laws and
Government do spring; if we consider the just Punishment which commonly
follows evil doers, and the sting of Conscience which tormenteth the greatest
Princes, that are out of danger in respect of the Laws, as Alexander for
killing his Friend Clitus, and Nero for the murder of his Mother Agrippina; If
we behold the order, progress and end of all Causes, the harmony of the whole
Universe, where there are so many contraries, and yet such a harmony amongst
them; Omnia ab uno, omnia ad unum; If we consider the Prediction of things
future, the strange Signs and Wonders that have fallen out, with their events,
do not all these things proclaim aloud unto us, That there is a Supreme Power
that wisely Governs and Overrules All! Suppose a gallant well furnished Ship
come safe to her Port through all the waves of the Sea, we may well conclude
that there was a skilful Pilot or Governor within that guided and directed her
to the appointed Haven; so we beholding this fair Universe, this World wherein
we live with all its Furniture and Ornaments, and the regular Motions of the
several Creatures, we may rationally conclude that there is a supreme Power and
Governor thereof which is God. What shall I say further on this subject, (if
enough were not already said) methinks this should convince and satisfy the
Reason of any man living (if he have but a spark of Reason left in him) that
all Nations generally in every Age, time and place of the World have
acknowledged that there is a God: The Heathens themselves could not endure them
that denied a supreme divine Power; for this cause they put to death that great
Philosopher Socrates and others, as supposing them guilty of this horrid Crime:
The Nations that have no true knowledge of God do at this day adore Stocks,
Stones, brute Beasts and the basest creatures, rather than they will have no
Deity, no Religion at all: They are zealous and forward in the Worship of their
Idols, which shows, that though they acknowledge not the true God, yet they
understand by the Light of Nature and Reason that there is a Supreme Being to
whom divine Worship is due. And as for such as have even studied and
endeavored to gratify the Devil to the utmost by becoming mere Atheists, they
could never so blot this fundamental Truth and Principle out of their
Consciences, but that the Majesty of God has affrighted them and been a
terror to them. So then the universality of this persuasion in all places
proves that there is an Eternal Deity; in as much as there is no History that
shows the Manners and and Customs of any People or Country, but it likewise
shows their Religion, yea all both new and ancient Commonwealths had always
something or other which they Worshipped and called in their Language GOD: But
as touching Atheism, we can easily show, and would take the pains to show it,
but that it is already done in the Writings of others, the very time and place,
and persons, when and where, and by whom it was first forged; which is a
sufficient Argument against it, such an Argument as may for ever silence the
Atheists of our times, which are as so many wild Beasts, fit to be destroyed.
It Is true, there are some wicked wretches that do desperately harden their own
Hearts, and drown themselves over Head and Ears in sensual Delights and
Pleasures, but yet if God put His Bridle into their Mouths, which he will do at
one time or other, those sparks and notions which God has implanted in every
man's Soul shall break forth and appear, and the darkness shall not always
obscure the light. In these three Cases especially this Principle will show it
self, even in those Atheistical spirits that have endeavored to suppress and
extinguish it. First, When they are surrounded and compassed about with
difficulties and dangers, and must needs fall into the hands of their Enemies,
unless they be preserved by a Divine power, then though they were never so
wicked and Atheistical before, yet now as the Tragoedian observes they will
fall down on their Knees and pray to a Deity, they will cry peccavi, and
confess there is a God indeed. There was a Controversy betwixt the Stoics and
Peripateticks; the Stoics held that Man had no Passions in him, but the
Peripateticks were of a contrary opinion: Now it fell out upon a time that when
a Stoic and a Peripatetick were sailing together in one Ship, there arose upon
a sudden a great Tempest; the Stoic began to look pale, and the Peripatetick
observing it argues thus against him, Thou look pale Stoic, and therefore
thou art not without Passions; he could not free himself of fear when he was in
danger to be cast away: So although the Atheist in his jollity amongst his
Companions belch forth sometimes that there is no God, yet in his distress he
is enforced to grant a Deity. Secondly, This Principle will manifest it self
even in Atheists when they are oppressed with Sickness and bodily distempers; as
there was an Atheist called Diogenes, who being much afflicted with the pain of
the Strangury, detested his former Opinion. And Thirdly, When Old age comes
upon them they grow more wise and sober: So we read of one Cephalus in Plato,
who said to Socrates, that whilst he was a young man he never thought that
there was any Styx, but now in his old age he came to doubt and question, What
if there be one? This indeed may confute all Atheists (as a manifest
unanswerable Argument proving that there is a God) because the greatest
Atheists that denied him in their lives have acknowledged and approved him in
their deaths. Pherecydes an Assyrian being merrily disposed at a Banquet
amongst his Friends, bragged how long he had lived and had never done Sacrifice
to any God; but his end was miserable, for he was devoured of Lice. Diagoras
for his damnable Opinion was the cause of the destruction of the whole Country
Meles in revenge of his Atheism: Lucian that scoffing Atheist going to Supper
abroad, and having left his Dogs fast bound as he went, when he returned home
(having railed against God and His Word) his Dogs broke loose, fell upon him,
and tore him in pieces. Machiavel rotted in the Prison at Florence, as the
Italians write. Appian scoffing at Religion, and chiefly at Circumcision, had
an Ulcer in the same part of his Body, as Josephus reports. Julian the
Apostata being pierced in the Bowels with an Arrow from Heaven, pulled out the
Arrow, and receiving the Blood that came out of the wound, cast it into the
air, saying, Vicisti Galilaee, and so died raging. Many others besides these
might be mentioned, who though they acted like Atheists in their lives, yet
justified God in their deaths.

CHAP. X. The Immortality of the Soul of Man proved by Reason.
AS it has been already demonstrated by the Light of Reason that there is an
Eternal God or Supreme Being, so it may be evinced by Reason that Man's Soul is
Immortal; and indeed the one of these depends upon and bears witness to the
other. The spiritualness and immortality of the Soul of Man, and that it may
and does subsist without the Body, is clearly held forth in the Sacred
Scriptures; Genesis 2.7. Eccles. 12.7. Matthew. 10.28. Luke 16.22, 23. and 23.43.
Romans 8.10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.6, 7, 8. Phil. 1.21, 23. Heb 12.23. Rev. 6.9, 10, 11.
into which the Faith of a Christian must be finally resolved: But besides this
Divine Testimony, we have also the Testimony of the Light of Reason.

First then, Let us consider that the Soul of Man when it understands any
thing, it abstracts from that which it understands all quantity, quality, place
and time, changing it into a more Immaterial and Intelligible nature: As the
Stomach when it receives meat, changes the outward accidents of the
nourishment into its own nature, whereby it becomes Flesh and Blood; so the
Soul when it conceives any thing separates it from the gross matter, and
conceives it universally in the Mind or Understanding. If a Man looks on a
Horse he sees him of such quantity and color, and in such a place; but if he
conceive him in his mind, then it is an universal notion agreeing to all
Horses: Now then as the thing conceived in the mind or understanding is not
visible because it has no colors, it is not audible because it has no sound,
nor is big or little because it has no quantity; so the Soul it self must
needs be of this nature, namely without all quantity, quality, time and place:
And therefore (according to the Light of Reason) the Soul cannot be
Corruptible, but must be Immortal.

Secondly, If we further consider the manner of the Souls Operation, she must
needs be an immortal spiritual substance. There are two undoubted Axioms and
Maxims in Philosophy which cannot be gainsayed, namely, That every thing is
received according to the quality of the receiver; and, That every thing has
the same manner of Essence as it has of Operation.

Now the Soul of Man can easily receive impressions and thoughts of
Immortality, and discourse thereupon, and therefore it is in its own nature and
essence Immortal.

Aristotle observes, That the Soul in understanding is made as it were the
Object that is understood; because as the Wax after it is stamped is in some
sort the very Seal it self that stamped it, namely, representative, so the Soul
in receiving the species of any Object is made the Picture or Image of the
thing it self.

Now then, the Understanding of a man being able to apprehend Immortality (yea
indeed apprehending every Corporeal substance as if it were Immortal, I mean by
refining and purging it from all gross, material and corruptible qualities)
must be much more it self of an immaterial and immortal nature.

The Soul depends not, as do other Forms, either in her Being or Operation upon
the Body; For as to the Act of Understanding, she works without the concurrence
of any Bodily Organ, and therefore can subsist by her own nature when separated
from the Body, without the concurrence of any matter to sustain her.

The Independence of the Soul in her Being and Operation upon the Body is
manifest, because she has in some measure the knowledge of Truth, of God, of
Angels, and of her Self; She can assent, discourse, abstract, invent, contrive,
and do the like; none of which Acts depend upon any material faculty: And then
further this Independence of hers appears in those Raptures and Ecstasies
wherein the Soul is raised above and from the Body and bodily Organs, though
not from informing the Body, yet certainly from borrowing any assistance or
help there from for the producing of its Operation: The truth is, the Soul of
Man is such a spiritual substance that it receives perfection from all things,
for Intellectus omnia intelligit, yea wherein all Contraries are reconciled and
lay aside their Opposition; For as a Noble Writer truly observes, Morney de
verit. Relig. Christian. cap. 14.
Those things which destroy one another in the World, maintain and perfect one
another in the Mind, one thing being a means for the clearer apprehension of
another.

Thirdly, This is also evident to Reason, That if the Soul were a mortal
perishing thing, then it would undeniably follow, That those natural desires
which are planted in every man's Soul should be frustrate and in vain; But such
desires being not sinful, cannot be frustrate, for Natura nil facit frustra,
Nature does nothing in vain: Now these natural desires of the Soul should be in
vain if there were not something to content and satisfy them, which being not
found upon Earth, must be sought for in Heaven, yea in God himself: And this
plainly shows that the Soul is divine and immortal.

Indeed a sinful desire should not be fulfilled (as if a Man should vainly
desire to be transformed into an Angel;) But as for mere natural desires in
Man, as the desire to live happy, and to be free of misery, these are not
sinful; and forasmuch as they cannot be fulfilled in this life, therefore they
must be fulfilled in the life to come.

Naturally every man desires to have a being after his Body is dissolved; Hence
is that desire which men have to leave a good Name behind them, and that it may
go well with their Posterity, and the like: And from this Natural instinct come
those ambitious desires in vain men to erect costly Sepulchers and Monuments
after their death, and to call their Houses and Lands after their own Names;
yea the poorest Tradesmen has this desire when he can reach no higher, he will
have a Stone laid upon his Grave with his Name upon it: Now this very ambitious
desire that is in man is a testimony in his mind of the immortality of his
Soul, that it subsisteth after this life, and dies not with the Body.

Fourthly, Another reason of the Souls Immortality (which is also obvious to
the Light of Nature) may be drawn from the dignity and pre-eminence of Man
above other Creatures, which were appointed to be subject and serviceable to
him; Now this dignity cannot possibly stand with the Souls mortality: For would
not many other Creatures far excel Man in health, strength, swiftness, and in
the duration of their being, if Man's Soul were not Immortal?

Alas how subject is the nature of Man to weakness, faintness, cares, fears,
jealousies, discontents and all other miseries of Mind and Body, which other
Creatures are not so obnoxious unto? Is there not disturbance in our very
peace, and have not our contentments and comfort here their vexation and
interruption? And must not their miseseries be exceeding miserable whose very
happiness in this Life is unhappy, if there were not a Life to come? Mortality
and corruption make the want of Reason a privilege to other Creatures; And in
this case the Beasts would be so much the more happy than Man, by how much the
less they know their own misery: And therefore there must be some other thing
wherein Man far excels the other Creatures, and that is in the Spiritualness
and Immortality of his Soul.

Fifthly, Every corruptible mortal thing is subject to time and motion, but the
Soul of Man is neither subject to time nor motion, and consequently she is not
corruptible and mortal.

That the Soul is not subject to motion is cleared thus; Motion hinders the
Soul from attaining its own perfection, when the Soul is free from motion and
perturbation then it is most perfect, and most fit to understand spiritual
things, suitable to its own nature: As Water when it is clear and not muddy
receives the similitude of the Face with most clearness.

Again, Reason it self will tell us, That the things that are true need not a
lie to further them: But now to make use of the Souls Immortality as a means to
further and incite us to the Duties which we are bound to do, were to use a
lie, if the Soul were not Immortal: For many Religious Duties which we are
bound to perform require the contempt of this Life, as the abstaining from the
Flesh and forforsaking the good of this World; which a man would not do if he
had not the hope of Immortality, in which he finds the recompense of his
losses; yea this very persuasion of the Souls Immortality made some Heathens
willingly suffer death for the safety of their Country. If our last End were
only in this Life, then all that we do should be for this last End, to aim at
it, to procure it, and never to cross it: Doubtless it were great folly and
madness in men to undergo so many hard things as they do, if they had not a
persuasion in their Hearts of this Immortality, and if their hope were only in
this Life of all men they should be most miserable; But they are persuaded that
the Soul is Immortal, and they find that this World (wherein they now converse)
is too steril and empty to fill the vastness and limit the desires thereof; It
must be the possession of an immortal, infinite, immutable good, that must
satisfy their Understandings and Wills, both which faculties aim at the
chiefest and highest object: The Understanding is carried ad summam Causam, to
the first of Truths, and the Will ad summum Bonum, to the last of Ends; And
therefore He only which is the First and the Last can satisfy the vast desires
of the Soul.

Sixthly, Upon this ground the Soul must needs be Immortal, because God is
just: A man may as well say that there is no God at all, as to say that God is
unjust: Now then God being the just Judge of all it behooves him to punish the
Wicked, and to reward the Just; but if God did not this in another life he
should never do it, for in this life the Wicked flourish and the Just are
oppressed: Therefore as God is just, there remains another Life after this,
wherein the Souls of the Just shall be rewarded, and the Souls of the Wicked
shall be punished. If the Soul were Mortal, forasmuch as in this World wicked
men prosper in their Wickdeness, and good men (as to their outward being)
perish in a way of Righteousness, how should the Justice of God who is the
Supreme Being, and whose ways are ways of Righteousness, be vindicated?

Seventhly, It may satisfy the Reason of any man that the Soul is Immortal,
since there is an universal consent and agreement of all Nations of the Earth
in one or other kind of Religion, and the Worship of some Deity, which is
raised out of this hope, That that God whom they worship will reward their
Piety, if not here yet in another Life. Nulla gens adeo extra leges est
projecta, ut non aliquos Deos credat, says Seneca: Hence proceeded those
Fictions of the Poets touching the Elysian Fields, or places of Happiness for
men of honest and well ordered lives, and places of Torment for the wicked and
irreligious. It must needs be a visible Character of a a Deity imprinted in the
Soul, an irresistible principle in Man's nature, that must constrain it unto
those sundry Religious Ceremonies (observed among all Nations) wherein even in
places of Idolatry, some were so irksom and repugnant to Nature, and others so
void of Reason, as that nothing but a firm and deep persuasion of a Divine
Judgment, and of their own Immortality could ever have imposed them upon their
Consciences: And besides this consent of men unto Religion in general, we find
it also unto this one part thereof, namely the Immortality of the Soul; All the
wisest and best reputed Philosophers for Learning and Honesty, and even
Barbarians, Infidels and savage people have discerned it by the glimmerings of
the Light of Reason.

CHAP. XI. The verity and excellency of the Christian Religion evinced by
Reason.
THe Light of Reason is of excellent use to convince Heathens and Infidels of
the truth of the Christian Religion, there being no Religion at this day
professed throughout the World that has so much reason in it and for it as the
Christian Religion has; if we consider the way of cleansing and expiating Sin
by Christ, the dignity and excellency of the Person of the Mediator, the
exactness of Divine Justice, which requires Satisfaction, the Rewards and
Punishment prescribed and appointed by the Christian Religion, the excellent
Doctrine and Instructions thereof, the Exemplary Life of Christ and His
Apostles; How many things in our Religion are witnessed to and approved in the
Writings of the most Rational and Learned Heathens; and how the greatest
Enemies of the Christian Religion, as Julian, Porphyry and others were once
Christians, and came to renounce the same merely through Pride and Discontent:
If these and other things relating to our Religion be but duly weighed, it will
appear even to the Eye of Reason that there is much Truth and Excellency
therein, and that other Religions are but fictitious and vain, having no
rational Consistence in them. But we will handle this matter more particularly,
though with as much Brevity as possibly we can.

First, The Antiquity of the Christian Religion proves it to be the true
Religion; Prima sunt vera, verum est prius; That is most true which is most
ancient: Seeing the true Religion is the way whereby Man must come to God, and
have Communion with him, and is copula relationis between God and Man, it must
needs be as Ancient as Man is: As for the Writings of most of the Heathens,
unless it be those that are forged and suppositious, they are but of yesterday
in comparison of Moses the Lawgiver under God to the Jews; even Orpheus the
first Heathen Poet was eight hundred years after Moses, as Strabo, Plutarch and
Diodorus Siculus testify. The most Ancient Records of the Heathens began in
Solon's time, which was in the time of Esdras; the Romans had their Religion
from the Graecians, and the Graecians from Caecrop an Egyptian; and the
Carthaginians had theirs from Cadmus a Phoenician; Now these two Countries,
Egypt and Phoenicia, with the Mediterranean Sea do compass about Judaea, and
therefore any man that is rational may easily perceive that all their Religion
came from the Jews. This is sufficiently demonstrated by several Writers of
ours, and particularly by Mr. Gale in his late Books; so that it would be
superfluous for me to enlarge upon this subject.

When the Wise men of Greece asked their Gods whence the knowledge of Arts and
Sciences should come, they received this Answer, Solus utique Chaldaeus
sapiens; and Orpheus their ancient Poet tells us that when God was angry He
destroyed the World, committed the Truth uni Chaldaeo: And Plato in his
Epimenides refers all, uni Barbaro. If it be demanded who this Chaldean,
this Barbarian should be, the Egyptians call him Theut, which signifies a
Stranger, meaning Abraham, for so Origin against Celsus and Josephus against
Appian say plainly, that when the Heathen Nations used to Conjure they would
make use of Abraham's Name, saying, Per Deum Abraham. Well then, if the Jewish
Religion be Ancient, ours must needs be so too; for ours is the same with
theirs Evangelically considered; their Types, Sacrifices, Prophecies and
Ordinances referring to Christ, who is the very substance of the Christian
Religion: The Mosaical Law of the Old Testament, what is it else but Evangelium
reconditum, a veiled Gospel? And the Gospel in the New Testament, what is it
but Lex Revelata? the Law of the Old Testament revealed: And thus it appears
that the Christian Religion is the most Ancient.

Secondly, If we look at the means and way of Atonement and Propitiation held
forth in the Christian Religion, it must needs appear to be the most Wise and
Reasonable of any Religion: The Eternal God or Supreme Being as He is full of
Love and Mercy, so He is Just and Righteous; His Justice is infinite as Himself
is, He will so show Mercy as that He will appear to be infinitely Just toward
the the Offender; and therefore in Reason there must be some way or means of
Satisfaction and Atonement found out, or else God and Man being separarated by
Sin could not be reunited.

The wiser sort among the Heathens were convinced by the Light of Reason, That
Man being alienated from God, and not able of himself to come to God in regard
of his darkness and ignorance, there is a necessity of some way or means of
cleansing and atonement: Hence came the multitude of their Sacrifices and
Oblations, especially when any great Plague or Judgment was upon them: But now
that Christ the Son of God, who is equal with God, should be this way or means
by giving up himself a Sacrifice for Sin, of this they were wholly ignorant. Is
it so that the Justice of God offended by Sin is infinite? Then it is but
reasonable, that this infinite Justice should have infinite reparation and
satisfaction, which neither Angels nor Men (being but finite Creatures) can
give to the infinite God; And therefore unless the Mediator or Days-man that
takes up the difference between God and man be himself the infinite God as well
as man, such an infinite Satisfaction cannot be given. This way or means being
contrived and found out only by the wise infinite God, and clearly held forth
in the Christian Religion (and in no other Religion besides) it must needs be
even by the Light of Reason the best and safest, and truest Religion, as that
which vindicates the Honor of the great God, and gives true peace and security
to man.

Thirdly, The Glorious Miracles wrought by Christ may convince any man's reason
of the Truth of the Christian Religion. Not only Josephus and other Jews
besides him, but also diverse Heathen Authors and some of Christ's greatest
Adversaries do acknowledge His Miracles: Julian the Apostata (as great an Enemy
as he was) confessed that Jesus cured the Blind, and the Lame, and delivered
some from Devils that were possessed in Bethsaida and Bethany; Pilate himself
in a Letter of his to the Emperor Tiberius witnesses, That Jesus gave sight to
the Blind, cleansed the Lepers, healed them that were diseased, delivered them
that were possessed from Devils, overruled the Waters, raised the Dead, and
rose again Himself from the dead after three days: Hereupon Tertullian bids the
Senate and People of Rome read their own Commentaries, and search their
Records, where they shall find the Miracles of Jesus, which if they had not
been sufficiently known to be true and real, Tertullian himself in this Case
might have been easily convicted of lying and forgery. These Miracles of Christ
were wrought not in one or two places, but in many, not in a corner but in the
open view of the World, and were attended with such Majesty and Power, that
there are thousands that will rather die on a Rack than deny or gainsay the
same. Jesus wrought great Miracles (says Josephus) and although He was
Crucified and put to death, yet His Disciples forsook him not, but did cleave
unto him: And as He Himself wrought many Miracles when he was upon Earth, so
His Disciples, after He was gone from them, by His power and virtue did likewise
effect such Miracles as filled the World with the fame of them, and were a
special means to convert whole Kingdoms to Christ.

If any be so absurd and impudent as to deny the Miracles of Christ, then I
would ask of them whether it be not a great and strange Miracle, That so many
Nations, and in them so many Wise and Learned men should follow and adore a
poor contemptible man without Miracles, and should be willing to die for Him,
even for Him that died a cursed ignominious Death upon the Cross! If His
Miracles were not great and far surmounting the Nature and capacity of a mere
Man, if they were not divine and supernatural, can any sober man imagine that so
many thousands would be so far convinced and persuaded by them as to die
joyfully and triumphantly for the Name and Honor of this Jesus? Is it a
Miracle to work upon a man by touching him, and much more without touching him,
and most of all without seeing him? Then what a Miracle is it to work
powerfully in the Hearts of whole Nations a far off, without once seeing them,
and to touch them without coming at them, and to convert and draw them to
Himself without touching them with His Hand? Yea but say some (very absurdly
and irrationally) Christ and His Apostles wrought Miracles by the help of
Magic; Let such vain men resolve us if ever they knew or heard of a Magician
that wrought such Miracles, and came with such power and efficacy upon the
Hearts of all sorts of men after his death, as Jesus did? And as for His
Apostles, what gain or advantage could they get by exercising this Magic? No
considerate man will attempt any great matter but for some end or other; Now
what Profit, what Preferment, what Honor in this World got they by it? Nay did
it not procure them much Hatred, Danger, Imprisonment, Torments, and at last
Death it self? Magicians usually hide themselves and conceal their Art when
they are pursued for it; But did the Apostles do so? What a strange kind of
Magic is this, that will needs be known and exercised even in despite of the
rage of Rulers and People, yea of Death it self? Doubtless it is very
remarkable, that as in Moses time God so ordered (in His wise Providence) that
there should be many great Magicians in Egypt, that He might make His own Power
the more evident; So in the times of Christ and His Apostles there was great
store of them in Judaea, Rome and other places, that a difference might be put
between the Illusions of Satan and the miraculous Works of God. Pliny reports
that there were never more Magicians in the World than in the Reign of Nero,
which was the time of spreading the Gospel by Christ's Apostles, neither was
the vanity of that Art (as he says) ever more apparently known than at that
time: If therefore this Art of Magic did never flourish more in Princes Courts
than in the times of the Apostles, why did not one or other step forth to
vanquish or convict them before the Magistrates? Origin (not to mention here
other Learned men that were converted to Christ) was himself a great
Philosopher, and fellow-Disciple to Plotinus who is highly commended by the
Philosophers; can any sober man imagine that he and others of great judgment
and abilities would suffer themselves (like so many fools and mad men) to be
led with vain Illusions? Or to attribute those things to God's special
miraculous Operation which depended wholly upon Natural Causes? Especially
seeing that both Origin and also Cyprian before their Conversion to Christ had
professed the Art of Magic! If it be further said that the Apostles were
influenced by pride and vainglory in doing what they did, how happens it
then that each of them did not cause himself to be worshipped and adored, as
the Idol-gods and Mahomet did? If they were so vainglorious in their works as
is pretended, why did they not make use of their own Names, and exalt
themselves? but refer all to Jesus, and give him the power and glory of all,
who was so much despised by the great men of the World? Surely this must needs
be from God and from a divine power, and not from Satan nor from Men.

Fourthly, Let a man but rationally consider the Life and Doctrine of Jesus,
who is the Author and substance of the Christian Religion, and he will be
convinced of the verity and excellency of it; What was the Life and
Conversation of Jesus upon Earth (even by the confession both of Jews and
Gentiles) but the very pattern of Virtue and Piety? What was it but the very
Body of the Legal Types and shadows, and the substance of the Predictions and
Prophecies concerning the Messiah? How wise, how patient, how meek and humble,
how loving and compassionate to Mankind? How holy and heavenly minded, how
diligent, faithful and impartial was he in the Work of God? He did neither
flatter the greatest nor discourage the meanest, but delivered the whole
Counsel of God without respect of persons: What a public spirit, what
self-denial, what excellent Virtues and Graces did Jesus show forth both in His
Actions and Sufferings? (His Enemies themselves being Judges) Insomuch that
Porphyry acknowledged Him to be a most Excellent Man, though (says he) the
Christians are to blame to Worship Him as God. And Pilate's Wife desired that
her Husband might not meddle with that Just man. To His painful Death which He
suffered for us He went as a Sheep to the slaughter, not opening His mouth, and
prayed most affectionately for His Enemies upon the Cross, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do. Never was there such an Example of Virtue and
Holiness as Jesus was, and therefore how can any man of reason think that he
should be the Author or Founder of a false Religion? As for His Doctrine and
Instructions, there cannot be any found out or devised more excellent and
precious; Never man spoke as He spoke; What was the continual subject of His
Preaching and Discourse but the evil of Sin, the vanity of this World, the
goodness and mercy of God in pardoning the Sinner, the excellency of Holiness
and Righteousness, the glory and happiness of Heaven: He teaches not His
Disciples how to obtain the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World, how to
be great amongst men, and to seek the praise and applause of men, how to
Conquer Kingdoms and subdue Nations by the material Sword; But he teaches them
how to deny themselves and take up the Cross and follow Him, how to be
Crucified to the World and the Flesh, to lay up Treasures in Heaven, to forgive
their Enemies, and do good to them that despitefully use them: Was there ever
such Heavenly Doctrine, such Excellent Instructions as proceeded out of His
mouth? If we look to the Precepts in Man's Laws, (as those amongst the
Lacedaemonians, Athenians, Romans) they neither command all good, nor forbid all
evil. The Laws of men are limited according to time, place and persons; As the
Wise men of Persia answered the King, who would have married his own Sister,
That indeed there was a Law that a man might not marry his own Sister, but yet
they found another Law, That the King might do what he would; (and so by this
means he shall have more liberty to sin than his Subjects.) But now on the
contrary the Laws of the Christian Religion do command all that is good, and
forbid and restrain all that is evil; the Precepts thereof are general and
impartial to all persons, to the King as well as the Subject, to the Master as
well as the Servant, to the rich as well as the poor, wthout exception. No
other Religion or Doctrine reaches the Heart and inward man but only this:
Where can we find another Law that has in it Non concupisces, Thou shall not
lust, which strikes at the very root and core of corruption. Other Laws teach
men to advance and enlarge their worldly interest and power, and to be in
favor with Princes; But the Precepts of the Christian Religion teach us to
forsake the world, and not seek great things for our selves, nor be ambitious
of the favor of great men, but to live above it. And as God Himself is a
Spirit, and does chiefly require the Heart, so that Worship which pleases Him
must be spiritual, and such a Worship is prescribed and commanded by the Laws
of Christ; whereas all other Religions in the World, as they proceed from man,
so man himself being Corporeal, the Worship that he chiefly prescribes must be
Corporeal also, and not Divine and Spiritual, as the Christian Religion chiefly
requires: Other Religions attribute the praise to man either in whole or in
part, but the Christian Religion attributes all to God, as the highest Truth,
the chiefest Good, and ultimate End of all.

Fifthly, The nature and success of Christ's Kingdom may serve to convince any
man's reason that the Christian Religion is divine and heavenly; By what weak
means, by what contemptible Instruments has Christ advanced and enlarged his
Kingdom? How has he from time to time confounded things that are by things
that are not? Whereas men will have apt Instruments to every action, and the
Matter also well disposed to work upon, Christ chooses weak and unapt
Instruments for carrying on His work in the World; not the Wise, and Noble, and
Learned of the World, but Poor simple men to be His Apostles and Ambassadors;
and then for the Matter which they were to work upon, namely the World, it was
altogether unprepared, both Jews and Gentiles hating Christ and His Apostles:
Vlpian the chiefest Lawyer, Galen the chiefest Physician, Porphyry and Plotinus
the chiefest Philosophers then living, were desperate Enemies to them, and
wrote Books against Christ and the Christian Religion: Julian the Emperor
forbad Schools of Learning to the Christians in hatred of Christianity, and the
other persecuting Emperors devised most exquisite Torments to be inflicted on
the poor Christians, and put thousands of them to a cruel death; and yet for
all this Christianity prevailed, and the Kingdom of Christ was enlarged; Which
is an undoubted Proof and Demonstration (even to the Eye of Reason) of the
Truth and Excellency of the Christian Religion, and that the Kingdom of Christ
is most divine and powerful, and not worldly, weak and carnal. That this Jesus,
who was born in the little Country of Judaea subdued by the Romans, of poor
Parents in a sorry Village, destitute of Friends and of all Worldly helps and
advantages, should give Law to and Conquer the World by His Gospel or the Word
of His Kingdom; is not this wonderful! And would ye know what He promises His
Subjects and Followers? Why, instead of great matters that they might expect in
this Life, He tells them plainly what great Afflictions and Tribulations they
must endure for His sake, if they will follow Him and be His Disciples indeed;
they must expect to be persecuted, reproached, scourged, imprisoned, and put to
death: Whereas other Kings and Monarchs promise great Dignities and Preferments
in the World to their followers, this King on the contrary by the Doctrine of
the Cross drew the Nations to Him; other Monarchs Conquer by killing their
Enemies, this King Conquered by dying for His Enemies; the death other Monarchs
is the decay and ruin of their Kingdoms and Conquests, but the death of Jesus
has established and enlarged His Kingdom, and is the life and happiness of His
Subjects.

Who sees not therefore by the Light of Reason, a humane weakness in the
greatness of Worldly Empires, and a divine power in the weakness of Christ's
Kingdom? When He died and was buried His Kingdom seemed to die and to be buried
with Him; a few poor despised Followers He had, and these were at their wits
end when their Lord and Master was Crucified and laid in the Grave; Well, but
at length they open their mouths and boldly teach men to believe on Jesus who
was Crucified and Buried, but is now Risen again, and to suffer for His sake;
And if they be forbidden, they will rather die than not Preach and own this
Crucified Jesus; hereupon they are accused and brought before Magistrates,
where they own their Crime (as their Adversaries termed it) and are not ashamed
of it; and is not this admirable? Other Malefactors are tormented to make them
confess their fault, and these are tormented to make them conceal it; those
hold their peace to save their lives, and these die for speaking; and yet by
this strange way and means Christ that was crucified spreads His Kingdom and
fills the whole World with it. Out of weakness he brings forth strength, and
out of death he brings forth life; And who can thus draw one contrary out of
another? Who can thus overcome by yielding, who can thus trample upon and
triumph over his Enemies by dying, but Jesus in whom the power of the Eternal
God was, and whose Kingdom is not of this World, but Divine and Heavenly?
Whilst He lived upon Earth He was despised and rejected, but after His death He
is worshipped as God, even to this day, and His true Followers will rather die
a thousand deaths than deny His Eternal Godhead and Kingdom. And may not this
one Consideration (if there were no more) touching the Kingdom of Christ
wherein it far excels the Kingdoms of this World, serve to convince any sober
rational man of the verity and efficacy of the Christian Religion?

Sixthly, What strange Conversions and Changes have been wrought by the Gospel
of Christ in the Hearts and Lives of some of the most eminent and famous men
for Learning and Parts? How were they wrought upon and converted by the plain
Preaching of weak simple men? Even by the foolishness of Preaching (as the
World counts it) that so the divine power and excellency of this Jesus and of
the Christian Religion might the more appear. Paul before his Conversion was
counted a wise and learned man, and was in great reputation, so that Porphyry
the famous Philosopher says of him that it was great pity such a man should be
a Christian; yet when Paul had received the greatest Authority, and raged most
against the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ, he was wonderfully converted and
turned quite another way, and was glad to tread many a weary step and to endure
many great difficulties for the Gospels sake. Origin also a man of great
Learning and knowledge in Philosophy and the Arts, being converted by a divine
power to the Christian Religion, was content to be a poor Catechist in
Alexandria, and was every day in danger of death, when he might have been with
his fellow Plotinus in great Authority and Favor, had it not been for his
Christian profession. Surely it must needs be some Divine and Heavenly power
that did thus prevail upon these men and upon many other Wise and Learned men
that might be mentioned: Never was there such wonderful Conversions in any
Religion as in this, never such sound Repentance and Reformation, never such
true Justice, Fortitude and Constancy in Affliction even to Death and Martyrdom
as in this; so that it was commonly said of the Christians, Soli Christiani
mortis contemptores.

Seventhly, It Is an Argument of the Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion, That it has been so much opposed and persecuted from time to time by
the rage and cruelty of the Devil and wicked men; As it was commonly said of
that Monster Nero a Persecutor of Christians, That it must needs be a good and
excellent thing which so wicked a man hated: The more wicked and ungodly men
are, the more they hate that which is Divine, and which most resembles the Holy
God. Now no Religion or Profession in the World has been so desperately hated
and persecuted by wicked ungodly wretches as the Christian Religion; and yet
the more it has been opposed and trampled upon by them, the more it has
prevailed and flourished, even in despite of their rage and malice. What a
miserable end did befall Herod and other great Persecutors of this Religion?
Many of which did vindicate Christ and His Truth at and by their death, (when
the Hand of God was heavy upon them,) though they had raged against Him in
their life time, and done whatever they could to root out His Kingdom and
People. Nay Satan himself the greatest Persecutor of all has witnessed for the
Christian Religion against himself; All the Art Magic which he invented could
never Conjure or call up Christ: Plotinus and Apollonius and other great
Magicians that raised up the Image of Jupiter and other Heathen Gods, though
they assayed with all their skill and power to bring up the Image of Christ,
yet could they never effect it; for Christ is not subject to their power, being
infinitely above them. It Is well known to the Heathens, that at the Birth and
Death of this Jesus their Idol-Gods fell down, and their Oracles at Delphos,
Dodon and other places were stricken dumb; Insomuch as Porphyrie himself
confesses and bewaileth, that since the time that Jesus was Worshipped they
have had no benefit at all by any of their Gods: The Voice that was heard in
the Air in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar about the time of Christ's death,
commanding the Master of the Ship to cry aloud that the Great God Pan is dead,
upon which followed great screechings and lamentations in the Air, we find
mentioned in diverse credible Authors. Lactantius tells us that when the
Heathens offered Sacrifice to their Gods the very presence of a Christian would
dash and spoil their Mysteries; and thereupon came that speech which we read in
Lucian, If there be any Christian here let him depart hence. This Jesus has
made such work amongst the Idol-Gods, that Augustine cries out, Where are your
Gods! where are your Prophets! where are your Oracles! where are your
Sacrifices! are they not ceased? If Christ the Ark of God comes in place, Dagon
the great Idol must needs fall down. Now the Christian Religion has three
great Enemies in the World, Heathens, Jews, and Mahumetans, against whose
Religion or rather Superstition we will speak a few words to show the
unreasonableness and absurdity thereof. And First I. Reasons against the
Heathenish Idolatry.
touching the Heathen Gods, we have this to say against them in a way of Reason
(which may be much more enlarged) That they must needs be vain, and even
ridiculous; since by the confession of their own Learned Writers, these Gods or
rather Devils did command Images to be erected to them, and told the fashion
that they were of. And is not this absurd and unbecoming the Majesty of a
Deity? seeing the true and infinite God who dwells in the Light inaccessible
cannot be resembled by any Shape? What did these Dunghil-Gods of theirs chiefly
command and forbid but outward corporeal things? Whereas the true God is a Holy
Glorious Spirit, who commands the Spirits of men, and chiefly requires
spiritual Worship and Obedience. These Gods of theirs were not of Universal
use, nor were they good for all things; One forsooth was good for Medicine, and
another for Wisdom, and another for War; whereas the true God is an Universal
perfect Good: The Religion of these Heathen Gods consisted only in offering
Frankincense and Spices, and outward Oblations, which could never cleanse the
Soul of man from its spots and defilements: And therefore when Cyril told
Julian the Apostata that Sin defiles the Soul, and that outward and bodily
things could never wash away the inward filthiness and corruption of the
Spirit, this made Julian stagger, for he could not tell how to answer it. What
shall we say further? Are not the Parents, Birth and Manners of these goodly
Deities particularly set down by their own Poets and Philosophers, and by
diverse of the Ancient Fathers and our own Modern Writers; and is it not
ridiculous for any man to believe that these were true Gods? Nay truly they
were not only Men whom the Heathens Worshipped, but wicked men, the worst and
vilest of men, given up to Whoredom and Drunkenness, and Cruelty, and all
manner of vice and wickedness; Yea they were Devils and wicked Spirits that
appeared in the likeness of Men, and commanded themselves to be worshipped. So
absurd and irrational were some of these poor Heathens, that they did not only
worship wicked Men and Devils, but even Beasts also; an Ox, a Dog, a Crocodile,
yea Onions and Garlic. O monstrous folly and madness! How did the Devil
bewitch them? What horrid cruelty did he exercise upon them, commanding them to
sacrifice Men and Women to him when he was grievously offended with them, (as
he does at this day in some Heathenish Countries.) But when he was more mild
and gentle, then forsooth he must have Stage Plays, Music, Dancing and the
like Pastimes to make him merry: Behold here the Vanity and Brutishness of the
Heathenish Idolatry. Secondly, As for the Jews II. Against the Jewish Religion.
they are most unreasonable in their Enmity against Christ and the Christian
Religion. The truth of the Old Testament is acknowledged by them as well as by
us, though they do not rightly and spiritually understand it, by reason of the
veil which is upon their Hearts to this day; So blind and so deluded they are,
as to hold that the true Messiah is yet to come; that Jesus is not the Messiah;
and that when the Messiah first comes he shall be great in the World, and have
a Princely Court and Attendants at Jerusalem; and that he shall subdue all the
Enemies of the Jews. Now truly these are but vain dreams and fancies of theirs,
and quite contrary to Scripture and Reason. In Jacob's Prophecy concerning the
Messiah, Genesis 49.10. we read that the Scepter was not to depart from Judah, nor
a Lawgiver from between his Feet till Shiloh come; by which Shiloh is meant
the true Messiah: But the Scepter was then newly departed when Jesus came, and
therefore He is the true Shiloh or Messiah; The Scepter, as is well known, was
in Judah till the Captivity, and after the Captivity it continued till
Aristobulus and Hircanus, who contending for it were both of them dispossessed
of it, and Herod an Idumaean and a stranger was invested with the Royal
Dignity, and then came Christ as was long before prophesied, after whose coming
the Jews were dispersed and scattered throughout the Earth; so that now there
is no distinct Tribe of Judah, but they are all mingled one with another; the
Roman Emperors still laboring to root out the Jews, and especially the Tribe
of Judah, which made them to confound their Genealogies. That the seventy Weeks
referring to the coming of the true Messiah, Dan. 9.24. are long since
determined, he that runs may read it, and yet the Messiah not come, if we will
believe the obstinate Jews. In their Talmud we read that the Disciples of
Hillel whom they highly esteem, perceiving the first seven Weeks in Daniel to
fall out so justly, they looked for the coming of the Messiah in those days
being long before the full time, because they had read in the Prophecy of
Isaiah that the Lord would shorten those days; And immediately before the
Incarnation of our Savior we find that there was a general expectation of the
coming of the Messiah amongst the Jews, as appears by their continual sending
to John Baptist to know whether he himself was the Messiah, or they must expect
another; And about this time also (which may be a further proof that the
Messiah is already come) there were more false Christ's and deceivers, (such as
Judas, Theudas, Gaulonites, Barcosba) as the Scriptures and Josephus with other
Writers bear witness, than was ever before or since. How came it to pass that
the glory of the second Temple, Hag. 2.10. was greater than the glory of the
first? Was it not by the coming and presence of Christ? For outwardly the first
Temple was far more glorious than the second, and therefore the second must be
made more glorious in some other other respect: Nor could the destruction of
the second Temple (which yet we read of Luke 19.44. and likewise in the History
of Josephus) fall out before, but must needs be since the coming of the true
Messiah. Suidas reports this from one Theodosius a Noble Jew, That before
Christ sharply rebuked the Pharisees they marvelling at His wise Questions and
Answers, made Him one of the Priests (without which He being of the Tribe of
Judah could not have been suffered to Preach at Nazareth and Capernaum) and
registered His Name in these words, Jesus the Son of the Living GOD and of the
Virgin Mary; which Register was preserved at the sacking of Jerusalem, and
afterward laid up in the City Tiberias. The Jews themselves have been miserably
deceived in prefixing the time of the coming of the Messiah, so that in this
matter they are become ridiculous one to another; there is now no Bethlehem
where the Messiah should be born if He be not already come: The Prophecies are
clearly fulfilled, and those dreadful Judgments threatened against the Jews (for
rejecting the Messiah) manifestly even in the view of the Word brought upon
them. Vespasian at the Siege of Jerusalem offered them Peace, but they would
not accept of it; he made his entrance into their City at Cedron where they
took Christ, on the same Feast Day that Christ was taken, and whipped them
where they whipped Christ, and sold twenty Jews for a penny as they had sold
Christ for thirty pence; and thus they were punished in the same kind that they
had sinned against God. Are they not Vagabonds at this day throughout the
World, hated of all men for crucifying Christ? Having no Temple, no City, no
fixed Worship, no settled Government, neither Civil nor Ecclesiastical. And
though they attempted by the Assistance of Julian that wicked Emperor to Build
again their City and Temple, yet their Attempt came to nothing, but was
destroyed by Fire from Heaven: And now, poor Wretches, they abide (and have
been so for many hundred years) without a King, and without a Sacrifice, and
without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. Hos. 3.4. And whereas they vainly
expect that the Messiah at His first coming will be an outward glorious Prince,
like the Princes of this World, this is quite contrary to many Texts in the Old
Testament, which they pretend to believe, and which assure us that the Messiah
shall come in great meekness and lowliness. Zach. 9.9. That He shall be wounded
and pierced for the sins of the People, and that their iniquities shall be laid
upon Him. Psalm. 22.16, 17, 18. Isa. 53.4, 5.6. That He who is the Shepherd and
God's fellow shall be smitten by the Sword of the Lord, and that the Messiah
shall be cut off and slain. Zach. 13.7. Dan. 9.26. Out of these and the like
Texts in the Old Testament the Ancient Rabbis do generally gather that the
true Messiah should be such a person, and so dealt with as is described in
these places, and that His Kingdom should be Divine and Spiritual, and should
not consist in outward worldly pomp and magnificence. By what has been already
said (and much more that might be alleged) any rational sober man may easily
perceive how vain and unreasonable, how blind and contumacious the Jews are at
this day in denying Jesus to be the true Messiah, and in maligning and opposing
the Christian Religion. Thirdly and lastly, Against the Doctrine of Mahomet and
the Turkish Religion III. Against the Turkish Superstition.
there is enough, if not more than enough alleged to convince any man of
reason that it is but of yesterday, and a mere Fable if compared with the
Antiquity and Truth of the Christian Religion; And that Mahomet himself their
great Prophet was a vile wicked wretch and Impostor, whom God suffered in His
just judgment to delude and even besot the World; because they had abused the
precious Gospel of Christ. Mahomet's Doctrine forsooth is so hardy, and so
unquestionable that it must not be disputed of; which is a sufficient evidence
of the vanity and falseness of it. The Money is good (say they) but you must
not bring it to the Touchstone to try it, nor must you weigh it: whereas Truth
loves trial, and fears no colors. Their foolish Alchoran (which contains the
body and substance of their Heresy) is stuffed with vain Fables and false
Tales, fit for Fools and Children; so that Andraeas Maurus a Saracen and a
Bishop, besides many other Writers, notes at least nine hundred Untruths in
this wicked Alchoran; whereof two in the Eighth Section are exceeding gross and
palpable: One, that Abraham was the Son of Lazarus; the other, that Mary the
Mother of Christ was the Sister of Aaron; both which are manifest untruths: And
what, shall we think that the God of Truth and Wisdom will regard such false
Tales and fopperies in His Worship as are found in this Alchoran? (Be it far
from us to entertain such a thought of God.) How gross and sensual, and foolish
are many things mentioned therein? as Sect. 16. where Mahomet said that he felt
the Hand of God seventy times colder than Ice. Is this becoming the Holy
Majesty of God? And again, that one Angel has seven thousand Heads; and that
the Devil is Circumcised, and such like ridiculous stuff which a Rational
discreet man would be ashamed of. If we look to the Promises and Rewards of
this Religion, they refer to Pleasures that are merely carnal and sensual, fit
for none but Sardanapalus, Heliogabalus, and such like monstrous Epicures, that
have lost their Wits and Reason. If we consider the Precepts of this Religion,
we shall find that they are indulgent to Perjury, Adultery, and other
wickedness. A Turk may have four Wives, and five Concubines; he must not be
accused though never so wicked under four Witnesses. This wicked Religion of
theirs allows Men to couple themselves with Beasts, and to spoil one another
Goods, and therefore it is false, wicked, and to be abhorred. And as for the
Miracles which the Turkish Religion pretends unto, they have no Authentic
testimony nor possibility of Truth in them in the judgment of any sober
Rational man. Take one Instance for all, which is this; that an Angel when he
was a Child opened his Heart and took out that lump of Blood which is the Cause
of Sin. And then for the way and means of propagating this Religion; it is not
like that of the Christians, Spiritual and Divine, by the efficacy of the
Gospel of Peace and Reconciliation; But it is Carnal and Wicked, by Cruelty and
Compulsion, killing men that are of a different Religion, so that he is the
most religious amongst them that can shed most Blood and destroy most
Christians: And this shows even to an Eye of Reason that the Mahumetan Religion
is a mere Imposture, and a most wicked Superstition.

CHAP. XII. The divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures proved by Reason.
THe Laws of God (as we have heard) differ much from the Laws of men: these
command only the outward man: but the divine Laws reach the Spirit, and command
the inward man, which Laws are Recorded in the Sacred Scriptures: now that
these Holy Writings are the word of God, and do contain the Laws of God and the
Rule of our Faith and practice, may be proved by Reason so far as may convince
a Heathen or Infidel, that there is such a divine Authority and Efficacy in
these Writings as are not to be found in any other. First, then let it be
granted, as it has been clearly demonstrated, that there is one living and
true God, and that this God is to be honored and adored by his reasonable
Creatures with that service and worship which becomes him: Then it will
undeniably follow, That there must be some Revelation made by God himself,
touching that way of worship, wherein he will have us obey him (this is
practiced by all wise Princes and States who govern their Subjects in a way of
Reason and of Prudence) for who can know what pleases God but he himself, and
they to whom he makes known his will and pleasure. Now then, supposing some
Revelation of Gods will in order to that service which he will accept, if the
Scripture be not this Revelation, where then shall we find it? Let any man, if
he can, show some other or better manifestation concerning the will and worship
of the great and Holy God, then what he has made known in his Written word.
Nothing can be the standing unerring Rule of our Faith, but what God himself
has made so; That which is the Rule must be the law of our Belief, and who can
make a Law of this nature but God himself? It Is unreasonable to imagine that
any men or Creatures can prescribe to us what we are to believe concerning God,
unless God himself make known his will and publish his Laws. Secondly, As for
the Scriptures of the Old Testament (which are received and embraced as the
word of God both by Jews and Christians) let us rationally consider how the
Church of the Jews, who were the peculiar People of God, to whom were committed
the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. have witnessed these Books to be divine and
Supernatural. Have they not from time to time, for many Ages together, in their
greatest misery and affliction, constantly acknowledged and contended for the
divine Authority thereof, whenas by only denying the same, they might have had
not only liberty but great preferments in the World? And is it not very
observable, that though the Princes, high Priests and others amongst the Jews
persecuted the Prophets, and despised their words whilst they lived, yet they
received their Writings as Prophetical and Divine, when they where dead? and
since blindness and obstinacy came upon the Jews, notwithstanding their great
enmity and hatred to the Christian Religion, and the Professors thereof, yet
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, yea those very Texts that do evidently
confirm the truth of the Christian Religion, are kept pure and incorrupt
amongst them. Thirdly, The Christian Church which embraces both the Books of
the Old and New Testament have witnessed, and do still witness to the divine
Authority thereof, even to the Death; the whole Universal Church of God, even
from the first Penning of the Scriptures, till this very day, have all along
professed that these Books are divine, and Thousands of them have Sealed the
same with their blood: this Testimony is of great weight and force, though it
be not so infallible and effectual to persuade and satisfy the Conscience, as
the Testimony of the Holy Ghost himself. Of all humane Testimonies whereby the
Author of any Book that has, is, or ever shall be extant can be proved or
evinced so as to satisfy man's Reason, the Testimony of the Universal Church of
God concerning this Book is the greatest and most satisfactory, both in respect
of the multitude, wisdom, honesty and faithfulness of the witnesses and the
likelihood, constancy and uninterrupted continuance of the Testimony it self.
Is it probable in a way of Reason, that so good and wise a God should suffer so
many honest well meaning People to be so long abused and deceived by a false or
feigned Book fathered upon himself: such a horrid Imposture, the God of truth
will not endure to lie hid and undiscovered for so many hundred years.
Christians of all sorts and conditions, Noble and Ignoble, Rich and Poor,
Learned and unlearned, Married and unmarried, Old and Young, throughout the
World for a long time together, have endured the most grievous and exquisite
torments that the Devils could invent, or the malice of men find out, for the
defense of this truth, and that with great constancy and alacrity, with an
undaunted heart and merry countenance. And can any sober man think that so many
thousand persons, and some of them of great quality, learning, and prudence,
that might have lived bravely and carried a great part in this World, should
suffer so many and so great things out of mere weakness, pride, vain glory,
discontent; or that they should suffer for a fable, that has no Truth, nor
reality in it? This Testimony (which is taken from the great sufferings,
Christian patience, joy and courage of the Martyrs) is not merely humane; for
that courage and cheerfulness which they showed in the midst of their Torments,
was not from the strength of humane Nature and reason, but it was from above,
and supernatural. Fourthly, God has confirmed the divine Authority of the
Scriptures in the view of the World, by many great wonders and Miracles from
Heaven; such as Satan himself cannot imitate; such as exceed the power of any,
yea of all the Creatures in the World; such as the most malicious subtle
Enemies of God's truth could not deny to be divine. These Miracles has the
Lord openly wrought by the hands of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles, which as
they were sufficient to confirm the divine Authority of the Scriptures to them
who were eyewitnesses thereof, so the undoubted and clear Narration of them is
to us an invincible Argument that the Word and Gospel of Christ is from Heaven
and not from men; the Lord witnessing thereunto both by Signs and wonders, and
with diverse Miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will,
Heb. 2.4. What shall I say of the Antiquity of the Scriptures and the Doctrine
contained therein, which of all Writings and Doctrines that have been taught
and published, is the most Ancient. In all other Writings and Records the
Doctrine of the Creation, and fall of man, is omitted, which yet is
particularly and plainly set down in the Scriptures. And truly it is admirable
to Consider how the power and wisdom and goodness of God have appeared in
preserving his written. Word and Laws to this day, notwithstanding the rage and
subtilty of Antiochus, Nero, Dioclesian, Julian the Apostate, and other cruel
and subtle Persecutors; and notwithstanding that Egyptian darkness of Popery,
Error, and Ignorance, which overspread the World for some hundred years since
Christ, and his Apostles; during which time these sacred Writings were laid
aside and contemned, and blind Ignorance extolled as the Mother of Devotion.
Fifthly, The very Style of the Scripture argues the divine Authority thereof.
By the Style we do not understand the external superficies of words and
phrases, but the whole order, contexture and frame thereof, which fitly agrees
to the dignity of the speaker, and the nature of the Argument treated of; and
is excellently and wisely tempered according to the capacity and condition of
them for whose sake it was written. Indeed every Prophet and Apostle almost had
a peculiar Style, God making use of their several faculties and abilities:
Isaiah is Eloquent and sweet, David affectionate, Solomon Accurate, Jeremiah
vehement and more rough, and so it may be said of the several Apostles and
Evangelists, that their Style is somewhat different, but all of them divine and
Heavenly. The Majesty and excellency of the Style appears in that Majestic
Title and dignity which the Author of the Holy Scriptures; does justly
challenge to himself; the which imports Independency of nature and essence,
Supereminency of power and sovereignty, and excellency both of properties and
works, and is further displayed in the manner of teaching which is used in the
Holy Scriptures, commanding, promising, and threatening things above sense and
reason. In this Book there are hidden Mysteries, divine, and supernatural
Truths such as exceed all humane capacity, revealed and unfolded without
Argumentation or Rhetorical motives of persuasion, and we are required to
understand and believe them relying only upon the Truth and credit of the
Revealer. God the great and absolute Sovereign requires in his word such and
such things to be done, such and such duties to be performed by the Sons of
men, with great strictness and severity; and yet brings no argument to persuade
or confirm the equity of these commands, but only the will of the Commander,
which though it becomes not man to do, yet it well becomes the Majesty of God.
In this Book also promises are made of good things to come, whereof there is no
humane probability nor reason given to assure us of the performance thereof,
but I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. In the manner of threatening
also the like majesty and Sovereign Authority may be observed throughout the
Scriptures, which you shall not meet with in mere humane writings. God commands
and threatens without respect of persons; be they what they will be, it is all
one to him: he prescribes his Laws to all men, Magistrates and Rulers,
Scholars and Soldiers, to whole Kingdoms and States, commanding and requiring
what is distastful to their fleshly nature and interest, and forbidding what
they approve and commend; promising them not Earthly Honors and Riches, but
Life Eternal, if they be obedient to the Gospel; and threatening them not with
Rack or Gibbet, but with eternal Death and Torments if they disobey. Neither
let any man be offended with the low and humble manner of speech used in holy
Scripture, for it was penned for the use and benefit of the unlearned, as well
as the learned, for those of weak parts, as well as for those of strong parts
and abilities: And though the phrase or manner of speech be plain, yet the
matter is high and excellent, profound and unutterable. Plainness and
perspicuity does best become the truth. A Pearl needs no painting. True beauty
needs not a whorish dress to set it forth; nor needs the truth of God to be
supported or underpropt with foreign aids, for it is of it self sufficient to
uphold and sustain it self. It becomes not the Majesty of a Prince to play the
Orator, this would be more pedantick in him, then in a person more inferior.
Though the Scripture seems to be plain in word and phrase, yet it is great in
power: No writings of men (be they never so well set forth with Wit, Learning,
and Ornaments of Rhetoric) can so enlighten the mind, move the will, pierce
the heart, and stir up the affections, as the word of God does. Nor do the
Scriptures want Eloquence; if the matter be well weighed, no other writing can
equalize them. The Song of Moses, the beginning of the Prophecy of Isaiah, and
other portions of Scripture, in variety and force of divine Eloquence, do far
exceed and transcendall other Authors, Greek or Latin, that are extant, though
never so excellently indicted and penned; yet it may be easily discerned, that
the one was written by a Divine, the other by a humane Spirit. Sixthly, the
wonderful powerful effects of this doctrine (more then any other) do clearly
demonstrate, even to an eye of reason, the divine Authority thereof, for it
inlighteneth the understanding, discovers clearly the evil of sin, and the
vanity of the Creature, converteth the Soul, convinces the gainsayer,
terrifieth the Conscience of a sinner, quickens and reviveth the wounded
Spirit, manifests the thoughts of the heart man, casts down strong holds
and the power of Satan, and remains invincible notwithstanding all the
opposition of men and devils; for though the nature thereof be contrary to the
will and wisdom of the flesh and world, yet still it has prevailed and
overcome. The enemies that have opposed this doctrine, were many and mighty and
subtle: the Devil, the Roman Emperor, the learned Philosophers, the zealous
Jews, and the common people being stirred up by them, have with incredible fury
and falsehood and vigilance, endeavored the utter abolition of it, but could
never do it. This doctrine conquers where it comes, either it converts or
destroys its Adversaries. And what manner of persons are they whom God chooses
as his Heralds and Ambassadors to publish this doctrine! are they great and
many? are they learned and wise? are they potent and mighty in the world? No
no, they are in number but few, in outward appearance simple, rude, poor and
weak, despised of men; things that are not in the judgment of men; by these God
has confounded things that are; and through their preaching the Cross of
Christ, has subdued many Nations to himself; in a little time a great part of
this habitable world was converted and brought to the obedience of faith, so
that Paul filled all places from Jerusalem to Illyricum with the sound of the
Gospel: Nor is it to be forgotten that the Jews, though wasted with many and
great Slaughters, and though they had and still have a desperate Enmity against
Christ and the Christian Religion, yet the Scriptures of the old Testament have
always remained safe and entire in their custody, even when the Hebrew
language did lie almost unknown, and had perished altogether, had not God
provided for the true Religion by the care of those Jews; so that (will they,
nill they) they shall be instrumental in maintaining and promoting the doctrine
and kingdom of Christ. Seventhly, That sweet and admirable harmony and
consent, which is found in the sacred Scriptures, cannot be rationally ascribed
to any but to the Spirit of God and the divine wisdom, each part agreeing so
exactly with it self, and with the whole; which sufficiently appears, by
comparing the Prophesies of the old Testament touching Christ, the calling of
the Gentiles, the reception of the Jews, and other remarkable things, with the
accomplishment of them, as the same is plainly declared and revealed in the new
Testament: Such exact consent and agreement as is here to be found, is
impossible to be feigned of men or Angels, from whom the things foretold were
hid till they were revealed. Nor could there be forgery in these writings, if
we consider in a way of reason the length of time in which these writings have
continued and been judged Authentic; that they were not written in one or two,
but in many ages; that there was a multitude of Books and of writers employed
in this Service, and that these writers were distant in place one from another,
so that they could not confer together: and withal if we consider the deep
silence of the Adversaries, who in all that long time (whilst the Scripture was
in writing) could never detect any thing in those books as false or forged,
whose silence in this case is of great importance because they were eye
witnesses of those things which our Savior taught, did and suffered, according
as it was prophesied of him; so that they knew the prophesies, saw the
accomplishment of them, and were acquainted with that which the Apostles had
written: Yea, many or most of the things relating to Christ and his Apostles,
and the accomplishment of prophesies, are mentioned and recorded in the
writings of some heathen Authors that lived and wrote not long after those
times. If the Prophets and Apostles in their writings seem to dissent one from
another (for it is but a seeming, not a real dissent) in any circumstances,
this derogates nothing from their Authority, for in themselves they differ not,
the fault is in our ignorance and misapprehension; for by a right and just
interpretation they may be easily reconciled; and that dissonancy that seems to
be amongst them in small things, does free them from all suspicion of fraud;
and their sweet harmony and consent in all matters of importance, may in reason
convince us that they wrote by the guidance and direction of one and the same
Spirit of truth. If they had all written one thing, they might seem
superfluous; if each had written a new History, there could not have been such
a full harmony and agreement: when they relate the same story with the same
circumstances, they have their use and benefit, one sometimes speaking more
plainly then the other; and when they agree in matter, and only seem to dissent
in some circumstances, the truth is the more confirmed, and an argument of
fuller credit and certainty may be drawn out of that seeming dissent: for as it
is truly and wisely observed, too exact diligence in every little circumstance
is neither approved by all, nor does it want suspicion. There is in the holy
Scripture (as a learned man writing in defense of their Authority says) a
Majestic kind of security, under many seeming contradictions, which yet
neither the honor of their truth, nor that harmony which they have in and with
themselves, do or shall at all suffer by: Nor do the Scriptures stand to excuse
and purge themselves, as if there were any cause to suspect them of any
contrariety or contradiction; No, they speak from place to place, whatever they
have a mind to say, with that liberty and freedom as if there were nothing
said by them elsewhere, that either was like to suffer the least prejudice by
it, or to cast the least prejudice on it: To that sweet agreement and consent
that is in the holy Scripture with it self, we may further add, that it agrees
with all other truths whatsoever; there is nothing true in Divinity, which is
false in true Philosophy; nothing in Philosophy is repugnant to the truth in
Divinity, but it may be overthrown by the principles of right and true
Philosophy, which are and ought to be subject to Divinity. Eighthly, The matter
treated of in the Scripture is divine and wonderful, which may convince us that
it is the word of the eternal God; it opens and reveals the greatest and most
glorious Mysteries, as the nature, properties, attributes and high acts of God,
and how he will be worshipped and adored: It describes the person, natures,
virtues and excellencies of Christ, so fully, so clearly, that if the mind of
man consider it attentively, he must of necessity acknowledge, that it does far
exceed the reach of a finite understanding and humane capacity; it discovers to
us the corruption and misery of man by nature, the great and unparalled love of
God in Jesus Christ toward lost man, and the happy agreement of his infinite
justice mercy and wisdom in ordaining Christ to be our Mediator; and reveals
the covenant of grace which God made with man after the fall, for restoring him
again to Gods favor: All which can be derived from no other fountain but the
Spirit of wisdom and Revelation, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. The
Scripture also contains the law of God, which teaches the whole duty of man
toward God and toward men: in the precepts of Scripture there are diverse
notes of a divine power and wisdom, as First, The surpassing excellency of the
acts required of us, namely, that we should deny our selves, and conform our
hearts and lives to the Image of the word of God. Secondly, the wonderful
equity that does appear in every Commandment. Thirdly, The admirable
strangeness of some acts and duties, as regeneration, self-abasement, the
renouncing of our own righteousness, and parting with all we have for Christ,
which a mere natural man would count foolishness and madness, yet prescribed as
necessary. Fourthly, The manner how obedience is required to be performed by
us; it must proceed from an inward spiritual principle, even from a pure heart;
a good Conscience, and faith unfeigned. Fifthly, The perfection of the holy law
of God, commanding and allowing all good, and forbidding and condemning all sin
and wickedness whatsoever, in thought, word, and action, not only the
filthiness of the flesh, but also the filthiness of the Spirit, and that with
reference to all persons, times and places without exception, binding the
Conscience, and reaching the very thoughts and secrets of the hearts of men.
And do not all these things (which would fill a great Volume, if I should treat
of them at large) clearly and convincingly set forth the divine Authority of
the Scriptures, so as we should acknowledge no other Author of those sacred
writings but God himself? for who can contrive these things but he who is
infinite in power and wisdom? who can give eternal life, or inflict eternal
death and condemnation by the word of his power, but the eternal God? Ninthly,
The end of the Scriptures is divine, namely, the Glory of God and the Salvation
of man, not so much Corporal and Temporal, as Spiritual and Eternal. The
Doctrines, precepts, promises, prohibitions, narrations, threatenings,
punishments and rewards thereof, are all referred finally and ultimately to the
praise and glory of God, the supreme being and chiefest good, which shows
plainly that they are divine and from above. And to speak truth and reason,
what is more equal and just then that all things should return thither from
whence they had their first rise and Original? for of him, and through him, and
to him are all things, to whom everlasting glory is due from all Creatures,
Romans 11.36. The Scripture plainly points out to man what true blessedness is,
wherein it consists, and where and how it is to be had and enjoyed, namely, in
the everlasting vision and fruition of God in Heaven, which men may attain unto
by the true knowledge of Christ, in whom God is reconciled and well pleased:
And this is a firm and clear demonstration of the divine Authority and
excellency of the Scriptures; for what is more agreeable to the wisdom,
bounty, mercy, goodness and power of God, then to restore man fallen, and to
make him partaker of eternal bliss and happiness? and who can show to man how
he may be restored and admitted into the favor of God, having offended his
glorious majesty, who can direct and lead him in the way to true bliss and
happiness, but God who is wisdom and goodness it self, and who has
effectually done it in and by his Son, the essential Word, and by the
Scriptures which are the written word of God? These Arguments and
demonstrations, whether they be severally or jointly considered by us, do as
strongly prove and evince that the Christian Religion is the only true
Religion, and that the Scriptures are the word of God; as any reason can prove,
that there was, is, and ought to be, any true Religion or Rule to walk by, in
matters that concern Religion and the worship of the Deity; and therefore may
serve to convince and satisfy the reason of any sober man, touching the divine
Authority of the Religion and Laws of Christ.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Use of Reason in the interpretation of Scripture, and
judging of Controversies.
EVery Christian should so far improve his Reason, as not to be imposed upon in
matters of faith by the mere dictates of men; be they Princes, be they Popes,
be they Councels, be they never so learned or pious, he ought not in aliorum
sententias pedibus potius quam cordibus ire: Reason and Judgment in these
matters should go before and make way for his practice. As there are some that
vainly magnify and lift up the Reason of man above the Spirit of God, in
judging of the Authority and mind of God in the Scriptures, so there are others
(and more especially that Bestial Antichristian Kingdom of the Papacy) that
would transform reasonable men and Christians into sensitive and irrational
Creatures, by the deceit and Legerdemain of a Popish Implicit credulity, which
commands men to put out their Lamps, to pluck out their eyes, and in a manner
to renounce their Senses, Reason and understandings; and so to follow their
leaders blindfold wheresoever they go. And I could wish there were not too much
of this Implicit faith and blind devotion amongst Protestants, yea and amongst
some that seem more forward and zealous, then others, at least for a party. The
Ranting Romanists tells us (with noise and clamor enough) of a visible supreme
Tribunal, and an infallible head of the Church here upon Earth, who is to
regulate all persons, and determine all controversies, though never so much
against the rules of Scripture and Reason: others of them more prudent and
moderate, resolve the final Judgment of Controversies into the determination of
a general Council; and all of them generally make the Authority of the
Scriptures to depend wholly upon the judgment of their Church: Hence was that
impudent saying of Bailey the Jesuit, that without the Authority of the Church
he would believe St. Matthew no more then Titus Livius, a Heathen Author. And
Stapleton is so much for a blind Implicit obedience, in contempt of Reason,
that he tells us plainly, the people are so subjected to the Sentences of their
Pastors, that if their Pastors err in any thing, the people may and ought to
err in obedience to them. And again, as the Jews were to believe Christ (says
he) so are we simply and in every thing to believe the Church of Rome, whether
it teaches Truth or Error. O monstrous! Is not this a base Tyranny, a Brutish
unreasonable act of theirs, when they go about to make us believe that to be
white, which we know to be black, that to be true which we know to be false?
there are some indeed amongst them more rational and sober, who would not have
private Christians put out their eyes, but make use of their Reason and
Judgment in reading the Scriptures, and judging of Controversies. The
examination and trial of Doctrines concerning faith (says Gerson) belongs
not only to the Pope and Councils, but to every Christian also, that is
grounded in the knowledge of the Scripture, because every Christian is a fit
Judge of that which he knows. And the saying of Panormitan, another of their
Doctors, is well known, that one faithful man, though he be but a private man,
is more to be believed then the Pope or a whole Council, if he have better
Reason and Scripture Authority on his side. Chrysostom in answer to this
Objection, that there are so many and so great dissentions amongst Christians,
that we know not of what opinion to be of, nor whom to believe, has these
remarkable words: Tell me, have thou any Reason or Judgment? for it is not the
part of a man barely to receive whatsoever he hears; but if thou diligently
mark the meaning, thou may thoroughly know that which is good; when thou
Buyest a Garment, though thou have no skill in weaving, yet thou say not, I
cannot buy it, they deceive me, but thou do what thou can to come to the
true knowledge of it; say not then I am no Scholar, and will be no Judge, I
can condemn no opinion; for this is but a shift and a cavil, and therefore let
us not use it, for these things are easy to them that endeavor after true
knowledge. Has not every Christian a reasonable Soul, an understanding faculty
which God has endued him with, that thereby he might search and try and
discern the things that differ? To what end has God set up this light in man's
Soul, if he must not use it in searching the Scriptures and trying Doctrines,
but must give way to Sloth and Ignorance? Is not this to transform man into a
Beast and is it not Brutish ness and folly in him thus to lay aside his Reason
and understanding, and to be wholly concluded by humane Authority and the names
of men in matters of faith? As in other points the Church of Rome (which is
made up of lies and contradictions) would impose upon us, as if we had neither
Sense nor Reason in us, so more especially in the point of Transubstantiation,
and the corporal carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which is against
Sense, against Reason, and against Faith. First, It is against Sense; now of
all demonstrations amongst men, whereby we prove things of this kind, nothing
is more firm, then that which is taken from Sense. It Is an undoubted truth in
Divinity, that in all matters of Sense, Sense is a complete Judge,
understanding it of objects proper and peculiar to Sense; otherwise we say the
Eye is not able to judge of Sounds, nor the Ear of Colors: Thus Christ when he
would prove that he had a true and real Body, he sends his Disciples to their
Senses; a Spirit has not flesh and blood as you see me have. Reach hither thy
hand, and thrust it into my Side. In turning water into wine, Sense might
easily judge of the change; you would think it a strange and incredible thing,
if Christ should have come to to the Master of the Feast, requiring him to
believe it was wine, though he saw and tasted nothing but water; or if God
should have said thus to Moses, well, thou see nothing but a Rod, yet thou
must believe notwithstanding that it is changed, and is really a Serpent: so in
this case of the Sacrament, when all the Senses tell us, it is Bread which we
see, and touch, and taste; why should any man be so foolish and vain, as to say
with the Papists that the Bread cease to be truly Bread, and is
Transubstantiated into the very Body of Christ? Again Secondly, As this
Doctrine is against Sense, so it is against Reason, namely, that Christ should
be in Heaven, and have but one Body, and yet at the same have Ten Thousand
Bodies on Earth; that his Body should be a true Body as ours is, and yet
without Circumscription, and other inseparable properties of a true Body; that
the substance of Bread should be abolished, so as it shall remain no longer
Bread, and yet we find the very quantity, taste, whiteness, substance and
nourishing virtue of Bread. If you ask them after all this, whether it does
nourish the Body or no, they will tell you (with impudence enough) if they be
true to their own principles, that it does not nourish, quite contrary to
Reason and experience: This monstrous opinion of theirs, is so irrational and
absurd, that the most learned amongst them are puzzled and not satisfied
therewith, but leave it as a miracle. I have taken some pains (says a learned
judicious man in his late Sermon against Popery) to consider other Religions
that have been in the world, and I must freely declare that I never yet in any
of them, met with any Article or Proposition imposed upon the belief of men,
half so unreasonable and hard to be believed, as this point of
Transubstantiation is. Thirdly, As it is against Sense and Reason, so it is
against Faith, which though it be beyond Sense or Reason, yet it is not
contrary thereunto. Sense and Reason are Gods works, as well as Grace and
Faith: Now one work of God does not destroy another, for if so, this would
argue imperfection in the workman; faith feeds on Christ spiritually in the
Sacrament, being the evidence of things not seen; now if Christ be corporally
present in the Sacrament, what need the receiver feed on him spiritually by
faith, as being absent; what need he do this in rememberance of him, till he
come? let us in this and other things, show our selves men, and not Beasts; let
us make a right use of our Senses, and of that Reason which God has bestowed
upon us. It Is we that believe and act in matters of Religion (whoever requires
the same of us) these are our Acts; if therefore we will show our selves to be
men endued with Reason and understanding, we must examine what is propounded
and offered to us, that so we may assent or dissent upon judicious grounds; we
are men, and should do things as men; we are Christians, and should do things
as Christians. Blind faith and blind obedience should be utterly Banished out
of Christian Assemblies; nor should we pin our faith upon any man or company of
men (be they never so Godly and learned) for this were to wrong God, and to set
man in his Throne, and attribute that to man, which is proper to God alone.
Hereby also we exceedingly prejudice and wrong our own Souls, and are in danger
of Apostacy, when we adhere to an opinion or way, of which we are not
rationally and knowingly persuaded that it is the way of God; what is this else
but to comply with a way or party out of faction and partiality, not out of
Judgment and Conscience, which therefore cannot have any true Consistence or
constancy in it. They rather bring their feet then their hearts into a way of
Religion, that adhere to it without due trial and examination. Herein we should
use our own eyes and judgments, and not wholly trust to others; Herein we
should diligently exercise our own Reason if we will judiciously and profitably
receive the truths of God; not that we should judge of the highest Gospel
mysteries according to natural corrupt Reason, but yet we should make use of
our own understandings and judgments, being enlightened by the Spirit and word
of God, in comparing one thing with another, that so our faith and knowledge
may not be fluctuating and uncertain, but steady and stable. It will perhaps be
objected, that if every man may judge in matters of Religion according to his
Reason, then so many men, so many minds, which will breed endless confusion;
every man pretends to Reason, and one man thinks his Reason to be as good or
better than another man's, and so according to this opinion there shall be no
order, no settlement in the Church. I confess there is much danger on this
hand, especially where people are running headlong into confusion, and will not
submit to Ecclesiastical order and government, yet this should not make men
throw away their Reason, and believe with an Implicit faith only as the Church
believes. In things of this nature there is a twofold judgment, a judgment in
foro externo or publico, and a judgment in foro interno or privato: The former
of these is an Authoritative judgment belonging to Christian Synods and
Counsels, duly and lawfully assembled, where the Christian Magistrate presides;
such Counsels debating and determining matters in difference, either as to
doctrine or practice, have been of excellent use from time to time in the
Church of God: But besides this, there is belonging to every Christian a
judgment of discretion or discerning, a rational self- directive judgment in
the Court of his own Conscience, and in reference to his own faith and
practice; he should so examine and judge of the things that relate thereunto,
as to be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14.5, He should so prove all
things, as to hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. Thus Christ in his
infinite wisdom, goodness and faithfulness, has given two sorts of judgment
to his Church and people: One public belonging to an Assembly of Godly Pastors
and Elders; for of that which the Prophets teach, let the Prophets judge, and
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. The other is a more
private personal judgment, which concerns all the faithful who are to judge of
what is taught, and to try the Spirits; in both these judgments we should
remember that Christ has committed nothing to the Church but the ministry of
giving judgment; for as touching the Sovereignty of Judgment and Authority, it
belongs only to him. Councels may expound and declare the doctrine of the
Scriptures, but they have no power from Christ to make any new Doctrines or
Articles of faith. And every Christian ought in a rational way to judge of
their determinations according to the word of God, and not yield blind
obedience thereunto; for this were to unchristian, yea to unman himself. Of
this opinion are all the Protestant Churches in general, and particularly the
Church of England See Rogers on 39. Articles P. 103.
who maintains that every sound member of the Church, has Authority from
Christ to judge in controversies of faith, and so to embrace truth, and avoid
error. The Church as a faithful witness, should give Testimony of the Doctrine
of Christ, but ought not to judge the word, nor to judge otherwise then Gods
word judges. General Councels consisting of men that are not infallible may
err. The things therefore that are ordained by general Councels, do so far
bind, as they are Consonant to the word of God, and no further; for we are not
to ground our faith upon them, but only upon the Authority of Gods word. Now
that such a rational judgment, or a judgment in foro interno (as has been
asserted) belongs to every Christian, so as he may and ought to make use of his
Reason in judging of the Doctrines of Religion, and of Ecclesiastical Laws and
determinations, is thus proved and demonstrated. First, From those plain Texts
of Scripture, Take heed that no man deceive you, Mat. 24.4. Prove all things,
and hold that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. Beloved, believe not every Spirit,
but try the Spirits whether they are of God, 1 John 4.1. He that is Spiritual
judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, 1 Cor. 2.15. Which
Texts, together with many other that might be alleged, do not only concern
public Ministers, but also private Christians, yea chiefly them, as being most
in danger to be seduced. Secondly, This has been also the approved practice of
the faithful thus to search the Scriptures, and try the Spirits, and exercise
their Spiritual Senses, that they might discern things that differ, Heb. 5.14.
The Bereans are counted more noble then others, because they searched the
Scriptures, and tried Paul's Doctrine by the Scriptures, though he spoke from an
infallible Spirit, Acts 17.11. The Church at Ephesus is commended for trying
them that said they were Apostles, and were not, and finding them liars and
deceivers after trial, Rev. 2.2. And Christ tells us, that his true Sheep will
follow him, for they know his voice, but a stranger they will not follow, but
will flee from him, Joh. 10.4, 5. Now this they could not do, unless they did
exercise a rational judgment in matters of faith. Thirdly, Every Christian is
to give an account of his faith and practice to God, yea he should be always
ready to give an Answer to every man that asks him a Reason of the hope which
is in him, 1 Pet. 3.15. But how can he do this rationally and understandingly,
without trial and examination? If he be found to embrace whatever his superiors
shall impose upon him, truly then the blind implicit faith of the Collier,
will serve well enough. Is this according to the Scripture which tells us that
we cannot truly believe, unless we have knowledge? That every man should be
persuaded in his own mind concerning the things which he does believe and
practice, and that whatsoever is not of faith is sin? Fourthly, How shall a
Christian cleanse his heart and ways, but by taking heed thereto, according to
the word of God, Psalm. 119.9. How shall he walk as a Child of light, unless the
word be a Lamp to his feet, and a light to his paths? Psalm. 119.105. How can he
walk wisely and Circumspectly (as he ought to do) understanding what the will
of God is, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.17. if we do not allow him a
judgment of discretion, and discerning in matters of this nature, that so he
may try Spirits and Doctrines. Fifthly, were it the duty of a private Christian
to receive all Doctrines that are proposed to him by his Superiors, without
trial and examination; then could not he be justly charged with sin and guilt,
who receives error in stead of truth, from those that are above him in dignity
and Authority; but we find that this will not excuse him: If the Blind lead the
Blind, both shall fall into the pit, Luke 6.39. and we are to fly from
Strangers, and not hearken to the words of those Prophets that speak the
visions of their own hearts, and not out of the mouth of the Lord, Jer. 23.16.
We must not believe every Spirit, but beware of false Prophets and Seducers,
which no Christian can avoid upon good grounds, unless he pass a rational
judgment upon them and their Doctrines. Why was Ephraim oppressed and broken in
judgment, but because he willingly walked after the Commandment of his Ruler
and Governor, corrupting the worship of God, and did not impartially examine
and judge of the same, by the rule of Gods word, Hos. 5.11. Sixthly, God has
furnished a Christian with abilities for this end; with Reason, as man, he has
a reflexive faculty which Beasts have not; he has a rational understanding
Soul which is the Candle of the Lord that enableth him to compare one thing
with another, and to deduce genuine inferences and conclusions from such
premises as are laid down and propounded. And then further, God has not only
given his people the light of humane Reason and understanding as rational men,
but has also infused into them a principle of divine light and knowledge, as
Christians, to search and try the Doctrines of Religion, whether they be true
or false: God has given them a Spiritual unction or understanding (as the
Apostle speaks 1 John 2.27. and Chap. 5.20.) that they may know him who is
truth it self; and they need not that any man teach them, but as this anointing
teaches them, which is truth, and is no lie. If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in him he is none of his. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him; and to them it is given by the father to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of God, Mat. 13.11. Hereby (says the Apostle) we know the things
that are freely given us of God, even by his Spirit which searches all things,
yea the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. For a man professing the knowledge of
Christ, to swallow down without trial or consideration all that he reads and
hears (if it comes from a person that he admires) which yet is the practice not
only of the blind Papists, but of many seeming zealous Protestants that are too
much addicted to a party, Non est opus virilis intelligentiae, sed puerilis
inscitiae, this rather becomes the simplicity and ignorance of a Child, then
the wisdom and understanding of a serious Christian. Luther speaking of the
blind implicit faith and obedience too of the Church of Rome, tells us that
it is such an opinion and practice as renders a man Brutist, and deprives him of
Reason and manhood; and for this wicked opinion and practice of theirs,
namely, for exercising an absolute dominion over the Faith and Consciences of
men; the Roman Prelates deserve to be driven out of the number of the faithful,
as Wolves and Tyrants. But what? shall every private Spirit (will you say) take
this upon him? Is not this to judge his Judges, and to pass Sentence upon his
Superior? To which we answer, that those persons (be they never so great and
learned) judge of divine things by a private Spirit, who depend upon their own
corrupt Reason and Fancy, and accordingly judge and determine; and not he,
though but a private Christian, that is taught of God, and judges of the
points of Religion, by, and according to the word of God. Nor do we say that
every private man is to judge by way of Authority, in foro publico; a public
Authoritative disquisition and trial in matters of Religion, is one thing, and
a private rational Christian examination is another; it is one thing judicare,
to judge of mine own acts, and another thing judicem agere to act as a Judge:
Indeed the Spiritual man judges all things, but how? not in a juridical
Authoritative way, but only so far as concerns his calling and capacity, if he
be a private Christian. Rational judgment belongs to him, but Magistratica and
Ministerial judgment belongs to others that are in a more public capacity and
office. And therefore in this case he is to try and judge with much modesty and
humility, not rashly and headily, as being self-conceited, and leaning too much
to his own understanding. Let him walk orderly, and keep his place and station,
giving due respect and reverence to Christian Magistrates, and godly Pastors,
and submitting to them in the Lord, Heb. 13.7, 17. And this will be a means to
preserve the Church of Christ from Anarchy and Confusion.

Thus we have showed how the Scriptures may be proved by the light of Reason to
be the word of God; and that every Christian ought to exercise himself in
searching the Scriptures, and judging of Doctrines; but yet we must distinguish
between those external rational Arguments which are brought to prove the divine
Authority of the Scriptures, and the internal Testimony of the Spirit of God in
the Scripture, which is the most clear, certain, infallible, public Testimony,
and of it self worthy to be believed, for it is the Testimony of God himself.
Hereof we shall treat more particularly in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Internal Testimony of the Spirit of God, witnessing the
divine Authority of the Scripture.
ALthough there are rational arguments (which have been already mentioned) to
prove the Scriptures to be the word of God, yet the inward Testimony of the
holy Ghost himself is necessary to assure us of the divine Authority thereof;
which Testimony is better and more certain then all our Reason; for as God is a
sufficient witness of himself in his own word, so the hearts and Consciences of
men will never be fully satisfied that the Scriptures are by divine
inspiration, till the same be sealed and confirmed to them by the inward
Testimony of the Holy Ghost; till then they will be much in the dark, often
doubting and wavering, notwithstanding all other reasons and proofs. Calv.
Instit. Lib. 1. Chap. 7. S. 5.
We should so believe the Scripture for it self, and in regard of the Testimony
of the Spirit of God witnessing the same, as not to subject the divine
Authority thereof, to our Reasons and demonstrations. When our understandings
are once powerfully convinced and enlightened by the Spirit of God (which
endited the holy Scriptures) then do we not believe by our own judgment or
Reason, or other men's, that the Scripture is from God, and by divine
inspiration, but above all humane Reason and Judgment, we hold it most certain,
even as if we beheld the majesty of God himself there present, John 4.42. And
having attained this, we seek not after humane Arguments to rest our faith
upon, but as a thing that admits of no doubt or dispute, we take it for
granted, and do fully captivate and submit our Judgment and Reason to it; such
therefore is the persuasion of a true Spiritual Christian of the Authority of
God in the Scriptures (far different from other men's) as requires no humane
Reason; such is his knowledge and certainty as has the best Reason for it,
even that wherein the mind more assuredly and steadfastly rests, then upon any
humane Testimonies or Reasons whatsoever. Such is the inward Spiritual
experience of the power, and wisdom, and goodness of God in the holy
Scriptures, that if all the World should oppose the same, yet he is fully
resolved to give credit and adhere thereunto. By nature every man is blind in
Spiritual things, and ignorant of the mind and mysteries of God; and therefore
though the Scripture be a shining light in it self, yet unless our
understandings be opened and enlightened we cannot behold it, no more then a
blind man can see the Sun when it shines. The Spirit of God is the Author of
supernatural light and faith; by the inspiration thereof, were the Scriptures
first written; the secrets and mysteries of God are fully known unto, and
effectually revealed by this Spirit. The same law and word which is written in
the Scriptures, this Spirit does also write and impress upon the hearts of them
that are endued therewith; and therefore the Testimony of this Spirit, where it
comes in power, must needs fully persuade and assure the heart and Conscience
of a Christian, that the Scripture is the infallible word of God. As in other
Sciences, there are always some principles, per se nota and indemonstrabilia,
whence other things are proved and demonstrated; so it is in Divinity, which is
the most excellent Science, all conclusions in point of faith and practice are
proved by the Scriptures; but as for the Scriptures they prove and evidence
themselves sufficiently to the judgment of every true Christian, by their own
light manifesting their divine Original. They are primum visibile, not like
color that cannot be seen till light make it apparent; but like light it self,
which makes all other things manifest, and it self too, by its own proper
quality. Now then if a true believer should be asked, why he believes the
Articles of the Christian Religion, he may truly answer thus, because they are
revealed in the holy Scriptures: If it be further demanded, how he can assure
himself that the Scriptures are the word of God, he may answer that he knows it
by the Scriptures themselves; the Spirit of God enlightening his understanding
to see those lively characters of divine truth which are imprinted upon those
sacred Volumes: If yet it be further demanded how he knows whether that is the
right meaning of such or such a place of Scripture, he may likewise truly say
that he knows it by the Scriptures, which being diligently examined and
compared together, do plainly discover to the humble teachable Soul their own
true sense and meaning in the things which concern everlasting Salvation. And
thus the faith of a Christian is finally and ultimately resolved into the
infallible word of God, or a divine Testimony, and into nothing less. As for
the Authority and Testimony of the Church, and the judgments and writings of
the Godly learned, they are good helps to make us see the Truth, but no causes
why we believe it; this we do for its own sake, not for their sayings or
determinations, which if they do not accord with the Scriptures, we ought not
to assent thereunto: Though we should give due Reverence to the Assemblies of
Godly judicious men, and thoroughly examine and weigh with humility and
self-denial, the grounds of our dissent from them, yet the bare Authority of
men, though never so eminent for learning and piety, should not command our
assent to any Article of Religion that shall be proposed to us: For our faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men (as the Apostle speaks) but in the power
of God, and the Testimony and demonstration of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. The
first and chiefest ground whereon is built the certainty of faith's assent, is
the infallible truth and Authority of divine Revelation; because God has said
it, we are to believe it, and assent to it, for whatsoever God says is true;
now this is a principle of Nature and Reason, which is deeply engraven into the
heart and Conscience of every Rational man; that God himself is so infinitely
wise, that he can be ignorant of nothing, nor can any Creature circumvent and
overreach him; and withal he is so infinitely good, holy, and just, that no
lie or untruth can proceed from him; wisdom it self cannot be deceived, truth
it self cannot deceive, and God is both: And therefore wheresoever any
Revelation is certainly known or believed to be of God, there the reasonable
Creature does fully assent to the truth of things revealed. But now the great
question will be, how we know infallibly that God is the Author of the
Scriptures, and that what we find written therein is of divine inspiration, the
very Oracles of God? Here lies the great, yea the irreconcilable difference
between the Church of Rome and us; for whereas we maintain (according to the
truth) that the Scriptures are known to be of God, by themselves, and by their
own light and power; they hold that we cannot be certain of their divine
Authority, but by the Testimony of the Church, which as they say, does
infalliby propose unto us what is to be believed, and what is not to be
believed: And so by this means our faith shall be resolved, either into nothing
at all (for they differ exceedingly about the Church representative, and the
supreme Judge of controversies here on Earth) or at the furthest it shall be
resolved but only into humane Authority, and so shall be but a humane faith.
That Circle which they falsely charge upon us Mr. W. Pemble nature and
properties of grace and faith, P. 210, 211.
they themselves are guilty of, and can never be dis-intangled therefrom, by
their Principles: For ask a Romanist, why do you believe that the Pope cannot
err, he will tell you because the Scripture says so, thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church; and I have prayed that thy faith may not
fail: and the like Texts of Scripture: But how know you that this is the
infallible word of God, and that your interpretation is the right sense and
meaning of these places? To this he answers, because the Pope and the Council
of Trent say so; or as some of them hold, because the Pope only says so; or as
others of them, because a general Council says so. If we further urge him,
yea, but how know you infallibly that the Pope and Council do not err in saying
so? he will answer you, because the Scripture affirms they cannot err, for thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc. And thus they run
round in a Circle The Popish Circle described.
and are so entangled that the wisest and most learned of them know not how to
deliver themselves. Indeed they accuse us with open mouth, as if we were
entangled in a Circle running round, from the Scriptures to the Spirit, and
again from the Spirit to the Scriptures; as thus, how know you the Scriptures
to be the word of God? by the Spirit revealing the same to my heart and
Conscience: but how know you this Revelation of the Spirit to be true? By the
Scriptures, which testify, that the secret of the Lord is revealed to them
that fear him: But then further, how know you this and the like places of
Scripture to be the word of God? we know it by the Spirit, which reveals to us
the things that are freely given us of God. And thus they pretend that they
have caught us in a Circle; but they greatly mistake us (though we do not
mistake their Doctrine) we teach indeed that we know the Scriptures infallibly
to be the word of God, by the Spirit of God, inwardly revealing and testifying
the truth of them to our Consciences: But what kind of Revelation or Testimony
is this? It is not any inward suggestion or immediate inspiration, different
from those Revelations of Divine truth, that are in the Scriptures themselves,
as if the Spirit of God did by a second private immediate Revelation, assure me
of the truth of those former Revelations contained in the Scriptures; we have
no warrant for this in an ordinary way; but the Spirit of God reveals and
testifies to our Consciences, the divine Authority and truth of the Scriptures,
by removing those impediments that hindered, as namely, our ignorance and
unbelief, and by bestowing upon us those graces that make us capable of this
Divine knowledge and assurance, illuminating our understanding, renewing our
wills, and sanctifying our hearts and affections: In which sense the Spirit of
God in the Scripture is to us a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, opening the
eyes of our understandings, that we may see by a spiritual light the excellency
of those divine Mysteries that are in the Word of God, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Now
this Doctrine of ours is no such Circle as the Papists pretend it to be, but a
plain and strait way for a sober Christian to walk in: Thus, How know you that
the Scriptures are Gods Word? We answer, By the Scriptures themselves; by that
wonderful light and excellency of truth and holiness that shines in them; here
we would rest, and go no further. But yet if we be asked, How we come to see
this light? We answer, It is by the only work of the Spirit of God, giving us
eyes to see, and hearts to embrace and love the light. If we be further urged
(for some are thus importunate) But how know you that you do indeed perceive
such a heavenly light as you speak of? Or how can you make it appear to others,
that you are not deceived? Now truly this is but a vain question, it being an
absurd thing to demand a reason of sense; which is as if one should ask him
that gazeth on the Sun, How know you that you see the light? Why, he is certain
that he sees it, and knows that he is not deceived, though he cannot convince a
blind man of it; and if in case he that is blind requires him that sees to
prove unto him by sound argument, that he beholds such an object, he demands an
impossible thing of him, unless he could give him eyes to see it. Some of the
most learned Papists, after all their disputing and wrangling, are driven at
last to acknowledge this inward illumination and testimony of the Spirit of
God: Stapleton himself, even in that Book where he defends the Authority of the
Church, says, That the godly are brought to faith by the voice of the Church,
but being once brought and enlightened with the light of divine Inspiration,
then they believe no more for the Churches voice, but because of the heavenly
light. And again, in the last Book that ever he wrote against learned Whitaker,
he tells us plainly, That the inward persuasion of the holy Ghost is so
necessary and effectual for the believing of every object of faith, that
without it, neither can any thing by any man be believed, though the Church
testified with it a thousand times, and by it alone any matter may be believed
though the Church held her peace or were never heard. Hereby it appears, that
we may be infallibly assured of the divine Authority of the Scriptures, though
the Authority and testimony of the Church be not so regarded by us as the
Papists would have it. But yet when we have to do with Infidels and Atheists,
that scoff at this divine light and inward testimony of the Spirit, we have
more Reason on our side (as has been showed at large) to convince them, and to
prove that the Christian Religion is the true Religion, and that the Scriptures
do contain the Word and Laws of the most high God, then any other Religion, nay
then all other Religions in the world. As for the inward testimony of the
Spirit witnessing the divine authority of the Scripture, and how it is to be
considered, take these following Rules Rules concerning the Spirits testimony.
for preventing mistakes.

First, That the Spirit of God does assuredly persuade the Conscience of a
Christian, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, not by an immediate Vision
or Revelation, under which pretense Satan (transforming himself into an Angel
of light) has deluded and ensnared many poor souls, but by enlightening the
eyes of our understanding to behold the light, writing the Law in our hearts
and inward parts (as God has promised in the new Covenant) sealing up the
Promises to our souls, and causing us experimentally to feel the powerful
effects thereof.

Secondly, This divine supernatural persuasion wrought in Believers by the
Spirit of God, is more certain and more satisfactory then can be proved by our
weak imperfect Reason, or expressed in words; for things doubtful may be
proved; but as for things that are in themselves most clear and certain, we
say, they need no rational proof or demonstration; as the shining of the Sun
(which discovers it self by its own light) needs not be confirmed by any
rational Arguments to him that has his eyes open to see the light thereof.

Thirdly, It is such a testimony and demonstration of the divine Authority of
the Scriptures, as is certain and manifest to him that has the Spirit, for it
makes it self evident where it comes; but this is private and particular (not
public and common) testifying only to him who is endued therewith, but not
convincing others, nor confirming doctrines to them: In this case men must have
recourse to the visible standing Rule, to the written Law and Testimony, if any
man speak not according to this (let him pretend never so much to the inward
testimony and revelation of the Spirit) it is because the light and truth of
God is not in him.

Fourthly, This testimony of the Spirit therefore is not to be severed from the
Word, which is the Instrument of the holy Ghost, and his public authentic
testimony: Nor is it injurious to the Spirit of God to be tried by the Word,
seeing there is a mutual relation and correspondence between the truth of the
party witnessing, and the truth of the thing witnessed: And this holy Spirit,
the Author of the Scriptures, is every where like unto, and does every where
agree with himself: as it is in a pair of Indentures, there is no difference at
all between them, but the very same things that are mentioned in the one, are
also mentioned in the other; so it is between the Spirit revealing, and the
truths of God revealed in the Scriptures.

Fifthly, The testimony of the Spirit does not teach or assure all and every
one of the letters, syllables, and words of the Scriptures (which are only as a
vessel to carry and convey the heavenly light unto us) but it does seal in our
hearts the saving truth contained in those sacred Writings, into what language
soever they be translated: Hence it is that the Apostle tells the Corinthians,
that they are the Epistle of Christ, written not with Ink, but with the Spirit
of the living God; not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshly Tables of the
heart, 2 Cor. 3.3.

Sixthly and lastly, The Spirit of God does not lead them, in whom he dwells
and witnesses, absolutely, and at once, into every truth of God, so as utterly
to dispel all ignorance and darkness out of the soul; but he leads them into
all truth necessary to salvation, and by degrees, John 16.12, 13. Being a free
voluntary Agent, he works when, and where, and in what measure he pleases;
so that holy men, partakers of the same Spirit in several degrees, may err and
mistake in some things, and dissent one from another in matters that are not
fundamental.

And thus we have given you some Rules to prevent mistakes touching the inward
testimony and revelation of the Spirit of God. It will not be amiss now to
reflect a little (yet without any rankor or bitterness against the persons of
men) upon their opinion that derogate from the Spirit of God and divine
revelation, and set up Reason as a Judge in matters of Religion, and so resolve
their Faith finally into Reason.

CHAP. XV. Briefly showing when Reason is rightly used, and when abused to the
prejudice of the Spirits Testimony in the Scripture.
NO discreet rational man will deny the use of Reason, in judging matters Civil
and Religious, in the sense formerly declared and proved: If you will show your
self a man and not a beast, a judicious understanding Christian, and not a
Child in knowledge and judgment, then you must make use of your Reason in
examining those matters that are propounded to you, whether Civil or Religious;
but yet if you admit Reason to be the only Rule or Standard to measure the
Mysteries of Faith by, and to judge of and comprehend the most divine
supernatural Doctrines and Truths of Christ, then you ascribe too much to
Reason, and too little to the Spirit of God and Faith: Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, (says the Apostle) neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him: And as none know the
things of a man save the spirit of a man which is in him; even so the things of
God knows no man but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.9; 11. The rational Creature
is a competent Judge of things merely rational; but the spiritual man only (in
whom the Spirit of God dwells) can rightly and spiritually discern and judge
of things that are merely spiritual and supernatural; and therefore we must
take heed that we confound not the Spirit and Faith of the Gospel with our
natural Reason, nor prejudice the divine Authority of the Scriptures, by
ascribing too much to Reason, as we ought not to take from Reason that which is
due to her in reference to divine matters.

First, Then we acknowledge that Reason is the eye of man's Soul, or that Organ
which lets into his Soul that divine light and testimony of God which begets
Faith, and upon which Faith does rest it self, and into which it is finally
resolved: Reason is not the object on which our Faith rests, but that faculty
which being sanctified takes in the light of Faith, which leads us to Christ,
and the things that are heavenly and supernatural. The judgment and
determination of the Word of God, inspired by the Spirit of God, is that
wherein we finally rest, as the rule of our Faith; and the light of divine
Understanding and Reason sanctified, is that whereby a Christian judges of
spiritual things. God in his Word speaks to reasonable Creatures (not to brute
beasts) who by way of discourse weighing what goes before, and what follows the
Text, and comparing Scripture with Scripture, do come to a right understanding
of the will and mind of God; therefore we are commanded as men that have reason
in us to search the Scriptures, to try the Spirits, and to judge what the
Apostles say: These are acts of Reason and Judgment, by the help whereof we are
enabled to give a sober rational account of our own Faith, and to convince the
Adversaries and gainsayers. If you be to deal with an Adversary that hates the
Christian Religion, how can you think to persuade him to Christianity, unless
you show him a reason (as indeed the Christian Religion is the wisest and most
rational Religion) If you say, your Church is the true Church, you must give a
reason for it, or else no discreet man will believe you, seeing many pretend to
the true Church that do not belong to it. If you urge a Scripture for your
opinion, sober men will rationally judge, whether it be agreeable to your sense
and interpretation, or not; and accordingly will embrace or reject your
opinion. It concerns every man, as he tenders the peace and salvation of his
own soul, to be certain of the truth of his Religion; And seeing there are so
many opinions, and such variety of persuasions in the world touching matters of
Religion, we ought to consider which persuasion has the best and surest
grounds for it, that we may with peace and safety venture our souls upon it:
Now this we cannot well do unless we make use of our Reason, in comparing one
thing with another, that we may embrace the truth and reject error.

Secondly, Though there are mysteries of Faith which Reason cannot comprehend,
yea, in their proper nature they are contrary to the dictates of natural
Reason: Ex nihilo nihil fit, says Reason, and Ex nihilo omnia fiunt, says
Faith: The dead cannot return again to life, says Reason; Thy dead bones shall
live again, and this mortality shall put on immortality, says Faith: yet the
rational Soul of man being overpowered and acted by a higher principle, even by
the Spirit of God, sees the greatest reason in the world to believe these and
all other divine supernatural mysteries and truths, because the Scripture
reveals them to be of God, and from God: Is it not meet, and reasonable, and
well becoming us that are rational Creatures, to believe the God of Truth
speaking to us in his Word, though what he speaks seem never so unreasonable,
never so contrary to flesh and blood? Yet Reason will tell us this, That all
that God speaks (for from this pure Fountain can proceed nothing but pure
streams) is true and good, divine and heavenly, whatever our corruption says
to the contrary: So then, our Faith must be resolved into the divine truth and
authority of Gods Word, and our Reason captivated and subjected unto this
higher principle, to believe what we find revealed in the Scriptures, because
it is revealed, and comes from the God of truth that cannot lie.

Thirdly, As I have reason to believe all that God speaks in general, as being
the God of truth; so I have reason also to believe in particular, that the
doctrine of Scripture is Gods revealed Mind and Will: Nor is it sufficient to a
well-grounded Faith for a man to say he believes all that God reveals to be
true; but he must also believe, that the mysteries contained in the holy
Scriptures are the things which God has revealed for his salvation: It Is true
(according to the Judgment of our Divines) that Faith may rightly be said to be
a firm assent, without evidence of many things in themselves which we do
believe; but yet the medium, by force whereof we are drawn to believe, must be
evident unto us: As now if I be asked by an enemy of the Christian Religion,
Why I believe the Incarnation, Death and Resurrection of Christ? I answer,
Because Gods Word testifies of them as things most certain and true. If he ask
me further, How know you that God has revealed these things? I answer, By
infallible signs and testimonies from Heaven, beyond all humane power, as has
been showed Chap. 12. of this Treatise; by which man's reason may be convinced
that those writings are of God; and so I can prove that a Christian has more
reason for his Religion then any other, whether Jew, or Turk, or Heathen.

Fourthly, Though in these respects that have been mentioned our Reason may be
of very good use in reference to spiritual and divine things, yet we must not
make our Reason the rule and measure of our Faith in matters that are beyond
our Reason: As for example, there is a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, as
the Scripture assures us, Matthew. 28.19. 1 John 5.7. Shall I now reject this
great Mystery, because it corresponds not with the dictates of my Reason and
Understanding, and say with those self-willed Socinians, that because it is
impossible to Reason that three should be one God, therefore I will not believe
this great Truth: But only interpret it thus, that these three agree in one,
and are one by consent of minds and wills, for so a thousand men may be one?
And again, If because I cannot conceive or comprehend by my Reason, how Christ
and his Father can be one in substance and essence, therefore I will find out
another interpretation which may agree with my Reason, though it be contrary to
the mind of God in the Scriptures, and to the Articles of the Christian Faith:
Truly this is to set Reason in the Chair, or Throne, above the Spirit of God in
the Scriptures; and so the sacred Scripture, or Divine testimony, shall vail
Bonnet to our Sense and Reason, and not we to the Authority of God in his Word.
Now this is the practice of curious proud Wits, who will not believe any thing,
be it never so sublime and mysterious, unless forsooth it be made evident to
their shallow understandings. Hence it is, that they consult with the dictates
of Reason about the chiefest Articles of Faith, and accordingly expound them,
or rather pervert them, denying and rejecting the Person and Offices of Christ,
the Doctrine of satisfaction and propitiation by Christ, the Resurrection of
the same Individual body, the absolute Decrees of God, and other Mysteries of
the like nature; and so at length God leaving them to their own vain
reasonings, and the wicked imaginations of their own hearts, they become mere
Atheists. Indeed every Christian, as has been said, ought to give a Reason of
the Faith and Hope that is in him; but we must put a difference between giving
a reason of our believing, and a reason of the thing believed. I believe the
Doctrine of the Trinity, That Christ is consubstantial and coessential with the
Father, that he was incarnate, and born of a Virgin, that Jacob was loved and
Esau rejected, before they had done either good or evil; and the reason and
ground of my belief is, because the same is written in the infallible Word of
God. But now to demonstrate and evidence these high Truths and Mysteries to
humane Reason, from the nature of things, or otherwise to disbelieve them, this
is a course destructive to the Christian Faith and Religion. There are some
things that are evident in themselves, as the Principles of Geometry, that
every whole and entire thing is bigger then a part of it, and the like: But
then there are other things that are not evident in themselves, but are
revealed and made known to us, both that they are, and what they are by a
foreign medium, without the compass of the things themselves: Of this sort are
all those things which we are persuaded of by the report of others; and this is
that certainty of knowledge which we have of things that are believed, the
truth of which in themselves appears not to us, nor is seen of us: And in
this respect Faith is truly said to be an assent without evidence upon the
credit of the Revealer: In these things our Reason reaches but the (...), that
such things are the Truth of God, but the (...) is hid from us, we cannot show
a reason how such things should be. Thus to tie our Faith to Reason, and form
our belief by the dictates of reason, so as to refuse to believe any thing
without evidence from the nature of the thing it self demonstrated and made
known to our Reason, argues much pride and self-confidence, setting up our
Reason above the Will of God Against subjecting the Scripture to Reason.
revealed, and arraigning the sacred Scriptures at the Bar of our Reason. Now
this is not to be admitted, but to be rejected by all Christians, and that upon
these Grounds and Considerations.

First, Because our Reason and Understandings are but weak and shallow in the
knowledge of the Mysteries of Nature, and we are much more ignorant and blind
in the mysteries of Grace, and in things that are divine and supernatural, John
1.5. 1 Cor. 1.19, 20. 1 Cor. 2.11.14. 1 Cor. 13.12. When the world by all its
wisdom and reason knew not God in Christ, It pleased God (says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 1.21.) by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe: Yea, not
only in the men of the world, but in the most eminent Saints, there is still
much blindness in their understandings, and much perverseness in their wills,
and in the reasonings of their hearts against the Truths of God: Now these
vain, and carnal, and foolish reasonings of ours should be regulated and
corrected by the Word of God. Man's Reason should not presume to regulate the
Word, but the Word of God should regulate and correct man's Reason. The Word is
the rule, and not our Reason; for that which is to be regulated, cannot be the
rule to regulate.

Secondly, To bring Scripture to the Bar of our Reason, and so make Reason the
Judge in divine mysteries, is exceeding preposterous, for this were to
subordinate and make subject that which is much superior to that which is far
inferior; that which is perfect and without error, to that which is imperfect
and erroneous. Now certainly that which is weak and corrupt is not fit to judge
that which is holy and perfect; nor is that which is subject to errors and
mistakes (as man's Reason is) fit to regulate and judge the Word of God, which
is all light, and all truth, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. As John the
Baptist said to Christ, Mr. Lyford on Heb. 5.13, 14. cap. 1. page 28.
I have need to be baptized of thee; and come thou to me, that am far thy
inferior? So may our Reason say to the blessed Word of God, I am far inferior
to thee, and have need to be regulated and reformed by thee, and come thou to
me? No, no, it is my greatest honor to submit my self to thee and thy Divine
Authority.

Thirdly, Upon this ground also man's Reason is denied to be the Rule and Judge
in matters of Faith, because one man cannot prove infallibly to another man,
that his Reason is the right Reason in such a case: He pretends Reason, so do
I: A third man comes and pretends to as much Reason as either of us; and
experience shows, that diverse men, yea; good men, have different Reasons, and
different apprehensions in many points of Religion: Nor can a man be certain,
that this or that is the true meaning of a Text, if he have nothing to assure
him thereof, but the appearance and probability of his own Reason, for others
that differ from him think they have, and may really have, as much or more
Reason on their side then he: Indeed if we compare our own Reason with the
Reason and Authority of other men which have decreed thus and thus, then must
we give the pre-eminence to our own Reason, when a clearer evidence is
propounded and presented to our Reason; for every one is to judge for himself
with a judgment of discretion and discerning (as has been formerly proved) and
it is unreasonable and absurd for a man to assent to a lesser evidence, when a
clearer evidence is propounded to him. It Is true there are not many that are
well able to judge for themselves in the Controversies of Religion, and
therefore God has provided spiritual Guides and Shepherds to go before them
and help them; but yet Christians must not resign up their wits and senses to
follow them wherever they go; if they would lead us blindfold, we should not
put out our eyes to follow them, but should rationally and impartially weigh
and consider the grounds of their doctrine and practice. Does such a godly
learned man tell you that this is firm ground, you may go safe upon it? And do
you see it to be so by the eye of your Reason, enlightened by the Spirit of
God? Then you may follow him as a man of judgment and understanding, and not
like a beast, that is led he knows not whither; and herein you have the
advantage of his Reason and of your own too.

CHAP. XVI. Of the difference between the mere rational and spiritual men, and
their knowledge and acts about spiritual things.
THe light of Reason should be made use of and improved by every Christian in
searching the Scriptures, and trying Spirits and Doctrines, yet so, as we must
not confound the principles, knowledge, and operations of the natural man, or
mere rational man, with the principles, knowledge, and operations of the
spiritual man. There is a twofold knowledge of spiritual things, a natural or
rational knowledge, and a spiritual and supernatural knowledge. The former is
but Historical, as when a man reads of such a Country in a History, or sees it
only in a Map at a great distance, but was never there himself to take a full
view of it, and report the things that are there of his own certain knowledge.
The latter kind of knowledge is intuitive, or a knowledge of spiritual vision,
beholding the things themselves in the light of Gods Spirit distinctly and at
hand. No Creature or created thing can go beyond its sphere, or comprehend that
which is beyond its capacity: The vegetative creature cannot reach so far as
the sensitive, nor the sensitive so far as the rational; nor can the mere
rational creature comprehend that which the spiritual man does. Such as are
alive to God, and have spiritual union and conjunction with Christ the second
Adam, the quickening Spirit, live and act from a higher principle, and in
another kind then mere natural or rational men do. The soul of the natural man
acts his body; and the more he improves the light of reason, the more rational
and considerate he is in his actings and operations: But the soul of the
spiritual man is under the power of Gods Spirit, and the glorious operations
thereof; and as far as Gods Spirit is above the spirit of man, so far is the
life of Grace, or the life of the spiritual man, above that of Nature. It Is
true (says Luther) Luth. Com. on Gal. cap. 2. v. 20.
that I live in the flesh, but this life, whatever it is, I esteem as no life,
for indeed it is no true life, but a shadow of life under that which another
lives, that is to say, Christ, who is my true spiritual life, which life thou
see not, but only hear, and I feel; as thou hear the wind, but know
not from whence it comes, or whither it goes, even so thou see me speaking,
eating, walking, sleeping, and doing other things as other men do, and yet thou
see not my true life. This spiritual life, which far transcends the mere
natural or rational life, must be discerned spiritually; the spiritual man has
a white stone, in which his name is written, which none can read but himself:
He is the Son of God, an Heir of Heaven, therefore the world knows him not,
even as we know not the Sons of Princes (were they amongst us) who dwell in
Countries far remote from us; but his life, which now is hid with Christ in
God, shall fully appear when Christ appears in glory, Col. 3.3, 4.

First, Then the spiritual man has Christ formed in him by the holy Ghost,
Christ is in him the hope of glory, and he lives the life of Christ (which a
mere rational man does not) there is a spiritual supernatural principle or
ability planted in him, which still remains and abides, and which differs much
from natural habits, for these are partly and sometimes wholly acquired by use
and frequent practice; whereas this spiritual principle is not gotten or
acquired, but infused; nor can it be utterly lost, as natural habits may, but
abides for ever, John 14.16. Sometimes it is called the Seed of God, which shall
grow up to perfection, 1 John 3.9. Sometimes a Fountain, yielding continual
supplies of Grace, John 4.14. sometimes from the Author (from whom it is
derived) it is called the life of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.10, 11. and sometimes the new
birth, or being regenerated and born again, John 3.5, 7. Doubtless it is a most
powerful spiritual principle, which raises and elevateth the soul far above
natural strength and reason. Those Creatures that have no higher principles and
faculties then sense, use them sensually; but as for man, who enjoyes the fame
faculties under the command of a reasonable Soul, he uses them rationally; but
when he is new born, and becomes a spiritual man, those faculties of the
understanding, will, and affections (which when they had no other command but
Reason, had no more but rational operations) being now governed and acted by
the Spirit of Christ, they work spiritually: Hence he is said to be led by the
Spirit, and to walk in the Spirit, and after the Spirit, Gal. 5.18, 25. Romans
8.1.

Secondly, This divine Principle, this new spiritual Birth and Regeneration, is
more then the improvement of the most excellent, natural, or rational
abilities; for it being infused and wrought in the soul of man by the mighty
Power of God, and the invincible operation of the holy Ghost, this argues that
man, or the reasonable Creature, is merely passive in his first receiving this
spiritual supernatural life; and thus much the very phrases of Scripture
import, that as we are passive in our first Creation, or Generation, so we are
passive in our Renovation or regeneration, Ephesians. 2.1, 5, 10. 1 Pet. 1.3, 23.
John 3.3, 5. Gal. 6.15. Indeed if it were no more but the improving of
something which we had in us before, or the strengthening only of that which
was weak in us, then man himself might co-opperate with the Spirit of Christ in
producing this new Birth; but seeing it is the infusing or planting of a divine
Principle, which was not at all before in the rational Creature, man must needs
be passive in the first work of regeneration: Nature being corrupted can do
nothing, unless it be to hinder and oppose this work, for it is enmity against
God, Romans 8.7. At the best, Nature is but the matter which is renewed or new
formed; and matter, as we all know, can have no operation at all; and therefore
it is rightly termed, a supernatural work, or a work beyond Nature. See Mr.
White on the Scriptures, cap. 7. of the Spiritual Man's Acts.


Thirdly, Man being thus passive in his spiritual renovation, or new Creation,
it is impossible for him with all his Reason, to discover how and after what
manner it is first wrought in him, as it is impossible for one to know how he
receives his own life: though he may discern some terrors of Conscience and
consternation of spirit in himself as preparatories thereunto, and may also
understand the motions and operations that are performed by him after his
regeneration, for then his spirit, or the principle of his reason and
understanding being renewed and sanctified, works together with the Spirit of
Christ; yet as to the first act of ingenerating and receiving Grace, the same
being wrought in him, not by him, yea, and that in an instant, and not by
degrees, it cannot be discerned how and in what manner it is wrought, either by
natural Reason, for that cannot spiritually understand spiritual things; or by
spiritual sense and experience, for that flows from spiritual life already
received, and therefore cannot discern what was done before it had any being at
all: The giving of spiritual life, and the giving of the sense of it to
Christians, are two distinct acts of the Spirit of God, which seldom or never
go together in an ordinary way. This heavenly mystery of regeneration is beyond
the understanding and capacity of a mere rational man, as Christ's words to
Nicodemus, and his words to Christ again, do import, John 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10,
11, 12.

Fourthly, The spiritual man's acts and operations do far transcend the acts and
operations of the natural or mere rational man, both in reference to things
natural, or the things of this life, which the one apprehends and uses in a
mere natural or rational manner, the other after a holy and spiritual manner,
and for a spiritual end; and more especially in reference to things spiritual,
as the unsearchable Treasures and Riches of Christ, and the glorious Mysteries
of the Gospel; such spiritual things are apprehended and used by the natural
man carnally (for he knows Christ only after the flesh) as on the contrary,
outward and carnal things are apprehended and used by the spiritual man
spiritually, but much more those things that are spiritual in their own nature,
1 Cor. 2.15. which he may be said to apprehend and receive spiritually, in
respect of the object, or that which is spiritual in the object, by a spiritual
light and judgment (beyond the natural light of Reason) and in a spiritual
supernatural way: Now this is more then any natural or mere rational man,
though never so much improved, can attain unto by the Principles of Reason.

Fifthly, The mere rational man, and the spiritual man (both living under the
means of Grace, and both of them believing) differ much in the nature and
effects of their Faith, as they do in their knowledge of spiritual things: The
Faith of the spiritual man is a true justifying Faith, grounded and built upon
a divine testimony; but the Faith of the mere rational man is but temporary, or
historical.

First, They proceed from different causes and principles, the one being
infused by the Spirit of Christ dwelling and abiding in the spiritual man; the
other being the effect only of natural Reason, further enlightened and improved
(at the most) by some common operations and assistances of the Spirit of God in
the Ministry and Ordinances of the Gospel, which a Reprobate may partake of,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 1.

Secondly, They are found in diverse subjects. Ttrue effectual Faith is only
found in persons that are truly regenerate, born of God, and partakers of the
divine nature, John 5.24. and 3.5. 1 John 5.1. But historical or temporary
Faith may be in such as have no root, no seed of God abiding in them, such as
are not born of God; for these are both one in Scripture, Luke 8.13. 1 John 3.9.

Thirdly, There is that spiritual evidence and certainty in the faith of the
one which is not in the faith of the other: True divine Faith so apprehends
spiritual and heavenly things, as having a real being in the Promise of God,
though they have no subsistence as yet in themselves, Heb. 11.1. Romans 4.17.
John 8.56. Heb. 11.27. Now this Faith, which is the evidence and demonstration
of things that are invisible to the outward Senses, makes no use in its
spiritual sight or apprehension either of Sense or Reason; not of Sense, for
things invisible cannot be the object of Sense; nor of Reason, which in this
case can help but little more then Sense, seeing it receives information by
Sense, from whence it gathers things by way of discourse; which indeed may
convince a man that things are, but can give him no evidence or demonstration
of the things themselves, what they are in their own nature: Hence it is, that
when a man comprehends things by Reason, he may be able by discourse of Reason
to inform another man of that which he knows, and by that means may cause him
to understand it as well as himself; but he that apprehends spiritual things
themselves, as the true Believer or Spiritual man does, cannot by discourse of
Reason make another man, that is a stranger to what he enjoyes, understand what
he himself sees, feels, and tastes. But as for historical Faith, or that
Faith which is in the mere rational man, it wants this clear evidence and
demonstration, having no further assurance of what it believes then that which
Reason suggests, which may rather be termed a conviction, that such things must
be, then an evidence what they be; whereby it plainly appears (which yet may be
more largely and fully proved out of Scripture) that true justifying Faith, and
that Faith which is only temporary and historical, differ not only gradually,
in respect of degrees, but specifically in nature and kind; the grounds of
assurance on which they are built being of a far different nature.

Fourthly, This difference will further appear, if we consider that the
effectual Faith of the spiritual man rests and depends upon, and is ultimately
and finally resolved into a divine testimony; but historical Faith, or the
Faith of the natural or mere rational man, is built upon a humane testimony,
which our Savior calls the revelation of flesh and blood, Matthew. 16.17. As the
Apostle calls the other the demonstration of the Spirit and of power, and the
revelation of things by the Spirit, which are understood only of spiritual men,
1 Cor. 2.4, 10, 14, 15. to whom they are manifested, and who have the Spirit
and Mind of Christ in them, which enables them spiritually to understand that
manifestation or revelation. This way of spiritual demonstration to the
spiritual mind of the true Believer, is far different from, and does far
transcend that way of conviction which is only by reason or rational discourse;
and in this respect is more excellent and divine then historical Faith, or the
Faith of the mere rational man, which is not chiefly grounded upon a divine
Testimony or Authority, but relyes upon, and is ultimately resolved into an
humane testimony, or the reasonableness of the truth and ways of God: The
glorious Mysteries of the Gospel, though they could never be found out by all
the reason and wit of man, 1 Cor. 2.9. yet they are consonant to right Reason;
and therefore man's reason does assent thereunto: As for example, The Creation
of the World, the Resurrection of the Body, the Incarnation of Christ, and the
like, these may be acknowledged by man's Reason to be possible, upon suppositinn
of Gods Almighty Power, and the Riches of his Grace, yea, and fit to be done by
him, whose great design is to make known the glory of his Power and Grace in
the Ages to come: So that howsoever these Truths are mysteries of Faith, and to
be believed, yet seeing Reason, which is a humane testimony, may approve them,
it is evident that such an historical Faith, believing these things only for
the reasonableness of them, is but a humane faith, and rests upon a humane
testimony: And so it may be said concerning the Scriptures themselves, if a
rational man believe them to be the Word of God, chiefly upon the Churches
testimony of them, or upon the reasonableness of the truths therein mentioned,
or upon the observation of the truth of those Sacred writings in most things,
which makes him therefore rationally conclude, that they are true in all. If
this be the chiefest ground of his belief, by way of rational inference from
such premises, then truly he believes upon a humane and not a divine testimony,
which is always accompanied with a clear spiritual demonstration of divine
truths, made evident by the light of the Spirit of God to the spirit of a true
Believer.

Fifthly and Lastly, True justifying Faith, or the Faith of the spiritual man,
differs from historical Faith, or the Faith of the mere rational man in the
object of it: Historical faith, though it may assent to the truth of Gods
Promises of Reconciliation, Pardon, and Salvation by Christ, yea, and may
believe the goodness of them in general, yet it does not embrace and apply the
goodness of them in particular as true justifying Faith does, which counts all
other things loss, that it may gain Christ, and be found in him, Phil. 3.8, 9.
and which enables a man heartily and really to close with Christ in the
Promise, and to apply him particularly, saying, This is my Beloved, this is my
Friend, who loved me, and gave himself for me. And thus we see that there is no
small difference betwixt the faith, knowledge, and operations of the spiritual
man, and the faith, knowledge, and operations of the mere rational man, in and
about Christ and spiritual things: And if such a man may have some kind of
knowledge and faith in Christ, and the mysteries of the Gospel, and yet come
short of eternal life and salvation, then certainly no man that is led only by
the light of Reason, though he improve it never so much, can be saved without
the knowledge of Christ as Mediator.

But of this in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVII. Showing that none can be saved by the mere improvement of natural
Light and Reason.
WHat the State and Condition of the best Heathens was and is in order to the
everlasting Concernment of their immortal Souls, we cannot certainly determine,
nor dare we confidently pronounce that they are all in Hell: Though we say not
with the Pelagians, that the improvements of Nature and Reason, or that light
that is in every man (as others phrase it) can make men everlasting happy: Nor
yet with the Semipelagians, that natural preparations and predispositions do
bespeak and procure Grace: Nor yet with the Papists, that works flowing from
Grace do meritoriously contribute to more Grace and glory: yet this we may
safely say, That as God gave the Heathens Natural light and abilities, and to
some of them the improvement thereof more then to others, so he might as freely
give them (in a way that we know not) Supernatural Grace and Strength, and
reveal his Son to them, if it pleased him. Far be it from us notwithstanding,
to hold that a man may get to Heaven by those mere improvements which are built
upon Natures foundation; for if he should accurately and punctually observe
every jot and tittle of Natures Law (which the exactest Naturalist or Moralist
does not) yet this natural obedience would not at all be commensurate to a
supernatural happiness. Christ is the only way, that new and living way, by
which God assumeth humane nature to himself, and makes it everlastingly happy;
by which we have access to God, and communion with him. This made Augustine
say, Qui dicit hominem servari posse sine Christo, dubito an ipse per Christum
servari possit. Whether the Gentiles could be saved by the Light of Nature and
Reason without faith in Christ, is a Question (I confess) much debated, both in
the writings of the Ancient Fathers, and some Modern Authors, both Protestants
and Papists. Diverse of the Ancients, as Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus,
and Chrysostom, were of opinion, that the moral Heathens might be saved by a
general faith and knowledge of God. And Justin Martyr thought they might be
saved by the light of Reason. Justin Martyr. Apol. 2.
His (...), or Dictamen rationis, applied to the Heathens before the coming of
Christ, you may read of in his Apology. The Church of Rome, represented in the
Council of Trent, has not yet determined, nor does she think fit to determine
this Question, Whether the moral Heathens might be saved by the improvement of
the Light of Nature. Amongst those of the Reformed Religion Zuinglius was of
this opinion, that the best of the Heathens were actually saved, and that
Christ did communicate himself to them in an extraordinary way. But this is
more then can be proved by him or any other: And herein not only Gualter and
Bullinger, but all our Divines generally, do dissent from him. Aquinas mentions
an inscription, found in the Sepulcher of a Heathen, in the time of Constantine
the Greek Emperor, and Irene his Mother, with these words, Christus nascitur ex
Virgin, and ego credo in eum. O sol sub Irenae and Constantini temporibus
iterum me videbit; whence he infers, that some of the Heathens were not
altogether without the knowledge of Christ the Mediator. That saying of
Erasmus, whether in jest or in earnest I know not, Vix possum me continere quin
dicam sancte Socrates ora pro nobis, may be seen and read in his Preface to one
of Cicero's Books. Nego hanc Propositionem (says a fierce Arminian) nemo
potest salvus fieri qui Christo per veram fidem non sit insitus: I deny this
Proposition, that none can be saved but such as are ingraffed into Christ by
true faith. And there are some that have coined a vain and groundless
distinction of a threefold Piety, Judaica, Christiana, and Ethnica, boldly
affirming, that what Moses was to the Jews, Christ to the Christians, the same
is Philosophy, or the knowledge of God by Nature to the Heathens: But this is
to frustrate the Grace of God in Christ the Mediator.

It Is not denied, but granted by us, First, That some persons have a more
clear, explicit, distinct knowledge of Christ the Mediator Vid. Dr. Pride.
Lect. 8. de Salute Ethnicorum.
then others, according to the means of Grace which they are under, and yet
both may be saved.

Secondly, That there were some of all sorts amongst the Gentiles, noble and
ignoble, learned and unlearned, for whom Christ died, and who did reap some
benefit by his death.

Thirdly, God may and sometimes does in an extraordinary manner, unknown to us,
reveal his Grace to, and work Faith in the hearts of some persons: This he may
do in those that are born deaf and dumb among Christians; and this he may also
do in some Heathens. If God will work whether in an ordinary or extraordinary
way, whether by means or without means, who can hinder him? Yea.

Fourthly, God may if he please reveal his saving Grace in Christ to a poor
Heathen even at the last gasp, by the secret inspiration of his Spirit, as he
showed mercy to the Thief upon the Cross. But that any Heathen, though never so
rational and moral, can be eternally saved by the improvement of his natural
abilities or moral virtues, without being implanted into Christ, and united to
him as the Head and Mediator of the Church, which is his body, this we utterly
deny, and that upon these following Grounds and considerations.

First, In regard of that corruption and wickedness which is in every man's
heart and nature. God saw that the whole imagination of the thoughts of man's
heart was only evil, and that continually; the Hebrew word signifies, not only
the imagination, but also the purposes and desires of man's heart, Genesis 6.5. The
heart of every natural man is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, Jer. 17.9. It is not only an enemy, but enmity against God, Romans 8.7.
By nature men are dead in trespasses and sins, and under the power of Satan,
Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. and taken captive by Satan at his will and pleasure, 2 Timothy
2.26. and therefore they cannot be saved by the light and power of nature
without true faith in Christ as Mediator.

Secondly, The best works and highest seize of the unregenerate (who
still remain in the state of nature, and are not implanted into Christ) are
sinful and unprofitable; the very prayers and ploughing of the wicked are an
abomination to the Lord. No man (says our Savior, speaking of the
unregenerate, Matthew. 7.16, 17, 18.) can gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles; nor can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. The Church her self
confesses, Isai. 64.6. that all her righteousnesses, even her best works and
righteousness are as filthy rags. And the Apostle Paul, who, if any man, might
have confidence in the flesh, he much more, yet counts all his own
righteousness and best works but loss and dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.4, 8. And if it was thus with Paul and with the
Church of God in respect of their righteousness and works, then what shall we
think of the works and performances of the most rational and moral Heathens!
Surely they must needs be much more vain and unprofitable. Hence it is that
Augustine says of the greatest virtues of the moral Heathens, that they were
but splendida peccata.

Thirdly, Faith in Christ, true Gospel faith, is indispensably required (at
least in all adult persons) as necessary to salvation. Without Faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but Faith which works by love, Gal. 5.6. He that
believes on Christ shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned:
The Believer has everlasting life, but the wrath of God abides on the
unbeliever, John 3.18, 36. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not
the Son has not life, 1 John 5.12. Nor is it a general Faith in God, as a
Creator or Rewarder, thrt will save a man, but there must be Faith in Christ as
Redeemer and Mediator; for no man comes to the Father but by him, John 14.6.
And this is life eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent, John 17.3.

Fourthly, God will have his dearly beloved Son honored and exalted in the
salvation of sinners; whether they be moral or profane, they need a Savior, a
Sacrifice to appease the wrath, and satisfy the Justice of God for them; He
that honors not the Son honors not the Father which has sent him, John
5.23. There is no salvation in any other besides Christ, neither is there any
other Name under Heaven given among men whereby we can be saved, Acts 4.12.
Other foundation can no man lay then what is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 3.11. Unless the Moralist with all his virtues and endowments be built
upon this Rock and Foundation he must needs perish everlastingly. Christ is the
way, (...), that way by which only man can enter into eternal blessedness: He
is the life, the Author and Giver of eternal life, John 14.6. John 11.25.

Fifthly, God has in his infinite Wisdom concatenated and knit together the
means and the end in the links of that Golden chain of salvation. Romans 8.30. so
that none shall be saved and glorified, but such as are predestined to be
conformable to the Image of Christ; such as are effectually called, justified,
and sanctified through Christ. And again, whosoever shall call upon the Name of
the Lord shall be saved; How then shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed? And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard! And
how shall they hear without a Preacher! And how shall men preach except they be
sent! Romans 10.13, 14. So then, those moral Heathens to whom the Gospel is not
sent, who are not effectually called and converted by the Spirit of Christ, so
as to be made conformable to his Image, cannot be saved by all their moral
virtues and improvements.

Sixthly, The Lord is a holy and righteous God, of purer eyes then to behold
the least iniquity with approbation; he loves righteousness, and hates sin;
nor will he justify any person at his Tribunal but such an one as either has
a perfect righteousness of his own (which no man has) or is found in Christ,
clothed with his righteousness, who was made sin for us, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Now this way of Justification is
divine and supernatural, far transcending the capacity of the most moral
Heathens. Adam himself in the state of Innocence looked for Justification by
works, and by his own personal righteousness, and not by the righteousness of
another; so that indeed this Gospel-way of Justification is not only opposite
to man fallen, but to man before the fall: It was never in man's Nature or
Reason to seek for Justification by a righteousness without him; and therefore
if God had not revealed this way of Justification in and by his Gospel, we, nor
the wisest men in the world, should never have thought of it. That the most
virtuous men that are (if ever they be truly justified and accepted) as well as
the most vicious persons, must be justified before God, not by working, but by
believing; not by the improvement of their moral virtues, but by faith in a
cruc fied Christ, resting wholly upon him in the sense of their sin and misery
for pardon and salvation. The true Gospel righteousness, as it is wholly of
Gods procuring, so it is also of his revealing. And as other mysteries of the
Christian Religion are far above the reason and capacity of a natural or moral
man, so is this also. All the Aristotle's and Plato's, all the learned rational
Philosophers in the world, could never have thought of such a way as this for
the justification of sinners: And therefore this righteousness of God is said
to look down from Heaven, and to be revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.17.

Seventhly, No mere rational or moral man can be saved, unless he be reconciled
and reunited to God, from whom he is separated by sin: Now this reconciliation
and reunion must be by and through Christ, or not at all; for he is the only
Mediator between God and man, who took on him the nature of man, and so joined
it to God by the indissolvable tie of the Hypostatical union: And whoever will
be saved must be united to God through him by the mystical bond of his Spirit,
which Christ received for, and communicates to all the Elect that shall be
saved; so that unless a man, be he Jew or Gentile, have the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in him, and be quickened by the same Spirit that raised Christ from
the grave, he is none of his, Romans 8.9, 11. unless he be transplanted out of
the old stock, the first Adam, and made one spirit with the Lord Jesus, the
second Adam, it is not all his moral virtues and endowments (if he were a
thousand times more virtuous then he is) that will bring him to Heaven.

Eighthly, To hold that a Heathen may be saved by the improvement of his moral
virtues without faith in Christ the Mediator, is such an opinion as is attended
with many absurdities; for if this were so, then should the true Church of God
partly consist of such Members as have no faith nor knowledge of Christ at all;
or else such shall be saved as do not belong to the Catholic Church of Christ,
but are strangers to it; whereas the Scripture assures us, that the Lord adds
unto his Church such as shall be saved, Acts 2.47. It will also follow from
this absurd opinion, that Christ dyed in vain, and that the preaching of the
Gospel, or Doctrine of Reconciliation by Christ is in vain, as to a number of
persons that shall be saved, if they may attain salvation by the improvement of
the light of Nature and Reason, without the knowledge of Christ as Mediator,
which certainly is not revealed in and by the moral virtues and writings of the
Heathen Philosophers, much less by the Sun, Moon and Stars, but by the
preaching of the Gospel. According to this Opinion another way, and much
easier, and more agreeable to flesh and blood then true faith in Christ,
self-denial, and resignation of the Soul to him, would be found out for man's
salvation; and then we need no longer admire the riches of Gods Grace and
Wisdom in the Redemption and Salvation of Sinners by Faith in Christ (which yet
is the great mystery of the Gospel.) Hence it is that some vain men in our
days are so affected and transported with the moral virtues of the Heathen
Philosophers, that they make little or no difference in their Books and Sermons
between these and the Graces of Gods Spirit which are wrought in the Saints; as
if to preach the Gospel of Christ, and exhort Christians to the exercise of
Evangelical Faith, Repentance, Love, and other Graces, were only to read unto
them a Lecture of moral Philosophy. Morality is one thing, and Christianity is
another; whoever they be that go about by their moral virtues and works to
appease the just and holy God, or to comprehend him out of Christ the Mediator,
will be dazzled with the brightness of his Glory, and overwhelmed with the
greatness of his Power; For no man has seen God at any time, the only begotten
Son, which is in the Bosom of the Father, he has revealed him, John 1.18.

But perhaps it will be said, Objections answered.
That the Gentiles which had not the Law did by Nature the things contained in
the Law, it being written in their hearts, Romans 2.14. And therefore they might
be saved.

If we apply these words of the Apostle to the unconverted Gentiles (for there
are those that expound the Text of the converted Gentiles) then we answer, That
there is a natural and a supernatural inscription or writing in the hearts of
men; the one is ratione luminis naturalis, by means of that natural light and
Reason that is in man, which will not save him, as has been proved; the other
is written in the heart of man, ratione luminis fidei, by the light of faith:
By the former only natural and moral virtues are imprinted in the heart; but by
the latter the true knowledge of Christ, and the Graces of the Gospel, which a
mere Moralist can never attain unto by the light of Nature and Reason, for
these are written and wrought by the finger of the Spirit of God.

If it be further objected, That Cornelius was a Gentile, that walked only by
the light of Nature, yet his Prayers and Alms were accepted of God, Acts 10.1,
4.

This is a mistake, for he had more then the bare light of Nature; for though
he had not at this time a clear explicit distinct knowledge of the Person and
Offices of the Mediator, yet he had the implicit knowledge and Faith of
Christ, and had embraced the Doctrine of the Messiah that was to come, which he
had learned of the Jews, with whom he had long conversed, and which was
afterward more fully opened and explained unto him by the Apostle Peter.

And thus we have proved that no man (be he never so rational and moral) can be
saved by the mere light of Nature and Reason; yet nevertheless we cannot deny,
but that the rational intellectual delights of some Heathen Philosophers ought
to be preferred far before all corporeal and sensual pleasures: And withal it
must be acknowledged, that Reason and moral Virtues being improved will help a
man to bear affliction, yea, to dye with more courage and composedness then
others that are not so rational and moral: And though Reason of it self,
without true Faith in the Blood of Christ, will not bring us to Heaven, yet we
have great cause to bless God for the comfortable use of our Reason and
Intellectuals, which is a mercy that many are deprived of. But of these
particulars we shall speak more fully in the following Chapters.

CHAP. XVIII. Showing, that those delights that are rational and intellectual
do far excel all sensitive pleasures.
ALthough the light of Reason be but as a Candle in comparison of the light of
divine and supernatural Revelation, which is as the light of the Sun; yet it is
a pleasant thing to behold this Candle. As for that light which is merely
corporeal, it is but a dark shadow of intellectual brightness: The more noble
and excellent any being is, the purer pleasure and delight it has proportioned
to it: Sensitive pleasure has more of dregs; Intellectual pleasure more of
quintessence in it. If pleasure were to be measured only by the corporal
senses, truly then the brutes (being more exquisite in sense) might have a
choicer portion of happiness then man can attain to; but therefore has Nature
very wisely provided, that the pleasure of reason in man should be far above
any pleasure of sense. There are diverse degrees of pleasures, such as they be,
according to every man's genius and disposition: As he is more noble and
excellent, or more vile and abject, so is the nature of those things wherein he
delights; and so is his pleasure either more noble, or more base; either more
pure and unmixt, or more impure and mixed; either of longer or of shorter
continuance: Of those delights which man takes in by the bodily senses (we
say) that which is received by the sense of touching is the basest; for as it
is the most gross and earthy of all the external Senses, so are the pleasures
that are taken by it. The delight that is taken by the Sense of tasting is not
altogether so base, but yet brutish enough. As for the delight which is taken
by smelling, it is but little, and nothing so pleasant as the contrary is
unpleasant; for a good smell delights not so much as an ill smell offends;
and besides, this Sense of smelling is not so quick and sharp in men as in
beasts. The pleasures that are received by the Sense of hearing in man, have
more beauty and excellency in them, for the more they participate of the nature
of the Air, they are so much the less earthy and brutish; and those delights
which we receive by the eyes, are yet more excellent then the rest, because the
eyes are of tne nature of fire which comes nearest to the Celestial nature.
Howbeit the best and noblest of those pleasures, which man receives by the
corporeal Senses, are baser and of less excellency then the least and meanest
of those pleasures which are received by the powers of the rational Soul; for
as the Soul is much more worthy and noble then the Body, so the pleasures and
delights thereof are much more noble and generous then those of the body; and
such delights as are most proper to the spirit and mind of man, are purest and
best of all; amongst which that delight which consists in the contemplation of
God is the chiefest. The pleasures of reason and of the mind and spirit of man
continue much longer then corporeral delights and pleasures, because the
rational soul or spirit is not so apt to be weary and tired as the body is, but
does recreate and refresh it self with variery of objects. No marvel indeed if
those that are wholly addicted to corporal and earthly delights deride and
contemn such as highly esteem these rational and intellectual delights
(insomuch that they are willing to forgo the goods and pleasures of this world,
that they may enjoy the same) these persons deride and speak evil of that which
they know not, of whom it may be truly said, that they resemble the Swine, that
delights more in a dirty Puddle or Sink, then in precious Stones and sweet
Odors, because they want judgment rightly to discern and esteem the value of
those things which they contemn and deride. Every being chooses to it self some
kind of pleasure or other, and the more excellent any being is, the higher and
more generous is its delight and pleasure.

For, first, If we look up to the chiefest being, God himself, he takes
infinite delight in himself; as all other perfections, so the perfection of all
true and real pleasure is enjoyed by God himself in a most spiritual and
transcendent manner: That which we call riches and honor is in him his own
Excellency and Glory; and that which amongst men is accounted pleasure, is with
him that infinite satisfaction which he takes in his own blessed Essence, and
the operations and works thereof. His glorious Decrees and Contrivances, and
all his providential Dispensations are full of delight and pleasure to him; the
creating of all Beings, yea, the permission of all Irregularities contribute to
his glory and pleasure; the laughing of his enemies to scorn is a pleasure fit
for infinite Justice; and the smiling upon his Church, and the countenancing
and favoring of his people, notwithstanding their great weaknesses and
behindments, is a pleasure fit for his infinite Mercy and Goodness: Miracles
are the pleasure of his Omnipotency; Varieties are the delight of his Wisdom;
Creation was an act of his Pleasure: And it must needs delight him to behold so
much of his own workmanship, so many pictures of his own drawing; Redemption by
the death of Christ was also a clear expression and manifestation of that
singular delight and pleasure which he took in the Sons of men, for He rejoiced
in the habitable parts of the earth, and his delights were with the Sons of
men, Prove. 8.30. Plutarch that grave Moralist, speaking of an Epicure, or
Atheist, says, That if such an one should grant a God in his full perfections,
he must presently change his opinion and his life, he must be a Swine no
longer, but must uncrown his rosy head, and yield practical obedience to this
Deity, who is infinitely perfect and glorious in himself; where as now the
wretched Epicure looks upon this as his fairest Rosebud, as the most beautiful
Flower in his Garden of Pleasure, that there is no Providence to check or
bridle him, that he is not so subject or subordinate as to stand in awe of a
Deity: But grant, O Epicure (says he) that thou carest not for a Deity in a
Calm, yet what will thou do in a Storm? Thou earest not for him in the Spring
or in Summer, but would thou not be glad of him in Winter? Will it be a
pleasure then that thou have none to help thee, none to guide thee, none to
protect thee!

Secondly, The blessed Angels of God, those Courtiers of Heaven, excel in
spiritual intellectual delights and pleasures, wherewith they are continually
taken up and ravished, so that they trample upon all carnal sensual inferior
Objects, they neither eat, nor drink, nor come near, nor desire to come near
any carnal pleasures. The painted and feigned Heaven of a voluptuous Mahomet
would prove a real Hell to an Angel, or glorified Saint; nay, it would prove a
Hell to a moral virtuous Philosopher here upon Earth. These Angelical Spirits
resemble God himself in their divine and spiritual delights and pleasures,
sunning themselves (as I may express it) in the continual uninterrupted vision
and contemplation of God, in whose light they see light; in which beatifical
vision and contemplation of the divine Essence, the Angels behold all things
that conduce to their happiness in the twinkling of an eye, by a perfect
intuitive knowledge, without any syllogistical or rational discourse, and this
fills them with unspeakable unconceivable delight and pleasure.

Thirdly, If we look to Inferior beings here below, every Creature has some
kind of delight and pleasure: How does the Inanimate Being clasp and embrace
its Center, and rest there as in the bosom of delight! How flourishing is the
pleasure of Vegetatives and Plants! And as for sensitive Creatures their
delights and pleasures are greater and higher then the other, being propagated
and maintained by acts of pleasure: How does the Fish play and make sport in
its Element, and the Bird sing for joy? But these sensitive corporeal delights
(wherein most men resemble the Beasts and brutish Creatures by abounding in
them, so much are they degenerated and debauched) are vain and fading, like so
many sparks they make a crack and presently vanish; they are but outward
pictures of pleasures, as Plato calls them, which perish with the using nay,
they leave a sore tormenting sting behind them. Remember this ye Wantons of the
times, who crown your heads with Rosebuds, and wholly addict your selves to
sensual and carnal pleasures; though they be sweet in the mouth, yet they will
be poison in the belly, and the end will be bitterness and unspeakable torment.
How do we see men and women given over to, and even drowned in the pleasures of
the flesh, like so many Epicures, or rather like so many Beasts, not only in
eating and drinking inordinately, but in all manner of whoredom and unclean
lusts, which are baser and more vile then the other! Eating and drinking
belongs to the Sense of Tasting, which is brutish enough; but these other
carnal pleasures belong to the Sense of Touching, which is far more brutish:
Experience may tell them that these Senses are sooner wearied and tired with
their pleasures then any other; and that such delights as they bath themselves
in do commonly bring with them more irksomness and loathing then joy and
pleasure, leaving many times behind them a long and shameful repentance for
pollutions contracted by them; yea, the baser and more vile the pleasures of
the flesh are, the sooner is a man surfeited with them, and immediately after
the act they become loathsome; as it is in those that are given over to bodily
whoredom, for how unsatiable soever they be, yet they cannot choose but be
glutted therewith, as that wicked Strumpet Messalina was, and others of the
like brutishness. And a for the pains that men take in the obtaining and using
of these pleasures, the more earthy and brutish the delight is, the greater
labor is to be used about it; and the more excessively any bodily carnal
pleasure is used, the greater hurt comes thereby, as we see daily in Gluttons,
Drunkards, and wanton lascivious persons, who contract to themselves by their
excess the worst and most loathsome diseases, pains, and aches.

Fourthly, If we therefore consider the delights and pleasures of Reason, and
of the Mind of man (who is but morally virtuous) we shall find that they far
excel and transcend the pleasures of the body and outward senses, even as those
things that are natural do far excel the things that are only artificial. Such
as are addicted to corporal pleasures are least able to judge of those
pleasures that are rational and intellectual; and so on the contrary, they that
delight themselves in rational and intellectual pleasures abstain most from
those pleasures that are corporal and carnal, for these two kinds of delights
are opposite, and in continual combat one against another. What pleasure did
the moral Philosophers take at their Banquet, though it was but a dish of green
Herbs, being seasoned with rational Philosophical discourses? These delights of
Reason and of the mind were so sweet and acceptable to many Philosophers, that
they esteemed them more then the greatest worldly Kingdoms and riches, which
these men despised and set light by in comparison of the study and knowledge of
Philosophy, and those pleasures that are intellectual. Men and Women, unless
they be grown impudent and shameless in ways of sin (which indeed is the
highest pitch of wickedness they can mount up to) will blush and be ashamed of
some corporeal pleasures: This Crown of Roses is but a blushing Crown: But who
need blush at or be ashamed of those delights that are rational and
intellectual, which need not fear the light or the Sunshine, as the other do.
Men faint and languish with sensitive delights and pleasures, as experience
shows; nay, such is the state and temper of the body, that it will better
endure extreme grief then excessive pleasure: But whoever was tired with
intellectual pleasures! Whoever was weary of an inward complacency! Whoever
surfeited of rational joy! Sensitive pleasures ingratiate themselves by
intermission, Voluptates commendat rarior usus, whereas all intellectuals
heighten and advance themselves by frequent and constant operations. The
pleasures of the body do but emasculate and dispirit the soul, they do not at
all satisfy it; but rational pleasure raises and cheers the soul, and oils
the very members of the body, making them more free and nimble; nay speculative
delights will compensate the want of sensitive pleasures: Hence it was that a
Philosopher put out his eyes that he might be the more intent upon his study;
he shut his windows close that the Candle might shine the more clearly within.
Amongst all mental operations reflex acts taste pleasure best, for without some
reflection men cannot tell whether they rejoice or no: Now these acts are the
most distant and remote from sense, and are the highest advancements of Reason:
Indeed sensitive pleasures make more noise and crackling like thorns under a
pot; whereas mental intellectual delights, like the touches of a Lute, make the
sweetest and yet the stillest and softest music of all. Intellectual vexations
and troubles have most sting in them (for a wounded Conscience who can bear)
why then should not intellectual delights have most honey and sweetness in
them? Sensitive pleasures are very costly and chargeable, there must be much
preparation and attendance, much plenty and variety if a man will enjoy them:
It Is too dear for every one to be an Epicure or Sensualist; but the pleasure of
the mind does freely and equally diffuse it self; we need not pay any thing for
it if we can but love and embrace it: As for sensitive and corporal pleasures,
a sick man cannot relish them, nor an old man embrace them; a Crown of
Rose-buds becomes not a gray head, nor a grave Senator, but the pleasure of the
mind is a delight most fit for a Senator, for a Cato; it is an undecaying, a
growing pleasure, it is the only pleasure upon the bed of sickness, and the
staff for old age to lean upon, when all other pleasures forsake a man; the
mind of him that has the Gout may delight it self and make music, whilst the
body is in pain. A moral Philosopher was so affected with the rational
intellectual delights of the Soul, when out of the body in another World, that
he breaks out into these expressions, There (says he) shall I have the
pleasure of seeing all my Friends again; there I shall have the pleasure of
more enobled acts of Reason; there shall I taste the so much longed for
sweetness of another world. Now if Philosophers and Moralists have been so much
affected with mere rational delights, how much more should Christians prize and
be affected with those spiritual, supernatural, and heavenly delights and
pleasures which are revealed in the Gospel, and which eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor has entered into the heart of a mere rational man: With God is
fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. Here are the
best and chiefest delights and pleasures which contain the very quintessence of
all other delights. Seneca could say, Hoc habet animus Argumentum divinitatis
quod eum divina delectant; This is an Argument of the Souls Immortality, that
it is delighted with divine and spiritual things. Indeed the spiritualized Soul
of a Saint, by the perfect enjoyment of God, comes near the pleasure of God
himself. If that small taste which we have of God and spiritual pleasures here
in this life, brings much joy and satisfaction to the Soul, far beyond all
mere rational delights, and Philosophical pleasures, how great will the
delights and pleasures of the Saints be in their most happy and glorious vision
and contemplation of God in Heaven, when they shall behold him face to face,
and know him as they are known of him; whereas here they see him but darkly as
in a glass and through a cloud.

CHAP. XIX. Showing that the light of Reason, and much more the light of Faith,
fortifies men against the excessive fear of death.
ALthough there be a far more excellent way then that of reason and morality to
overcome the fear of death, namely, by Faith in the death, and resurrection,
and victory of Christ, O death I will be thy death, O grave I will be thy
victory! Blessed be God who has given us victory through Jesus Christ: Yet we
find that the improvement of the light of Reason, and moral Virtues, in some
Heathens have tended much to the composing of their spirits, and the allaying
of their passions in their greatest sufferings, and when their immortal Souls
were about to forsake their mortal bodies: The wisest and most rational amongst
them have dyed with most composedness and serenity of spirit.

Concerning Death, The Reason of a man Arguments drawn from the light of Reason
against the fear of death.
will suggest these and the like Considerations to him.

First, That a wise man should not be like the inconsiderate vulgar sort of
people, that are of cowardly ignoble spirits, and afraid to dye; nor should he
be led by opinion, but by judgment in this matter. No man knows what death is
that he should fear it; and there is no reason that he should fear a thing
whereof he is wholly ignorant; and therefore Socrates. the wisest man amongst
the Philosophers, when he was about to dye by the sentence of the Magistrates,
speaks thus to his Friends, That to fear death is to make show of greater
understanding and sufficiency then can be in a man, by seeming to know that
which no man knows: And being solicited by his Friends at his death, to
plead before the Judges for his life, and in the justification of himself, made
this Oration to them, If I should plead for my life (says he) and desire you
that I may not dye, I doubt I may speak against my self, and desire my own loss
and hindrance, because I know not what it is to dye, nor what good or ill there
is in death: They that fear to dye presume to know it: As for my self I am
utterly ignorant what it is, or what is done in the other World: Perhaps death
is a thing indifferent, perhaps a good thing, and to be desired: Those things
that I know to be evil, as to offend my Neighbor, I fly and avoid; those that
I know not to be evil, as death, I cannot fear and therefore I commit my self
to you; and because I cannot know whether it is more expedient for me to dye or
not to dye, determine you thereof as you shall think good.

Secondly, That a man should continually torment himself with the fear of
death, argues great weakness and pusillanimity. There is scarce a Woman (though
she be the weaker vessel) but in a few days she will be pacified and contented
with the death of her Husband or Child; And why should not Reason and Wisdom in
Man effect that in an hour which Time performs in one of the weaker Sex, who
is more subject to grief and passion? Shall not Wisdom and Reason enable us to
do more in this matter then ignorance and folly? Perhaps we account our death a
great matter, as if all things here below did depend upon us, and must suffer
with us: This is but a wild conceit and vain imagination, for which there is no
reason.

Thirdly, By this cowardly slavish fear of death man shows himself unjust and
irrational; for if death be a good thing (as the best and wisest Men conceive
it is) why then does he fear it? If it be an evil thing, why does he make it
worse, by adding one evil to another?

Fourthly, For a man to fear death is to be an enemy to himself and to his own
life; for he can never live at ease and contentedly that fears to dye: That
man only may be said to be a Freeman which fears not death; and truly life
would be but a slavery if it were not made free by death; for death is the only
stay of our liberty, and the common and ready receptacle of all evils; It Is
then a misery and bondage (and miserable are all they that do it) to trouble
our life with the fear of death, and our death with the care of life: What
murmuring and repining would there be against Nature if death were not at all?
If we should still have continued here, though never so much against our own
wills and liking? Would not a durable life, accompanied with trouble and
affliction, be much more insupportable and painful then life with a condition
to leave it? If death were quite removed out of the World, we should desire it
more then now we fear it, yea, perhaps thirst after it more then life it self,
as being a remedy against many evils, and a means to obtain much good; and were
not some bitterness mingled with death, men would run unto it with exceeding
great desire and indiscretion: To keep therefore a moderation, so that men may
neither love life too much, nor fly from it, that they may neither fear death,
nor run after it, both sweetness and bitterness are therein tempered together.

Fifthly, The light of Reason will tell a man, that death is a thing natural, a
part of the order of the whole Universe, and very profitable for the succession
and continuance of the works of Nature; and would thou have the order of
Nature changed, yea, ruinated for thee? Nay death is part of thy essence, it
being no less essential to thee to dye then to be born and to live; in flying
death thou flyest from thy self; thy essence is equally parted into these two
life and death; this is the condition of thy creation; this is the frame and
constitution of thy nature; if it grieve thee to dye, why wast thou born? Men
come not into the world upon any other design, but to go forth again, after
they have acted their part upon this Stage: To be unwilling to dye is against
nature; it is as if thou were unwilling to be a man; for all men are mortal, and
therefore a wise Heathen, when news was brought him of the death of his Son,
said without passion, I knew I begot a mortal man: Children and Beasts fear not
death, yea, many times they suffer it cheerfully: It is not then the light of
Nature and Reason that teaches us to fear death, but rather to attend and
receive it as being serviceable to Nature.

Sixthly, Death is certain and inevitable, and therefore a rational discreet
man will not torment himself with the fear of it. That which cannot be avoided
should be endured with patience and magnanimity; What is there more inevitable,
more inexorable then death? And to what purpose should we importune or parley
with him that will not be entreated? In things uncertain we may fear, and in
things that are not past remedy, we may do our endeavor to help and restore
them; but for that which is certain and inevitable, as death is, we must
resolve courageously to attend and endure it. Here we should make of necessity
a virtue, and welcome and receive this Guest kindly, for it is much better for
us to go to death willingly and freely, then that death should come to us and
surprise us suddenly, and unawares.

Seventhly, To dye is a thing but reasonable and just, for why should not
thou give place to others as others have given place to thee? Why should not
they as well succeed thee in this life, as thou did succeed others that went
before thee? If thou have made thy advantage of this life, it is but reason that
thou should be satisfied with thy lot, and be willing to go hence, that
others may come in thy stead and take thy place. Death is a debt that must be
paid, whenever it is demanded; and it is against reason that thou should
refuse to dye, and so to discharge that debt which lies upon thee. It Is a thing
general and common to all to dye, and will thou stand alone by thy self, and
expect a privilege and exemption, which is granted to no other man in the
World? Will thou be shut out from the common lot of mankind, which all others
partake of? Millions of men are already gone before us, and millions of men
will follow us when we are gone; one generation passes away, and another
generation comes; and as great a noise as we make in the World amongst our
Neighbors, there will be little notice taken of us when we are removed out of
this life: And why should we make so great account of our selves, when others
take so little notice of us? Why should we think that the whole World is
concerned in us, when so few that live near us do not at all remember us, or
speak a word of us?

Eighthly, Such men as are led by Judgment and Reason should be so far from
this slavish fear and pusilanimity, that they should put on a generous
undaunted Resolution to dye, and even contemn death, especially being required
to dye in a good Cause, for Truth and Righteousness, and for the good and
benefit of their Country, which should be dearer to them then a thousand lives.
He that knows not how to contemn death, shall never be able to perform any
worthy Acts for God and his Country; for whilst he goes about in a base
cowardly manner to secure his life, he exposes himself to many dangers, and
hazardeth his Conscience, Honor, Virtue, and Honesty: The contempt of death is
that which produces the most valiant Acts, and the most honorable Exploits.
He that fears not to dye needs not fear the face of any man, be he never so
great and potent in this World. Elvidias Priscus, a noble Roman, being
commanded by the Emperor not to come to the Senate, or if he came, then to
speak as the Prince would have him, and no otherwise, made this gallant and
noble Answer, That as he was a Senator, so it was fit he should come to the
Senate; and if being there it should be required of him to give his advice, he
would speak freely that which his Conscience commanded him. Being further
threatened by the Emperor, that if he spoke his mind so freely, he should dye
for it: Did I ever tell you (said he to the Emperor) that I was immortal? Do
you what you will, and I will do what I ought to do: It is in your power
unjustly to put me to death, and in me to dye constantly. The noble
Lacedaemonians being threatened with hard and cruel usage, if they did not
presently yield themselves and their Country to King Phillip, who came against
them with a great power, one in the name of the rest answered thus, What hard
dealing can they suffer that fear not to dye? And being told that King Phillip
would break and hinder all their designs, What, say they, will he likewise
hinder us from dying? And after this, when Antipater cruelly threatened them
what he would do unto them, if they did not comply with his demands, answered,
If thou threaten us with any thing that is worse then death, death shall be
welcome to us. These were men guided and acted only by the light of Reason and
moral Virtues, which raised them above the threatenings of their greatest
enemies, and the fear of death: And should not Christianity, the best and most
excellent Religion (as has been sufficiently proved in this Treatise) much
more ennoble our spirits, and raise our hearts above all slavish fears? If we
be Christians and Believers, we may then argue and reason spiritually from
Faith in the Word and Blood of Christ (which the most moral Heathens could
never attain unto) against the slavish fear of death, in this manner.

[Two Arguments from Scripture against the fear of death.]
First, Did not our blessed Savior dye and rise again for this end, to deliver
us not only from the cursed effects of death, and from the Devil, as the
Executioner thereof, but also from the fear of death, that thereby he might
cure us of this fear, and raise us above it, Heb. 2.14, 15. Yea, and this was
long since foretold and prophesied, that Christians applying the victory of
Christ over death, should be so far from fearing death, that they should tread
upon this Enemy, and insult over him, Isai. 25.8. Hos 13.14. compared with 1
Cor. 15.54, 55.

Secondly, Has not God wrought us for the self-same thing, that we being made
new creatures, by the gracious operation of the holy Ghost, might aspire unto
glory and immortality, which we cannot fully enjoy till we dye, for we must be
absent from the body, that we may be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.5, 8.

Thirdly, It Is a condition which our Lord and Master puts us into when he first
admits us to be his Disciples, That we must deny our own lives for his sake,
and not only be content to take up the Cross in other respects, but our lives
should not be dear to us when he calls for them, Luke 14.26. We pray that Gods
Kingdom may come, namely, the Kingdom of Glory as well as that of Grace; and by
death we must enter into this Glory; We are born again (says the Apostle) to a
lively hope of this glorious Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Now if we be afraid of
the time and means of our translation thither, how then do we hope for it after
a lively manner?

Fourthly, Have we not the examples of the godly before us, even a Cloud of
Witnesses, who have desired to dye, and were above the fear of death? Genesis
49.18. Phil. 1.21, 23. Luke 2.29. Psalm. 14.7. 2 Cor. 5.2, 7. Yea, the whole
Church of Christ, and general Assembly of the Saints, love his appearing, and
earnestly desire that he would come quickly, 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 22.17, 20. How
unbecoming is it for a Christian to fear death with a slavish fear? For hereby
he dishonours God, and disgraceth his Religion, as if it did not afford
sufficient encouragements and supports against this fear. Some Heathens (as we
have heard) that had not the true knowledge of Christ, have dyed courageously
and undauntedly; And shall a Christian, whose life is hid with Christ in God,
and who is risen with Christ, and sits together with him in heavenly places, be
afraid to dye? It Is the property of wicked men to dye unwillingly, their death
is compelled, and not voluntary; And shall ours be so too? Shall we be afraid
of a shadow, we that are passed from death to life, and shall live for ever,
because Christ ever lives? The separation of the Soul from God is death indeed,
but the separation of the Soul from the Body to a ttue Believer is but the
shadow of death. If we be in love with life, why do we not effect that life
which is eternal, and desire to be dissolved that we may be possessed of it?

Fifthly, Shall we in this case be worse then Children or mad Men, neither of
which fear death? Shall not Reason and Religion prevail more with us, then
Ignorance and Madness with them? Do we that are the peculiar People of God,
rather desire to remain in Egypt, or in the doleful irksome Wilderness (for
this World is no better) then to enter into Canaan, yea, into the heavenly
Canaan, where we shall be at perfect rest? Is not death ordinary and common
amongst Christians? Do not some of our Friends and Neighbors dye daily? Adam
had more reason to fear death then we, for he never saw man dye an ordinary
death before him; but for us to be afraid to dye, who see thousands dye before
us, is the more intolerable. The whole Creation groans, waiting for the
liberty of the Sons of God, and earnestly longing for this change, Romans 8.21,
22. And shall we be worse then the brute Beasts and other Creatures, and afraid
of that Porter that opens the door to our own everlasting happiness? Has not
this Enemy (which seems terrible to us) been often foiled and vanquished? Has
he not been beaten by Christ and thousands of his Saints? And shall it be
terrible to us to encounter a vanquished disarmed Enemy, whose strength and
power is destroyed? It Is in vain (if we think) to shun that which cannot be
avoided; for it is appointed unto all men once to dye; death is the way of all
flesh, and there is no discharge from this War: What man is he that lives and
shall not see death? Heb. 9.27. Psalm. 89.48. Eccles. 8.8. And therefore we must
resolve courageously to meet and encounter this Enemy, for we cannot avoid him;
if we go not to him he, will come to us, so that we shall be unavoidably
engaged in this conflict sooner or later.

Sixthly, Why should a Christian fear or be troubled, considering what a gain
and advantage death will be to him? For it puts a period to all those tempests
and storms, those boisterous temptations, passions, and afflictions, with which
his life was continually tossed and encumbered, and brings him to a safe
harbor; it is to him a sweet sleep, a bed of rest after all his toil and
labor in a vain and troublesome world, Isai. 57.2. 1 These. 4.14. Rev. 14.13.
There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest, and hear
not the voice of the Oppressor, Job 3.17, 18. It is the day of a Christians
reward and of receiving wages; Then is the servant set free, and the Heir at
full age; then shall the banished and strangers from a far Country, shall
enter into their Fathers house, and shall be received into everlasting
habitations, Heb. 11.13. John 14.2. Luke 16.9. Death is the Birthday of a
Christian, the funeral of all his vices and corruptions, and the resurrection
of his Graces. Death was the daughter of Sin, and in death shall that be
fulfilled, The Daughter shall destroy the Mother; It Is the dissolution of the
Body, but the absolution of the Soul. Then is the immortal Soul delivered out
of a dark prison, and then does she throw off her old ragged, clothes and foul
garments, that she may be decked and adorned with the glorious Robes of
Salvation, Isa. 52.1. 2 Cor. 5.2, 3. Then does a Christian remove from an old
rotten house, ready to fall about his ears, to a sumptuous Palace. Does that
Landlord (think you) wrong his Tennant, or offer him hard measure, that would
have him remove out of a base Cottage into his own Mansion House, which he has
freely given him? Shall the Believer be unwilling to come to the end of his
race and receive the prize, even an incorruptible Crown of glory? 1 Cor. 9.24.
This is the day of his Coronation; for though now he be an Heir of the heavenly
Kingdom, yet he shall not be crowned till death with that Glory which is
unutterable, 2 Timothy 4.8.

Seventhly, The good man is taken away by death from much evil to come; and
has he any cause to quarrel with such a freedom? Truly the consideration
hereof should make us love this life the less, because the Clouds gather thick
about us, and we know not what fearful alterations may shortly befall us, either
in our outward estate, or in matters of Religion, either by domestic broyls,
or by foreign invasion. Should not a Christian rejoice exceedingly to be
delivered from the continual malicious suggestions and stratagems of the evil
Angels, and from a vile wicked World, that hates and persecutes the Image of
Christ wherever it is? A World whose seeming felicities, as Honors, Riches,
Pleasures, Trade, Beauty, Friends, Children, Relations, and Acquaintance, are
but vanities, full of labor and toil, accompanied with much vexation, and
affording no true rest or contentment to that man that enjoyes them; neither
can they help him in the least when death seizes upon him. All these things
will be forgotten, and there will be no remembrance of them with those that
shall come after, Eccles. 1.11. What a privilege is it therefore to be
delivered from these vanities? Yea (which is more) from that body of sin and
corruption which a Christian groans under as his greatest burden, and is the
more grievous and intolerable because it infects and spreads over the whole
man, soul and body, and is an inseparable companion of this life, causing a
troublesome, yea, an irreconcilable war in the Soul, and swarms of evil
thoughts, affections, desires, and actions, besides innumerable diseases and
distempers which attend the Body; And should not death be welcome to us to set
us free from all these evils and miseries? Thus may a Christian reason and
argue against the fear of death upon far higher and more spiritual Grounds and
Considerations then a moral Heathen can, and therefore he should not be afraid
to dye.

Eighthly, and Lastly, That we may be the better fortified against the fear of
death, let us call to mind and improve the living speeches of dying Christians,
some of which shall be here mentioned.

The famous sayings of some dying Christians.
Good old Simeon, Lord, let thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have
seen thy salvation.

Stephen the first Martyr, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, and lay not this sin
to their charge.

Polycarpus to the Proconsul urging him to deny Christ, I have served him
eighty-six years (says he) and he has not once hurt me, and shall I now deny
him?

Ignatius, I am the Wheat or Grain to be ground with the teeth of Beasts, that
I may be pure bread for my Masters tooth; let Fire, Racks, Pullies, yea, and
all the torments of Hell come on me, so I may win Christ.

Cyprian, God Almighty be blessed for this Jail-deliver.

Theodosius, I thank God more for that I have been a Member of Christ then an
Emperor of the World.

Hillarion, Soul get thee out, thou have served Christ these seventy years; and
art thou now afraid of death and loath to dye?

Vincentius, Rage and do the worst that the spirit of malignity can set thee on
work to do: Thou shall see Gods Spirit strengthen the tormented, more then the
Devil can do the Tormentor.

Gorgius to the Tyrant offering him promotion, Have you any thing equal (says
he) or more worthy then the Kingdom of Heaven?

King Edward the Sixth, Lord bring me into thy Kingdom, free this Kingdom from
Antichrist, and keep thine Elect in it.

Bishop Latimer to Bishop Ridley going before him to the Stake, Have after as
fast as I can follow; we shall light such a Candle by Gods Grace in England
this day, as I trust shall never be put out again.

Bishop Hooper, to one that prayed him to consider that life is sweet, and
death is bitter, True (says he) but the death to come is more bitter, and the
life to come is more sweet: Oh Lord Christ, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven;
draw me to thy self with the cords of thy mercy.

Thomas Bilney, I know by Sense and Philosophy that fire is hot, and burning
painful; but by Faith I know it shall only waste the stubble of my Body, and
purge my Spirit of its corruption.

Glover to his Friend; He is come, oh he is come, meaning the Comforter, Gods
Spirit.

John Bradford to his fellow Martyr, Be of good comfort Brother, for we shall
have a merry Supper with the Lord this night. If there be any way to Heaven on
Horseback or in fiery Chariots, this is it.

Lawrence Sanders, I was in prison till I got into prison; and now, says he,
kissing the Stake, welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life: My
Savior began to me in a bitter Cup, and shall I not pledge him?

John Lambert, None but Christ, none but Christ.

Baynam, I feel no more pain in the fire, then if I were on a Bed of Down; it
is as sweet to me as a Bed of Roses.

Priest's Wife, to one that offered her money; I am now going (says she) to a
Country where money bears no mastery. And when the Sentence was read, Now have
I gotten that which many a day I have sought for.

Doctor Tailor, when he came within two miles of Hadley, where he was to be
martyred, Now (says he) lack I but two Styles, and I am even at my Fathers
house.

John Ardeley, If every hair of my head were a man, it should suffer death for
the Truth of Christ.

Alice Driver, when the Chain was about her Neck, Here is a goodly Hankerchief
(said she.)

Julius Palmer, To them that have the mind linked to the body, as a Thieves
foot to a pair of Stocks, it is hard to dye indeed; but if one be able to
separate soul and body, then by the help of Gods Spirit it is no more mastery
for such a one to dye, then for me to drink of this Cup.

Elizabeth Folks, embracing the Stake, Farewell all the World, farewell Faith,
farewell Hope, and welcome Love.

Picus Mirandula, Death is welcome to me, not as an end of trouble, but of sin.

Martin Luther, Thee, O Christ, have I taught, thee have I trusted, thee have I
loved, into thy hands I commend my spirit.

Phillip Melancton, I desire to depart out of this World for two causes, one
that I may behold the face of Christ in the Church Triumphant; the other, that
I may be freed from the bitter contentions of Brethren.

Tremelius, a Christian Jew, Let Christ live, and Barrabas perish.

John Buisson, I shall now have a double Jail-deliver; one out of my sinful
flesh, another from a loathsome dungeon.

Lewis Marsake Knight, seeing his Brethren go to their execution with Halters
about their necks, which they offered not to him because of his dignity, Why, I
pray you (quoth he) deny me not the badge and ornament of so excellent an
Order, is not my Cause the same with theirs?

Henry Voes, If I had ten heads, they should all off for Christ. God forbid I
should rejoice in any thing save in his Cross.

CHAP. XX. Showing that humane Reason, and the due exercise of it, is a great
mercy.
THat God should make thee a Man, and not a Beast, a Toad, a Serpent; that he
should bestow upon thee all the internal and external Senses, the Reason and
Intellectuals of a man, and should preserve and continue the same,
notwithstanding all the foggy mists, vapors, and distempers, which the head
and brain of man is subject unto; this is no small mercy, if we consider withal
how many in our days are born Idiots, blind, and lame, wanting the use of
their Senses and Members; yea, and others who formerly had the free and
comfortable use thereof, are now deprived of this mercy, without which all the
friends, riches, honors, and pleasures of this World are a burden rather than
a blessing. Is it not a wonderful thing, that man's brain, and the exercise of
his reason and intellectuals should be preserved by the Power and Goodness of
God, though many times there are, as it were, floods of water enclosed within
his head and brain (when he thinks but little of it) which if the great God,
who sets bounds to the raging Sea, did not restrain, would presently distract
and overwhelm him: The phlegmatic humor in man, which is of the nature of
water, ascends up to the Brain, by reason of vapors arising out of the Stomach
like the vapor of a Pot boiling on the fire with liquor in it, and like to
vapors that ascend up from the Earth into the Air: Now when these vapors are
come up to the Brain, they turn into the nature of those humors of which they
were bred, as the vapors that ascend up into the Air turn again into the same
nature of water of which they were ingendered. Thus we carry about us and
within us floods of water, which if they should be suffered to run with
violence would overflow and bear down all before them; bodily health and
strength, and the use of reason and understanding would be quite overwhelmed by
them. If we had no Examples of other Floods and Inundations, of Earthquakes and
many other Judgments of God, whereby he punishes this wicked World, yet these
Water-floods which we carry about us should put us in mind of our sin and
misery, and should admonish and induce us to bless the Name of the Lord, for
preserving us and our reason and understanding in the midst of these
water-floods, whereby many men are destroyed. We read of a great King that was
driven from the society of men, and his dwelling was with the beasts of the
field; he did eat grass as the Oxen, and was wet with the dew of Heaven, till
he acknowledged that the most High rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives
them to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.25, 32, 33. This was a sore Judgment upon
Nebuchadnezzar, thus to be deprived of his reason and understanding as a man;
He was not really transformed into a Beast, as Bowin and others imagine, but he
was smitten by the Lord with frenzy and madness of mind, and deprived for a
time of the use of his reason; for it is said, that his understanding returned
to him: And besides this, his body was much changed and altered in feeding and
living among brute Beasts, his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and his
nails like Birds claws: As we may read in several Authors of some wild brutish
Men taken in Forests, that went upon all four as Beasts do; they were swifter
then a Horse, and did howl like a Wolf, and were covered all over with hair:
And thus it was in a great measure with Nebuchadnezzar till the Lord had mercy
on him, and restored him. What are we more then others, that God should deal
more graciously with us then with them, in giving us better intellectuals, and
more reason and understanding as men, and preserving to us the use and exercise
thereof? In this respect truly God has put a great excellency upon man, and
upon us in particular, so that we may well say with the Psalmist, Lord, what is
man that thou art thus mindful of him? Psalm. 8.4. Man by the wise contrivance
of God is a little World, a curious piece of Embroydery, an excellent piece of
Workmanship, wherein the Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness of God does
wonderfully appear. I will praise thee (says David, Psalm. 139.14, 15, 16.) for
I am fearfully and wonderfully made: Mavelous are thy works, and that my
Soul knows right well, my substance was not hid from thee, when I was
curiously wrought in the lowest part of the Earth. It Is a speech Borrowed from
those that work Opus Phrygionicum, the Phrygian or Arras work, which is
curiously wrought and contrived. Man in respect of his frame and constitution
is like a piece of curious Tapestry or Embroydery.

First, In respect of his body, and the parts and members thereof, which are
curiously wrought and put together, by the wise contrivance of God. The forming
and composing the body of man of so many bones, veins, arteries, sinews is a
curious piece of workmanship: God has with infinite wisdom disposed and placed
the several members of man's body; some members are called radical members, as
the Liver, the Heart, and the Brain; and in these God has placed the natural,
vital, and animal spirits: These spirits are carried by the veins, arteries,
and Nerves; the veins carry the vital spirits from the Liver, the arteries
carry the natural spirits from the Heart, and the nerves carry the animal
spirits from the Brain. The several members of the body are helpful and
serviceable one to another; the superior rule the inferior, as the Eyes guide
and direct the whole Body; and the inferior support and uphold the superior,
as the Feet, Legs and Thighs support the whole Body; and as for the middle
members they defend the Body, and provide things necessary for it, as we see in
the Hands and Arms. This variety of the members of the body shows the
excellent Wisdom of God; for if all were an Eye where would the seeing be? 1
Cor. 12.15. So excellent is the body of man, that there are sundry members
thereof which God ascribes to himself, as the Head, the Heart, the Eyes, the
Ears, the Feet, to express his Attributes to us; yea, God has made the body of
man a Temple for himself to dwell in; and the Son of God has assumed the body
of man in one person to his Godhead, a dignity which the Angels are not called
unto. After the making of man he left nothing unmade but to make himself man.

Secondly, Man is curiously wrought and contrived in respect of his rational
immortal Soul, and those two noble faculties, the Understandtng and the Will,
wherein man far excels all the sensitive Creatures: The rational Soul is the
better part of man, more worth then all the World besides, Mark 8.36, 37. What
is the body of man without the soul, but a dead Trunk, an empty Case? It Is the
soul that is the pearl or precious jewel, the creation, infusion, and
operations whereof are like a curious piece of Embroydery, well becoming the
Creator and Contriver thereof, who is a simple immaterial immortal Spirit, the
Spirit of spirits, the Supreme and Sovereign Spirit, the God and Father of
Spirits, Numb. 16.22, Bless God, O man, that has given thee a reasonable Soul,
and inspired thee with an immortal Spirit, wherein thou far excellest other
Creatures. For,

First, The reasonable Soul of man can conceive of things by the light of
understanding as well as by sense, yea, it can conceive of things that never
were in the Senses, as things absent which the Senses never saw nor
apprehended; it can conceive of things spiritual and immaterial, as Angels and
Spirits, yea, of the divine Attributes of God, and that which is invisible; by
the things that are visible we come to the knowledge of God who is invisible,
Romans 1.20.

Secondly, The rational Soul is able to reflect upon its self, and its own acts
and operations, which no mere sensitive Creature can do; it understands that it
does understand, and knows that it does know: And this understanding and
knowledge of the rational Soul is large and extensive, for it can in a moment
go over almost the whole World, and view it all as it were at once; whereas the
Senses are limited and confined to a very narrow compass.

Thirdly, The rational Soul can invent things that were never before in being:
What strange things for number, and skill, and variety are daily invented and
contrived by man's wit and reason, by which also many great matters, both Civil,
Military, and Ecclesiastical, are ordered and regulated? This is that Candle of
the Lord which searches all the inward parts of the Belly, Prove. 20.27. And
God has set the World in man's heart in regard of that reason and understanding
that is in him Eccles. 3.11.

Fourthly, The excellency of the reasonable Soul of man appears in this, that
his understanding after a sort is made one with, and becomes the things that
are understood, in that it conceives a true Image and Idea of the things to be
understood; and herein the rational Soul does somewhat resemble God himself,
who has the perfect Idea of all other things in himself; so the Soul of man
does, as it were, form Worlds of things within it self.

Fifthly, The excellency of the rational Soul appears in that divine thing
called Conscience, which is more then a thousand Witnesses, yet subordinate to
a higher Tribunal (beings Gods Deputy) for God is greater then Conscience, 1
John 3.20. No man, be he never so great and potent can always bribe
Conscience, but it will give an impartial verdict at one time or other, either
accusing or excusing him. In these and other particulars men may contemplate
the excellency of Reason, and praise God for the exercise of it.

Thirdly, and lastly, The rational Soul of man becomes much more excellent, and
is like a curious piece of Embroydery, by a new Creation, being made partaker
of the Divine Nature; whereas by sin the Soul of man was corrupted and
alienated from the Life of God, yet now being born again of the Spirit of God,
and Christ being spiritually formed therein, it recovers the Image of God, and
is restored to a holy fellowship and communion with him, and will be a curious
excellent Piece indeed, when she is perfectly transformed, as she shall be,
into the divine Image, and clothed with Glory and Immortality, Psalm. 45.14. 2
Cor. 5.2.

Let us now briefly recapitulate the Heads of this Discourse, A Recapitulation
of the several Heads.
touching Faith and Reason, so far as we have proceeded. It requires much
spiritual Skill, as has been said, rightly to distinguish between them, and
give to each its due; though man's Reason be much weakened and obscured, yet a
good use may be made thereof both in Civil and Divine things. There is a light
in Reason, though far inferior to that of Faith. How far this Light of Reason
extends we have showed. The best Heathen Philosophers were sensible of great
defects and languishings in their natural Reason and Abilities, though they
ascribed too much thereunto. Some there are amongst Christians that give too
little to Reason in Religious and Ecclesiastical concerns; but others more
generally offend in giving too much; and therefore we have here declared how
and in what respects Reason and moral Prudence should be exercised by us both
in Civil and Church affairs. The Light of Reason proves that there is a God or
Supreme being, and that the Soul of man is immortal, and also the truth of the
Christian Religion, and the divine Authority of the Scriptures, and is of
excellent use in comparing and interpreting the Scriptures, and judging of
Controversies. But though Reason be useful in these respects, yet the internal
testimony of the holy Ghost does principally witness the divine Authority of
the Scriptures, and satisfy Conscience touching the same. Here is showed when
it is that Reason is rightly used, and when abused to the prejudice of the
Spirits testimony in the Scripture; and likewise the difference betwixt the
mere rational and spiritual man, and their knowledge, faith, and operations in
and about spiritual things; that none can be saved by the mere improvement of
natural Light and Reason; and yet notwithstanding the rational intellectual
delights of Philosophers and Scholars do far excel all earthly and sensitive
pleasures; yea, the Light of Reason (but especially the Light of Faith) enables
a man to bear affliction, and arms him against the excessive fear of death. And
lastly, That Man's Reason, and the due exercise of it is a great mercy, which
should be thankfully acknowledged by us.

Having gone thus far, we shall now (by the Lords assistance) briefly sum up
and comprehend in these two last Chapters the substance of what we intended to
say concerning Faith and humane Reason.

CHAP. XXI. Showing distinctly in some particulars the use of humane Reason and
Knowledge in reference to the Christian Religion.
FOr the better opening and clearing of this great Point, to the satisfaction
of the Christian Reader, we shall first premise a few Considerations, and then
afterward show particularly what good use may be made of humane Reason and
Knowledge in divine matters.

I. Consider. That the Light of Nature and Reason is not near so clear and
bright in us since the Fall, as it was in Adam before the Fall, but is much
darkened, Eclipsed, and depraved, even in those that are most rational and
moral; whereas it was perfectly implanted in Adam's heart and nature, we have
but only some fragments of it remaining in us. This is so evident in Scripture
and Experience, that it is generally acknowledged by all Christians. When Sense
is deceived Weems Portrait. of the Image of God.
Reason corrects Sense; but when Reason errs, as she often does in divine and
religious matters, she cannot cure her self, but her Mistress Divinity must
come in and teach her. Sarah being old, God promised her a Son; this she
laughed at, as being contrary to her Reason; in which respect she thought it
impossible that a Woman so stricken in years should have a Child; but Faith
corrected her corrupt Reason; she believed by Faith that which her Reason could
not take up and comprehend. Thus also Nicodemus failed in his reasoning against
the mystery of Spiritual regeneration.

II. Consider. That the Light of Nature, or natural Reason, the Light of Faith
or Grace, and the light of Glory, should be carefully distinguished by us, and
put in their several places and spheres: Reason is but as the light of a
Candle, a glimmering, diminutive, derivative light; Faith is as the light of a
Star, which is a far clearer and brighter light; but the light of Glory is most
perfect as the light of the Sun, wherein we shall see God as he is, and behold
him face to face. Lumen naturae Vid. Rob. Baron. excercitat. de triplici Lumine.
est quo ea cognoscimus quae solis naturae viribus sine auxilio Dei speciali
intelligi a nobis and dijudicari possunt; lumen fidei est quo ea cognoscimus
and intelligimus quae Deus in verbo suo nobis patefecit; lumen gloriae est quo
beati spiritus in Coelis clare and perspicue vident gloriosissimam Dei
essentiam.

III. Consider. That although some Truths and Mysteries do far transcend the
Light of Nature and Reason, yet there is nothing true in Divinity that crosses
the truth of Reason, as it is the remnant of Gods Image in us: Indeed when by
Reason we take up a Truth, and by Faith we believe the same Truth, if in this
case Reason claim the first place, she is to be blamed as being not a dutiful
Handmaid to Faith. As for the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Incarnation and
hypostatical Union in Christ, the great mystery of Predestination, etc. though
these may be said to be above the Light of Reason, yet they are not contrary or
contradictory thereunto; it is the greatest Reason in the World, that the
Creature should believe and rest in the divine infallible testimony and
revelation of his Creator. There are some things in Divinity mixtly divine;
other things are merely divine: In those things that are mixtly divine Reason
may be of use, yet only in the second place, Primo creduntur and postea
intelliguntur, as a man first believes the Souls immortality, and then he
begins to take up the same by Reason; here Reason must not go before, but
follow Faith, for that which I believe I believe it ex authoritate dicentis,
relying upon the truth of him that says it; and all the evidence I get by
Reason is nothing to this certitude. If Reason should go before as an Usher to
make way to Faith, we should never believe; and hereupon the Schoolmen say
well, Rations praecedentes minuunt fidem, sed rations subsequentes augent
fidem. Reason going before Faith weakens Faith, but coming after it strengthens
Faith. Reason makes not the matter more sure Ex part veritatis dictantis, sed
ex part inlectus assentientis; In respect of God the Speaker, but in respect
of the weakness of our understanding; for by this access of further knowledge
it is more confirmed. But now in things that are merely and purely divine and
supernatural, Quae cadunt direct sub fide, which fall directly under Faith, as
those high mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnation of Christ, what can Reason
or Philosophy do here, but admire these depths which she can never reach unto?
Hence it is that God is pleased sometimes to work effectually upon some learned
Infidels, not by the eloquence and subtle reasonings of learned Divines, but by
the plain downright discourses of Christians of meaner Parts. To this purpose
that Story is remarkable which we read of; Diverse Learned men having long
endeavored by strength of Reason and Argument to persuade an Infidel to be
baptized into the Faith of Christ; he being learned also, did evade all their
Arguments; at length a grave pious Man amongst them, of no repute for
Philosophical learning stands up, and bespeaks him with some downright
affectionate expressions, which wrought so effectually upon him, that he
presently submitted to the Truth in these words, Donec audiebam rations
humanas, humanis rationibus repugnabam; caeterum simul atque audivi Spiritum
loquentem cessi Spiritui.
Whilst I heard only humane Reasons, I opposed the same with humane Reasons;
but when I heard the voice of the Spirit of God speaking powerfully, I
presently yielded to that powerful voice. It Is also reported of learned Junius,
that before his Conversion (whilst as yet he was no better then an Atheist)
meeting a plain Countryman, and discoursing with him about Religion, he
observed him to speak so experimentally, and with so much affection, as made
him conclude, that certainly there was something more in the Christian Religion
then his humane Learning and Reason had yet discovered, and this was a special
means of his Conversion.

IV. Consider. That the same Object may be and is known both by the Light of
Nature and Reason, and also by the Light of Faith. You may know that there is a
God, and that he made the World by the Light of Nature; For the things that are
invisible are clearly seen and understood by the things that are made, whereby
we come to know his eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. And we must believe
this also, because God in the Scripture has revealed it, Heb. 11.3. Faith and
the Light of Reason go to the knowledge of one and the same thing different
ways; Faith does it because of the divine Testimony, Authority and Revelation
of God (who is Truth and Goodness it self) but the Light of Reason does it,
because of Arguments drawn from the thing it self, by rational discourse.
However we must hold to this as an undoubted truth, that though the Light of
Nature and Reason, as it is a relict of Gods Image in man, be necessary in
religious and moral things, yet it is not sufficient, there being great decays
and languishings in our Reason, as the greatest Philosophers themselves have
acknowledged.

V. Consider. That if we speak of Nature and Reason as corrupted and depraved
by sin (as it is in every son of Adam) so it is an enemy, yea, enmity it self
against God, Romans 8.7. (...), the very wisdom of the flesh, i. e. the
reasonings and discourses of the natural man, his best thoughts, desires and
affections, the best inclinations and motions of his mind, are not only
enemies, but enmity against God. An enemy may be reconciled, but enmity it self
can never be reconciled. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.21. uses a strange expression,
that the World by wisdom knew not God; he does not say, that the World through
foolishness was ignorant of God, but that by wisdom, that is, by the right use
of Reason and discourse it knew not God (as Diodate notes upon the Text) They
became vain in their imaginations (says the same Apostle, Romans 1.21.) The word
is (...), which may be better rendered thus, they became vain in their
reasonings, or their practical inferences and discourses, such as they made out
of the principles they had in their understandings. So likewise, 1 Cor. 3.20.
The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, not the simple thoughts, but, (...),
the most prudent reasonings and discourses of the men of the world that they
are vain. You have the same word, 1 Timothy 2.8. which is translated, without
doubting; but it is, (...), without reasoning or dispute: In the exercise of
Faith and Prayer we must not argue against the Promise by our Reason. In this
sense the more humane Reason, Learning, and Wisdom men have, the more
opposition there is in them against God, and the great Mysteries of the Gospel,
1 Cor. 1.20, 26. and Chap. 2.9, 10, 11. and Chapter 3.18, 19. And therefore
Augustine wrote thus to a man of great learning and parts, Ornari abs te
Diabolus quaerit. But now if we speak of Nature and Reason as enlightened and
rectified by the Spirit and Word of God, so it is an excellent help in matters
of Religion; let the Word of God, let the Testimony of the Spirit of God in the
holy Scriptures first lay the foundation, and then Reason may build upon it.
Reason should not take the first place, or have the pre-eminence, but should be
subject and subordinate to Faith, as Agar the Bondwoman was to be to her
Mistress Sarah the Freewoman. We must not first consult with Reason, nor ask a
Reason of our believing, when we should believe beyond Reason. A mere rational
considering of means and second causes is a great enemy to Faith. If you would
believe, says Luther, you must crucify that Question, Why God would not have
us so full of Wherefores. Abraham against hope believed in hope, Romans 4.18, 19.
Contra spem, nempe carnis rationis and totius naturae, as some of the best
Interpreters comment upon it; He believed against Sense and natural Reason; in
hope against hope, i. e. in hope supernatural against all the appearances of
natural hope [nothing doubting] says the Apostle, speaking of Abraham's Faith;
it is the same word which you find, 1 Cor. 11.29. Nothing discerning; as when a
man looks on things with an eye of Sense and Reason, he passes a judgment of
discerning, or dijudication upon them; as thus some things are easy, some
things are hard. Abraham did not so reason or consider of things when he
believed: Faith when it is lively and strong will subscribe to a Blank, and
will rest on the Power and Goodness of God; when all things seem contrary in
outward appearance, and to an eye of Reason; Faith can see love in anger, light
in darkness, life in death (as we have the Woman of Canaan for an instance,
besides many others) Faith will tell a man, that the lower he is cast down and
abased, the higher he shall be raised, and the more he shall be comforted; and
this is further then Reason can go. Faith (as a late godly Writer truly
observes) has a great and large prospect, it can look over all the World, yea,
and into the other World too; it beholds God who is invisible, and is the
evidence of things not seen: but now as for Reason it gets upon some little
Molehill of Creature ability, and if it can see over two or three hedges, this
is much; and therefore it is a great trouble to Faith to be tied to Reason. If
a man be able to go a journey of two or three hundred miles on foot, you will
say he is a good Footman; yet if you constrain him to carry a little Child with
him, this will be a great luggage to him; for though the Child may run along in
his hand half a mile, yet he must carry him on his back, or in his arms, the
rest of the way, especially when he goes over waters and steep hills, which
will be no small burden and trouble. Thus it is between Faith and Reason,
Reason at the best is but a Child to Faith, Faith can foot it over Mountains of
difficulties, and wade through the waters of affliction (though great and many)
but when Reason comes to wade through an affliction, or to go over some great
difficulty, it cries out, and says, Oh Faith, let us go back again and proceed
no further: No, says Faith, but I Will take thee upon my back Reason; and so it
does: But yet Reason is a great luggage and burden to Faith, which never works
better then when it works most alone, for then it has recourse to Gods
Alsufficiency and Omnipotency, and finds enough there to quiet and satisfy the
Soul.

But now having premised these five Considerations touching Faith and Reason,
we shall show the Christian Reader in some particulars what use he should make
of humane Reason and Knowledge in reference to divine and religious matters;
and that it ought not to be rejected, but to have its due respect and
commendation.

First, We find that many famous godly men have excelled in humane Knowledge:
Moses that man of God was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts
7.22. which was an ornament to him, and fitted him for his employment. Paul
that great Apostle was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Acts 22.3. and did
abound in humane Knowledge and Learning, though he counted it loss for the
excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8. And the most eminent
Instruments for God in his Church since the times of the Apostles have been men
of great Reason and Learning, as Athanasius, Basil, Jerome, Cyprian, Augustine,
Luther, Melancton, Pucer, Calvin, Jewel, Reynolds, etc.

Secondly, The Penmen of holy Scripture make use of it in that accurate method,
those figurative Expressions, Rhetorical Proprieties of words, insinuating
Proems, and rational Argumentations, which we meet with in the Bible. The
Apostle Paul deduceth an Inference from a common principle of Philosophy, Acts
17.28, 29. and quotes the sayings of some Heathen Writers.

Thirdly, Secular Learning, Reason and Knowledge, being sanctified by the
Spirit of God, helps a man to understand the Grammatical literal sense (which
is the true sense) of the Scriptures. We meet with Physics in Genesis, with
Ethics in the Proverbs, and with many Allusions in other parts of Scripture to
the nature of Beasts and Birds; and likewise with Allusions to the Customs of
the Babylonians, Jews, Persians, Romans; therefore the knowledge of the
Histories of those Nations, and their Governments, are very useful.

Fourthly, The knowledge of the times by the Olympiads, and other ways of
computation (wherein humane Authors minister much light) is necessary in an
ordinary way for the right understanding of Scripture Chronology, and the
Prophesies of Daniel and the Revelation, as appears by the Writings of learned
Mede and others.

Fifthly, The knowledge of the Original tongues, Hebrew and Greek, in which the
sacred Scriptures were first penned, does greatly help us to understand the
right sense of Scripture, wherein there are some Texts which cannot be so fully
and emphatically rendered in any vulgar Translation. And yet we do not say,
that this knowledge is absolutely necessary in a Preacher of the Gospel; for
Augustine himself, one of the most eminent amongst the Fathers, had but little
skill in the Greek tongue, and none at all in the Hebrew: And so it has been
with diverse godly painful Ministers from time to time, whose faithful labors
notwithstanding God has blessed with great success.

Sixthly, Humane Learning and Reason is profitable and useful for instructing
and convincing Pagans and Heathens, who do not yet acknowledge the Christian
Faith, and divine Authority of the Scriptures. Thus diverse of the Ancient
Fathers, as Tertullian, Origin, Lactantius, Basil, Cyril, Augustine, etc.
confuted the learned Heathen Philosophers out of their own Writings, as David
killed Goliath with his own Sword. And in latter times Aquinas, Grotius, Morney,
and others, have most learnedly and excellently improved the true sayings of
the Heathen Philosophers against themselves, and have demonstrated the verity
and reasonableness of the Christian Religion, which is also endeavored in this
Treatise.

Seventhly, Granting the Scripture to be the infallible Word of God (as it is
generally acknowledged all Christians) we ought to exercise our Reason in
searching these sacred Books, looking into the Grammar of the Scripture, or the
forms of expression, to find out the truth of them; and having an eye to the
Logic of the Scripture, to the scope, context, and consent thereof, comparing
Scripture with Scripture, and interpreting the more obscure places by the
clearer, according to the Analogy of Faith, that so we may be able to discern
and judge of things that differ, Ephesians. 5.17. 1 These. 5.21. Acts 17.11. Heb.
5.14. which is the duty of every true Christian, as has been proved in the
twelfth Chapter of this Treatise. In which respect we hold that there is a very
good use of Reason, Haec autem exploratio atque examinatio doctrinarum fieri
non potest nisi adhibito rationis judicio quae judicat de veritate
consequentiarum per sua principia de veritate rerum; non innitendo principiis
sibi notis extra verbum Dei, sed in Scriptura sacra traditis. B. Daven. in
Coll. 2. 8.
so far are we from teaching, that men in searching into the meaning of the
Scriptures must become either Fools, or Madmen, or Enthusiasts.

Eighthly and lastly, We acknowledge that the Light of Nature and Reason is
necessary both in religious and moral things, as it is seated in man; every man
that comes into the world being enlightened by the God of Nature, John 1.9. And
this Light of Nature and Reason is necessary in two respects.

First, As a passive qualification of the subject for Faith and Repentance; for
there cannot be Faith and Repentance in a Stone or Beast that wants the
Principle of Reason; this makes man in a passive capacity fit for Grace,
although he has no active ability for it.

And then secondly, It is necessary by way of an Instrument, for we cannot
believe or apprehend Christ unless we have a principle of Reason in us; it
being without controversy that an act of understanding or knowledge does
always accompany true Faith; Through Faith (says the Apostle, Heb. 11.3.) we
understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God.

CHAP. XXII. Wherein humane Reason comes far short, and is abused in reference
to Divine things.
HAving in the Chapter immediately going before mentioned diverse particulars,
wherein humane Reason and knowledge is serviceable to the interest of
Christianity, we shall now in the last place tell you particularly and plainly,
wherein humane Reason and Knowledge comes far short in matters divine and
supernatural, summing up in a little room what has been more largely set forth
on this subject both in this and other Treatises.

The defects that are in man's Reason.
First then the great Mystery of the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God,
and Justification of Sinners by his Righteousness cannot be found out by the
Light of Nature and Reason; it never entered into the heart of a natural man to
conceive of them; but these things are of mere supernatural revelation, 1 Cor.
2.9, 10. Though it be true, that when through Faith we have believed them,
Reason will also subscribe to the truth of them, as being revealed by the God
of truth, who cannot lie; yet all the Reason of Men and Angels could never have
found out nor come to the knowledge of these Mysteries if God himself had not
revealed them: There are some Articles of our Faith that are both believed and
taken up by Reason, as namely, that there is a God, that the World was created
by him, and that the soul of man is immortal; but then there are other Articles
of our Faith which are only believed, as the mystery of the Trinity, the
Incarnation of Christ, etc. which our weak reason cannot take up or apprehend.
There is a wonderful depth in the mysteries of the Gospel; this Well is so deep
(as the Woman told Christ in another case, John 4.11.) that unless we have the
Bucket of the Spirit of God to draw with, we shall never be able, by the
improvement of our Reason, to bring up this living Water; unless we have the
Spirit of Light and Power to dig with, we shall never find this spiritual
Treasure. Nature indeed will go far, and the improved natural man may do much
by his Skill and Industry in finding out and discovering the mysteries of
Nature, things that are excellent in their kind: Such a man (as Job speaks,
Chap. 28.7, 11, 12, 13, 21, 23) can dig out of the Earth Gold, Iron, Brass,
Brimstone, and all sorts of Metals; nay, he can see further then the Birds of
prey, which though they be quick-sighted, yet can they not behold these Metals
which he by his Skill can discover and dig out of the earth. There is a path
which no Fowl knows, and which the Vultures eye has not seen, yet Man
traceth it by his Skill, yea, the thing that is hid brings he forth to light;
but yet he cannot by all his natural Reason and Skill (though never so much
improved) spiritually and savingly discern the excellency of Christ, and the
mysteries of the Gospel. But where shall Wisdom be found, namely, Christ, who
is the essential Wisdom of God, and who is made of God Wisdom to us? And where
is the place of understanding? Go over the whole Creation, and every part of
it, and it will say, It is not in me; man knows not the price thereof,
neither is it found in the Land of the living; it is not within the reach or
sphere of the wisest natural men in the World, they cannot dig this Mine, or
find out this Treasure; they cannot comprehend this divine and supernatural
mystery, for it is hid from the eyes of all that are living, and kept close
from the Fowls of the Air: Whence then comes this divine Wisdom? Where is it
to be had, and how shall we attain to it? He tells you, ver. 23. that this
Wisdom is in the Bosom of God, and must be revealed by him, or else we shall
never savingly apprehend it; God understands the way, and knows the place
thereof; for Wisdom was with him from eternity, when he made a decree for the
rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder; then did he prepare it, yea,
and searched it out: Or as it is, Prove. 8.29, 30. a place parallel with this of
Job, When he gave to the Sea his decree, that the waters thereof should not
pass his Command; when he appointed the foundations of the earth, then was I by
him (says Christ) as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight,
rejoicing always before him.

Secondly, The Light of Reason cannot truly discover the sinfulness of man's
nature, and the deep deceits of his heart, which are only made known by
Scripture light and revelation, Jer. 17.9. darkness cannot discover darkness,
nor can corruption discover it self. Indeed by the Light of Nature (improved by
education and the knowledge of humane Arts and Sciences) men may discover a
great languishment and infirmity that is come upon them. Diverse learned Writers
have showed, that many of the ancient Platonists agree in this, That man's Soul
is now vassalized to the senses and affections, and that her wings are cut, so
that she cannot mount upward by divine Contemplation; but as for the nature and
kind of original corruption, and how it was brought upon us, together with the
woeful concomitants and effects thereof, these can only be known by Scripture
light: And therefore the Apostle says, He had not known lust to be sin, had
not the Law said, Thou shall not lust.

The Light of Nature and Reason is altogether insufficient to prescribe or set
down the true worship of God: Hence it is that God does so often forbid us to
walk after our own imaginations in the matters of his House and Worship; and
the Apostle calls it will worship, Col. 2.23. when a man's own will or invention
is the framer of it. If men be taught only by the Light of Nature Vide Calvin.
Instit. lib. 1. cap. 5. sect. 12.
they can know nothing certainly and soundly touching the worship of the true
God, but their thoughts and apprehensions will be confused and carnal, and
exceeding unsuitable to God, who is a holy Spirit, and will be worshipped in
spirit and truth: And though there were a few amongst the Heathens, that were
not altogether so mad as the common people, yet the most excellent of them did
exceedingly wander and go astray, devising and contriving the worship of God
according to their own vain opinion and imagination. Socrates the wisest
Philosopher; in Zenophon, praised the Answer of Apollo, wherein he willed that
every man should worship the Gods after the manner and custom of his Country or
City. But oh what folly and madness is this! How came mortal men by this power,
that of their own authority they should determine that which far surmounteth
the wisdom of the World! Natural Reason would have the worship of God sensible
and pleasing to the eye, and is apt to appoint other Mediators between God and
Man besides Christ, and to perform all duties of worship in its own strength,
and by way of compensation and satisfaction to God; and therefore in this case
Reason comes far short, and is no competent Judge how and after what manner God
will be worshipped; though we deny not, but the Light of Reason and moral
Prudence (when God has appointed his own worship) may be very useful and
instrumental in ordering some civil circumstances relating thereunto, and in
the exercise of Church affairs. Nor does that Text, Romans 12.1. argue, that man's
reason can devise or find out that worship and service which is acceptable to
the most wise and holy God; this is more then the greatest Rationalists and
Moralists amongst the Heathen Philosophers could ever attain to; but whereas
the Apostle calls it, (...), Your reasonable serving of God, he understands
that service which is not only or chiefly with the body, but with the mind and
spirit, for so will God be worshipped, John 4.23. And so Chrysostom and others
call this reasonable service, Spiritualem cultum, spiritual worship or service,
when the mind and Spirit is offered up to God. This interpretation is further
confirmed out of 1 Pet. 2.2. where the Apostle Peter calls the Word of God,
(...), The reasonable, that is, spiritual milk; and ver. 5. The service or
sacrifice of a Christian is spiritual, and so it is acceptable unto God: And
it is well observed by diverse learned Interpreters on Romans 12.1. that there is a
secret opposition between this reasonable service and (...), or will worship,
as it is called, Col. 2.23. when men invent a religious worship suitable to
their own carnal humors and interests; whereas that is the reasonable service
of God; which is spiritual and agreeable to his will: This is the true meaning
of the Text, and yet we acknowledge that the Christian worship (under the new
Testament administration) may be truly said to be a more teasonable service,
whereof a better reason may be rendered then the sacrifices of unreasonable
beasts under the Law, and withal that those Christians (who by good advice and
reason) do the things that are agreeable to the will and command of God are
they that offer up a reasonable service to God.

Fourthly, Those Principles of Nature and Reason that are left in men, do not
enable them exactly and perfectly to perform natural and civil actions, without
the general assistance of God, in whom we live, and move, and have our being:
And then as for actions spiritually and Evangelically good, man by the power of
Nature and Reason is wholly unable to perform them, for without Faith it is
impossible to please God. This plainly appears by all those places of Scripture
which declare and set forth the sinfulness and corruption of every unregenerate
man's nature and estate, and also by those Texts which speak of Grace, and
Conversion, and Regeneration, as the sole work of Gods Almighty power, and the
effectual operation of his Spirit, which is put forth and manifested in all
those that truly believe, Ephesians. 1.19. The natural man (says the Apostle)
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him;
neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.
By the natural man here (as Calvin and others truly observe) he means not
properly a man addicted to gross and sensual lusts, but every man that is
endued only with the Light of Nature and Reason, and has not the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in him, yea, the most rational improved natural man; this is
evident, because the natural man is opposed to the spiritual man, or him that
is born of God, and acted by the Spirit of God. The word (...) signifies
properly not such a man as is exceeding carnal and gross in sin and sensuality,
but souly man, an improved rational man, or a man made up only of Reason; one
that does ex colere animam, such as Plato, Aristotle, and Tully were: It is
meant of every unregenerate man, who is ruled by the Spirit of this World, and
the mere Principles of Nature and Reason, and who cannot spiritually discern
and receive the great mysteries of the Gospel, but is offended therewith: Nay,
the wiser men are in their own imaginations and reasonings, the vainer they
are, and the more opposite to the grace and simplicity of the Gospel of Christ,
which stands not in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. The other day,
says Chrysostom, I heard a certain Christian discoursing ridiculously with a
Greek, each of them in their discourse prejudicing his own Cause, for the Greek
spoke that which the Christian should have said, and the Christian spoke that
which the Greek should have said, for the Question between them being about
Paul and Plato; the Greek endeavored to prove, that Paul was rude and
unlearned; but the Christian, through his simplicity, would prove, that Paul
was far more learned and eloquent then Plato; and so the Greek would obtain the
victory, if the Christian's Reasons should prevail; for if Paul were more
learned then Plato in humane Arts and Sciences, then might men object, that he
overcame not the World through Grace, but through humane Eloquence: Therefore,
says this Father, when the Greeks shall object* that the Apostles were rude
and unlearned, simple obscure persons, of no great reason nor parts, let us
freely acknowledge it as the truth, for this is not their reproach, but their
glory, that being such they yet overcame the Learned men, the Wise men, the
Philosophers, the Rhetoricians, the Orators, the Princes, and all the World;
for when any thing is done above the power of Nature, this does exceedingly set
forth and magnify the Grace of God.

Fifthly, A Christian should so far deny his natural Reason and Wisdom in
things spiritual, that his assent to the Truths and Mysteries of the Gospel may
be the assent of Faith, as to a divine Testimony, and not the assent of mere
Reason: The immediate ground of this assent should not be the self-evidence of
the thing testified in the Scripture to man's reason, but the divine authority
of God testifying. That which is the formal object of Faith, as the Schools
speak, is the first truth, or God himself revealing his mind to us. Suppose a
truth taught in the Scripture be likewise demonstrated to my reason by
Philosophical Arguments, as namely, That God created and governs the World, and
that the Soul of man is immortal, my assent to these Truths is so far the
assent of divine Faith, as it is grounded and bottomed upon the authority of a
divine Testimony. As for that assent which is merely grounded upon
Philosophical reason and demonstration, it is not divine Faith, but only humane
Faith and Reason.

Sixthly, Our Reason is so imperfect, so defective, so apt to mistake in divine
and spiritual matters, that we must not make our apprehensions (though under
pretense of Reason) the rule of what we will receive for the Word and revealed
Will of God, and what we will reject; but what the Scripture holds forth must
be the rule of our apprehensions, though we cannot comprehend the same by our
weak depraved reason and understanding: otherwise we subject the authority of
Gods Truth to our own weak shallow apprehensions, and believe him not because
he has said it, but because we by our reason can comprehend it, and this is
dangerous and destructive to the faith of a Christian, for the Scriptures do
reveal those things that are above our reason. What reason of Men or Angels
could ever have thought of such a thing as the three Divine Persons of the
Godhead, the personal union of God and Man in the Mediator, the imputation of
Adam's sin to his Posterity, and the imputation of the glorious Righteousness
of Christ to poor Sinners for their justification? Without all controversy
great is the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. But what great mystery is there
in it, if we by our shallow reason can comprehend it? We must pray for Grace,
says Mr. Fox In his Preface to Luther on the Galatians.
the Author of the Book of Martyrs, that we may rightly understand the Gospel:
So strange is this Doctrine to carnal Reason, so contrary to the World, so many
enemies it has, that except the Spirit of God from above do powerfully reveal
it, Learning cannot reach it, Wisdom is offended, Nature is astonished, Devils
and Men do oppose and persecute it; briefly, as there is no way to life so
easy, so there is none so hard; easy to whom it is given from above, hard to
carnal Sense and Reason not yet inspired. And Luther himself in his Commentary
on the Galatians has many notable sayings touching Faith and Reason; In this
case of believing the Gospel (says he) we must silence Reason which is an
enemy to Faith, which also in temptations of sin and death leans not to the
righteousness of Faith, for thereof it is utterly ignorant, but to her own
righteousness. Now as soon as the Law and Reason join together, Faith loses
her Virginity, for nothing fights more strongly against Faith then the Law
and Reason: The Gospel leads us beyond and above the light of the Law and
Reason into the deep secrets of Faith, where the Law and Reason have nothing to
do. Again, If ye will believe Reason, Reason will tell you, that such things as
God has promised are impossible, foolish, weak, absurd things: What more
absurd, foolish, and impossible, then that Abraham should have a Son in his old
age of the barren and dead Body of Sarah? But now Faith kills Reason, and
slays that Beast which the whole World and all Creatures cannot kill. Thus
Abraham killed it by Faith in the Word of God, which promised him a Son: To
this word Reason yielded not straitway, but fought against Faith in him,
judging it to be an absurd impossible thing; but Faith wrestled with Reason,
and at length got the victory: Abraham killed and sacrificed Reason, that most
pestilent enemy of God, and so must all the godly do. There are many things in
Scripture that are quite cross and contrary to the apprehensions of corrupt
Reason, and it is the great work of the Spirit of God to subdue and captivate
our Reason to the authority of the Word of God, and the obedience of Faith. The
weapons of our warfare (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) are mighty through
God for the pulling down of strong holds, casting down reasonings, and every
high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: Those strong holds
that stand out against the Gospel are especially two, namely, the greatness and
power of worldly Princes and Rulers; and also the reasonings and argumentations
of the learned Orators and Philosophers; both these must be subdued and
captivated to the obedience of Faith. Men must be led away like Captives (says
Judicious Calvin on the Text) from their own Reason and Will: The word (...),
reasonings, is very emphatical. Quo vocabulo Estius in 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
significantur non qualescunque cogitationes sed quae fiunt ratiocinando and
disceptando dum adhibito judicio rationis animus examinat aliquid and de eo
pronuntiat, sit ne verum an falsum, bonum an malum. Here we may see plainly,
that our Reason must be conquered and captivated to the obedience of the
Gospel, or else there can be no true Faith: Indeed Reason and Faith may well
walk together, provided that Reason give Faith the upperhand. We must not say
(they are the words of a noble Writer, who makes great use of Reason to prove
the truth of the Christian Religion) Morney de veritat. Christi. Religio.
That because Reason does not comprehend this or that point of Religion,
therefore we we should not believe it, for this were a measuring of Faith by
Reason, whereas we ought to believe the Mysteries of God that are beyond our
Reason. To believe on God through Christ, what is it else but to submit our
reason and understanding to God? And thus our Reason must be a servant to
Faith, and must stoop to the power of Faith; Faith must not be abased and stoop
to the measure of Reason. Now when and wherein humane Reason and Knowledge is
perverted and abused, and so comes to be prejudicial and dangerous, shall be
here briefly represented in a ew particulars, and so we will shut up this
discourse of the right use and abuse of Reason.

How and wherein humane Reason is abused and perverted.
First, It is then dangerous and destructive to the divine Purity of the
Christian Religion, when the Opinions and Sentiments of some Learned
Philosophers and Rationalists, that are contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
are imposed upon us as true, as namely, the Worlds Eternity, the Stoical Fate,
Purgatory after this life, the denial of the Resurrection of the Body,
worshipping of Angels, and the like, having a show of Reason, Wisdom, and
Humility, Col. 2 18, 23.

Secondly, When those Principles of Nature and Philosophy, which are true in an
ordinary way, are perverted and abused to the rejecting of those Gospel Truths
that are above Nature: These Maxims and Positions of Philosophers, That of
nothing nothing can be made: That of privation to a habit there is no
regression: That a Virgin cannot conceive; though they are naturally and
Physically true, yet in Divinity and Christianity they ought not to be
admitted: God created the World of nothing; our blessed Savior without the
help of Man was born of a Virgin (as the Scripture assures us) God calls the
things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. These bodies of ours, after
they are resolved into dust, shall be raised up again and made like to the
glorious Body of Christ, according to the working of God, whereby he is able
even to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21. Here Faith in Gods
Omnipotency must be exercised, and Reason must give way to Faith. Indeed man's
Reason, as now it stands, is so far from taking the just measure of Faith
(which transcendeth natural Strength and Reason) that it cannot so much as take
the just and full measure of Nature, nor of the least of Gods Creatures, in
regard of that ignorance and darkness that is in every one of us; and therefore
it is a great error to believe no further then Reason can measure and
comprehend: For what a great way does the truth of spiritual and divine things
extend beyond our Reason? And even Reason it self will lead us to this Point,
namely, That we should believe beyond Reason, I mean, those things which no
mere natural understanding or capacity can reach or attain to; and that when
these things are revealed by God to men, which Reason could never have
comprehended (no not even when it was at the best) the same Reason which could
never have found them out, makes us to allow of them; it being reasonable and
fit for us to believe whatsoever God has revealed to be true: And herein
Reason teaches us that which she her self neither knew nor believed, namely,
by leading us to the most infallible Teacher, whom we ought to hear and believe.

Thirdly, It is then dangerous when a Christian boasts of his humane Reason and
Knowledge, and is elated and puffed up therewith, undervaluing and slighting
all others, as if their Reason and Knowledge were not comparable to his; and so
it becomes a vain windy thing. Knowledge (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.1.)
puffs up, but love edifieth. Vain man would be wise (as it is in Job 11.12.)
though he be born like a wild Asses Colt. In the Hebrew there is an elegant
Paranomosia, Vain man, or as the word may be rendered, hollow or empty man,
though he be foolish and ignorant, would seem to be wise and rational if he
knew how. Doubtless God will curse and blast that profane wit and knowledge
which despises the simplicity of Christ's Gospel, and will not captivate it
self to the obedience of Faith.

Fourthly, When the reasonings or rational argumentations of men are
unseasonably and excessively used in divine things (the nature of the matter
not requiring it) then are such reasonings dangerous. Hence some of the Fathers
are justly censured (and the Schoolmen much more) for mixing and adulterating
the Truths of the Gospel with the Reasons of Philosophers, which are no better
then Paralogisms and Impostures, if mixed with and added to the pure Word of
God, and the great and glorious Mysteries of Christ.

Fifthly, Then do men abuse their humane Reason and Knowledge, when they use
needless subtilties, quirks, and quidditties in debating the great Truths of
the Gospel, which should rather be humbly believed, admired, and adored, then
subtly disputed. Even amongst the Heathens themselves, and in all Religions,
they have had some sacred Mysteries and Secrets that were to be adored, and not
curiously pried into, and disputed by the subtle reasonings of men; and whoever
did profanely dispute thereof were severely punished.

Sixthly, and Lastly, Man's Reason is abused and perverted, and proves to be of
dangerous consequence when it is made, not only an Instrument, but a Judge, in
matters of Faith; some there are that seem to depress Reason too much; but on
the other side the Socinians exalt it too high, for they make it not only an
Instrument, but a Judge, and thereupon reject and contemn the greatest
mysteries of the Christian Religion, because they cannot fathom and comprehend
them by their Reason. It Is true there are some that say, Religio est summa
ratio, and there are great learned Men that have endeavored to prove the truth
of the Christian Religion by the Light of Reason; and certainly if we can by
Reason prove that there is any Religion at all, we may by the same reason prove
the truth and excellency of the Christian Religion (as I have showed in this
Treatise) but yet man's Reason is but a weak, glimmering, uncertain thing in
comparison of Faith. Ratio recta est ratio lumine Spiritus sancti directa. Nor
must we confound the Instrument and the Judge. Holy Truths, Scripture Truths
and Mysteries they are divine and supernatural, though hammered out and
improved by Reason: As the Smith that takes Golden plate and beats it into what
shape he pleases, his Hammer does not make it to be Gold, for so it was
before, but only Gold of such a shape; so Reason does not make a Truth divine,
or add any thing to the divine authority of it, but only holds it forth and
declares it in such a way or method. It is with Faith and Reason (says a
Learned man) as with the mould that is at the root of a barren fruitless tree,
take the mould out and throw in dung or other compost, and then put the mould
in again, and it will much help the tree which hindered it before; thus lay
aside Reason at first, and receive the Truth of God by Faith, and afterward
improve Faith by Reason, and so it will be of excellent use to a Christian.
Divine Truths are not founded on Reason, but on the Authority of God in the
Scriptures; yet Reason may help to bear them up, as you see the Elm or Wall
bear up the Vine, but the Elm or Wall does not bring forth the fruit, only the
Vine does that. As long therefore as the Light of Nature and Reason is not the
Rule, but ruled and squared by the Word of God (as it ought to be) there is no
danger; but when man's Reason is made the Rule, and divine Mysteries are
vassaliz'd and subjected thereunto, this must needs be preposterous and
dangerous; and therefore to be abhorred and avoided by all sober Christians,
whose Faith should not stand in humane Wisdom and Reason, but in the
Demonstration and Power of the Spirit of God.

FINIS.
Books sold by Thomas Passenger at the three Bibles on London Bridge.
A French and English Dictionary, composed by Mr. Randolph Cotgrave, Folio. A
Mirror or Looking-glass for Saints and Sinners, showing the justice of God on
the one, and his mercy toward the other. Set forth in some thousand of
examples, by Sam. Clark late Minister of Bennet-Finck, London, in two Volumes
in folio. Royal and Practical Chemistry, by Oswaldus Crollius, and John
Hartman, faithfully rendered into English, folio, price 10. s. Gods Revenge
against Murder, by John Reynolds, containing thirty Tragical Stories, digested
into six Books, newly reprinted, folio, price 10 s. Lord Bacon's Natural
History, folio, price 8 s. Sandy's Travels, containing a Description of the
Turkish Empire, of Egypt, and the Holy Land, of the remote parts of Italy, and
Islands adjoining, folio, price 8 s. Markham's Masterpiece. Roman Antiquities,
by Tho. Godwin, quarto, price 2 s. 6 d. The famous History of the Destruction
of Troy, in three Books, quarto, price 3 s. Valentine and Orson, price 18 d.
Etymologicum parvum, by Francis Gregory, octavo, price 3 s. Chemical Essays,
by John Begumis, price 1 s. 8 d. Spiritual Antidotes against sinful contagion,
by Tho. Doolittle, price 18 d. Pool's Dialogue betwixt a Papist and a
Protestant, twelves, price bound 1 s. Monasticon Favershamiense; Or a
Description of the Abbey of Faversham, octavo, price bound 18 d. The Christians
Crown of glory; or Holiness the way to Happiness, octavo, price bound 18 d. The
Path way to Health, price bound 18 d. The Complete Academy, or Nursery of
Complements, bound 1 s. The Book of Knowledge in three parts, price 10 d. The
Book of Palmistry in octavo, price bound 18 d. The Wise Virgin, being a
Narrative of Gods dealing with Martha Hatfield, price bound 18 d. The Pilgrims
Port, or the weary Man's rest in the Grave, in twelves, price bound 1 s. The
famous History of the five wise Philosophers, containing the Life of
Jehosaphat, Son of Avenerio, Emperor of Corma, and his wonderful conversion to
the Christian Faith. The great Assize, by Sam. Smith. The Delectable History of
Amadis de Gaul. The pleasant History of Paladine of England. The Bear-baiting
of Women. The History of Friar Bacon and Friar Bungy. New conceited Letters.
The Jovial Garland, containing all the newest Songs that are now used. The
Penitent Prodigal, or a gracious Reproof for Pharisaical Saints, by J. H. The
Christians best Exercise in the worst of times, by J. H. Scarborough Spaw,
being a description of the nature and virtues of the Spaw of Scarborough in
Yorkshire, by Doctor Witty. The French Schoolmaster. Farnabies Epigrams.
Newtons Art of Logic. Newtons Art of Rhetoric. The famous History of Don
Bellianis of Greece, in three parts, being now complete. The famous History of
Montelion, Knight of the Oracle. Hodders Arithmetic in twelves. Ovid de
tristibus in English. Bishop Hall's Soliloquies, in twelves. The Poems of Ben.
Johnson Junior. A plain and familiar Exposition of the ten Commandments, by
John Dod.
A TABLE of the chief Heads of this TREATISE.
CHAP. I. Of distinguishing betwixt Faith and Reason. Page 1 1. HEre is showed,
that it requires much spiritual Skill rightly to distinguish them. 2. That
Morality is one thing, and Christianity another.
CHAP. II. Showing that Reason is useful both in Civil and Divine things. Yet
withal it is presupposed. Page 4 1. That the Light of Reason in us is much
darkened. 2. That it wrangles against the greatest Mysteries of the Gospel. 3.
That men of great Reason and parts have promoted the greatest errors.
CHAP. III. How far the Light of Reason extends. Here is showed. Page 6 1.
That this light is but a derivative light, like the light of a Candle, and not
like the light of the Sun. 2. It Is but a diminutive light. 3. It Is
notwithstanding a quiet and peaceable light so far as it goes. 4. It Is an
ascendant light, and cannot find the chiefest good in things below.
CHAP. IV. How the Heathen Philosophers themselves have complained of great
defects in Nature and Reason. Page 13 1. Here are several Instances given. 2.
Solomon himself was sensible of much darkness, though his intellectual Lamp
burnt far brighter then others. 3. Christians should not magnify the light and
power of Nature, the defects whereof are acknowledged by moral Heathens.
CHAP. V. Of them that give too little to the Light of Reason. As Page 15 1.
Such as will not admit of a rational discourse in matters of Religion. 2. Such
as rely on Enthusiasms. 3. Such as hold an annihilation of the faculties of the
Soul in Regeneration. 4. Such as will not be regulated by Reason in civil
Circumstances relating to worship, but cause disorder and confusion in
Church Assemblies.
CHAP. VI. Of those that ascribe too much to Reason. As Page 18 1. The
Socinians, who reject the greatest mysteries of the Gospel, because they cannot
comprehend them by their corrupt Reason. 2. Pellagius and his followers
(whereof there are many in our times) who derogate from the Grace of God and
extol the power of Nature.
CHAP. VII. Of the use of humane Reason in civil matters. Here is showed. Page
21 1. That it is the most rational and prudent way to be governed by known
Laws. 2. That such Laws are best as are most agreeable to Reason, and tend most
to the public good. 3. That the most rational Men are fittest to be
Lawmakers. 4. That such are also of best ability and capacity to administer
the Laws and Government.
CHAP VIII. Of the exercise of Reason in Church affairs. Page 27 1. Reason
suggests that men should join together in Societies for the visible worship of
God, 2. That there should be order and Government in these Societies, and that
all should not be Rulers, but some should obey. 3. That such as administer the
worship of God in Religious Societies should have due reverence and
maintenance. 4. That every Christian ought to join himself to a Chureh-society,
that he may visibly worship God with others. 5. That men ought not to assign
any other Conditions of Church Communion then what Christ has prescribed in
his Word. 6. That such as are admitted into a Church-society should freely
consent to be governed by the Laws and Rules thereof. 7. That they should
remain in such a Society, and not break off communion on slight grounds. 8.
That all things in Church* assemblies should be administered with much
seriousness and gravity, that so the Ordinances of God may be rendered
majestical. 9. That there must be some way or other for determining differences
arising in such Societies, Here is showed.
1. That Appeals are founded upon the Law of Nature and Reason. 2. That it is a
more rational and prudent way to have Controversies determined by a grave
Assembly of godly learned Pastors, then by a few engaged persons in a
particular Society.

CHAP. IX. The Light of Reason proves that there is a God. Page 40 1. By the
frame of this World. 2. By the Original of all things; here it is demonstrated
that the Creatures cannot have their being or beginning from themselves. 3.
That there must be a first Cause or Mover of all, else there would be before
every Mover another Mover, and so in infinitum. 4. It appears to the eye of
Reason that there is a God, by the distinction of good and evil. 5. By the
great and glorious Miracles that have been wrought in the World. 6. By the wise
governing and ordering of the several Creatures, and the plentiful provision
that is made for them. 7. By the testimony of man's Conscience, which shows
that there is a supreme Judge, that commands the inward thoughts, and binds
the Conscience. 8. By the vast desires and capacity of man's Soul, which will
not be satisfied without the enjoyment of the chiefest good. 9. By the
continual assaults of Satan, who would utterly extinguish the knowledge of God
in men. 10. By the wonderful preservation of the Church of God, which though it
has been as a burning Bush yet it is not consumed. This Principle, That there
is a God, has showed it self even in Atheists, especially in three Cases.
1. When they have been surrounded with difficulties. 2. In the time of bodily
sickness. 3. When old age comes, and multitude of years teach them experience,

CHAP. X. The immortality of the Soul of man proved by Reason Page 54 1.
Because it abstracts from that which it understands, all quantity, quality,
time, place, etc. 2. Because the Soul receives impressions of Immortality, and
is spiritual in its operations. 3. No mortal corruptible thing can satisfy the
desires of the Soul. 4. If Man's Soul were not immortal then the sensitive
Creatures would excel Man. 5. The Soul is not subject to motion, being most
perfect when most free from motion, therefore she is not corruptible. 6.
Another Reason is taken from the Justice of God. 7. From the universal consent
of all Nations in one kind of Religion or other.
CHAP. XI. The truth of the Christian Religion proved by Reason. Page 62 1.
From the Antiquity of it 2. From the excellent way and means of atonement and
propitiation held forth therein. 3. From the glorious divine Miracles and Works
of Christ and his Apostles. Objections against the same answered. 4. From the
precious excellent Doctrine and Life of Jesus. 5. From the nature and success
of Christ's Kingdom. 6. From the strange Conversions that have been wrought by
the Christian Religion. 7. From the desperate opposition of Satan and his
Instruments against it, notwithstanding which it has still prevailed. Here is
discovered the unreasonableness and absurdity
1. Of the heathenish Idolatry. 2. Of the Jews Enmity against Christ and the
Christian Religion. 3. Of the Mahumetan Superstition.

CHAP. XII. The Divine Authority of the sacred Scriptures proved by Reason.
Page 97 1. Because no other or better Revelation of Gods Will can be produced.
2. The Old Testament has been throughout all Ages witnessed to, and
wonderfully preserved by the Jews. 3. The whole universal Church of Christ have
all along witnessed the Divine Authority of the Old and New Testament, even to
the death. 4. God has confirmed the Authority thereof by great and strange
Miracles from Heaven. 5. The Scriptures are the most ancient and authentical of
any writing. 6. The style, order, contexture, and frame of the Scripture, show
the Divine Authority thereof. 7. Another Reason is taken from the wonderful
powerful effects of the Doctrine of the Scriptures. 8. From the admirable
harmony and consent thereof. 9. The matter treated of therein is divine and
wonderful. Here are mentioned five notes of a Divine Power. 10. The end which
the Scriptures aim at is divine and heavenly.
CHAP. XIII. Of the use of Reason in the interpreting of Scripture, and judging
of Controversies. Page 110 1. Here is a discovery of the unreasonableness of
the Popish implicit Faith, and blind Obedience. 2. Their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is made apppear. 1. To be against Sense. 2. Against Reason.
3. Against Faith.
3. It Is also showed, that there is a twofold Judgment in matters of Religion,
one in foro publico, another in foro privato. 4. That every private Christian
ought to make use of his Reason, and to exercise a Judgment of discretion in
trying Spirits and Doctrines, This is proved by six cogent Arguments.
Objections against this tenet and practice answered.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Internal testimony of the Holy Ghost, proving the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures. Page 123 1. It is here showed, that this Testimony
is more satisfactory to the Conscience then all other proofs. 2. That a
Christians Faith should be ultimately and finally resolved into the Testimony
of the Holy Ghost, and not into the Testimony of the Church which is but
humane. 3. The Popish Circle is described, and the Protestant Doctrine herein
vindicated, 4. Some Rules and Cautions concerning the Testimony of the Spirit
are here propounded to prevent mistakes.
CHAP. XV. Showing when Reason is rightly used, and when abused to the
prejudice of the Spirits Testimony in the Scriptures. Page 133 1. Reason is the
Organ which lets into the Soul the Light of Faith. 2. It being overpowered by
the Spirit of God, sees the greatest reasonableness in the Truths and Ways of
Christ. 3. Reason is exceeding useful in maintaining the Doctrine of Christ. 4.
Nevertheless we should not make Reason the Judge in Divine matters, nor subject
the Authority of the Scriptures to our Reason, as Socinians do. Three Arguments
against it.
CHAP. XVI. Of the difference betwixt the mere rational and spiritual man, and
their Acts about spiritual things. Here is showed. Page 142 1. That the
Spiritual man has Christ formed in him, and lives the life of Christ, which
the mere rational man does not. 2. That the divine Principle which acts the
Spiritual man, is more then the improvement of the most excellent, natural, and
rational abilities. 3. That man is passive in the new spiritual Birth, and
cannot by all his Reason discern, how this spiritual life is wrought. 4. How
and wherein the spiritual Man's Acts and Operations do far transcend the mere
rational Man's. 5. They differ in the nature and effects of their Faith in
reference to Christ and the Promises, in five Particulars.
CHAP. XVII. Proving that none can be saved by the mere improvement of the
Light of Reason. Page 152 1. Diverse of the Fathers, and some modern Writers
have erred in this Point. 2. Four things are laid down for the better opening
of it: God might reveal his Son (if he so pleased) in an extraordinary way to
some Heathens. 3. It is proved by nine Arguments, that no rational moral
Heathen can be saved without faith in Christ as Mediator. One or two material
Objections answered.
CHAP. XVIII. Of rational and intellectual delights. Here is showed. Page 16^
1. That every being chooses to it self some kind of pleasure. As 1. God, who is
the chiefest Being. 2. The Angels. 3. Men that have rational Souls. 4. The
sensitive Creatures.
2. In what particulars the delights of Reason, and of the Mind do far excel
the pleasures of the Body.
CHAP. XIX. Showing that Reason, and much more Faith, does fortify a man
against the excessive fear of death. Page 172 1. Here are eight Considerations
drawn from Reason against the slavish fear of death. 2. Seven Arguments are
also drawn from Faith in the Word of God against the fear of death. 3. The
famous sayings of some dying Christians are mentioned.
CHAP. XX. That humane Reason, and the due exercise thereof is a great mercy.
Page 187 1. This is opened in some particulars. 2. It is here showed, that man
who has a reasonable Soul is wonderfully made, like a curious piece of
Embroydery. 1. In respect of his Body, and the members thereof. 2. In respect
of his rational Soul, wherein Man far excels other Creatures. Five things
mentioned relating to the excellency of the reasonable Soul.
3. In respect of his new spiritual Birth, and participation of the Divine
nature.
CHAP. XXI. A Recapitulation of particulars touching the use of humane Reason
and Knowledge in reference to the Christian Religion. Page 195 1. Here are five
Considerations premised, 2. The excellency and use of humane Reason and
Knowledge is particularly held forth. As 1. Some that have been famous
Instruments in the Church of God have abounded therein. 2. The Penmen of the
holy Scriptures make use of it. 3. It helps us to understand the Grammatical
literal sense, and the Chronology and Prophesies of Scripture. 4. It Is useful
for convincing Heathens and Infidels. 5. In trying Spirits and Doctrines,
comparing Scripture with Scripture. 6. As a passive qualification of the
subject for Faith and Repentance, in which case there must be a Principle of
Reason.

CHAP. XXII. How and in what respects Reason comes short, and is abused in
Divine things. Page 206 1. Reason cannot discover the mystery of the Trinity,
Incarnation of Christ, etc. 2. Nor the sinfulness and corruption of man's heart
and nature. 3. It cannot prescribe the true worship of God. 4. Nor enable us
perfectly to perform natural and civil Actions without the general assistance
of God. 5. Our assent to the Gospel should be the assent of Faith, and not of
mere Reason. 6. The Scripture and not Reason is the Rule for a Christian to
walk by in spiritual matters; he must be crucified to his Reason. Here is also
showed in six particulars, when and wherein humane Reason and Knowledge is
abused, and so becomes dangerous to the Christian Religion.


