THE Possibility of Gods Forsaking a people, That have been visibly near and
dear to him TOGETHER, With the Misery of a People thus forsaken, Set forth in a
SERMON, Preached at Weathersfield, Nov. 21. 1678. Being a Day of FAST and
HUMILIATION.

By Mr. Joseph Rowlandson Pastor of the Church of Christ there. Being also his
last SERMON.

2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye be with him, and if ye seek him,
he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

Hos. 9.12. Woe also to them, when I depart from them.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND Printed for John Ratcliffe, and John Griffin. 1682.

To the Courteous READER, (especially the Inhabitants of the Town of
Weathersfield, and Lancaster, in New England.
Gods forsaking of such as he has been near to, is a thing of such weight, and
solemnity, and has such bitter effects, that it is a meet Subject, (especially
in a dark and mourning day) for Ministers to speak to, and for People to hear
of: that the one may warn of the danger, and the other avoid the judgment. As
Gods presence is the greatest glory to a People on this side Heaven, so his
absence is the greatest misery on this side hell; this therefore must needs be
a concerning point, to such as will concern themselves in their concernments.
The ensuing Sermon will appear a solemn word, if duly considered: the subject
matter is very solemn and weighty, (Treating of Gods being with, or forsaking a
people) the time when it was delivered was a solemn time, (a day of FAST
throughout the Colonies) the Reverend Author that Composed, and Preached it;
was one solemn and serious above many others, and that which adds one great
circumstance to its solemnity, is, in that it was the last word he spoke to the
World, being but about two days before he left it. As it is solemn, so it is
seasonable, and pertinent. It is a time wherein we have given God just cause to
forsake us. a time wherein God is threatening to forsake us. A time wherein God
has in some measure forsaken us already, and what can be more seasonable, then
to show the evils that befall a forsaken People, that we may yet be awakened,
and return, that the Lord do not forsake us utterly.

As for the Reverend Author, there needs nothing to be said in his
commendation, he was known amongst the Churches in the Wilderness, and known to
be a workman that needed not to be ashamed. That his Name (which was sometimes
precious amongst those that knew him) may not be forgot, and that being dead,
he may yet speak to a land that have in some measure forsook their God, and are
in danger of being forsaken, is the ground work of the publishing this small
part of his labors. It is commended especially to the perusal of the
Inhabitants of Lancaster and Weathersfield: He was a Man well known to you, the
one had his Life, and the other his death; and both his loss, you cannot easily
forget his name, and it is desired that you may not forget the labor and
travel, he has had amongst you; the word which he Preached to you was
acceptable whilst he was living, and it is presumed it will be accepted with
the like candor now he is dead. Indeed had it been intended, and fitted by
himself for the Press, you might have expected, and found it more large, and
polished; but as it is, it is thought fit, not to be lost, and may be of great
use, and benefit, to open to us the danger of forsaking God, to humble us for
all our coolings, and declinings from God, to quicken us in our return to, and
close walking with God, and that it may attain this end, is the hearts desire,
and prayer of him, who abundantly wishes thy welfare, and prosperity in Christ
Jesus.

B. VV.

Jeremiah 23.33. And when this People, or the Prophet, or a Priest, shall ask
thee, saying, what is the burden of the Lord? thou shall then say unto them,
what burden? I will even forsake you; says the Lord.


IN the Words, there lies before us, (First) A Question, supposed, to be
propounded, wherein there is two things: 1. The Questionists, this People, or a
Prophet, or a Priest. 2. The Question it self, or the matter of it, What is the
burden of the Lord? (Secondly,) There is an Answer, and a solemn Answer too,
which is put into his mouth by the Lord, and which he is to return as the Lords
Answer to the Question? thou shall then say unto them, what burden? I will even
forsake you, says the Lord.

In which Answer there is three things.

1. An expression of Indignation, What burden? 2. An assertion by way of Answer
to the question, I will forsake you. 3. A Seal of ratification, in the last
words, Says the Lord.
God having before dealt with the Pastors, that did destroy, and scatter the
flock, as in the beginning of the Chapter, Woe be to the Pastors that destroy
and scatter the sheep of my pasture, and ver. 2 I will visit upon you the evil
of your doings, says the Lord, and also with the false Prophets, that
prophesied lies in his Name, as ver. 9. My heart within me is broken because of
the Prophets, and ver. 32. Behold I am against them, that prophecy false
dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their
lies, and by their lightness: which sort of Prophets went without their
Commission, as ver. 21. I have not sent these Prophets yet they ran. He
proceeds from the head Rulers, to the people that were seduced by them: for by
this means their hands were strengthened in sin, so as that they did not return
from their wickedness, as ver 14. It was a usual thing for the Prophets of the
Lord, to begin their Sermons (the matter whereof was minatory, wherein the Lord
threatened them with just judgments) with that Phrase, the burden of the Lord,
as will easily appear if you consult, Isai. 13.1. and 15.1. and 22.1. and 30,
6. Now they do in the words of the Text, or are supposed in mockery to demand,
what Burden he had from the Lord, for them.

For the opening of the words And: or moreover because he here enters upon new
matter: this People, or the profane sort of them, whom the false Prophets had
secuced, to which he joins the Prophet, and the Priest, in hit they were alike
profane, as ver. 11. for both Prophet and Priest are profane, yea in my
house, says the Lord: and when Prophets are profane there is wont to be a
pack of them, as Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophesies falsely, and the Priests
bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so: shall ask thee
saying, viz. in a deriding way, not out of a holy end, or desire, What is the
burden of the Lora? or from the Lord? so were the Prophesies styled, that
contained in them, Threatenings, Judgments, and Plagues, 2 King. 9.25. as if
they had said, what have thou further mischief in thy head to declare? further
Woes and Threatenings to pronounce? have thou nothing else to prophecy, but
Mischief and Calamity? What is the burden now? Thou shall then say unto them,
the Lord know what they would say to him, and tells him what he should say, by
way of reply, What burden? a retorting by way of holy indignation; ask ye
indeed what burden? and that in a way of derision? are you of that strain, and
spirit? I will even forsake you says the Lord: a burden heavy enough, and you
are like to seel it so ere long, heavy enough to break your Backs, to break
your Church, and your Common wealth, and to sink your haughty Spirits, when
this Burden shall come upon you, in its force and weight.

Doct. That the Lord may even forsake a People that have been near to him, and
he has been near to, though for the Lord thus to do, is as fearful and hideous
a judgment as can be inflicted on any People.

The Doctrine is double, it has two parts:

First, That the Lord may do thus.

Secondly, When he does, it is a very sad and heavy burden. It may be
prosecuted as two distinct points.

1. P. 1.
God may forsake a People that has been near to him, and that he has been
near to. This may be spoken to in this order. 1. What is meant by Gods
forsaking a People. 2. How may it appear that God may forsake, even such a
People as the point speaks of? 3. The Reasons. 4. The use.
1.

Sol. It means Gods with drawing himself, as the Prophe: Hosea phraises it,
Hos. 5.6. They shall go with their Flocks and their Herds to seek the Lord, but
shall not find him, he has withdrawn himself from them. They shall seek him,
and not find him, and there is a good reason, he has withdrawn himself, he is
gone, in respect of his gracious presence. We must here distinguish betwixt
Gods general presence, and his precious presence. In respect of his general
presence, he is not far from any one of us, for in him we live, and move, and
have our being, Act. 17.27, 28. We have not only our beginning from, but our
being in him. As the beam has its being in the Sun. Of this general presence
of God, we read, Psalm. 139.7. There is no flying from it. Whither shall I go
from thy Spirit, or whither shall I sly from thy presence? In this sense God
is every where, as it is ver. 8, and 9. If I ascend up into Heaven thou art
there: if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there. He fills Heaven and
Earth, and there is no hiding from him, Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in
secret places, that I shall not see him,? says the Lord do not I fill Heaven
and Earth? says the Lord. He has Heaven for his Throne, and the Earth for his
Footstool, as it is, Isai. 66.1. This general presence of God, if believingly
apprehended, and strongly believed, might be of great use.

But it is not this general presence that is meant: but his especial presence,
his favorable and gracious presence, the removing whereof, is that that is
intended, by the forsaking that the Text and Point speaks of. God is said to
forsake a People two waves.

1. As to Affection. 2. As to Action.
1. As to Affection, when he discontinues his love to them, when he takes away
his love from a people, then he takes his leave of a people. My mind is not
toward this people, Jer. 15.1. a very heavy Judgment, and sad removal. Be
instructed O Jerusalem, least my Soul depart from thee.

2. As to Action, when God takes away the signs of his presence.

1. When he takes away merciful and gracious providence, when he carries not
toward them as he was wont to do: but vexes them with all manner of adversity,
Deuteronomy. 31.17. I will forsake them, and many evils and troubles shall befall them:
when he ceases to protect them from evils, and enemies, as in times past, and
provides not for them, as he was wont to do. 2. When he takes away his
Ordinances, and bereaves a people of the glorious things of his house; or take
away his spirit from accompanying them, whereby the glory ceases, and the
ordinances are rendered in effectual for the saving good of a people.

2.

It may appear by what God has threatened. What God has threatened, to such as
the point speaks of, may be inflicted on them: but God has threatened such
judgments to such a people. My anger shall be kindled against them, and I will
forsake them, as near as they are to me, and as dear as they have been to to
me, Deuteronomy, 31.17. Many such threatenings are found in the Scripture against
Israel, who are styled a people near unto him.

In that such as have been near to God, and he near to them, have complained of
their being forsaken by God. Thou have forsaken us, is one of the bitter moans,
on record, that the Church of God did often make unto him

What God has inflicted on such, may be inflicted on such again; what God has
done to some, he may do to others, in the same state, and relation: for he is
unchangeable. Those that were once the only peculiar people of God, near to
God, and had God near to them, yet what is is their condition at this day? A
forsaken condition, is the condition, of the Off spring of Abrahaem Gods
Friend, a seed whom he had chosen, and has been so, for above sixteen hundred
years. God has been angry with them, and forsaken them, as they were foretold
long ago. How is it with the Churches of Asia, that were once famous golden
Candlesticks? that had Epistles written to them. Are they not in a forsaken
condition? not the face of a Church to be found amongst them.

In that they may do that, which may deserve a forsaking, therefore they may do
that which may actually procure it. They may do that which may deserve a
forsaking, they may through the corruption and unbelief of their hearts forsake
God, and God may in just judgment retaliate, and thereupon forsake them. This
is spoken to in the forequoted place, Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17. They will forsake me,
and break my Covenant which I have made with them: then my anger shall be
kindled against them in that day, and I will forfake them, and hide my face
from them. So again, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. But if you forsake him he will forsake you;
the first is supposed, if you forsake him, the latter is imposed, he will
forsake you:

But why does the Lord forsake such a People?

1. To show that he has no need of any, he has forsaken many, and may forsake
many more, to show that he has no need of any. God would have all the world to
take notice, (that though all men have need of him, yet) he has no need of any
man.

2. To testify his Sanctity, and severity against sin. He will not spare them,
that have been near him, if they will not spare their sin for him. He is a holy
God, and if they will have their sins, and their lusts, and their ways, and
their lovers, he will vindicate his holiness, by inflicting this judgment on
them.

3. To be a warning to all that enjoy his gracious presence. That they see that
they make much of it, and that they take heed that they do not sin against him,
and forsake him, and provoke him to forsake them also.

Caut. The point is to be understood of a people that are visibly and
externally near and dear to him, and these may be totally and finally forsaken
of God: and yet here it must be noted, that God may exercise a deal of
patience, and forbearance toward such as he is about to forsake, he did so with
the old world, he did so with the Israelites of old, he did so with the seven
Churches of Asia: he is not wont suddenly, and at once to forsake a people,
that have been near and dear to him; but he is wont to give them warning, and
in patience to bear a while with their frowardness, and wait to see if there be
any returning to him, before he does inflict this heavy and sharp judgment.

Use It serves to admonish us, Micah 3.10, 11. They build up Sion with blood,
and Jerusalem with iniquity, yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not
the Lord amongst us? But if our deportment be not according to our privileges,
if we do not carry it thereafter, by becoming an humble, fruitful, and holy
people; the Lord will bring forth this heavy burden against us, we shall be
rejected, and forsaken of the Lord, whatever our external privileges be.

But the second part of the Doctrine; P. 2.
or the second Doctrine may be now spoken to, viz.

That it is the heaviest burden, or the sorest of Judgments for the Lord to
forsake a people.

There may be two things spoken to in the management of this truth. 1.
Arguments to evidence it. 2. The Uses of it.

1. If God has threatened it as a very sore judgment, then sure it is so. Now
when God has been angry with a people, he has manifested the same by menacing
them with his forsaking them: when he has been designed to do them a deep
dispseasure, upon the account of some high provocation he is wont to threaten
them not by taking away this, or that outward comfort from them; but by taking
away himself from them.

And that is a woe indeed, a woe with a witness, Hos. 9.12. Yea, woe also to
them, when I depart from them: this is the wofullest day that such a people are
wont to meet with.

2. Gods forsaking a People is a sore judgment, in that it exposes them to all
judgments. Sin is a great evil in that it exposes to all evil this is a great
evil of punishment, in that it exposes to all punishments. If God be gone, our
guard is gone, and we are as a City, in the midst of Enemies, whose walls are
broken down. Our strength to make resistance, that is Gone, for God is our
strength, as a carcass without life, is a prey, to beasts of prey; so are a
people forsaken of their God, to all their devouring enemies, and to infernal,
and cursed spirits: they are exposed to mischief, and the malice of all their
malignant enemies. When the Lord had forsaken Jerusalem, the Romans quickly
made a prey of it; when they were destitute of God, their habitation became
desolate. There is no Protection to a People, whom the Lord forsakes; but they
are perplexed on every side.

3. Because the evils that are on such, whom God has forsaken, they are only
evils. The Prophet Ezekiel sometime has the expression, Ezekiel. 7.5. Thus says
the Lord God, an evil, an only evil behold is come. This is such an evil, an
only evil to a people. An evil whilst God is present, may have much good in it,
the Lord may sanctify it for abundance of blessing: there is hopes of this
whilst the Lord continues amongst them; but if he be gone, it is an only evil,
and the evils that come upon them are such, they have nothing but evil in them.

4. Because no creature can then afford any help; for what can creatures do
when God is departed, he makes the creatures useful and helpful, but without
him they can do us no good, stand us in no stead: they may say to thee as the
King of Israel, said to the Woman, that cried Help O King, He answered, If the
Lord done help, whence shall I help thee? all creatures may say if God be
departed, we cannot help: Nay the very Devil cannot help if God be gone: when
God departed from Saul, he sought help from the Devil, 1 Samuel 28.15. Wherefore
(says the Devil) ask thou of me? seeing the Lord is departed from thee.

5. It appears to be a sore judgment, by the anguish and distress, that such
have been in, that have been sensible that God has forsaken them. Sin has
flown in the face of such, and terified them: Oh the blessed God is gone, and
if he is gone, mercy is gone; and Oh for such and such sins, that lie upon me!
what shall I do? what a moan have Saints themselves made in such a case? as
David, Psalm. 22.1, 2. My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou
so far from helping me? and from the words of my roaring? Oh my God, I cry in
the day time, but thou hear not, and in the night season, and am not silent.
Oh how Saul roared out his distress! and that on this account especially, that
God was departed from him, not so much that the Philistines were upon him, had
not God been gone, he could have dealt well enough with them; but here was the
misery, and the sting of the misery, God was departed from him.

6 It is a sore punishment, in that it is a great part of the punishment of
Hell. The essential parts of that punishment, is pain of loss, and sense, and
the sormer some reckon the greater.

Use 1. How foolish are sinners that do even bid God depart from them? as we
read, Job 21.14. Therefore they say unto God depart from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways. But do they know what they say? Oh sinners is this
your wish? if it be granted it will prove your woe for ever. Happily Gods
presence is now your trouble; but I tell you his absence would be your torment.

2. Se here what an evil it is to forsake God, is it a judgment of judgments
to be forsaken of God? surely then it is the sin of sins to forsake him: the
evil of punishment is in being left by God, and the evil of sin is in leaving
God. What, forsake God, who is our only good? God who made us, and possessed us
from our beginning, God that has been the guide of our Youth, that has been
good to us, and fed us all our days? Jer. 2.19. Know therefore and see, that
it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. And
there is an aggravation of it, ver. 17. Thou have forsaken the Lord thy God,
When he led thee by the way. As a guide to direct thee, as a staff to support
thee, as a convoy to guard thee, as a Fathe to provide for thee, that thou have
wanted nothing: well may it be said, how evil and bitter a thing is it, that
thou have forsaken the Lord? He adds in the 31. verse. Oh Generation!
Generation of what? of what you will; God leaves a space that you may write,
what you please, generation of Vipers, or Monsters, or any thing rather then
Generation of Gods people. See ye the word of the Lord behold your face in that
Glass. So your causless apostasies, have I been a wilderness unto Israel? Have
you wanted any thing, Oh ye degenerating crooked, and wilful generation? God
may say to such sinners, as Pharaoh to Hadad, when he would be gone, 1 King.
11.22. But what have thou lacked with me, that thou seek to be gone? what
have thou lacked sinner, that thou seek to be gone from the Lord? The sinner
must answer with him, nothing howbeit let me go in any wise. He came to him in
his distress, and when his turn was answered, away he packs. They forsake
because they will forsake.

3. Wonder not that Gods Saints have been so solicitous with him, not to
forsake them. Thus David, Psalm. 1198. Oh forsake me not utterly. He might well
be solicitous in this matter, for he understood what it was to be forsaken of
the Lord. They press hard with the Lord whatever he does he would not leave
them, nor forsake them. Jer. 14.9. Leave us not. And no wonder, there are such
moans, when the Lord may have seemed, to have forsaken them.

4. If Gods forsaking be so sore a judgment, it should make us more cautelous,
and wary least we pull down this judgment on our heads. Men should be afraid
of this heaviest of judgments, more then the Child of whipping.

5. Let Gods dear ones take heed of concluding against themselves, that they
are under this judgment. They are readiest to couclude against themselves, and
yet really in the least danger. Thus we read, Isa. 49.14. But Zion said, the
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. But why said Zion so? it
was from diffidence: as Saints do not forsake God as others do, Psalm 18.21. I
have not wickedly departed from my God: so God will not forsake them as he
forsakes others not utterly forsake them: His forsaking of his is but
temporary, and partial.

But here a question may be moved what is the difference betwixt a sinner
forsaken and a Saint forsaken? for the Lord does not forsake both alike. 1.
When God forsakes his own, yet they cry after him, he withdraws himself from
them sometimes, yet so as that he draws their hearts after him as a mother may
hide away from her Child, that it may seek and cry the mor earnestly after her.
2 They retain good thoughts of him in his withdrawment, or absence. As the
Spouse in the Canticles, she calls him her beloved still. As the faithful wife:
she retains good thoughts of her husband, and keeps up her respect, though he
be gone from home but the wicked when the Lord forsakes them, harhour hard
thoughts of him. Is this to serve the Lord, and walk in his ways? what good
have I got by all I have done? see how he has served me.

3. They will seek him, till he return again, when the Lord forsakes others,
the will sees after vinities to make up the want of Gods presence. The
Adustress in her Husbands absence will seek after other leavers. The true Saint
will be satisfied in nothing else but the Lord till he return. Moreover there
is a difference in Gods forsaking the sinner and the Saint, when he forsakes
the wicked (...) in darkness: but when he withdraws from his own he leaves some
light, whereby they see which way he is gone, he leaves some glimmering light,
by which they may follow after him, and find him.

And again, when he leaves his own, yet his bowels are owards them, Jer. 31.20
My bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the
Lord. He has an eye toward them for much good, in his forsaking them.

Use. 2. Of Exhortation: 1. To thankfulness to God, or that he has not yet
forsaken us. Whatever he has stripped us off, he has not yet stripped us off
himself, he has not as yet forsaken us. He might have done it, and have done
us no wrong; but he has not yet done it.

2. To do our utmost that he may not forsake us. And here there may be added
Motives and Means.

1. Consider Gods lothness to forsake us. This is a thing that he is not
desirous of he does not willingly afflict us with this fort of Affliction, or
grieve us with this grievous stroke. God has showed himself loath to depart
from those that have departed from him; but have warned them of his
displeasure, that they might stay him. It goes near Gods heart to forsake a
People that have been near to him. Methinks I hear him saying thus, How shall I
give thee up, Oh New England! thence speaking to warn us, of. our forsakings of
him, and to be instructed, why? least his Spirit depart from us, Jer. 6.8. Be
thou instructed Oh Jerusalem, least my Soul depart from thee, least I make thee
desolate, a land not inhabited. You may easily stay him, the matter is not so
far gone, but you might yet stay him were we but as loath he should forsake us,
as he is to forsake us, he would never leave us. His gradual motions from a
people argue his lothness, and unwillingness to leave them.

2. Consider what the Lord is to us, or what relation he stands in to us, while
he is with us. He is our friend, we have found him to be so, and a special
friend too: men in the World are not willing to forego a Friend, a good Friend:
he is as faithful, skilful, powerful, and tender hearted a Friend as ever a
people had, he stuck by us when also we had been in a woe case, Psalm. 124.1. If
it had not been the Lord, who was on our side may Israel now say. And had not
the Lord been on our side, may New England now say. He is a Father, and a
tenderhearted Father, Isai. 63.16, Doubtless thou art our Father. Can children
be willing their Father should leave them? he is a Husband, Isai. 54.5. For thy
Maker is thy Husband, a loving, careful, tender husband too; can the Wise be
willing to part with her Husband? if the Lord forsake us, we are bereft of our
friend, left friendless, he is all friends in one, none can be our friend, if
he be not. If he leave us, we shall be as Orphans, for he is related as a
Father, and how sad is the state of poor Orphans: and we shall be in a state of
Widow-hood, a very solitary, and sorrowful state. He is our guide, and our
pilot; what will become of the blind if their guide leave them? and what will
become of the Ship if the Pilot desert it? thus the Lord is to his, and well
may he say, as Mic. 6.3. Oh my People what have I done? or wherein have I
wearied thee, or given thee any cause to be weary of me.

3. Consider there are shrewd signs of Gods intent to leave us, unless somewhat
be done. If you enquire what? I Answer:

1. The sins for which God has forsaken others are rife amongst us. The sins
for which God forsook the Jews, are our sins.

1. Horrid Pride, Hos. 5.5. The Pride of Israel does testify to his face.
Pride in Parts, and pride of Hearts, pride in Apparel, and Vestures, and in
Gestures, and in Looks, how lofty are their eyes! New England is taken notice
of abroad, for as proud a People, of a professing people, as the World affords.
When a People are humble the Lord will say with them. If our immunities, which
are Gods mercies, puff us up, God will empty us: he will blast that to us that
we are proud of.

2. Deep and high Ingratitude. Do you thus requite the Lord? Deuteronomy. 32.6. So the
Prophet Hosea taxes them, Hos. 2, 8. God gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil,
silver and Gold, but she consumed them on Baal. We have been blessed but has God
had the glory of our blessings.

3. Oppression. Amos 8.4. Ye that swallow up the needy. These Jews were like
the Fishes, the greater did devour the less. Some are like wild Beasts, like
Wolves that tear off the fleece, and eat the flesh of the Flocks. There is more
justice to be found in hell, then amongst some men on earth: for there is no
innocent person oppressed there.

4. Weariness of Gods Ordinances. Amos 8.5. When will the Sabbath be done? They
that are weary of the service of God, and the Ordinances of God, they are weary
of God. God indeed has fed us to the full, as to Ordinances: and we are
glutted, and surfeited, and have lost our esteem.

When men's Commodities bare but a little price in a place, they will remove the
market! if Gospel Ordinances are but a cheap commodity, have lost their price,
and men are weary of them: God will let out his Vineyard to another People. If
our mercies become our burdens, God will ease us of them.

5. Cousenage in men's dealings, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great,
selling the refuse of Wheat, Amos 8.5, 6. They pick out the best Grain for
themselves, and the refuse is to sell.

6. Idolatry, which is Spiritual Adultery, and is there nothing of this?
choosing of new Gods.

7. Incorrigibleness, or opposition of a spirit of reformation. When God calls
to a People to return, by repentance, but they will go on still in their sin:
God calls to them by his judgments, and by his Rod; but they will not hear, as
it is Ier. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have
consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction: they have made
their faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return. When it is thus
with a People, God will pluck up and be gone; so Ier. 7.13, 14 Because they
would not hear, and would not answer the call of God, I will do to this house,
as I did to Shiloh, why? what did the Lord do to Shiloh? ver. 12. Go to Shilch,
and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my People Israel. Go, and view
it, and you will see what he did, he left tokens of his wrath upon them, and
forsook them.

2. Another sign of his intent to forsake us, is, in that he is dealing, with
us as he is wont to deal with them that he is about to forsake. He takes away
those that are mostly with him. He will take away his Moses's those that stand
in the Gap, and binds his hands with their Prayers, when he is designed to pour
out wrath upon a People: he will remove be lights, when he is about to darken a
land. W^^e men send away their Plate and Jewels and choice things; it intimates
their intention of removal

3. Another sign is our Luke warmness, and Indifferency in Religion: a usual
forerunner of its removal When a People care not for God, and the things of
God, he has lest them in some measure, already, and if that Spirit abide he
will not tarry long with them.

Use 1 Of Direction. 1. Examine and humble your selves, for all your departures
from God, your forsakings of him; humble your selves for them, confessing with
bitterness your evil therein bemoaning your selves before the Lord upon the
account thereof. May the Lord hear his People, from Dan to Beersheba bemoaning
themselves, Ephraim like, then the Lord will hear, and have mercy, and not
leave us, for his Names sake.

2. Judge your selves worthy to be forsaken, because of your forsaking of him.
If you judge your selves worthy to be forsaken, God will not judge you worthy
to be forsaken, 1 Cor. 11.31.

3. Pray the Lord not to forsake you, the Lord is sometimes staid with Prayers:
Prayers have prevailed with his Majesty often, and may do again.

4. Forsake your sins, whereby you have forsaken him. Nothing less then this
will prevent this mischief, coming upon us. If there be any, either Son or
Daughter that will not leave their fins for God, God will leave such.

FINIS.
ERRATA. In the Preface to Mrs. Rowlandsons Narrative Page 1. Line 3. for
Thursday read Tuesday.


