A CLEAR DEMONSTRATION OF A Righteous and Ungodly Man, in their Frame, Way and
End. CONTAINING five excellent Sermons, preached in the Dutch Tongue by the
Reverend Theod. Jac. Frilinghuisen, Minister of the Holy Gospel at Raraton, in
New Jersey. And now translated into English, by a Wellwisher to Zion's
Prosperity.

NEW YORK, Printed for the Publisher by John Peter Zenger. MDCCXXXI

THE PREFACE.
Discreet Reader;
WHEN I considered the numerous Quantity of Books, (and who knows how many
fruitless ones) which this learned Age has heaped upon one another, and
thereby the great Remissness among Professors in reading, especially Books of
this Nature; I was nevertheless for a long Time very loath, yea unwilling (as
my Friends very well know) to have these Traslations published: Yet the
incessant Desire of some, and the obliging Importunity of others have so far
prevailed upon me, that I have been induced to commit them to the Press; not
expecting they will meet with a general Reception, or be worthily esteemed of,
no, sorrowful Experience, and God's Word teaches, ( Tim. iv 3.
) That many have itching Ears, and can hardly endure sound Doctrine. Alas! how
is now the Prophesy of Amos fulfilled in our Days? ( Amos v 10.
) How are those hated in the Gate who faithfully rebuke Sin, and how are those
shunned who speak uprightly concerning the State of our souls? O! how
unwillingly do the generallity of Professors hear that distinguishing manner of
Preaching, and how strange seems it to them? As if a Servant of Christ should
not any more make a Difference between the ( Jer. xv 19.
Precious and the Vile. Thereforefore it may be no great Wonder (but just Cause
of Grief) if this Book should not be acceptable to all its Readers; the more
because it never was the Author's Design to please Men, in rocking those faster
in sleep ( Amos vi (...).
) who are at Ease in Zion, by Means of a general or undistinguishing manner of
Preaching.

As for the Reason why some may take it to be too distinguishing, is perhaps,
because they have lived long, or yet live under an undistinguishing Ministry,
or because they are not willing to be discovered to themselves, in having a
Knowledge of the State of their Souls, and with the Prodigal, come to
themselves, Luke xv 17. in order to go to Christ, and be saved in God's
appointed Time and Way. But what Reason soever any one may have, it must
nevertheless be granted, that the safest Method which any Ministers can take
(who desire to be faithful to their Lord, and profitable to the immortal Souls
committed to their Charge) is to follow the Practice of the Prophets and
Apostles, whose Method was not to use sordid Speeches and enticing Words, 1
Cor. ii 4. or to detain their Auditors with a Relation of such and such like
People being in the World, or in the Church; no, but thire Method was to speak
some to the Purpose, and that it might be known what Sort of People they had in
View; as, Thou art the Man, 2 Samuel xii 17. Thou have neither Part nor Lot in
this Matter, etc. Act. viii 21. Thou Child of the Devil, Act. xiii 10. Ye
foolish Galatians, Gal. iii 1. Ye Generation of Vipers, Matt. iii 7. And such
like Expressions. This was also the wholesome Practice of the faithful Ministers
in the primitive Church, as in their Writings sufficiently appears, they not
being daunted in the least to drive Peaple into Despair, as our present
Time-Servers (as Rurtherford calls them) imagine they ought, that is guarded
against as if it was the only Way to be lost, whereas Thousands are Lost
through Carelessness, when not one is lost through Despair: And it is
nevertheless certain, that it is neither God's Word, nor sharp Preaching that
brings People to Despair, but their Sins.

And perhaps it will be distasted by others because it is written in too mean a
Style, appearing without any Embelishments of Erudition, not being adorned with
Theological Expressions: But know, that the Author (as the Learned who know him
testify) may nevertheless be numbered among the Rabbis in Israel; and that he
is never at a Loss to utter himself in all manner of suitable Expressions, both
in a Rhetorical and Theological Way, when Occasion so requires. But he has
always thought it more proper and as his Duty, to express himself in such a
plain manner, as he might be best understood by his Auditors, even by those of
the meanest Capacity.

And although his manner of Preaching is not to stuff up his Sermons with
eloquent Expressions, such as are of Men's Composing* yet his fluency of
Preaching is well known and his exceeding Talent, of drawing on^ Matter out of
another, thereby discovering the State and Condition of his Auditors to
themselves (as Experience can plainly evidence, and) as by the following
Discourses may sufficiently appear: But in this as in a great many more
Translations, the Grace and Fluency of the Style of the Original is much lost
in the Translation, which the Translator is Sorry to say, in this is occasioned
by his Want of Letters and Practice in such Cases, this being the first Time
that he ever took in Hand to translate* yet he has, as far as his Capacity
would allow, kept to the Substance of the Matter.

But not to be tedious, and as I said before, although it is not Expected, that
this Treatise will be generally accepted, yet it may be desired by many, if it
was only with Herod, to hear what this Troubler of Israel would say, yet it may
be and is Earnestly prayed for, that instead thereof they may therein find
Sweetness for their Souls and bring them to Salvation in an Effectual manner.

But if any of it is Readers should hap^^n to stand in the Ways asking for the
old Paths, Enquiring where they good Way is being desireous to walk therein,
Is. vi 16. I doubt not but that those will through the Lord's Blessing find
sweet and sure Directions and rest for their wearied Souls. And whereas this
Book is but small, plain and also Clear, therefore I think it needless to give
a large Description of the Subject Matter treated on.

That which next and Chiefly concer^^ us, is to pray unto the Lord that he
would in his Mercy be pleased to accompany this Book with his Blessing, and
that he would graciously be pleased to give all of us suitalble Hearts to take
Notice of those great and saving Truths treated of in the following Sermons: In
them (if we may say) our Lamps are viewed, our Gold so tried and our eternal
Weight laid in the Balance O! my Friends! If we were wise we would Consider
our latter Ends Deuteronomy. xxxii. 29. And would esteem i^ our Happiness that we
still have such Men among us who do so faithfully treat us concerning our
eternal State; the more because there is so few such to be found in these our
Days who set forth truly (...) their Auditors the Condition of their Souls*
I'ts true there be some who often endeavor to discover their Hearers, but they
are generally gross, notorious Sinners, or else the Failings, if not the false
Accusations of the Pious, etc. Perhaps that they might be Despised of by the
world; but as for the Rest as if they were all good Christians, at least as if
they were afraid to disquiet them, for it seems as if nothing else was required
than a Form of Godliness, and therewith they are contented, although the Power
thereof is denied, if not scoffed at and opposed in those who endeavor to
practice it.

But not to exceed the Limnits of a Preface, I shall draw to a Conclusion:
Desireing thee, discreet Reader* to Accept of this small Treatise as a Fruit of
the Author's real Love to the saving of thy Soul especially those of, and near
his own Congregation, to whom this Book is especially Dedicated; and you need
not Question but that the Reverend Author has often been greatly concerned for
you; his Heart, without Doubt, has often been seized with Compassion in
seeing, and hearing of your miserable and deplorable Conditions, especially for
your great Want of a pure evangelical Ministry, seeing your Wanderings like
lost Sheep having no Shepherd, and lying open for all manner of Errors; the
which, as you may realy blieve, often caused him to bend his Knees to God to
have Mercy on you in that respect. And who knows but you will not reap the
Fruits thereof, nay, how has the Lord favored you since with many, yea, pure
means of Grace so that the Lord is even now found of them who sought him not. O
that your Souls might live by these things, Is. xxxxiii. 16. And O! that these
few Leaves might to that end be blessed of the Lord, if it was only as a Hand
full of Corn upon the Top of the Mountains, the Fruit thereof nevertheless
shake like Lebannon, Ps. lxxii. This is the hearty Desire of

your effectionate Friend H. Visscher.

THE CONTENTS
Sermon I. Text. 1 Pet. IV, 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, --
Sermon II. 1 Pet. IV, 18. -- Where shall the ungodly and Sinner appear. Sermon
III. Prove. XIV, 12. There is a Way that seems right unto a Man: But the end
thereof are the Ways of Death. Sermon IV. Is. LXVI, 2. But to this man will I
loost, even to him that is Poor, and of a Contrite Spirit, and trembles at my
Word. Sermon V. 1 Cor. XI, 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily
eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body.
A Faithful Demonstration, etc. THE First Sermon.
1 Pet. IV 18. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly
and Sinner appear.
P Recious Things are Difficult to be obtained, was once a Proverb of the
Ancients. The Truth of this is evident in Things natural, even as Diamonds and
white Pearl are difficult to obtain: But this is also evident in Things Moral,
even as Wisdom and Virtue are the most excellent upon Earth; for the more a Man
possesses thereof, the more acceptable he is in the Eyes of God, of Angels,
and of Men; therefore Solomon sets such a Value upon it, Prove. iii 13, -- 19.
But with what Difficulty are Things Spiritual obtained? For certainly there is
Nothing more beautiful, Nothing more dear, Nothing more amiable, than those
Spiritual Celestial Things which are with God in Christ. But how difficult is
it to obtain them, since they must be fought for, and Violence used for the
Kingdom of Heaven, in order to take it with Violence, Mat. xi.

This is likewise seen in that Merchant, who went and sold all that he had, to
purchase that Pearl which was in the Field, Mat. xiii 44, 45. This Paul also
shows, Know ye not, that they which run in a Race, run all, but one receives
the Prize? So run that ye may obtain. And what was the Prize they were to run
for? The incorruptible Crown of Glory which was hanged up at the End of the
Race, and that is the Salvation which God gives to his Childeren after this
Life. And this is compared to a Crown, because God gives them there the
Victory over all their Enemies, and delivers them from all Conflicts and
painful Labor: But as long as they continue here upon Earth, it is unto them A
Va^ey of Tears, a Way of much Tribulation.

And this is clearly seen, if we do but cast an Eye on the Divine Words of the
Text, wherein the Apostle shows, That the Righteous are saved, although
scarcely, that is, through many Conflicts, with much Difficulty. In the
foregoing Verses the Apostel had shown the sorrowful and wretched End that will
certainly befall the Ungodly, that are disobedient to the Gospel: But to show
the Difference, he says in the Words o^ the Text, that the Righteous shall not
have such an End, but that they shall be saved, although scarcely: But as
concerning the ungodly Sinner he shall be lost. Therefore he joins these Word
to the Words preceding, with the Word [ And If the Righteous scarcely be
saved, etc.

Two Cases are here to he taken notice of.

I. The State of the Righteous, That they shall be saved, although scarcely.

II. The wretched state of the Ungodly (...) Sinners.

For the present we shall be contented with the first Part, viz. That the
Righteous are s^rarce^^ saved, wherein Peter shows, how difficult it for a
Child of God to be saved, wherein thre^ Cases are represented to us,

I. The Persons, which are the Righteous.

II. What he testifies of them, that they shall be saved.

III. The Manner how, to wit, scarcely.

I. AMong all the Titles of Honor wherewith the Chiledren of God are Honored,
(...) also this, that they are called Righteous. This Previledge had not only
Moses, Jo^, Abraham, Lacharias and Elizabeth, and others which were called
Righteous, but also every Child of God is (...) called, and this Name
appertains to all true Believers, as it is Jes. xxvi 2. And therefore they
are altogether called The Generation of the Righteous, Ps. xiv 5. and a
righteous People, Is. xii A righteous Person whereof Peter here speaks is not
such an one that is perfect and without Sin; O no! for such an one is not among
the Posterity of Adam; therefore says Solomon; Eccl. vii 20. There is not a
just Man upon Earth. Prove. xx 9. This every righteous Person with Shame, Grief
and Sorrow must experimentaly confess, which Paul lamented, Romans vii 21. I find
then a Law, that when I would do good, evil (...) present with me. And as the
Church likewise ^^ith, Is. lxiv. None have this Prerogative ^ut the second
Adam, who therefore in an eminent manner bears that Name, for he it is that
knew no Sin, 2 Cor. v 21.

Neither are they Righteous, because that according to what God reuqires in his
Law, Do this and thou shall live, they could thereby be justified. O no! for no
Flesh shall be justified by the Deeds of the Law, Romans iii 20. Therefore Job
says, Job ix 2. How should a Man be just with God. And David Ps. cxxx.

Much less is understood by the Righteous those who justify themselves, and
think they are Righteous, as was the Condition of the Pharisee, Luke xviii 9.
But by the Righteous are here understood,

1. Such Sinners who although in themselves Ungodly, having no Righteousness
whereby to stand in the Judgment of God, but who through Faith have received
the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus, whereby they are acquitted from the Guilt
and Punishment of Sin, and have obtained a Title to Eternal Life.

2. A Righteous Person is such an one who be haveth himself conformable to this
Righteousness, and does what is Right and Just according to Gods Law, and so is
filled with the Fruits (...) Righteousness, Phil. i 11.

3. Who are thereon also justified in their ow^ Conscience, out of their Good
Works, and out of an holy Frame of Heart, which they find it themselves, as a
Fruit of their upright Faith yea, That Gods Spirit Witnesses with the^
Spirits, that they are the Children of God, Rom viii 16.

4 Who likewise through their holy Conversation show that they are Righteous,
so that the^ are also justified in the Consciences of others, an^ are
acknowledged as such. And these now (...) Gods Childeren, Believers, and in
Covenant with the Lord; and these Righteous are put in opposition to Sinners,
and are scarcely saved.

II. BY the Word Save in general is understood to preserve any one, to deliver
or (...) (...) from any Evil, and to bring him over to Happiness and
Well-being; and that in respect either upon temporal Deliverances, as Mat. viii
25. ^hen the Disciples said, Lord save us, we perish, (...) upon mortal
Diseases, as James v 15. The prayer of Faith shall save the Sick; or upon hea^y
Persecutions and hard Tribulations, Mat. xiv 22. But in the New Testament it is
generally taken for the Preservation of the Soul to eternal Life: From whence
Jesus is called The Savior, Mat. 1 21.

But in this Place we must not understand a temporal Salvation, or corporal
Deliverance, although the Righteous are sometimes* Partakers ^^ereof; as Noah
from the Waters of the Deluge: ^ot out of Sodom: The three Children out of
(...) fiery Furnace: Daniel out of the Lions Den: and Peter out of Prison:
Which (as Exemples) ^ere delivered from such Disasters. And that is likewise
the Promise, that the Lord delivers them out of all their Adversities, Ps.
xxxiv (...) here we must understand a Spiritual Deliverance, an everlasting
Salvation, according to Body and Soul; and that Salvation is set in opposition
(...) Damnation, Mark XVI 16. Now as Damnation comprehends in it the highest
Evil, so Salvation comprehends in it the highest Good, which is the Fellowship
with God, which the righteous do here partake of in Grace, and hereafter in
Glory. It is that Salvation, that great ^ood which cannot be written with Pen,
nor uttered with Tongue: And therefore we can say (...) more of it, than, O how
great is thy Goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, Ps. xxxi.

This Salvation the Apostle puts without Disputed that the Righteous shall
enjoy, and so it is in Truth: For to be Righteous is the Way to Salvation. And
this appears

1. Because he is acquitted from the Guilt and Punishment of Sin, and become an
Heir of Eternal Life, and also saved in Hope. Thus says Paul, Romans viii 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies.
And so David discribeth the Blessedness of the Man unto whom God imputes
Righteousness without Works. And this is a perfect Righteousness, and can stand
in Gods Judgment therefore the Church was so Rejoiced, Jes. lx 10. saying, I
will greatly rejoice in the Lord.

2. The Righteous are such who through Faith are in Christ, and thereby
justified in him, (...) Just shall live by his Faith, Hab. ii 4. And b^
Consequence, they are only the Believers, For (...) that believes on the Son
has Life everlasting, Jo^^ iii 36. The Righteous are such Persons who are
sanctified through the Spirit of God, He that doet^ Righteousness, 1 John iii
7. That follows after it, 1 Timothy vi 11. And walk in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord, Luke i 6. Now as without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord Heb. xii 14 Then consequently those who are Partakers of Sanctification
will certainly see the Lord.

3. The Rightoeus are also a Godly People, and Godliness has not only the
Promise of the Life that now is, but also of Li^e Eternal wi^h is to come, 1 Timothy iv 8. And thus it is certain that the Righte^ons are saved, and they only.

III. AND although the Righteous are saved, it is notwithstanding scarcely. This
Word Scarcely must not be understood, as if the Righteous could fall from that
State and be rejected from Salvation, as the Drivers of a Free Will would from
hence seek to prove. Scarcely is no uncertainty, but Difficulty: For the
Salvation of the Righteous, who through Faith in Christ are justified, and
Sanctified by his Spirit, according to Gods Promise is sure and certain and
unalterable, Romans viii 33. Because they are elected from Eternity. Therefore
Paul says, 2 Timothy ii The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal,
the Lord knows them that are his. Howbeit this is not to be understood as if
the Righteous were always to doubt and be uncertain of their Salvation; No; for
that Word has not that Signification: For the Righteous may be assured of
their Salvation, as Paul says, 2 Timothy i 12. For I know in whom I have
believed. And Romans viii 38, 39. For I am persuaded, that nothing shall separate
us from the Love of God. And therefore they are exhorted, To make their Calling
and Election sure, 2 Pet. i 10. Howbeit, the Word scarcely, by Virtue of the
Original Word, signifies Difficulty. So it is taken by the Greeks for any
thing which is hardly and with Difficulty brought to pass. And in this Sense it
is taken Act. xiv 18. And with these Sayings scarcely restrained they the
People that they had not done Sacrifice unto them. Paul and Barnabas with
Difficulty, showing all Signs of their Displeasure in order to hinder them that
they did not do Sacrifice unto them as if they were Gods. And so it is olso
taken, Act. xxvii 16. And running under a certain Island, we had much Work to
come by the Boat. [Or, as the Dutch Translators render it, We could scarcely
come by the Boat.] That is, we got to the Boat, but with much Trouble and
Difficulty. Therefore scarcely is, when any Thing is obtained with Difficulty,
with much Pains and Toil. And so it must be understood here in our Text. The
Righteous then are saved, although scarcely, with much Toil and Pains, through
great Conflicts Tribulations, Oppressions, Anguishes of Hell, Trials and
Chastisements. This the Lord Jesus shows, Luke xiii 24. Strive to enter in at
the straight Gate. There he speaks of a Gate which is straight, through which
we cannot go except we strive, and wherethrough we must break with Violence.
Let us also take Notice of that remarkable Place, Matt. vii 13, 14. The Way of
Life to Heaven is very narrow, because Man's whole Life must be regulated
according to Gods Law, and the Law requires a strict and precise Godliness. So
then, let us see how the Righteous are scarcely saved.

1. With Trouble and much Difficulty are the Righteous saved: For shall they be
saved they they must be born again, Joh. iii 3. God cannot save them unless he
first Spiritually enlivens them, who by Nature are dead in Trespasses and Sins,
Ephesians. ii. Verily there is such Power required in transforming and regenerating
of Sinners, as there was required in creating the whole World: Yea, much
greater! For in the Creation there was nothing that was against God; but now
all that is in a Sinner is in Enmity against God, Romans viii 7.

2. Shall he be saved he must believe; now that is only a Work of God, Joh. vi
29. And what belongs not thereto when a Man shall be brought to God, who
conceits so much of himself and behaves himself in all his Words and Actions as
if he was God himself! What belongs not thereto, to abase and humble haughty
and arrogant Man, and cause him like a poor Beggar to creep as a Worm, and so
to beg God for Mercy. Judas rather chose the Halter than to believe. O! what
belongs not thereto, for one who depends upon his own Righteousness, and
thereon is at Ease, to throw him off from his false Grounds, and to strip him
naked, and drive him out of himself, as one helpless, desperate and lost, in
order to lay hold on Jesus, and so through him to make Peace with God, to be
only saved through the perfect Righteousness of Jesus. It is hard to desire
Christ, and to desire nothing else but Christ. It is Difficult to follow Christ
all the Day, and never to be at Rest until he is found; and therefore, if we
shall believe, certainly the Arm of the Lord must be revealed, Jes. liii
Therefore Paul also says, Ephesians. i 19, 20. That the Work of Faith is an
exceeding Greatness of God's Power, according to the Working of his mighty
Power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead. And
therefore it is Scarcely.

3. Shall he be saved, he must be converted, according to Luke xiii. 3. And
what belongs not thereto? For he must turn from Sin to Virtue from Satan to
God, from himself and all Creatures to Christ? and what is it not a Work for
one who is in Darkness, yea even Darkness it self who cannot find the Way of
Life who is unable and unwilling to return, who is so blind through Self love
that he calls his evil Heart good that has such a salse Hope, from which he
cannot nor will not depart, who is so captivated in the Snare of the Devil,
taken Captive by him at his Will, 2 Timothy ii 26. who is a Child of Wrath, who is
an Enemy of God. O! what belons not thereto to stay such an ungodly, careless
Sinner iu that his Way in order to awaken him. O! what belongs not there unto
for such an one who has forgoten and despised God and has caused God to be his
Enemy, who can expect nothing else but Gods Wrath to Eternity, to bring such an
one again to God, that he might see and enjoy his Favor and Love. Will he not
think, How shall I again become reconciled with God, whereas I am an Enemy, a
Hater of God, when I shall appear before his Holy Presence will be not then
forthwith reject me and cast me into Hell? Should God have a Desire to save
such a Sinner as I am? And therefore it is a difficult Work to cause a Sinner
to believe this, in order to be converted. And therefore he is Scarcely saved

4. Shall he be saved, he must be sanctified for without Holiness no man shall
see the Lord, Heb. xii 14. And what appertains thereto what Pains and Labor
must not the Holy Spirit bestow to sanctify the elect Sinner; for within and
without he is wholly unclean, and loathsome, from his Head to his Feet there is
no soundness in him, Jes. i 6. And thus he must not only to be sanctified in
all what he does and leaves undone, yielding of his Members as Instruments of
Righteousness, and thereby to forsake all, cuting off his right Hand, plucking
out his Eye, Matt. v. that is to leave his most beloved Sins: But he must also
besanctifi^ed inwardly, his Heart must be changed and wholly subverted, Gods
Image must be impressed therein, he must be holy in all his Aims to glorify God
in all Things. And O! what Labor does not that require, that Heart which was
so accustomed to Sin, to Vanity and Folly, and now to sanctify it to a steadfast
Wisdom, this requires a Divine Power. And therefore he is scarcely saved.

5. He is scarcely saved, because he must deny himself, Matt. xvi 24. If any
Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
me, that is in general the old Adam, the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts
must be crucified, Gal. v 24. He must bring his Knowledge in to Captivity to
the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. x 5. He must forsake his own Will, he must
forsake his Affections Lusts and Pleasues, 1 Pet. ii 11. Ep. iv 24. and 5 11.
we must also deny our Honor, Goods and Friends for Christ, yea even our own
Lives, see, Luke xiv 26. If any Man come to me, and hate not his Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children and Brethren and Sisters, yea, his own Life also,
he cannot be my Disciple. How hard is that for a Sinner whose Heart is like
unto a Stone, and yet this must be done, and therefore he is scarcely saved.

6 Because he must be heavenly minded, and forsake all Things visible for
Things invisible, with Paul, count all Things but loss and Dung for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, Phil. iii to disdain the Favor of Men,
the Treasures, Riches and pleasures of this World, and only seek those things
which are above where Christ siteth, Col. iii 1. 2. and to extol Jesus above
ten Thousand, and make him thus known unto the World. But O! what a Labor does
that require. and therefore he is scarcely saved.

7 He is scarcely saved, because he must love God above all, and his Neighbor
as himself, Matt. xxii 37. 40. he must bless them that curse him, do good to
them that hate him, Matt. v 44. But what a difficult Thing is that, even to
love his Enemies. And therefore he is scarcely saved.

8 With Trouble and Difficulty he is saved in himself, since it is very
difficult for a Man who is mortally sick to begin o^ perfom any Labor, yea as
little as an Ethiopian can change his Skin, or a Leopard his Spots, Jer. xiii
23. So little can they do Good who are accustomed to do Evil. They are Dead,
and can do nothing toward their Quickening, so mortally unable are they:
Therefore Paul says, Romans vii 14. I am carnal Sold under Sin. And therefore
Scarcely saved.

9 Hereby comes the Fickleness and the Variableness of Man, when he is
convinced of God, then they resolve to behave themselves otherwise, and commit
that Sin no more, but their Design against that Sin goes over again, and thus
return to folly. And so that sorrow is as a morning Cloud that soon passes
away. And therefore he is scarcely saved.

10 Scarcely and with much Difficulty are the Righteous saved; and beeause God
sometimes leaves them, not for always, but (only) for a Moment, not wholly,
but in respect of that sensible comfortable Grace. Thus the Church complained,
Js. xxxxix 14. The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Hereby
comes that the Lord who is their Light and Strength of their Life, for a time
denies them his wonted Assistance, and lets their Enemies lose upon them, and
thus hides his lovely Presence from them, and seems to be wroth with them, and
writes bitter Things against them, and holds them for his Enemies, Job. xiii
24. 26. Then they are busied with Complaning and Lamenting, asking and seeking,
striving and wrestling. This is seen in Job. vi 2-4 and xiii. 24 in David, Ps.
xiii 1-3. And in Asoph, Ps. 1xxvii. 3-9. And in H^man, Ps. 1xxxvii 14-17 One
unconverted knows nothing of this, he does not know what the missing of Gods
fellowship is, because he has never experienced it therefore knows not what
Sweetness there is in it.

11 With dificulty they are saved, because they meet with many Temtations and
Eencounters of Satan, for the Devil their Adversary goes against them as a
roaring Lion, Pet. v 8. He is nimble and deceitful and always Vigilant and
constantly aims at their destruction, and makes it his Business to draw them
off from God. Therefore in a secret manner he shoots his venomous Dart at
them, to cause them to sin, and to oppose or defile which is good, that it
should not be rightly performed, or darts into them blasphemous Thoughts that
he might lift their Faith, and to bring them to Despair and Doubts. How they
must arm themselves against it, can be seen, Ep. vi 10. 18. It Is then scarcely.

12 Thereby comes the World which lies in wickedness 1 John v. 19. that is
the wicked People with their sinful Companions, who are as Satan's Instruments
for all what is he cannot do himself, that he does through them as his
Instruments, for he rules in the Children of disobedience, and these he stireth
up to destroy the Godly: At one time representing unto them by false Flatteries
all with handsome, honorable profitable to entice Souls: At other times
persecuting them with wicked Slanders and disdainful Lies and evil
Threatenings, which the Righteous must so much suffer of the Wicked, and that
for the name of Christ, Matt. v. 11. 1 Pet. ii 19, 20. an thus they must go
through a good and evil Report, 2 Cor. vi 8. and all this they must overcome,
which can never be without striving, Therefore it is scarcely.

13 Moreover they have also got a deceitful, seducing and subtle Heart, that
evil and corrupted Nature which constantly turns them aside. For the Heart is
deceitful yea mortally deceitful above all Things, Jer. xvii 19. Js. xxxxii 20.
so every one that is tempted is drawn away of his own lusts, James. i 14. For
that Heart which is a Slough of Uncleanness which constantly excites to Sin,
yea it constantly issues forth Sin, therefore the Heart must be kept, above
all that is to be kept, Prove. iv 23. And therefore we must crucify the old Man,
and mortify the Members which are upon the Earth, Col. iii 5. and bring the
Body into Subjection making no Provision for the flesh, 1 Cor. ix 27. and Romans
xiii 14. From hence that Wrestling, that Watching and Praying against Sin. From
hence likewise their Tears, Sorrow and Wailing with Paul, Romans vii. O wretched
Man that (...) am! Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! And all
this occasions a continual Strife.

14 And lastly, by all this yet comes all Tribulations and Adversities which
so heavily and so often do shock the Righteous: For many are the Afflictions of
the Righteous Ps. xxxiii* 19. And through much Tribulation they only mu^^
enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts. xiv. 2^ And who can number the Disasters
they meet wit^ in this Vale of Tears, in their Persons, Families, Estates and
Callings, and in their Honor and good Name, How often do they suffer Sickness,
Poverty, Griefs, Disasters, and Violence Slanders and Persecutions, the one
Evil is scarc^ gone, but the other is come, so that innumerable Evils compass
them about, Ps. xxxx 12. And how hard is this for the Flesh. Hereby comes that
miserable and grievous Sense and ^ear because of the Punishment of Sin and this
^s yet the Bitterest for them, Ps. xxv 17. The troubles of my heart are
enlarged, O bring thou (...) out of my Distresses: For that Reason when God
speaks against Obtaining of Salvation, ^seth such Phrases which Signify great
Labor, Pains and Trouble. The working out of our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, Phil. ii 12. To seek, Matt. vi 33. to strive, Luke xiii 24. Where
the Savior speaks of striving which al^^des to a Warrior, who has got many
and strong Enemies, against which he must strive, in order to conquer them. And
so must also a Child of God strive against his Enemies in the Work of Salvation
and so use Violence, Matt. xi ^2. and run the Race, 1 Cor ix 24 and follow
after Perfection Phil. iii 12. and exercise himself, exercise thy self unto
Godliness, this Word ^n the origenal also Signefies Wrestling, a Comparison
taken from Champions in Wrestling-Places, and thereto are all Exhortations to
be valiant as a Champion in the Battle, entirely armed, Cap-a-pe, from head to
Feet that he might win the Battle. and carry away the Crown of Life, and so to
watch standing fast in the faith, quiting himself like a Man, 1 Cor. xvi 13. to
fight the good Fight, 1 Timothy vi 12. and be steadfast and unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, 1 Cor. xv 58. See there all these Phrases
are to let us know that those that shall be saved will not easily be saved, but
through much Strife, with much Labor and Pains, and that by reason of the
Unworthiness of their Works, by reason of the Lust between Flesh and Spirit, by
reason of the Corruptableness of their Hearts, the Narrowness of that Way, the
Difficulty of good Works, the Imperfectness of their Righteousness, and because
of the severe Justice of the Judge.

APLICATION.
WEll Hearers! are the Righteous with so much Difficulty and scarely saved,
then we must not think that Salvation is easily to be obtained; if we will not
contradict Gods Word then verily Salvation must be quite another Matter as the
most of People do imagine who notwithstanding hope to be saved, for they think
that it is very well with them, and that they shall be saved, if they do but
shun outward gross Sins, and live modest and orderly, if they do but observe
those external Duties of Religion, and be deligent in their Calling: O poor
Souls! Should that be Godliness and the narrow Way to life? O no, to refrain
from outward Sins, to seek Virtue, to live modest and orderly, why that has
been the Life of the Heathen, as Christ Says, Do not even the Publicans so,
Matt. v 47. Although God in his Word says it so exprelyssly that there is
samething else required to Salvation, and that the Way to Heaven is very
narrow: and notwithstanding People persuade themselves of Salvation and think
to obtain it so easily. They don't examine whether they are Righteous, and
trouble not themselves whether they are in a State of Grace, and whether they
have an Interest in Christ, but they content themselves merely with a vain
Imagination, and rest on a civil Conversation, supporting themselves because
they are Baptized, made a Confession of their Faith, and so go to the Lords
Supper, observe going to Church, reading of Gods Word, and with that they are
well Satisfied, and are in the mean Time moiling and toiling like Moles in the
Earth, and that only to obtain a great Estate, and doubt not in the least but
that they shall be saved, that is held for certain: But know O vain Man! that
you will not get there so, those Things must also be done, but they are not
sufficient for Salvation Gods Spirit says by the Mouth of Peter. That the
Righteous are but scarcely saved; and do you think to come there so easily? O
no! you deceive your selves miserably, and are quite at a loss, the God of this
World has blinded your Minds, and keeps you Captive in his Snares, 2 Cor. iv 4.
2 Timothy ii 62. And whilst he Promises you Heaven, be assured that Hell will be
your Portion, hear what the Mouth of Truth says, Matt. vii 21 -- 23. Not every
one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven. Many will say unto me in
that Day Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name have
cast out Devils? And in thy Name have done many wonderful Works? And then I
will prosess unto them I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that work Iniquity.

O careless and unconverted Sinners, who are not concerned about the State of
your Souls, and fancy that you will be saved, who persuaded you that you will
so easily get to Heaven; judge your selves, would not then Peter, have spoken
wrong, that the Righteous are but scarcely saved? should not then the Lord
Jesus wrongfully have discribed the Way to Salvation to be so narrow. If you
should be saved in your carnal, vain, worldly-minded and careless Life, through
such a customary Worship, then it would not be Scarely, but Easily; your Manner
of Living is certainly no strict Godliness, and should not the Disciples and
Martyrs and the best of Saints have been Fools to have done so much and have
lived so percisely? And yet they have been so concerned against their
Salvation, and should you go on so carelessly and yet be saved? O let not your
deceitful Heart thus deceive you, shut not wilfully thus your Eyes in
imagining any longer to be so easily saved; know certainly and believe that
your deceitful Heart turns you aside, and tha^ you feed your selves with
Ashes, and that you are thus posting with at Lie in your right Hand to
Eternity, How should a regenerated Christian daily pour out so many fervent
Prayers and heartbreaking Supplications to God, and so many fervent Tears, and
thereby to be so straightened and troubled for Sin, and so valiantly oppose the
same, and moreover endure so many Temptations and Tribulations before he is
saved? And should you with a faint Sigh to God, with some usual Prayers be an
Heir of Salvation? O no; But if you ask, should none be saved but such who just
have such Striving? No, no others. This the one experiences more* the other
less. and there be none but what find something of it And such an One will find
his Heart when he looks on what is said in the Explanation But do not think
that Striving is a Cause for why the Righteous are saved; O no, that is but
merely free Grace, but this is the Way to salvation, for God ^eads his Children
through Strife to Conquest.

But perhaps you may say, Is that such a dreadful Way, it is enough to affright
me, for who can always live so. But know O Man, that it is but for a time, and
that the suffering of this present Time are not worthy to be compared with the
Glory which shall hereafter be revealed to Gods Favorites. Is the Labor
great, the Reward is much greater, is the Conflict heavy, the Conquest is
glorious, and although it continues long, it is notwitstanding sure: Therefore if
you have any love (...) your Salvation let not that deter you, O no, you did
but know what Loveliness there is likewise in that Way, you would wtih Moses,
Esteem the Reproach of Christ to be greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt.
For it is not always (...) Time of Oppression nor Misery. O no, The Lord Anger
endures but a Moment, but there is Life i^ his Favor, Ps. xxx 5. The Children
of the Lord do sometimes shout because they have more Gladness in their Hearts
than the Ungodly when their Corn and Wine increases, and in the cxix Ps I have
rejoiced in the Way of thy Testomonies as much as in all Riches^^ (...) ask it
of a Child of God, he will tell you* that he himself in the midst of all his
Tribulation^ would not exchange his State for a Thousand Worlds, O no, but
would say, If a Man would give me all the Substance of his House for this Love,
would, utterly contemn him, Cant. viii. 7.

Well, would you not rather be on this Way or will you rather go, on in the Way
of Sin, and notwithstanding persuade your selves to be saved, O don't persuade
your selves of it, I pray forsake that Soul destroying Opinion, do no^ cheat
your selves any longer upon that false Ho^ but, O! awake, before you do
experience it wha^ it will be too late, and then be sensible that you have
cheated your selves, It is even to be wondered at tha^ you can go on so
contentedly, and fear so little, notwithstanding that the Righteous are but
scarcely saved. Or do you think that you are Righteous. But tell me what Ground
have you for it? The Pharisees thought so too; but they were mistaken. There is
also a Moral Righteousness, as living honest according to the Laws of the
Country, to wrong and injure no Man, giving every one his Due, doing Equity and
Justice to all Men, these Things are also good, and make an Honest Man, but not
a Righteous Christian.

1 Now you must needs acknowledge, That you by Nature, through Original and
Actual Sin are become guilty before God, and that you daily increase your
Guilt, and therefore are Children of Wrath, thereby that you are unable to help
your selves; yea, that you will not because you are Enemies to God. Now the
Question, is whether you find this so in your selves, whether you see and feel
this with Grief and Sorrow, or if you have ever experienced it.

2 Whether that has made you so destressed, that you were as one Miserable,
and at a loss, not kowing what to do to be saved? Where you convinced of Gods
Holiness and Justice, have you thus seen how liable you are to Punishment, that
you could justify God if he shonld cast you into Hell? Have you seen that God
could not forgive you your Sins without bearing the Punishment? (due to Sin)
Does this make you hungry and thirsty after the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus? Did your Heart go out after him? Was he precious in your Eyes? Did you
desire him, and nothing else but him, and were you convinced that you had such
an obsolute Necessity of him.

3 Was your Desire only to Jesus, be justified through him, to be reconciled
and appeased with God, to obtain Gods Favor and live in his Fellowship? Have
you to that End taken your Refuge to the Lord Jesus, and given your Selves over
to him.

4 Was it your desire to be sanctified by virtue of Christ Merits in order to
live holy? Have you experinced this, and do you experience it daily, and do you
thus seek for Reconciliation, for your (...), and do you thus take your Refuge
to the Lord Jesus, through Prayers and Supplications?

5 Do you seek to glorify God in all what you do and with a good Life to edify
your Neighbor and so working out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling,
is this your Ground, then you are very happy. But O! How far is it from it, in
showing the contrary with your Actions.

1 You who still hold to your own Righteousness yet depending on your Heart, or
your good Intentious, that you intend well, yet resting on your outward Duties,
and will do your best, like unto the Armenians.

2 Neither you, who live so carelessly, putting far away the evil day, Amos. vi
3. and therefore walk according to the Course of this World, Ep. ii 2 and only
following the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes, and the pride of
Life, which are not of the Father, but of the World. 1 John ii 16.

3. Neither you, who oppose the Way of God to save you, because you will not live
so strict and precise, and will not go through this way of Tribulation, but could
say, The Way of the Lord is not (...), therefore let us break their Bands
asunder and cast away their Cords from us, For what Profit, is it that we
should serve God and that we keep his Ordinances, and that we have walked
mournfully, Ezekiel. xviii 25. Ps. ii 2. Mal. iii 14.

4 Neither you, who could scoff at such Afflicted Souls, and call that
Operation a Fancy, and think that it is not needful to live so, and therefore
despise their strict Life.

But pray consider in what a miserable Condition thou art, O! that you might
once see your Unhappiness, as long as thou art not a Righteous one, you
certainly yet lie under Gods Wrath under the Curse of the Law, God is unto you
an incenced Judge; and if you continue so, you will certainly be lost, For if
the Righteous are but scarcely, saved then you will not besaved, O Sinner! can
you hear or think of this without Astonishment? Do but consider when you s^all
lie on your Death Bed, with pale Death in your Face, and when your Conscience
shall be awakened, and tell you that you are not Righteous, O then you will
open your broken Eyes and perplexed Mouth, and cry out, O how have I cheated my
self! Now alas! I must experience that the Way to Heaven is Narrow! O how shall
I get on the same? O now it seems it is too late for me the Door seems to be
shut, now it is past Hope, O woe unto me! That I have thus despised the Way of
Salvation, O now I shall be obliged to experience what I would not believe
hereto fore, and therefore O Frightfull Eternity? Therefore be admonished
before you thus experience it.

Do you ask, Wat shall I do? I answer, Seek to obtain a right Sense and
convincing Knowledge of Sin and your damnable State before God, and withal your
mortal Inability, that you cannot help your selves, and that being so, you must
be lost, except the Lord through his free Grace prevents it, and pray to the
Lord that he would impress that State upon your Hearts, that you might become
concerned and distressed about it, and that you thus might as one lost be
driven out of your selves to the Lord Jesus, and to flee to him for Refuge, and
as an Ungodly, and as one worthy to be damned, with a free-willing condemnation
of your selves, give your selves over to him to be justified and sanctified,
freed from Sin, and glorified through him. O you should not rest before you had
attained to this, in order thereto you must earnestly seek the Lord with
Prayers and Suplications; and with Paul you must count all things but Loss and
Dung that you might win Christ, Phil. iii. And to that end you must forsake all
vanities and Wordly Company: For Evil Comunications corrupt good Manners, 1
Cor. xv 33. Therefore you must be diligent to use all Means, as the reading of
God's Word, and to hear it preached, but besides you must have an Impression of
your Inability, so that you must under the Use of the Means look up to the Lord
for his Spirit, and so go forward and rest not, until you are found in Christ,
and set often before you your miserable Condition, and withal, how soon Death
may sieze you, and how you must then appear in Judgment and if you are not
converted in this Life, that then you will be lost; and withal, that the Lord
is willing to help poor Sinners, who do but in Uprightness come unto him. O I
pray you in God's Stead, that you would take this to Heart, that it may not
witness against you in the Day of Judgment. Now I wish, that the Lord through
his Spirit might impress it upon your Hearts, that you thereby may be converted.

O how happy are the Lord's People who are truly Righteous, of them we may say
Blessed is the Nation whose God is the Lord, and the People whom he has
chosen for his own Inheritence, Ps. xxxiii 12. For who shall lay any thing to
the Charge of Gods Elect, Romans viii 33. They have the Expectation of great
Riches; They are partakers of the divine Nature and we may say of them, Happy
art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O People saved of the Lord, Deuteronomy.
xxxiii 29. Verily their Happiness is so great, that it cannot be expressed
albeit it is not yet known, and they while here find it not; but yet they can
glory, Beloved, now are we the Children of God, and it does not yet appear what
we shall be, 1 John iii 2. but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is, It Is true, that here they are despised
Lamps in the Thought of him that is at ease Job. xii 5. But they are precious
in the Eyes of God, their portion is not in this Life, but they ^ave the
Expectation of a better Treasure, here they must enter through much Tribulation
into the Kingdom of God, Acts. xiv 22. Here it (...) with them as it was with
Israel in the Wilderness this World is like a wilderness, and weeping
Wilderness for them to lead them to the heavenly C^naan. Therefore O Children
of God let it not seem strange unto you when many Temptation^ befall you, you
have now heard how scarcely that the the Righteous are saved; O let that
encourage you in your Crosses, be it to the Body or Soul, since this is the
Lord's general Method with his Children, how could it else be said Comfort ye,
Comfort ye my People says your God, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, ^d
(...) unto her that her Warfare is accomplish^^* Jes xxxx 1, 2. Now if the
Lord's People had (...) Sorrow and Strife, then from whence this Comfort Yea
what will that else say, which stands, Rev* vii 17. Of those who serve God
before his Throne Day and Night that God shall wipe away all Tears from their
Eyes, if it be not because the^ have Sorrow and Grief, and therefore shed Tears
Have Courage then, The Lord will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able, but will with the Temptation also make a Way to escape. Thin^ that the
Lord does it unto you for your good when he suffers you to come into
Affliction, for the Lord Chastizeth those he loves, that they might ^e
partakers of his Holiness, Heb. xii. And re^kon with Paul, That the Sufferings
of this present Time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall
be revealed in us, Rom viii 18. Think it is but a short Time, for our light
Afflictions, which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more exeeeding and
eternal Weight of Glory, 2 Cor. ^v 17. And the Lord will once deliver you from
all Crosses, when he through Death shall bring you o^^er into his happy
Comunion, where you will forever (...) with the Lord, and never be separated.
There your Sorrow will be turned into Joy: For the Lamb which is in the midst
of the Throne shall ^^ed you, and shall lead you to the living Fountains (...)
Water, and God shall wipe away all Tears from ^our Eyes. Rev. vii 17. For Light
is sown (...) the Righteous and Gladness for the Upright in Heart, Ps. xcvii 11.

AMEN.
(...) their Deaths; O what is the Difference infinitely gheat when they dye?
What a Difference is there between the Righteous and Ungodly at their Deaths?
They both have one End, but very different, the End of the Righteous is to Joy
and eternal Glory: But the End of the Ungodly is the Pain of the Soul and
wretched Damnation. This we read Ps. xxxvii 37, 38. and i 6.

This also Peter shows in this our Text. The first Part of this Verse we have
already treated on, to wit, of the State of the Righteous. Now follows the
wretched End of the Ungodly. Where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear.

In the Explication of these Words we have two Parts to distinguish.

I. The Persons, the Uungodly and the Sinner.

II. Their unhappy State, where shall they appear.

I. THE Apostle Peter speaks here of Ungodly and Sinners; by which two Words
some Divines think that two Sorts of People must be understood: Some judge that
by Ungodly must be understood all those who are without God, as the unblieving
Heathen, who live without God in the World, without the Covenant of God,
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise. By Sinners they understand Profane
Nominal Christians, who although the confess God with their Mouths, but deny
him him with their Works. Other understand by Ungodly, such who sin against
God, (...) Sinners, such who sin against their Neigh^ours. But this Difference
is uncertain, because ^he Words Ungodly and Sinners are often used
promiscuously, to signify one and the same Person. By Ungodly all Sinners are
understood, Romans iv 5* And by Sinners are often understood those who Exceed in
Ungodliness, who are therefore ranked among Publicans, Luke xv 1. Yea the
Gentiles were called by this Name, Gal. ii 5. We who are Jews by Nature, and
not Sinners of the Gentiles. Some times all those who do not serve, honor nor
obey God, Joh. ix 31. Now we know that God hears not Sinners: But if any Man
be a Worshipper of God, and does his Will, ^im he hears. So that here we may
seasonably understand by Ungodly and Sinners one and the same Person, to wit,
all that are not born again, who are yet in a State of Nature, although the one
sins more than the other; but yet, all, as long as they live in that State
according to their unconverted Hearts are Ungodly and Sinners.

An Ungodly (or Godless) then by virtue of the original Word which we find
here, is such an one who neither honors nor serves God, as it is usual to call
a Man Uncharitable who has no Charity, Remediless who knows no Remedy,
Graceless one who has no Grace, and one who is poor and has no Money, Monyless.

An Ungodly (or Godless) Man then in that Sense, is a Man who is yet in his
Natural State, and therefore (as Paul describes him Ephesians. ii 12.) Without God in
the World, and as he more nearly describes him, Ephesians. iv 8. Having the
Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, having no
spiritual Life, but only active through natural Corruption, so as it proceed^
from the evil Desires of the Heart; whereby he has no Peace nor Rest in his
Mind, but is tossed, troubled and moved, so that his Desires are in a constant
Motion to do Evil. It is peculiar to the Wicked that the Holy Spirit says of
him Jes. lvii 20. By which he also damnifies others, troubling defiling and
corrupting them, according to the Proverb in Israel, 1 Samuel xxiv 13. Wickedness
proceeds from the Wicked.

From all this it is evident, that if a Man i^ distitute of the Right to Life,
and adjudged as unrighteous; for to have a Right to Life, is also to have a
Portion in the Spirit of Life, and therefore an Ungodly Man is not only without
God, but likewise without Christ, as Paul puts it together, Ephesians. ii 12. All
this is contained in the Word Ungodly (or Godless.) And since there be so many
Misapprehensions concerning it, by which Satan knows to profit withal; for
although this Word is frequent in Scripture, the Power and Meaning of it is
nevertheless not understood, and therefore we commonly think on other People,
than those whom the Holy Spirit will have understood; therefore it will be
Necessary that we show from God's Word what sort of People the Holy Spirit
understands by it.

I. One Graceless, a Man who knows not God (...) his Highness and in his
glorious lovely Per^ections, not loving nor affecting his Ways. Thus ^n Ungodly
Person is represented unto us, Jer. xii 1. Wherefore does the Way of the Wicked
prosper, is there asked, and what sort of Persons they be is there shown, Thou
art near in their Mouth, and far from their Reins. The Prophet would say
hereby, They mean it not with thee, they have no Love for thee, they don't know
thee, they do not act from an inward Principle of Spiritual Life. Therefore all
those who not born again, who are not renewed and changed through the Spirit of
Life are Ungodly.

2. It is One who is troubled and driven to and ^ro. There is no Peace says my
God to the Wicked, Jes. lvii 21. They are moved through Lusts which war against
the Soul, 1 Pet. ii 11. And because they are driven on through those Lusts
therefore they bring themselves into Unquietness, the more, because this
sometimes happens in such a manner, that they are convinced in themselves, that
such a Life will be eternal Destruction; but Sin being so pleasant, Evil
overpowers him, and this often occasions, that Unquietness, Disturbance and
Fear, which is occasioned by their Conviction and Cheks of Conscience, which
occasions Dread and Fear in them, when they think of Death and the last
Judgment. The Wicked flee when no Man purs^et^^, Prove. xxviii Many Sorrows
shall be to the Wicked, Ps. xxxi^ 10.

3. An Ungodly Person is likewise one who disturbs good Orders, who raises
Sedition and Strife, who defile and damnify others, The sleep not except they
have done Mischief, and their Sleep is taken away, except they cause some to
fall, Prove* iv 16. What cannot an Ungodly Man do by hi^ bad Example? How
defiling and corrupting are his Words? Evil Communications corrupt good
Manners, 1 Cor. xv 33. How often do the move, through their poisonous
Discourse, the Lusts and Sinful Affections of others, who hea^ them speak,
Their Tongue is set on Fire of Hell full of deadly Poison, Jam. iii 6, 8.
Therefore David said, Depart from me all ye Workers (...) Iniquity, Ps. vi 8.
and cxix 115. Depart from m^ all ye evil doers, for I will kiep the Commandmen^
of my God.

4. But especially an Ungodly Man is one condemned, who has no Right to stand
in the Judgment, so it is taken, Ps. cix 7. When he shall be judged, let him be
condemned. The Words properly are, go out Guilty, that is condemned, declared
Guilty. An Ungodly one is set in Opposition to a Righteous Person: A Righteous
Person is one who by Virtue of Christ's Merits (...) absolved from the Guilt
and Punishment of Sin and in Christ has a Right to Life, and is sanctified
through his Spirit: Therefore an Ungodly Man is such a one who according to
Gods Law ^as no Right to Life, who is not through Faith ^nited to Christ, and
so has no Interest in his Sufferings and Obedience, and therefore Guilty before
God, Ps. v 10. For the Mouth of Truth ^aith, He that believes not in the Son
is condemned already, Joh. iii 18. He has no Interest in the Righteousness of
the Life of Christ.

Such Ungodly are all People in the State of Nature, who do not as yet partake
of Spiritual Life through the Spirit of Regeneration, but who live after the
Flesh, according to their own Mind and Desires, not being united to Christ, and
live not ^o his Glory, thus says Paul, Romans v 6. In due ^ime Christ died for
the Ungodly.

But these are all different from one another, ^or there be several Sorts of
Ungodly.

I. Open profane Ungodly, Monsters of the Humane Race, Burdens of the Earth,
who are constantly busied in their Ungodliness and glory (...) it, who declare
their Sin as Sodom, Jes. iii 9. Paul describes these, Romans iii 13 -- 18. 1 Cor.
vi 10. Who by the Works of their Flesh sufficiently show that they are Ungodly.

2. Ungodly Moralists, who abstain from gross ^ins, and outwardly live orderly,
civil and unre^roveable, and therefore they do not mistrust themselves to be
ungodly, for such think (although ^^^trary to Gods Word) that the Ungodly are
(...) profane People, as Adulteres, Fornicators, Drunkards, Thieves, and such
like, from those Sins they are clear, therefare they imagine that they are not
Ungodly Persons, even as that Pharisee, Luke xviii. whereas notwithstanding one
who knows and fears the Lord, can see that they are Ungodly by their
Conversations: The Transgression of the Wicked says within my Heart, there is
no Fear of God before his Eyes, Ps. xxxvi 1. As if he said, They may think of
themselves what they will, my Heart is nevertheless assured that they are
Ungodly, their Life and Conversation witnesses it, There is no Fear of God
before their Eyes.

3 There are Ungodly Persons who will not know that they are Ungodly; who
imagine that they are Righteous, of which the Savior Speaks Mat. ix 13. I am
not come to call the Righteous* These take it strange that they are looked upon
as Ungodly, and nevertheless according to the Language of God's Spirit, this is
their proper Name? such were the Jues, which said tha^ God was their Father,
the Lord Jesus shewe^ them, that they had no Interest in God, but were Ungodly:
And were of their Father the Devil which seemed so strange to them that they
would stone him, Joh. viii 41 -- 44 When the Lord told them that they were yet
in their Natural Blindness not knowing God, and therefore estranged from the
Life of God, they apposed him with Audacious Words, are we blind also Joh. ix
40. The ignorant Nominal Christians judge those to be Uncharitable who make
known to them what they think of them, that they are without the Fellowship of
God in Christ, and thus Ungodly although they show nothing in their Lives of
the Life of God.

4 There be some who would not be accounted Ungodly, but Righteous who have a
Name that they live, although they are Dead, Rev. iii 1. These People are
outwardly reformed and have escaped the Pollutions of the world, and outwardly
live devoutly, behave themselves before men as Gods People use to do, Ezekiel.
xxxiii 31 and in very deed they are Ungodly People who have no Right to Life in
Christ, who live without his Spirit and without his Fellowship, in a Word
Hipocrites. Therefore we might not only understand such who live in open
abominable Sins; but also all unconverted natural People, although they are
Virtuous and Civil but are nevertheless without Christ's Fellowship, and
therefore have no Right to Life, and not sanctified through the Spirit: Hereto
therefore is annexed, a Sinner.

Not as if an Ungodly was not a Sinner, but thus to express the Nature of Man
the better: All People are Sinners, because they are Transgressors of the
Divine Law, and are void of that Holiness which God in his Law requires of Man,
hereby is understood an impenitent Sinner who makes it his Business to Sin and
but therefore worthy to be called a Sinner as every unconverted Man is a
Sinner, since he does nothing else but Sin, because he has no right Aim in any
Thing that he does, not prefering the Glory of God, and although he does not
commit all Sins, and does not always Sin yet he does not hate Sin, if he leaves
some Sins it is not from a Love and Fear of God, bu^ because he has no
Oppertunity, his Nature or Means or Calling suffer him not. The Sins which he
commits Rule in him, he lives in them with delight, and thus with Ahab, he
sells himself to work wickedness, Kings. xxi ^5.

II OF this Ungodly Person and Sinner Peter asks where shall he appear? when
the Apostel thus asks we must not apprehend the matter as if he doubted, much
less denied, that the Ungodly and Sinner, appear in Judgment, before the
Judgment Seat of Christ: No, this he presupposes, that the Ungodly and Sinner,
shall be obliged to appear in Judgment, verse* 5. for this appearing is general
as the Apostel Paul teaches, 2 Cor. v 10. We must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, Thus the Apostle Jude also says in his Epistle, verse,
xiv 15. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute
Judgment upon all, and to convince or punish all that are Ungodly among them.

When the Apostle then asks, where shall he appear, his Intent is to make
known thereby, the terrible and sorrowful End of the Ungodly, as it is said in
tho preceding of verse. It Is a Comparison taken from a Debtor who is summoned
to appear before a Judge, who is examined, convinced and condemned: So it is
also in this case, therefore St, Peter asks, where shall he appear? That is
where shall he so appear as the Righteous, in order to be saved, he will not be
able to stand in the Judgment, but be condemned and Damned, as David also
teaches this, Ps. i 5. Therefore the Ungodly sholl not stand in the Judgment,
nor Sinner in the Cougregation of the Righteous.

This is the miserable Condition of the Ungodly and Sinners, that he not only
can not appear in God's Judgment hereafter, but also in this Life can no where
appear with Comfort or any Confidence for Solomon in his Proverbs, (from whence
Peter cites these Words) in general sets his Mischief before him, Prove. xi 31.
Behold the Righteous shall be recompensed in the Earth: much more the Wicked
and the Sinner. So that the Ungodly and Sinner cannot appear any where even
here upon Earth, but with Horror and Fear.

I The Ungodly Sinner cannot with any Confidence or child like Affiance appear
before God in Prayer; for we know that God hears not Sinners, Joh. ix 31 his
Prayers is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 14. 8. He that turns away his
Ear from hearing the Law, even ^is Prayer shall ^e abomination, Prove. xxviii 9.
And although he makes many Prayers, which notwithstanding is only through
customary Fashion, and not through the Spirit yet not acceptable to the Lord,
Js. i 15. And when ye spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you,
yea when ye make many Prayers I will not hear, yea his Prayer becomes sin, cix
7.

2 Does he appear in the House of God to hear his Word, that is no Benefit to
him, no^ acceptable to God, Js. i 12 when ye come to appear before me who has
required this at your Hands to tread my Courts? Because his heart is filled
with all Filthiness and Supperfluity of Naughtiness and prejudice against Gods
word, Jam. i 21. He comes not to do what the Lord shall speak, but to reprove,
or to harden his Heart against it, for he continues in his Sins, and will do
the Lust of his Heart, therefore the Lord says to the Prophet Ezekiel, And
they come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit before the as my People,
and they hear thy Words, but they will not do them, Ezekiel, xxxiii 31.

3. If the Ungodly and Sinner will also approach the Holy Supper (as they alas
also do) O miserable! the Seal of Grace becomes to them a Singn of Damnation.
The Table becomes a Snare unto them, they eat and drink Damnation to
themselves, because they discern not the Lord's Body, 1 Cor. xi 29. For they
approach unworthily, without true spiritual Life, without spiritual Intetions,
without spiritual Examination and Preparation.

4. But when Death comes, where shall then the Ungodly and Sinner appear? How
shall he be able to stand? Death will be unto him a King of Terrors, who will
make an End of him, whereby his best will cease and his Worst draw near,
because he has lived as an ungodly Person, he shall dye as one Accursed. O how
terrible are the Thoughts of Death unto him, whose Portion is in this Life! How
terrible will approaching Death be unto him! Even as Balshazzer when he saw the
Hand that wrote on the Wall, Dan. v 6. Then the Kings Countenance was changed,
and his Throughts troubled him, so that the Joints of his Loins were loosed,
and his Knees smote one against another.

5. But where shall he appear in the Day of Judgmen? It Is true he shall rise
again, but it will be to Shame and everlasting Contempt, Dan. xii 2. He shall
likewise appear before the Judgment Seat, but like a Goat, he will be placed on
the left Hand, where they will not be able to bear the strict Examination of
the Omniscient Judge nor the Lawful Judgment of the Omnipotent, when they shall
give an Account of every idle Word, Mat. xii 36. Therefore they will be
speechless, and the Judge will pronounce this Sentence, Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Divil and his Angels; the which
will be immediately executed, and they shall go into everlasting Punishment,
Mat. xxv. Hell the Place of the Damned, that is his own Place, which is
prepared for him, to continue there forever, but not able to subsist by reason
of the revenging Justice of God, who will punish them: O miserable Wretches!
who must there appear, how shall his Laughter be turned into Mourning! his
short Prosperity be rewarded with neverending Curses, when he shall there
appear! Alas! then he will howl by reason of the Pain of his Heart, gnawing his
Tongue by reason of the unexpressible Anguish and Pain, gnashing upon his
Teeth, cry out to the Mountains and Rocks, fall upon us, Rev. vi.

And this necessarily follows; for if the Righteous are but scarcely saved,
then certainly the Ungodly and Sinner shall be lost, as the Apostle concludes.
A Righteous one differs as much from an Ungodly and Sinner, as Heaven and
Hell, as Light and Darkness, therefore their latter Ends are also very
different. Must a Righteous Person endure so many Tribulations, what will then
not happen to an ungodly Sinner, who yet lives in his Sins, if those who love
God sustain so many Sufferings and Oppresions, what will he not do to him who
hates him and is his Enemy? If God is pleased so sensibly to visit and chasten
his Children and Favorites, by reason of their Failings, O! how then shall not
God avenge himself of his Adversarie^ by reason of all their Sins and evil
Deeds which they have done in all their Lives? Such a Resolution is also taken
by the wise King Solomon, Prove. xi 31. Behold the Righteous shall be
recompen^nd in the Earth, much more the Wicked and Sinner. An Ungodly one is
without God, estranged from the Life of God, whom he neither fears nor serves,
therefore there is no Comfort nor Salvation for him. A Sinner living in Sin
shall have no Portion with the Righteous, for what Fellowship has
Righteousness with Unrighteousnes, or what Comunion have the Believers with
Unbeliers, 2 Cor. xiv 15. Where then shall the Ungodly and Sinner hereafter
appear, whereas ^he refuses on Earth to come to God? God ^alls him to his
happy Communion in Christ; but he says with his Deeds (if not with Words)
Depart from us, for we desire not the Knowledge of the Ways, Job xxi 14. Cause
the Holy one of Israel to cease from before us, Jes. xxx 11. The Holy Jesus
invites him to come unto him, but he will not come, Joh. v 40. He loves Sin
and the World better, God calls him to return, but he coti^^eth averse, he
calls him to Tears of Repentance; but he continues at Ease in his vain
Delight, and since he does not Strive, he shall not be able to enter; since he
does not use Violence for the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore he shall not take
it; but since he runs with full Carreer on the broad Way which is so easy to
him, so he need expect nothing else but eternal Destruction. This then is sure,
this follows from Gods revenging Justice, who by no means will clear the
Guilty, and can have no Fellowship with the Sinner; therefore he must punish
and damn him, thus says David, Ps. v 4. For thou art not a God that has
pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell with thee. The Foolish shall
not stand in thy Sight, thou hate all Workers of Iniquity. The Lord will
abhor the bloody and deceitful Man. If then the Righteous are but narrowly,
with Trouble and Pains saved, then the Ungodly and Sinner have nothing to
expect than eternal Damnation.

APLICATION
FRom all this we may observe the miserable and sorrowful End of all
Unconverted Ungodly and Sinners, and from hence is also easily perceived that
althoug the Ungodly might, ^e prosperous, it is notwithstanding vain and
momentary for their Happiness is short, and their Joy only in Appearance and
ends in everlasting Grief and sorrow; although they seem to be never so well
secured against all manner of Disasters, there is nevertheless hanging over
their Heads an entire fearful Desolation wherein they shall perish; therefore
David might well say* Fret not they self because of Evil Doers, neither be thou
envions against the Workers if Iniquity, for they shall soon be cut down like
the Grass and wither as the green Herb Ps. xxxvii 1. 2. Is their Fortune
Quality, Power and Riches plausable in the World, yet if we observe their Ends*
we may see that God sets them in slippery Places and casts them down in
Destruction and are brought into Disolation as in a moment and utterly consumed
with Terrors, Ps. 1xxiii 17 -- 20,

Here then you can see the miserable Condition the of Unconverted. Come here
you Ungodly Sinner, you who delight in Sin and are without Fear and Care, here
see your wretched and miserable Condition in which you are before God, you have
yet never been lost in your selves, never have been driven out of your own
Righteousness, your own Power and good Works (...) therefore never have partook
os the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Sinner who art not yet (...) again, not
changed and renewed in Heart and life, but art yet in the old Man, in the old
corrupted Nature and therefore yet living in Sin here i^ sorrowful News for
you, woe unto you, it shall be ill* with you; If the Righteous are (...) saved,
where shall thou appear? It Is (...) thou shall come to Judgment before that
great God, that Omniscient, Omnipotent Judge, but thou shall not be able to
stand in that Judgment but therein be condemned. O consider what thou will
Answer when thy Judge rises up. Job. xxxi 14. wherewith will thou vindicate
thy self against all that will be alleged against thee? every thing will
witness against thee, all Means of Grace all the Sermons which you have heard,
heard, the many Warnings Exhortations and Instructions which you have enjoyed
will condemn you, and deprive you of all Excuses, all the Mercies and
Long-Sufferings of God, all his Benefits which should have led you to
Repentance will agravate your Sins, the Law will Curse you, Deuteronomy. xxvii. 36.
The Gospel also utereth Curse, 1 Cor. xvi 22. Hereby your Conscience will come
and consent to all this, and set your Sins in order before your Eyes, yea also
the Spirit of God whose Motions and Knockings you have so long resisted, will
then be turned an Enemy against you. O Sinners where shall you appear? Think
how it will go with you, when you must give an Account for every idle Word that
you have spoken, Matt. xii. when thou shall be condemned and immediately be
denied the Presence of the Judge, thou will not be able to stand before God,
for he hates all Workers of Iniquity, Ps. v. Therefore he will openly denounce
to you, Depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity, Matt. vii.

Alas! How little do you know now how terrible it is to be separated from God
the Highest Good? the Enjoyment, of God's gracious Presence which the Saints
enjoy in this Life is already more precious unto them than all the World: If
they now but enjoy one Glimps of his Presence it makes them cry out, Lord,
there is a Life in thy Favor Ps. xxx 5. Yea how precious soever Life may be
unto them they testify nevertheless that Gods (...) Kindness is better than
Life, Ps. 1xiii 3. if they must miss this they are concerned, straightened and
troubled: (...) did hide thy Face, and I was troubled, Ps xxx 17. Now
consider how terrible it will be forever to miss that perfect Communion of that
God of salvation, O that Eternal mi^^ing of God's Favor! O how terrible will
that be! Wh^^e shall thou appear when thou shall be delivered into the Power of
the Devils? When they shall drag thee along into Hell, no Body can help you
there, there all leaves you, it is there in vain and too late to seek out for
Help. O! My Heart trembles when I consider in what State, in what Perplexity
and Anguishes of Hell the Sinner will be when he shall see that he is left of
God, of Christ, of Angels, of Saints, and that forever, and that he now ^inds
himself in the Assembly and Power of the Devils who shall torment him: Before
him he will see an Inexorable wrathful Judge Devils round against him, who as
Gods Revengers shall be ready; he will percieve within him a gnawing Worm of
Conscience, Heaven boulted above him denying him entrance, beneath him an open
Hell which will devour him and that will be the Place were the Ungodly and
Sinner shall appear, and forever remain, O miserable Eternity! O Eternal
Misery! Alas Hearers! How is it that your Hearts are not more affected
herewith: David a Man after God's own Heart, when he thought on the Judgment,
cried out. My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, I am afraid thy Judgment, I
cxix 1 20. And can you hear that, without a ho^ Aflection, and Surprise of
Conscience, do you ta^^ no more to Heart a Matter of such eternal importance,
which you are concerned in and is so nea^ But alas! I know the Reason of it, it
does (...) concern you for we are so gone astray that we imagine if we read in
God's Word of Ungodly (ho^ beit here in this Text and in several other Place
the Word Sinner is annexed to it) that we (...) thereby only understand
public abomina^^ People, such as Blasphemers, public Swear (...) Murderers,
Thieves, Fornicators, Drunk^r^ and such sort of People, but as for Morali^^^
(...) are free from such gross Sins, and live (...) modest, although they have
not the (...) ^^dence of true Grace and (...) those we think to be good
Christians and (...) People, 't is true in civil Cohabi^^^^ (...) good honest
People. But notwith^^^ (...) People are esteemed of God to be (...) Sinners.
God's Spirit who certa^^^ knows (...) calls all Unconverted natural People who
(...) without Gods Fellowship, not being united Christ, and not sanctified by
his spirit, Ungo^^^ and Sinners, although notwithstanding they (...) modest and
civil, yea outwardly Piou^^^ all (...) are in their natural Estate, not being
born-again without Difference, they are Ungodly and Sinner as we have also
proved in the Explanation. (...) that this were taken to Heart! That this is
Subtilty of Satan which deceives the Unconver^^, persuading them that they are
not so bad, (...) others are more wicked and sinful than (...), that their
Actions are not so bad, that they are (...) such as reprove and cheat the
Minister, that (...) have yet many good Virtues, that their State ^ot so
unhappy that Ungodly are only resigned ^^ians, who make themselves guilty of
open hai^^ Crimes which the Authority punishes, and (...) they are not such.
And through this subtle at Satan causes that the Sword of the Spirit, (...)
Word, cannot penetrate and bring forth a (...) Change, but remains fruitless.
And there, (...) this is the Cause,

That we do not seriously consider our former (...), and get a true Knowledge
of our selves, (...) read God's Word, or if it be said unto the ^^ked, What
have thou to do to declare my Sta^^^ or that thou should take my Covenant in
Mouth, Ps* l 16. The Sacrifices of the Wi^^^^ an Abomination to the Lord, Prove.
xv 8. (...) such like Expressions, you are not concerned, you think you are not
meant thereby, but the ^^est sort of People, and therefore you apply (...) to
your selves, you continue insen^^.

This likewise keeps you back from Conver^^, viz. such Soul-moving Expressions,
as Ezekiel. ^iii, where the Lord says, As I live, says the ^^RD God, I have no
Pleasure in the Death of (...) Wicked, but that the Wicked turn from his Way
and live. Turn ye, turn ye, from (...) evil Ways, for why will ye dye, O House
of Isr^^^ And Romans iv. That God justifies the Ungod^^ As also, Jes. 1v, Let
the Wicked for sake his W^^ and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and him
return unto the Lord, for he will abundan pardon. This we can hear and read,
but it d^ not toutch the Heart, we believe it not, we (...) it not, that we are
ungodly Sinners, and therefore we remain Unconverted and Unjustified*

3. From hence it is that you are careless (...) go on unconcerned in Sin,
against all Admon^ons, Threatenings and Judgments of God, (...) dreadful soever
they be, let it be said, Woe (...) the wicked it shall be ill with him, Js. iii
11. (...) the terrible Noise thunder that the Curse of Lord is in the House of
the Wicked. Prove. iii Romans ii. After thy hardness and impenitent b^ treasurest
unto they self Wrath against the D^^ Wrath and Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God Tribulation, and Anguish, Indignation* (...) Wrath shall be
recompensed upon every Soul Man that does evil, we are not so much as ^^^turbed
against it are not afraid, we have no Compassion with our selves, by reason,
alas! (...) we have got a wrong Apprehension of an Un^^ly Person and will not
acknowledge our (...) as such,

O Sinner! That this Truth was once ^^nifested to your Souls, who now are at
ease a^ walk so contentedly what would there arise (...) and Concerment in you!
How would you (...) and shriek Day and Night to Go that he ^^uld have Mercy on
you.

If we should flatter one onother, and if we ^ould say to you, Perhaps it may
yet go well ^^th you, you have yet done many good Things, ^^re be those that
are yet much worse than you are, (...) are Baptized, you have made a Confession
^our Faith, you go to Church, you must hope for (...) best, would that make you
happy? O no; (...) would be nothing else than to daub with ^^emperate Mortar,
Ezekiel. xiii 14. God's Word (...) that natural People who have not the Spirit
(...). v 19. who are Estranged from spiritual (...) and without the Fellowship
of Christ that ^se are Unconverted Sinners and shall not God's (...) avail?
What Service should we do you, (...) we should deceive and corrupt you; O how
(...) once those who are thus misled and deceived, ever Reproach and Curse
those who have so ^^^ted them, he that says unto the Wicked thou (...)
Righteous, him shall the People Curse, Prove. ^v 24.

You believe at least that God's Word is true, (...) that we shall be judged by
it, well then, in (...) Word are many Marks of an Ungodly and ^^ner, therefore
we ought deligently to examine (...) selves whether we are not those Persons,
and such a State.

I An Ungodly and Sinner is he who commits (...) as John shows, 1 John. iii
8, 9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin, but he that commiteth Sin,
is of the Devil, and he that is of the Devil is certainly an Ungodly Man and he
is thereby known, that he commiteth Sin, Now it is certain that you who commit
Sin without an inward Opposition, wrestling and conflict who have your
Satisfaction and Delight in Sin, an^ do not humble your selves after you have
committed it, and are not ashamed before God, no^ heartily sorrowful, having no
sensible Repentance, saying, alas! What have I done, Jer. viz. woe unto me that
I have Sinned, and are not desirous for Reconciliation and Sanctification, tha^
you, I say, are Ungodly and Sinners, nowithstanding you are free from gross
Sins.

2 An Ungodly, Man how moral he may (...) is not united to Christ, he is
without his Fellowship, and therefore he has no Right to Life. It Is therefore
clear, that you who are not active in Christ in choosing him for your Surety, in
accepting of him for Righteousness and Sanctification* longing and looking out
after him, who are not busied in accosting him with Prayers and Supplications,
and as an Ungodly and Condemned Person to be through him justified, that thou
art* (...) Ungodly Unconverted Sinner.

3. An Ungodly Man is one that is Graceless who has no spiritual Life in him,
and therefore unregenerated, not partaking of the Divine Nature. Now it is
certain that you who are not truly changed both outwardly and inwardly, not
powerfully made loose from Things below and ^ntent upon Divine and heavenly
Subjects that you are unconverted Sinners although you are never so Moral.

4. An Ungodly Man is one who has no true Peace with himself nor others; this
is the proper Mark which the Holy Ghost ascribes in the Word (...) the Ungodly,
Jes. 1vii, There is no Peace, says (...) God to the Wicked. And Prove. ii 8.
The ^^icked flee when no Man pursues, for they have (...) Peace with God, nor
with their own Conscience, nor with all the Creatures. From whence (...) now
that Discontentedness, that Disturbance and Fear for God's Wind and Weather,
yea, for the Rushing of a Leaf, and other Dangers of Men and Beasts, a
threatening stern Countenance makes the Ungodly fear, a Worm, a Snail affrights
them; an infectious Sickness makes them flee, and how troubled are they at the
Danger and ^ear of Death? How discontented are they under the afflicting Hand
of God? And so they are also in Discontent with others, and do corrupt others,
sometimes through their Wrath, then through their Uncleanness, then through
their ^lander and Backbiting, then through their De^^res (...) that which
belongs to another, and many other Ways, according as Opportunity offers. and
these are right Properties of the Ungodly.

5. The Ungodly how Moral they may be, are ^evertheless right Haters and
Opposers of the ^^rrow Ways of Godliness: Such as keep the Law contend with the
Wicked, says Solomon, Prove. xviii 4. And although notwithstanding they
practice some Virtues, it is nevertheless not out of Love to Virtue, but true
Virtue is indeed burdensome to them for as it is Joy to the Righteous to do
Justice, so it is burdensome to the Ungodly, and are apt to say with the
wicked Jews, What a weariness, Mal. i 13.

O that you wolud once believe it, and kenw it, and did you once see your
wretched State, and what will follow thereon, had you once got a Sight of your
corrupted and miserable State, what a Loathing, what an Aversion would you have
of your selves and of your Sins: Therefore if you desire to get any interest in
Salvation, then leave the broad Way, wherein hitherto you have walked, and that
manner of Life which by the most is followed; therefore you must forsake all
Ungodliness, it ought to suffice you that in Time past you had lived after the
Flesh, in all sinful Lusts, 1 Pet. iv 3. Now you ought to cease from committing
Sin, and regulate your selves for the time to come to live in God's Service, to
that end we ought to perform these Duties.

I. We should mourn for, hate and flee from our former sinful and Ungodly
Lives. The Sins which are acceptable and delightful unto us, should be bitter
unto our Souls, and be Sorrow and Grief unto us, and mourn for them with
^ervent Tears, and thus show Repentance that we have offended God with our
manifold Sins, and with a Hearty Confession confess and bewail them before the
Lord, with David, I acknowledge my Sin unto thee, and mine Iniquity have I not
hid. I said, I will confess my Transgressions unto the Lord, Ps. xxxii 5. O
that Sin as a Burden might lay upon your Hearts, and thereover with sensible
Souls and a hearty Concern might pray to our Judge for Mercy, with David, Have
Mercy upon me, O God! according to thy loving Kindness, according to the
Multitude of thy tender Mercies, Ps. li 1. But this Sorrow should be upright
for Sins as Sin, because they are contrary ^o God's Holiness and his Law; so
this Sorrow should work in us a great Carefulness, clearing of our selves,
Fear, vehement Desire, yea Zeal, yea Revenge, 2 Cor. vii 11.

2. But it is not enough only to be not ungodly, but we must Religious and
Godly; he then that will show that he hates Ungodliness, must endeavor after
that which is Good, these two Things always go together, as the Apostle says,
Tit. ii 11, 12. The Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all
Men, teaching us that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we (...) live
soberly, righteously, and Godly in this ^^^sent World.

But because we are impotent and cannot change our evil Corruption our selves,
we must therefore pray to God for the Grace of his Holy Spirit, and use all
Means, in order to get a living sight and opened Eyes of the Understanding to
see the Abominableness of Sin; for although it appears never so fair, she is
notwithstanding ugly, her Beginning is of the Devil, and he that commiteth Sin
is of the Devil, he shows his Shape, he bears his Image and is a Child of
Darkness, Sin ^ispiseth God's Highness, contradicts his Holiness, disdaineth
his Goodness, denies his Authority, renounces his Omnisciency, rejects his
Justice, in a Word Sin hates God and Deserves eternal Damnation. O he that has
a a true Sight of the Abominableness and Ugliness of Sin, must of Necessity
hate it, We should take heed of the beginning of Sin, since Sin gradually
conquers us, therefore we should be freight^^ed from the first Beginnings of
Sin, we should shun the least and smallest Iniquity, if we would take heed of
greater. Therefore we should represent to us that the Lord is Omniscient,
knows, sees, and hears all Things, and as registring them, and that there is a
Judgment Day to be expected, where we must all appear and give an Account for
all things.

Is there any body convinced, that he hitherto has been Ungodly and
Unconverted, let him not think, that it it too late, he should not be
discouraged, that Condition is better than of those that are Moral, Careless,
Secured and Contented. O whosoever has been saved were likewise Ungodly and
Sinners. It is God that justifies the Ungodly, Romans iv. shall any one be
justifies, he must first see that he is an Ungodly Person, as God requires of
such that they leave, their Ungodliness, and return unto him, Js. 1v 7.

How Soul moving is Gods Testification, Ezekiel. xiii 14. concerning the
Wickedness of the Wicked, he shall not fall for the same, if he return; how can
you hear this without being moved? Why don't this cast you upon your knees with
an humble confession with Israel, we have committed Iniquity, we have done
wickedly, Ps. ^vi 6, why don't this drive you to the Lord Jesus who indue Time
died for the Ungodly, Romans v 6. with a Desire to be justified through his
Blood, and be sanctified through his Spirit for which he has a fit Fluness for
all the want that is in a Sinner, and is very bountiful and willing to
communicate it to penitent Sinners, he stands to receive you with open Arms, he
invites and calls Sinners and Ungodly to Repentence. O who thus in a lively
Manner perceives his Sins and dmnable Estate before God, and his Impotenacy and
Unwillingness, who is thus convinced of the All sufficiency and Willingness of
Jesus, that he finds himself lost in himself, and therefore (...) Delight and
Desire to be reconciled to God only through the Merits of Jesus Christ, and to
be sanctified through his Spirit, to the Praise of God's Free Grace; O let him
surrender himself over to the Lord Jesus. He that comes (...) him he will
(...) Case cast out, Joh. vi 37. I conclude with the Words of the Prophet
Isaias, Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is
near. Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and ^e will have Mercy upon him, and to our God,
for (...) will abundantly pardon, Jes. lv 6, 7.

A MIRROR that Flatereth not, BEING A Serious Discourse to discover false
Grounds, and an Admonition, to proceed with Zeal in the narrow Way of Godliness.

A MIRROR that Flattereth not, etc.
Prove. XIV 12. There is a way that seems right to a Man: But the end thereof
are the ways of Death.
REMARKABLE and not less certain are the Words of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
xvii 9. The Heart is deceitful above all Things, and desperately wicked, who
can know it? By the Heart must be understood the Soul of Man, that Reasonable
Being, endued with Understanding, Judgment, Conscience, Will and Desires: Now
this Heart of Man after the Fall, as long as it is not renewed by the Spirit of
Regeneration, is

Deceitful: The Original Word that stands here is the same whence the Patriarch
Jacob derived his Name from, because he in his Birth had hold of his Brother's
Heel; but it likewise signifies Subtilty, Craft, Fraud, Snares, Jos. viii 13.
Genesis xxvii 36. So that Deceitful here signifies Fraudulent, Reservation,
inclining to deceive. Thus the Heart is constituted above all, yea, deadly,
tending to Death, whereunto Death is fastened, uncurable, evil above Measure:

So deceitful and corrupted are the Hearts of Men, the which they make manifest
when they deceive themselves and others, in concealing and hiding of their
subtle Wickedness. When Herod int^^ded to Murder Christ, he feigned himself as
if he would worship him, Matt. ii 8. Judas covered his Covetuousness with an
Affection to the Poor. If they cannot wholly conceal the Evil of their Sins,
then they lessen them; hence proceeds all Hypocrisy, by which they appear as if
they were something: But that which does manifest the Deceitfulness of the
Heart more naked, is Self-Deceit, through which People think, that they are not
so bad as indeed they are, and think they be in a good State, and hope to be
saved, whenas they are indeed yet miserable Oblects of Damnation.

So it was with the Church of Laodicea, they thought themselves rich and
increased with Goods, and to have need of nothing; and notwithstanding were
poor, miserable naked, and blind, Rev. iii 17. If a Man (says St. Paul) think
himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself, Gal. vi 3. A
Deceit really which is very common, and likewise very dangerous: For in this
Case, a Man, through Deceit of his Heart, is as a Man who is Hungry and
thirsty, and in his Sleep dreameth that he eats and drinks, but when he
awakes finds himself deceived, and still feels his Hunger and Thirst, Is. xxix
8. Thus also will the deceitful Heart, who thought it had been in the Favor of
God, after Death and in the Day of Judgment be sensible of it is Deceitfulness,
that its Imaginations have only been as a Dream, when he with an imaginary
Heaven shall open his Eyes in Hell. That a Man persuades himself to be a
Believer, without any Grounds, makes him the more wretched; it is deplorable,
that this Deceit which is so dangerous, is likewise so common.

From hence says Solomon in the Words of our Text, There is a Way that seems
right unto a Man, but the End thereof are Ways of Death. Words which cantain in
themselves a (faithful and) true-hearted Warning, that every one that dreads
for Self-Deceit, to be not deceived in his Expectation and become ashamed at
the coming of the Lord Jesus, may well press upon his Heart.

Two principle Things we have here to take Notice of.

I. The Proposal, There is a Way that seems right to a Man.

II. The definitive Sentence, But the End thereof are the Ways of Death.

In the Proposal we are more nearly to consider of what is spoken, to wit, A
Way, and then the Imagination which a Man has of it, namely, That it seems
right unto him.

A Way is a manner of doing, or of living, which a Man uses, wherein he has
proposed to himself to attain some certain End; for a Traveller uses a Way as
the Means to attain his proposed End; and thus we find mention made several
times in the Holy Scriptures of Two Ways a broad and a narrow Way, and two
sorts of Travelers, with their final Ends, we find, Ps. i 6. The the Lord
knows the Way of the Righteous (their Actions and manner of living) but the
Way of the Ungodly shall perish, that is their Life and Actions.

Now there is a Way, a manner of living that seems right unto a Man, and
notwithstanding has a miserable End. Solomon here has his Eye upon those
People who deceive themselves, expressed with that Word a Man. And he
understands by such a Man, such as he here, and in other Places calls Fools, as
in Prove. xii 15. Which are not enlightened, not having the Wisdom which is from
above, without the Fear of God, therefore natural People whom he also calls
Ungodly; in a Word, unconverted People, which is evident, because he ascribes
unto them a miserable End. These have a Way, a Manner of living, wherein they
propose to themselves a wrong End; on the one side aiming at earthly Happiness,
Riches, Honor and Delight; This is their inward Thoughts, that their Houses
shall continue forever, Ps. xlix 11. Who make a God of their Belly, who mind
earthly things, Phil. iii 19. They are more Lovers of Pleasures, than Lovers of
God, 2 Timothy iii 4. In a Word they are Men of this World who have their Portion
in this Life, Ps. xvii 14. And on the other side, they likewise aim at Heaven
and everlasting Happiness, namely, when they can keep the Earth no longer, then
they would fain have Heaven, only to be delivered from Hell. And thus their Way
which seems right unto them, is

1. A Way of Sin, or a living in Sin, so that they give their Lusts the full
Sway, and follow their corrupt evil Nature, know nothing of crucifying the
Flesh, live in Envy, Strife, Hatred, Drunkenness, Revenge, Lying and
Backbiting, (although one more than another) in one Word, such a Life wherein
they wilfully retain some Sins; thus David describes the Way of the Ungodly,
That he devises Mischief upon his Bed, he sets himself in a Way that is not
good, he abhors not Evil, Ps. xxxvi 2 -- 5. That it is such a Way, is
manifest from the event, the which is Death, now the Wages of Sin is Death,
Romans vi 23.

2. This Way is also A Way of Civility and Morality, thus out of Fear of Hell,
Damage or Shame, or of natural Conviction of Conscience, they take heed of
notorious gross Sins, and they are very diligent in practicing the external and
lesser Parts of the Law, and live so that no Body has any thing to say against
them. This can be seen in the rich young Man, Matt. xix 19, 20. All this he had
kept, according to the outward Sense, but they give little heed to the internal
Frame of their Hearts, not knowing the Spiritual Sense of the Law, which
condemns the least Lust, the which they don't know.

3. It Is likewise a Way of External Godliness, in the excercising and
performing of some Duties which they observe, wherein they seek God daily, and
have a Delight in the Knowledge of his Ways, as it is said of the
self-deceiving Jews, Is. lviii 2. So that at the last Day many shall arise, and
say, Lord, Lord, have we not eat and drunk in thy Presence, and in thy Name
have cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works, Mat. vii 22,
23. Luke xiii 26, 27.

4. Yea even this is a W ay of outward Repentance and Conversion, by which they
are Sometimes convicted moved and troubled, and confess their Sins and weep for
them, as Saul, 1 Samuel xxiv and 25. and with Agripa to be almost persuaded, Act.
xxvi. and begin to leave some Sins and evil Customs, as Herod, who heard John
gladly, and did many Things, Mark. vi. and yet continued Wicked. So that there
can be such who through the Knowledge of Christ have escaped the Pollutions of
the World, and still continue in their old Way of Unconvertedness, 2 Pet. ii 20.

5. It is a Way of Self-Righteousness, that they do all this to rest thereon,
setting their Salvation secure, and justifying their Conscience, and therewith
to satisfy God, supposing Heaven will in no wise escape them, having done so
much Good* That Is it which the Lord says, Thou did (...) in thy Way, Hos. x
13.

6. It is a Way which they have cho^en according to their own Judgment, wherein
they are careless* without true Repentance of their Sins, without (...) narrow
Searching of themselves, whereon they seek Self-Honour, Ease and Profit in the
World; they practice Religion as much as the World can snare, or out of usual
Custom, or for Wellfare's sake or for the sake of others to be seen by them, to
pass for an honest Man and a good Christian, or to stop the Mouth of their
Conscience to keep it from regret, or even to do God Service therewith, and as
it were to oblige him to save them; therefore their whole Life and Actings is
yet Sin, because the only live for themselves and not for God, because that
they in all their Endeavors have not a right Aim to make Gods Honor and Will
their only Purpose, and thus they are Lovers of themselves, 2 Timothy iii 2.

How perverse also this is, how wretched also this Life is, yet they think that
this Way is right, and this Life good, as Solomon says, that this Way seems
right: That seems right to a Man.

These Words according to the Orginal properly signify before the Face of a
Man, that is in his own Eyes; which Phrase we also find Eccles. ii 26. that is
good in his Sight. Solomon would say That the unspirtual Man supposes and
thinks that his Manner of Life and Deeds are good and acceptable unto God,
and (in a Word) that his Way is right; he judges and means that by him (...)
and he does not in the least question, but depends upon it: For this Seeming is
no Guessing, (...) to ho^^ it to be True and Certain, and put it out of Doubt*
as it is said of the Heathen, that they thought to be heard for their much
speaking, Matt. vi 7. In this Case the Heathen were much mistaken, however they
thought it to be surely so; (...) here, he has hereof an Imagination by him
self* he thinks it to be so, and not only has he that Imagination by himself,
but would also that others should hold him as such; therefore with Herod, he
will do many good Things, Mark. vi. 10. to have a Show: Thus it was with Saul,
he would be honored before the People, as one who retained the Service and
Honor of the Lord, 1 Samuel xv 30. So likewise it was with the Pharisees, Joh. v
44. So it goes here also with the unconverted Sinner, for he not only thinks
that his Way is right, but also that others should esteem him to be a pious
Man, because he seems to be something, as Simon the Sorcerer said of himself,
That he was some Great One, Act. viii 9. So it was with the Jews, who supposed
that they were Abraham's Seed, and yet did not do his Works, but were of their
Father the Devil, Matt. iii, Joh. viii. So is it likewise with the unspiritual
nominal Christian, it seems likewise unto him, that his Way is right, and
that he shall be saved, and in the Mean Time he is quite out of the Way.

Here we can trace the Causes, or what sh^^ (...) be the Reasons why the
Sinner, with such (...) Immaginations deceives himself, and thinks that his
Way is right, notwithstanding God in his Word makes such a clear Difference
between the broad and the narrow Way, that is between the Way af the Ungodly
and the Way of the Righteous, between a natural Estate and a State of Grace,
between those that Fear God, and those who fear him not; so that the State of
one differs as much from the other, as Light and Darkness, Heaven and Hell;
the Reasons are many, some of them we shall examine.

( a) It is of Right God's just and holy Judgment upon Men, God strikes them
with Blindness and Obscurity in their Understanding, by Nature Man is
spiritually blind, and yet he has some Natural Knowledge of Divine Things; but
that which he yet has is justly taken from him, Matt. xiii 12. his foolish
Heart becomes more darkened, Romans i 21. whereon he deceives himself, so that he
says, I am rich and increased with Goods, Rev. iii 17. This we can likewise
see, 2 These. ii 10, 11. Thereby comes the Hardness of Heart, that as a Stone
he is past Feeling, and becomes Obstinate; before this Time he could weep for
his Sins, become tender and fear his Ruin but now God being very angry with
him, lets his Heart grow fat, makes his Ears heavy, and shuts his Eyes, lest he
should see with his Eyes, and hear with his Ears, and understand with his
Heart, and convert and be Healed, Is. vi 9, 10. God gives him over to himself,
and as a Slave to Sin, by which he falls from one Sin into another, see this
Ps. lxxxi. 11, 12. Their Lusts are let loose upon them, whereby they are
apprehended and driven and given over to a reprobate Mind, to do those Things
which are not convenient Romans i 28.

(b) Satan that revengeful and great Enemy of Man's Happiness and Salvation,
keeps the poor Sinner, not only Captive by him at his Will, as Paul says, 2 Timothy ii 26. but he blinds so his Mind, that the Light of the Gospel (which
otherwise would have discovered his wretched State) does not shine unto him, as
we read 2 Cor. iv 6. This the Savior likewise teaches, Luke viii 12. He takes
the Seed (the Word of God) out of the Heart, lest they should believe and be
saved. From hence it is that the Word of God has no Power on their Hearts, it
is not unto them as a Hamer, and Fire, Jer. xxiii 29. nor Quick and Powerful,
Heb. iv 12 but it is unto them A dead Letter, 2 Cor. iii. For the Word preached
does not profit them, not being mixed with Faith, Heb. iv 2. For as Satan
through his Subtilty deceived Eve, even so he yet deceives and ensnareth Man;
he persuades him, O Sinner, thou shall not dye; and thus he puteth into his
Hands a false presumptuous Faith, in stead of a true saving Faith; O (says he)
you must believe that you shall be saved, and that Jesus is your Savior, and
that consists in trusting that all thy Sins are pardoned, and upon that you
may rest at Ease; and although the Minister should tell thee otherwise, and
would cause thee to doubt, suffer not your self to be seduced, but believe it
not: And thus the Devil ^uteth into their Hands a civil Life instead of a
Spiritual Life, and a presumptive Faith instead of an upright Faith, and thus
the Sinner is decieved.

( c) This Deceit is much encouraged by such Teachers who do not faithfully
warn the People of this dreadful Self-Deceit, that do not seek to discover
them, nor show unto them the Subtilty of Satan, and the Deceitfulness of their
Hearts not making known unto them the false by-Wa^^^ not rightly dividing the
Word, but ( Armenian like) throwing out the Promises (in general) to scramble
at, and like unprofitable sick making Physicians, healing the Breaches and
Wounds in the slightest manner, daub with untempered Mortar, sew Pillows to all
Arm-Holes, crying, Peace, Peace, and there is no Peace, Jer. viii. Through
Default of discovering, convicting, powerful Preaching People continue in a
Dream that their Way is right.

( d) On the side of Man this is the Reason because he is corrupted and blind,
and his Heart is deceitful, according to the Words of the Prophet Jeremias,
xvii The Heart is deceitful. The deceived Heart seduceth him through Self-Love,
so that he feeds of Ashes, Is. xliv 20. The salse Imaginations of the Flesh,
the wrong Conclusions which proceed from the deceitful Heart, do so blind his
Judgment, that he passes a wrong Judgment on himself, and thinks to be
something whenas he is nothing, and thus does deceive himself, Gal. vi 3. From
hence it is that he perverteth God's Word to his own Destruction, 2 Pet. iii.
The Doctrine of the Imperfectness of the Saints, and especially the Complaints
of Paul, Romans vii, these he uses as a Pillow of Carelessness, as also the
Doctrine of Justification of Sinners, thus turning the Grace of God into
La^iviousness, Jude 4. And instead of true saving Faith, has got a strong
Imagination, That Christ is his Savior; and so he does with several other
Truths, therefore he thinks that his Way is right.

( e) This Way likewise seems right in their Eyes, because it is an easy Way
for the Flesh, therefore called the Broad Way, in regard to that loose and
careless manner of living, wherein they live in all manner of Lusts, so as it
comes forth from the corrupt Nature, doing of that which their Heart desires,
for that Way is light and easy to them, because their Understanding, Will and
Inclinations incline that Way, it is acceptable to them, because therein they
can satisfy their carnal Desires according to their Minds; for they know
nothing of Crucifying the Flesh, Gal. v, or of Mortifying their Members which
are upon Earth, Col. iii, in denying themselves, Matt. xvi, in striving to
enter, Luke xiii, of using any Violence on the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. xi, of
any pursuing after Holiness, of any suffering of Disdain and Oppression for
Christ's sake, but every thing goes before the Wind, they know not of any
secret Godly Exercise, nor Conversation with the Lord, nor of any punctual
precise Life before God and Man, but fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh, Gal. v
16. And because that this Way is so easy to them, thereforefore it seems
right to them.

( f) Farther yet, this Way seems right in their Eyes, because they often get
thereon Honor, Respect, Riches, outward Blessings and Prosperity, so that they
conclude from thence, that their Way is right. Therefore Jeremiah asks,
wherefore does the Way of the Wicked prosper, Jer. xii 1. And Prove. i 32, The
Prosperity of Fools shall destroy them.

( g) They likewise think that this Way is right, because it is a commnon Way
whereon so many are walking, as Christ says, Broad is the Way that leads to
Destruction, and many there be which go in there at, Matt. vii 13. For all
natural People are walking on this Way, and the one hardneth the other and
makes him easy.

Lo these are the Reasons why unconverted People imagine that their Way is
right; but how ever firm and strong they conceit this of themselves, and
although it seems it their Eyes, that this Way is right, yet notwithstanding
the Event thereof will teach quite otherwise, the End thereof will manifest it,
as appears by the definitive Sentence of Solomon, from the second Part of our
Text* saying, But the End thereof are the Ways of Death.

II. BY the Word End must be understood the hindermost the End and the utmost
are Ways of Death, manner of Actings leading to Death, and causing Death and
Destruction, whereon Death follows: For as one who is walking on a pleasant
way, but at the End of the Way there is a secret Pit, and he quietly walks
still forward, until he tumbleth down into the Pit, and awaketh when it is too
late, and then sees (...) Danger: So it is likewise here in this Case with the
Sinner, he goes along contentedly, with that conceit and vain Hope, thinking
his Way is right (that is) that his manner of Life is good) until at length he
be utterly lost: For the End of that Way (however right it may seem in his
Eyes) is Destruction, or as it stands here, is Death.

There is a threefold Death. (1) The natural Death, consisting in all the
Miseries of this Life, and finally in the Separation of Soul and Body. (2) A
Spiritual Death, it being a want of the Life of God. A^ Eternal Death,
consisting in the mising of Gods Fellowship, and in the bearing of the endless
Pains and Punishments, both in Soul and Body, which consists, (1) in the
missing of the saving Fellowship of God, the chiefest Good, when the Damned
shall want all what is Happy, all Light, Peace* Joy, Re^^^ Contentment, Love,
Holiness; yea, all the Good that God in his Longsufferance granted them to
enjoy in this Life, will be then wholly taken from them; this missing of Gods
Favor will then be intolerable, although now they are insensible of it,
because they divert themselves with the things of this Life. Of this State Paul
speaks 2 These. ii 9. That they shall be punished with everlasting Destruction,
from the Presen^^ of th^^ Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. They shall
weep and gnash their Teeth when they shall (...) Abraham Isaac and Jacob and
all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and they themselves thrust out, Luke
xiii 28. Then they shall bewail the Loss and Missing of God, and they shall
gnash on their Teeth in envying the Happiness of the Children of God. (2)
Eternal Death consists likewise in the Feeling of the greatest Pain and God's
Wrath in the Understanding, in the Will and Conscience, a frightful Despair in
all the Powers of the Soul and Body, a suffering an eternal Punishment in the
Place of Torment, as the Greatness of eternal Death is described to us, Rev.
xvi 10, 11. They gnaw their Tongues for Pain, and blaspheme God. It will be
unconceivably dreadful. Paul expresses it, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation
and Anguish upon every Soul of such Persons, (N. B.) that do Evil, Romans ii.
Their Worm dies not, neither will their Fire be quenched, Mark. ix 44.

And this is eternal Death, the wretched End of this Way, and no wonder, (1)
God has no Pleasure in it* but it is an Abomination unto him, Prove. iv 9. He
^^ates the Ways of Sin which they have chosen according to their own Judgment.
They now suppose that their Way of Civility and external Godliness will bring
them to Salvation, although they retain their Sins, although they give the
Flesh its Swing, they think notwithstanding that their Way is right, and that
they shall be saved, but this their Way at the End will fall ^^or^, it will not
bring them to Salvation, as Christ has foretold; Many will seek to enter but
shall not be able, Luke xiii 24. (3) Although this Way seems right unto them,
it is notwithstanding a Way of Sin, of Unconvertedness the End whereof is
eternal Damnation, for the Wages of Sin is Death, Romans vi 23. This is also the
Sentence from the Mouth of Truth, who says, that the broad Way leads to
Destruction, Matt. vii 13. And David says The Way of the Ungodly shall perish,
Ps. i 6. And from hence Solomon, There is a Way that seems right unto a Man,
but the End thereof are the Ways of Death.

APPLICATION.
SEE here attentive Hearers, how People can be miserably deceived and imagine
that their Way is right, that they be in a good State and think to be saved,
and notwithstanding the End thereof are the Ways of Death: What do you say of
your selves? don't you likewise think that your Way is right? It seems you do,
for else you would not walk along so unconcerned; for if we should ask you,
what Thoughts you have what would become of you if you should dye? why you
would imagine that you shall be saved: But know and think hereon, There is a
Way that seems right unto a Man, but the End thereof are the Ways of Death.

There will be few People found, although he be a Drunkard, a greedy Miser,
Liar, Backbiter, an ignorant Worldly minded Man, that thinks any otherwise but
that he shall be saved as well as the best; and no wonder, for Satan that
Murderer of Man, and that deceitful Heart blinds him through Self-Love:
Therefore almost every one flattereth himself with a strong Hope of being
saved. But alas! think upon it, There is a Way that seems right unto a Man,
but the End thereof are the Ways of Death.

The Mouth of Truth has taught us, That the Gate is strait, and the Way narrow,
that leads to Life, and there be but few that find it, Matt. vii. That is, that
there shall be but few saved; now if it were true that all these would be
saved, who imagine that they shall be saved, then there would be many saved and
few damned, then the narrow Way would lead to Hell, and the broad Way to
Heaven: For who is he that does not persuade himself, that he shall be saved.

O what a great Number there be of such straying Souls, who suppose that their
Way is right, Trusting like Fools in their own Hearts, as Solomon says! Prove.
xxviii 26. O! how many be here that cannot give the least Account of the Hope
which is in them, have not the least Ground but are void of Spirit and Life,
ignorant, carnal, unregenerate, and sufficiently show it, notwithstanding they
suppose that their Way is right. But my Friends, do you suppose that your Way
is right, that your Condition is good, do you hope to be saved? But have you
Ground and Evidence that your Hope will not deceive you' and bring you to
Shame. O! know, and lay it on your Hearts, That there is a Way that seems
right unto a Man, but the End thereof (O take Notice of it) are the Ways of
Death.

Pray tell, me what is your Ground?

(1) Is this your Ground, that your Way seems right, because you believe that
your Heart is upright, that you have a good Intention, notwithstanding your
Works are vile: But know, He that trusts in his own Heart is a Fool, Prove.
xxviii 26. And because your Works are vile, that gives to understand, that
your Heart is naught; for, An evil Man out of the evil Treasure of his Heart
brings forth evil Things, Matt. xii 35.

(2) Is this your Ground, that you firmly hold and do not doubt, but that
Christ is your Savior, and that you shall be saved, and you suppose that these
strong Imaginations are a true Faith, and therefore that you are a Believer;
but know that this Ground is false, Satan that Subtle Deceiver, and our own
deceitful Hearts may persuade us to this and miserably deceive us; as it is no
Proof that any one is wise, because he thinks himself wise, but on the contrary
it i^ much more a Sign of a Fool; so verily it is no Sign that any one is in a
good State* when he conceits that of himself, and belives it; the Jews said, we
are Abraham's Children, and called God their Father, although Jesus on the
contrary told them, Ye are of your Father the Devil, Joh. vii. The Foolish
Virgins likewise realy thought that they should be saved, when they cried Lord,
Lord, open unto us. But they were Answered, I know you not, Matt. xxv. And
besides, any one can say this and persuade himself of it. O! to the State of
Grace appertains somewhat else; Not every one that says Lord, Lord, Matt.
vii.

(3) Or is this the Reason that you think that your Way is right and your
Condition good, because you are free of gross public scandalous Sins, no
Swearer, Drunkard, Whoremonger, Thief, Robber, and such like Abominations: But
don't you know that that was the Ground of the Pharisee, who nevertheless was
deceived, Luke xviii 12. And because thou live civily, orderly and
virtuously, and art outwardly unreproveable, that no Body can say ought against
thee; but know that this is no Argument, for Paul testifies of himself, that
touching the Law he was blameless, and yet a Persecntor of Christ, Phil. iii.
Mark well what is said of the rich young Man, Matt. xix 16. which came to Jesus
and said, good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal Life?
Jesus answered him, keep the Commandments. The young Man said, all these have I
kept from my Youth up, what lack I yet? Behold how far he was come, he had kept
all the Commandments, not this or that Commandment, not for a little Time, but
from his Youth up; yea, he is desirous to go further, what lack I yet? He is
concerned about his Salvation, and asks, Good Master what shall I do? But
when he heard that all these Things could not help him, except he denied
himself and followed Jesus, he went away sorrowful. A Token that he could not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

4 Or is this your Evidence that your Way seems right unto you; Because you
are very religious, pray often, often and willingly hear and read Gods Word,
give many Alms, these are necessary and profitable Things, but always no
Evidence that we are in a good Way, and in a good State: For then the way of
the Pharisees and Scribes must have been right, or their State good, because
many of them made a great Work of such Duties, so far that they (as Christ
teaches) out of devotion prayed often, fasted twice a a Week, Luke xviii. and
gave mang Alms: The Savior teaches that we can preach Gods Word do Miracles,
go to the Lord's Supper and that notwithstanding he will say to many of those,
I never knew you, Matt. vii. yea the Apostle Paul says, though I bestowed all
my Goods to feed the Poor, 1 Cor. xiii. thus giving to understand that a Man
not only can be free from gross Sins, and diligently can use all religious
Means, but can come so far as to give all his Goods to the Poor, and can give
himself over to be Burnt for the Truth, without being in a good State and have
right to Salvation.

5 Or is this your principle that you have Delight and Joy in God's Word, that
you have been afraid, troubled, distressed, moved and sorrowful, and that you
can weep for your Sins, but know that all these things are no sufficient Ground
to have Right to Salvaiion, for the Lord Jesus shows that the temporary Beliver
can likewise receive the word with joy, Luke viii. Felix trembled when Paul
preached to him of Judgment, Acts. xxiv. Agrippa, hearing Paul preach was
almost persuaded, Acts. xxvi. Saul wept for his Sins and confessed them, 1 Samuel
xvi. 15. and 14. 17. to be troubled, moved and touched and thereupon to become
concerned and at a loss about his Salvation that is presently no saving Work of
God's Favor, but often comes through a disturbed Conscience and goes over
again like a Sea Sickness, whereas all these Things have place in such who are
no less than upon the right Way, but a mere unconverted Man; thus it follows of
its self that all these Things are no Sufficient Ground that your State is good
and and well pleasing to God, and from whence Salvation will follow.

6 Or is this your Principle? Because you are much reformed and changed in your
external Life, having more knowledge, live much beter and retired as hereto
fore, but that this is a loose Ground may appear in Saul of whom is read, 1 Samuel x 9. that God gave him another Heart, and notwithstanding continued in his
old natural State: St. Peter, testifies that after we have escaped the
Pollutions of the World through the Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ that we may be again entangled therein and overcome, 2 Pet: ii 20. a Man
may be externally much reformed from ^^any Extravagancies, and abstain from
many gross Sins and with Jehu show a great zeal. and yet not be on the narrow
way which only leads to heaven.

Thus you see that these Things are no true and sure Principles whereon a man
may conclude his State to be good and conceit to be saved, but that this is the
Way that seems right unto a Man, whereof the End are the Ways of Death. If
then you are at ease on these or such like Principles you have hitherto most
miserably deceived your self, if you have concluded from any of these Things
that your Way is right and your State good, then you have hitherto misled your
Soul, and if you still persist in these presumtuous Imaginations against all
these discoveries you will the more deceive your self and make your self the
more wretched. But O! how many be there that do not come so far and
notwithstanding conclude that they be in a good State against all clear
Evidences these lie upon the Brink of Hell, and it is to be feared that many
will not be awakned until they open their Eyes in Hell, when it will be too
late.

Alas Hearers? That yet walk in the ways of Sin, and will not leave them, but
do love them, and live in them with Pleasure; You likewise who walk in the Ways
of Self Righteousness, trusting upon your Heart, upon your good intentions, and
the like, you also who are come no farther then upon the Way of Civility (...)
external Godliness, but know nothing of any ^rue Change, are not as yet
regenerated and renewed, O here is sorrow full News! for the end of your Way is
Death: although your Way seems right unto you, yet the End thereof are the
Ways of Death, O think upon it well what Wretchedness that herein is included
for you, if it might be a means for your Conviction and Conversion.

I Are your Ways Ways of death, then that way where in you now walk will not
bring you to Happiness, but thy Hope of being saved shall perish: When the
wicked Man dies his Hope perishes, yea his strongest Expectations. Prove. xi^
7. the Hypocrites Hope shall perish, whose Hope shall be cut off, Job. viii
43-15. O with what Horror will thou then gaze after thine imaginary Hope!

2 Your Quiet, Tranquillity and careless Peace shall then also perish; though we
propound unto you the Curse of the Law, the Wrath of God, your miserable and
wretched State to raise you (if it were possible) up again, but alas! You know
nevertheless to set your Hearts at ease, you go along careless and unconcerned,
you go on merrily, in Tranquillity of mind as if you ailed nothing, although we
cry a aloud and list up our Voice like a trumpet, you become not convicted, you
think nevertheless that there is no Danger, the devil keeps all Things at Peace
within you Luke xi. 21. your deceitful wicked Heart agrees thereunto, but when
thou shall (...) it^ is Peace and safety, then sudden Destruction. (...) comes
as Travel upon a Woman with Child, and then thou shall in no wise escape it, 1
These. v 3. O! who can conceive that Remorse and Torment of Conscience when the
wretched Sinner shall see that all his Peace, Rest and imaginary Happiness is
now all Past and gone, so that he finds himself deceived, and that it is now
too late, and that he cannot return again forever.

(3) This Way, how right and good it seems in your Eyes, will not bring you
to the happy Communion with God, from that you will forever be debarred; but
your Way and manner of living will bring you to everlasting Death, to eternal
Destruction, which you shall suffer from the Presence of the Lord, and from the
Glory of his Power,' 2 These. i 9. When you think to enter in; you will find
that you have deceived your self; for you will be excluded and hear that
dreadful Sentence, Depart for I never knew you, Matt. vii and xxv. O dreadful
Destruction! O miserable Death! O that being abandoned from God to all
Eternity! O that everlasting missing of God's Favor! O that eternal bearing of
the Wrath of the Almighty! O Sorrowful Condition! And that is as certain the
Portion of all Unconverted People, as God's Word is true. O! think upon it, The
End of these Ways are Ways of Death.

O! that this would cause you to look about you, that you might leave your
erroneous Way, and walk in the Way of Understanding, upon the right Way: O!
that God would grant that you were once discovered, and did see that Way that
seems right in your Eyes, I pray you, lay it to Heart, believe it, I entreat
you, that a Man may herein easily deceive himself, believe it, I beseech you,
That there is a Way that seems right unto a Man, and the End thereof
notwithstanding are the Ways of Death; believe it, I beg you, that you have a
wicked deceitful Heart, which (...) prone to deceive you, expect no good from
that deceitful Heart; know that you carry a Murderer in your own Bosom; He that
trusts in his own Heart is a Fool, says Solomon: O that is such a crafty
Subtilty of Satan, and Deceit of the Heart, that we take outward Godliness and
Civility for true Holiness, and are so easily persuaded, that we are in a good
State. What can it help you, that you now think that you State is good, when at
length you will be deceived? Can that Immagination make you happy? O no! it
will make you the more unhappy. But to see and feel his Misery, that is the
first means to come to Redemption.

It Is true, on this Way which seems right unto you, you may live at ease and
be merry, and walk in the Ways of thine Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes,
and take delight in all manner of Pleasure and Lusts, and have outward
Prosperity, and here you have likewise a great Company that delight themselves
with you, and spea^^ and do as you would fain have it; but know that for all
these Things God will bring you to Judgment Eccl. xi 9. And what if your
Portion be in this Life with the rich Glutton, your Portion will be with him
likewise in Hell.

There are two Ways proposed unto you, on the one side, A broad Way, wherein
you have a great company, whereon you can live at ease, to your Mind, Desire
and Lust, and keep your self employed in things of this World, and Use them as
you please, and do as the greatest Heap, as t^^ most Part of People do, and
(with one Word) whereon you can live as you now do, without painful feeling and
Sorrow for Sins, without Concernment about the Condition of your Souls, without
striving and mortifying the Flesh, without praying and Wrestling and flying to
Jesus for Reconciliation and Sanctification, but know and depend upon it, The
End of that Way is eternal Death and Perdition.

On the other side is propounded unto you a narrow Way, wherein you must deny
your self, your own Understanding, own Righteousness, own Will and Mind, own
Worthiness and Power, wherein you must depart from your loving Sins, and from
the Vanities of this World, wherein you must seek the Kingdom of God and its
Righteousness above all Things, Matt. vi. and bring forth Fruits worthy of
Repentance, live a precise and holy Life, follow the Footsteps and Virtues of
Christ: It is a Way also which is compassed with Oppressions, Ad^^^sities and
Hardships, that strive against Flesh and Blood: But O! what (...) happy and
glorious End has this Way! for the End is Eternal Life, everlasting Glory,
everlasting Joy and Salvation.

Here then are two Ways, but you cannot walk in them both at once, there be two
Lords, but you cannot serve the^^ both at once, you must leave the one if you
will cleave unto the other; you must choose one of the two, entirely wicked, or
else entirely Godly, cold or hot, for those that are ^ukewarm will I spew out
of my Mouth, says Christ, Rev. iii 17.

Here then I set before you, Life and Death, ^he Blessing and the Curse; O!
choose Life that you may live. O Sinner! abandon your Way which seems so
right unto you, your careless and secure Tranquillity, your own Righteousness,
your Sins and Lusts, your own Thoughts and turn to the Lord, Jes. lv 7. Forsake
the Foolish, those ^oolish Supporters and false Grounds, and go in the Way of
Understanding. You have lived Twenty, Thirty, Forty, Fifty, Years, and some
longer, and walked in the Way that seemed right in our Eyes, now you are so
near Eternity, and God warns you still not to go forward in these your own
Ways, O! be no longer distracted, that you would against all these Warnings and
Convincings ^ill hold fast, that your Way is right, and more and more deceive
your poor Souls. Give Ear^ (...) the Counsel of God in his Word, Jer. vi (...)
Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the Ways, an^^ see and ask for the old Pat^^,
where is the good Way, and walk therein, and ye shall find Rest for your Souls.

But there is likewise a Way that seems Wrong in the Eyes of the World, which
nevertheless is the right Way, and that is the Way of Faith, o^ Regeneration,
of Sanctification, of Self-denial, o^ Heavenly mindedness and Love; this is
that narrow Way whereof the Savior speaks, Matt. vii^ But O! Happy are they
who have set their Fee^ thereon, who are gone over from the Broad Way of Sin,
on this narrow Way of Virtue and Godliness, who have chosen the Way of Truth,
Ps. cxix 30.

1 Give God the Glory of his free Grace in showing unto you the Hurtfulness of
that Way that see^^th right, and the Loveliness of the Way of Life, and that he
has brought you on the same.

2 Continue steadfast on that Way, never repine that you have chosen that Way.
And now so much Ill is spoken of this Way, and because there are now a Days so
many Elymassites wh^ pervert the right Way of the Lord, therefore often renew
your Choice for that Way, to go sure forward therein, and show your selves the
more in behalf of it, and above all adorn that Way through many Fruits of a
holy Life, and where (...) they speak evil of this Way, they notwithstanding
out of the Fruits might glorify God, and so might be drawn to that Way, to that
End, pray often with Divid, Ps. cxix 32, 33, 35. and xxv 5.

3 Go constantly forward with an high esteem of that Way, They shall sing in
the Ways of the Lord, Ps. cxxxviii 5.

4 seek to allure others to bring them over to that Way; that Way is not only
for you, but likewise for others: We must seek for Company to Heaven, therefore
your Desire must be to make known these Ways to others, and to hold forth the
Excellency of that Way to others, and explain it to them.

5 Walk cautiously, lively, wisely, holy and tender of Conscience in that Way,
which is the Way of Life, that Way of Wisdom, that narrow holy Way, take
especial Care that you never do any thing which is unseemly to this Way, but as
He which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation,
1 Pet. i 15. Think what a Difference there is between Heaven and Hell, and what
a visible Difference must there than be between your walking on the narrow Way,
and the walking of those on the broad Way. If you thus direct your Steps on
this Way, you will increase in Strength, and Peace, and will be sure that your
Way is right, and he will lead and bring you to Heaven.

But if it happen unto you that you have to strive with Fear, Concern and
Doubtings, if your Way might not be such which seems right, the End whereof
nevertheless is Destruction; then follow David, and wrestle earnestly before
the Throne in Prayer for Confirmation and clearing up of your State, saying,
Search me, O God! and know my Heart, try me, and know my Thoughts, and see if
there be any wicked Way in me, and lead me in the Way everlasting, Ps. cxxxix
23, 24. and depending upon the Promises of the Faithful God, by Jeremiah xxxi
9. I will cause them to walk in a straight Way, wherein they shall not stumble.
Wait but on the Lord, and keep his Way, and he shall exalt thee, Ps. xxxvii 34.
and cause thee by his Light to walk through Darkness, and he who has taken
hold on thy right Hand, will lead thee by his Counsel through this Wilderness
of the World, and hereafter receive thee to Immortality, and so be forever with
the LORD.

A SERMON, etc.
Jes. LXVI, 2. -- But to this Man (...) I look, even to him that is Poor, and
of a co^^trite Spirit, and trembles at my Word.
INTRODUCTION.
WHEN once the Prophet and Judge Samuel was to anoint one of the Sons of Jess^^
to be King over Israel instead of Saul, the Lo^^ gave him these necessary
Instructions, Man loo^eth on the outward Appearance, but the Lord loo^eth on
the Heart, 1 Samuel xvi 7. Samuel being ready to pour out the holy Oil upon one
of (...) Sons of Jesse, the first that comes in his vi^^ was Eliah, he being a
Youth well proportioned beautiful, and of a comely high Stature, which caused
him to say within himself, This is he whom the Lord has chosen to be the
Leader of his People. But herein he mist it, wherefore the Lord instructs him
otherwise, saying, look not on his Countenance, or the Height of his Stature,
for (...) have rejected him: That is not chosen him to be King, but passed him
by; and the Reason that God gives is, For Man looks on the outward
Appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart. And thus he reproves Samuel of
a Fault common to men, who dote on that which is outward, and he tells him
his Infallible Judgment, that he judges Man not according to the outward
Appearance, but according to the Frame and Temper of their Hearts, according to
their Diligence, Sincerity, Patience, and Fear of God, the which especially
have their abode in the Heart. It is not only so in temporal Offices and
Administrations, but also in Divine Service, in the endeavoring after true
Godliness; and herein the Lord looks not on the outward Appearance, but on
the Heart, and therein he only takes his Delight. He that comes unto him with
his Mo^th, and honors him with his Lips, keeping his Heart ^ar from God,
there he says, In vain do they worship me, Matt. xv. He that contenteth
himself with the Work externally done, as the car^nal nominal Christian does,
God holds to be an Idolater, notwithstanding he is very deligent in the
Observation of outward Ordinances, and Practice of instituted Duties, for God
requires at the End of all his Commandments, Charity out of (...) pure Heart,
and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy i 5. The which if he
find^ not in Man, although he be a diligent Observer of the external Divine
Service he is notwithstanding an Abomination to the Lord. If Praying be
acceptable to the Lord, it must be performed in Spirit and Truth, Joh. iv 24.
If going to the Lord's Supper be pleasing to him, and profitable to Man, it
must be adorned with the Wedding Garment of Repentance, Faith and Love: For the
Lord looks on the Heart, the external practicing of Divine Duties without
th^^ good Frame of Heart he hates; but, On these will he look, even to him
that is poor, and of (...) contrite Spirit, and that trembles at his Word as
the Lord says in the Words of our Text.

CONNECTION.
Here the Lord rebukes the Jews, who relied on the outward Temple, verse 1.
Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool, where i^ the House that ye
build unto me, and where is the Place of my Rest? Whereby the Lord shows,
that under the New Testament he had no more any limited Throne or Footstool,
as heretofore under the Old Testament, when he sat upon a Throne between the
Cherubins above the Ark, and had the Temple, Mount Sion, Jerusalem, and the
Land of Canaan for a Footstool; but that ^aving the earthly Sanctuary, should
then have ^o Throne but in Heaven, and the whole Earth under Heaven for a
Footstool for his Feet, then ^here could be no Place chosen to build him an
House, a Place for his Rest, as then under the Old Testament. The Lord gives
the Reason, verse 2. For my Hand has made all these Things, and all these
Things have been, says the Lord. Whereby he shows who are well-pleasing unto
him: But will thou know on whom I will look as on a House, a resting Place,
wherein I will only dwell as in a Spiritual Temple under the New Testament, it
is such as are Poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and that tremble at my Word.

DIVISION.
In the Text are two Parts, I. The Objects or Persons here represented, which
are described threefold, as 1 Poor. 2 Contrite of Spirit. 3 Tremble at his Word.
II. The Promise of the Lord to such, But on this Man will I look.


EXPLANATION of the first Part.
POOR ( GNANI) are by Virtue of the Original Word, such who are humble,
pensive, meek, and has its Derivation from a Word that among others signifies
to be abased, oppressed and according to its Original signifies one who has
such a Frame of Heart as to be bowed down and oppressed in Mind, either under
temporal Oppressions, as from a Sense of Sin and Judgment, which does often
demonstrate it self in the Lord's People. And thus it agrees with those who
are Meek; therefore Poor and Meek are put together, Jes. xi 4. A Name
wonderously becoming the People of the Lord: For the Believers are Poor, for as
much as they are humble, of no puffed up or haughty Temper, but are low and
little in Heart, humble in regard of the^^ Countenance and Apparel, also in
their Gesture and Talk, also in Mind, and in their common Conversation, as
David, 2 Samuel vi 22.

And more especially they are humble according to the Frame of their Souls,
Lord my Heart is not haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty, etc. When they think upon
God, then they cry out with Job, I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes,
Job xlii 6. When they look on themselves, the Sense of Spiritual Want and
inability causes them to see themselves void of all Boasting, seeking their
Refuge in the Fullness of JESUS: But also the Lords People are meek, by Virtue
of that low and humble Frame of their Hearts, which is a Fruit of God's Spirit
in the Believers, For the Fruit of the Spirit is Gentleness, Gal. v 22. which
they show in a friendly Conversation with their Neighbors, without Wrath and
Revenge, and in a pliable and yielding Readiness to the Lord's Commandments,
and in a patient enduring of Reproaches, of Injuries, Adversities and
Oppressions: This is the Reason why the Word Poor is also translated Meek, for
that which in Zac. ix 9. rendered Poor, is in Matt. xxi 5. declared Meek, an
Evidence that these two Tempers agree in one.

The Believers are poor because they are Oppressed and miserable, are subject
to many Miseries and Adversities, sometime with Spiritual, which straiten them
in the inward Frame of their Souls, and make them very Fainthearted, sometimes
with bodily, which outwardly press them, especially Persecution and Bitterness
of their Enemies: This is the Reason that of Christ's People is thus spoken,
Zeph. iii 12. I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted People, and
they shall trust in the Name of the LORD. This is spoken of the Jews that
should believe in Christ. Zach. xi 11. And it was broken in that Day: And so
the Poor of the Flock that waited upon me knew that it was the Word of the
LORD. The Oppression and Poverty of Believers are put together, Rev. ii 9. this
is their Lot, Joh. xvi 33. This was seen in the first Times of Christendom. How
have not the Believers been poor and miserable by reason of the many
Persecution? All these Things are found in those that are truly Poor.

Poverty in general is a Want of such Things which a Man has need of for
Sustenance, by which he can subsist; so that the Poor in general are such which
have Want of Means to live, as necessary Food, Meat, Drink and Clothing, by
which the Body is defended against the Inconveniences of the Times, as Cold,
Heat, Rain and Wind, So that they become necessitated with Anguish, Oppression
and Trouble to seek their Sustenance before the Door of another. This is a
miserable Condition; this David wishes to his Enemies who rewarded him Evil for
Good, that their Children be continually Vagabonds, and beg, and seek their
Bread out of their desolate Places, Ps, cix. 10.

Poverty is twofold Carporal and Spiritual; the Corporal is here not excluded,
for often both go together. The Believers ore often Poor according to the
World, their Lot is not always to have much of temperal things, because there
is reserved for them other and better Riches; so that Poverty and Need is often
their Portion. Riches are often Hindrances to follow JESUS, not only because
the Heart is generally too much set thereon, and cleaves fast thereunto, but
also that it is so loath when required with Moses to esteem the Disgrace of
Christ above the Treasures of Egypt, when many are called thereunto with the
Rich young Man, to count those Things but dross and Dung for the Excellency of
Christ, then they go away sorrowful, Matt. xix 22. This was the Reason that
Christ spoke that hard Word, Matt. xix 23, 34. It was likewise seen that the
most part were poor that did ^mbrace the Gospel of Jesus this James shows us,
James ii 5. and therefore Christ's People are often of a mean Condition in the
World, therefore it was foretold of him, that he should turn his Hand upon the
little ones, Zac. xiii 7. Paul likewise shows this very emphatically, 1 Cor.
i 26. 28. They were but Fishermen, and the most Part but mean People who were
first converted to Christ, it was the Multitude and the common People that
clave unto him John, vii 40, 41. and in process of Time both Jews and Gentiles
were almost but a mean and disregarded People, which easily could leave their
Possessions, that embraced Jesus and the Gospel. The Heathen therefore used to
ubraid the Christians for being so Mean and Disregarded: as the Heathen
C^cilius upbraided them, That they were a Company of the Off-scourings and
refuse of the People, that the most and best of their Adherents were a poor
beggarly and hunger starved Generation who had niether Riches or Respect to
support themselves. However this goes some what too far; for when Christendom
some what increased and the Number of true Believers multiplied, there were
also several rich and eminent People that were brought too; though
notwithstanding it is in great Measure true, that the most Part of the Belivers
were poor and mean, though not prejudicial to the Gospel.

But because here is not chiefly spoken of temporal Poverty, we will enlarge no
more upon it but treat of a Spiritual Poverty, as in Truth all Believers are
Poor in Spirit that they might become fit Objects of God's Grace and Favor,
and thus the Savior discribes them, Matt. v 3. These Poor thenare such who are
not only made bare of all Spiritual Goods, for thus are all People by Nature:
It is true, GOD has created Man good and upright after his image, so that he
was rich in God, in Knowledge, in Love and in Glory, overflowing with Spiritual
Goods, but it did not last long that man continued in that State, he sinned and
thus was bereaved of that Image of God, that precious Pearl, those dear
Treasures, the Spiritual Raiment was taken from him, deprived of those
inestimable Riches: From hence we are all poor and made naked of those
Spiritual Goods, and are without Hope of eternal Life for all have sinned and
come short of the Glory of God, Romans iii 23. having the Understanding darkened,
being alienated from the Life of God, Ep. iv 18. through Sin man is reduced to
an Abyss of Want, in a terrible Condition and deep Poverty: And although all
men are poor, they are notwithstanding not all poor in Spirit, for the most are
like drunken People who suppose themselves Rich and increased with Goods, and
to have Need of nothing, Rev. iii 17. But these Poor are those who have
Knowledge of their Spiritual Want, who see and feel this in themselves, they
are such,

1 Who have a quickening and convincing Sight of their Spiritual Want, Sin and
deserved Punishment and Inability, being sensible of their forlorn and damnable
Condition in themselves, and of their Inability, to help themselves so that
they can say with David, Ps. li. 3. For I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my
Sin is ever before me.

2 Who under this sense get a low, humble Frame, low and humble in their Mind,
Affections and Conversation, having mean Thoughts of themselves, as the truly
Poor always have, who do not look on themselves as if they were Something, but
are made bare of all, find no Good in themselves, as that Publican, Luke x.

3 They through all this are also driven without themselves, become poor
Beggars at the Throne of Grace, full of Desire to be filled out of the Fullness
of JESUS, even as that poor one by the Way side, Lord Jesus have Mercy on me.
And if they are poor in Body, they with Patience willingly bear it, and esteem
it more highly than the Treasures of this World, they are contented with their
own, and the Rest they wait for from God that Father of Lights, from whom
comes every good and perfect Gift from above, James i 17.

Though they be rich in Earthly Goods, which may go together with Spiritual
Poverty, they do not set their Hope upon transitory Riches, they do not forget
their Charity and Liberality.

These are the Reasons why the People of JESUS, the Favorites of God, are
called Poor. These are the Poor whereof Christ's Message was to John the
Baptist, The Poor have the Gospel preached unto them, Matt. xi 5. And those
whom he places as Objects of his Fvangelical Commission, He has sent me to
preach the Gospel to the Poor, Luke iv 18.

Those who are thus poor and naked must needs be concerned about it, and have a
sensible Feeling thereof: Therefore the Prophet likewise adds, and of a
contrite Spirit.

By the Spirit must be understood the reasonable and immortal Soul of Man,
through which he understands, wills, and judges, in its Motion and inward
Frame, and thus the Spirit of Man is that Habit, Frame and Operation, those
Passions and Motions which have Place in the Soul, that which we also call the
Mind.

The original Word which is translated contrite, denotes, to beat, pound,
bruise; from hence it is often translated Destruction, Ps. lxxxx. 3. to break
and grind to Powder, according to, Js. xix 10. From whence it appears that it
must be improperly understood: For the Soul being Spiritual, cannot properly be
broken or bruised: This Word then is borrowed from hard Matter, the which with
Strength must be broken and bruised. Now this being brought over to the Soul,
gives to understand the Frame of Hearts. They are before this Bruising,
exalted, high-minded, so hard and impliable as a Stone and Diamond, as God's
Word likewise says, Zac. vii 12. The Contrite of Spirit then are those, who
lay down all Loftiness of Mind, Arrogance, Self-conceitedness, and deeply
humble themselves before the Lord confessing and acknowledging to be Dust and
Ashes unworthy of the least Blessing, being heartily solicitous about their
Sins and desirous for Grace; in a contrite Spirit are found.

1 A deep Sense and quickening Knowledge of Sins, by which the Sinner is
convinced of his miserable and damnable Condition, Unworthiness and manifold
Sins, and Inability, so that he feels his Sins as a heavy Burden which press
him, through which the Heart becomes sensible, tender, broken and bruised in
reflecting on the Curse of the Lord and the wrath of God against Sin, the
Hammer of God's Law strikes on the Soul: And thus God's Word becomes unto them
as a Hammer and Fire that breaks the Rock in Pieces, Jer. xxix 29. From
whence proceeds a Sense of Sin, which as a heavy Bur^hen are too heavy, so that
he must say with David, Ps. xxxviii.

2 An hearty Astonishment and Sorrow for Sins past, with Repentance and Regret,
not so much for the Punishment, as by Reason of the (...) who tremble at God's
Word, And tremble at my Word. There is a wrong slavish Fear and Trembling,
which is found in the Ungodly, the which hearing of the Curse and Punishment
they have to expect, grow afraid, and the Punishment of Hell terrifies them,
the which for a Time may work in them a dissembling or hypocritical Repentance,
1 Samuel xxvi 21. Thus we read of King Belshazzer, when he saw a Hand writing his
Judgment, Dan. v 6. When Felix heard Paul preach of Judgment, he exceedingly
trembled: But such trembling is not here understood, but this Trembling at
God's Word, is found in the contrite Spirit.

1 The which with a holy reverent Motion of the Mind are concerned before God's
Majesty and Highness, and a careful Watching not to displease God, so that they
fear and tremble for his Commandments, and receive them with a Childlike Fear
and Submission: So that this Trembling is nothing else but an humble Sense of
himself, accompanied with an awful Reverence for the Majesty and Highness of
God. Thus we read, Hos. xi 10, 11. They shall walk after the Lord: He shall
roar like a Lion: When he shall roar, then the Children shall tremble from the
West: They shall tremble as a Bird out of Egypt, and as a Dove out of the Land
Assiria: And I will place them in their Houses, says the LORD. Thus says Job,
xxxvii 1. At this also my Heart trembles and is moved out of his Place.

To tremble at God's Word is then

2 To have an internal high Esteem of, and deep Veneration for the Word of the
living God, and being a Word which is quick and powerful, Heb. iv 12. To have a
deep Impression for the Promises, Threatenings and Commands of the Gospel, to
make much of it, highly to esteem it, Trembling at his Word, with Awe and
Reverence.

3 Therein likewise to have Desire, and delight to glory therein, as worthy of
all Acceptance, as David, Ps. xix 10 and cxxxix 16.

4 To hear that Word with Desire and Eagerness, not slowly, but ready and swift
to hear, Jam. i 19. Eccl. v 1.

5 To ponder and meditate on that Word, Ps. (...) 2. To read examine and regard
it, to lay your Souls down by it, that you might penetrate into the right
Understanding of it, Joh. v 39. As those of Berea, Act. xvii 11. To dig for it,
as for hidden Treasure.

6 To preserve and impress that Word deep in his Heart, that it may not be
washed out, constantly to be busy about it, and with Mary, to keep all the
Words of the LORD in his Heart. Thus David says of himself, cxix 11.

7 Not only to know and understand the Truths therein revealed, but also to
receive them, and with Love to believe the same, with Humbleness, denying your
own Wisdom, keeping to the infalible Testimony of God, to obey from the Heart
that Form of Doctrine which was delivered you, Romans vi 17

8 To have an inward and careful Regard not to Sin against that Word, either in
not making an open Profession of it, or to depart from the Ways of
Righteousness.

9 To tremble at God's Word is likewise to fear the Commands and keep them, and
to behave himself in Life and Conversation accordingly, as a Rule, Gal. vi 16.
And thus to work out his Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. ii 12. For
this Trembling is accompanied with a diligent Care to do what is well-pleasing
to God, which cannot be done but by keeping of the Commandments, Eccl. xii 13.
This was David's Petition, Ps. cxix 35. Make me to go in the Paths of thy
Commandments, for therein do I delight.

10 Lastly, it is to tremble at the Threatenings, Punishments and Judgments
expressed in the Word to some Knowledge of punishable Guilt, to fear for
Chastisement. So it was with David, Ps. cxix 120. My Flesh trembles for Fear
of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. So that the Fear of God's Wrath has
this Effect, Ps. ii 11, 12. Serve the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with
Trembling, kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the Way, etc. This
is the Frame of the Lord's People, those are the Persons aimed at* these have a
glorious Promise, for the Lord will look at them.

EXPLANATION of the second Part.
BUT To this Man will I look. As the Lord God is a Spirit, having no Eyes,
therefore Seeing is improperly ascribed unto him. To him that is poor and of a
contrite Spirit, will the Lord look.

1 That is, he will be Gracious and Favorable unto them. For since they are
Poor (for they being made naked of all, and contrite of Spirit) they are fit
Objects of his Grace, such Conditions are pleasing unto him, Ps. li 17. And as
by the Lord's Seeing is expressed his favorable Omnisciency, so it is certain
that he

2. Looks on them: For in a special manner, he knows them by Name, 2 Timothy ii
19. He has known them from Eternity according to the Intention of his Grace,
and now he knows them also as his Favorites, he knows what the do, and not
do; he knows their Sincerity, their secret Devotion, their Prayers and
Supplications, their Strugglings in Prayer, their Sighs and Cries, their
reading and meditating of God's Word, their Godly Conversation; he sees and
knows their Striving against Sin, their Sorrow and Smart for Sin, and for their
great Distance from God, and other Straits of the Soul, Ps. lxxxviii 9. He
knows their bodily Wants, Adversities and Oppressions: The Lord looks on
them, that is,

3 He provideth and maintains them with all that they want, with spiritual
and temporal Blessings, and suffers them not to want what is necessary for Life
and Godliness; his Care extends toward their Souls and Bodies, in Prosperity
and Adversity, for they are engraven on the P^^lms of his Hands, Is. xlix 16.
He looks upon them, that is,

4 He loves them with a Love of Complacency; for as a Father pittieth his
Children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him, Ps. ciii 13^. And they are
his Property, for that reason he will spare them as a Man spares his (...) Son
that serves him, Mal. iii 17. But particularly the Lord looks on them,

5 When he makes them feel his loving Favor, so that they do taste how good
the LORD is, when he speaks unto them of Peace, and with Power brings such
or such like Words upon their Hearts: Thou art mine: I have loved thee with an
everlasting Love, therefore with loving Kindness have I drawn thee, Jer. xxxi.
3. I know thee by Name and thou have found Grace in my Sight, Exodus xxxiii. 12.
Thy Sins be forgiven thee, Mark. ii. 5. Thou art (...) Heir of eternal Life;
the which endue^^ (...) Soul with much Light and Power. So that (...) then
enjoy a silent Peace, a pleasent delightful^ Sweetness and refreshing Joy,
through which they become drunk in Love and feel the Beginning of Salvation
within them: Thus the Love of God is shed abroad in their Hearts, and assures
them that their Hope will not make them ashamed, Romans v 5. This David enjoyed
when he said, thou have put Gladness in my Heart, more then in the Time that
their Corn and their Wine increased; Ps. iv. 7. This causes Rejoyceing and
saying, I will greatly rejoice in the Lord my Soul shall be joyful in my God,
etc. Js. xvi. 10. This is the inward Testimony of God's Spirit, through which
the People of the Lord become assured Romans 8. 16.

6 Finally. On these will the Lord look, because he will dwell in them as in a
Spiritual Temple and in a particular manner will be present in them, for they
are united unto him for there is a mutual Familiarity between God and them,
they walk with God and he with them, this favorable Presence which is so Soul
refreshing is so acceptable to them, therefore David was so desirous
thereafter, Ps. lxiii. 1 He dwells in them through his Grace and powerful
Oppe^ation of his Spirit who dwells in them, Joh. xiv. 17. through which they
are led comforted and strengthened so that they are Temples of God wherein he
has his Dwelling, as his Promise is,

This God testifies throughout in his Word, that he will be favorable and
gracious unto the poor, lowly brokenhearted, the contrite in Spirit, as Ps.
xxxiv. 11. cxxxviii. 6. And no Wonder for such Qualifications are pleasing unto
him Ps. li. 17. This is obvious in that sinful Woman* Luke vii. in the prodical
Son, Luke xv. in the Publican, Luke xvii. such Conditions the Lord requires and
desires Joel. ii. 12, 13. God himself is the Cause and Master-Workman of a
contrit Spirit, Phil. ii. 3 a contrite Spirit denies and forsakes its self to
Gods honor, therefore the Savior is come into the World according to, Js.
xvi. 1. and Matt. ii 28. Therefore he calls them blessed, Matt. v.

APPLICATION.
FRom hence we can see worthy Hearers, th^^ those who are in Covenant with God,
Chist People, the Believers, the Heirs of Salvati^^ are qualified quite
otherwise than is commonly meant, the saving Promises of God's Favor and grace
are made unto such who in the Work are in a low, humble and despised Condition,
who outwardly have not much Respect, for they are spiritually poor, of a
contrite and humble Spirit, trembling at Gods Word, bruised, humbled and broken
in Heart, s. ^^vii 15. Broken hearted sorrowful, Is. lxi 1, 2, 3. the poor and
needy seeking Water (Water of Life but her is none) they cannot find it by
themselves, nor by none else, their Souls faint for Thirst, and none can keep
alive his own Soul, Ps. xxii. they who are quite made bare who have accustomed
themselves to pray to him who regards the Prayer of the Distitute, Ps. cii.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, Is. xl. 1. this supposes Sorrow, Spiritual
Cambat, Temptations. They appear as a bruised Reed, as bowed down broke,
bruised and as a smoking Flax, in a State of Darkness without much Light of Joy
and refreshing, Is. ^^iv. 11. Behold these are in Covenant with God, Christ's
People, Heirs of Salvation, who are by Christ called Blessed, Matt. v. Those
who are thus qualified have all Right and Freedom to appear at the Table of the
Lord, as appears by our Church-Form, for having spoken that all ungodly and
offensive People must be kept off, it says; But this is not spoken unto us to
make the ^ejected Hearts of the Believers fainthearted: ^hen by consequence,
they are the Poor and those of a contrite Spirit who tremble at God's ^^rd on
whom the Lord looks, that may par^^^^ of the Lord's Supper. Now every one will
consent to me that those who are not thus qualified, who are not poor and
contrite of Spirit, and do not tremble at God's Word are not in Covenant with
God, and for that Reason should not appear at the Table of the Lord, except
they will draw a Judgment on themselves: For that Reason it will be necessary
that we examine our selves whether we have those Qualifications, and especially
this is the Duty of those who intend to participate of the Lord's Supper, for
this is God's Express Command, 1 Cor. xi. 28.

What do you think Hearers? Are ye poor and of a contrite Spirit? Do ye tremble
at God's Word? If ye have hearkened with Attention you might have heard how your
Condition in this case is.

INQUIRY BY MARKS.
1 ASK your selves once sincerely, as in the Presence of the Omniscient God, am
I spiritually Poor? Have I a sensible Knowledge of my miserable damnable
Condition? Do I feel in my self that I am so damnable, unclean, vicious, so
estranged from God, and the Life of God, so wretched, miserable, poor, blind,
naked, and unable to save my self, or to do ought in order to save my self, so
that I must be lost if I thus continue?

2 Am I by Experience of this Spiritual Want and Deformity discontented and
distressed? Do I accuse and condemn my self? Am I abashed, and ashamed
concerning it? Am I concerned how I shall be delivered from such a miserable
Condition? Is the Spiritual Misery and Want the chiefest and greatest Matter
whereof I complain^ Am I sensible of thinking, O how will it go with me? O what
a miserable Creature am I! I am poor, blind, unbelieving, void of Love and
Sincerity: Truly if God has not Mercy on me, If I do not get an Interest in
JESUS for Reconciliation, If I do not become truly sanctified, I must forever
be miserable? It is natural for the Poor to complain, or with Solomon's
Language, to use Entreaties, Prove. xviii 23. He that is poor and needy, his
Heart is wounded within him, Ps. cix 22.

3 Am I of a contrite Sririt, through a grieviour Sense of Sin? Do my Sins
press me? Do I find in the inward Part of my Soul a hearty Sorrow for my Sins
out of a Love to God and Virtue, and out of a Hate and Aversion to Sin, by
reason that they are so shameful, detestable and base, and committed against
such a holy, good and righteous God, with a Purpose of Heart henceforth to live
conformable to the Will of God? O how distressed, perplexed and contrite of
Spirit are such who have obtained a right Sight and Sense of their Sins and
manifold Transgressions and spiritual Wants.

4. It is peculiar to the Poor to seek to have their Wants supplied, and in
Order thereto to seek out for Means; therefore you must ask your selves, If you
know your Wants and feel your Needs, and whether your Desire is after the holy
JESUS, so that you wish nothing else, long for nothing more than to be enriched
with the Spiritual Goods of JESUS CHRIST, viz. rich in Knowledge, Faith Love
and Holiness, that you might live to the Glory of God? whether it be the
greatest that you look after, long for, and wherein you are most employed
about, to obtain unto the Fullness and Riches which is in JESUS, and whether
you use all religious Means, as hearing and reading of God's Word and Praying,
in order to attain there unto that you might be supplied of your spiritual
Wants, and especially that you may be a partaker of true Sanctification.

5 Ask your selves also, Do I find in me a Trembling at God's Word, so that I
have a deep Reverence for the same, and a true Desire after it, to search it
and Meditate thereon, and have a careful dread not to sin against it, have a
Desire to direct my Life and Conversation according unto it.

CONVICTION.
WHEN you set these things before you* and perceive by your selves that you do
not find them in you, that you do not find such a Frame of Heart, as being poor
and of a contrite Spirit, trembling at God's Word, not knowing them, nor a
Partaker of them, that you have no Sense of your Sins, Damnableness and
Inability by a painful Feeling; then judge your selves, (...) you in Truth can
think that you are in Covenant with God: It connot be if these Things are not
found in you. Let not Satan and your deceitful Hearts persuade you to it, and
you notwithstanding approach to the Lord's Supper: Will the Lord look to him
that is Poor and of a contrite Spirit, trembling at his Word, then he will not
look to them who are not so, nor be favorable and gracious unto them: Verily
if you have not these Qualifications, you are not in Covenant with God, you
have no Right to the Sacraments, you who live at Ease without inward Anguish
for the Condition of your Souls.

2 You who are ignorant in the Mysteries of the Gospel and about the
Institution and Meaning of the Lord's Supper.

3 You who are not sensibly humbled because of your Sins, but can live
contented without Atonement and seeking after Christ, who have no longing after
a Sense of the Pardon of Sins, after Comfort, after Sanctification, after
Certainty of Salvation.

4 You who are in your own Eyes spiritually rich, and persuade your selves
such, as those of Laodicea, Rev. iii 17.

5 You who never had a distinguishing Sight, a lively Feeling, an humble and
fainthearted Disposition under Sin and Inabilty, and by your selves have never
been concerned about it.

6 You who have no Practice and Deeds of Faith, are not labourious in Christ in
choosing him for your Surety, to long after him, seek for him in Prayers and
Supplications, in accepting of him for Justification and Salvation.

7 You who have no Reverence, no Awe, no ^rembling at God's Word; you all I say
who are ^hus, are not in Covenant with God, but unconverted; therefore we warn
you most earnestly, that you embolden not your selves to approach to the Table
of the Lord, for you have no part in Christ, neither in his Goods, the Lord's
Supper is not prepared for you: But still if you approach, we declare unto you,
that ye pull down a heavy Judgment on your selves, and that you make your
selves Guilty of the Body of the Lord; the most fearfullest Sin that can be
thought on. I know very well that you will not believe that you have no Right
to come to the Holy Table, although you clearly see, that you are not poor nor
of a contrite Spirit, neither trembling at God's Word: But I likewise know, you
may believe it on not, that you have no right (according to God's Word) to
approach, and if you notwithstanding do it, you Seal your Destruction.

EXHORTATION.
O That you might see how necessary this Frame of Heart is, that no one can be
in God's Favor, except he be poor, and of a contrite Spirit. O then seek for
this Frame of Heart. (I Learn well to acknowledge, that the only riches of the
Soul do only consist in the enjoying of God and Christ, that that might make
you little and empty in your selves. (2 Learn to think little of all that is
your own, not to esteem your own Righteousness, own Ability; but on the
contrary, enlarging your Sins and Inabilities, seek to get a Knowledge of a
spiritual Want. (3 Bring your selves often under the Light of God's Majesty,
that would make you poor, contrite and trembling even as Job xlii 5, 6. and Is.
vi 5. seek to get a reverent Awe for God's Word.

On the contrary, those who are poor and of a contrite Spirit, and tremble at
God's Word may approach to the Lord's Table, such (1) who find themselves quite
lost, feel their Sins as a Burden, and thereover have Sorrow, Shame and
Dislike, and therefore desire to have an Interest in Christ, through him to
obtain Forgiveness and also Sanctification, to live holy and blameless. (2) Who
from experience of their Misery and Defect take their Refuge to Jesus, seek out
after him, long, cry, and give themselves over to him, accept of him to be
justified in his Blood, and to be sanctified by his Spirit. (3) They that find
in themselves a Hatred and Aversion to Sin, a grieving when they sin, and a
constant rising and running to the Blood of Jesus for Reconciliation, have a
Desire and love to live acceptably to the Lord, according to his Commands; such
I say, that do in Truth experience this in them, and no other may come to the
Lord's Supper. These must know, that if any one opproach profitably, that
before he come, he must prepare himself well; for every one will there narrowly
be viewed, whether he has on a Wedding Garment, that is, a decent Frame of
Heart, Matt. 22. For it is an extraordinary weighty Matter, as also Command of
God, that we prepare our selves well before we draw near. Unto the Preparation
is required an Ornament: If we go to a Wedding we adorn our selves with the
best we have, much more must that be done before we go to the Lord's Supper;
the Guest not having on a Wedding Garment was soon known, Matt. xxii. To this
Ornament appertains that we be in a State to be Objects of free Grace, that
we look on our selves in our Nothingness and Sinfulness, thereby to become
Meek, for such are fit Objects of Grace, Matt. v 5. which consists herein,
that we meditate and have Experience of our own Unworthiness: What am I, wholly
unworthy that the Lord should look on me, I am a very Nothing but Sin, I miss
by Nature the Image of God, being by Nature a Child of Wrath, what Abominations
proceed from my evil Heart? O how many Sins have I committed in Thought, Word
and Deed? How sluggish and deadish am I in God's Service? Verily I am not
worthy that God should regard me, or show me any Mercy.

On these things we must ponder a while, until we get such a Frame of Spirit
which we have need of, as (1) Humbleness of Heart, Genesis xxxii 10. (2) An inward
Shame, Ezra ix 6. (3) Hearty Sorrow for Sin. Ps. li. (4) An humble Detestation,
2 Samuel xxiv 10. (6) A Fear for Punishment. (6) An openhearted ingenuous
Confession of Sins, acknowledging the Hatefulness and Damnableness of the same,
Ps. xxxii 5. (7) Hearty Prayers for Reconciliation and Peace, Ps. li 1, 2 (8) A
Lifting up of the Heart through Faith (...) (...) Promises made unto the
Confession of Sins, 1 John

9. There is also required to this Adorning. A Desire after Christ, and an
earnest purpose to live holy, Ps. cxix 5. Also, A Heart that goes forth in
Love to all the Children of God, and unto all Men 2 Pet. ii 7. Happy are they
who have this humble Frame of Heart, being poor and contrite of Spirit, and do
Tremble at Gods, Word, to these the Lord shows his free Grace, the Beginnings
of it here, and hereafter in the perfect Degree of Glory,

AMEN.
A SERMON concerning the Lord's Supper ON I Cor. XI. 29. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning
the Lord's Body.

A SERMON etc.
1 Cor. XI 29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's Body.
XXX Sunday.
81 Quest, For whom is the Lord's Supper instituted

Answ. For those who by reason of their Sins loath themselves, and
notwithstanding trust that the same for the sake of Christ are forgiven them,
and that their remaing Debilities are covered with his Sufferings and Death,
and being more and more desirous to amend their Lives: But Hypocrites, and
those who do not with true Hearts turn to God, they eat and drink Judgment to
themselves.

82 Quest. Must those be admitted to this Supper who by their Confession and
Life behave themselves as unbelieving and ungodly People?

Answ. No, for thus the Covenant of God is prohpaned, and his Wrath kindled
against the whole Congragation Therefore the Christian Church is obliged,
according to the Order of Christ and his Apostles, to exclude such (until they
show Amendment of Life) through the Keys of Heaven.

INTRODUCTION.
GOD under the Old Testament had given a Law, by which was forbidden, That no
Stranger, Uncircumcised, or Unclean might approach to the Sactuary or
sanctified Things, Exodus xii 43, 45. Le^. The Children of Israel were not only
to disallow any to approach to the holy Things, but they were not to suffer any
Thing in the midst of them that was unclean; but they were strictly commanded,
That they should put all the Unclean out of the Camp: And thereof the Lord
himself gives the Reason, That they de^ile not their C^mps, Numb. v 2,3. and
Numb. xix 13, 20. And this Command went so far, that when the Children of
Israel suffered but one Person that was unclean among them, to have Communion
with them, although they were clean themselves, yea, although they did not know
that such an unclean Person was among them, yet in the first Place all Israel
were punished, as we see in the Example of Achan. Jos. vi 17, 18. and vii 12.
And then secondly the LORD GOD imediately withdrew himself from all Israel and
the whole Congregation, when but one unclean Person was found among them:
Neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed Achan from
amongst you, Jos. vii 12. These things were our Examples, 1 Cor. x 16. For we
likewise have a Sanctuary under the New Testament, the Lord's Supper, which is
come in stead of the Passover, of which is earneslly commanded, that no
unconverted Person, yet lying in their Pollutions, not being sanctified through
the Holy Spirit, may come to the same, for the Lord has threatened a heavy
Punishment to all those who unworthily approach to this Sanctuary, and eat
thereof: And withal has charged the Overseers to keep off the Strangers and
Ungodly, and put them out from the Midst of them, that the Covenant of God be
not profaned, and that God's Wrath be not kindled against the whole
Congregation, and the Lord thus depart from his Congregation with his Blessing,
Spirit and Grace. This is what in this Sunday is taught.

DIVISION.
Two Heads the Instructor gives us here to explain,

I Who they are, and who they are not, that may approach to the Lord's Supper,
Quest. 81. II How the Church through the Keys must keep off from the Lord's
Supper those who are offencive and live ungodly, Quest. 82.
EXPLANATION of the first Part.
CONCERNING the first Part the Intructer asks, For whom is the Lord's Supper
instituted?

It is not instituted for the Dead, for they are in their Place where they
forever will remain. It must likewise not be administered to those who are
dying, for they are not in a Condition to receive. Likewise not to Children,
because they are not in a Condition to examine themselves. But it must be
administered to the Living and Adult: But not to all that live corporally, for
it is only instituted for the Regenerate who live spiritually, for it is a
spiritual Food, which spiritual People can only receive for their strengthening,
it is a Sign and Seal of God's Covenant, thus it follows of it self, those only
who are (...) Covenant have a Right thereto, Christ has (...) prepared this
Meat for his Believers, faith t^^ Liturgy, as he only kept it with his
Discipl^^ who were sanctified. That this is the general Opinion of the Reformed
Church is evident, not only hence from the Instructor, but also from the
Confession of Faith of the Reformed Church of the Netherlands, which says

We believe and confess that our Savior Jesus Christ ordained and instituted
the Sacrament of his holy Supper, to feed and maintain those who are already
regenerated, and are ingrafted into his Household, the which is his Church,
etc. Art. 35.

And because none but those should approach, the Instructor gives a few Marks
for the T^^^al of those who have a Right to come to the Lord's Table, and who
they be that must keep themselves from it.

1 Those who by reason of their Sins loath themselves, says the Instructor.
Those who are convinced, and have a sensible Knowledge of their manifold Sins,
great Guilt, sinful miserable damnable Condition, and are with Grief, Sorrow
and Shame, yea, even with Condemnation and Abhorrence become concerned about
it, and thus to repent of their Wickedness, saying, What have I done? Jer. viii
6. We see this in Eph^^im, Jer. xxxi 19. This Dislike is that Regret through
which a believing Sinner becomes sensibly humbled for his Sins, and bitterly
lamenteth the same, from a Love to God and a hate to Sin. For such the Lord's
Supper is instituted, for such are in the Covenant, and from the Covenant of
Grace is unto them given, that they Remember their own evil Ways and Actions,
that were not good, and thus to loath themselves in their own Sight for their
Iniquities and Abominations, according to the Promise of the LORD, Jer. xxxvi
31. Yea those are his fitted Objects of that Grace which is here Sealed, for
the Poor in Spirit and those that mourn are called blessed, Matt. v. The Lord
promises in his Favor to look at such, Is. lvii 15, 18 and lxvi 2.

2 This Dislike is in its self not enough, for Gain, Esau, Saul, Ahab, and
Judas, where likewise convicted and repented, here must also be a Trusting or
Depending that Sins are through Christ forgiven, and also that the remaining,
Debilities are covered with his Sufferings and Death.

This Trusting, or Depending is no vain Presumption, nor a stiff Imagination
through which one imagines that Christ is his Savior but it is a
refuge-taking Confidence of Faith, where by a believing Soul has a liking in
the Council of God through Jesus Christ the Surety, to reconcile and save
Sinners, and with the highest Content, praises and approves of that Way, as
good, wise and holy, wishing through that Way only and no other to be
sanctified and saved, and on this to turn himself to that Surety and Mediator
out of a pai^ful Sight and Sense of his Sins, wishing only to be found in him,
with a restless Desire to place all his Salvation in him, because he wants him
in all Things and cannot endure without him, and also that he desire nothing
beside him, because in him he sees a sufficient Fullness to satisfy all his
Wants and Needs, upon this the Soul goes with an active Desire out to him,
choosing him for its Portion, and thus comes with him in a Treaty, and thus
gives her self wholly and unlimitted over unto him, and accepts of him on his
own free invitation as he is tendered, and intrusteth his Soul and Salvation in
his Hands, and thus rests in him with all his Heart, and thus receives God's
Testimony, (...) seals-that he is (...), Joh. iii 33. those now have a Right to
the Lords Supper, for Hungry and Thirsty are invited, and are promised to be
satisfied, Is. lv. 1. Matt. v, 6. He that believes on the Son has everlasting
Life, Joh. iii 36. To wit. here in Grace, which is the spiritual Life, a
Beginning of eternal Life.

Those are more and more desirous to strengthen their Faith, says the
Instructor; for indeed, to be desirous after Growth is the Nature of those who
live spiritually, the Cry of the weak Believers is, Lord I believe help thou
mine Unbelief, Mark. ix 24. increase our Faith, Luke xvii 5. from hence it is
manifest that this Food is also for the weak Believer, for the Instructor
requires not the highest Degree of Faith, or full Confidence: But yet, he that
has the sure Confidence of Faith that all his Sins are through Christ
pardoned, is fit to receive the Lord's Supper with more Fruit, because, he as
one that has Right thereto and dare approach with Boldness and discern the
Lords Body, and accept of the Signs as a Seal of the Forgiveness of Sins.

3 And that it might appear that this Trusting or Depending is no vain Conceit
therefore the Catechism likewise requires a Desire to an Amendment of Life.
The Believers then taking Notice of themselves constantly see their Strayings
with Grief and Displeasure, and hate (...) heartily and strive against it,
therefore their Souls are very desirous to amend their Lives, yea, even to
attain to Perfection, for although they know that in this Life they cannot
attain to Perfection, yet they know that they can be more perfect than they
are, therefore with Paul they follow after Perfection, and press toward the
Mark, if that they may apprehend it, Phil. iii. 12, 13. The earnest Desire
after Sanctification is needful if we approach to the Lord's Table, for all
Things there are holy, and through the Use of this Covenant Seal, we not only
declare that the Lord is our God, but also that we are his People to keep all
his Commandments. Deuteronomy. xxvi. 17. The Sacraments are likewise means to
Sanctification, Ep. v. 2^. and (...) that oblige us to show forth the Lord
Death 2 Cor. xi. 26. which cannot come to pass than by an Amendment of our
Lives. Those are only they for whom the Lord's Supper is instituted, who
partake hereof, viz. These Marks of the Spirit dwelling in them, namely, a
Sorrow of a penitent Mind after God, a Living upon Christ as upon the only
Cause of life a supporting Faith, an unfeigned Love toward God, and his
Neighbor, accompained with an earnest Intention to amend his Life, and to
glorify God in all Things; and continually to live according to his
Commandments. Now from hence flows of its self, that those who do not possess
these Things have no Right thereto, as the Instructor farther shows for whom
the Lord's Supper is not instituted.

1 Hypocrites, Dissemblers, and (...) who show themselves better as indeed they
be, having a Form of Godliness by Confession and external unreproveable
Conversation and thus seem to be something by what they pretend to, and by
their Gestures, Looks and Sighs deceive People, that they should suppose they
where Pious; therefore they seek to behave themselves both in Words and Deeds
as their Teachers would fain have it, and in the mean (...) they are not like
themselves at all Places, and at all Times, but then thus, and then so, the
which can be discerned in their Conversation; for the most are yet so blunt
that when they are examined it may easily be discerned that they know not the
Power of Godliness, much less possess it: But all that they aim at, is, to have
the Name of a good Christian: These may not approach, because their Heart is
not right, and because they do not possess any true Grace, but are yet Enemies
and Haters of God, as Christ has so often denounced a Woe unto such
discemblers. These are not only those who must not approach.

2 But also all those who do not with a true Heart turn to God, says the
Instructor. He says, that the Unconverted have no Right thereto. And if it he
asked, who are unconverted? I answer all natural People, who are yet Strangers
to the Life of God, as

(1) All Ignorant, who have no Knowledge of the Fundamental Truths of the Work
of Christ's Mediators Office, that have no Knowledge of the Nature of
Regeneration, of the Nature of Faith, and know not how they through Faith
should be ingrafted into Christ, that have no Knowledge of God's Righteousness
and the Sinners Damnableness; those who do not understand the Nature of the
Lord's Supper, and do not know to unite the Sign with the Thing signified, and
know it not as a Seal.

(2) Those who are not sensibly humbled by Reason of their Sins, but are
unconcerned about the State of their Souls, live at ease, and are carelese.

(3) Those who have no Exercise and Deeds of Faith, and are not active in
Christ, choosing him for their Surety, to long after him, and seek out after
him with Prayers and Suplications, to accept of him for Justification, and
Sanctification, to give themselves over unto him, to live in Union with him.

(4) Those who are earthly minded, whose Desire, Longing, Seeking, Care, Love,
Content, and Fear is in earthly Things, in Lust of the Eyes, Lust of the Flesh,
and Pride of Life. In a Word.

(5) Unconverted are such who wilfully and wittingly without any Strife retain
some Sins, and content themselves with a moral, civil and external Worship, but
have never felt their forlorn State without Christ, not being sanctified and
internally changed to live a holy Life, from a Union with Christ, with
Selfdenyal. Those are Unconverted. The Reformed Church judges of such
according to God's Word, that they may not approach: For this is evident from
powerful Reasons.

(a) A stranger, an Uncircumcised and Unclean might not eat of the Passover.
So likewise now, the Unconverted, who are uncircumcised of Heart and not washed
through the Blood of Christ, and not sanctified through the Spirit, but are
sti^lying in their natural Pollution, may not eat of this Bread nor drink of
this Cup.

(b) For unto an unconverted Person there is not one only Promise made,
therefore nothing unto him sealed.

(c) An unconverted Person has not the Spirit of Christ, and therefore does not
belong unto him, and for that Reason cannot be Sealed through the Spirit of his
Partnership with Jesus and his Virtues, Romans viii 9.

(d) The Unconverted are void of spiritual Life, are Dead in Sins and
Trespasses, now those who are thus spiritually dead, cannot eat spiritually.

(e) The Unconverted have no Faith, which is notwithstanding the Mouth of the
Soul, and therefore they cannot with any essential Fruit of the Soul eat of
that Bread which is only prepared for the Believers.

(f) The Unconverted are Servants of Sin, Members and Slaves of Satan, now
(...) would be dreadful that the Unholy should be the Members of Christ who is
so holy, 2 Cor. vi. 14,15. But if they notwithstanding approach (the which
alas! they do) they must know, that they eat Damnation to themselves, as the
Instructor says from the Mouth of Paul. 1 Cor xi. 29. They agravate their
Damnation, for Judgment is a (...) or Punishment, in regard to the Hypocrites
and Unconverted, who eat to their Damnation: And no wonder, for using the
Lord's Supper unworthily, they make themselves guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord, as Paul, says, 1 Cor. xi. 27. They mock Christ and crucify him a
fresh, with the Jews, Heb. ^i. 6. they defile this Sacrament the which is a
Sign of the Body and Blood of Christ, and make themselves guilty of great Sins
against Christ and also of Punishment, temporal and eternal: Therefore such are
not much better than Judas, who betrayed Christ, and as the Jews and Romans who
crucified him, and shed his blood. He that receives this Sacrament unworthily
(says Theophylactus) he is as guilty as if he had himself killed the LORD, and
had himself shed Christ's Blood. O abominable wickedness!

But one might think, if Hypocrites and Unconverted may not partake of the
Lord's Supper, ^hy then was Judas permitted? But although we should allow that
Judas did receive the Lord's Supper, foom thence nevertheless does not follow
that he had any Right thereto, as we have now sufficiently proved: But we hold
it with the Chiefest Divines that Judas did partake of the Passover, but not of
the Lord's Supper; this we can see from the Relation of John, in his Gospel,
Chapt. viii. 26, 27, 30. who plainly says, that as soon as Judas was
discovered, and had received the paschal Sop, and the Devil being entered into
him, (...) he immediately went out, v. 30. He then haven^ received the Sop,
went out immediately, this happned before Supper.

Christ would have spoken a lie if he had given Judas the Supper, saying, This
is my Body, which is broken for YOU; this is my Blood which is shed for YOU;
Which must not so much as be thought of the Mouth of Truth.

Therefore it remains sure, that not only Unconverted may not approach, but
also the Overseers of the Church must resist and debarr such from opproaching.

EXPLANATION of the Second Part.
THerefore the Instructor asks, Quest. 82. Must those be admitted to this
supper who by their Confession, and Life behave themselves as unbelieving and
ungodly People?

Answ. No, all those who by their Confession and Conversation behave themselves
as Unbelieving and Ungodly must be kept off, and these are who err in the
Truths of Faith, and have thereof Misapprehensions; all the Ignorant who have
no true Knowledge of themselves, nor of Christ, nor of the Contents of the
Lord's Supper for such are Unbelievers, for there can be no Faith without
Knowledge, Romans x 14. Such are not in State to discern the Lords Body,
therefore says Solomon, Prove. xix 2. Also that the Soul be without Knowledge
it is not good. All those who live wickedly and offensively, such are
Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, Contentious, and all that are guilty of
public notorious Sins, whereof the Liturgy has a Register (...) For if those
were admitted, God's Covenant would be profaned, says the Instructor, because
we then profane the Seals of God's Covenant, and thus the Covenant it self.
Yea, then God's Wrath is kindled against the whole Congregation, says the
Instructor, who is wroth that his Covenant is profaned, and punishes it on
those who not only do the same but also on those who do not keep them off: But
unto the Wicked God says what have thou to declare my Statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant in thy Mouth, Ps. l. 16. Thus it went with the
Corinthians, they acted very slovenly with the Lord's Supper when amongst them
many where punished with Weakness Sickness and Death, I Cor xi 34.

But who must debarr such? The Church of Christ, says the Instructor; the
Overseers are thereto obliged, because there is a Command of Christ, Matt. vii.
6. of the apostles, 1 Cor. v. 2. and 11. 12. 2 These. iii. 6.

These must shut out the Unworthy through theKeys of Heaven, that is the Church
Discipline, until they show Amendment of their Lives. But hereof we must treat
in the following Sunday.

APPLICATION.
SE there Hearers; this is the Doctrine of the Reformed Church concerning those
who have Right to the Lords Supper, and those who have no Right thereunto; and
the Offencive and Ingodly must be ^^barr'd and kept off by the Overseers of the
Church.

This also has always been the Practice of those who sought to be Faithful in
their Duty concerning the pure administration of the Lord's Supper.

The Ancients have been very careful and cautious in admitting any to the Holy
Supper.

From hence that man of God, Calvin, gave a clear demonstration when he says
Here we must also have regard to the Lord's Supper, that it be not defiled hy
giving it in general without exception; for it is very sure and certain that he
who must administer the same, if he by his Knowledge admits any who are
unworthy, the which with Right he might have kept back, is guilty of as great a
Sacrilege as if he had cast the Body of the Lord to the Dogs. Therefore
Chrysostom expostulates very strenuously with the Priests for fearing the Power
of great Men, not daring to debarr any from approaching. The Blood (says he)
shall be required at your Hands; if thou fear Man, he will mock thee; But if
thou fear God, Men will likewise respect and regard thee. Let us not fear
Scepters nor purple Clothing, nor Kingly Crowns, we have here a greater Power,
I would rather give my Body over to Death and have my Blood shed than to have
any Part in such Defilements Institution of Calvin, Book, 4 Chapt. 12. Numb. 5.

Our Modern Writers do also urge the same thus says that famous and well
learned, J. D Ou^rein in a Treatise called, The right Use of the Keys by the
sick, Page 108. It is verily no small Matter to open to one the Door of the
Kingdom of God, to declare unto him that he is in the Covenant with God, and a
Partne^ with JESUS in his Merits and Benefits, to permit him to the Enjoyment
of the Pledges and Seals of the Fellowship of the crucified Christ, whereunto
properly no one has Right than those who are partakers of the Work of Faith
and Regeneration. This is a known Truth which must stand fast by all the
Reformed for when in the 81. Quest of the Heydelberg^ Catechism is asked, For
whom is the Lord Supper instituted? The Answer is, For those only who by
reason of their Sins loath themselves etc. from whence appears that they be
only Penitent Believers and true Convert^ which ought to be admitted to that
holy Covenant- Seal.

What man will take it ill of a Teacher when he watches over the holy
Covenant-Seal tha^ it might not be profaned? None but the unspiritual blind
nominal Christian, who will not be dealt with according to God's Word, but
according to his own Conceptions when we consider what a great and terrible Sin
it is when an^ unworthy Person is admitted, for then Jesus is greatly
dishonored, as if he was the Head of the Wicked and profane People, God's
Covenant becomes profaned, God's Wrath becomes kindled against the whole
Congregation, the poor Soul shakes himself guilty of sore Punishment. What
Teacher, if he fears God and loves his Neighbor, would not watch earnestly
herein, as well for God, that his Sanctuary be not profaned, as over his
Auditors, that no Unworthy might approach hereunto to eat to his Death and
Damnation? Judge your selves, would not a godly Teacher who is zealous for the
Honor of Christ and for the wellbeing of his Neighbor do better when he in
Immitation of that old godly Teacher Chrysostom, would rather have his Life
taken away than to make himself guilty of this great Sin. But alas how far are
we now departed from the purity of the primitive Church! O how far do we daily
fall away! For this is thus far not only the Profession of our first Reformers,
but it is a Confession of our whole Church, That whenas there is but one
admitted to the Lord's Supper, who by his Confession and Life behaveth himself
as an unbelieving and ungodly Person, that thereby the Covenant of God is
profaned, and God's Wrath is kindled against the whole Congregation; that
therefore the Overseers are obliged to debarr the Offiencive by
Church Discipline. But (...) ^here is now that Faithfulness which is requir^
(...) the Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. iv 2. Nay, truly, is it not
m^nifest, that the Lord's Supper is now so often pr^phaned; for now a days none
approach that (...) unworthy, but how many use it that are either ignorant or
ungodly, as Drunkards, Swearer^ Blasphemers, Backbiters, Violaters of God's
Name and Day, vain and worldly-minded, or civilized who do not possess
Godliness but hate it. It is (...) certain Truth what the Reverent D'Outrein
says in the aforementioned Treatise, page 110. When we now compare therewith
the Practice in ou^ Church, must we not confess that this weighty Work is not
perceived, and much less maintained. Many are admitted who have no fundamental
Knowledge of the Truth which is according to Godliness, yea, without having a
true Comprehension why the Lords Supper was instituted, and what a Christian
has there to perform, and what Matter those outward Elements signify and Seal:
and when it goes yet at the best, the new coming Members are in some Degree
examined, concerning the Ground^ of Knowledge and Truth, and farther, if their
Conversation is inoffensive, but concerning tru^ Repentence, Faith and
Conversion is scarce inquired into by many, not to mention that where these
things, (at least probably) are not found should not be admitted to receive
this holy Food and Drink, which Christ has only prepared for his Believers,
to speak with the Words of the accustomed Liturgy.

If the reformed Church learneth that none that are Unconverted may approach,
but that the Ungodly must be kept off; what is then the Reason that this
Sacrament is so lightly given to those who do but desire it, and have the Name
of Members, although they are often (...) ignorant as the Heathen, and visibly
live in notorious Sins, and show not the least modesty. O good God to what evil
times have thou spared me! May be cried out with the holy Policarpus: For it is
now come to that pass that we find many People that bare the Name of Reformed,
and yet not understand that Doctrine, but speak against it, and accuse it, and
in Practice deny it. I have administered the Holy Supper twice (now four times)
and insisted upon this Truth, that no Unconverted may approach, and that the
Ungodly must be debarred according to our Doctrine: But what murmurings has
there not been about it? How many Tongues set on fire of Hell have slandered
this, yea ^^ven those whom it in the least did not become. (...) would ask
those who have for this been so Dissatisfied, and perhaps are yet, whether this
is not the Doctrine of the Reformed Church? I cannot think that any one will
deny it; for ^he that is not wilfully blind has heard this sufficiently. But
why then are you disobedient unto the Truth? Why do you make your selves ^uilty
of so many Blasphemies and Slanders? ^ay you, that I speak too hard and sharp;
says not the spirit of God by the mouth of Paul, 1 Cor. xi 29. He that eats
and drinks unworthily eats and drinks Damnation to himself, can there be
a severer Punishment threatened? Does not our Catechism say that if any ungodly
be admitted that then God's Covenant is profaned and the Wrath of God kindled
against the whole Congregation? Can there be any Thing spoken more severe?
Indeed thou must needs accuse thy self, and if thy Conscience was not past
feeling, but did you once see and know what you have done, you would needs be
terrified and fear the Wrath of God. But I will insist no longer hereon. And
what concerns my own Person, I care but little what unreasonable and natural
People prattle of behind my Back, who would fain be dealt with according to
their own perverse Conceptions but not according to the Truth of God's Word
They miserably deceive themselves who think to cause me to be silent, I rather
wish to die a thousand Deaths as not to preach the Truth.

Well beloved Hearers, those of you who have so often been at the Lord's
Supper, do you know that no one that is unconverted may approach Have you then
deligently examined your selves if you were Regenerated? Have had an under
standing Knowledge of these Things which were thereto required when you
approached so contented and well satisfied? Or did you become so blindfold to
the same, not only without a Wedding Carment, but not so much as being
troubled concerning it, not trying your selves whether you were of those who
are invited? Say you, I did not know that there was so much required thereto.
But this you ought to have known, you ought at least to have understood your
Catechism. Is it so dangerous to receive the blessed Supper unworthily, for we
sin dreadfully and incurr a terrible Judgment on our selves; how then is it
possible that Satan can thus blind Men, so that they esteem this so light, and
so little fear God's Judgments and so lightly snatch at a Food which instead of
eternal Life might seal unto them eternal Perdition? How is it possible to be
so inconsiderate and profane in such a great Matter?

Hearers be no longer ignorant concerning this Truth, lay this to Heart: For if
there be any Thing in the World, wherein we ought to act cautiously, it is
here; let us then be cautious herein. He that loves Danger is worthy to come
into it, but no Danger greater than here. Here with one Morsel and with one Sup
we can profane God's Covenant, and bring his Wrath over the whole
Congregation, and make our selves guilty of temporal and eternal Punishment.
Therefore call to mind this Truth and remember it, and know that although you
may be civil and outwardly religious, and yet not born again, bare of spiritual
Life, that you have no Right to approach to the Table of Grace. You that are
ignorant, worldly-minded and ungodly, wh^ live offencively, be it known unto
you, that we dare not allow you to approach, but that we are obliged to debarr
you; not to your Destruction, but for your Best, that you might amend your
Lives and repent. And if you in very Deed show Amendment of your Lives, then
with a good Conscience we can, and with all Readiness of Mind will permit you.

Think likewise by this, that every Member is obliged to let the Teacher
examine him, thus to give an Account of his Faith and Hope that is within him,
but with Meekness and Fear. This is God's express Command, 1 Pet. iii 15. Heb.
xiii 17. Now who dare resist God's Command.

Although the Knowledge of a Persons Regeneration is not the Ground whereon a
Teacher can and may allow one to approach, as the Labadists do err; yet it is
notwithstanding the Duty of a Teacher to examine the Members, according to
Prove. xxv^^ 23. Ezec. xliv 33. For the Servants of Jesus Christ are those
Fishermen discribed in the Parable, Matt. xiii 48. Who sat down on the Shore,
and of the Fish that were caught in the Net of the Gospel, gathered the good
into Vessels, but cast the bad away, which the Lord explains by the Separation
of the Wicked from the midst of the Righteous; they are those improper Angels
in the Gates of the New Jerusalem, which must make a Difference of those that
go into the City, Rev. xxi 12.

This Duty is very well described by the famous D'Outrein, in his Treatise
beforementioned, page 109. The Teachers who are especially entrusted to admit
of Members, must not only take care, that those whom they shall receive be by
them already well taught in the Principles of the Christian Dactrine; or if
they be taught by others, to sound or touch them concerning the Ability which
they have in making a Confession of the Truth; but they must also examine the^
if then are truly penitent, and have an upright saving Faith, and a
heart-changing Conversion: The Necessity of these Things the Teacher must
earnestly press on their Hearts; he must examine them if those Things be with
them, and warn them not to deceive themselves: For when he without an
Examination hereof, and a faithful Warning, allow any one Admittance, and so
induces him to eat and drink Damnation (...) himself; how is that to be
apprehended, (...) that the Guilt thereof in some Degree should (...) come to
the Charge of those who do not punctually examine such, at least having not
earn^^^^ warned him, according to Ezec. xxxiii 7, 8.

If then an Overseer in good Conscience shall receive or admit of any, he must
have regard whether that Partaker gives a good Confession of the Truth, of his
Sins, of his Faith in Christ, and of his Design to Holiness and Amendment of
his Life; and if his Conversation does not contradict his Confession; this is
also required by the Order of the Church, Art. 61. No one shall be Admitted to
the Lord's Supper but according to the Custom of the Church where he joins
himself, and has mad^ Profession of the Reformed Religion, together, having the
Testimony of a pious Conversation, without which also those who come from other
Churches shall not be admitted.

But this is not enough for the Communicants, they must be true Believers, who
by Reason of their Sins loath themselves, and seek their Salvation and
Forgiveness of Sins in Christ, and is set upon Holiness and Amending of his
Life, that he may be fit to use it holy and blessed.

Therefore examine your selves whether you have Right to the Lord's Supper; if
these Thing are found in you, examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith,
prove your own selves says Paul. 2 Cor. xiii 5. For it is sure and certain and
sufficiently proved that whoever does not possess or enjoy these Things may not
approach But whoever does in truth partake of those Signs of Spiritual Life, he
not only may, but he must approach: Therefore he must also know that he
undertakes a great Matter ^f he intends to go to the Lord's Supper, where unto
he must in particular order and prepare himself well, upon which we shall not
enlarge at present (for of this Subject we must treat at large in the
penitential Sermon) but we will conclude with what we read, Ps. cvii, 43.

Whose is wise and will observe those Things, even they shall understand the
loving Kindness of the LORD.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Preface p. 1 l. 7 r. for which reason I was (...) a long time, p. 3 l.
19. r. Minister l. 20 for their r. (...) the same in l. 21 l. 23 for sordid r.
flordie p. 4 l. 3. for some r. home. l. 14 dele daunted. l. 15. (...) least
Afra^^ to l. 17 dele the. l. 19 r. Jer. 6. 16. Thus (...) the Preface.

P. 10. l. 6. dele, they. p. 12. l. 20. dele, to. (...) 13. l. 13. r.
pleasures. p. 14. l. ult. r. and that because p. 15. l. 4 r. Encounters. l. 25.
for against r. about. p. 16. l. 11. r. what. l. 16. for with* r. what is l. 17.
r and profitable. p. 18. l. 6. for. against r. of. p. 19. (...) r. expressly. p.
21. l. 24. for, against, r. about, p. 24. l. 30. r. to be. p. 36. l. 14. r. who
are not l. 25. for be, r. end in, p. 40. l. 15 for might, r must, (...) 41 l
61. r. shall appear. p. 42. l. 1. dele of p. 43. l. 20. for, the, r. thee l.
26. r. Sign. p. 44. l. 25. for Lawful r. awful. p. 48. l. 8. r. of the, p. 53.
l. 24 for against, r. about, p. 54. l. 2. for Go, r. God p. 55. l. 19. r.
me^^oe^ p. 66. l. ult, r. abjects p. 71. l. 11 for justisfying, r. Satisfying.
l. 12. r. these with think, l. 29. for the, r. they, p. 73. l. 30. for and r.
but, p. 93. l. 24. for, now, r. since. p. 104. l. 28. r. Perfecutions, p. 108.
l. 22. for, one r. Man, p. 111. l. 1. for you^ r. they, l. 3. for us* r. them,
l. 4. for his, r. their, p. 114. l. 4. for as, r. and p. 116. l. 25. for smart,
r. grief, p. 125. l. 12. for on, r. or, p. 135. l. 1. r. self that those, p.
138. l. 6. for Fruit, r. Benefit, p. 149. l. 15. r. who have no knowledge of
the fundamental Truths, p. 151. l. 18. r. have you had. If there be any more,
the Reader is desired to correct them.


