THE CASE OF THE CLERGY of MARYLAND.
IT appears from the Charter of Maryland, that the Intent of that Grant, was to
promote the Interest of the Protestant Religion in that Province: For in the
Preamble it is said, That the Proprietor was excited by a laudable and pious
Zeal, for the Propagation of the Christian Faith; which must be understood of
the Faith as professed in the Church of England, because the same Charter lays
him under an Obligation, to cause all Churches, Chapels and Oratories, to be
dedicated and consecrated according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Kingdom
of England.

But so it happened, that no Attempt was made for establishing a Protestant
Church or Clergy in that Province, until the Government thereof devolved into
the Hands of the Crown, upon the happy Revolution under the glorious Reign of
his Majesty King William III. At which time some Acts of Assembly were proposed
and passed, for settling the religious Worship of the Church of England,
amongst his Majesty's Protestant Subjects in that Colony; but by Reason of some
Defects, that appeared in the Draught of the said Acts, they were by the royal
Authority repealed; and one other immediately prepared and transmitted to the
Governor and Assembly, by Direction of his said late Majesty in Council, which
after passing the necessary Forms abroad, received the royal Sanction here in
the solemn Manner, set forth in the Petition hereto annexed.

Thus relying on the Favor and Protection of the Crown, which in that Manner
so well secured a reasonable Maintenance for the Clergy; many regular Divines
by the pious Care of the Bishops of London from Time to Time were induced to go
over and settle in that Province; not in the least apprehending, it was in the
Power of any Governor and Assembly to break through so firm an Establishment
without the Concurrence of an equal Authority to that which first gave it a
Being; viz. the royal Sanction.

Nevertheless so it is, that on the third Day of October, 1728, an Act of
Assembly was passed in Maryland, under the Authority of the present Lord
Proprietor's Deputy Governor, whereby the aforesaid solemn Act for the
Establishment of the Clergy, is materially altered, and their future Support
and Maintenance not only impaired one fourth Part* but the whole rendered
precarious and subject to the fluctuating Humor of their popular Assemblies
from Year to Year; as will be clearly understood by observing the following
Particulars.

I. Whereas, by the first Act so carefully drawn up and afterward passed into
a Law by the royal Assent, the Clergy were entitled to receive, free of all
Charge 40 lb. of Tobacco per Poll, on every taxable Person in Maryland, in lieu
of Tithes; the late Act directs the said 40 lb. of Tobacco per Poll to be paid
in current Money, at ten Shillings per hundred, which is but 7 s. 6 d. Sterling.
or in Tobacco three fourths for the whole, at the Election of the Planter: So
that when Tobacco rises in Value, the People will choose to pay the Clergy at an
under-rate in Money, and when the Market falls below ten Shillings per hundred,
they will pay in Tobacco three fourths for the whole; whereby in all Events,
the Clergy must be great Losers by this Act, and have no manner of Chance with
their Fellow Subjects to share in the proposed Benefits of the Act, be what
they will.

II. This Uncertainty of the Species in which the Clergy is to be paid their
Subsistence, by this Act, is attended with another most grievous Inconveniency,
viz. In a Country like Maryland, where for want of a sufficient Currency in
ready Cash, the People must deal by Barter, and on Credit for their Clothing
and other Necessaries of Life; if a Clergyman agrees to purchase any thing of
the Merchant for Money, perhaps the People, as has been said, will choose to pay
his Stipend in Tobacco, and then the poor Clergyman must be at the Will of the
Merchant, how much Tobacco he will please to accept of, for the Money due to
him; and on the other hand, if an Agreement be made with the Merchant for
Tobacco, if then the People happen to choose to pay that Year in Money, the
Merchant will still be at Liberty to set his own Price on that Quantity of
Tobacco, which by Agreement was due to him: So that whatever happens, the
Clergy must be certain Losers, without a Possibility of shareing in any
Advantage or Improvement that can be made in the Tobacco Trade.

III. The Clergy are most grievously oppressed by the Time limited in this late
Act for collecting and paying their Allowance. For the People have to the tenth
of April to make their Choice, whether they will pay in Money or Tobacco: and
afterward the Sheriff has to the last of June to make up his Accounts with the
Clergy; by which Means it will often happen, that a Clergyman may serve three
Years before he can reap the Benefit of his Labor. For until the first Year is
ended (which commonly begins in November) there is nothing due; and if the
Sheriff be allowed to keep their Tobacco till the last of June following, the
Market will, in all Probability, be over; and the Tobacco lie on their hands
until next Year; when if (as it frequently happens) they cannot sell it, it
must be shipped home for Great Britain, and then it will be another Year,
before they can expect any Returns. All which the Clergy conceive to be such
Hardships, that neither the present Set, nor any who under these
Circumstances, may be unadvisedly induced to succeed them, can possibly subsist
or continue in that Province.

It is further to be observed, that some of the Clergy of Maryland petitioned
the Honorable Council of that Province against the passing this Act; and the
Council having thought fit to enter upon the Back of their Petition, some
Reasons for passing it into a Law; it will be necessary for the better
Understanding of the whole Matter, to subjoin those Reasons given by the
honorable Council in Justification of their Proceedings, with proper Answers
on behalf of the Clergy.

I. The honorable Council are pleased to say, that the Income or Provision
made for the Clergy is greatly advanced in Quantity, from what it was, when the
Act for their Establishment was made.

II. That the Design of the Legislature in passing this subsequent Act, was not
to deprive the Clergy of any Advantages that accrued to them by the former Law:
But on the contrary, that their Intention was, by lessening the Quantity of
Tobacco hereafter to be made in that Province, to render three fourths of the
Clergy's Allowance equal in value, to the whole of what was formerly levied for
their Subsistence.

III. That the Wages allowed to the Members of Council and Assembly, the
Lawyers Fees, and all Debts due to and from the Inhabitants, are by this Act
subject to the like Deductions, with that imposed on the Clergy.

To the first, it is answered on behalf of the Clergy, That when the forty per
Poll was settled by the first Act, the Number of People were then so few, that
it did scarce any where amount to a Subsistence; wherefore the same Act gave
Liberty to the Clergy, to hold two Parishes, with the Consent of the respective
Vestries: the Legislature then justly considering, that one Parish in those
Days could not be deemed a Competency. But they did not omit to observe as a
further Encouragement to the Clergy, that their Income would certainly increase
with Time; and it has proved so; though there are many Parishes that are not yet
a Competency: and no sooner does any Parish swell to any considerable Bulk, but
it is immediately dismembered and divided by Act of Assembly.

Besides, since the making the first Law, and contrary to the Intent of it, an
additional Duty or Deduction of five per Cent. out of the forty per Poll,
charged for Collection, was put upon the whole Clergy by a subsequent Act, though
that first Act had provided and directed that the Sheriff should collect the 40
per Poll in the same Manner and by the same Authority, as he did the Public
and County Levies: which are paid for by the Country, and given to the several
Officers without deducting any Thing for Collection. So far then has the
Interest of the Clergy been from being advanced, that by this additional Charge
for Collection, it was reduced two per Poll; and though (as was before said) many
Parishes previous to the late Act for deducting one fourth, are not a
Competency; there was not one in the whole Province that exceeded a reasonable
Subsistence.

But further; the Increase of People in every Parish increases likewise the
Minister's Labor and Duty, which (it is humbly conceived) should in justice
increase or add to his Subsistence.

From all which, it is hoped, that it is Evident that the Increase of People
under the aforesaid Circumstances, is not a good Reason, for deducting a fourth
Part of the Clergy's Subsistence.

To the second Reason suggested by the Council, in support of the Act, it is
answered in behalf of the Clergy; That supposing this Act had the pretended or
designed Effect, i. e. by lessening the Quantity of Tobacco, to raise it in
Value, perhaps to twenty Shillings a Hundred; yet the Clergy can be no Gainers,
but great Sufferers, since the People are in that Case by the Act left at
liberty to pay the Clergy in current Money at ten Shillings a Hundred. On the
other hand, if (as most People think) the Act will not lessen the Quantity, and
consequently not raise the Value of Tobacco, it cannot be assigned with any
color of Justice, as a good Reason that the Clergy must be paid in Tobacco,
three fourths for the whole. Such a strange and unhappy Dilemma has this Act
put the Clergy under!

But still, supposing this Act should lessen the Quantity of Tobacco, the less
Quantity of that, the People are limited to, the more they will make of other
Commodities; which will compensate their Deficiencies in Tobacco. And it is
humbly conceived, that the lessening only the Quantity of one Commodity, when
the People are at liberty of making as much a^ they can of all others, to any
Share whereof, the Clergy have no legal Pretense, cannot be a good Reason for
deducting ^ fourth Part of the Clergy's Subsistence.

To the third and last Reason suggested by the Council o^ Maryland, in Support
of this Act, it is answered on behalf (...) the Clergy; That their
Circumstances, with respect to world^^ Interest or Gain, is vastly different
from that of any other Se^ of Men in that Province; for all other Persons, of
what Employment soever, are at liberty to pursue Gain, by turnin^ their Effects
into some Sort of Merchandise or Traffic, b^^ the Clergy are wholly confined
from sharing in any Advantage of that Kind; first, by their Education and
Character, an^ secondly, by the Extensiveness of their Cures, which requi^^
continual Application and Industry.

It is probable, that the Lawyers and others who are well acquainted with the
Course of Trade and Business, may gain more than they lose by the Act; but the
poor and unimprovable Allowance that is given for the Maintenance of the
Clergy, puts them on no Equality with other People; their whole Dependence
being on the Established Maintenance, so that whatever is taken from them, does
so far deprive them of the Necessaries of Life.

It is therefore humbly hoped, that when this Act comes to be deliberately
considered by the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, in
their Committee for Plantation-Affairs, they will for the Reasons here offered,
be pleased to move his most Excellent Majesty to cause the said Act to be
repealed, with such proper and permanent Instructions, to the Governor and
Council of the said Province for the time being, as may re-establish the Clergy
in their former Rights so graciously conferred on them by the Crown, and
effectually prevent Encroachments of the like, or any other nature, for the
Future.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty, The Petition of Jacob Henderson, Clerk,
Rector of Queen Anne Parish, in Prince George's County, in Maryland, in behalf
of the Clergy of the said Province;
Most humbly shows,
THAT in the most Auspicious Reign of his late Majesty King William the Third,
of Blessed Memory, when the particular Government of the Province of Maryland,
in North America, devolved into the hands of the Crown, there were diverse Acts
transmitted from thence, relating to the Establishment of Religion, which by
reason of several Defects found therein, were at that time repealed.

That his said late Majesty, nevertheless, out of his gre^^ Zeal and pious
Inclination to promote the Protestant Religion among his Subjects in that
distant Part of his Dominions was pleased to give Directions to the Right
Honorable the Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, to prepare ^ new
Draught of a Bill to the same purpose, agreeable to the Toleration allowed in
England.

That such a Bill drawn up by their Lordships, accordingly was laid before his
Majesty, who, upon a Petition of some of the People called Quakers, in behalf
of their Brethren i^ Maryland, was graciously pleased to hear the said Quakers
by their Counsel, against the Draught of the said Bill, and also to consider
the Reasons which were offered for it.

That on mature Deliberation and due Consideration had (...) the whole Matter,
his Majesty by his Order in Council of the fifth of June, 1701, was pleased to
direct that the said Draugh^ should be sent to the Governor of Maryland, to be
offered to the General Assembly there at their next Meeting, as a proper Bill
to be passed into a Law of that Province.

That on the 25th Day of March, 1702, the same was passed into an Act of
Assembly in Maryland accordingly, and afterward transmitted to the Lords of
Trade and Plantations, who thought fit to lay it before her late Majesty Queen
Anne for he^ Royal Approbation, and her Majesty was graciously pleased in
Council to declare the same to be finally enacted, ratified and confirmed.

That the said Act so advisedly and solemnly passed, wa^ immediately printed at
London, for the encouragement of Clergymen to go over into that Province; the
Parishes there were soon filled, and the Vacancies from time to time
continually supplied by the pious Care of the Bishop of London ever since.

That the Clergy of Maryland thus relying on the Public Faith of that
Province, but more especially on the gracious Favor and Protection of your
Sacred Majesty, and your Royal Predecessors, have been induced to make some
poor Settlements for the needful Subsistence of their Families, in a Country
where the Duty of their sacred Function led them to spend their Lives.

That, notwithstanding these just and reasonable Encouragements, the whole Body
of your Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Clergy in Maryland, find themselves at this
time most grievously oppressed, by the Tenor of a certain Act of Assembly
passed in that Province, the third Day of October, 1728, Entitled, An Act for
Improving the Staple of Tobacco, whereby a fourth Part of what was granted and
established for the Support and Maintenance of the Clergy, by the before
recited solemn Act, is cut off, and the remaining three Parts of their
Subsistence rendered precarious, by being subject to the fluctuating Humor of a
popular Assembly, from Year to Year, especially in a Country where both the
Papists and Dissenters from the Form and Discipline of the Church of England
have a considerable Influence.

That though the Clergy humbly conceive, they have just cause to believe that
no Act in any Colony of America, but especially in a Proprietary Government,
can operate, so as to repeal or alter any substantial Part of a former Law in
the same Province unto which the Crown appears to have been a Party, without
your Majesty's Royal Assent; and, although your Dutiful Clergy of Maryland are
firmly persuaded that your Sacred Majesty cannot be induced to approve of a Law
which evidently destroys the former Bounty and pious Intentions of the Crown,
toward promoting and establishing the wholesome Doctrine and Worship of the
Church of England in America: Yet as these matters seem in this Case to depend
on the Explication of certain Rights contained in the Lord Proprietary of
Maryland's Charter, which does not so well become the Clergy under his
Lordship's Government, to meddle with, or dispute:

Your Petitioner therefore in behalf of the Clergy aforesaid, does humbly Pray
your Most Sacred Majesty, That in your Royal Wisdom and Justice, you will be
graciously pleased to order this matter to be examined; whereby, not only your
Majesty's Royal Prerogative, but also the just Rights of the whole Body of your
Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Clergy may be ascertained and maintained.

And your Petitioner, as in Duty bound, will ever Pray.

FINIS.

