LAWS of Maryland, ENACTED At a Session of Assembly, begun and held at the City
of Annapolis, on Tuesday the Thirteenth Day of March, in the Eighteenth Year of
the Dominion of the Right Honorable CHARLES, Lord Baron of Baltimore, Absolute
Lord and Proprietary of the Provinces of Maryland and Avalon, etc. Annoque
Domini, 1732.

By AUTHORITY.

ANNAPOLIS: Printed and Sold by WILLIAM PARRS. M, DCC, XXXIII.

[Price Two Shillings to those who bought the whole Body of Laws, and Two
Shillings Six Pence to others.]

At a Session of ASSEMBLY, begun and held at the City of ANNAPOLIS, in
MARYLAND, the Thirteenth Day of March, 1732, the following Laws were Enacted.
An Act to continue the Process and Proceedings in the Provincial Court, and
County Courts; and for Trial of Capital Offenses, at the next Provincial Court,
to be held the Third Tuesday of May next.
WHEREAS, several of the Attorneys practicing in the said Courts, are Members
of the Assembly, and obliged to attend their Duty therein:

BE it Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the Authority
of the same, That the several Causes, Actions, Pleas, and Proceedings, now
depending in the Provincial Court, shall be continued; and are hereby Declared
and Enacted to be continued, to such, and so many Provincial Courts, as the
Justices of the said Provincial Court shall think fit, not exceeding Two
Provincial Courts, after the making this Act; any of which said Two Provincial
Courts shall not be reckoned any of the Four Courts for Limitation of Actions;
any Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it likewise Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the several
Causes, Actions, and Proceedings, now depending in the County Courts, shall be
continued; and are hereby Declared to be continued One Court, which shall not
be reckoned any of the Four Courts for Limitation of Actions; any Act to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Assizes shall
be held in April next, in any of the Counties of this Province: And that all
Issues tryable next April Assizes, shall and may be tried at the Assizes to be
held (...) September, in the respective Counties of this Province; any Act to
the contrary, notwithstanding. And to prevent People accused of Offenses, not
tryable in the County Courts, from being long detained in Prison; and to the
End, their Trial be not delayed,

BE it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful for the Justices of the Provincial Court, at the next Provincial Court,
to order the Sheriff of Anne-Arundel County, immediately to summon a competent
and sufficient Number of good and lawful Men, de Circumstantibus, or of the
nearest Inhabitants, to serve as Grand Jurors then; and return a Panel of
them, for the finding of Bills of Indictments, for all Treasons, Murders, and
other Capital Offenses: And that the said Sheriff shall and may, by Order of
the said Justices of the Provincial Court, then immediately summon a competent
and sufficient Number of good and lawful Men, de Circumstantibus, or of the
nearest Inhabitants, to serve as Petit Jurors; and return a Panel of them, for
the Trial of any Issue, to be had and tried upon any such Indictment, before
the said Justices of the said Provincial Court; any Act to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

PROVIDED always, and be it further Enacted, That no Person or Persons, who
has or have given Notice of any Trial to be had at next April Assizes, shall
be burdened with any Costs, for not coming then to Trial; any Law or Statute
to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, That any Witness or Witnesses, who is or are bound,
by any Recognizance or Recognizances, to appear at the Assizes, to testify
against any Person charged with any Offense not tryable in the County Courts,
shall appear to testify, and give his, her, or their Evidence, in the
Provincial Court, to be held the Third Tuesday in May next; any Law, Usage, or
Custom to the contrary, notwithstanding.

An Act for Emitting and Making Current, Ninety Thousand Pounds, Current Money
of Maryland, in Bills of Credit.
WHEREAS Tobacco, the only Staple of this Province, and the principal
Dependence of its Inhabitants, has for several Years past produced so little,
that several of the People, not able to get the Necessaries of Life, by the
Fruits of their Labor, have been obliged to desert their Habitations; and many
more must follow their Example, or be constrained to attempt some other Way of
living, less advantageous to the Trade of Great Britain, their Mother Country,
than making Tobacco, unless some Expedient can be found, to remove the
Difficulties under which they have long labored:

AND whereas, the most probable Means to enable the People to discharge their
Taxes, and other Engagements now payable in Tobacco, otherwise; and to destroy
such ordinary and unmerchantable Tobaccos, which serve only to clog the
Markets, and to depreciate the best Sorts of that Commodity, as well as to put
the People in a Condition to carry on the Tobacco Trade, to the Advantage of
Great Britain, and this Province, is to establish a Paper Currency, or Bills of
Credit, upon a sinking Fund: Wherefore it is prayed, that it may be Enacted:

AND be it Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the same. That Bills of Credit, to the Value of Ninety Thousand
Pounds, current Money of America, according to an Act of Parliament, made in
the Sixth Year of the Reign of the late Queen Anne, For Ascertaining the Rates
of Foreign Coins in the Plantations, to circulate for Thirty One Years, from
the Commencement of this Act, shall be printed and struck, in Manner and Form
following:

THIS Indented Bill of (...) shall pass Current, for the Sum therein mentioned,
in all Payments, according to the Directions of an Act of Assembly of Maryland.
Dated in Annapolis, the ^ Day of (...) Anno Dom. ^

WHICH Bills shall be of the different Valuations hereafter mentioned; ( to
wit,) Thirty Thousand Bills of Twenty Shillings Value each; Thirty Thousand
Bills of Fifteen Shillings Value each; Thirty Thousand Bills of Ten Shillings
Value each; Forty Thousand Bills of Five Shillings Value each; Forty Thousand
Bills of Two Shillings and Six Pence Value each; Sixty Thousand Bills of One
Shilling and Six Pence Value each; Sixty Thousand Bills of One Shilling Value
each.

WHICH Bills of Credit shall be signed and numbered by the Commissioners or
Trustees appointed to put this Act in Execution; and the Sum of Money that each
and every of the said Bills is to pass for, be printed at the Top of each Bill,
in Words at Length, with His Lordship's Arms, and the Commissioners Names, on
the other Side thereof. And that the Bills of Credit, so signed, shall be kept
and deposited in One strong Iron Chest, with Three strong, substantial, and
different Locks; and that each Commissioner or Trustee, shall keep a Key; to
the End that no Bills of Credit, which shall be signed, be taken out, or
disposed of, but by or in the Presence of all the Commissioners or Trustees.
And that Counter-Parts of the said Bills of Credit, together with all other
Books and Papers relating to the said Office, shall be kept and deposited in
One other strong Iron Chest, with so many Locks as the Commissioners or
Trustees shall think proper. Which Chests shall be lodged and deposited in the
Repository already built for the Public Records, until some other secure Place
can be provided for that Purpose. Which Repository shall be entirely in the
Possession of the said Commissioners or Trustees, for the Uses aforesaid, until
such other secure Place can be provided.

BE it Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid, That One
Office shall be erected at Annapolis, under the Management of Three
Commissioners or Trustees, to be nominated and appointed by the Right
Honorable the Lord Proprietary, or the Governor or Commander in Chief of this
Province, for the Time being, to put this Act in Execution; and to remove any
of them, in Case of Misbehaviour, or Unfitness to act, when and as often as it
shall appear to His Lordship, the Governor or Commander in Chief, that the
Welfare of this Province shall require such Removal; who shall be called and
styled Commissioners or Trustees, for Emitting the Bills of Credit established
by Act of Assembly; and by that Name and Style, shall have Continuance and
Succession, during the Continuance of this Act, for issuing the said Bills of
Credit, and taking Securities for so much of them as shall be lent, according
to the Directions of this Act, and for directing, managing, and performing all
other Matters and Things hereby enjoined and required to be done and transacted
by them, in and relating to the said Bills of Credit, according to the
Directions and true Meaning of this Act: And if any of the said Trustees shall
happen to die, or be removed by Misfeazance, Incapacity, Unfitness, or for not
acting, it shall and may be lawful for the Right Honorable the Lord
Proprietary, the Governor or Commander in Chief, for the Time being, from Time
to Time, during the Continuance of this Act, to appoint some other fit Person
or Persons, in the Place or Places of such Commissioner or Commissioners,
Trustee or Trustees, so dying, misbehaving, becoming incapable, unfit, or
refusing, as aforesaid; which said Commissioners or Trustees shall be able and
capable in Law, to receive, take, hold, enjoy, and retain to them, and their
Successors, in the said Trust, all such Lands, Tenements, Rents, and
Hereditaments, and all other Real or Personal Securities, of what Nature or
Quality soever, as shall be granted them in Mortgage, or given for securing the
Repayment of such Sums of Money, as they shall from Time to Time lend and
issue, in the said Bills of Credit, and the Interest thereof; and also to sell,
grant, alien, and dispose of the same, in Default of Payment, as in and by this
Act is provided and directed in those Cases; and by the same Name, to sue and
implead, be sued and impleaded, answer, and be answered, in all Cases relating
to the said Trust, in all Courts, and other Places whatsoever; and by the Name
aforesaid, to do and execute all other Matters and Things that to them shall or
may appertain to do and perform, pursuant to this Act; subject to the
Provisoes, Restrictions, and Limitations herein expressed: And that the said
Commissioners or Trustees, for the Time being, shall duly attend at the said
Office, every Wednesday in every Week, or oftener if requisite, until all
Demands for emitting, paying, or borrowing Money in the said Office, be
answered; and afterward, at such Times as their Trust, and the Service of the
Public, may require them, during the Continuance of this Act. And such of the
said Commissioners or Trustees as shall undertake and execute the said Trust,
shall be allowed for their Service and Trouble therein, after the Rate of One
Hundred Pounds each, for the first Year, and for every Year after, Eighty
Pounds each, as Commissioners or Trustees for emitting the said Ninety Thousand
Pounds, during the Continuance of this Act, out of the said Bills of Credit:
But the said Commissioners or Trustees, before they enter upon the Execution of
their said Trust, each of them shall enter into Bond, with sufficient Sureties,
to One of the Provincial Treasurers, for the Time being, in the Penalty of One
Thousand Pounds each, Sterling, payable to the Lord Proprietary, conditioned
for the Observance of the Trust hereby reposed in them; and shall also take an
Oath, before any One Provincial Justice, who is hereby empowered and required
to administer the same, in these Words; ( to wit,)

I A. B. do swear, That I will, according to the best of my Skill and
Knowledge, faithfully, impartially, and truly demean my self, in Discharge of
the Trust committed to me, by an Act of General Assembly of this Province,
entitled, An Act for Emitting and Making current Ninety Thousand Pounds
Current Money of Maryland, in Bills of Credit, according to the Purport and
Tenor of the said Act, so as none may be prejudiced by my Consent, Privity, or
Procurement. So help me God.

AND be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners of Trustees, after they
are so qualified, shall proceed to sign and number the said Bills of Credit,
and number Counter-Parts of them, and keep true Accounts, as well of the said
Bills which they shall sign and issue out, as also of the Money and Bills which
they shall actually receive and pay, pursuant to this Act; which several
Accounts, a Committee of both Houses of Assembly shall be appointed, every
Session, to inspect and examine; which Committee shall also inspect and examine
the Proceedings of the said Commissioners or Trustees, who are hereby required
and enjoined to lay a full and fair State of their Proceedings before such
Committee; to the End, they may be satisfied, that the Sums for which Bills may
be issued, pursuant to this Act, is not exceeded; and may be acquainted, from
Time to Time, with the State of the whole Transactions and Affairs relating to
the said Office, and of the Management and Behavior of the said Commissioners
or Trustees: Which Committee shall, every Session, report to the Assembly, the
State and Condition of the said Office, and the Conduct and Behavior of the
said Commissioners or Trustees; to the End, that any Corruption or
Mismanagement may be timely guarded against, and prevented.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Bills of
Credit shall pass in Payment, Satisfaction, and Discharge of all Contracts to
be made from and after the Publication of this Act, within this Province, for
Current Money; and that all, or any of the Inhabitants of this Province, may
and are by this Act enabled to discharge all Lawyers Fees and Levies (the Forty
per Poll, and all Tobacco directed by any Act of Assembly of this Province to
be levied and applied to the building or repairing any Church or Churches,
herein excepted) in the said Bills of Credit, or Gold or Silver, rating Tobacco
at Ten Shillings per Cent. in the said Bills, or Gold or Silver, and all
Bounties, Rewards, and Allowances given and allowed by any Act of Assembly of
this Province, in Tobacco; and also all Fines, Forfeitures, and Penalties,
settled and established in Tobacco, by any Law of this Province, shall and may
be paid, satisfied, and discharged, in the said Bills of Credit, or in Gold or
Silver, rating Tobacco at Ten Shillings per Hundred, and in Proportion for a
lesser Quantity: And all Rates, Duties, and Impositions, upon the Importation
or Exportation of any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, Servants, and Slaves (the
Duties on Tobacco per the Hogshead, Chest, or Case, and Tonnage on Ships or
Vessels, and all other Money to become due, or payable to the Right Honorable
the Lord Proprietary, not being for the Breach of any Penal Law, or Penalty for
any Offense, excepted,) allowing the usual Allowance of Thirty Three Pounds,
Six Shillings, and Eight Pence, per Hundred, between Sterling and Currency.

PROVIDED always, That no Person shall be obliged to pay the said Bills of
Credit, or Gold or Silver, in Lieu of Tobacco; but that every Person shall be
at Liberty to pay Tobacco for the said Levies, Fees, and Penalties, as if this
Act had never been made.

AND be it further Enacted, That any Person tendering or offering the said
Bills of Credit, in Discharge of any Debt, for current Money, to be contracted,
as aforesaid; or the said Bills of Credit, or current Money, in Payment and
Discharge of any Levies, (except as before excepted) or the said Fees, or
Penalties, shall have and receive the same Benefit and Advantage, from and by
such Tender, as if such Tender was made of Gold, or Silver, or Tobacco in
Specie; any Law, Usage, or Custom, to the contrary, notwithstanding.

PROVIDED nevertheless, and be it Enacted, That every Person, who shall not
tender or pay such Bills of Credit, or Gold or Silver, by the Tenth Day of
April, Yearly, during the Continuance of this Act, shall be obliged to pay all
Levies, and all Persons, who shall not tender the said Bills of Credit, or Gold
or Silver, for any Lawyers Fees, when the Causes shall be ended, for any Fees
from them justly due and owing, in Tobacco, as if this Act had never been made;
any thing therein contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, That if at any Time, pending any Action or Suit, on
any Bond, or other Contract, for the Payment of current Money, payable by such
Bond, or Contract, to be made after this Act shall take Effect, if the
Defendant shall bring into Court, where the Action or Suit shall be depending,
all the Principal Money and Interest due on such Bond, or other Contract, and
effectually secure the Payment of all Tobacco Costs, which shall arise due on
such Action or Suit, in the Judgment of the Court where such Action or Suit
shall be depending, and shall tender the same Bills of Credit, or Gold or
Silver; that upon such Tender, and giving Security for the Costs, as aforesaid,
the Defendant, or Defendants, in any such Action or Suit, shall be by the Court
absolutely discharged therefrom.

AND to the End the said Bills of Credit may be the more useful to the
Inhabitants of this Province, and the Circulation of them as speedy and
diffusive as possible,

BE it Enacted by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid, That there
shall be Thirty Shillings, in the said Bills of Credit, issued, for every
Taxable Person, in each respective County, within this Province; and also Ten
Pounds, over and above the said Thirty Shillings, for each respective County,
at the County Court to be held next after the said Bills of Credit shall be
signed, and ready to be emitted, to the Justices of the several County Courts,
to be distributed and disposed of as follows, viz. Thirty Shillings thereof
to be paid to every Master or Mistress of a Family, or his or her Order, for
such Master, and every Taxable Person to him belonging; and the like Sum for
every Taxable Person belonging to any Mistress of a Family, or Mistress of any
Servant or Servants, or Slave or Slaves, being a Taxable or Taxables; and also
to every other Free Man, being a Taxable, or his Order, the like Sum of Thirty
Shillings, in the said Bills of Credit; for which the several and respective
County Clerks shall take Receipts, in a Paper Book for that Purpose, to be by
them transmitted to the Commissioners or Trustees; for which each respective
Clerk shall have and receive Ten Pounds, in the said Bills of Credit.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, That any Person, who shall claim and receive any of the said
Bills for more Taxables than he or she shall really have, or shall give in any
Servant or Slave, or other Person, as a Taxable, who shall not then be really a
Taxable, according to the Laws of this Province, shall, for every Servant,
Slave, or other Person, so given in, or for whom the Bounty intended by this
Act of Thirty Shillings per Taxable, shall be claimed, and received, shall
forfeit Five Pounds current Money of Maryland; to be recovered by any Person
who will sue for the same, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information;
wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law, shall be allowed.

AND be it further Enacted, That a Sum in the said Bills of Credit, not
exceeding Three Thousand Pounds, shall be applied to purchase convenient Ground
for the Use of the Public, and building a Dwelling House, and other
Conveniences thereon, for the Governor of this Province, for the Time being,
to reside in: And Five Hundred Pounds, in each respective County within this
Province, shall be laid out in building convenient Goals in the respective
Counties, near and convenient to the several Court-Houses; under the Direction
and Appointment of the several Representatives of the several Counties, for the
Time being: And a Sum, in the said Bills of Credit, not exceeding Five Hundred
Pounds, to be applied toward or in the Repairs of the Public Buildings,
according to the Directions of an Act to be passed this Session.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That what shall remain
of the said Bills of Credit, and not by this Act particularly applied, shall
and may be by the said Commissioners or Trustees lent out upon Interest, in the
Manner hereafter directed; that is to say, any Sum or Sums, upon Mortgage of
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or Personal Security, at the
Discretion of the said Commissioners or Trustees, to be taken according to the
Directions of this Act.

AND be it further Enacted, That upon Application, during the Continuance of
this Act, to the Commissioners or Trustees in this Province, by any Person or
Persons, having any Bill or Bills of Credit torn or defaced, which may be
thought necessary to be renewed, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Commissioners or Trustees, and they are hereby required, without Fee or Reward,
to sign and deliver a new Bill or Bills of Credit, to such Person or Persons,
in Lieu of such torn or defaced Bill or Bills, for the same Value for which
such torn or defaced Bills shall be intended to pass current, at such Time of
bringing the same to the said Commissioners and Trustees; and to cancel and
vacate such torn Bills as shall be brought in; and also to make and keep
Counter-Parts of the new Bills, to be so delivered, as herein before directed.

AND for the better Discovery of Encumbrances, which may affect any Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, to be so mortgaged, it shall and may be
lawful for the said Commissioners or Trustees, and such as they shall appoint,
from Time to Time, to make Searches in any Offices in this Province, and, if
there be Occasion, take Copies or Transcripts of the Dockets, or Notes, of any
Judgments, or of Mortgages and Entails, or other Encumbrances, kept in any of
the said Offices, without paying any Fee or Reward for the same. And to the End
the said Commissioners or Trustees may be the better enabled to perform their
said Trust, they shall inform themselves, as well of the clear Value, as of the
Titles, of all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, which shall
be proposed in Security for the said Bills; so as to be satisfied, that the
said Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, are at least double the Value, and
Messuages treble the Value, of the Sums requested to be lent; and then they
shall receive and take the same in Mortgage accordingly.

PROVIDED, Any Person proposing to mortgage Messuages, or Lands, with the Value
whereof the Commissioners or Trustees are not acquainted, the next Justice of
the Peace to such Messuages, or Lands, shall be obliged, by Virtue of this Act,
to appoint Two reputable Freeholders, upon Oath, to be to them administered by
such Justice, to value such Messuages, or Lands, and to certify what they
believe in their Consciences the true and real Value thereof to be: Which
Certificate shall be produced to the said Commissioners or Trustees.

PROVIDED, That upon all the Loans hereby intended, the Commissioners or
Trustees shall take all possible Care, that the Borrower has an indefeasible
Estate in Fee Simple, in the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, by
him or her proposed to be mortgaged; and that they are free from all former
Sales, Gifts, Grants, Mortgages, Entails, and all other Encumbrances, except
the Lord Proprietary's Quit-Rents, or other Rents issuing out of the same, and
expressly mentioned in the Deed or Deeds thereof. But before the Commissioners
or Trustees shall accept of any Mortgage, upon Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, subject to the Payment of such Quit-Rents, Ground-Rents,
Rentcharge, or other Annual Payments, they shall duly consider, and, according
to the best of their Skill, find out the clear Value of such Messuages, not
reckoning on the Rents thereof, at more than Twelve, nor less than Eight Years
Purchase; and shall let out upon Loan to the Mortgager, One Third Part of the
Value aforesaid, in Bills of Credit, at the Interest of Four per Cent. per
Annum; and One Half the Value of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments; and for
such Term as shall be agreed on, not exceeding Seven Years. And that the Person
offering any of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, to
mortgage for any of the said Bills, shall, at or before the Time of executing
the Deed of Mortgage, declare upon Oath, or solemn Affirmation, in the usual
Form, if the Party be a Quaker, (which the Commissioners or Trustees, or any of
them, are and is hereby empowered and required to administer) that he or she is
really seized of the Premises in his or her own Right, and to his or her own
Use; and that the same were not conveyed to him or her in Trust, for the Use of
any other Person, nor with Intent to raise any Sum or Sums of Money upon the
same, by way of Loan, or otherwise, for the Use of any other Person or Persons
whatsoever; and that the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Herediments,
mentioned in the Deed by him or her to be executed, are free and clear from any
former or other Gift, Grant, Mortgage, or other Encumbrance, to his or her
Knowledge, (excepting the Lord Proprietary's Quit-Rents, or other Charges
appearing in his or her Deeds then produced,) which Oath or Affirmation shall
be indorsed on the Back of the Mortgage, with the Day and Year of the Caption
thereof; for which, the Clerk shall receive Six Pence, and no more.

AND be it Enacted, That any Person, knowingly swearing or affirming falsely,
and being thereof convict by due Course of Law, shall suffer, as in Case of
corrupt and wilful Perjury. And for securing the Payment of the Sums or Values
to be lent, as directed by this Act, the said Commissioners or Trustees, or any
Two of them, shall, in Pursuance of the Trust reposed in them, and as
Commissioners or Trustees as aforesaid, and not otherwise, take and receive
Deeds of Mortgage in Fee Simple, or sufficient Personal Security, for what they
lend; which being executed and acknowledged, or proved and delivered, as herein
after directed, shall transfer the Possession of the Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments thereby granted to the said Commissioners or
Trustees; and vest the Inheritance thereof in them, and their Successors, for
the Uses and Purposes aforesaid, as fully and effectually as Deeds of Feoffment
with Livery and Seisin, or Deeds enrolled in any of the King's Courts at
Westminster, may or can do in England; in all which Deeds, the Words grant,
bargain, and sell, shall amount to, and be construed and adjudged in all Courts
of Judicature, to be express Covenants to the said Commissioners or Trustees,
their Successors and Assigns, from the Bargainer or Mortgager, for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, that the Mortgager, notwithstanding any
Act done by him or her, was, at the Time of the Execution of such Deed, seized
of the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, and Premises thereby
granted, of an indefeasible Estate in Fee Simple, free from all Encumbrances
(Rents due to the Lord Proprietary, with the other Rents and Reservation
contained in their respective Deeds, only excepted,) and for quiet Enjoyment
thereof, against the Mortgager, his or her Heirs and Assigns, and all claiming
under him or her, or the former Owners thereof, and also for a further
Assurance to be made by the Mortgager, his or her Heirs, as the Case may
require; so that the express Covenants are not to be set down at large in any
of the Mortgages; but that the said Commissioners or Trustees, and their
Successors, in the said Trust respectively, shall and may in any Action to be
brought, assign Breaches thereupon, as they might do, in Case such Covenants
were expressly inserted in such Deed.

AND be it Enacted, That the said Commissioners or Trustees, or any Two of
them, may take Bonds or other Obligations, of able and sufficient Persons, for
any of the said Bills of Credit, at the Interest of Four Pounds per Cent. per
Annum, and so in Proportion for a greater or lesser Sum, payable at such Time
as shall be agreed on; which Bonds or Obligations shall be payable to the said
Commissioners or Trustees, or their Successors, and shall be of the same Force
and Effect, to all Intents and Purposes, as Statutes Merchant, or of the
Staple; and shall and may be proceeded on, accordingly.

PROVIDED, That the said Commissioners or Trustees shall not lend any one
Person above One Hundred Pounds, at any one Time, or within Six Months; and
that all the said Mortgages, or defeasible Deeds being sealed and delivered to
the said Commissioners or Trustees, or some of them, in Presence of Two or more
credible Witnesses, and proved or acknowledged before any Justice of the Peace
in this Province, shall be fairly entered, at the Charge of the Mortgagers, in
large Books to be for that Purpose provided and kept by the said Commissioners
or Trustees, as herein after directed; an attested Copy of the said Deeds so
entered and certified, under the Hands of the said Commissioners or Trustees,
for the Time being, or any Two of them, shall be, and is hereby declared to be
Matter of Record, and shall be good Evidence to prove the Sale or Mortgage
thereby mentioned to be made: And the said Commissioners or Trustees shall, at
the proper Cost and Charge of this Province, provide the said Books, of Royal
or other large, good Paper, well bound and covered, wherein shall be recorded
all the said Deeds of Mortgage, given in Security for the said Bills of Credit,
to be lent out as aforesaid; and also all other Books, Paper, Parchment, Ink,
Wax, and Wafers, printed Bills, Offices, either by hiring or building, for the
Benefit of the Public, and this Trust, and other necessary Conveniences, for
putting this Act in Execution: And for the more regular Management of the
Affairs relating to the said Trust, the Commissioners or Trustees are hereby
empowered to chose and employ a fit and able Person, who shall give sufficient
Security, in the Penalty of One Thousand Pounds Current Money of Maryland,
payable to the Lord Proprietary, for the faithful Discharge of his Duty, to
serve them as a Book-keeper and Clerk, to keep the Books of Account of all
their Transactions, and as a Clerk of the said Commissioners or Trustees,
during their Pleasure; who shall have a Salary of One Hundred Pounds current
Money, for the first Year, and Eighty Pounds afterward per Annum, so long as
he shall continue in his Office, and in Proportion for a less Time than a Year,
to be paid in the said Bills of Credit; and shall have and receive, for
recording every one of the said Deeds, the Sum of Three Shillings* and for
every attested Copy thereof, Three Shillings, and no more; and for every
Mortgage Deed that he draws, the Sum of Four Shillings, and no more; which said
Sums are to be paid by the Mortgager, his Heirs, Executors, or Administrators,
in full Satisfaction of all Fees and Charges demandable by the said Clerk, for
drawing, engrossing, and recording the said Deeds; and the said Clerk shall
also prepare a Bond, of double the Mortgage Money, for every Mortgager to
execute, along with their respective Deeds of Mortgage, conditioned for the
Payment of the Money borrowed, with the Interest, according to the Proviso or
Condition contained in every such Deed of Mortgage; and shall also prepare a
Warrant of Attorney, to be at the same Time signed and sealed by every
Mortgager or Obligor, impowering such Person or Persons, as the Commissioners
or Trustees shall nominate and appoint, to acknowledge or suffer Judgment;
which they the said Commissioners or Trustees are hereby required to cause
their Attorney to enter, in due Form of Law, in the County Court where the
Mortgager or Obligor shall reside, if such County Court can hold Plea thereof,
if not, in the Provincial Court, against such Mortgager or Obligor as shall
make Default in the Payment of the Mortgage Money, or the Interest thereon due,
or any Part thereof, according to the Directions of this Act, and Times of
Payment, specied in the Proviso contained in his or her Mortgage Deed, or in
the Condition of any such Bond or Obligation, either in Actions of Ejectment,
to gain the Possession of the mortgaged Premises, or in Actions of Debt, to be
brought upon any of the said Bonds, for Nonperformance of the Conditions
thereof, or in such Actions of Debt as the said Commissioners or Trustees are
hereby required to bring, for the Value of the Bills of Credit which shall be
received by the Mortgagers, whose Title to the Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, by them mortgaged, shall prove defective, together with the
Interest hereby allowed upon such Loans, and Costs of Suit: And the said Clerk
shall also insert a Release of Errors, in every of the said Warrants of
Attorney; and for the said Bonds, Warrants of Attorney, and Release of Errors,
the said Clerk shall have One Shilling, and no more. But before any Person, so
chosen to be Clerk, shall enter upon the Execution of his said Office, he shall
take an Oath before some Justice of the Peace of Maryland, who is hereby
empowered and required to administer the same, in these Words:

I A. B. do swear, That I will truly and faithfully perform and execute the
Office and Duty that is directed and required of me, according to a Law of this
Province, entitled, An Act for emitting and making current Ninety Thousand
Pounds, in Bills of Credit; and that I will keep a just and true Account of the
Names of all such Persons as shall apply to the said Office for Bills of
Credit; and that I will keep a just and true Account of all the Bills of
Credit, which shall be issued out of the said Office, and all other necessary
Accounts relating to the said Bills of Credit; and true Entries make of all
other Proceedings and Transactions of the Commissioners or Trustees appointed
to put the said Act in Execution; and will prepare and record all Deeds of
Mortgage, in the same Order of Time as their Applications shall be made,
without any undue Preference, unnecessary Delays, or fraudulent Practice
whatsoever. So help me God.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Sums of
Money to be so lent upon Mortgage, Bond, or other Security, shall be paid in
again, with the Annual Interest, in the said Bills of Credit, or in current
Money of America, that is to say, the Principal, at such Times, and in such
Proportions, as the Commissioners or Trustees, and the Borrower, shall agree,
not exceeding the Time herein before limited, and the Interest of the whole Sum
to be borrowed, every Year: And the said Commissioners or Trustees shall
indorse the Payment of the Principal and Interest on every Mortgage that shall
be discharged; which Indorsement shall, without any Reconveyance, reinvest the
Mortgagor, or his Heirs, in his, or their former Estate. And for the better
Security of Mortgagers, and Obligors,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid, That when any
Mortgager (...) shall satisfy all the Money, in Bills of Credit, or Specie, for
Principal and Interest, due from him or her, upon any Mortgage, the Mortgage
Deed shall not only be delivered up, with a Discharge thereon, as herein before
mentioned, but the said Commissioners or Trustees shall also enter a Vacate in
the Margin of the Record of such Mortgage, and cross the same: And that when
and as often as any Money shall be paid, in Bills of Credit, or Specie, in Part
of or toward the Payment and Satisfaction of any Money due upon any Mortgage
or Bond, the Commissioners or Trustees shall indorse such Payment, and the Time
when it shall be made, on such Mortgage or Bond; and make Entries or Notes
thereof, in the Book or Books where such Mortgage shall be recorded.

AND be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners or Trustees are hereby
empowered and required, to lend any of the said Bills of Credit which shall be
paid in by any Borrower or Borrowers, and which shall not be actually applied
in defraying the necessary Charges of emitting the said Bills of Credit, or
otherwise, according to the Directions of this Act, upon Interest, as herein
before expressed; to be repaid, with the Interest thereof, as herein before
directed.

PROVIDED always, That if any Part of the said Ninety Thousand Pounds be
remaining in the said Office, at the End of One Year after this Act shall take
Effect, more than shall be necessary to defray the Expenses and Charges of the
Office, and to answer the several Demands, Sums, and Purposes, herein before
mentioned, that then, and in such Case, it shall and may be lawful for the said
Commissioners or Trustees, to purchase good Bills of Exchange with so much of
the said Bills of Credit as shall not afterward be taken out, or borrowed upon
Interest, as herein before mentioned, allowing One Hundred and Thirty Three
Pounds, Six Shillings, and Eight Pence, in the said Bills of Credit, for One
Hundred Pounds Sterling, payable by Bills of Exchange; and proportionably for
any other Sum: Which Bills of Exchange shall be remitted, by the said
Commissioners or Trustees, to the Trustees in London, hereafter named, or other
Persons there, who shall take upon them the Execution of the said Trust; to be
negotiated in the same Manner, to the same Use and Purposes, and upon the same
Terms, as the Duty on Tobacco, hereafter mentioned.

PROVIDED always, and be it further Enacted, That until some Default shall be
made, by the said respective Mortgagers, of or in Payment of the Mortgage
Money, or Interest, or some Part thereof, it shall be lawful for them and their
Heirs to hold and enjoy the mortgaged Premises, with the Appurtenances; any
thing in the Deeds of Mortgage, or in this Act contained, to the contrary,
notwithstanding: But if Default shall be made, or suffered, by any of the said
Mortgagers or Obligors, their Heirs, Executors or Administrators, of or in
Payment of any of the said Yearly Payments or Sums, whether in Part of the
Principal or Interest, which they or any of them should have paid, on the Days
and Times, and in Manner and Form, as in and by their respective Deeds of
Mortgage or Obligations shall be specified, it shall and may be lawful, to and
for the said Trustees, for the Time being, at their Discretion, either to take
their Remedy by Course of Law, as herein above directed; and proceed to take
the mortgaged Lands and Hereditaments in Execution, as herein before mentioned,
within Two Months next after the Days whereon the same ought to be paid,
according to the several Provisoes or Conditions in their Deeds or Obligations
respectively contained, and to enter upon the Lands, Houses, Rents, and
Hereditaments, in the same Deeds specified, and expose the same to a Public
Sale; and thereupon sell and convey the same Lands, Hereditaments, and
Premises, to the best Purchaser; and out of the Money arising by such Sale,
detain and keep the Moneys to them due thereon, to the Uses and Purposes
aforesaid, and all Costs and Charges relating thereto; returning the Overplus,
if any be, to the Owners of such Lands and Hereditaments; and that then, and in
such Case, the Owners of such ^^nds and Hereditaments shall stand absolutely
foreclosed from all Equity of Redemption of the same; or to proceed on any such
Obligation or Obligations, as upon a Statute-Merchant, or of the Staple; and
that no Sale, which shall be made by Virtue of this Act, shall be extended to
create any farther Estate to the Vendees, than the Lands or Hereditaments, so
sold or delivered, shall appear to be mortgaged for, by the said respective
Mortgages, or defeasible Deeds.

PROVIDED also, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said
Commissioners or Trustees of the Office aforesaid, or any Two of them, to let
out upon Loan, in such Manner as they shall think best, any Sum of the said
Bills of Credit, upon Security of good Plate; to be delivered to them, at the
Value of Five Shillings current Money of America, per Ounce, and at the
Interest of Four per Cent. per Annum; to be paid in again to the said Trustees,
within the Space of Twelve Months; and in Case of Non-payment, to sell and
dispose of the said Plate, for the most it will yield; returning the Overplus,
if any be, to the Owner thereof, after Payment of the Principal and Interest,
with the Charges.

PROVIDED always, That if any Person or Persons, who shall take up or borrow
any of the said Bills of Credit, upon Mortgage or other Security, shall at any
Time, before the Sum so borrowed or taken up shall become due and payable, by
such Mortgage or other Security, pay down the Principal Sum so borrowed, and
all the Interest thereof, that then, and in every such Case, the Commissioners
or Trustees shall receive the same; and deliver up and discharge such Mortgage,
or other Security; and enter a Vacate thereof, and cross the same, as herein
before directed; any thing in this Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND, for the better supporting the Credit of the said Bills, Be it Enacted, by
the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid, That there shall be a Duty of One
Shilling and Three Pence, Sterling, paid to the several Naval Officers, for
every Hogshead of Tobacco, and upon every Four Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, be it
in Chest or Case, which shall be exported out of this Province, from and after
the Twenty Ninth Day of September next, by the several Masters of Ships, or
other Vessels, exporting the same, in Bills of Exchange, for and during the
Space of Thirty One Years, next ensuing the said Twenty Ninth Day of September:
For the Payment whereof, the several Naval Officers shall be obliged to take
good and sufficient Security, from all Persons exporting any Tobacco out of
this Province, as in Case of any other Duty now payable; for which Duty, the
Naval Officers, and their Sureties, already given or to be given, shall be
answerable and chargeable; for which the said Naval Officers shall be allowed
the usual Salary or Commission as they have, and by Law are allowed, for
collecting other Duties; to be paid them in Bills of Credit, with the usual
Difference between Sterling and Currency, of Thirty Three Pounds, Six
Shillings, and Eight Pence, per Cent. which the said Naval Officers are hereby
empowered to retain in their Hands, out of any other Duty which they shall
receive in current Money, or Bills of Credit; and which shall be allowed them
in their Accounts.

PROVIDED always, That in Case any Tobacco, for which the said Duty shall be
paid, shall be lost in the Exportation thereof, from this Province; that then,
and in every such Case, the Proprietor or Person who shall have paid the
aforesaid Duty for such Tobacco, shall and may export the like Quantity, Duty
free; to be allowed by the Naval Officer who shall receive the Duty.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid,
That the Bills of Exchange to be received for the said Duty of One Shilling and
Three Pence per Hogshead, or Case, or Chest, shall be remitted to the Persons
hereafter nominated and appointed; to be by them negotiated and disposed of,
according to the Directions of this Act.

AND be it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Duty of One Shilling
and Three Pence per Hogshead, so to be collected and levied, as aforesaid, by
the several Naval Officers, shall be, with all possible Speed, after Receipt
thereof, remitted to Mr. Samuel Hyde, Mr. William Hunt, and Mr. Robert
Cruickshank, Merchants in London, or any Two of them, or other Persons, or the
Majority of them, who shall be entrusted and appointed Trustees in London,
according to the Directions of this Act, for receiving and laying out the same,
in such Manner, and for such Uses, Intents, and Purposes, as are herein
after-mentioned and declared; and the said Naval Officers are hereby directed
and enjoined, to produce and lay before the General Assembly of this Province,
Yearly, and every Year, Accounts of their Receipts of the said Duty, and in
what Manner they shall have remitted the same to London; which Accounts shall
not be received, unless respectively proved upon Oath, to be just and true.

AND be it further Enacted, That the said Samuel Hyde, William Hunt, and Robert
Cruickshank, the Trustees herein beforementioned, or any Two of them, or any
other Trustees, for the Time being, who shall be appointed by Virtue of this
Act, or any Two of them, shall, and they are hereby authorized and directed, to
lay out the Moneys so to them to be remitted by the said Naval Officers, as
aforesaid, Yearly, and every Year, as soon as they receive the same, or as soon
after as they conveniently can, in the Purchase of Bank Stock; which Purchase
they shall declare to be, and they shall procure the same to be entered in the
Books of the Company, to be for the Use, and in Trust, for the Province of
Maryland; and the said beforementioned Trustees, are hereby also empowered and
authorized to receive the growing Interest or Dividends on the said so
purchased Stock, Yearly, and every Year, as the same shall grow due and
payable; which Interest and Dividends, so by them received, they shall
immediately lay out in the Purchase of Bank Stock, and also receive the
Interest and Dividends thereof; so as Interest upon Interest may be made, as
much as may be, of the Principal Moneys or Duties re-remitted from this
Province, according to the true Intent and Meaning hereof. And the said
Trustees are hereby directed and enjoined, to transmit their Accounts to the
Commissioners or Trustees in this Province, Yearly, and every Year, of the
Receipt of the Moneys from the said Naval Officers; and in what Manner they
shall have laid out the same; and how much Stock is Yearly purchased, for the
Use, and in Trust, for this Province; with proper Testimonials from the Bank,
of such Entries and Transfers: Which Accounts and Testimonials shall be Yearly
inspected, and laid before both Houses of Assembly; in which Accounts, there
shall be allowed to the said Trustees, for their Trouble and Commission in
receiving the said Moneys, and laying out the same, in Manner aforesaid, Two
Pounds per Cent. and no more.

AND whereas, for the better Security of the Fund intended by this Act to be
raised, and lodged in the Bank of England, as well as for the more effectual
Execution of the Trusts reposed in the Trustees, who shall be from Time
appointed and entrusted to manage and transact any Parts of the Trusts
mentioned to be transacted in England, His Lordship, the Right Honorable the
Lord Proprietary of this Province, has been pleased, at the Desire and
Application to His Lordship, of both Houses of Assembly, for that Purpose, to
signify his Willingness and Condescension, to take upon himself the Trusts, and
Care, of super-intending and directing the Conduct and Behavior of such
Trustees; and which Goodness in His Lordship is most gratefully acknowledged:

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid, and
it is hereby declared, That, as well in the purchasing the said Bank Stock, and
in making all Entries (...) Transfers thereof, in the Bank Books, as in the
Sale of the same, or any Part thereof, for the Benefit and Use of this
Province, the said Trustees, and every of them, shall from Time to Time,
consult with, and procure the said Approbation of the said Lord Proprietary,
for such their intended Proceeding: And that no such Stock shall be sold until
such Approbation had: And also, that the said Trustees, and every of them,
shall be subject to the Control and Direction of His Lordship, in the Execution
of the Trusts to them committed; and shall, from Time to Time, acquaint Him
with any Proceeding or Transaction they intend, in the same Trusts. And
further, it shall and may be lawful, to and for His said Lordship, from Time to
Time, and as often as he shall think proper, to remove and displace any of the
Trustees, in England, from the Execution of all or any Part of the Trusts to
him or them committed; and nominate and appoint other Person or Persons, in his
or their Places* or in the Place and Stead of any of the Trustees mentioned in
this Act, in Case of Refusal, or Death: All which said Person or Persons, so to
be nominated and appointed, shall be, and is and are, hereby declared to be
vested and empowered with the same Authorities, in the Execution of all the
Trusts in this Act, as the Person or Persons, in whose Room or Place he or they
should succeed, were at any Time vested or empowered with, by Virtue of this
Act: Which said Removal, and Nomination, shall continue, and be available, for
the Execution of the Trusts committed to the Trustees in England, until the
same shall be altered by the Assembly of this Province.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That after the End of
Fifteen Years, after the Twenty Ninth Day of September next, to wit, the Twenty
Ninth Day of September, which shall be in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand,
Seven Hundred, and Forty Eight, any Person or Persons, who shall have the
Property in, or the Possession of, any Number or Quantity of the said Bills of
Credit, shall be hereby entitled, upon producing the same before the said
Commissioners for emitting the said Bills of Credit, to have, demand, and
receive, from the said Commissioners, the full Third Part of the Value of the
said Bills so produced, as aforesaid, to be paid to the said Person or Persons
so producing the same, in Bills of Exchange; to be drawn by the said
Commissioners for emitting the said Bills of Credit, upon the said Trustees
residing in London, in Manner and Form following; that is to say, Upon any
Person or Persons producing to the said Commissioners for emitting the said
Bills, any Number or Quantity of the said Bills, and demanding Payment of the
Third Part of the Value thereof, the said Commissioners are hereby directed,
empowered, and authorized, to take the said Bills of Credit, so produced as
aforesaid, and cancel, and vacate the same: And thereupon the said
Commissioners are to sign and deliver to the Person or Persons aforesaid, new
Bills of Credit, to the Amount and Value of Two Third Parts of the Bills of
Credit so cancelled and vacated, as aforesaid: Which said new Bills of Credit,
the Commissioners shall cause to be signed at the Top of each of the same, with
the Words, New Bill; thereby to prevent any Fraud which may be intended to be
practiced, by twice, or oftener producing and demanding Payment of One Third
Part of the same Bills of Credit, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of
this Act. And the said Commissioners are hereby further directed, empowered,
and authorized, to draw One or more Setts of Bills of Exchange, in the usual
Manner or Form of Bills of Exchange, payable at Forty Days Sight, to any Person
or Persons, or his or their Order, to the Value or Amount of the other Third
Part of the said Bills of Credit, so cancelled, or vacated, as aforesaid: Which
said Bills of Exchange shall be drawn upon the said Trustees, residing in
London; and in the Body of each respective Bill of Exchange, it shall be
directed, that the Moneys to be paid, shall be placed to Account of the
Province of Maryland. Which said Bills of Exchange, the said Commissioners
shall deliver to the Person or Persons so producing the said Bills of Credit,
so cancelled, and vacated, as aforesaid, in full Satisfaction and Payment of
the other Third Part of the Value of the said Bills of Credit, so cancelled and
vacated, as aforesaid. Provided nevertheless, That no Person or Persons* shall
be entitled to the Payment of One Third of the Value of any Number or Quantity
of the said Bills of Credit, in Manner and Form aforesaid, except he or they
produce the same, and demand such Payment, at some or any Time, between the
said Twenty Ninth Day of September, which shall be in the Year One Thousand,
Seven Hundred, and Forty Eight, and the Twenty Ninth Day of March, which shall
be in the Year One Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Forty Nine; any thing herein
before, to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND, for the sure Payment of the said Bills of Exchange, so drawn by the
Commissioners for emitting the said Bills of Credit, as aforesaid, in Manner
and Form aforesaid,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees, residing in
London, shall, and they are hereby directed and enjoined, to accept, in the
usual Form, all and every the said Bills of Exchange immediately upon the
Tender and Presentment of the same: And, to enable the said Trustees to pay the
said Bills of Exchange, at the Time the same shall become due, they the said
Trustees are hereby directed, empowered, and authorized, at any Time between
the Acceptance of the said Bills of Exchange, and the Time of Payment thereof,
to sell and dispose of any Quantity of the said Bank Stock, for the best Price
that can be had for the same, thereby to raise Moneys for the Payment of the
said Bills of Exchange.

AND be it further Enacted, That all the Residue of the said Bills of Credit
which shall remain uncancelled, and shall be produced to the said Commissioners
or Trustees, at the End of the remaining Sixteen Years of the Thirty One Years,
limited by this Act, for the Circulation of the said Bills of Credit, shall be
cancelled and vacated; and that the Possessors or Proprietors of such Bills of
Credit shall be satisfied and paid for them, as herein before expressed; and
that the Trustees in London, shall accept and discharge the Bills of Exchange
to be drawn upon them for that Purpose, and raise the Money contained in such
Bills, by Sale of the Stock, in the same Manner as herein beforementioned.

AND be it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That when the said Bills of
Credit, amounting to Ninety Thousand Pounds Current Money of Maryland, shall be
destroyed and cancelled, as aforesaid, and the said Sum shall be satisfied and
paid, as herein beforementioned, and the Trust herein beforementioned be
fully and faithfully executed; that then, and from thenceforth, the said
Commissioners or Trustees, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and
their Sureties, shall be, and for ever stand absolutely exonerated and
discharged from all Troubles, Suits, Costs, Damages, and Charges whatsoever, as
Commissioners or Trustees aforesaid, or as Bondsmen or Sureties for the said
Commissioners of Trustees.

PROVIDED always, That no Commissioner or Trustee, or any of their Sureties,
shall be liable, by any Bond to be taken by Virtue of this Act, for any other
Fault or Miscarriage in the Execution of any of the Trusts committed to the
Trustees or Commissioners in this Province, than such at shall happen in the
Time or Times of the Continuance of the respective Trustee or Commissioner in
such Trust.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That the Money which shall remain in Bank, of the Fund
established by this Act, for sinking the said Bills of Credit, and the Interest
thereof, and the Money lent on Mortgages, Bond, or Securities, as aforesaid,
and the Interest arising by the Loan of any of the said Bills of Credit, after
all the said Bills of Credit shall be sunk and discharged, shall be applied and
disposed of in such Manner and Form, as the Assembly of this Province shall
direct and appoint. And to prevent the said Bills of Credit being counterfeited,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That any Person who shall
counterfeit the said Bills of Credit, and his, her, or their Aiders or
Abettors, and shall be thereof convicted, by due Course of Law, shall suffer
Death, as a Felon or Felons, without Benefit of Clergy; and also, that any
Person who shall pass any such counterfeit Bill or Bills of Credit, knowing the
same to be counterfeit, shall also suffer Death, as a Felon, without Benefit of
Clergy: And, that all Magistrates, and others, into whose Hands any
counterfeited Bills may happen to come, shall forthwith deliver the same to One
of the said Commissioners or Trustees, who shall cause the Names of those that
delivered them, and of the Persons from whom they were taken, to be indorsed on
the Back thereof; which Bills shall be safely kept in the said Office, and be
forthcoming, when there may be Occasion to make Use of the same.

AND it is hereby Declared, and Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That this
present Act shall be taken and allowed in all Courts within this Province, as a
Public Act; and all Judges, Justices, and other Persons concerned therein, are
hereby required to take Notice thereof, as such, without pleading the same
specially.

AND, the better to prevent the Exportation of trashy, ordinary, and
unmerchantable Tobacco, Be it Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent
aforesaid, That every Master or Mistress of a Family, shall be, and is by this
Act required, to burn, or cause to be burnt, in the Presence of such Person or
Persons as shall be appointed by Virtue of this Act for that Purpose, on or
before the Last Day of July, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, Seventeen
Hundred, Thirty and Four, the Quantity of One Hundred and Fifty Pounds of
Tobacco, to be tied up into Bundles, dry enough to pack, of the most ordinary
Sorts of Tobacco, for every such Master of a Family, or other Person, having
any taxable Servant or Slave, and every taxable Person to him belonging; and
the like Quantity of One Hundred and Fifty Pounds of Tobacco for every taxable
Person belonging to any Woman, who shall be an Housekeeper, or Mistress of any
Servant or Slave, Servants or Slaves, being a Taxable or Taxables, and also for
every Housekeeper, or other Person, being a Taxable; and the like Quantity of
One Hundred and Fifty Pounds of Tobacco, of the like Quality, on or before the
Last Day of July, Seventeen Hundred, Thirty and Five, for every taxable Person,
as herein beforementioned: And that every Person who shall fail to perform
what is required by this Act, shall, for every One Hundred and Fifty Pounds of
Tobacco thereby appointed to be burnt, and which shall not be so burnt, be
fined Twenty Shillings current Money of Maryland; to be applied to defray the
Charge of emitting and negotiating the said Bills of Credit.

AND be it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the
several and respective County Courts, at their several Courts to be held in the
Month of March next, shall appoint Two substantial and reputable Freeholders,
not being Members of either House of Assembly, Clergymen, Sheriffs, or
practicing Physicians, in every Hundred, in their respective Counties, who
shall, by Virtue of their Office, and this Act, take Copies of the several
Lists of Taxables, returned by the several Constables, in the County Courts,
the preceding Year; which said Lists, the several County Clerks are hereby
required to deliver unto them, within Twenty Days after such their Appointment;
and that the Persons so to be appointed, shall take the following Oath, or
Affirmation, if a Quaker.

I A. B. do swear, or affirm, That I will well and truly execute the Powers and
Authorities to me given, by an Act, entitled, An Act for Emitting and Making
current Ninety Thousand Pounds Current Money of Maryland, in Bills of Credit,
without Favor or Affection, Partiality or Curruption, to the utmost of my
Power, Skill, and Knowledge.

PROVIDED always, That no Person who shall be so appointed, shall be deemed or
taken to be an Officer, or subject to any Pains, Penalties, or Forfeitures, for
not taking the Oaths to the Government, as a Qualification, to put this Act in
Execution.

AND be it Enacted, That the Persons so to be appointed, shall, between the
Last Day of May, and Last Day of July, in the respective Years aforesaid, of
Seventeen Hundred Thirty Four, and Seventeen Hundred Thirty Five, either
together, or one of them to one Part, and the other to the other Part of their
Hundreds, at their Discretion, repair to the Dwelling House, or Place of Abode
of every Inhabitant, within their respective Hundreds, and require every such
Person to produce the several Quantities of Tobacco herein beforementioned;
which the said Persons, or either of them, shall cause to be burnt in his or
their View: And that the respective Inhabitants shall be obliged to find and
provide Fuel for that Purpose, and to burn, or cause such Tobacco to be burnt
and destroyed, in the Presence of the Person or Persons to be appointed, as
aforesaid: And that such Person or Persons shall give a Certificate or
Certificates of the Quantities of Tobacco to be so burnt; which Certificates
may be compared with the Constables Lists of Taxables, in Order to discover any
Frauds, when there shall be any Suspicion of any Fraud being committed,
contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act. And that the said Person
or Persons, so to be appointed to put this Act in Execution, shall return to
their respective County Courts, a List or Lists of such Person or Persons as
shall refuse or neglect to burn the Quantities of Tobacco herein
beforementioned; which List to be so returned, shall, by such Person or
Persons sworn, or affirmed, to be true, and deemed to be full Evidence, to
prove a Breach of this Act, unless such Certificate shall be contradicted and
falsified by the Testimony of Two legal and indifferent Witnesses, upon Oath,
or Affirmation.

AND be it further Enacted, That the said Commissioners or Trustees, upon every
Person so to be appointed, producing or sending to them, a Certificate of such
Appointment, and a Testimonial from any one Justice of the Peace, or of Two
honest and reputable Persons, of the same County with such Person, that he has
honestly executed his Duty, according to the Tenor of this Act, shall pay to
every such Person, or his Order, Six Pence, in Bills of Credit, for every
Hundred and Fifty Pounds of Tobacco.

AND be it further Enacted, That any Person, who shall be appointed, as
aforesaid, and who shall refuse to act, not being disabled by Age, Sickness, or
other Infirmity, to be proved to the Satisfaction of the Justices of the County
Courts, shall forfeit and pay a Fine of Ten Pounds current Money of Maryland;
to be applied, as aforesaid. And that in every such Case, or in Case of the
Death, Disability, or Removal of any Person or Persons who shall be so
appointed, and shall act, that then, in the Vacation, any One or Two Justice or
Justices shall appoint another or other substantial and reputable Person or
Persons, in the Stead of the Person or Persons so dead, disabled, refusing, or
removed: And that the Person or Persons, to be so appointed, shall be obliged
to take the Oath, or Affirmation, herein before mentioned; and to execute and
perform the same Duty, as if appointed by the Justices of the County Courts, in
Court, under the same Fine and Penalty as herein before expressed; and shall be
entitled to the same Reward and Satisfaction, as if so appointed.

PROVIDED always, and it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, That if it
shall be more convenient to any of the Inhabitants of this Province, to burn
and destroy the Quantities of Tobacco, herein before mentioned, in some other
Hundred than where such Inhabitant shall reside, it shall and may be lawful, in
every such Case, that such Tobacco shall be burnt before, and in the View of,
the Person or Persons appointed to put this Act in Execution, in such Hundred;
who shall give a Certificate thereof to every such Inhabitant.

AND provided also, That any Person, having several Plantations whereon Tobacco
shall be made by Taxable Persons, shall not be obliged to remove any Tobacco,
in Order to be burnt, from such Plantation; but that the same may be burnt
where it shall be made; any thing in this Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

A Supplementary Act, to the Act for the Ordering and Regulating the Militia of
this Province, for the better Defense and Security thereof.
WHEREAS the Dominion of His Majesty, the Government of His Lordship, and the
Properties of the Inhabitants of this Province, ought to be guarded with such
ready Defense, as might be able to resist any sudden Invasion, or Hostile
Attempt: And whereas the several Provisions hitherto intended by the
Legislature of this Province, as well as the several Sums of Money laid out in
the Purchase of Arms, and Ammunition, for those Purposes, have not had the
desired Effects, in a proper Regulation of the Militia of this Province, by
Reason of some Defects in the Laws already made:

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the same, That any Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or Major, already
commissioned, or hereafter to be commissioned, by the Governor or Commander in
Chief, for the Time being, or any Two, or more of them, shall have the same
Powers and Authorities, in the Execution of any Laws now in Force concerning
the Militia, as the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or Major, intended by the said
Laws, are invested with: Provided, the Number of such Officers, who shall at
any Time act, or execute any Part of the same Laws, be the same as is directed
for such Purposes, by the said Laws.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That his Excellency the
Governor or Commander in Chief for the Time being, shall and may, at any Time
or Times, as to him shall seem meet, cause or order to be delivered out of the
Public, or County Magazine or Store, such and so many Arms (...) to Him shall
seem proper, to the Colonel of each County, and the Captain of every Company,
within any Town or Corporation of this Province: For which said Arms, the said
Colonel and Captain, shall give his and their Receipt and Receipts; which said
Receipt and Receipts shall be recorded in the Council-Book of this Province;
and the Record thereof allowed as good Evidence against such Colonel or
Captain; and shall account with and be answerable to the Governor or Commander
in Chief, for the Time being, from Time to Time, for the same, or the Value
thereof, or of so many as shall not be produced to His Excellency the Governor
or Commander in Chief, for the Time being, or to such Person or Persons as
shall be appointed by the Governor or Commander in Chief, for the Time being,
for such Purpose, when He or they shall demand the same, in as good Order and
Condition as they ought to be: Which Condition and Value, shall and may be
adjudged and determined by his Excellency the Governor, or Commander in Chief,
for the Time being, or by such Person or Persons as shall be appointed by the
Governor or Commander in Chief, for that Purpose: Which Value, being so
determined, such Colonel shall pay to his Excellency the Governor, or Commander
in Chief, for the Time being, or to such Person or Persons as shall be
appointed by the Governor or Commander in Chief, for that Purpose; to and for
the Purchase of Arms, and Ammunition, for the Use of the Regiment or Regiments
in the respective County to which the said Colonel belongs. And upon the
Neglect or Refusal of such Colonel or Captain, to pay such Value, it shall and
may be lawful, to and for His said Excellency, or Commander in Chief, or such
Person or Persons as shall be appointed by the Governor or Commander in Chief,
for that Purpose, to certify such Neglect, or Refusal, under his or their
Hands, to the Clerk of the respective County, and require the same Clerk to
issue an Execution for such Value, against the Body, Goods, or Chattels, of
such Colonel or Captain: Upon which Certificate, such Clerk is hereby ordered,
to issue an Execution accordingly, directed to the Sheriff of the said County,
or Coroner thereof, if the said Colonel or Captain should be the Sheriff
thereof at that Time, to levy the Sum amounting to such Value, on the Body,
Goods, or Chattels, of such Colonel or Captain; which said Execution, the
Sheriff, or Coroner, of each respective County is hereby directed and required
to serve and execute: And the Money which shall be paid to the said Sheriff, or
Coroner thereon, he, the said Sheriff, or Coroner, shall deliver and pay, once
in every Year, to his Excellency the Governor or Commander in Chief, for the
Time being, for the Uses aforesaid. And if the said Sheriff, or Coroner, shall,
by Virtue of such Execution, execute or seize any Goods of such Colonel or
Captain, then the said Sheriff, or Coroner, shall forthwith cause the same to
be appraised by Two Appraisers, to be sworn before one Justice of the Peace of
the same County, to appraise the same, according to the best of their
Knowledge; which said Goods shall, after such Appraisement, be sold by the said
Sheriff, or Coroner, at a Public Auction, to the best Bidder: And the Value,
for which they were so taken in Execution, shall be paid, once in every Year,
by the said Sheriff, or Coroner, to His Excellency the Governor or Commander in
Chief, for the Time being, for the Uses aforesaid; and the Remainder (if any)
returned to the Owner of such Goods.

AND, in Order that such Colonel who shall or may be obliged to be answerable,
as aforesaid, may have a Recompense for Arms spoilt or lost, as aforesaid, by
the Fault or Negligence of any other than himself,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful, to
and for every Colonel of a County to deliver, or cause to be delivered, to
every Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, who may have a Troop or Company in
his County, so many Arms as may be necessary and proper for such and so many
Men as he shall think fit, in his the said Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels,
Majors, or Captains Troop, or Company; and shall take a Receipt from every
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, for such Arms: And for which Arms, or
any Part thereof, every respective Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, shall
be accountable to the Value thereof; to be set and rated by his Excellency the
Governor or Commander in Chief, for the Time being, or by such Person or
Persons, as shall or may be appointed by the Governor or Commander in Chief,
for such Purposes, as aforesaid, to the Colonel of the said County; in Case the
said Arms, or any Part thereof, shall not be produced in such Order or
Condition as they ought to be, to the said Colonel, when the same shall be
demanded and required: And which said Condition and Order, shall be determined
by His Excellency the Governor, or Commander in Chief, for the Time being, or
some Person authorized by him; and the Value thereof certified by the said
Governor or Commander in Chief, or by such Person or Persons as shall be
appointed by the Governor or Commander in Chief, for that Purpose, to the
County Clerk as aforesaid, requiring him to issue such Execution, as aforesaid,
and directed to the Coroner, (if the said Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or
Captain, should be Sheriff,) otherwise, to the Sheriff, as aforesaid, for the
Use of such Colonel, against the Body, Goods, and Chattels of the
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, who cannot produce such Arms, as
aforesaid; which Execution shall issue, and be executed, as aforesaid, and the
Money arising thereby, shall be paid to the Colonel of the County, for his own
Use.

AND, in Order that any Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or Major, who may have a
Troop or Company in the Regiment, and every Captain either of a Troop of Horse,
or a Company of Foot, may be indemnified for what may happen in the Loss or
Damage of the Arms, by Fault or Negligence of the Men in their respective Troop
or Company,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful, to
and for every Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, and Captain, who may have a
Troop, or Company, as aforesaid, to deliver, or cause to be delivered, to such
and so many Person and Persons, who are or shall be inlisted or enrolled in his
or their Troop or Company, within this Province, such Arms as the respective
Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain shall think proper, for such
Person or Persons in his respective Troop or Company to have: And which Arms
such Person or Persons are hereby obliged and directed to receive; and to give
a Receipt for the same, to such Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, under
Penalty of Two Hundred Pounds of Tobacco; which said Penalty shall be recovered
against such Person or Persons.

AND such Execution shall be issued by the Clerk of the respective County, on
the Certificate of the respective Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or
Captain, certifying the Refusal to accept, and give a Receipt for such Arms, as
aforesaid, directed to the Sheriff, (or Coroner, if the Person refusing should
be Sheriff:) And which Execution shall be served, and the aforesaid Sum of Two
Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, levied by the Sheriff, or Coroner, of the respective
County, in Manner as before directed; and such Sum, when levied, shall be paid,
once in every Year, to the Governor, or Commander in Chief, for the Time being,
for the Uses aforementioned. And in Case such Person or Persons cannot produce
such Arms so received, in as good Order and Condition as they ought to be, when
he or they shall be required, by the respective Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel,
Major, or Captain, who may have a Troop or Company, as aforesaid, then it shall
and may be lawful, for His Excellency the Governor, or Commander in Chief, for
the Time being, or some Person authorized by Him, upon Application to Him made,
by such Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, to assess, and value
such Arms, so not produced: Which Valuation shall be certified by His
Excellency the Governor, or Comander in Chief, for the Time being, or such
Person as shall be appointed by the Governor, or Commander in Chief, for that
Purpose, to the Clerk of the respective County, directing him to issue an
Execution for such Value, against the Body, Goods, or Chattels, of such Person,
or Persons, not producing the Arms, as aforesaid, to the Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain for the proper Use of such Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain: Which Execution shall be directed to the
Sheriff, or Coroner, if such Person shall be Sheriff, and shall be executed;
and the Value levied, and raised, in Manner before directed, by the Sheriff, or
Coroner, of the respective County; and the same shall be paid to the proper
Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, for his own Use and Benefit.

AND whereas there are, and may be, several Companies in Towns, independent of
the Authority or Command of the Colonels of the respective County, or Counties,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Captain, Lieutenants, and
Ensign, or any Two of them, shall have the same Powers and Authorities, to
execute this, or any other of the Laws now in Force within this Province,
relating to the Militia thereof, in and over their Company or Companies, in as
full and ample Manner, as the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or Majors, or any
Two of them, can or may do, in and over their respective Regiments, Troops, or
Companies, by Virtue of this or any other Law now in Force.

AND also, That the Captain or Captains of such Company or Companies, within
such Town or Towns, shall receive proper Arms from, and be liable and
accountable to, His Excellency the Governor, or Commander in Chief, for the
Time being, for such Arms, in the same Manner as is before by this Act
directed, with Regard to the Colonel: And the Value of the Arms not produced,
as aforesaid, shall be set, proceeded for, levied and applied, in the same
Method aforementioned in Relation to the Colonel; and the respective Men shall
be liable and accountable to such Captain for such Arms, not produced, as
aforesaid, in the same Manner as directed by this Law with Regard to the Men in
any Troop or Company in the County; and the Value shall, in the like Manner, be
set, proceeded for, and levied; but it shall be paid to the Captain, by the
respective Sheriff, for his own Use and Benefit.

AND, to the End that every Person so inlisted or enrolled, at the Time of
their Training Exercise, or other Duty in the Militia, may improve, and render
themselves fit for Duty and Service, if Occasion should require,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person or Persons so
inlisted or enrolled, shall, at the Time and Place of Training, and in the
Performance of their Exercise, behave him or themselves decently, and in a
Manner suitable to the Attention and Care requisite in such Exercise, under the
Penalty of One Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, or Ten Shillings current Money, for
every such Misbehaviour; which shall be determined by any Two Field Officers of
the County, either upon their own View, or Representation of the Commanding
Officer then present, and certified by such Field Officers, to the Clerk of the
same County; who shall, on such Certificate, issue an Execution, directed to
the Sheriff, (or Coroner, if the offending Person shall be then Sheriff,) to
levy such Penalty on the Body, Goods, or Chattels, of such Person or Persons so
offending: Which said Sheriff, or Coroner, shall proceed, as is
aforementioned, and pay the Penalty so levied, to the Governor or Commander in
Chief, for the Time being, once every Year, for the Uses aforementioned.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful, to and for Governor, or
Commander in Chief, for the Time being, and he is hereby desired, to nominate
and appoint some fit Person or Persons residing in each County, to execute,
from Time to Time, such Parts of this Act, as is directed to be executed by any
Person or Persons appointed by the Governor, or Commander in Chief.

AND be it further Enacted, That no Servant or Servants shall from henceforth
continue, or hereafter be inlisted or enrolled, in any Regiment, Company, or
Troop, unless upon such an Emergency as may be judged necessary and proper by
the Field Officers of the respective County, or the major Part of them, for the
inlisting such Servant or Servants; any Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff, or
Coroner, shall have and receive Thirty Pounds of Tobacco, for every Execution
he shall serve or execute, by Virtue of this Act, and the usual Imprisonment
Fee, or Fees due on the Sale of Effects, in Case of an Imprisonment, or Sale;
and the Clerk shall have and receive Six Pounds of Tobacco, for every Execution
issued by him, in Pursuance of this Law; which said Fees so to be due to the
said Sheriff, Coroner, or Clerk, shall be levied on the Body, Goods, or
Chattels, of the Person against whom such Execution shall issue.

AND whereas, there are several Public Arms now lodged in the several Counties
in this Province, which may be in a Condition unfit for Use, Be it therefore
Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and Consent
aforesaid, That the Colonel of each respective County, shall, as soon as
conveniently may be, after the Governor, or Commander in Chief, shall require
the same, return to the Governor, or Commander in Chief, a List of such Arms
which such Colonel can find in his County, together with an Account of the
Condition such Arms are in; and for the Reparation, Amendment, or Disposal
thereof, the Governor, or Commander in Chief, is hereby desired to give such
Directions, as he may judge most proper. And to prevent the Embezzlement of the
Public Arms,

BE it Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and Consent
aforesaid, That all the Public Arms shall be marked with such Marks, and in
such Manner, as the Governor, or Commander in Chief, shall think most proper,
to denote such Arms to belong to the Public; after which Marks so made, no
Person or Persons whatsoever, shall presume to sell or purchase such Arms so
marked, or where the Mark appears to have been defaced, or knowing the same to
be Public Arms, under the Penalty of Forty Shillings; to be recovered against
the Seller; and the like Penalty of Forty Shillings, to be recovered against
the Purchaser, for every Offense, before a single Magistrate, upon the Oath of
One or more credible Witness or Witnesses: Which said Magistrate shall issue
his Warrant to the Clerk of the County, directing him to issue an Execution for
such Penalty; which Execution he shall issue, and the Sheriff shall serve and
levy the Penalty, in Manner aforesaid: Half of which Penalty shall be paid to
the Informer, for his own Use; and the other Half to the Governor, or Commander
in Chief, for the Uses aforesaid.

AND whereas, there is not any Exemption, by the Laws now in Force, of any
Member of His Lordship's Council, and of the Upper House of Assembly, Be it
therefore Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, That no such Member shall be obliged to serve in the
Militia, or be enrolled or inlisted in any Regiment, Troop, or Company thereof;
any Law to the contrary, notwithstanding.

PROVIDED always, That this Act, nor any thing herein contained, shall be
construed to charge the Executors or Administrators of the Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, dying, for any of the Arms aforesaid,
more than they shall have in their Possession, or shall have received
Satisfaction for, from the several Persons, liable to such Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, so dying: Nor any Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, succeeding any deceased Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, shall receive or take in his or their
Possession, or for more than he or they shall take Receipts for, as aforesaid;
but such succeeding Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, shall, on
the Death of any Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, or Captain, immediately
warn the respective Regiment or Regiments, Companies and Troops, to a Muster,
and then take Receipts for such Arms as shall then be produced in good Order:
The Number thereof, together with the Condition of such Arms as shall be lost,
or spoiled, as aforesaid, shall by the respective Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel,
Major, or Captain, be certified to the Governor, or Commander in Chief, within
Thirty Days after such Muster: After which Return of the Certificate aforesaid,
every such Officer shall be liable to each other, and the Men to such Officer,
as is before directed by this Act: Which Muster and Return, shall be made and
had, as aforesaid, under the Penalty of the Officer neglecting the same, being
liable for the Value of the Arms delivered to the deceased Officer, in whose
Place he shall succeed; which Value shall be ascertained, levied, paid, and
applied, in the Manner, and to the Use aforementioned.

PROVIDED also, That no Officer, nor his Executors or Administrators, shall be
liable, by Virtue of this, or any other Act, for such Arms as shall be
delivered to any Person or Persons, which are or shall be inlisted or enrolled
in any Troop or Company, and who shall, after such Receipt of the said Arms,
and before any Satisfaction made to the proper Officer, for the Loss, Damage,
or Embezzlement of such Arms, either prove insolvent, or run away, or die
insolvent.

An Act for laying our and applying Three Thousand Five Hundred Pounds, Current
Money of Maryland, to the Uses therein mentioned.
WHEREAS, by an Act passed this Session of Assembly, entitled, An Act for
emitting and making current Ninety Thousand Pounds, current Money of Maryland,
in Bills of Credit, a Sum, not exceeding Three Thousand Pounds, in the said
Bills of Credit, is directed to be applied to purchase convenient Ground, for
the Use of the Public, and building a Dwelling House, and other Conveniences,
for the Governor of this Province, for the Time being, to reside in: And
whereas a Sum, not exceeding Five Hundred Pounds, in the said Bills of Credit,
is appointed to be applied toward or in the Repairs of the Public Buildings,
according to the Directions of an Act to be passed this Session of Assembly:

BE it Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the Authority
of the same, That the Honorable Samuel Ogle, Esquire shall be, and by Virtue of
this Act is, empowered and authorized, to purchase convenient Ground, with Part
of the said Sum of Three Thousand Pounds, for the Use of the Public, in the
City of Annapolis; and that the said Samuel Ogle, Esquire or the Governor of this
Province, for the Time being, may, by Virtue of this Act, direct and appoint
the building a Dwelling House, Outhouses, and other Conveniences, for the
Residence of the Governor of this Province; and that the Commissioners or
Trustees, who shall be appointed for emitting the Bills of Credit, established
by Act of Assembly, shall and may issue and pay the said Sum of Three Thousand
Pounds, in Bills of Credit, according to the Directions of the said Samuel
Ogle, Esquire or the Governor of this Province, for the Time being, for the
Purposes aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable
Charles Calvert, Esquire Benjamin Tasker, Esquire Edmund Jenings, Esquire John Beale, Esquire
Ralph Crabb, and Philip Hammond, Gentlemen, or the major Part of them, shall
and may, and by Virtue of this Act are authorized and empowered, to apply the
said Five Hundred Pounds, in Bills of Credit, in and toward such Repairs of
the Public Buildings, Parade, and other Public Uses, in Annapolis, as they
shall think most advantageous and proper for the public Service of this
Province; and that the said Commissioners or Trustees, shall issue and pay the
said Money, according to the Directions of the said Charles Calvert, Benjamin
Tasker, Edmund Jenings, John Beale, Ralph Crabb, and Philip Hammond, or the
major Part of them.

An Act to continue an Act, entitled, An Act for raising a Duty of Three Pence
per Hogshead on all Tobacco exported out of this Province, for the Uses therein
mentioned.
WHEREAS, an Act of Assembly, made at Annapolis, at a Session of Assembly held
there, the Eleventh Day of July, in the Year of Our Lord, Seventeen Hundred,
and Thirty Two, entitled, An Act for raising a Duty of Three Pence per
Hogshead on all Tobacco exported out of this Province, for the Uses therein
mentioned, was passed; which Act was to continue until the Twenty Ninth Day of
September, in the Year of Our Lord, Seventeen Hundred, and Thirty Three: And
whereas, this present General Assembly, as well to testify their Affection and
Regard for the Honorable Samuel Ogle, Esquire late Governor of this Province, as
their Gratitude for His just Administration, during His Government, are
desirous to encourage Learning, and willing that it may be Enacted:

AND be it Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the same, That the said Act shall be continued from the said
Twenty Ninth Day of September, until the Twenty Ninth Day of September, which
shall be in the Year of Our Lord, Seventeen Hundred, and Thirty Six.

PROVIDED nevertheless, That in Case the said Samuel Ogle, should dye, or be
removed from being Governor, before the Twenty Ninth Day of September, One
Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Thirty Six, that then, at the End of the next
Session of Assembly which shall happen after such Death, or Removal, as
aforesaid, this Act shall be void, to all Intents and Purposes; any thing
herein before contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

An Act to empower the Inhabitants of Anne-Arundel, and Prince George Counties,
to make the main Branch of the River Patuxent navigable, above Queen-Anne Town,
in Prince George County, aforesaid.
WHEREAS, sundry of the Inhabitants of Anne-Arundel, and Prince George
Counties, in this Province, bordering on the main Branch of Patuxent River, by
their humble Petition to the Legislature of this Province, have set forth, That
the said main Branch of Patuxent River may be made navigable; and that some
Proposals are well received for effecting the same, by Subscription, for
upwards of Twenty Miles above the said Town; and for that it appears to this
General Assembly, that great Advantages may accrue thereby, to the Inhabitants
of the said Counties, and also to others, trading or resorting thereto: It is
therefore prayed, it may be Enacted,

AND be it Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the same, That it shall not, nor may be lawful, for any Person or
Persons within this Province, from and after the End of this present Session of
Assembly, to make any Hedge, Ware, or Fence, in or across the said Branch; or
to repair or amend any Hedge or Hedges, Wares, or Fences, already made, or
which shall be hereafter made, in or across the said main Branch of Patuxent
River, above Queen-Anne Town aforesaid; or to fall, or cause to be fallen, any
Tree or Trees, into the said Branch, either for the Convenience of Fishing, or
for any other Matter or Thing whatsoever, whereby the Navigation up and down
the said Branch may be any-ways obstructed, under the Penalty of Four Hundred
Pounds of Tobacco for every such Offense; to be recovered by the Oath of the
Informer, before any Justice of the County Court where such Offender shall
reside; and to be aplied, One Half to the Use of the Informer, and the other
Half to be paid, or accounted for, to the County Justices, and by them applied
for the Benefit of such Person or Persons as shall appear to them to have
cleared, or to be concerned, at their own Expense, in clearing such River.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority, Advice and Consent aforesaid,
That it shall and may be lawful, for any Person or Persons whatsover, to clear
and keep the River aforesaid open and navigable, at their own proper Cost and
Charges, without being obstructed by any Person or Persons whatsoever.

PROVIDED, That if the Petitioners shall not begin to clear the said River, or
cause the same to be begun, within Six Months from the End of this Session of
Assembly, that this Act shall cease, determine, and become null and void. And
Provided, That if the Clearing the said River shall be begun within Six Months
after the End of this Session, and shall not be completed, so as to render the
said River navigable, according to the Intent of this Act, within Six Years
after the End of the said Six Months; that then, and in such Case, this Act
shall cease, determine, and become null and void; any thing therein contained
to the contrary, notwithstanding.

SAVING to the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, his Heirs and Successors,
their several and respective Rights.

An Act Reviving an Act of Assembly, entitled, An Act for the speedy and
effectual Publication of the Laws of this Province; and for the Encouragement
of William Parks, of the City of Annapolis, Printer.
BE it Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the Authority
of the same, That the Act, entitled, An Act for the speedy and effectual
Publication of the Laws of this Province; and for the Encouragement of William
Parks, of the City of Annapolis, Printer, made at a Session of Assembly, begun
and held at the City of Annapolis, the Tenth Day of October, Anno Domini, One
Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Twenty Seven, be and is hereby revived, and
continued in full Force, from and after the End of this Session of Assembly,
for and during the Term of Seven Years, and to the End of the next Session of
Assembly, that shall happen after the said Seven Years.

An Act for the Assessment of so much Tobacco on the Inhabitants of St.
Stepen's Parish, in Cecil County, as will build them a new Parish Church, and a
Chapel of Ease, on Bohemia Manor, in the said Parish.
WHEREAS, the Vestrymen, Churchwardens, and other the Inhabitants of St.
Stephen's Parish, in Cecil County, have, by their Petition to this General
Assembly, set forth, That their Parish Church is in such a ruinous Condition,
that it is dangerous being therein; and have prayed, that an Act may pass, that
so much Tobacco may be levied on the taxable Persons of the said Parish, as
will enable them to build a new Church, at or near the Place where the old one
now stands; and to build a Chapel of Ease, on Bohemia Manor,

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the same, That the Justices of Cecil County Court, shall and may,
and they are hereby authorized and directed, on the Application of the
Vestrymen and Churchwardens of the said Parish, to assess and levy on the
taxable Inhabitants of the said Parish, any Quantity of Tobacco, not exceeding
Sixty Thousand Pounds of Tobacco, to erect a new Church in the said Parish, at
or near the Place where the old one now stands; and Fifty Thousand Pounds of
Tobacco, to build a Chapel of Ease, on Bohemia Manor; which said Tobacco so to
be levied, shall be collected, in equal Dividends, in Three Years, by the
Sheriff of Cecil County, for the Time being, who is hereby authorized and
required to collect the same; and who shall have, for such Collection, at and
after the Rate of Five per Cent. And the said Tobacco, when so collected, shall
be paid to the Vestry and Churchwardens aforesaid, who are hereby authorized
and required to apply the same to the building and finishing a new Church in
the said Parish, at or near the Place where the old one now stands; and to
build the Chapel of Ease aforesaid, as near as may be, to the Place where the
old one now stands.

A Supplementary Act to the Act, entitled, An Act, for laying out anew Fifteen
Acres of Land, part of the One Hundred Acres of Land, formerly erected into a
Town, commonly called Benedict-Leonard Town, upon Patuxent River, in Charles
County, besides the Lots which have been already taken up, pursuant to the
Directions of former Laws; and to restrain the Inhabitants from keeping any
Stock, except within their Enclosure, in the said Town.
WHEREAS, by the said Act, the Owner or Owners of the said Fifteen Acres of
Land, are to have his or their first Choice of One Lot; but no Time being
limited therein, to make such Choice,

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the same, That the Owner or Owners of the said Fifteen Acres of
Land, shall be obliged, within Ten Days after Notice is given to him or them,
by one or more of the Commissioners, or by the Clerk of the Town, to make his
or their Choice of One Lot; or upon Neglect or Refusal to make Choice thereof,
any Person or Persons shall have Liberty to take up the said Lot or Lots,
pursuant to the Directions of the said Law.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Taker-up of
any Lot or Lots within the said Town, shall be obliged to pay the Tobacco set
and assessed upon the said Lot or Lots, to the Owner or Owners, either in the
Hands of the Sheriff of Charles County, or to bring the Tobacco to such Owner
or Owners Dwelling House.

AND whereas, it is thought prejudicial to the Inhabitants of the said Town,
for any Person living there to keep any Creature or Creatures within the said
Town, out of his Enclosure,

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons
whatsoever, living, or to live, within the same Town, shall, after the End of
this present General Assembly, under any Pretense whatsoever, keep, or support,
within the same Town, or the Enclosure or Enclosures of Mr. Charles-Somerset
Smith, any Hog or Hogs, Goose or Geese, Sheep, Horse or Horses, Cow or Cows, or
other Cattle, belonging to themselves, or to any other Persons whatsoever;
unless such Hog or Hogs, Goose or Geese, Sheep, Horse or Horses, Cow or Cows,
or other Cattle, be kept within such Person or Persons Enclosure, so keeping or
supporting them.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That any Person or
Persons, that shall be convicted before a single Magistrate, on Confession, or
Proof, of keeping and supporting within the said Town, out of his, her, or
their Enclosure, any Hog or Hogs, Goose or Geese, Sheep, Horse or Horses, Cow
or Cows, or other Cattle, shall pay One Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, for each
Transgression; the same to be levied on the Body, Goods, or Chattels of the
Offender, by Way of Execution, as in Case of small Debts; and to be applied to
the Use of the Free School of the County aforesaid.

An Act for Erecting a Town at and about the Landing, called, The Elk-Ridge
Landing, near the Head of Potapsco River, in Anne-Arundel County.
WHEREAS, the Inhabitants of the Upper Parts of Anne-Arundel County, have, by
their Petition to this General Assembly, set forth, That the vast Body of rich
Lands, and the Situation of the Neighborhood in general, renders the Head of
Potapsco River, at the Landing, called, The Elk-Ridge Landing, a very
commodious Place for the Situation of a Town, and the most convenient for the
Western Parts of Baltimore County, and all the back Land upon Patowmack and
Monockacy Rivers; and prayed, that an Act might pass, to erect the said Place
into a Town:

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the sa^e, That Mr. Philip Hammond, Capt. Benjamin Howard, Mr.
Joshua Dorsey, Mr. John Dorsey, Son of Edward, Mr. John Howard, and Mr. John
Hammond, Son of Charles, or any Three of them, shall be, and are hereby
appointed Commissioners for Anne-Arundel County, aforesaid; and are hereby
authorized and empowered, as well to agree for the Buying and Purchasing Thirty
Acres of Land, at or about the Place aforesaid, and such Part as lies most
convenient to the Water, as for Surveying and Laying out the same in the most
convenient Manner, into Forty equal Lots, to be erected into a Town.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Commissioners aforesaid, herein before
nominated and appointed, or the major Part of them, are hereby empowered, some
Time before the Last Day of October next, to meet together, at the Place
aforesaid, or some other convenient Place, adjacent thereto; and shall then and
there treat and agree with the Owner or Owners, or Persons interested in the
said Thirty Acres of Land, for the same; and after Purchase thereof, shall
cause the same to be surveyed, laid out, and divided, as near as may be, into
Forty equal Lots, allowing such sufficient Space or Quantity thereof, for
Streets, Lanes, and Allies, as to them shall seem meet; with Posts, or Stakes,
toward every Street, Lane, or Alley: The said Lots to be numbered, One, Two,
Three, and so on, to Forty, for the better and more sure distinguishing each
Lot from the other: Of which Forty Lots, the Owner or Owners of the said Land
shall have his or their first Choice, for One Lot; provided he or they make
their Choice in Ten Days: And after such Choice, the remaining Lots may be
taken up by others; and that no Person shall presume to purchase more than One
Lot within the said Thirty Acres, during the first Four Months after Laying out
the same; and that the said Lots shall be purchased by the Inhabitants of the
County aforesaid: And in Case the said Inhabitants shall not take up the said
Lots within Six Months after such Laying out, as aforesaid, it shall then be
lawful for any Person or Persons whatsoever, to to take up the said Lot or
Lots, paying the Owner or Owners proportionably for the same. And in Case the
Owner or Owners of the aforesaid Thirty Acres of Land shall wilfully refuse to
make Sale of the same, or that through Nonage, Coverture, or any other
Disability, or Impediment whatsoever, are disabled to make such Sale, as
aforesaid* that then the Commissioners aforesaid, or the major Part of them,
shall and are, by Virtue of this Act, authorized, empowered, and required, to
issue their Warrants under their Hands and Seals, to the Sheriff of the said
County; which said Sheriff is also hereby required and empowered, upon Receipt
of such Warrants, to impannel and return a Jury of the most substantial
Freeholders, Inhabitants within the said County, to be and appear before the
said Commissioners, at a certain Day and Time by them to be limited: Which Jury
upon their Oaths shall enquire to whom the said Land belongs, and assess and
return what Damages and Recompense they shall think fit, to be awarded to the
Owners of the said Thirty Acres of Land, and to all Persons interested therein,
according to their several and respective Interests: And what Sum of Tobacco
the said Jury shall adjudge the said Thirty Acres of Land to be worth, shall be
paid to the Owner or Owners, so found by their Verdict, and to all Persons they
find interested therein, by such Person or Persons as shall take up the said
Lots, proportionably to their Lot or Lots; which shall give the said Purchaser
or Purchasers, their Heirs and Assigns, an absolute Estate of Fee Simple in the
said Lot or Lots, he or they complying with the Requisites in this Act
mentioned.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Surveyor of Anne-Arundel County, for the
Time being, shall have and receive, for Surveying and Laying out the Town
aforesaid, the Sum of One Thousand Pounds of Tobacco, and no more; to be paid
and allowed him in the County Levy; and that he return a Plat thereof to the
County Clerk, to be by him kept amongst the County Records: And in Case the
Taker-up of such Lot or Lots do not build, within Eighteen Months, an House
that shall cover Four Hundred square Feet, that then it shall and may be lawful
for any other Person or Persons whatsoever, to enter upon the said Lot or Lots,
so as aforesaid not built upon, paying such Sum of Tobacco as shall be first
set and assessed upon such Lot, to the Commissioners aforesaid, or such other
Person as the said Commissioners, or the major Part of them, shall nominate and
appoint to receive the same, for the Public Use and Benefit of the said Town;
and to be taken up a Second Time.

PROVIDED always, That such Taker-up or Purchaser, build and finish, within
Eighteen Months after such his Entry made, such House as in this Act is before
limited and appointed to be built by the first Taker-up: Which House so built,
shall give and settle a^ good an Estate, to all Intents and Purposes, to such
Second Taker-up and Builder, as aforesaid, his Heirs and Assigns, as is in and
by this Act before limited and settled upon the first Taker-up and Builder. And
in Case any of the said Lots shall be neglected to be taken up in the Town
aforesaid, during the Term of Seven Years, next after the Publication of this
Act; that then, and in such Case, the Owner, or Persons interested at first in
such Land, shall, after such Time expired, be possessed and interested in the
said Lot or Lots, as in their first and former Estate; any thing in this Act to
the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That the Town aforesaid, be called by the Name of
Janssen Town.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That the Commissioners aforesaid, or the major Part of
them, employ some sufficient Person for their Clerk; and that they cause such
Clerk to take an Oath, That he shall make true and impartial Entries of their
Proceedings; and assess reasonable Fees for the said Clerk, to be paid him by
the several Takers-up of the said Lots; which said Entries they shall cause to
be made up in a well bound Book, and lodged with the Clerk of Anne-Arundel
County Court, for the Inspection of any Person.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid,
That every Person taking up, or being in Possession of any of the Lots taken up
in the aforesaid Town, shall be chargeable with, and liable to, the Payment of
One Penny Current Money of Maryland, per Annum, for each Lot, to the Right
Honorable the Lord Proprietary, and his Heirs for ever; and that the Clerk of
the said Commissioners do transmit to His Lordship's Agent, an Account of all
Lots taken up, pursuant to the Directions of this Act.

SAVING to His Most Sacred Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the Right
Honorable the Lord Proprietary, his Heirs and Successors, and to all Bodies
Politic and Corporate, and to all Persons not mentioned in this Act, their
several and respective Rights; any thing in this Act to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

An Act for the Erecting a Town near the Head of Monokin River, on the South
Side thereof, in Somerset County; and for laying into Lots, Twenty Five Acres
of Land.
WHEREAS, several Inhabitants of Somerset County, have, by their Petition to
this General Assembly, set forth, That there is a very convenient Place for a
Town, near the Head of Monokin River, on the South Side thereof, by the Bridge,
on a Tract of Land now in Possession of David Brown, and supposed to be the
Right of the said David Brown:

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and
with the Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the
Authority of the same, That Col. Levin Gale, Capt. George Dashiels, Major
Robert King, Capt. Henry Ballard, and Mr. George Gale, or any Three of them,
shall be, and are hereby appointed Commissioners for Somerset County aforesaid;
and are hereby authorized and empowered, as well to agree for the Buying and
Purchasing Twenty Five Acres of Land out of the Tract aforesaid, and such Part,
not exceeding Twenty Five Acres, as lies most convenient to the Water, as for
Surveying and Laying out the same, in the most convenient Manner, into Thirty
equal Lots, to be erected into a ^own.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Commissioners aforesaid, herein before
nominated and appointed, or the major Part of them, are hereby empowered, some
^^me before the Last Day of August, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God,
One Thousand, Seven Hundred, and Thirty Three, to meet together, on the Tract
of Land aforesaid, or some other convenient Place thereto; and shall then and
there treat and agree with the Owner or Owners, and the Persons interested in
the said Twenty Five Acres of Land, for the same; and after Purchase thereof,
shall cause the same to be surveyed, laid out, and divided, as near as may be,
into Thirty equal Lots, allowing such sufficient Space or Quantity thereof, for
Streets, Lanes, or Alleys, as to them shall seem meet, with Posts or Stakes
toward every Street, Lane, or Alley; the said Lots to be numbered One, Two,
Three, and so on, to Thirty, for the better and more sure distinguishing each
Lot from the other: Of which said Thirty Lots, the Owner or Owners of the said
Land, shall have his or their first Choice for Two Lots; provided he or they
make their Choice within Four Days after the Survey aforesaid is made; and
after such Choice, the remaining Lots may be taken up by others: And that no
Person shall presume to purchase more than One Lot, within the said Twenty Five
Acres, during the first Four Months, after Laying out the same; and that the
said Lots shall be purchased by the Inhabitants of the County aforesaid. And in
Case the Inhabitants shall not take up the said Lots, within Six Months after
such Laying out, as aforesaid, it shall then be lawful for any Person or
Persons whatsoever, to take up the said Lot or Lots, paying the Owner or Owners
proportionably for the same. And in Case the Owner or Owners of the aforesaid
Twenty Five Acres of Land, shall refuse to make Sale of the same, or that
through Nonage, Coverture, or any other Disability or Impediment whatsoever,
are disabled to make such Sale, as aforesaid; that then the Commissioners
aforesaid, or the major Part of them, shall, and are, by Virtue of this Act,
authorized, empowered, and required, to issue Warrants under their Hands and
Seals, to the Sheriff of the said County; which said Sheriff is also hereby
required and empowered, upon Receipt of such Warrants, to impannel and return a
Jury of the most substantial Freeholders, Inhabitants within the said County,
to be and appear before the said Commissioners, at a certain Day and Time by
them to be limited: Which Jury, upon their Oaths, shall enquire to whom the
said Land belongs, and assess and return what Damages and Recompense they shall
think fit, to be awarded to the Owners of the said Twenty Five Acres of Land,
and to all Persons interested therein, according to their several and
respective Interests: And what Sum of Tobacco, the said Jury shall adjudge the
said Twenty Five Acres of Land to be worth, shall be paid to the Owners so
sound by their Verdict, and to all Persons they find interested therein, by
such Person or Persons as shall take up the said Lots, proportionably to their
Lot or Lots, which shall give the said Purchaser or Purchasers, their Heirs and
Assigns, an absolute Estate of Fee Simple in the said Lot or Lots; he or they
complying with the Requisites in this Act mentioned.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Surveyor of Somerset County, for the Time
being, shall have and receive, for Surveying and Laying out the Town aforesaid,
the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds of Tobacco, and no more; to be paid and allowed
him in the County Levy: And that he return a Plat thereof to the County Clerk,
to be by him kept amongst the County Records. And in Case the Taker-up of such
Lot or Lots, refuse or neglect to build upon such Lot or Lots, within Eighteen
Months, an House, with one Brick Chimney, that shall cover Four Hundred square
Feet, that then it shall and may be lawful for any other Person or Persons
whatsoever, to enter upon the said Lot or Lots, so as aforesaid not built upon,
paying such Sum of Tobacco, as shall be first set and assessed upon such Lot,
to the Commissioners aforesaid, or such other Person as the said Commissioners,
or the major Part of them shall nominate and appoint to receive the same, for
the Public Use and Benefit of the said Town; and to be taken up a Second Time.

PROVIDED always, That such Taker-up or Purchaser, build and finish, within
Eighteen Months after such his Entry made, such House as in this Act is before
limited and appointed to be built by the first Taker-up; which House, so built,
shall give and settle as good an Estate, to all Intents and Purposes, to such
Second Taker-up and Builder, as aforesaid, his Heirs and Assigns, as is in and
by this Act before limited and settled upon the First Taker-up and Builder. And
in Case any of the said Lots shall be neglected to be taken up, in the Town
aforesaid, during the Term of Seven Years, next after Publication of this Act,
that then and in such Case, the Owner or Persons interested at first in such
Land, shall, after such Time expired, be possessed and interested in the said
Lot or Lots, as in their first and former Estate; any thing in this Act to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That the Town aforesaid be called by the Name of
Princess Anno Town.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners
aforesaid, or the major Part of them, employ some sufficient Person for their
Clerk; and that they cause such Clerk to take an Oath, That he shall make true
and impartial Entries of their Proceedings; and assess reasonable Fees for the
said Clerk; to be paid him by the several Takers-up of the said Lots: Which
said Entries, they shall cause to be made up in a well bound Book, and lodged
with the Clerk of Somerset County Court, for the Inspection of any Person.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid,
That every Person taking up, or being in Possession of, any the Lots taken up
in the aforesaid Town, shall be chargeable with, and liable to the Payment of,
One Penny Current Money of Maryland, per Annum, for each Lot, to the Right
Honorable the Lord Proprietary, and his Heirs for ever: And that the Clerk of
the said Commissioners do transmit to His Lordship's Agent, an Account of all
Lots taken up, pursuant to the Directions of this Act.

SAVING, to His most Sacred Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the Right
Honorable the Lord Proprietary, His Heirs and Successors, and to all Bodies
Politic and Corporate, and to all Persons not mentioned in this Act, their
several and respective Rights; any thing in this Act, to the contrary thereof,
in any wise, notwithstanding.

An ACT for the Relief of Prisoners for Debt.
WHEREAS, many Persons, by Losses, and other Misfortunes, by the necessary
Charge of a numerous Family, or by inevitable Losses or Misfortunes, deserving
the Compassion of Mankind, and not having been guilty of fraudulent and
deceitful Practices, become incapable of paying their whole Debts; and though
willing to make the utmost Satisfaction they can, may be detained in Prison, by
their too rigid and and severe Creditors: And whereas, such unhappy Debtors,
have always been deemed the proper Objects of Public Compassion; for the
Relief, therefore, of such unhappy Debtors, who shall faithfully discover upon
Oath, and deliver up and assign all their Estates and Effects whatsoever, for
the Benefit of their Creditors,

BE it Enacted, by the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietary, by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Upper and Lower Houses of Assembly, and the Authority
of the same, That the several and respective Justices of the several County
Courts of this Province, be, and are hereby empowered, authorized, and
required, upon the Petition to them preferred, of such poor Prisoner for Debt
or Damage, to be discharged, to call, and cause to come before them, or any
Three of them, whereof One to be of the Quorum, such Debtor or Debtors, who at
any Time after the End of this present Session of Assembly, shall be actually
in Prison, or Custody of any Sheriff or Jailer within this Province, for any
Debt or Damages, or upon any Attachment or Execution, or any Process issued or
issuing by any legal Authority, for any Debt or Damages; as also the Sheriff or
Jailer, in whose Custody such Debtors are detained, with the Cause of such
Detainer; before which said Justices, or any Three of them, as aforesaid, such
Prisoner shall take the following Oath (or Affirmation if a Quaker:)

I A. B. do, upon my corporal Oath, solemnly profess and declare before
Almighty GOD, that I have not any Estate Real or Personal, in Possession,
Reversion, or Remainder, of the Value of Forty Shillings in the Whole, or
sufficient to pay the Debt or Damages for which I am imprisoned; and that I
have not directly or indirectly at any Time since the Debt or Damage aforesaid
became due, sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed, disposed of, or entrusted, all
or any Part of my Estate, thereby to secure the same, to receive or expect any
Profit or Advantage thereof, or defraud or deceive any Creditor or Creditors
whatsoever, to whom I stand indebted.

THEN, after the taking such Oath, or Affirmation, as aforesaid, the said
Justices, as aforesaid, shall remand the Prisoner to Prison, and shall give a
Certificate in Writing under their Hands and Seals, to such Prisoner, of his
having taken such Oath, or Affirmation, as aforesaid, before them, to be served
upon, or left at the usual Place of Abode, of such Person or Persons, or their
Attorney or Agents, in the County or Province, if not Resident, at whose Suit
such Prisoner stands charged and imprisoned, thereby appointing as well the
said Person or Persons, as the said Prisoner, to appear before the said
Justices, at the next Court to be holden for the said County; when if it shall
appear upon Oath, (which Oath the Justices are empowered to administer) the
said Certificate was so served, or left Forty Days or more, before the said
Court; and that the said Oath taken by the said Prisoner, be not disproved by
good and sufficient Testimony; then the said Justices being satisfied
therewith, and that the Poverty and Inability of such Debtor, did not proceed
from their having been guilty of fraudulent and deceitful Practices, shall
direct their Warrant under their Hands and Seals, commanding the said Sheriff,
Jailer, or Keeper of the Prison, to set at Liberty and discharge the said
Prisoner, if imprisoned for the Causes aforesaid, and no other, without paying
any thing for Imprisonment Fees for the present; but the Sheriff or Coroner,
shall be paid such Fees, out of what shall arise by the Servitude of such
Prisoner, if sold, preferable to any other Creditor: Which Warrant shall be a
sufficient Discharge to the same Sheriff, Goalor, or Keeper of the Prison; and
no Action of Escape, or other Action, shall be brought against them, or any of
them, for the same, in any wise.

AND forasmuch as some Persons being Prisoners, and petitioning as aforesaid to
be relieved, cannot take the aforesaid Oath, or Affirmation, by Reason of their
having some Estate, Goods, Debts, or Effects, though not being sufficient to
pay his or their Debts, which the Prisoner or Prisoners are willing to yield,
surrender, and give up, to the Use of his or their Creditors, equally to be
divided amongst them, Be it therefore Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and
Consent aforesaid, That any such Prisoner or Prisoners, that shall actually
yield, surrender, and give up, to the Use of all his Creditors, equally to be
divided amongst them accordingly, pursuant to the Directions of this Act, in
case such Prisoner or Prisoners, shall take the following Oath or Affirmation
to the same Effect.

I A. B. do solemnly swear, in the Presence of Almighty GOD, That the Inventory
by me delivered to the Sheriff of (...) County, a Copy of which Inventory I
have now delivered to the Justices of (...) County Court, with my Petition to
that Court, does contain a full and just Account of my real and personal
Estate, Debts, Credits, Goods, and Effects, which I am ready to deliver up,
assign, and make over, to such Trustee or Trustees, as my Creditors shall think
fit to make Choice of, or in case my Creditors should not meet, or choose a
Trustee, to the Sheriff of County, in Trust for the Use of my Creditors, is the
whole Estate, whether real or personal, which I have, or have any Title to in
the World; and that I have not any Estate, Debts, Credits, Goods, or Effects of
any kind whatsoever left, either in Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, (the
necessary wearing Apparel for my self, Wife, and Children, and the Tools or
Instruments of my Trade or Calling, not exceeding Ten Pounds Current Money in
Value, in the Whole, only excepted;) and that I have not directly or
indirectly, at any Time since my becoming so indebted, sold, leased, or
otherwise conveyed, disposed of, or entrusted, all or any Part of my Estate,
thereby to secure the same, to receive or expect any Profit or Advantage
thereof.

AFTER which Proceedings, and Oath, so had and made, it shall and may be lawful
for any such Person or Persons as aforesaid, that shall be actually in Prison,
for any of the Causes, and in Manner as aforesaid, at the next County Court
after such Imprisonment, to be held for the County where such Debtors are in
Prison, or at any other Court thereafter, give an Account upon Oath, to the
Justices of the said Court, or any Three of them as aforesaid, of all his
Estate, real and personal; and of his Readiness to surrender up, and assign to
such Trustee or Trustees, being appointed as aforesaid, or for want of such
Trustee or Trustees, to the Sheriff of the said County, according to the Oath
herein before prescribed, and declare his Willingness to part with the same, to
be equally divided amongst his or their Creditors, toward Satisfaction of his
or their Debts; upon which Tender of Surrender to be made, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Justices, or any Three of them, in Court sitting, as
aforesaid, and they are hereby empowered and required, to cause public Notice
to be given, to all his or their Creditors, in Forty Days after the End of the
said Court, to appear at the Courthouse where the Debtor is detained in
Prison, before Two or Three Justices of the Peace of the said County, whom the
Sheriff of the said County is hereby required to summon, on Request of such
Prisoner or Prisoners, to make Choice and appoint a Trustee or Trustees; and in
case of such Appointment not being made by such Creditors, then the Sheriff of
such County to take and receive such Debtors Estate into his or their Charge;
and cause the same to be inventoried, appraised, and valued: And the said
Debtors are hereby ordered and directed to convey, assign, transfer, and make
over, to the Trustee or Trustees, so to be appointed by the Creditors of such
Debtor or Debtors, and for want of such Appointment, to the Sheriff of that
County, for the Use of the said Creditors, all such their Estate, Interest, or
Claim, after such Manner as the said Trustee or Trustees, or the Sheriff
aforesaid, or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall reasonably devise
or require, at the Cost and Charges of such Person or Persons as shall claim
the Benefit thereof; so always as such Prisoners be not burdened with any
Warrantys thereof, other than from themselves, or those that claim by, from, or
under them; with an Account to such Trustee or Trustees, or Sheriff, as
aforesaid, of their Debts due from such Debtors: And after such Apraisement,
the said Trustee or Trustees, or Sheriff, are empowered to sell the same, by
way of Auction, or otherwise, as to them shall seem meet; after which
Assignment and Conveyance, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Justices, in case it appears to to them that the Poverty and Inability of such
Prisoners proceeded rather from the Causes mentioned in the Preamble, than any
deceitful and fraudulent Practices, by Warrant under their Hands and Seals, to
direct the said Sheriff to discharge such Prisoner or Prisoners, which said
Sheriff shall forthwith accordingly discharge the same from his Custody.

AND whereas several Persons are now in Prison, for Debt, who before the
Meeting of this present General Assembly, have continued so for (...) Days, and
upwards, who always since their first Imprisonment, have (...), and now are,
willing to yield, surrender, and give up, for the Use of his or their
Creditors, all their Estate, Goods, Debts, or Effects, pursuant to the
Directions of this Act of Assembly, and to take the last Oath, or Affirmation,
in this Act prescribed:

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful for any such Person or
Persons, who are now in Prison for Debt, and who before the Meeting of this
present General Assembly have continued so for Forty Days, and upwards, at any
Time after the End of this present Session of Assembly, to deliver to the
Sheriff of the County where such Prisoner is kept in Prison, an Inventory of
his whole Estate, and to lodge with the Clerk of that County Court, a Copy of
the said Inventory, with a Copy of the last mentioned Oath* in this Act
mentioned, certified by One or Two of the Justices of the Peace of that County,
to have been taken by such Prisoner, before him or them, and cause public
Notice to be left at the Courthouse, Churches, Chapels, and all other public
Places within the said County, for all their Creditors, at any Time, not being
less that Twenty Days after the Date of the said Publication, to appear at the
Courthouse where the Debtor is detained in Prison, before Two or Three
Justices of the Peace of the said County, whom the Sheriff of the said County
is hereby required to summon, on Request of such Prisoner or Prisoners, to make
Choice and appoint a Trustee or Trustees as aforesaid; and in case of such
Appointment not being made, as aforesaid, then the Sheriff of such County to
take and receive such Debtors Estate into his or their Charge, and cause the
same to be inventoried, appraised; and valued: And the said Debtors are hereby
ordered and directed, to convey, assign, transfer, and make over, to the
Trustee or Trustees, so to be appointed by the Creditors of such Debtor or
Debtors, and for want of such Appointment, to the Sheriff of that County, for
the Use of the said Creditors, all such their Estate, Interest* or Claim, after
such Manner as the said Trustee or Trustees, or the Sheriff aforesaid, or his
or their Council learned in the Law, shall reasonable devise or require, at the
Cost and Charges of such Person or Persons as shall claim the Benefit thereof,
so always as such Prisoners be not burdened with any Warrantys thereof, other
than from themselves, or those that claim by, from, or under them; with an
Account, to such Trustee or Trustees, or Sheriff, as aforesaid, of their Debts
due from such Debtors: And after such Appraisement, the said Trustee or
Trustees, or Sheriff, are empowered to sell the same, by way of Auction, or
otherwise, as to them shall seem meet. After which Assignment and Conveyance,
it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said Justices, in case it appears to
them, that the Poverty and Liability of such Prisoners proceeded rather from
the Causes mentioned in the Preamble, than fraudulent and deceitful Practices,
by Warrant, under their Hands and Seals, to direct the said Sheriff to
discharge such Prisoner or Prisoners; which said Sheriff shall forthwith
accordingly discharge the same from his Custody.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That all and every the Estate, Real or Personal, of such
Prisoners, or every Sum or Sums of Money, or Quantities of Tobacco, that shall
(...) may be raised by Servitude, Sale of such Real or Personal Estate, if sold
by Virtue of this Act, shall be distributed and paid, by the Trustees, Sherif^,
or Coroner, to and amongst the Creditors, in Proportion to their Debts, after
Deduction of the Fees due to the Sheriff or Coroner, for serving the Execution
or Imprisonment Fees, which shall be paid in the first Place to the said
Sheriff, or Coroner.

PROVIDED always, That this Act shall not extend to discharge any Person from
any Debt due to, or Suit of, the Crown, or from any Debt or Damage due to, or
claim from, the Lord Proprietary, for his own Use or Benefit.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid,
That all and every Sale, or Sales, that shall be made by the said Trustee, or
Trustees, Sheriff, or Coroner aforesaid, of such Debtors Estate, as aforesaid,
shall be good and valid in Law; and bar the Debtor, and his and their Heirs,
and all others claiming under them, to all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes
whatsoever.

AND be it further Enacted, That no Prisoner shall be discharged out of Prison,
until he shall declare upon Oath or Affirmation, as aforesaid, before the
Justices as aforesaid, what Debts are owing to him, or them, to the best of his
or their Remembrance, a Schedule whereof shall be made by the said Justices, or
Clerk of the County Court; and the Creditors or such of them as will join,
shall be, and are hereby empowered to sue for the same, in the Prisoner's Name,
saving him harmless from all Cost and Damages; and after Recovery of all or any
such Debts, they shall be by the said Trustee, or Trustees, or Sheriff
aforesaid, applied toward Satisfaction of such Creditors who sued, or was at
the Charge of recovering the same.

PROVIDED nevertheless, and it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, That
if any Person, or Persons, not having Wife or Children to maintain, being
Prisoners, as aforesaid, and petitioning to be relieved by this Act, shall be
of an handy-craft Trade, and of Ability of Body to follow the same, or having
no Trade, is otherwise of Strength and Ability of Body to labor; and that
either of their Creditors are willing to accept of their Service, in
Satisfaction of their Debts, or Part thereof, to be divided amongst the
Creditors, as aforesaid; or that any other Person will accept thereof* and
discharge them from the Creditors, for any Length of Time, not exceeding Seven
Years; every such Person refusing to make Satisfaction to their Creditors, by
Servitude, in Manner aforesaid, shall not be allowed to reap any Advantage by
this Act: But then it shall and may be lawful, in every such Case, for the
Justices of the respective Counties, where the said Debtor or Debtors are
actually in Prison, upon Application to the Justices by any Creditor or
Creditors of such Debtor, Notice being affixed at the Courthouse Door the
Court preceding such Application, to oblige such Debtor to become a Servant to
any Person who shall employ him, and who shall find and provide necessary
Clothes, Meat, Drink, Washing, and Lodging for such Debtor, for so long Time as
may be sufficient to satisfy and pay the Debt or Debts by him due or owing, or
such Pa^^ thereof as can be raised by the Servitude of such Person, so as no
such Debtor shall be obliged to serve longer than Seven Years, and the Money or
Tobacco arising thereby, to be applied toward discharging the Claim or Claims
of their Creditor or Creditors so applying, proportionably, according to their
several Demands; any thing herein contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

PROVIDED likewise, and be it Enacted by the Authority, Advice, and Consent
aforesaid, That notwithstanding the Discharge of the Persons of the Prisoners
aforesaid, upon taking either of the Oaths aforesaid, (excepting such as shall
make Satisfaction by Servitude) all and every Judgment now had and taken, or
that shall hereafter be obtained, had and taken, against any of the
forementioned Prisoners, by any of their Creditors, for any Debt or Debts,
owing and remaining due from any of them, to such their Creditors, after such
surrender and Distribution made as aforesaid, shall be and stand good and
effectual in Law, to all Intents and Purposes, against the Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, Goods, and Chattles, that the said several Prisoners so
discharged, as aforesaid, shall hereafter acquire, and come to the Possession
of, and in their own Right only. And it shall and may be lawful, to and for the
Creditors of the said several Prisoners, so discharged as aforesaid, their
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, to take out any new Execution, against
the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, and Chattels of the Prisoner, or
Prisoners, aforesaid, (his or their wearing Apparel, Bedding for his or their
Family, and Tools necessary for his or their Trade or Occupation, and what may
be necessary for their Subsistence, not exceeding the Value of Ten Pounds
Current Money, only excepted,) for the Satisfaction of the Remainder of his or
their said Debt, in such Sort, Manner, and Form, as he or they might have done,
if the Person or Persons of the said several Prisoners, so discharged as
aforesaid, had never been taken in Execution; any Act, Statute, or Custom to
the contrary, notwithstanding.

AND for the better Discovery and Application of the Lands and Effects, which
such Debtors may after their Discharge, and by Virtue of this Act, obtain and
acquire, according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act:

BE it therefore Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That on Application of any Creditor or Creditors, of
such Debtor or Debtors, to the Justices of any County Court in this Province,
it shall and may be lawful, to and for such Justices, to compel such Debtor, or
any other Person, if Resident in the County, by Summons or Attachment, to
appear before them, and answer upon Oath, or Affirmation if a Quaker, to such
Questions as may be asked them, which may conduce to the Discovery of such
Lands or Effects; and the Answers to be made to such Questions, shall be
recorded, in the Records of the County Court, where such Questions shall be
asked; and shall be allowed as Evidence, in any Court of this Province, where
any Suit shall or may be commenced or prosecuted, for the Recovery of such
Lands or Effects, for the Benefit of the Creditors.

AND be it further Enacted, by the Authority, Advice, and Consent aforesaid,
That in case the Sheriff, or any other Person concerned in the Execution of
this Act, shall be sued for any Matter or Thing required of them, or either of
them, to be done, by Virtue of this Act, that then the said Sheriff, or other
Person whom it may concern, may enter a common Appearance, without special
Bail, to any such Action or Actions as shall be brought against them, or any of
them, and plead thereto the general Issue, and give this Act, and the special
Matter therein, in Evidence; and that in case the Plantiff or Plantiffs
commencing or bringing such Action or Actions, as aforesaid, shall be
nonsuited, have a Verdict pass against him, or discontinue his Action, the
Defendant shall recover against him or them, double Costs of Suit; any Law,
Statute, Usage, or Custom to the contrary, notwithstanding.

BE it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, That such Prisoner who shall not make a full and exact
Discovery, upon any of the Oaths aforesaid, of his or her Debts, Effects,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, as aforesaid, shall upon legal Conviction,
be adjudged a Felon, and suffer Death, without Benefit of Clergy.

THIS Act to continue for One Year, and to the End of the next Session of
Assembly, after the Expiration of the said One Year.

An ACT for the Relief of Anthony Parker, Patrick Ryley, and Cleborn Lomax,
languishing Prisoners in Charles County Goal. Private.

A LIST of the Laws made this Session; and the Pages they are printed in.
An ACT (...) continue the Process and Proceedings in the Provincial-Court, and
County Courts; and for Trial of Capital Offenses, at the next Provincial Court,
etc. Page 3. An ACT for Emitting and Making Current, Ninety Thousand Pounds,
Current Money of Maryland, in Bills of Credit, etc. Page 5. A Supplementary
ACT, to the Act for the Ordering and Regulating the Militia of this Province,
etc. Page 22. An ACT for laying out and applying Three Thousand Five Hundred
Pounds, Current Money of Maryland, etc. Page 28. An ACT to continue an Act,
entitled, An Act for raising a Duty of Three Pence per Hogshead, etc. Page 29.
An ACT to empower the Inhabitants of Anne-Arundel and Prince George Counties,
to make the main Branch of the River Patuxent navigable, etc. Page 30. An ACT
Reviving an Act of Assembly, entitled, An Act for the speedy and effectual
Publication of the Laws, etc. Page 31. An ACT for the Assessment of so much
Tobacco on the Inhabitants of St. Stephen's Parish, in Cecil County, etc. 31. A
Supplementary ACT to the Act, entitled, An Act for laying out anew, Fifteen
Acres of Land, Part of the One Hundred Acres of Land, formerly erected into a
Town, commonly called Benedict-Leonard Town, upon Patuxent River, in Charles
County, etc. Page 32. An ACT for Erecting a Town at and about the Landing,
called The Elk-Ridge Landing, etc. Page 33. An ACT for the Erecting a Town near
the Head of Monokin River, on the South Side thereof, in Somerset County, etc.
Page 35. An ACT for the Relief of Prisoners for Debt. Page 38.

