THE Melancholy State OF THIS PROVINCE Considered, in a LETTER, From a
Gentleman in Boston to his Friend in the Country.

Printed in the Year 1736.

SIR,
Yours of the 20th of May, I have received, in which you complain of the
Extortion and Oppression which is breaking in upon this People, and admire that
the Government does not by some suitable Laws prevent it, more especially you
complain of the Gentlemen concerned in the Bank, and wonder how any Men can be
so blind as not to foresee the fatal Consequences that would attend that
Project.

In the first Place, I must inform you, That the Scheme these Bankers are come
into is not the Scheme which was first proposed: The first Proposal was to make
One hundred thousand Pounds, in Notes to be paid in to the Trustees of the Bank
in ten Years, in Silver at twenty Shillings per Ounce; the Silver to remain in
the Bank until the ten Years were expired, By this Method we should have been
sure of One hundred thousand Pounds passing amongst us to carry on our Trade,
and at the End of the ten Years there would have been One hundred thousand
Pounds in Silver to exchange for those Bills, for it would not have been worth
any Man's while to have locked up these Notes in their Chests for ten Years,
through it might answer their End to lock them up for three Years as they now
do; I must say it was surprising to me to see the Gentlemen concerned in that
Affair so easily imposed on and persuaded to alter the Scheme, and agree to
have the Silver drawn out at three Periods, viz. three Tenths at the End of
three Years, and three Tenths more at the End of other three Years, and the
remaining four Tenths at the End of the tenth Year: How does this agree with
their pretended Design in erecting this Bank; they pretended that their Design
was to supply the People with a Medium of Exchange, and under that Notion
refused letting in any to subscribe who would not oblige themselves to refuse
the Rhode Island Bills emitted in 1733. Actions speak louder than Words, and
are more to be regarded: When they first proposed this Alteration in their
Scheme, they were told it would ruin their Design, for that the Bills or Notes
would be hoarded up, and that it would raise the Price of Silver and Gold,
instead of lowering the Price thereof, as they pretended it would do: I confess
I was sick of the Project when I heard that one Gentleman signed ten thousand
Pounds, which was a tenth Part of the Stock, and that he and others for him
insisted on his having twenty Votes; to suffer this I said was Distraction in
the Subscribers, and contrary to the Policy of all Nations: Power is usually
Handmaid to Riches, therefore when Men of overgrown Estates are grasping after
Power, every where People have a jealous Eye over'em, least they be swallowed
up by them before they are aware: I suppose there never was the like Instance
in any Bank. In the Bank of England, South Sea, or India Stocks, any Man who
has One thousand Pounds original Stock has two Votes, and he who has One
hundred thousand Pounds has but four Votes, and these Banks are settled by Act
of Parliament, so careful is the Government to prevent the Rich oppressing
their poor Neighbors, and I shall always be of Opinion, that the Parliament of
England which is composed of so many wise, able Statesmen, and so many
ingenious Merchants, and have been in the Practice of these Things for Ages
past, are better Judges in such Matters than we who are but of Yesterday.

It was easy to see what these Men were driving at who proposed drawing the
Silver out at three Periods: But much the greatest Part of the Subscribers were
drawn in by others before they considered the Consequences that would attend
the Alteration, and now dearly repent and say they were imposed on, and all
they have to say for themselves is, alas, who would have thought that Men who
swim in abundance, and have as one would think more than Heart can wish, should
show themselves so unsatiably Avaricious, so Unconscionable and Unjust as to
pay Men Rhode Island Bills and oblige them to give Bonds to pay in Lieu thereof
Merchants Notes, or on Failure of paying such Notes, to pay Silver at nineteen
Shillings per Ounce, and at the same time these very Men are engrossing the
Notes, and give an Advance on them to get 'em all, if possible, into their own
Hands, that so those who have mortgaged their Estates to them may never be able
to redeem them, and so of Consequence such Estates must fall into their Hands
for what they will be pleased to allow for them: I cannot but pity those who are
exposed to the Mercy of such Men.

But to these Things the Usurer will reply and say, That it is at the
Borrower's Election whether he will take up their Money on such Terms or no,
and perhaps he will pretend it was out of pure Friendship and to serve the Man
that he lent him his Money, etc. But will not every impartial Man who hears him
say so, laugh at all such idle Pretenses; a Friend will rather abate of the
common Interest than make any Advantage of his Friend's Necessity: A Man ought
not to exact on a Stranger, much less on his Friend: But the Right of the
Matter is this, The Law of the Land ought to be a Rule to the Usurer in this
Case, that Man who cannot be content with the common Interest, but will exact
more than the Law has set Interest at, is a Breaker of the Law and oppresses
his Neighbor; but notwithstanding we have a good and wholesome Law to prevent
Men's taking excessive Usury, many Men make no Scruple to exact ten per Cent
for Loan of Money in Defiance of the Law; as I said before, the Law ought to be
kept strictly unto, for if Men swerve from the Law, and it is winked at by the
Government, it is like breaking down the Hedge or Wall, and letting in the wild
Creatures to devour the Vineyard; and as to the frivolous Pretense that it is
at the Election of the Borrower to take the Money or leave it, it is Necessity
that obliges Men to take up Money when they give more than the common Interest,
and that the Lender knows very well, and no Man ought to make another Man's
Necessity his Opportunity, and take Advantage thereof to squeeze and oppress
him: Let us eat and drink to day, for to morrow we die; rather than go into a
Goal Men will comply with any Terms be they never so hard and unreasonable: And
it is for this Reason that the Legislator makes Laws to restrain the
Corruptions and vicious Inclinations of Men, without which Laws Men would prey
upon one another like Fish in the Sea, the greater would devour the less: But
yet notwithstanding the good Laws we have to prevent this Evil from spreading
amongst us, it is too much practiced at this Day to the Ruin of many Families,
and if some speedy Remedy be not found out to prevent it, a few Usurers will
soon eat up the Substance which many industrious People have been many Years
scraping together, in Hopes that their Children would reap the Benefit of it.

As to what you say about the Government's interposing their Authority to
prevent the Destruction of so many Families as are in Danger of being ruined by
this vile Bank, I am informed it was proposed in the Assembly to make our
Province Bills a lawful Tender for them; how that Matter came to be dropped I
know not, it is great Pity it was not prosecuted to Effect, for such an Act
would have been of great Service, not only to those who have mortgaged their
Estates for these Bank Notes, or have borrowed Money on Bond, to pay in these
Notes or in Silver, but to the greatest Part of the Bankers themselves, who
groan under the Burden when the Time comes to pay in their Silver, for it has
raised the Price of Silver to Twenty seven Shillings and six Pence per Ounce;
what dreadful Sufferers then are they like to be, who as soon as they received
their Money out of this Bank, put it away immediately to pay their Debts, and
never had the Advantage of making any profitable Improvement of it, it has
been a very unhappy Bank to such Men, their Case calls for Pity.

The Objections made by some in the Assembly against making the Province Bills
a lawful Tender for these Notes are, First, They make a Matter of Conscience of
it, to oblige a Man to take any thing for his Bond, other than what is
mentioned in the Condition. And Secondly, They say it will be a Means of having
the Province Bills hoarded up; In Answer to these Reasons, I must observe, That
the Government have in their great Wisdom, with great Justice and in Compassion
to the Poor, as well becomes the Fathers of the People, made the Bills of this
Province a lawful Tender for any Debt that should be contracted after the
making that Law, so that no Person may be imprisoned who tenders those Bills
for Payment; and shall the same Government see a few Men issue out their own
Notes as a Bank, and call nineteen Shillings of those Notes an Ounce of Silver,
and take Bonds for them accordingly? Shall Usurers as they come to be possessed
of these Notes, call in their Bonds and Morgages, and oblige their Debtors to
give new Bonds and Mortgages, payable in these Notes, or Silver at nineteen
Shillings per Ounce? Shall a few mercenary Men so prey upon their necessitous
Neighbors, as to pay them Rhode Island Bills, and oblige them to give Bonds or
Mortgages to pay in Lieu thereof Bank Notes or an Ounce of Silver for every
nineteen Shillings, when an Ounce of Silver is worth twenty-seven Shillings and
six Pence, and rising, and will be at thirty Shillings per Ounce before the
Year comes about, if this Bank continues as it is, I say will the Government
suffer such horrid Injustice? No surely. No Christian can hear these Things and
not be deeply affected at the Thoughts of such monstrous Extortion and
Oppression breaking in like a Torrent upon the People, much less will a
Christian Government suffer it: But I have heard some of these Bankers say, It
is not in the Power of the Government to do any thing to relieve the People in
this Matter: To which I reply and say, When a Physician finds his Patients Case
extremely hazardous, he will venture to go further than in ordinary Cases,
desperate Diseases call for extraordinary Remedies, even so when the State is
disordered and Extortion and Oppression comes rolling over a People like the
raging Sea, and all Things are running into Confusion; whence can we expect
Relief but from the Government who are clothed with Power for that very End,
and GOD expects it from them; that they be Eyes to the blind, and Feet to the
lame, and deliver the Poor out of the Hands of their Oppressors: The Rich are
always able to help themselves, and it is in their Power, very often, to
oppress their Neighbors, if the Government do not take Care to prevent it, and
their Assistance was never more wanted than at this Day to deliver this poor
oppressed, and distressed People out of the Hands of the Rich and Mighty: I
believe every disinterested Man in the Province will say, That he who receives
Rhode Island Bills, ought to pay in the same, and all others ought to pay in
Bills of this Province. Shall any Man's Note be better than the Money of the
Government established by the Law of the Land and confirmed by the King? Can
there be any Injustice in making a Law to oblige every Man who has paid
Rhode Island Bills to accept the same for any Specialties for which he paid no
other than those Bills, and to oblige all others to receive the Bills of this
Government in lieu of the Merchants Notes? No, I know it is the Opinion of many
good Men and rich Men too amongst us, That such a Law would do a great deal of
Good, and do no Injustice to any Man: Most certainly it would do this Good, it
would bring abroad the Merchants Notes, we should soon see them abroad
circulating in Trade and doing the Office for which it was pretended they were
made, viz. pass from Man to Man to facilitate our Payments in in our Commerce,
and I am persuaded that nine Tenths of the Bankers were concerned with no other
Views, but that the whole People should reap that Benefit by the Circulation of
the Notes; but when it was proposed to draw 'em in at three Periods, no Man
that would bestow a Thought on it, could think they ever would Circulate or do
the least Good to the Trade, or to People in general, but quite the contrary:
It was easy to see that some Men would build great Estates by them, and that
many Families would be ruined by them. And can this be thought to be for the
Good of the Public? All Men know that the middling Sort of People are the
greatest Support to the common Wealth, they pay the greatest Part to support
both Church and State. But we, in the Method we are in, shall in a little Time
have no middling Sort, we shall have a few, and but a very few Lords, and all
the rest Beggars: Some there are among us who say there is Money enough, and
that there is no Want of Money with them to whom the Money belongs; as if Money
was designed only for a few rich Men to lie in their Chests, until a lucky
Opportunity offers it self for them to make their Market with on their poor
Neighbors: I confess these Men's Notions concerning Money, vastly differs from
mine: I think every Man is Entitled to Money, as much as the richest Man
amongst us; I mean to so much as he Earns; the Tradesmen and Laborers ought to
receive their Money as soon as their Work is done, and not be turned away to
Shops, or perhaps to a Shop for their Pay: The Laborers at this Day will work
for Six Shillings per Day in Money rather than for Seven Shillings in Goods,
and I believe it is their Interest so to do, I confess, I shall never think
there is Money enough till poor Men can get Money for their Labor, and have it
in their Power to lay it out where they can be best used, and not be obliged to
go to such a particular Shop for their Pay because their Imployer deals with
that Shop and no other, which is the Case of many in this Town every Day, and
it is to be feared, some Shopkeepers use but little Conscience with such
Customers, but make 'em pay dearly for what they have.

The second Objection some make against the Province Bills being made a lawful
Tender for the Merchants Notes is, That in lieu of hoarding up these Notes,
they will then hoard up the Province Bills: But I confess I can see no weight
at all in this Argument, for these Notes are mostly in the Hands of the
Merchants who made 'em, and now keep 'em on Purpose to make a Market of 'em by
leting 'em out to receive Silver at Nineteen Shillings per Ounce in lieu of
them, and they never will come abroad until there be such a Law made. But admit
it should have that Tendency as they pretend, we should be much better than we
are now with Respect to our Trade; for we should then as I said before, have
the Notes abroad Circulating in Payment, and that would prevent hundreds of
Lawsuits which are brought into the Courts only through the scarcity of Money.
This Consideration alone methinks should induce the General Court to make the
Province Bills a lawful Tender for them. But add to this the mighty Advantage
it would be to many poor Men whose pressing Necessities have obliged 'em to
Mortgage their Estates for these Notes, who if something be not done for their
Relief will be obliged to pay forty per Cent for the Money they have so
borrowed, over and above the common Interest established by Law. But I cannot
believe the Province Bills will be hoarded up more than they now are, if there
were such a Law; for every Man who keeps any Money by him, keeps our Province
Bills as long as he can, it is the last Money he will part with. We see very
few of 'em abroad, we have little else but Rhode Island Bills to go to Market
with from Day to Day to buy our Provisions with. To speak plain, our Misfortune
is, we have a few lucky Men among us who have had the good Fortune to raise
considerable Estates from nothing within these twenty or thirty Years: these
Men are for sinking all paper Mediums, and say, If the paper Bills were once
gone we should have Silver among us; but I confess I cannot be of their Opinion,
I rather think we must have a paper Medium or none at all: While the Balance
of our Trade with Great Britain is so much in their Favor, all our Silver and
Gold which we Import from other Places, will go to England to Balance that
Account, we shall have none of it stay with us until we can find a Way to live
more Independent of them: And every Scheme that can be projected to bring in
Silver, will most certainly be attended with the same Inconveniences which
have attended the Merchants Notes. I wish some Method could be found out to
revive our dying Trade, for I see nothing but Poverty and Misery before us in
the Way we are in; our Neighbors at Rhode Island Thrive and grow Rich while we
decline every Year; they sit easy, the Interest of their Money out on Loan pays
the whole Charge of the Government, while we are loaded with Taxes, more
especially this Town, we set at a very great Charge, more then the People will
be able to pay, unless some Way can be found out to enliven our Trade, which I
am of opinion must be by supplying the People with Money, or assisting them in
supplying themselves in a private Way.

It seems very strange, that Men who have raised themselves and Families from
nothing by the Help of our Province Bills, should be such bitter Enemies to a
Paper Medium; I am sure it is past the Art of Man to make Silver pass as Money
unless you can prevent the Silver which comes in being shipped off again: If
some Way be not found out to supply the Trade with some Medium or other, to buy
and sell with and pay our Debts with, our Trade will sink and come to nothing,
and Poverty will soon overspread the whole Land, both Town and Country: We in
this and the other Sea Ports will be first affected with it, but the whole Land
will feel the sad Effect of it in a little Time: We may speak as contemptibly
as we please of the Rhode-Islanders emitting Bills, they have found the Sweet
of it, for they have eaten up half our Trade with it, and will soon eat us out
of all if we don't contrive some sort of Money to pass amongst us: It is easy
for us to have a better Medium than what we now have, for we have nothing but
Rhode Island Bills passing among us, whereas if we had a Medium of our own we
might soon sink all their Bills, but to talk of refusing to take them, before
we can have some other Medium to answer in Lieu of them, seems very strange, it
is Necessity alone which gives them a Currency: Did ever any trading Place
pretend to carry on their Trade without some sort of Money; I believe every
Nation under the Sun have something passing amongst them, which answers instead
thereof. It is evident that the Heathen in this Land had their Wampum which
passed amongst them, and no doubt, was in as much Esteem with them as Silver is
with us, and with it they traded; the Inland Country supplied those who dwelt
on the Sea Coast with Furs, etc. for Clothing, and they who dwelt on the Sea
Coast supplied the Country with Fish, Fowl, etc. according to the different
Seasons of the Year. I have heard some Gentlemen cry up this Merchants Bank for
the best Paper Money that ever was made, but I think I have plainly proved it
to be just the Reverse; had they stuck to the first Proposal it would have been
of general Service for eight or nine Years, but some Gentlemen had not Patience
to wait so long for the Silver, which proved the Ruin of the Scheme. To
Conclude, Happy should we be if we always bore in mind those wise Sayings left
us upon Record; Riches profit not in the Day of Wrath; a little that a
righteous Man has is better than the Treasures of many Wicked.

Boston, June 1. 1736. I am, Sir, Your assured Friend.


