A Short TREATISE OF THE VIRTUES OF Dr. BATEMAN'S PECTORAL DROPS: The Nature of
the Distemperr They Cure, and the Manner of Their Operation. Published by the
KING's Letter Patents under the Great Seal of Great Britain.

The Seal of each Bottle.

To be Sold only by James Wallace, in New York.

Reprinted by J. Peter Zenger, in New York,

The INTRODUCTION.
AS the Universal Good of Mankind is, or, at least, ought to be, as well the
particular End of every private Member of that large Community, as the more
general Aim and Ambition of all public Societies; it consequently follows.
That all Actions, Designs, and Inventions, tending mediately, or immediately to
the promoting that great and glorious Design, must, in themselves, be
essentially good, and therefore Praiseworthy; and to be encouraged and
supported by all those who, partaking of that Nature, are in a Capacity to
receive the Benefit and Advantage of such Undertakings: And if so, as there is
no Blessing in the Treasure of Providence of so true and inestimable a Value as
HEALTH, which (as a good Ground in a Consort of Music, modulates and forms the
Variety of Sounds, into a most agreeable and delightful Harmony) is the very
Basis and Foundation of all other subordinate Pleasures, Delights and
Satisfactions, so, on Course, the promoting, preserving, or, if lost, restoring
so precious a Jewel, must necessarily be one of the principal and most
acceptable Designs in the Latitude of humane Application; and, as such, worthy
the Encouragement and Approbation of every one, who is desirous of advancing
the Good of his Country, without this Consideration, (which, nevertheless, may
be an accidental, additional Motive) That himself may, at one time or other
probably stand in need of so great and useful a Benefit.

Now of all the numerous Train of Diseases, of all the vast Variety of
Distempers, which at any Time affect the human System, there are none more to
be dreaded, none ^^rder to be by Art removed, and, what is worst of all, none
more Epidemical, than the Gout, the Rheumatism, the Stone, the Jaundice, and
Asthma's; not to mention the more accidental, though frequently fatal Attacts,
which Colds, Surfeits, Agues, Fevers, Colics, Pleurisies, Melancholy, Rickets,
and a Thousand other Distempers, arising from Crudities, Flatuities, and a
Thousand other different Causes, make upon our Constitutions; each of which, if
not timely and strongly repelled, is sufficient to subvert, and at length
wholly destroy the Order and Method of the Animal Economy; and thereby procure
our certain, hasty, and, probably, unprovided Dissolution from the Life, which
it is our great and main Care and Study to preserve and prolong: which Repulse
can no how better, nor more effectually be made, than by the speedy Application
of such Remedies as are best calculated to refill, break, absorb, and expel the
noxious Particles of the morbific Matter, whose Mixture with the Particles of
the Blood, and violent Attraction of one another, causing irregular
Circulation, unequal and la^g^id Motion viscid Grumes, unnatural Rarefactions,
rapid Collisions, or violent Impetus therein, or other how altering the
Quality, disturbing the free Circulation, or disordering the natural Texture
and Moment of that Fluid, necessary for the Support and Preservation of Health
and Li^e; do by the Means give Birth to the most fatal and accute Destempers,
and dispersing themselves and their dire Effects through all the Vessels and
Channels of the Body, do in Time, if not speedily and vigorously repelled,
impair corrupt, and destroy the Solids also, and lay the Foundation of all
those grievous and almost incurable C^^nic Diseases, whereof some wretched
Part, or other of Mankind is daily and hourly complaining; among whom not a
few prolong their Misery or hasten their End, by a tedious, unprofitable Course
of Methodical Experiments, whereby they rather pall and weaken. Nature, than
relieve and restore her; being resolved, as I have often heard them express
themselves, To dye by the Hands of the Learned: While others, out of a contrary
Prejudice to all Means in general, perish for want of a timely Application of
such Remedies, as the Piety, Learning, and Industry, of some private Persons
inspired with the Love of his Country, and Good of Mankind, has with great
Pains and Labor, found out and produced to the World, as a more near,
immediate, and effectual Preserver and Restorer of that Health they seem so
de^irous to obtain, yet are so backward and unwilling to procure, though, by that
Means, attainable with very little Trouble, and less Charge.

Among which Productions, for the Good of Mandkind, and cheap and easy
attaining, restoring, and preserving of Health, there never yet has been any
Thing made known to the World of that prodigious and almost incredible Virtue
and Efficacy, as Dr. BATEMAN's Pectoral Drops, which are justly to be preferred
to, and distinguished from all others, for their wonderful, and almost
infallable Effects, not only in Colds, Agues, Fevers, Colics, Melancholy, and
Rickets; but also in curing those great and impacable Enemies of our Health and
Ease, the Gout, Rheumatism, Jaundice, Stone, Gravel, and Asthma's. But before I
can enter upon an Explanation of their Use and Manner of operating in all these
several Cases, I will previous thereto, lay before you in short, the Nature,
Case, Rise, and Progress of those Distempers; whereby you shall yourselves be
able to judge of the Efficacy of these DROPS in relieving them: In doing
whereof, I shall not abuse your Patience, as is too commonly done, with them
probable Conjectuers, incoherent Notions, unnatural Opinions, and fantastical
Inventions of the ignorant and unlearned Pretenders to Physic; but I shall
deliver you the stanch and undoubted Judgments, Decisions and Opinions of the
best and most approved Physicians and Philosophers, both ancient and modern,
such as Hippocrates, Serapion, Averrois, Galen, Sydenham, Radcliffe, Keil,
Quincey, and others of indisputed Authority and Reputation in the Arcana of
Nature. And first of the GOUT.

CHAP. I Of the GOUT.
THIS is a Distemper of that inveterate and malignant Nature, as to be a
continual Foil and Reproach to the best Physicians of all Ages: No Method of
Physic, Diet or Habit, however regular, reasonable and orderly; no
Prescriptions, though bearing the specious and plausible Sanction of Academic,
Graduate, and Collegate Learning, being able to give a Turn to this Distemper,
or reach its secret Recesses; for retiring into the Extremit^s of the fine
Capillary Vessels, where by reason of the unequal Celerity and languid Motion
of the Blood in those Parts, it is venomous Particles are suffered to attract
one another with great Violence. It bids Defiance to all their Art, and will
oftener yield to one lucky Nostrum, than all the repeated Assaults of what they
call Regular Practice, which is never more ineffectual and at a Loss, than in
this Case; and more especially, if that Nostrum be prepared as these DROPS are,
for such a Species of Simples as are capable of being rendered, by such
Preparation, fit to pierce the very inmost nervous Cells, increase the Impetus
of the Vital and Animal Fluids, and follow the Particles of the morbific Matter
through all the fine Meanders of the Blood till having disturbed their
Attraction, and broke them by repeated Collisions, one against on other, into
the minutest Parts, it forces most of them through the Pores of the Body by
Perspiration, obtunding, absorbing, and and carrying the rest away with it in
its Course, til arriving at the Kidneys, they are secreted there from the
Blood, and pass away by Urine. All which Operations These DROPS to a Miracle
perform, by Virtue of their Diaphoretic, Absorbent, and Detergent Qualities;
opening at once all the Emunctories of the Body, and forcing off, through them,
they very Root an Ba^^s of the Distemper they are to cure; and that this is the
only effectual, rational Method of treating this obstinate Distemper the Gout,
I appeal to that great Searcher of Nature, Dr. Sydenham, who says, Whatsoever
is assistant in discharging the foul, vicious Humors, out of the Body, can
never fail of answering the Intention of Cure for which it is designed, whethe^
in the Gout, Rheumatism, or any other Cronick Distemper. And his Authority, I
should think, ought not reasonably to be disputed in the Cure of this
Distemper, whom not only a vast Stock of acquired Learning, together with a
prodigious natural Capacity, improved by long and great Practice, and
Experience upon Others; but also a continued and unconquerable Gouty Habit in
his own Body, confirmed in this Opinion, That there was no other Method of
treating this terrible Distemper; which is also confirmed by what those two
admiral Physicians, Dr. Keile, and Dr. Quincey, have told us concerning the
Cause of it; which, say they, is created by the mucilaginous Glands in the
Joints becoming gritty and stiff, by Means of a sharp acid Humor flowing
thereon, which coagulating the oily Liquor secreted by them for lubricating the
Ends of the Bones at their several Articulations, to render them apt and ready
for Motion, makes it, instead of promoting and assisting that Motion, impeed
and prevent it, by clogging the Interstices, so that they cannot move at all,
at least, not without very great Pain, hard'ning, by Degrees, into white,
chalky, gritty Stones, which are forced to be cut, or otherwise taken out by
Art, from the Joints of the Hands and Feet of the miserable Patient, as daily
Experience manifests.

Now you are to observe, That the Particles which compose this sharp acid
Humor, are surrounded with little pointed Needles, which wound and irritate
the Vessels through which they move, and the very Globules of the Blood it self,
beating and coagulating thereby any Fluid with which they mix; but these being
either obtunded and blunted, and the points of them, as it were, sheathed and
wrapped up in some of the Particles of this Medicene, or else drove violently
against one another with a Force sufficiently to break off those little pointed
Spears, and render them capable of flying off by Perspiration by others; or
else so disturbed and separated by this new Auxiliary Force, that they cannot
attract one another, but unwillingly disperse themselves in the Blood, and are
many of them secreted and carried off by Urine; This I say, must necessarily
answer the Intention of Cure; for by this Means they are rendr'd incapable of
irritating, loading, or coagulating any of the Fluids; and then, on Course, the
Distemper before caused by them, must by Degrees abate, and at length
absolutely cease. To which Ends and Purposes. These DROPS are so excellently
adapted and prepared, and are in their Nature so very Absorbent, Detergent and
Diaphoretic, that it is morally impossible they should fail of working a Cure,
which can only be performed by the joint Operation of those three Qualities,
which are scarce to be met with, in any considerable Degree, in any one
Medicine in the World, but THIS alone.

But perhaps, some who understand no nore of this Distemper than the Pain and
Torture it gives them, will say, That probably in the former Stage of this
Distemper, these Drops may be effectual; but, say they, mine is inmy Stomach,
Bowels, etc. and they will not be able to reach it there. But how weak and
trivial an Objection this is, will appear from a Reflection upon this Phase of
the Gout, which is only caused by a Weakness and debility of Nature, through
frequent Debauches, hard Drinking, long Courses of useless Physic, etc. whereby
the Impetus of the Blood becomes so weak and languid, and its Motion so slow
and irregular, as to permit the morbific Particles to attract one another in
the Blood Vessels of those Parts, which can only be remedied by such Things as
warm and increase the Blood's intestine Motion, so breaking and disturbing the
Attraction of the venomous Particles, and sending them back again to the
extreme Parts, where they are to be treated as before: For which Purpose,
nothing in Nature can be better fitted than these Drops, which have such a fine
invigorating, Alexiterial Property in them as to render them one of the best
Cardiacs in the whole Materia Medica.

THE Dose in the former Phase of the Destemper, is a large Spoonful, in any
warm Vehicle, as Mountain Wine, strong Ale: etc. made as hot as you can drink
it, repeated three Nights suc^ssively, going to Bed, and, by the Blssing of
GOD, you need not fear Ease.

But in the latter Phase, where the morbific Matter is not only to be repelled,
but the faint and languid State of Nature enlivened and invigorated, it is
necessary that you increace your Dose as the Cause may require, in any warm
Vehicle, as before; composing your self after it, and encouraging Sweat by all
proper Methods.

After this in order effectually to rout this most terible Enemy it is
necessary you continiue to take a small Dose of about 100, or 150 Drops, every
Three Nights alternately; taking three Nights, and missing three Nights; till
such time as you find the Strength of the Distemper to abate, which it will
sensibly do in a small time, and at length quite go off.

Instances of the Cure of this Distemper, by These DROPS, might be given in
great Numbers, from Persons of undoubted Credit, and Reputation, on enquiry,
would satisfy the Curious of their wonderful Effect in that Intention: but not
bring willing to tire the Reader; and these Drops, by their continual Success,
so strongly recomending themselves? I shall out of a very great multitude only
trouble you with a few, as you will find at the end of this Treatise.

CHAP. II Of The Rheumatism.
H Aving in the foregoing Chapter, been so very particular in describing the
Origin, Nature, Rise Progress and Cure of the Gout; there will be the less need
of enlarging in this upon a Distemper so near a kin to it as the Rheumatism;
even so near, as, in many Constitutions, to be owing to the same Cause, with
this only Difference in the Effect, that as the former preys chiefly upon the
Joints and extreme Parts of the Body; this for the most part affects the
Membrana communis Musculorum, or rather, to speak more properly, the Membrana
ad^posa; at least that part of it which lies between the Muscles, and the
Cutis, and is the Basis of the Cellulae adeposae; being fall of small, fine
Glands for the Secretion of that Oily, Sulp^^rous Matter, of which the Ade^s or
Fat is composed, which Sulperous Oil being coagulated, by the same Means, and
from the same Causes, says a learned Author, as the Juices of the Mucilaginous
Glands in the Joints, are in the Gout; that is to say, from the Attraction of
sharp, acid Particles, secreted from a viscous Blood; this Membrane becomes
stiff, harsh and rigid, and unapt for Motion, the Oil which those Glands
continually discharge for lubricating the Muscles, being all turned by
Coagulation into a sizey thick Jelly: So that every time the Muscle or Muscles
round which that Part of this Membrane is wrapped, contract, in order to perform
Musculer Motion, they are, instead of ^eing assisted therein by that
lubricating Oil, impeeded and confined by the stiffness of the Coagulum, and
the Rigidity and Harshness of the surounding Membrane, 'till by Force of the
Nervous Fluid flowing into the Fibers, and extending them in the Contraction,
they force it to give way; which is not without great Pain, and consequent
Weakness and Soreness of that Part: Not to mention the Pains caused by the
unnatural Distentions of the Vessels, from the Quantity of Visced Serum
obstructing them and hindering the free Circulation of the Blood; especially in
the fine Capillary Chanells, without a considerable Dilatation; from whence,
not seldom proceed Asthmas, Pleurisies, Peripneumonies, Inflammations, Fevers
and D^ata.

This is only to be remedied by Deluents and Evacuating Medicines, as in the
Gout; but not by any common Evacuators; many or most of which weaken Nature too
much in their Operations, and being used without proper Deluents will evap'rate
all the real natural Serum, and leave nothing but a sort of Serous Jelly in the
Blood; which thereupon will either immediately Stagnate, or Effervesce in such
Manner, as to cause a violent putrid Fever, and, without almost a Miracle, the
certain Death of the Patient: It is true, they may ease the violent Pains of
this Distemper, but if at the same Time they increase the Inflammation, and
Effervescence of the Blood, the Fever proportionably increases, and the poor
deluded Patient dies; as too many do by common Practice: Whereas these DROPS
delute and expel what is redundant; whereby the Blood is restored to its
natural Crasis, its due Velocity, and Impetus recovered, the Pains cease, the
Fever abates, perfect Health ensues. Besides which by their Alexiterial,
Cardiac Qualities, at the same Time that they thus increase the Impetus and
Moment of the Fluids, to the Discharge of the Morbific Matter in Perspiration;
they also warm and comfort the whole nervous System, assist mightily in
repairing the Wast of the Animal Spirits, occasioned thereby; which is evident
in what has been already said of them concerning the Gout in the Stomach and
Bowels, proceeding from a real Weakness and decay of Nature.

In short, no preparation was ever yet sound out so suitable to the very Nature
of this Distemper as these DROPS; which will plainly appear from the vast
number of Certificates of Cures wrought by them every Week, out of which I have
thought fit to trouble you with but few.

THE Dose and manner of ordering your self, is the same as before directed in
the Gout; to be varied according to the Distemper, and strength of the Patients
Constitution, from 80, to 150 or 200 Drops, in any convenient Vehecle; which
need not be so strong and spirituous as in that Destemper; but must be dra^k as
warm as possible going to Bed, and covering your self up warm, as before.

CHAP. II. Of The JAUNDICE.
TO give you an exact Theory of this Distemper, would take up more room than
this short Treatise will admit of: I shall therefore, as I have done by the
other Distempers, in the foregoing Chapters, open it so far to you, as to
convince you, that these DROPS are the best Specific (if I may be indulged
that Term) in the whole Materia Medica, to break through it is Schirrous
Obstructions, and finally eradicate it and all its dreadful Symptoms out of the
humane Body.

This Distemper arises from obstructions in the Glands of the Liver, thereby
preventing a due Secretion of the Gall from the Blood, by them in that Viscus,
which Bilious Particles circulating therewith, gives a Yellow Tincture to the
Mucus or Curpus Reticulare spread under the Cuticula, which from thence appears
of that Color: This is the first and common Phase of this Distemper; but it
will sometimes, and more especially in hard Drinkers, arrive to that height, as
to Cause a frequent Spitting and Vomiting of Blood, which is generally reckoned
a Mortal Symptom; for it is caused by the Obstructions in the Hepatic Glands
becoming schirrous; and so indurated, as with great Difficulty (if at all) to
be opened again; which straitens the Motion of the Blood through that Viscus so
much, as to cause it to revulse with a great Motion into the Gastrick Arteries,
which go off from the Hepatic, insomuch, that breaking through them, it drains
into the Stomach, and by that means the Course of that fluid is altered the
Secretion of the Bile at an End, and the whole System destroyed: So that this
latter Stage of the Distemper is seldom or never to be cured; but may easily be
prevented by taking the former Phase in time; powerfully deterging those
tartarous abdurating Particles out of the Blood; which can only be by strong
Detergents and Diaphoreticks, (which I have already proved to you these DROPS
are; and therefore cannot ^ail of Curing, if taken in time, and followed up,
till by a Continuation they become perfect Alteratives:) And if any thing will
cure the latter Phase of this Distemper, these DROPS will, having done Wonders
in it, even when the Patients have been given over by their Physicians, and the
Distemper baffled their utmost Skill.

THE Dose, and manner of ordering your self with them, is as before directed,
in the Gout.

CHAP. IV. Of the Stone and Gravel.
THESE are one and the same Distemper, in two several Degrees; the Stone being
only concerted Gravel, and the Gravel the Matter whereof the Stone is formed
and in some what is washed off it by powerful Nepritic and Lytholutics; both of
them being in their Degree an aggregate of the tartarous Particles of the
Urine, pent up by the Straitness of the Urinary Ducts; which is only to be
cured by dissolving the Stone, widening and deterging the Passages; and ridding
the Blood of those tartarous Particles by Diaphoretics, before the Secretion of
Urine is performed: All which several Operations these DROPS perform to a
Wonder, and have, by their Detergent Diuretic Quality, brought away, from
several Persons, STONES of the Size of a small Nut Kernel, when every other
Remedy has failed to give them Ease; and, by being continued afterward,
cleans'd the Blood of it is tartarous Particles, so as to prevent another Fit
for many years.

THE Dose is as in the Gout, in a Cup of White Wind Posset Drink, Old Hock
Green Tea, or any other potent Diuretic; made very warm, and sweetened with an
Ounce of Syrup of Mash-Mallows, going to Bed immediately on taking them, and
they give Ease instantly.

CHAP. V Of ASTHMAS,
THHE prodigious Variety of Causes from whence this Distemper proceeds, in
different Constitutions, gives it so many various Species and Degrees, as to
render it one of the most difficult Disorders to be skilfully managed of any
affecting the human System. But the chief sorts are, the Humid, the Dry, and
the Nervous Asthma; of each of which I will separately give a few Hints
concerning their Cause and Systems, and then proceeding to the Description of
the Eeffects of these Drops in all those Intentions.

But first, it is necessary to premise what an Asthma is in general: That it is
a frequent, difficult, and short Respiration, or Breathing, joined with a
hissing Sound, and a Cough; especially in the Night, in cold Weather, and in a
prone Posture, or lying down: The former because the Pressure of the Atmosphere
is greater in the Night then in the Day, when the Noxious Vapors exhaled and
dispel'd by the Force of the Sun Beams. In the Night, by reason of the Pores of
the Body being contracted by the circumambient Cold, our Tpanspiration is
lessened, and consequently a Gravedo or Weight of perspirable Matter ensues;
which being ^lung upon the lungs, clogs them, and renders them less apt to
perform their Office; and in the last Case, from the Pressure which the
contents of the Abdomen, when the Body is in that Posture, make upon the
Diaphragm, thereby lessening the Capacity of the Thorax or Breast, so that the
Lungs are too much confined, and cannot dilate themselves sufficient to receive
a due Quantity of Air.

This being premised, it will be easily understood, how these several Kinds of
Asthmas are produced: The first or Humid, called also the Peluretic Asthma,
arises from the Redundance of Rheumatic Serum, and viscous Humors in the
Blood, which being too thick to pass through the small Fibers of the Lungs
stick close to the Sides of those Vessels, and obstruct the Blood in its
Circulation; the Parts swell and often ulcerate, with great Pain, feverish
Habbits, and Difficulty of breathing: Or else the pituitous Particles are
spewed out into the Bronchiae, especially if not impregnated with a due
Proportion of Salts, causing a continual irritating Cough: In both which Cases
all inciding Pectorals are good, all Diaphoretits, and whatever attenuates and
lessens the Quantity of Serum; by that means depleting the extended Vessels,
and Working a Revulsion of the stagnating Humors: Which nothing can better
effect then these DROPS, which evacuate both by Perspiration and Urine, and are
certainly, at the same time, one of the very best Cardiacs in the whole World.

The next Species of this Distemper, is the dry or ^^thoric Asthma, caused
either by too great a Repletion of a cachochymious Blood called a Plethora, or
else by too great a Rarefaction of that Fluid in it is Vessels; so that the fine
Canalls of the Lungs are too far distended; and consequently there is not room
enough for the Air to inflate the Vessels, which produces an Inability of
Respiration, for want of a due Degree of Expansion in that Viscus: Such Persons
are generally crying out for Air; they always seem as if girted hard upon their
Chest, and are almost become Victims to a long Scorbutic Cachetic Habit; of
which this is the last, and oftentimes, for want of proper Remedies applied in
time, fatal Symptoms; or in this Case there is no time to use Alteratives,
which work but slowly in the Mass of Blood; whereas here we want an immediate
Assistance; which can only be obtained by a Conjunction of Cardiacs and
Diaphoretics, both which Qualities are eminently distinguishable in these
DROPS; Which can therefore never fail the Intention of Cure in this Distemper,

The Third and last Sort of Asthma I mentioned, was the Nervous; which is
occasioned by a Dificiency of the Pectorl Muscles, for want of a sufficient
Quantity of Spirits to nourish and contract them; and is the dir^ Effect of a
nervous Atrophy; and to be r^^m^d^'d by high, and vigorous Cardiacs; to rouse
and invigorate daca^ing Nature, and as it were, re-enkindle the almost
extinguished Lamp of Life; which nothing can perform more effectually than
these DROPS, which have a prodigous Influence in reviving the drooping Spirits,
warming and comforting the Nerves, increasing the Moment of the Blood, and
doing every other O^ ^^^quisite to call back the almost sleeting Life, by their
admirable Cardiac Quality; insomuch that many have been restored to a Miracle,
from even Death's Door by them alone, both in this and other Cases.

THE Dose in all these three Cases, is as before in the Gout, in any convenient
Vehicle, but good Mountain Wine is best, if it can be procured, made very warm,
as before; and taking Care you do not get Cold after it.

CHAP. VI Of Colds, Agues, Fevers, etc.
I Put these Distempers all in one Class because they have a mutual Relation
the one to the other, as the Cause has to the Effect, and e contra, and as
different Effects produced from the same Cause have to another; for it may
generally be allowed that what we call Colds are the Basis, or Ground work of
most of those Epedemic Fevers, which so commonly rage in this Kingdom: For
perspiration being diminished through a Contraction of the pores, caused by the
perception of external Cold, the Perspirable Matter flies of in a less Quantity
than when the Pores are more relaxed; and that part thereof which cannot get
out, returns back into the Blood, which it heats and irritates more or less
according to the Quantity of Matter retained, forcing it to distend it is
Vessels, and producing thence frequently a Solutio continui, whence follows the
Idea or pain in that part, with a Gra^^do or Heaviness of the whole Frame, but
especially of the diseased part; or else, a Coryza or Defluxion of serous,
sharp Humors from the Glands of the Head, through the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, etc.
From whence, if speedy C^re is not taken, are engendered Asthma's,
Consumptions, Fevers, etc. And a whole Train of Evils which may be easily and
certainly prevented, by a timely Use of some proper Evacuator, which shall by
it is Diaphoretic Quality, discharge the Blood of it is Load of foreign
deleterious Matter; and force off the offending Particles through the Pores;
which we call Sweating: To which Purpose, there is no one Thing in Nature more
effectual than these Drops, which are most powerful Diaphoretic, and never fail
of Success in the most stubborn Cold whatever. It is an old and indeed most
excellent Maxim, "veni^nti occurrite morbo.
Prevent a threatening Disease, for as the English Proverb has it, A Stitch in
Time saves nine.
And so it is here, a single Dose seldom or never sails curing a Cold, whereas
if you let that Cold grow into a Fever, it may be the Work of several to
complete the Cure; and glad you may be to come off so; for nothing corrupts the
Blood more than a Cold, by irritating, and inflaming it to the highest Degree;
whence proceed Putrifactions, which if not evacuated by proper Remedies,
increase the Fervor, and often generate acute, putrid, and malignant Fevers,
whose dire Effects daily Examples sufficiently demonstrate to every ones
Experience. These deleterious and malignant Particles are therefore to be
evacuated both by augmenting the before diminished Perspiration, and the
urinary Secretion; for by that Means, a great Quantity of them pass off with
the discharged Serum, and on Course lessen the Fermentation in the Blood: But
unless at the same Time, you use proper Cardiacs to refresh Nature, she will
^^nk under this vast Burden, for, the Hurry and Heat the Blood is in,
necessarily consumes a vast Quantity of the animal Spirits, which decaying
faster than Nature can possibly return them, she must certainly fall beneath
the prodigious Wast, unless relieved by some auxiliary Force. Now, as I have
often mentioned before, these Drops are both Diaphoretic, Diuretic, and
Cardiac; containing in themselves all those three great Qalities, absolutely
necessary in a complete Febrifuge, and themselves by the Blessing of God effect
a perfect Cure with out the Help of any other Medicine.

As for Agues, they are only the Intermissions of Fevers, the cold Fit being
only an accidental, and not an essential Property thereunto; so that as they
are properly a Sp^^^^s, of a Fever, they are to be treated after the same
Manner, and the Method and Intention of Cure, is the very same; and if so, then
consequently the same Remedy that prevails against one, cannot fail in the
other.

And here, I cannot omit mentioning one peculiar Property in these Drops,
sufficient of it self to recommend them effectually to all the reasonable part
of Mankind, who are not wedded to methodical Error; and that is, their powerful
Energy in clearing the Blood from the Dregs of that fashionable (but in many
Cases pernicious) Drug, the Bark of Peru, commonly called, The Jesuits Bark.
This is the Publik Asylum of Mankind, the Panacea of the World, the sovereign
and universal Orvietem against all the Diseases of Pandora's Box, and what not,
in the Opinion of those valetudenarian Wretches, who dare not eat a Meals Meat,
open a Chamber Window, or so much as go to Stool, without the Leave of their
Physician; whose constant Prescription is still the Bark, in some Form or
other: If Madam has got a fit of the Vapors, the Bark will cheer her Spirits:
If she has taken too plentiful a Dose of Ratifea, the Bark will make her as
sober as a Nun: If she is Lovesick, the Bark is to moderate her Desires: And if
she is in the raging Fever of Jealousy, the Bark is to make her believe that
her Husban^ is as Constant as a Turtle: In short, whenever the Privy-Counceller
of Health is at a Loss what to do for his Guinea, he persuades his Patient she
has an intermitting Fever, and Bark is the Word to save the Expense of further
thinking. Now by this you may Judge, whether this gigantik Drug, which is
whimsically applied to so many chim^^rical Evils, is of any valuable Use, any
substantial Benefit to Mankind in real Disorders, and Maladies, arising from a
vitiated State of the Fluids. We seldom play with serious Matters, nor make
Childen Ratles of Diamonds. One learned Practitioner says, the Bark is a
violent Stiptic, and Astringent; another, it is solutive, and will of it self,
without proper Alteratives, pass immediately downwards. One says it consists of
a ^ixt Salt, another of a voaltile, and a third that it is a Composite of both.
One that it gives the Spur to the intestine Motion of the Blood; another that
is locks up every Thing in the Blood. Some, and those of Note too, assert, that
if given in large Quantities, it will by its attenuating Property create an
Anasarca, or Dropsy; others that it is it self sufficient to cure the Dropsy.
One forbids the Use of it in Rheumatic Fevers, for fear its attenuating Virtue
rarefy the Mass of Blood, and thereby enlarge the Dimensions of its Vessels, so
far, as to occasion an Anurisma or Rupture, or at least greatly increase the
Idea of P^in, of which Opinion are no less Men than the famous Morton and
Sydenham; whereas another late Practitioner, no Ways i^feriour to either, by
all means indciates the Bark in this Case, grounding ^^s Notion upon Reason,
and to use his own Words, contemning and changing the common and trite but
deceitful Method of Practice by Observation.

Now if this be the Case, that these great and learned Men cannot agree among
themselves, neither as to the Nature, nor Effect of this magical Drug; is it
not greatly to be feared, and that with very good Reason, that if one is
mistaken, they may all of them be so; the Consequence whereof will be, that
this famous Panacea, like the Jay in the Fable, stripped of all its borrowed
Pomp, will appear of no other Use, but to fill up the Variety of Nature's
Works, receiving a Value only from Opinion, grounded on the Weakness of the one
Part of the World, and the Wileyness of the other.

But if there be any Virtue in the Drug, the Taste it self seems to point it out
to be Stiptic, and Astringent, which is also generally allowed by all who have
any Skill in it; while for Fashion sake they admit of other Qualities, as if it
were by prescriptive Right; and for Interest invent new ones to Authorize its
Administration in some Present Necessity: Now, if once it is allowed, the Bark
is Styptic and Astringent, it points out directly to the Manner of its
Operation and Effect; in seemingly giving a turn to some certain periodical
Exacerbations; for which it is more generally administered, as intermitting
Fevers, Hemicraneas, Haemoptoes, Epilipsi^s, and Hysterics; which, says a great
and learned Author, are to be relieved the Cortex only; but what Way is this
Relief to be had? why, says the same Author, the Cortex lo^ks up the febrile
Ferment in the Blood; and, says he, in another Place, if Cathartics be given
soon after it, they make the Type of the Fever return in its old Shape, for
when the Bark is carried off, what looks up the Distemper? From whence I
conclude, that this mighty Medicine, like a cunning Mountebank, deludes us with
plausible Appearances, and instead of really working a Cure, only postpones the
Exacerbation, it may be for a Week or a Fortnight, by locking the Cause up in
the Veins, which upon any accidental Cold, little Irregularity, or Imprudent
Management, breaks out again with double Violence; the Consequence whereof is
not seldom attended with the Death of the Patient; as common Experience daily
confirms; unless, with Morton, you continue dosing your Patient with it every
ten Days, till the next S^z^gy; or else, with another great Physician, give him
as much after the Distemper is taken off as was sufficient to take it off in
order to prevent a Return supposing that, 'qui facta liberant, si ante fiant,
prohibent.
And pray what must the Consequence of this be? why the Mass of Blood is
impregnated with so prodigious a Quantity of Styptic Particles, that the Price
you pay for your imaginary Cure is a valetudenary State as long as you live;
becoming entailed upon your Physician, as much as his Patrimony, since few that
have been weak enough to be persuaded into this Habit, have the Resolution to
get rid of the Poison afterward, unless by the same Hand that gave it them:
Whereas would they be wise at last, and get rid of their troublesome, dangerous
Inmate as soon as they can, by deterging and cleansing their Blood, they might
in Time, by the Blessing of Providence restore that Fluid to its natural Crasis
and by Degrees overcome the malevolent Effects of their fashionable Physic; for
which Purpose, as well as the other Intentions in this Treatise, these DROPS
have been greatly commended by several who have happily experienced their
Effects; and those among the learned World, of both our Universities, and by
them recommended in this very Intention to the World, for the general good of
Mankind.

CHAP. VII. Of the other VIRTUES of these DROPS.
HItherto I have laid before you the particular Effects of these DROPS, in
particular Cases; and that not by a dogmatical Assertion of their Virtues, or
any canting Declaration of their specific Influence, and occult Qualities,
Terms only serving to cover Ignorance and Imposition: But I carried you through
all the Meanders of Nature, in her several Turns and Winding, in her several
various Phases, and Symptomical Apperances upon every Case affecting the humane
System; which this noble and efficacious Medicine is capable of searching: And
from thence drawn such easy and rational Conclusions upon their Operations, as
to make it visible to every Capacity that has but the least Notion of the
Connection between Causes and their Effects, etc. that they cannot fail in the
several Intentions wherein they are advised; a Task which not any
Self-Interest, nor any sinister View of serving my own Turn, has in the least
induced me to; but purely the universal Good of Mankind, and Charity to my
Fellow Creatures; as is plainly evident from the established Reputation these
Drops have already gained in the World, the surprising Cures they have wrought,
and the vast Quantities of them sold throughout the whole Kingdom: So that,
there was no Occasion upon any of these Accounts to have been either at the
Trouble or Charge of this Treatise, but purely to convince Gainsayer of their
admirable Nature and Efficacy in the Intentions aforementioned to inform the
ignorant of the Nature of their several Cases, and where they may meet with a
speedy, certain, and safe Cure for their respective Maladies. And lastly, to
assure the whole World that these Drops are no Quack Preparation or Drugs
injudicicously mixed and jumbled together, without either Art or Design, but
such as are grounded on both, and carefully suited to answer the several
Intentions to which they are designed, which any one capable of forming a right
Judgment of Things, may on the reading this Treatise, be sufficiently convinced
of: Wherefore I shall enlarge no further on this Subject, only to assure you,
that besides the several foregoing Intentions, these Drops are also wonderful
in their stopping Diarrhea's and Fluxes of all Kinds Vomitings, Hamoptos, and
other dangerous unnatural Discharges which weaken and destroy the entire human
System; They give immediate Ease in Colics of what Kind soever, whether Stone,
Wind, Bilious or Hysteric; raise the languishing Frame of Nature in
Consumptions and Marasmi; if taken before the Lungs are entirely corrupted,
raise and cheer the Spirits in melancholy Despondency, Hypocondriac and
Hysteric Vapors; give a new life to all Paralytic Evils; restoring Sense and
Motion to the almost perished Limbs; They bring out the Small Pox, Measles and
Rashes, to a Wonder; cure the Rickets in Children, ease After-Pains, prevent
Miscarriages to a Miracle, and in short the greatest Restorer and Strengthner
of Nature in the whole World.

Note, No Person ever yet afflicted with the most violent Cough and Cold, took
this Medicine, (...) ^ha^ has been cured by taking one ^ottle only.

A printed Paper of Directions is given with each Bottle.

Here follows some few, out of the many Thousands of Certificates of Cures
effected by these DROPS; which Certificates are not extorted by any sinister
Means; but they are the true, genuine and spontaneous Declarations which the
Persons receiving Benefit from these Drops have voluntarily made, to let the
World know their Efficacy and Virtue; many of which Persons who have been
violently and grieviously afflicted with intolerable Pains, etc. have begged
for God's sake, that it might be published for the Good of Mankind, that these
DROPS ALONE restored them to their Health and Strength.
I Gregory Cripwell, of P^nny, near Nottingham, was for a long time grievously
troubled with the Rheumatimsm, and had not the least Use of one Limb or Joint
about me, insomuch that I have often desired to dye to be out of my Misery: All
the Medicines that I took was to no Purpose: At length, by the Advice of Sir
Thomas Parkyns, of Bunny abovesaid, Bart: I took a Dose of Dr. Bateman's Drops,
and immediately sound Ease, and slept the greatest part of the Night, though I
had not slept for above a week before, and am now, blessed be God, as well as
ever I was in my Life.

Witness my Hand. June 4. 1725. ^r^go^y Cripwell,
We whose Names are underwritten, are Witnesses to the Truth of the abovesaid
Certificate. Sir Thomas Parkyns, Bart. Nathaniel Henson, Thomas Henson, Thomas
Lineker, John Lineker, Thomas Hornbuckle, Henry Shepherd, Joseph Street, John
Shepherd, John Brown, This Man was cured of the Ague by taken one Dose only.
George Smith, Henry Cooper, Humphrey Wainwright.

I Mary Treslove, Boddice-maker in Northampton, was for many Years afflicted
with intolerable Pains in the Back, not inferior to those I had felt in Travil,
I could find no Relief, 'tall I made use of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops. Two
Doses of which entirely freed me from all my pain and Misery.

Mary Treslove,

I Richard Row of Moulton-Marall Lodge, in the County of Warwick, was for many
Months troubled with a Third Day Ague and Fever, and could find no Relief,
'till I made use of Dr Bateman's Drops, which restored me to my former Strength.

Richard Row.

I Mary Wright of Stapleton in Leicestershire, was for many Years troubled with
the Rheumatism, insomuch that I had entirely lost the Use of one Arm. Tongue
could not express my pain, physicians could do me no good; but blessed be God,
Bateman's Drops eased me of all my pains. Witness my Hand,

Mary Wright.

I William Kempion, Farrier, of Dainton in Northamptonshire, had lo^^ the Use
of my Arms with the Rheumatism, and could find no Relief 'till I took Dr.
Batman's Drops which perfectly restored me to the Use of my Limbs. Witness,

William Kempion.

I Edward Thirst of Rushden in Northamptonshire, was brought so low with an
Ague, that I could not walk cross the Room; and no Medicine did me any good,
'till I took Dr. Bateman's Drops, which restored me to my former Strength.

Edward Thirst.

I Robert Abbott; Servant to Mr. Martin of Catesbrook in Northamptonshire,
having lost the Use of my Limbs by a Numbness or dead Palsy, was restored to
my former Strength by Dr. Bateman's.

Robbert Abbott.

I William Emlee of Shaftbury, having been for above ten Years past so
violently afflicted with the Gout, that my Life was burdensome to me, was
restored to perfect Health and Strength by Dr. Bateman's Drops, and can ride or
walk as well as ever.

William Emlee.

I Robert Hinton of Shaftsbury has been for near twenty Years past grievously
afflicted with the Gout and Rheumatism, and for the last five Years was forced
to use Crutches, and lived in continual Pain and Misery, in spite of all the
Physicians or Remedies that could be procured for Money; was by Dr. Bateman's
Drops restored to the Use of my Limbs, and I thank God I have now thrown away
my Crutches.

Robert Hinton.

The following Letter came from Mr. Johnson of Chelsea.
HAving for a long Time been violently troubled with the Gout and Rheumatism, I
was advised to make use of Dr. Batemans Drops, which I did, and, to my great
Surprise, and the Wonder of my Friends, in two Hours I found so much Ease, that
I thought my self in Paradise; and (blessed be God) by taken but one Bottle of
these Drops I am perfectly ^ur'd Yet, seeing (in the Driections given with the
aforesaid Drops) that it was good in many other Cases, I sent for another
Bottle for a Neighbor that was troubled with the stone and Gravel, the first
Dose whereof occasioned him to void a vast Quantity of Sli^e and Gravel: and he
is now as well as ever he was in his Life. I desire you will publish this for the
Good of my Country. I am to be heard of at the white Heart near the Horse ^erry
in Chelsey.

July 3, 1725.
I Robert Howkins, Porter, near the Angel Inn, in Angel street, London, (where
I have lived for above 40 Years) having been troubled with the most racking
Pains of the ^out and Rheumtaism; and so very ill, that I could not walk
across my Chamber without Cruthes; and reading in the News Papers of a
Medicine (sold at the Printing House in Bow-Church-Yard) called Dr. Bateman's
Pectoral Drops, which had done Wonders to many in my Case I sent for one
Bottle, though without Hopes of Success, the two first Doses of which, caused
such an Alteration in me, that I was able, the third Day after, to go to the
said Printing House, and enquire after the Author of this noble Medicine, to
return him (under God) Thanks for my safe Deliverance from that Deplorable
Distemper; I being now as well as ever I was in my Life. This I am ready to
testify upon Oath, if required.

Witness my Hand, Robert Hawkins.

A Child at the two Brewers in Hoxton, near London, was extremely weak, and
worn to a mere Skeleton, occasioned by an intermitting Fever, one Bottle of the
aforesaid Drops made a perfect Cure of it, to the great Surprise of the
Neighbors, by whom the same will be attested.

MRS. Elizabeth Hull of Islington, (aged 70 Years) sent her Servant to the
Printing House in Bow-Church-Yard, to desire it might be made Public, That she
had been a long time troubled with the Gout and Rheumatism, and was cured by
taking only three Bottles of these Drops.

June 25, 1725. Enquire at the Ch^^^monders in Ivey-Lane.
MR. James Long at, at the Queen's Head, near White-Chapel Church, came, some
time since to the Printing House in Bow-Church Yard, and declared, That both
himself and his Wife had been troubled with the Rheumatism, and in a very bad
Condition; but were both cured by taking but two Bottles of Dr. Bateman's
Pectoral Drops. This he is ready to testify upon Oath, as declared,

June 7, 1725.
I John Legate, Carpenter, at the three Pidgeo^s in Bedford-street, Convent
Garden, having been for a long Time troubled with the Stone and Gravel, do
hereby declare, That by taking but one Bottle of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops.
I voided, not only a vast Quantity of S^nd and Gravel, but several Stones of a
very uncommon Size, some as big as Horse Beans. I desire this may be Published
for the Good of my Fellow Creatures.

April 27, 1725. Witness my Hand, John Legate.

Mr. Cluer, Bunny. Sept. 23, 1727.
WE whose Names are under written, do here by thankfully acknowledge, and freely
under our Hands do Certify, for the public Good of our Fellow Sufferers, That
through the Assistance of Almighty God, and by the Advice of Sir Thomas Parkyns
of Bunny-Park, in the County of Nottingham, Part. That we have been lately
cured, and are now perfectly well of the present raging Distemper, viz. A
violent Fever, etc. by taking only 2 or 3 Bottles at the most of Bateman's
Pectoral Drops, and, according to his Advice, we took four Days together
successively, every time about the same Time of the Day, one Spoonful (having
first shaken the Bottle, to make an equal Mixture of the Medicine) in a Class
of soft, smooth mild hot A^^; after which we forbore and rested two Days, then
we took again the third Day, and so on every other Day, as the Fit returned,
till we were perfectly well, but were advised to take the third Day, and after,
viz. The second taking, or second Bottle, four or five Hours sooner than we did
the first four Days, for then it gives a Check to the approaching Fit. One
Bottle generally takes off the Distemper; but Sir Thomas advises taking
another, it not two, to complete and perfect the Cure. By these Drops, taken
ofter the Method above said he has cured Hundreds, whilst others by Bleeding,
Vomiting and taking the Bark, lie dead two of a Night in some Families in these
Parts.

Thomas Hallam Mary Smith, Thomas Smith, George Walker, Mary Poxon, Richard
Cripwell, ^en. Elizabeth Wainwright, John Davis and Wife, John Tailor, Stephen
Smith, John Bacon Peter Tompson and Wife, John Sheppard.


I Mary, the Daughter of Nathaniel Pryor, of Much Hallingb^ry in the County of
Ess^x, being in a very violent manner afflicted with the Ag^^ and Fever, was
perfectly cured by taking (...) one Bottle of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops, and
I (...) desire this may be published to the World in Justice to t^^ Author of
that Medicine.

I John Rolfe, of Dunmow, in the County of Ess^x, was for a long time so
grievously troubled with the Rheumatism, that I could not turn my self in my
Bed, and at last it settled with such a violent Pain in my Bowels, that Tongue
can hardly express. I took a power of Medicines, but to no purpose, till a
Friend of mine sent a Bottle of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops, t^^ first Dose of
which gave me Ease in a quarter of an H^^^, and after I had taken two Bottles,
I walked seven Miles with great Ease and Pleasure, for which I give God great
(...), and the Author my nearly Thanks.

John Rolfe.

I Thomas Coote, Servant to the Reverend Mr. Dauverg^e, (...) of Much-(...), in
the County of Essex, was ^^r^d of an Ague and Fever, by taking only one Bottle
of Dr. Bateman's Drop^^ and I desire it may be made Public.

Thomas Coote,

I Mary Havers, Widow, of the Parish of Little-(...). in the County of Essex,
think my self bound to declare to my ^^llow Creatures, that I was perfectly
cured of the (...) by taking only one Bottle of Dr. Bateman's Drop.

Mary Havers.

W Illiam Eather of Cotesbrook in the County of Northampton, being for a
considerable time troubled with an Ague and Fever, and thereby brought to so
miserable and weak a Condition, that he was not able to perform his necessary
Business for the support of Life; and although he had taken the Je^uits bark and
abundance of other Medicines, yet could he have no Relief, till he was
persuaded by some Persons in the same Town, to move use of Dr. Bateman's
Pectoral Drops, and before he had taken three Bottles, his Ague and Fever both
left him, and to the Astonishment of his Neighbors, he was suddenly brought to
his former Health and Strength. This he is ready to testify, as many of his
Towns-people will do the same.

April 20. 1724. William Eather.

A Lad who belonged to some, Drovers, and quartered at the Coach and Horses in
Horton in the County of Northampton, being taken violently with an Ague and
Fever, and so very bad that he could in no wise perform his Journey, but was
obliged to lie there for some time in that Condition, till by the Advice of the
Woman of the House he took part of a Bottle of Dr. Batsman's Drops, which in a
few days so relieved ^im, that ^e was able to proceed on his Journey. This will
readily be t^st f^^d by the landlord and Landlady at the House aforesaid.

I John Richman of the Parish of Mary's in ^^i^^st^^ do under my Hand signify
to the world, for the public Good, that my daughter Sarah Richman was for a
long time troubled with a grievous Lameness and Numbness in all her Joints, so
as (...) to be able to stir or help her self, ^or could I ^ind any Help in any
of the Things I had (to a very great Cost) tried for her Reco^^ry at Length I
was desir^d to give her a Bottle of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops, by a
Neighbor who had received great Be^^f^t thereby, four Bottles of which^^
st^r'd her to a perfect State of Health, entirely removing and the numbness and
disorder in her Joint, and she is now as well as ever she was in her Life. All
which I am ready to t^st^fy to any who shall give t^^mselv^r the Trouble of
calling at my House in St. Mary's aforesaid.

July 20. 1724. John Richman.

M Rs. Mary Clark of Rushden, in the County of Northampton, being afflicted to
a very great degree with the Ague and Fever and could not by any Means get rid
thereof, till by taking of Dr. Bateman's Drops by the Recommendation of some
Relations and Neighbors in the same Town, who had some time before been cured
thereby, a few Bottles of which, she takes this public Method to declare for
the Good of those who labor under such like Distempers, made a porf^ct Cure of
her.

Nove. 12. 1723. Mary Clark.

MRs. Anne Norman of I^^eham in Cambrigeshire desires for the good of the
afflicted and mis^rable, who are ready to despair of Relief under the long and
racking Torments and Pains of the Rheumatism) that her unfortunate Condition
under mentioned may be made public, that having been troubled with Rhumatick
Pains; and having used all proper Means that could be perscribed to get rid
thereof and although it cost me a great many Pounds, yet could I get no Relief,
but as I grew in Years so my Pains increased, and at last lost the Use of my
Limbs, but hearing of the Excellency of Dr. Bateman's Drops, I resolved, as the
Charge thereof was but small, to use the Eendeavours of that Medicine, and
accordingly bought one Bottle of the same, in the taking of which I found so
much Ease and Satisfaction, that I resolved to proceed and accordingly taking a
few Bottles more found the Use of Limbs returned, and in a very short space I
was as well as ever I was in my Life. The surprising and wonderful Effects of
this Cure, scores of People can testify, as well as m^ self.

July 18 1724. Anne Norman.

I Elizabeth A^^^^ of Long Stanton in the County of Cambridge, do here certify,
that I had many Months been ^orely afflicted with the Ague and Faver, and, by
the long Continuance thereof, rendered so weak that I even despaired of any
Help, having taking many Medicines to little or no purpose, for if my Faver or
Ague left me for a Week or so, it returned with greater Violence. At last, I
was happily advised by some Friends and Neighbors, who had by Experience found
the greatest Relief under the like Distempers, by Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops,
make Trial thereof, which to my Comfort I soon, found answered the great
Character my Frienes had given them; for in taking one or two Bottles more, my
Ague quite forsook me; so that I am, blessed be God, in as good Health as ever
I was in my Life.

Witness my Hand, Eliz. Addey.

I Thomas Martin of Newmarket, having for above these 2 Years last past, been
troubled with a violent Cough, attended with Shortness and Stoppage of my
Breath, so as very frequently to be deprived of whole Nights Res^s, and my
Stomach and Appetite also brought thereby to so bad and low a Condition, that I
could never get any settled Relief, notwithstanding I had all the Advice
imaginable and that to a very great Expense; till by Advice of Mr. John Morley
of Newmarket, I was recommended to Dr. Bateman's Drops; the which Medicine he
hereby for the public Good declares, relived himself and Family from a
languishing Illness that had for a long Time attended them. From the Character
and known Credit of Mr. Morley aforesaid, I made trial of the above mentioned
Drops, and found in taking a few Bottles that satisfactory Relief that many
poundsworth of Medicines before taken, could never effect; for my Cough and
Shortness of Breath soon abated I took my natural Rest, which I had not done
for many Years, and my former Appetite and Stomach returned to my entire
Satisfactiom. This I think my self bound in Duty to Mandkind in general,
publicly to declare, under my Hand.

Sept. 6, 1724. Thomas Martin.

MRs. Hutchinson of Ashby de la zouch, in the County of Leicester, being for
many Years troubled with the Gout and Rheumatism in her Limbs, to so great a
degree, that she was not able to walk across her Room: After taking abundance
of Medicines to no purpose, and despairing of Cure, being reduced to the
greates^ Extremity and Misery; had the good Fortune to make trial of Dr.
Bateman's Pectoral Drops, a few Bottles of which have made a perfect Cure of
her; and she now remains in a good State of Health, desiring this may be
published to the World, that all who labor under the like Misfortunes, may
endeavor for the same Relief.

Ashby de la Zouch, Dec. 29, 1721
I John Jones of Webley in the County of Hereford, being long afflicted with a
Violent pain in my Stomach, as also with Pains in my Limbs and Back to such a
degree, that I was helpless to my self; and having tried a multiplicity of
Doctors and Apothecaries, to a very little purpose. I was advised (by a
Gentl^men who had received entire Satisfaction in pains of the Gout, from Dr.
Bateman's Pectoral Drops) to try a Bottle or two, and in the taking the first
Dose I found Ease in a few Minutes, and before I had taken three Bottles, my
Pains entirely left me, and am as well as ever I was in my Life, I make this
Publication for the Good of my Co^try.

June 18, 1722, Witness my Hand, J. Jones.

BEing willing to inform the World, for the public Good of Mandkind. That my
Son was very much troubled with the Stone and Gravel in the Kidneys, and had
been so for some Years, he took many Medicines to no purpose; at last an
ingenious Gentleman in the Neigbourhood, advised me to buy a Bottle of Dr.
Bateman's Pectoral Drops, which has given him Ease to a Miracle, and made a
perfect Cure, for it has brought from him not only a large Quantity of Sand
and Gravel, but many Stones, some as big as Peace.

October. 10, 1721. John Barret.

M Rs. Mann of Swell near Dunstable, bring troubled with violent ^ore ^^es: and
afflicted extremely with the Cholick, for which she declares she could find no
Ease, and that after many fruitless Try^^s of Medicines to a great Charge, and
no Purpose^ she resolved to make trial of Dr. Bateman's Drops, of which she had
heard ^o universal a Character, two Bottles of which she declares made a
perfect Cure of her.

Mrs. Mann.

I William Skevington from Irchester, (...) Welling borough, being troubled
with a violent Pain in my Joints for ^ear three Weeks together, that I could
have no Rest neither day nor night until I took a Bottle of Dr. Bateman's
Pectoral Drops, and in a little Time, by the blessing of God I was ^ased of all
my Pa^^s, and am now in perfect Health, I bless Almighty God for it.

Witness my Hand, Will. Skevington.

I Richard Ball at the White-H^rt in Bridge-Street. Northampton, having for
several Years been very frequently and grieviously afflicted with violent Pains
in my Hips, Back, Loins, Kidneys and Stomach and thereby r^d^^ed to so
miserable a Condition that I was never out of my Be^, no longer than 'twas
turned o^ made, for 20 Weeks, nor never once out of my Room, for three quarters
of a Year, having spent under that unhappy Condition, above 50 l. to no manner
of Satisfaction. I have been so terrified by this Disease, that I verily
believe that if me^ted L^^d, or any other scalding Metal had been poured down
my T^^oat. I could not have underwent more racking and torturing Pains, being
expected by all that saw me under the abovesaid Agonies, to have expired every
Moment. I was advised (very fortunate for me) to use Dr. Batsman's Pectoral
Drops, the first Dose whereof removed my Pains, and immediately gave me Ease,
and in taking a few Bottles I recovered my Strength and Limbs, and shortly
after became as well and strong as every I was in my Life, and I bless God I
still am although it is now two Years since, and have never o^ce had the least
Sympt^om of my old Disease, or Pain; t^^ formerly if I met with any Medicine
that gave me Ease, yet if I took the least Ca^d, I was dr^ve into Extremity of
Pain. This Publication I think my self in Duty both to God and my Country,
bound to make, that all suffering (...), whose Torments, like mine nonot be
expres'd may find (...) happy Relief.

Sep. 28, 1734. Rich. Ball

MRs. Pywel, at the Cross-Keys-Inn in Northampton, being troubled with the
Rheumatism for a long time, and having tried all the Help that could possibly
be got to no purpose, her Distemper still raging with more Vehemence, 'till at
last she became Bedridden, and not able to turn herself therein, and the Use of
her Limb were taken away, in which Case she was in a short Time given over for
one past Recovery; but being advised to try a few Doses of Dr. Bateman's
Pectoral Drops, in the taking of which, that Numbness which seized on her Limbs
begin to abate, and in about a Weeks time she was able to walk across the
Room, and soon after entirely recovered, to the Astonishment of all who had
seen her in that deplorable Condition. This for the Benefit of those whose
Misfortunes it is to be so miserably afflicted, she desi^es may be made public.

Susanna Pywell.

WHereas I William Osbourn, now living with Mr. John Da^, Farrier in the
Bridge-street, Northampton, was taken with violent Pains in my Back and Limbs,
occasioned, as I believe, by exceeding Heats and Colds, and having tried all
Things as was thought necessary for Relief, could have no Benefit thereby, my
Illness still grew worse, and worse, till at last I was entirely incapable of
following my Trade; at which I was happily advised to take some of Dr.
Bateman's Pectoral Drops, two Bottles carried off all my Pains, and enabled me
to follow my Business, and am now, blessed (...) God, as well as ever I was in
my Life.

Sept. 19 1724. William Osbourn.

MRs. Gudgeon of Dunstable, desires the (...) informed, That she had been for a
long (...) with the Rheumatism and Colic, and tha^ (...) happy Cure by taking
of Dr. Batemans (...)

I Eleanor Lampry of Harberry near Warwick (...) been for 20 Years very much
troubled with (...) in all my Limbs, was avis'd though I (...) Cure, to make
trial of Dr. Bateman's Drops, the (...) Dose gave me Ease, and two Bottles
cured me, so that I am as well as I ever was in my Life.

April 10, 1724. Witness my Hand. E. Lamprey,

MRs. Wingfield, living near Twy^ross in Licestershire being a long time
troubled with the Rheumatism and Shortness of breath, some ^^iends in her
Neighborhood advised her to take Dr. Bateman's Drops, two Bottles of which
made a perfect Cure of her, and several other Persons have been cured of the
Rheumatism, Colds Cholicks, etc. in the same Parsh, that had taken the same
Medicine by Advice,

I John Smith of Wainington in Huntingdonshire, do declare that my Wife has
long labored under a great Fit of Sickness, occasioned by a great Cold that
she took I consulted all the Physicians in these Parts; I Am sure I paid for
what she took, above Ten Pounds; yet still she was worse and worse. A great
many of our Neighbors being cured of one Distemper or other by Dr. Bateman's
Drops, occasioned me to buy her a Bottle, four of which m^de a perfect Cure of
her Limbs.

John Smith.

I John Chater of Brayfield in Northamptonshire, do declare, That for a long
time I have been afflicted with the Rheumatism so very ill, that I could not
mo^e an^ farther than I was carried, and nothing could be found to do me Good,
till I was advised b^ a Friend to make use of Dr. Bateman's Drops, two Bottles
of which has made a perfect Cure of me.

Wit^ss my Hand, J. Chater.

I Hannah Tomlin, having been long troubled with an Ague and Fever, which
rendered me so very weak, that my Life was despaired of: I was advised by a
Physician of this City (after great Expenses) to make use of Dr. Bateman's
Drops, it being a Medicine, he said, that had done wonderful Cures in this
University, two Bottles of which has made a perfect Cure of me.

O^^^, Oand 12, 1723. Hannah Tomlin.

I Simon Smith of Hardick in Warwickshire, having been for a long time very ill
of an Ague and Fever, that it was the Opinion of my Friends and those about me,
that I must lose my Life, having taken hundreds of Medicines to no purpose, at
last I was advised by a learned Gentleman, to take some of D^. Bateman's
Pectoral Drops, one Bottle of which made a Perfect Cure of me.

Hardick Feb. (...) 1720 21. Witness my Hand, S. Smith.

THese are to certify, That I have been for several Years afflicted w^^^
violent Pain in my Limbs and Joints, which at last brought me into a
Consumption: I went to the Bata, and took hundreds of Medicines from several
eminent Hands, which proved of no use to me, at last I had the good Fortune to
make use of Dr. Bateman's Drops, 3 Bottles of which has restored me to my
perfect Health.

Witness my Hand. John Iliff.
Thurp-mandivel near Banbury, March 26, 1721.
I Thomas Woodin^ at the Swan in Hockle^ near Dunstable, do certify, that I
having been afflicted with the Fever and Ague and though I got the Fever off,
yet the Dregs of it lay in me, and could not be removed, which kept me
continually ill, 'till I procured a Bottle of Dr. Batemans Drops, by taking of
which three Nights successively, my Illness was Removed I think this Cure very
extraordinary (...) Reason I felt the Effects of it so suddenly.

No^. 28. 17^0, Thomas Woodin.

I William Peach^, (...) St. Bennet's Church in Cambridge having been vo^^^^tly
afflicted with the Gravel in the Kidneys, do testify, that upon taking but one
Battle of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops, I found present Ease; and not only so
but voided a great Quantity of Gravel. I think my self in Duty bound to publish
this to the World, that all those who labor under that racking Disease^ may
find Relief: As I am ready to testify upon Oath I have.

February 10, 1720 21. William Peach^.

I George Moore, at the King's Arms in Dunton-(...) In Leicestershire, being
frequently troubled with the Gout in the Limbs, and many times the very Use of
them ware taken away. I have had Tr^als of many Doctors) been advised to take a
few of Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops, and found there by the greatest and
soonest ease of any. Thing I ever took.

George Moore.

WIlliam Hewett, Esquire of Dunton ^a^^^^ in Leicestershire, being for many Yea^^
under a^^^^ Habit of body with the Gout and Rheumatism: and ^^^^ing but very
little or no Ease and Relief from the many Medicines which he had taken from
the ablest Physicians, was prevailed on by some Friends, etc. in the same
County, who had found great benefit in the like Cases, to take a Bottle of Dr.
Bateman's Pectoral Drops, which immediately gave him Ease; and for the Good of
Mankind he was pleased to affirm, that he found it the most immediate, safe,
and only Disturber of that Cronic and Torturing Distemper aforementioned.

THE Reverend Mr. Sunders of Gamlinga^, near Position in Bedfordshire,
declares. That these Drops, under God, cured him of a violent Cold and Pains in
the Limbs, and he (as well as diverse other Clergymen) bought several Dozens for
the Good of his poor Neighbors.

MRs. Frances of Norton in Licestershire, having been a long Time troubled with
the Rheumatism. Shortness of breath, etc, was restored to perfect Health (...)
these Drops.


