JOHN WALTON'S RELIGION, Proved not to be the Religion of JESUS. Or a
Confutation of sundry Errors published by John Walton, Gent. in his Book
entitled, The Religion of Jesus vindicated.

By John Aplin.

NEWPORT: Printed by the Widow Franklin, for the Author 1737.

John Walton's RELIGION, Proved not to be the Religion of JESUS.
WHEN Error and its Advocates are so busy in proselyting the World, I know nor
why a modest Confutation should be judged Criminal. Or why those who engage in
the Behalf of Truth, should be thought meddling and contentious? Especially
when the Pattons of Error endeavor to establish their Oppinions, by assuming
to them the Dress of Verity, and to give them a Sanction in the Eyes of the
World, and crowd them under the Protection of God himself.

Of such is the Author of the before high recommended Treatise; yet neither the
Work it self, nor the Authors fl^^id Title thereto p^efi^ed, prevent my
Animadversions thereon, especially when I consider how few of that Ra^k Christ
employed in his Ministry when on Earth, and now little disirous the Apostles
his Successors of those empty Titles, as Paul himself rectifies, when he gl^rys
only in his many Afflictions and Poverty. But this Author's preferring the Name
of Gentleman, to that of CHRISTIAN, is, no doubt to advance himself, as well as
his Work, in the Opinion of the World.

The whole Work it self, is like the Chaos in the Beginning, Void of Light and
Order, and overspread with impenetrable Clouds of Darkness, charged with
dangerous and hurtful Errors which shows that God has not commanded Light to be
there, nor was at all concerned in the Composition or Contrivance thereof.

The Gentleman says that the Occasion of his writing was some Deistical Papers
la^ly printed at Newport; but I am of the Opinion that he is unacquainted with
the Tenets of Deism, or the issuing of a deistical Paper would never have se^
him to quarreling with the Quakers, whose Principles are far from Deistical,
neither has he mentioned the Name of Deist, except in the Title Page of his
Book.

And in order to rescue the Quakers from so unjust a Charge, I shall give the
Reader a short Detail of the Principles of a Deist; and then it will be
requisite of the Gentleman to prove that the Quakers are Deists, on whom the
Reflections, in his Book are chiefly thrown, which if he should fail to do, I
hope he will be so just, to do as he has done before, viz. Recant

The Deists deny Revealed Religion, viz. That God ever communicated the
Knowledge of himself to Mankind by any supernatural Method: But the Quakers
(the Gentleman himself confesses) contend for a Superior Dictator, viz. The
Spirit of God: The Deists deny the Worship of God through Jesus Christ, which
the Quakers hold to be the only exceptable Way of worshipping him, with other
Things very different from the Belief of the Quakers; so that I am at a Loss to
know why the printing of a Deistical Paper should provoke the Gentleman to
quarrel with a People so different in Opininion from the Deists as the Quakers
are.

The first Eight or Nine Pages of his Book are spent, in proving. That which no
Body hereabouts contradicts, viz. That the Christian Revelation, is exellent,
and necessary. But the Grand Question in Debate, is, What this Christian
Revelation is, and how made known? which our Author seems to resolve in Page
10th, where he calls the Bible, The Rule of Faith, by which we ought to try our
Opinions. And since the whole Tenor of his Book aims to confine all Religion to
the Bible, and the external Ordinances therein contained. I shall endeavor to
confute, by proving, That God has saved Mankind, and communicated the Knowledge
of his Son sufficient to Salvation without the Help of the Bible, or any of the
external Ordinances therein mentioned; which if I should do, I know not why the
Bible it self, and more especialy the External Ordinances it contains, should
be enumerated among the Graces essential to Christianity, on why those who
gratefully accept the Former as proceeded from the Spirit of God, and therefore
understand it in a Spiritual Manner, although they disallow the Use of the
Latter; I say, I know not why they should be loaded with false and odious
Opinions to render them vile in the Sight of the World. In order to prove the
abovementioned Assertion, viz. That God has communicated the Knowledge of his
Son sufficient to Salvation without the Bible, or any of the external
Ordinances taught therein, it would be obvious for the Reader to search the
Origin thereof, which if he should do, he will find no Footsteps of it in the
World, till about. Two Thousand Four Hundred Years after the Creation; about
which Time the Law was to the Jews, all which Time, the most severe Formalist
must grant that Mankind had no outward Revelation of the Will of God, although
it appears by the Bible it self, That Christ was taught, and the Gospel
preached, as by Noah, whom the Apostle Peter calls A Preacher of Righteousness,
2 Peter 2.5. Likewise, by God himself, who the Apostle (...) Gal. 3.8. Preached
it to Abraham. And consequently it must be the Gospel that Noah preached, for
Righteousness, is not of the Law as the Scripture universally testify. And it
is evident that he had no Bible to inform him, or communicate the Knowledge
(...) of to him; neither had the Prophets (...) after Times, any Dictator, but
the Spirit of Christ, which the Apostle says, was in them. And if we look into
the Progress of the Bible, since its being completed, viz. since Christ's
Appearance upon Earth, visibly, we shall find it confined to a small Part of
Mankind, with respect to those who act without it, and among those that act
without it; we shall find many who never had an Opportunity of seeing it till
lately, particularly the natural Inhabitants of this Continent, on which we now
live, could not possibly have seen it till about Two Hundred Years since; And
yet it would be contrary to the Bible it self, to pronounce them all damned
that died without that Opportunity, for Christ speaking of the Jews, John
15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin; but now
they have no Cloak for their Sin. and Verse 24. If I had not done among them,
the Works which no other Man did they had not had Sin. And the Apostle Paul,
Romans 4.15. Where no Law is, there is no Transgression. So that it will
inovitably follow, That the Nations that had no opportunity of seeing the
Scriptures could not have Sin if the Knowledge of Christ is communicated by the
Scriptures only: But then it will follow, That the same Scriptures that acquits
them from Guilt, denis them Salvation, for the Apostle Peter says, Acts 4.12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is none other Name under
Heaven given among Men whereby we may be saved. And Christ, in John, 1.36.
says, He that, believes on the Son has everlasting Life, but he be that
believes not on the Son shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on
him. Therefore it must be granted, That if the Knowledge of Christ be
communicated to Mankind by no other Method than by the Scriptures only, That
those which have no^ seen the Scriptures could not believe on him and so cannot
be saved; and by what has been said already, it is manifest that they can not
be damned; so that these People can neither be saved nor damned, according to
the inconsistant Opinion of this Author, Therefore, I am at a loss to know how
the Author would dispose of the greater Part or Mankind, without reviving again
the Papistical Opinion of a Purgatory.

If the Force of the above Argument be well weighed, it might serve for an
effectual Answer to the Authors whole work, since the whole Scope of it tends
to lay upon Mankind an unnecessary Burden of ^eedless Ordinances, without the
Observation of which, or even the Knowledge of the Latter of the Bible it self
Salvation may be obtained; and if so, By what Force of Reason? By what Divine
Warrant do they confine the Almighty God to particular Methods of Salvation?
And such Methods too, as he himself says he will save no Man by, viz. An
outward Law of Works. Is it not more agreeable to the Nature of God and the
Scope of the Scriptures to conclude with the Apostle Peter Acts 10.34, 35. Of a
Truth I perceive God is no respecter of Persons; but in every Nation he that
fears him and works Righteousness is accepted with him,

Thus is the Doctrine of Christ's being communicated to Mankind without humane
or external Aid, once and for ever established. And though this Gentleman, with
others, may think that the unovoidable Consequences of the above Argument may
tend to place the Bible a Degree lower in the Esteem of Mankind; but such I
must take leave to tell that it is now set in the Place of God, by this
Gentleman and his Adherents; for in it we are told That the Spirit of God
cohabits with Just Men as, 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? And if so, Why should we bring
the Dictates of so divine an Instructor to the Bible for Proof. In a Word, it
is nothing but to arraign God before his Works to prove whether he be God or no.

But the Gentleman is so hardy as to deny that there is any Spirit of God
Cohabiting with Mankind, and contemp^u^sly calls it The Light of Nature,
althouh the Apostle, in Romans 8.9. says, But ye are not in the Flesh but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you, now if any Man have not
the Spirit of Christ, be is none of his. And in 2 Cor. 13.5. Jesus Christ is in
you except you be Reprobates. And, although the Gentleman treats them that
contends for the Truth of the aforementioned Scriptures, with so many malicious
Aspersions, such as Enthusiast and the like: Yet I think it not (...) because
Malice, Envy and Detraction are the most distinguishing Charactarists of this
Gentleman and his Prosel^tes: -- And I am sure that the Quakers magnify not
their Perfection, as much as this Author does his Imperfection, in venturing to
contradict such known Truths. And I am sorry that the Gentleman could find no
properer Object of Scurr^^^^y and Railery than the Spirit of God. The
Gentleman's best Proof for his last Piece of Railery on the Quakers, ^s that,
That Spirit in one contradicts that in another of his Brethren, and would from
hence argue, the Necessity of their coming to be tried by the common Standard,
the Bible; but the Success of those that have already made it the Measure of
their Faith, may inform us how much nearer we should approach to Certainty, for
we have little Encouragment to this Method, of Probation, if we consider how
many and how different the Expositions which Commentators have made from one
and the same Bible are, although all, or most of them, had the best Assistance
from Humane Learning. Are they not continually quarrelling one with another?
Nay, this Gentleman himself, now preaches up Doctrine that but a few Years ago
he condemned. Nay, ^o less than Twice has he shifted his Station, and out of
that one corrupt Fountain of his Understanding has issued Waters both bitter
and sweet; so I shall leave the Reader to judge of this Gentleman's Title to
Infalability.

In Page the 10. We find the Gentleman ^ontending for the Lawfulness of War,
and brings. Luke 3.14 to prove it. And the Soldier likewise, demanded of him,
saying, What shall we do? And be said unto them, do Violence (...) no Man,
neither accuse any falsely, and be concern with your Wages. Which he says proves
lawful to be Soldiers; but these Soldier will appear to he nothing but the
Roman Cohorts quartered upon the Jews, for the more quietly exacting their
Tribute: An^ the Genleman seems to forget that Joh^ commanded them to do no
Violence, as well as to be content with their Wages; but the^ could not execute
the Office of a Soldie^ without doing Violence viz. Exacting from the People
that which was not their Due^ So that John in Effect, bid them cease from being
Soldiers; and since they were far from acting in definitive War, I admire at
the Gentleman for bringing John to testify the inhumane Practices of these
barbarous Soldiers.

Our Authors next Assertion will oblig^ me to reflect on the natural
Consequence of true Religion, which the Gentleman give us in page 8th. of his
Book, and admire (...) his Inconsistency with himself, for he says, "That the
Observation of tree Religion promotes Love in all Societies, and destroy
Malice, Envy, Hatred, etc." And if so, would enquire of the Gentleman, from
whence those malicious Detractions, and scandalous Reflections which he throws
at the chief Minister of a well established Government proceeds? Not from the
Observation of true Religion, by his own Grant: So that I fear the Gentleman by
his own Concession cuts himself out of the Right he has to the Character of
Religious.

In page 12th. he says, That he has sufficiently proved Salvation by a Christ
without us; but I think I have more effectually proved, That if Christ is
without him, he is no Christian: So I shall next pass on to ^ake notice of his
Doctrine of Satisfaction by the Blood of Christ; a Doctrine so contrary to the
Scriptures, and derogatory from the Honor of God, a Heap of Errors which his
Carnal Construction of the Scriptures has led him into, to confute which I
shall only with Brevity say that God in proclaiming His Name, Exodus, 34.6, 7.
And the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God
merciful gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping
Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquitys and Transgressions, etc. I say, That
here God signifies himself to be a God that can forgive Sin, though this
Gentleman says he will not, until he has received Satisfaction, which is no
Forgiveness at all And would it not likewise follow, That if the Doctrine of
the Trinity be true (that is, if the Father and the Son are one) that the Son
must make Satisfaction to himself which is absurd; but allowing him to have
made Satisfaction, he being one with and o^ the same Nature as the Father, can
no more forgive Sin than the Father: Therefore, the Debt remains as due, both
to the Father and Son, they being one, as ever.

But the Gentleman, to prove this Matter conjures up an Argument that he will
be puzzled to set aside, although he thinks he has done it, which is, That it
was unjust for Christ, who was Righteous, to suffer for the Wicked; "the Force
of which he pretendedly ev^des, by saying, That Christ suffered as Surety, and
not as Principal; but I admire at the Gentleman's Weakness for allowing it to
be so! It alters not the Case; for if Christ was Righteous, as without doubt he
was, it must be contrary to the Scrip^ues for God to have punished him at all,
for in Prove. 17.26. Also to punish the ^ust is not g^od, etc. and Prove. 12.28.
In the Way of Righteousness is Life, and in the Path way thereof there is no
Death. and Prove. 17.15. He that justifies the Wicked, and be that condemned
the Just, even they are both Abomination to the Lord. And as our Author holds,
That none but Christ was able to make God Satisfaction for Man's Sin committed
in the Fall; and that God demanded Satisfaction, which Satisfaction
Satisfaction must be Punishment: Then it must certainly follow, That God must
delight in punishing the Innocent; for, whoever becomes Man's Surety must make
Satisfaction, and if the Satisfaction be such, That whoever makes it must be
made infinitely miserable; and that God has said, as I have already poved, That
non shall be punished or made miserable by him, but the Wicked. But his
Innocent Son in making Satisfaction is made miserable, and punished by him: It
must certainly follow, That Guilt was found on the ^nnocent Son of God, or,
That God has acted contrary to his own Decree, neither of which ^ay be
admitted, without allowing the most horrid Blasphemy, and such strange and
astonishing Incongruities must unquestionably ^rgue, the most extravigant
Degree of Injustice in the Deity, Blessed for ever more. And so deserves any
other Treatment rather ^han a serious Confutation. Certainly, one ^ught to be
very well ascertained of the sense of Scripture, before one ventures to ^scert
such unreasonable Opinions.

Thus have I abundantly confuted the Doctrine, of those who with this Gentleman
^present God in so revengeful a Manner (...) Mankind, as to say that he cannot
forgive an until he has punished this Innocent Son (...) Man's Sin. Is not that
condemning the ^nnocent acquitting the Guilty? A Practice whic God so loudly
condemns throughout his whole Word: Is it not to render God so unmercyful and
unjust, that rather than forgive the Sin, and mitigate the Punishment, he would
choose to punish the Innocont, and exact the Debt where it was no^ due? Nor does
this Gentleman at all soften it, by making God exact those Sufferings from Man,
because he knew none but his Innocent Son must undergo them.

The Gentleman's next Attempt, is to prove That Water Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, a^ he calls it, are to be continued in the Christian Church, in order
to which he brings a Crowd of Scriptures, perverted from their Genuine Sense:
and I perceive, he uses a very ill Method of interperating Scripture For by
Transposition, and other unfair Methods he makes the Scripture contradict it
sel^ when he pleases; as for Instance, he brings Acts the 3.12, 13. to prove
that Acts 2.3 is false, for in the Former he says, Th^^ Simon never received
the Spiritual Baptism, though (...) was baptized with Water. And in the Latte^ he
says, That Spiritual Baptism is receive^ by the Conditional Performance of
Water Bptism. It Is true he brings in Repentance, and (...) doubt but Simon made
an outward Prafess^ of Repentance, which is the Method th^^ the Advocates of
Water now use. So the ^e see this Gentleman pulls down with one ^and what he
builds up with the other.

My intended Brevity in this small Performance, will not suffer me to rescue
these ^orrured Scriptures out of the Hands of this Barberous Expositor: So I
shall only prove, That they do not intend, that the Use of Water in Baptism,
should be perpetuated ^n the Christian Church. And since the chief Method, by
which the Gentleman would ^stablish it is, by joining it to Spiritual, or
Christ's Baptism; I shall prove them separate first, and that they were
continued (...) during the whole Administration, both ^f Christ and his
Apostles.

In order to which, observe that John separated them in the first of his
Ministry, Luke (...) 16. I indeed baptize you which Water; but ^e comes after
me that is mightier than I, (...) shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
^ith Fire. Which shows an irreconcilable Difference in them. viz. As great as
betwixt Water and Fire. John's Baptism likewise, was almost Four Years before
Christ's; for we find one baptized with the Spirit till after Christ's
Sufferings, as in Acts 1. and that ^hey were continued distinct, I prove from
Acts 19.3. where the same Persons that were ^aptized with John's Baptism, were
baptized again with Christ's Baptism: Where the Apostle himself makes the
Distinction between the Baptisms of John and Christ, which, if they had been
joined, he would not have done. And we find the frequent Appellations o^ John's
Baptism and Christ's, throughout their whole Ministry.

The Gentleman, from his supposed Union of the Baptisms of John and Christ,
form the Baptism spoken of in Ephesians. 4.5. Bu^ without any Warrant from
Scripture: An^ here he makes but one Baptism, both (...) John's and Christ's;
nevertheless, in Page the 19th of his Book, he allows of Two no^ in use, viz.
An Internal and External one And in this the Gentleman adds to h^ Former,
another most fatal Mistake, which renders his Writings, The Jest of the
Ingenious as well as of the Religious; for (...) says, That the Baptisms of
John and Christ make up but one Baptism And yet (...) says there are Two to be
strove for, an performed; but I cannot tell where he wi^ find the Other,
without he forms it o^ of his own Brain. Thus we see wh^ miserable
Self-Contradictions the Patrons a bad Cause are found to commit.

But the Gentleman would infer anoth^ Argument, for the Use of Water in Baptism
from Christ's submiting to it: But I shall only make this short Reply, That he
may as well argue, the Perpetuity of Circumcision, and other Mosaic
Ordinances, from Christ's of submitting to them.

But he tells us, That the Apostles practiced it, which is true, though not from
Christ, but from John; for they baptized with water long before the Holy
Spirit, or Christ's Baptism was given them; neither ^s it safe to argue from
their Practice, for ^n the Minority of the Church, they made great
Condesentiens; for we find Paul circumcised Timothy, and Peter observed almost
all the Jewish Law, see, Gal. 2.11, 12. So that he may as well enforce almost
all the Ceremonies of the Jewish Law, from the Practice of the Apostles; as
this of Water Baptism.

The Charge given to baptize, in Mat. 28. Which the Gentleman calls, The great
Commission, could never intend Water: Because the Apostles would have needed no
new Commission to perform that which they had done before, and, That they
baptized with Water before, appears from, John 4.2. Neither needed they any new
Assistance to baptize with Water: But here Christ charged them not to depart
from Jerusalem until they were endued with Power from on high, that is, until
they were baptized themselves with the Holy Ghost, and not with Water:
Therefore, it is obvious to believe, That since they received a new Commission,
and new Assistance, they received a new Baptism also; even that Baptism with
which they were baptized with themselves, before they could act in this
Commission.

But the Gentleman says, that Baptism cannot be understood as the Quakers
define it; because in the Text aforesaid, Teaching and Baptizing are both
mentioned; but he mistakes the Sense, for if they are both mentioned, yet they
are both included in the same Act; for Christ says, Teach all Nations,
baptizing them. that is, in the Act of Teaching into the Name of the Father Son
and Holy Ghost, as the Words are truly rendered, and by the Name of Christ, we
are to understand his Power or Authority, as in Mark 16. Christ says, In my
Name ye shall cast out Devils. That is, in my Power or Authority: So that
without the Gentleman can prove That every Person dipped in Water is baptized
into or seasoned with the Power of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, ^e cannot
suppose that Christ in that Commission intended Water

In Page 16, He says, "That Paul enforces the Use of Water," though in truth he
says nothing that informs, or as much as ^ecommends it, in all his Writings,
though ^e s;aith much of the Necessity of ^piritual Baptism, for in Cor. 12.13.
he says, That by one sprit we are baptized into one Body. Neither does the
Gentleman's Comment upon Paul's own Words argue any Necessity of Water in
Baptism; for he ^pposeth the Apostle to be under the most ^ict Cammand of
Christ, to administer Water in Baptism, and yet says, he neglected that
Command for fear People should think he did it in his own Name; but I presume,
this would hardly have excused the Apostle, a poor Excuse indeed, That he
neglected ore of the most sacred Ordinances of God, for Fear of being ^censured
by a few wicked Men.

He further adds, That Peter, under the Conduct of the Holy Spirit, baptized
with Water; though in Fact, the Text says no such Thing: He produces Acts 10.47,
48. Can any Man forbid Water, etc. Though it is very ^ubious whether he meant
material Water; for in Scripture, Water often signifies the Spirit, as in John
7.38. But allowing it to be meant material Water, The Gentleman himself
observes, That they were baptized with the Spirit before; and so, they were
holy, as 1 Cor. 4.16, 1^ And if holy, consequently Subjects of Salvation, and
if Salvation be attained, Wha^ need of outward Ordinances?

In Page 18. He says, That none beside Christ can baptize with the Holy Spirit
But I admire at the Extravigancy of the Gentleman's Discourse! He must certain
know that the Holy Ghost was given (...) the Laying on of the Apostles Hands,
as (...) Acts 8.17. Then laid they their Hands (...) them, and they received
the Holy Ghost. So that without the Gentleman will allow Christ to be in the
Apostles (which will be too grand a Concession for him) he must own himself in
the Wrong.

His next Assertion is equally erroneous; for he says, That more flockt to
Christ than to John, by reason of his Fame of baptizing with the Spirit.
Although it appears by Acts 1. That none was baptized with the Spirit till
after Christ's Sufferings; neither can he produce one Testimony to support his
Argument in all the Scriptures: So that I cannot but admire at the Gentleman
Immodisty, in venturing to publish such bold untruths to the World.

All which must certainly confound the ^entleman's Argument for using Water
Bap^sm: He might, with a better Assent ^om the Scriptures, use Fire; for
Christ's ^aptism is said to be with Fire, more early than with Water. And if we
con^er (that allowing the Apostles to have ^ed Water, visible Gifts of the Holy
Ghost ^tended on them to witness the Truth of ^eit (...)) the Advocates of
Water ^ave little Right to practice it from them, (...) Why would they retain
the Shadow, (...) God has disowned their Ministry, by ^enying them the
Substance? For after all their Washings in Water, and laying on ^f Hands, they
were never able to confer ^e visible Gifts of the Holy Ghost on one of their
Proselytes. And if God had intended ^hey should have used it still, no doubt
but he would have continued the same privileges to them as to the Apostles;
^or Christ makes no Reserve in Mat. 28. ^here he promises to be with the
Apostles (...) the End of the World, in their Successors; and therefore, the
Gentleman may with as good Reason, press the Performances of the Ordinances
that He mentions; such (...) making Clay, and anointing the Eyes of ^e Blind: I
say, he may as well administer that Ordinance to a blind Man, and (...) him, it
is a Help to the Recovery of his Sight, as to dip a Convert in Wate^ and tell
him he is ever the nearer being baptized with the Holy Spirit.

Some also add, That a Promise of Salvation is annexed to Water Baptism (...)
but I deny that there is any such Promis^ to Water Baptism only; although
ther^ is almost to every Grace of the Spirit, (...) Faith, by which the Apostle
says, We ar^ saved. Love, he says, is the fulfilling (...) the whole Law. And
he says, Timothy (...) save himself, and those that hear him, (...) preaching
found Doctrine. And for a ful^ Confutation of this, take a Promise of Salvation
from the Apostle's own Mouth, without our Water Baptism, Romans 10.9. That (...)
shall confess with thy Mouth, the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine Heart, That
God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved.

The Gentleman says so little to the Purpose, in his Attempt to enforce the
Use of Bread and Wine in the Church, That I think it not worth answering it.
True he brings the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. Relating what his Lord did; and
he may find the Apostle in the same Epistle enforcing the Observation of the
Passover, by a far more positive Injunction, 5. 7. 8. Forever (...) Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for (...). Therefore let us keep the Feast, not with old
Leaven, etc. And if the Gentleman would allow of the same Spiritual Observation
of the Supper, as of the Passover, (...) would join with him, which he cannot
help granting, without making the same Apostle contradict himself; for in
Colos. 2.20. he (...), Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ, from the Rudiments
of the World; Why, as ^^ough living in the World, are ye subject to ^^dinances,

So that I shall have to a Conclusion, and join with the Gentleman, in
enforcing (...) constant Use of the Bible; but with (...) Caution of the
Apostles, 1 Cor. 2.11. For what Man knows the Things of a Man, (...) the
Spirit Man? Even so the Things of God knows no Man but the Spirit of God.
Therefore, if the Bible be of God, no Man can interpret it without the Spirit
of God: And although the Spirit of natural Man, in its Attempts thereon, has
arrayed the humane Ordinances therein, in so gaudy a Dress, and carved them by
the Help of humane Wisdom, into the most enchanting Forms; yet they are but as
a languid Picture, or a faint Resemblance of that Immense Source of uncreated
Light that shines with unlimitted Perfection in the Heavenly Face of the God of
the Right (...) Divine Beauties, the Transformers of (...) Celestial Image
shall never behold: And how despicably soever they treat those that contend for
the immediate Assistance of the Spirit, yet shall never cease to revive his
Work in the midst of the Years: And that Pillar of Fire, though it appear as
Darkness to the Egyptians, shall for ever guide the Israel of God in all their
Wandrin^ through the wayless Wilderness of this World, until they arrive to the
promised Land in safety.

FINIS.

