THE NECESSITY OF Receiving the Truth in LOVE. Considered in A SERMON On 2
These. 2.10. Preached at New-Brunswick, in New Jersey, August 17. 1735. With
enlargements.

By GILBERT TENNENT A. M. and Minister of the Gospel there.

NEW YORK Printed by John Peter Zenger. 1735.

Candid Reader;
THE Occasion of the following Discourses, of which the first is but a
Preparative to the second, was the Removal of a certain Person by Death, some
small Space of Time after the Last sacramental Solemnity, which has been the
Subject Matter of much Discourse, and the Occasion of many Reflections.

I thought it was my Duty to improve that solemn Providence publicly, for the
Edification and Vindication of such as are truly pious, and for the Conviction
of the Impenitent: This therefore I have attempted in the Sermons following,
which by the Advice of Friends are now submitted to the Readers Judgment, with
this Request, that he would not condemn them, either in the Whole or in Part,
before he weighs impartially what is offered in them, by the Sanctuary Scales.

And seeing the awful Providence of God, respecting the aforesaid Person, gave
Birth to the subsequent Discourses, I judged it not improper to preface them,
with some brief Account of his Character, as also of the Manner of his being
taken, and of his Dissolution.

By the best Information I can get of his Neighbors, he had a very regular and
Christian like Conversation.

And when examined here, the Saturday before the Sacrament, he gave a very
modest and satisfactory Relation of his gracious Experiences.

The Time and Manner of his being taken was as follows: Upon the Sabbath
Evening, at the House of a certain Person near this Place, after the reading of
a Chapter of sacred Scripture, he was struck with such a Sense of the Holiness
of GOD, as overwhelmed his Spirits, so that he fainted and fell to the Earth;
after which the Devil beset him with violent Temptations, telling him, That he
was a Hypocrite, and as bad as Spira; the Shock of which his feeble Faith not
being able to endure, he was imediately bereaved of the Exercise of his Reason,
and then knew not what he spoke or acted. This was the Account he gave himself
the Monday following, in the Afternoon, when he enjoyed (so far as I and others
were capable of judging) the full Exercise of his Reason.

It has been storied about (as I am informed) that it was the Preaching of one
or more Ministers, which was the Cause of his Disorder; But there is not the
least Shadow of Reason for this Aspersion, his own Relations have acknowledged,
That during the whole of his Illness, he reflected upon none, as being the
Causes of it. Surely if there had been any Thing in this, he would have made
some Mention of it that Afternoon aforesaid, when the Occasions of his Distress
were enquired into; but not one Word Was so much as hinted this Way.

The Manner of his Death (as I am informed by a Person of Credit that was then
present) Was hopeful; he seemed to enjoy, for some Space before his
Dissolution, the Exercise of his Reason, during which he penitently asked
Forgiveness of his Father, respecting the Faults he had committed against him,
and so expired.

His Relations concur in asserting, that he eat but very little for some Days
before he was taken (so as is before hinted) viz. nothing but a small Crust of
Bread and Water, Which with his Riding about Thirty Miles, for some Days
successively (his Place of Abode being about Fifteen Miles from the Meeting) it
is probable Weakened his Constitution considerably, and so prepared Fuel for
the Temptations of the Enemy to fasten with more Power upon him; this he
himself complained of on the aforesaid Monday, and therewith used the
Psalmist's Petition, Ps. li. 8.

Candid Reader, give me Leave to add one Word more, and I shall conclude; I
pray God that thou and I may be assisted of him to learn suitable Instructions
from, and take seasonable Warning, by such awful Examples, lest We our selves
be made such.

Farewell.
THE NECESSITY OF Receiving the Truth in LOVE, etc.
2. These. ii. 10. latter Clause of the Verse. -- Because they received not the
Love of the Truth, that they might be saved.


AS Good both Moral and Physical is the proper Object of the Will or rational
Apetite, so Truth is the proper Object and Food of the Mind. But it is mournful
to behold the awful Infatuation and Disorder, which have now seized all the
noble Powers of rational, once innocent, but now degenerate Creatures! Alas,
how imperiously do their Wills tyrannize over their enslaved Minds! How eagerly
do they court real Evil under the Guise of Good, and greedily embrace temporary
and perishing for durable and eternal Gain! And thus like the Dog in the Fable,
while they grasp at fleeting Shadows, they lose the enduring Substance! But the
fatal Original of this Folly and Disorder, is owing to the Defects, Darkness
and Infatuation of the Mind; which not only through the corrupt Bias of the
Will, but also because of its own native Weakness and Ignorance, is easily
imposed upon by the sophistical Arts of Satan and his Emisaries, to assent to
Error and Falsehood, under the Pretext of Truth. Dreadful Instances of this we
have in our Text and Context, in which is contained a Description of the
Properties and Characters of Antichrist, and his deceived Followers; as also
of their deserved Ruin and final Overthrow. Some of which I shall mention. And

1. He is called v. 3. That Man of Sin; which seems to signify, that he is not
only notoriously wicked himself, but commands and commends Impiety in others.
And do not the Popes of Rome command the Worship of Saints and Angels? Have
they not contrived, enjoined and praised the barbarous Murder of Protestants of
all Orders? And do they not connive at the most execrable Uncleanness to
advance their worldly Interest?

2. Another Character is this, That he opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God or that is worshipped. v. 4. Have not Popes had the Impudence
not only to insult, with the greatest Degrees of Disdain Kings and Emperors,
who are called Gods, because they are his Vicegerents, in Respect of civil
Power and Authority, and thereby are dark Shadows and faint Representatives of
his Glorious Sovereignty, but even to confront the Authority of God himself,
countermanding and cashiering his positive Laws and Institutions, and even
tearing one of the Commandments out of the Decalogue?

3. The third Character is, That he as God sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God. v. 4. As God is worshipped in the Assemblies of
his People, is not the Pope so worshipped in the Papist's Churches? Do they not
style him our Lord God the Pope, in their blasphemous Missals?

4. The fourth Character is, That he is concerned in a Mystery of Iniquity. v.
7. i. e. Wickedness cloaked with a fair Pretext of Piety. And will not the Pope
and his bloody blind Votaries pretend a great Deal of Zeal and and Devotion,
when they are going to cut your Throats, or pick your Pockets.

5. The fifth Character is, That his coming is after the Working of Satan, with
all Power and Signs and lying Wonders, and with all Deceiveableness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish. v. 10. It is too notorious to be denied,
that Popes and their Adherents have almost in every Age, since their
Antichristian Kingdom has been erected, pretended a Power to work Wonders and
Miracles; but their Wonders are lying Ones, mostly wretched Untruths, or
juggling Tricks, and fraudulent Impositions upon the poor ignorant and deluded
People; or if there was any Reality in any of them, it was through the Working
of Satan. Others may call them pious Frauds (says Henry) but the Apostle called
them Unrighteous and Wicked Frauds; and indeed all Fraud which is contrary to
Truth, is an impious Thing; as the same Author observes.

After the Apostle had spoken thus much, concerning the Characters of
Antichrist, he comes to describe the Properties of his Subjects; one of which
is mentioned in the Words I am now to insist upon, and it is this, That they
receive not the Love of the Truth that they might be saved. This, in order to
vindicate God's Justice and Holiness, in his penal Process against them, is
represented to be the meritorious Cause of the dreadful Judgments threatened in
the following Verses, as the causal Particle [because] sufficiently intim^tes,
which is twice repeated in this and the following Verses, [ because and for
this Cause] perhaps for a twofold Reason. (1.) To show how heinous this Sin of
not receiving the Love of the Truth is in it self, and how offensive to God, as
well as destructive to us. And (2.) to signify the Stupidity of Sinners who
need such repeated Warnings, in order to fix necessary Impressions of their
Guilt and Danger because of Sin upon them.

Two Words only of the Text under our present Consideration, viz. Truth and
saved, need Explication, in order to form a doctrinal Proposition from them;
and (1). let me enquire what may be intended by the Word Truth in our Text. To
this End consider,

I. More generally, that Truth is threefold, metaphisical, logical, ethical.

1. Metaphisical Truth is, when the Form or Appearance of a Thing answers what
it represents.

2. Logical Truth consists in our Apprehension of a Thing according to its
Nature.

3. Ethical Truth consists in the Conformity of our outward Expessions to our
inward Sentiments, or in the Harmony and Agreement of the Speeches of our Lips
with the Dictates of our Minds; the first is opposed to Paint, the second to
Error, and the third to Lying, which as some observe consists (at least in
part) in crossing the Dictates of the Mind. But when our Speech is concerned in
Promises, then the Truth consists not only in expressing what is agreeable to
our Intentions, but in a seasonable and punctual accomplishment of what we
express, in the Time and Manner specified, unless some unavoidable Hindrance
prevent. It is the second of these Kinds of Truth mentioned, that comes nearest
to the Design of our Text. But

II. More particularly.

1. By the Word Truth in Scripture is sometimes understood the Grace of Truth,
viz. Sincerity, a precious Grace of the Gospel, Ephesians. VI. 14. And

2. Sometimes the Doctrine of Truth or Gospel of Grace, 2 Pet. I. 12. 2 John v.
1. 1 Timothy II. 4. This is called Truth by Way of Eminence in three Respects,
viz. in Regard of its Author, Nature and Effects.

1. Its Author is the God of Truth, an unchangeable simple Being, punctual in
the Performances of his Promises and Threats, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 4. He is the Rock,
his Work is perfect, for all his Ways are Judgment, a God of Truth, and without
Iniquity, just and right is he. And

2. The Gospel is called Truth, because of the Simplicity and Candor of its
Doctrines, which give a just Representation of Things, according to their
different Natures and final Issues. Sin is there represented in its native
Horrors, and Holiness in its proper Charms and alluring Attractives, and the
Fruits of both set in a true Light. Its Histories are an honest and true
Relation of Matters of Fact, as the Simplicity of the Style, and conspiring
Harmony of its different Narratives witness.

Its Precepts are a just and true Representation of the Claims of Right, which
God and our Neighbor have to our Obedience and Service: A transcript of the
Nature, and agreeable to the moral Perfections, of that Glorious Being to whom
they owe their Original.

Its Promises are not like the fabulous Elisiums of the Pagan Poets, (though
natural Men treat them as if they were no better) but True and Faithful. Deuteronomy.
VII. 9.10. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God,
which keeps Govenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his
Commandments to a Thousand Generations; and repayeth them that hate him to
their Face to destroy them, he will not be slack to him that hates him, he
will repay him to his Face.

Its Threats are no Romances or Bugbears, but such deserved Penaltys, suited to
the Nature and Aggravations of Crimes, (whatever secure Sinners dream to the
contrary) as that God who is Justice and Truth it self will surely inflict, the
Heavens and Earth may pass away, but not one Word that ever God has spoken,
shall pass away without its just Accomplishment, one Jot or Tittle of his
Truths shall never fail, Mat. V. 18.

Its Terms are no flattering Impositions upon his Disciples credulity, like the
Turkish Tales, but a genuine and true Relation of the worst they must suffer
for his Sake.

When the Arabian Impostor Mahomet, first divulged his religious Hypothesis at
Mecha, he suited his Principles to corrupt nature's Dictates, and sinister
Inclinations, and made these Things the great incentive to a Compliance with
them; which were most soothing to human Passions, and most subservient to
Temporal Interests: He promised a carnal Paradise after Death and Honors
Profits, and Preferments in Life, as the grand Motives to engage the rude
Populace to adhere to his erroneous Opinions, he indulged the carnal and cruel
Appetites, with the unreasonable liberty of abhorred Polygamy, and the most
Savage Barbarity: By which art full Device, attended with the Terror of the
civil Sword; he allured some and scared others into his Sentiments. The great
Grandees with their pompous Retinues, quickly listened to the Sense pleasing
Sounds, and danced after the enchanting Pipe of that fatal Orpheus: And no
wonder, for Nature needs not many Perswasives to enduce a Compliance with what
it has the strongest innate Proneness to, and Tendency after. But our Glorious
JESUS not intending a Kingdom in this World took not such Measures to erect it,
as were hatched in the Womb of carnal Wisdom. Nay, on the contrary the Terms
our Lord proposed were so opposite to the corrupt Inclinations of Nature, so
cross to Men's Honor and Interests, that they seemed to have a Natural and
strong Tendency to drive the whole World away from him, instead of gaining any
to him, our Lord proposed no temporal Paradise to his Disciples here, nor a
carnal One hereafter; but on the contrary informed them that they must expect a
continued Scene of Affliction and Sorrow in this World. Joh. XVI 33. Acts XIV.
22. Joh. XVI. 20, As also, that they must deny their Lusts, Wills, Honors and
temporary Interests, and that on the Account of a Spiritual and (at present)
invisible Glory and Happiness, to be enjoyed in the next State. Luke. IX. 23.
This duly considered, together with the speedy and vast Progress, the Gospel
made in the early Ages of Christianity among the politest Nations, and that
without the Helps of civil Power, or human Literature, yea, against the utmost
Force, of both, shows with meridian Brightness the divine Birth of that Gospel
we prosess, whose holy Laws and equal Terms are so contrary to the corrupt
Lusts and natural Inclinations of Mankind, that unless they had been
accompanied with Divine Energy, none would (in the Face of such Danger as the
primitive Christians were exposed to) have complied with them, and so the
Christian Name would have been long ago extinct, and therefore none now in
being to profess the Lord Jesus. What! to give up and entirely abandon all
these Lusts and Interests, which we naturally love above our Lives, yea, our
Souls, and expose our selves to a Series of Shame, Pain and Suffering, and all
for the Promises of a future and unseen World! How difficult is this? Utterly
transcending the Power of mere Nature, till efficaciously renewed by Divine
Grace.

3. The Gospel is called Truth, in regard of its Effects; it makes those who
receive it in Love, conformed to God the Fountain of Truth, in Disposition,
Speech and Action. Those like Nathaniel of old are Israelites indeed, in whom
there is no Guile. Joh. I. 47. Rev. XIV. 5. 1 Pet. II. 1. While they contemn
the ceremonious Flatteries of fawning selfish Sycophants, they carry themselves
through the Course of their Conversations with an inncoent and primitive
Simplicity, void of disguised Design.

It is the Doctrines of the glorious Gospel which I believe are mainly intended
by the Word Truth in our Text, not only for the Reasons already Mentioned, but
also because those are of absolute Necessity to be received in Love, in order
to obtain Salvation, as will be afterward made evident; which leads me to
enquire, what may be intended by that Word in our Text saved. And,

1. The Word Salvation or Saved, sometimes signifies a Deliverance from
temporal Danger, by the Agency of Divine Providence, Ex. XIV. 13. And Moses
said unto the People, fear ye not, stand still and see the Salvation of the
Lord. -- And,

2. Sometimes it signifies an imperfect Deliverance from spiritual Dangers and
Miseries, by the Operation of special Grace; 1 Cor. I. 18. For the Preaching of
the Cross is to them that perish Foolishness; but unto us which are saved, it
is the Power of God.

Those who receive the Truth in Love taste the first Fruits of the Heavenly
Harvest in this World; for they are brought from a State of Sin, Misery and
Death, into a State of Grace, Blessedness and Life. Rev. III. 17. Ephesians. I. 3
Romans V. 5. Ephesians. II. 1. Preserved in this gracious State by the Almighty Power
of God, 1 Pet. I. 5. Strengthened to overcome the World, resist Temptations and
subdue the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, 1 John V. 4. Ephesians. VI. 12. Romans
VI. 5, 6. Gal. V. 24. Scaled to the Day of Redemption, by the Holy Spirit of
Promise: Which is the Earnest of their Inheritance. Ephesians. I. 13.14. enriched
with a fullness of divine Blessings. Whereby they are prepared for perfect and
perpetual Happiness in a State of Glory. 2 Pet. I. 2, 3. Col. II. 2, 7. 2 Pet.
I. 10, 11. -- Which is the

3d. Thing signified by the Word Saved, Romans X. 1. 1 Timothy II. 4. intending a
perfect Deliverance from all Evil; perfect, I say, in Kind, Degree and
Duration, and a perfect Communication of all Good; the two latter
Significations mentioned, but the last especially, is intended by the Word
saved in our Text, which not only the Drift of the Context, but the Antithesis
or Opposition of this to the Word damned in the 12 v. sufficiently confirm.

From the Words thus explained I would observe the following doctrinal
Proposition, viz.

That receiving the Truth in Love is absolutely necessary in order to obtain
eternal Salvation.

To prepare this Observation by Explication for Improvement, I design

I. To speak something of the Nature of that Salvation, which receiving the
Truth in Love is necessary to obtain.

II. Show what it is to receive the Truth in Love.

III. Discover and expose the principal Obstructions which hinder Men's
receiving the Truth in Love.

IV. Prove the Necessity of receiving the Truth in Love.

V. And lastly, endeavor to improve the whole.

I return therefore to consider the

I. Proposed, which was, To speak something of the Nature of that Salvation,
which receiving the Truth in Love is necessary to obtain.

This I think is excellently represented in that ^^ble and comprehensive
Character the Apostle Paul gives of it in his Epistle to the Hebrews II. 3.
viz. That it is a great Salvation; and that most certainly it is in three
Respects, namely, in its Contrivance, Nature and Continuance.

1. The deepest Wisdom, the greatest Power, and the richest Love have been
conspicuous, in devising and accomplishing the Work of Man's Redemption and
Salvation by Christ Jesus, hence he is justly called The Wisdom of God, and The
Power of God. 1 Cor. XXIII. 24. Memorable to this Purpose is that Passage of
the same Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians III. 10. [he polupoikilos
sophia tou Theou] the manifold Wisdom of God; hence the Angels are said to
desire to look into these Things [eis a' epithumusin angeloi paracupsai.] 1
Pet. I. 12. The Word [ paracupsai] signifies to bend downwards, and is usually
applied to Bodies when they stoop: But when it is applied to Spirits destitute
of Bodies, it must needs import great intenseness of Mind; hence also are these
Sayings of the same inspired Writer to the Romans, I. 3, 4. -- And declared to
be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the
Resurrection of the Dead. And Ephesians. I. 6, 7, 8. To the praise of the Glory of
his Grace, wherein he has made us accepted, in the Beloved. See Ephesians. V. 2. and
1 John IV. 10.

2. It is a great Salvation in Regard of its Nature, if we either consider The
Miseries Saints are by it delivered from, or The Blessings they are instated in.

1. The Miseries which glorified Saints are delivered from, are couched in
these two Generals, viz. Sin, and all Incentives to it, and Sorrow the fatal
Fruit of Sin, in all its various Degrees and Forms, Rev. XXI. 4, 27. which
comprehend many Particulars, some of which I shall mention.

1. The Miseries and Afflictions which God's People are in this Life distressed
with, and in the next State perfectly delivered from, are of two kinds,
external or internal, temporal or spiritual; their temporal Troubles may be
distinguished, for Order's Sake, into these three Kinds, namely, into such as
respect the Name, Body or Estate.

1. As to the Name, who are apt to suffer more this Way than those who least
deserve it? Witness the Prophets, Apostles and primitive Christians, yea, even
Christ himself. Those ancient Worthies could not escape the World's Calumnies;
who though the most excellent of the Earth, were counted the Off-scourings of it,
1 Cor. IV 13. A good Name and Character is naturally dear to us, Eccl. VII. 1.
Therefore it must needs be somewhat afflictive to be unjustly bereaved of it:
Yet this is the common Lot of gracious Persons, more especially of such who are
zealously active for, and successful in the Promotion of Christ's Kingdom. If
any will go beyond the Line of carnal Wisdom, and Lukewarmness in the Cause of
God, and precious Souls; they are presently esteemed Monsters and Madmen, and
set up as Marks for the Devil and his envious Brood, to shoot at with their
envenomed Arrows, Act. XXVI. 25. Rev. XII. 15. Such is the Enmity of Satan and
his Favorites against them, that if they will gain Souls, they shall lose
their Reputation. 2 Timothy III. 12. The most unsullied Innocence shall not screen
them from invidious Reflections; as I hinted before: How was Christ himself
reproached, called a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a seditious Person? Mat. XI. 19.
Luke XXIII. 2. If they did these Things in a green Tree, what shall be done in
the dry, Luke XXIII. 31. The Lord Jesus foreknowing that this would be the Lot
of his People, who in this World are as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. Mat. X.
16. has given them sufficient Warning of it, lest they be surprised, Mat. X.
22. And ye shall be hated of all Men for my Names sake; and does give them
sufficient Support under it, lest they should be discouraged, Rev. II. 1, 3.
Is. XLVIII. 10. with the encouraging Promise of a perfect Deliverance from it,
and a greater Reward for it in the higher House. Mat. V. 11, 12. Blessed are ye
when Men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all Manner of Evil
against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: For great is
your Reward in Heaven. --

2. Another Kind of temporal Troubles which in this Life afflict the Just, is
concerning their Bodies. -- What a melancholy Train of numerous and painful
Diseases infest the whole Progeny of apostate Adam? The just Penalty of the
broken Covenant. Genesis II. 17. In the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
dye; not only Death it self, the King of Terrors, and Terror of Kings, but all
Kinds of Pain and Sickness, the awful Ushers and Antecedents of it, are the
best of Men exposed to here. Man in his innocent Estate enjoyed a just
Temperature of Humors, which served to preserve his excellent Constitution,
which being by Sin broken, tend to beget and inflame those Diseases, which pain
and put a Period to human Life; every of which the dearest of Gods Servants are
liable to in this Wilderness of Sorrows and Vale of Misery; but it is their
Covenant Mercy to have them sanctified and often sweetened in this World by
God's Spirit and his Love, Is. XXVII. 9. Romans V. 3, 5. and it will be their
Privilege to be perfectly saved from them in the next, when all the Seeds of
Death and Sources of Pain, shall be far removed from their immortal Nature and
happy State, Rev. XXI. 4. And shall wipe all Tears from their Eyes; and there
shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any
more Pain, for the former Things are passed away. See 1 Cor. XV. 53, 54.

3. Another Kind of Miseries which afflicts pious People, respects their
Worldly Estates. It is the common Lot of the best of Men, not to have much of
this World's Goods, Ps. LXXIV. 19. 1 Cor. I. 26. -- 29. Now Poverty through the
Corruption of Nature, and Weakness or want of the Exercise of Grace, is apt to
beget anxious Fears, and distrustful Cares, which prey upon the small Comforts
of Life. This with the Defeat of blooming Projects, and the Bites of covetous
knavish Misers, is no inconsiderable Affliction. -- From these Afflictions also
there is a Rest for the People of God, in that great Salvation they are
entitled to, He^ IV. 9.

Besides these personal Afflictions mentioned, there are sympathetick Sorrows,
occasioned by the Reproaches, Pains, and Deaths of such as be near and dear to
us, by the Bonds of Nature, Grace and Gratitude, which wound our Spirits and
distress our Hearts. Oh what a Scene of Sorrow and Vale of Mourning is the Life
of Man! But from all these and every other Misery, shall the Redeemed of God be
saved in their future happy State; Rev. XXI. 4. In that joyful perfect
Paradise, they shall never behold any miserable Object, to call forth their
mourning Passions. Is. LI. 11. Therefore the Redeemed of the Lord shall return
and come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting Joy shall be upon their Head:
They shall obtain Gladness and Joy, and Sorrow and Mourning shall flee away. --
But I proceed to consider the

2. Kind of Trouble before mentioned, viz. Spiritual and internal, which this
great Salvation includes a Freedom from; these may be again distinguished into
two Sorts, namely, personal and relative.

1. Personal, these Troubles which respect our selves are,

1. Orginal Corruption, that Spawn of Sin and Fountain of Pollution, the very
Parent of all the Evils that stain our Lives and perplex our Hearts. O what an
intolerable Burden is this to a gracious Person! Ps. LI. 5. Behold I was shapen
in Iniquity; and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Romans VII. 24. O wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death!

2. Actual Sin, this disturbs their Peace, blots their Evidences for Heaven,
offends their gracious God, causes much Heart Sorrow, and many mournful
Complaints: But from both these grievous Maladies last mentioned, which are
indeed the meritorious Causes of all others, shall the People of God be
perfectly freed by the great Salvation. Heb. X. 22, 23. But ye are come unto
Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable Company of Angels, to the general Assembly and the Church of the
first born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of just Men made perfect.

3. The Defects of their Graces and Imperfections of their Duties cost them
many a sorrowful Hour. 1 These. III. 10. Romans VII. 21. Their Duties are in this
Wilderness like Pillars of Smoke, blackned with Sin as they flow from them,
although they be perfumed with the Myrrh and Frankincense of Christ's
Righteousness, and for that be graciously accepted by God. Cant. III. 6. Rev.
VIII. 3. Hypocrites look only to the Matter or Husk of Duties, and if that be
done they are easy: But it is the Property of every gracious Heart to look well
to the Form and Manner of them; the Principles from which, the Scope to which,
and the Frame with which they act. Phil. III. 3. Hence are their Complaints, Woe
is ^ne, how cold and dead am I? My wretched Heart is like a Piece of the
neither Millstone! What a dead Dog am I? 2 Samuel III. 8 Woe is me, I have no
Faith at all, or very little! Mark III. 24. Quicken me, quicken me, enlarge my
Heart, O God! And then will I run in the Way of thy Commands. Ps. CXIX
25.37.88. Ps. CXIX 32. But assuredly the great Salvation they are interested
in, will perfect both their Graces and Duties Ephesians. 5.27.

4. Other Afflictions which distress the People of God (many of them)
exceedingly, are doubts about their State; and the violent Temptations of the
Enemy: Who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. With
what Fear and Trembling will God's People weigh themselves in the Scales of the
Sanctuary, and often think they find themselves too Light? Alas! says the poor
humble Soul, I have never been humbled enough for Sin! Woe is me I fear, I make
no Progress in Holiness! Some make light Work of Examination, they easily
imagine without Scripture Foundation, that their State is good. Ay, but
conscientious Persons who know the worth of their Souls, and the de^itfulness
of their Hearts, will not take Things of such Moment and Consequence upon
Trust; without the most solemn and impartial Trial. Those Doubts about the
goodness of their State, and the fiery Darts, of Satan, are often the Effects
of God's hiding his Face from the Soul upon the Account of Sin. As when the
natural Sun retires from our Horison, Darkness immediately ensues, and then do
the Vermin of the Forest which were ashamed to see the Light, come out of
their lurking Places for their Prey: Thus it is in a spiritual Sense, when the
Lord withdraws the influences of his Love, then Satan that Bird of Prey,
knowing his Opportunity, bends his hellish Bow, and shoots ^^s fiery Arrows
into the distressed and deserted Heart; from these Afflictions also shall they
be everlastingly delivered by the great Salvation. Romans XVI 20. 1 Cor. XII. 12.
Having spoken something concerning the spiritual Troubles of God's People, in
respect of themselves: I proceed to consider.

2. The relative Afflictions they Labor under in respect of other; the Lord
best knows what breakings and rendings of Heart, what deep Sobs and
overwhelming Sorrows they have for their unconverted Relations! Abraham's
request for Ishmael is often on their Hearts, and in their Lips. Genesis 17.18.
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee! Also they
cannot but be grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph, in the following Instances.

1. The little Success of the glorious Gospel troubles them, when the Word and
Ordinances are like a miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts; when Ichabod, or the
Glory is departed, may be written upon them 1 Samuel IV. 21. Micah VII. 1.

2. The paucity or sewness of the truly godly who are like two or three Berries
in the top of the uppermost Bough. Is. XVII. 6. Like a few Jewels, among an
Infinite Number of P^bbles and Rubbish. Mal. III. 17. Like a few gleannings,
after the Vintage in Comparison of the Wicked. Mic. VII. 1. A little Flock.
Luke XII. 32. A small Remnant. Is. I. 9. Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto
us a very small Remnant, we should have been as Sodom. -- Romans IX 27. Tho the
Number of the Children of Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, a Remnant shall be
saved. Jer. III 14. And I will take you one of a City, and two of a Family, and
I will bring you to Zion. It was the Complaint of the Prophet. Amos VII 5. That
Jacob was small.

3. The Reproaches that are cast upon them by wicked People, are afflictive to
those that fear God; thus it was Jeremiah's Lamentation, that the precious Sons
of Zion were disesteem'd and undervalued. Lam. IV 2.

4. The increasing Number of the Churches enemies. Ps. III. 1. Lord how are
they increased that trouble me? many are they that rise up against me? And
their growing Power. Pro. XXIX 2. When the Righteous are in Authority, the
People rejoice: But when the wicked bears Rule the People mourn.

5. The Removal of her faithful Friends, Is. I. 57. The Righteous perishes
and no Man lays it to Heart.

Now from these relative as well as from all personal Afflictions, do the
People of God find rest; in that Salvation Christ has purchased for them.

2. These. I. 6.7. Seeing it is a righteous Thing with God, to recompense
Tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled rest. -- Is.
LXIII. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us. --

Having spoken thus much of the Miseries, God's People are delivered from by
the great Salvation. I come now in the

2. Place according to the Order proposed to speak of the Blessings they are
instated in, which are Desirable in their Nature, and Durable in their
Continuance; for

1. They are introduced into, and made Possessors of a stately Palace. Luke
XXIII. 43. Which has these three notable Qualities, viz. Vast extent,
inimitable Beauty, and eternal Duratiou.

1. This Palace of the King is of vast extent, hence it is called by the Apostle
John, the great City. Rev. XXI. 10. Which the Angel having measured with a
golden Reed, found to extend each Way Twelve Thousand Furlongs, which amounts
to Forty eight Thousand Furlongs in the whole Compass; or Fifteen hundred
German Miles, ver. 15.16. As Mr. Henry Observ's. Here is yet Room for all true
Penitents. Luke XIV 22. Here are Mansions suitable in Nature, (or Quality) and
sufficient in Number, for all returning Prodigals. John XIV. 2.

2. It is of inimitable and unconceivable Beauty, and Splendour, hence its
called Light; Col. I. 12. And we are further informed concerning this City,
that it has no need of the Sun neither of the Moon to shine in it, for the
Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. Rev. XXI. 23.
It Is called the Heaven of Heavens because of it is Height, Extent, Excellency.
1. King. VIII. 27. The Throne of God, because of his majestic Presence there.
Is. LXVI. 1. The Heavenly Jerusalem, because of its spotless Sanctity, Heb.
XII. 22. Paradise, because of the inexpressible Beauty of the Place, and the
transcendent Pleasures there enjoyed, Luke XXIII. 43.

3. It is of Eternal Duration; hence it is called a House not made with Hands,
eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. V. 1. A City that has Foundations, whose
Builder and Maker is God, Heb. XI. 10.

2. The Blessed are made to enjoy a glorious God, Mat. V. 8. From whose Bosom
springs Rivers of Pleasures, a Fountain of Life, and Fullness of everlasting
Consolation, Ps. XXXVI, 7, 8, 9. Ps. XVI. 11. Something suitable and sufficient
to satisfy all the Powers of the Soul.

The Understanding is infinitely pleased with beholding the surprising Beauties
of his Nature, the Charms and Wonders of his Love, the Wisdom and Symmetry of
his Works. In his Light it beholds Light and Truth, which is its proper and
suitable Good.

The Will is as much ravished with embracing him for its full and final
Portion, who is as full of Glory and Excellency, as the Sea of Water, or the
Sun of Light.

3. They are made to behold a beautiful Redeemer, Rev. V. 6. which will
certainly make the Tide of their Joys swell in his Presence, in Proportion to
the Degrees of their Desire, and Sorrow in his Absence; if Believers are
ravished with the Love of Christ in this World, when they have but a small
Glimpse of his Beauty through the Lattesse. Cant. II. 9. Cant. V. 4. How
unconceivably great will their Satisfaction be, when they shall see him shining
in his full Glory, and be blessed with his Embraces? Especially when they
remember the Labors of his Love, and Depth of his Sufferings on their Account.

4. They shall undoubtedly receive additional Satisfaction and Solace from
their agreeable Fellowship and social Worship with Saints and Angels. Here,
though much Pleasure at some Times may be had with the Saints, in a mutual and
united Performance of the sweet Duties of Religion; yet their different
Opinions in Matters of lesser Importance, different Frames, and Jealousies
arising from the Defects they perceive in each other, sometimes mar the Harmony
of their Worship, shut and seal the Springs of their mutual Solace: For when
one is mourning, the other is rejoicing, with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory; while one trembles, the other triumphs; while one feels his Heart
straightened, the other is enlarged; while one thinks himself forsaken, another
can say with the Spouse, My Beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant. II. 16. feels
his Affections burning and flaming within him, and roaming after Christ and the
heavenly Eden; like the Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. VI. 12.

Again, there are such Defects in the Graces of God's People, and such Weakness
in their Mortal Frame, as give no small interruption to the Thread of their
Devotion; but these Imperfections will be forever done away in Heaven, that
Seat of transcendent Glory, perfect Purity, and perpetual Pleasure. Heb. XII.
23. Their Bodies being made spiritual, will of Consequence be indefatigable. 1
Cor. XV. 53.

Once more, that solemn Dread we are struck with at the Appearance of an Angel,
in this State of Imperfection, which springs principally from our Guilt and
Sin, shall then be perfectly removed; and consequently they will become
agreeable and pleasant Companions in that triumphant State. Now from these
Things mentioned there cannot but flow.

5. Continual Joy and Delight. In order to convey some Idea of the Greatness of
this Joy to us, it is compared, as Doctor Bates observes, To the Joy of the
Harvest. -- Ps. CXXVI. 5, 6. They that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy; he that
goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious Seed, shall doubtless come again with
Rejoicing bringing his Sheaves with him. And to the Joy of a Victory, Romans
VIII. 37. Nay in all Things we are more than Conquerors, through him that loved
us. Mat. XII. 20. A bruised Reed shall be not break, and smoking Flax shall be
not quench until he bring forth Judgment unto Victory; which must needs be
great, because of the Dangerous Enemies that are overcome, and the Prize that
is hereby secured.

If God's People sometimes rejoice, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory,
when they have but transient Tastes and small Drops of Comfort communicated to
them, to what Degree shall their Delight increase, when they shall enter into
their Master's Joy, and swim in the boundless Ocean of divine Goodness and
Love, Ps. XXXVI. 9.

3. This Salvation is great in regard of its Continuance and Duration, which
(as Divines say) is semper and ad semper, continual without Intermission, and
eternal without End. Mat. XXV. 46. The least Doubt of any Intermission of, or
Period put to their present happy Scene, would set the whole Heavens a
mourning; for the greater Delight we have in the Enjoyment of any Good, the
greater proportionably are our Sorrows when bereaved of it. -- Well might the
Apostle John observe concerning the happy State of perfected Spirits, that it
is to us in our present Condition incomprehensible, 1 John III. 2. Beloved, now
are we the Sons of God,' and it does not yet appear what we shall be. -- And
thus I come to consider the

II. General Head proposed, ^^^ch was to show, What it is to receive the Truth
in Love, and this is,

1. To hear the Doctrines of the Gospel of Truth frequently, as often as
Opportunity presents, Heb. X. 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of your selves
together, as the Manner of some is.

2. Attentively, Acts XVI. 14. And a certain Woman named Lydia, a Seller of
Purple, of the City of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us; whose Heart the
Lord opened, that she attended to the Things which were spoken of Paul.

3. Reverently, Is. LXVI. 2. -- But to this Man will I look ( i. e. with
Compassion and Complacency) even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit,
and trembles at my Word. 1 These. II. 13. For this Cause also thank we God
without ceasing; because when ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the Word of Men, but (as it is in Truth) the Word of
God, which effectually works also in you that believe. --

This leads me to consider the

4. Particular included in receiving the Truth in Love, which is Faith, a
necessary Antecedent of the Former; for Faith works by Love. Those who receive
the Truth in Love hear it believingly, i. e. not only give a firm Credit to
what is spoken agreeable to the Scriptures of Truth, as the Word of God in
general, but also make a close Application of their Portion of that Word they
hear in particular, Heb. IV. 2. For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well
unto them: But the Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with
Faith in them that heard it. -- See Acts II. 37. Again,

5. Receiving the Truth in Love, implys high Esteem, Job. XXII 12. I have
esteemed the Words of his Mouth (says Job) more than my necessary Food. The
Psalmist speaking of God's Commands, in Ps. XIX 10. says that They are more to
be desired than Gold, yea than much fine Gold.

6. Eager Desire, 1 Pet. II. 2. As new born Babes desire the sincere Milk of
the Word that ye may grow thereby. Agreeable to this precious Precept was the
Psalmist's pious Disposition and Practice, Ps. XX. 4. One Thing have I desired
of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord
all the Days of my Life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
his Temple.

7. Great Delight, Ps. LXXXIV. 10. For a Day in thy Courts (said the Psalmist)
is better than a Thousand (i. e. elsewhere) I had rather be a Doorkeeper in
the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. I suppose he
meant in the most pompous Manner; for there seems to be a Meiosis in these
Words, i. e. more intended than expressed. And Ps. XIX. 10. he tells us, that
the Word of God is sweeter than Honey and the Honeycomb. And Ps CXIX. 103. he
says, How sweet are thy Words unto my Taste, yea sweeter than Honey to my Mouth.

8. Unfeigned Obedience, Jam. I. 22. But be ye Doers of the Word and not
Hearers only, deceiving your own selves. Here the Apostle instructs us, that if
we depend upon bare Hearing of the Word, without acting answerable to what we
hear, we do but deceive our selves. See Joh. XIII. 17. If ye know these Things,
happy are ye if ye do them. And miserable if ye do them not; this is doubtless
intended in the Expression, in which there seems to be an Elipsis. -- But I
proceed to consider, the

III. Proposed, which was to discover and expose the Obstructions which hinder
Men's receiving the Truth in Love; and they are such as these following, viz:

1. Ignorance of the Foundation-Truths and precious Principles of Christianity
Prove. XIX. 2. That the Soul be without Knowledge it is not good; -- The blessed
God complains by the Prophet Hosea IV. 6. That his People were destroyed for
lack of Knowledge: And, alas, there is too great Reason for the same Complaint
at this Day over a great Part of this miserable Land! who not being by
Catechizing instructed in the first Truths of the Christian Religion in their
early Years, are suffered to wander endlessly in the wild Mazes of those smoth
deceitful Doctrines their Corrupt Natures dictates, and so are ignorant of, and
averse to, the plain fundamental Truths of that Religion they profess, and
therefore pass a Judgment upon what they hear, rather according to the corrupt
Bias of their Fancy and Caprice, than the Rules of Scripture and Reason. And
thus truly the Praise or Dispraise of the most are equally insignificant and
trifling; for they can give as little Reason for the one as the other: But
because it is the Fashion, they must pass their Verdict forsooth, and that is
but a random Shot directed rather by their Palate than their Judgment or
Reason. This lamentable Ignorance is the great Cause why so many get so little
Good by what they hear, as our Lord informs us in his Explication of the
Parable of the Sower, Mat. XIII. 19. When one hears the Word of the Kingdom,
and understands it not, then comes the Wicked One and catches away that
which was sown in his Heart.

2. Enmity is another great Obstruction against receiving the Truth in Love;
for this gives the Minds of Men a strong Prejudice against it, so that they
will not hear patiently, or weigh impartially, the Reasons which are offered to
confirm and illustrate it; and thus they oftentimes reject the Truth unheard.
What Men do not like should be true, they will be easily induced to believe is
false; the Shadow of Reason will gain their inconsiderate Dissent. Thus do they
square their Faith by their Fancy, and sport themselves in their destructive
Deceivings. 2 Pet. II. 12, 13. But these, as natural brute Beasts, made to be
taken and destroyed, speak evil of the Things they know not, and shall utterly
perish in their own Corruption. But this Disposition indulged, is foolish as
destructive: For can it be with Reason imagined, that a false Faith will alter
the Nature of Things?

Now natural Men are possessed of a fourfold Enmity.

1. Against God himself, the Fountain of Truth, because of his absolute
Sovereignty, strict Justice, and unspotted Holiness. Rom VIII. 7. Romans I. 30.
They cannot bear the Thoughts of God's absolute Power to govern over them, and
dispose of them as he pleases, as the Potter over the Clay; no, this crosses
the horrible Pride of their Natures, by which like their Father the Devil, they
seek to be above God, would have Jehovah bound to their Belt, and truckle to
their Nod; while they themselves are absolutely free forsooth, and at their own
Dispose, capable (as they imagine) to purchase in part, a Right to the Heavenly
Paradise, with the filthy Truck of their stinking Prayers, and other graceless
Performances. Romans X. 3. Romans III. 13. Zech. XI. 8. Tit. I. 15. Hag. II. 14.
Now when these haughty Conceits and hireling Principles are opposed, they
presently show their Spite against the blessed God, by offering carnal Cavils
against his holy and eternal Purposes. Romans IX. 20. They would rather trust
themselves in their own Hands than in the Hands of God: This proves plainly
(notwithstanding their false Pretenses to the contrary) the sorry Opinion they
have of God, and the high Conceit they have of themselves.

And thus do they hate the Justice and Holiness of God, they will praise God's
Mercy sometimes with open Mouth, through Selflove; but as to his Holiness and
Justice, not a Word of them; as there are some Laws of God which do not suit
well their darling Lusts, which they could secretly wish were to^^ out of the
Bible or Decalogue; so there are Attributes which they would have torn from the
Being of God. -- To conclude this, let it be noted, that those who do not love
God for his Holiness, Sovereignty, Justice, hate him, and are therefore in the
Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity. Such who love not all God's
Attributes, love none of them in Truth, for they are all equally amiable.

2. Against the Ministers of God, the Messengers of Truth, for their
Faithfulness and Plainess. 2 Chronicles XVIII. 7. -- There is yet one Man, by whom
we may enquire of the Lord: But I hate him; for he never prophesies good unto
me, but always evil: The same is Micaiah the Son of Imla.

3. Against the People of God, the Lovers of Truth, because of their Piety and
Strictness. 1 John III. 12. Not as Cain, who was of that Wicked one, and slew
his Brother: And wherefore slew he him? Because his own Works were evil, and
his Brother's righteous.

4. Against the Truth it self, because of its Simplicity and Sanctity. The Word
of God, though it bears the Characters of Divine Majesty, which justly command
the Attention and excite the Esteem, of all who are not abandoned to stupid
obstinate Infidelity: Yet being void of meretricious Beauty, its useful
Plainess is treated with Contempt, by a Generation of Mortals who are willingly
ignorant of true Worth. 1 Cor. I. 21. 2. Pet. III. 5. 1 Cor. II. 14.

Its spotless holiness which deserves the Veneration of all inteligent
Creatures, who have any Remains of the Divine Image, does but excite the
Indignation of willful Impenitents; because it crosses and condemns the
Corruptions they Love and caress, Joh. III. 19, 20. If our Gospel be hid, it is
hid from them that are lost, 2 Cor. IV. 3. Shall we think the worse of the
natural Sun, because the whole Congregation of Bats dislike and shun its
discovering Light?

3. Another Obstruction is Obduracy, or Hardness of Heart. Heb. III. 7, 8. To
Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. Pharaoh heard not Moses
because his Heart was hardened. -- Unhappy Sinners harden their Hearts by
Sinning against Light, by neglecting that which they know to be Duty, and doing
that which they know to be Sin; by this woeful Course the Heart is gradually
hardened, the Conscience seared, and God often provoked to inflict a penal
Hardness Is. VI. 10.

4. Obstruction is Pride, 2 Cor. X 4, 5. -- Casting down Imaginations, and
every high Thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and
bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ. The horrible
Pride that governs natural Men so stiffens their Hearts, that they scorn to
stoop to the Simplicity of the Truth as it is in Christ: But hear and remember
ye stout hearted, that are far from Righteousness, Is. XLVI. 12. you shall be
humbled; either graciously to your Conviction and Conversion, or judicially to
your Confusion and Damnation. Is. II. 12. Tim. III. 6. Joh XXVI. 11, 12. The
Pillars of Heaven tremble, and are astonished at his Reproof. He divides the
Sea with his Power, and by his Understanding he smites through the Proud.

5. Obstruction is Presumption. Many have got though without a scriptural
Foundation, a good Opinion of their present State, and therefore like not these
close awakning Truths, which tend to discover the Badness and Danger of it.
Rev. III. 17. Joh. III. 20, 21. The

6. And last Obstruction I shall mention, is that of bad Tutors and Examples.
Prove. XIII. 20. He that walks with the Wise, shall be wise: But a Companion
of Fools (i. e. wicked Men, who have frequently that ignominious but just
Epithet given them in Scripture) shall be destroyed. Too many ungodly People
are like the Pharisees of old, who will neither enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven themselves, nor suffer those that are entering to enter, if they can
hinder them, either by their crafty Sophisms, and envidious Reproaches against
vital Religion and its Professors; or by their disdainful Taunts and filthy
Practices. Mat. XXIII. 13. But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees; for ye shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men: For ye neither go in your selves neither
suffer ye them that are entering, to enter. Li^e Elimas the Sorcerer, too many
are endeavoring to turn away People from the Truth, whom we may address in
Paul's Language, Act. XIII. 10. O full of all Subtilty and all Mischief, ye
Children of the Devil, will ye not cease to pervert the right Ways of the Lord?

I proceed to consider the

IV. Proposed, which was to prove The Necessity of receiving the Truth in Love.

1. It is necessary by God's positive Command, Luke VIII. 19. Take heed
therefore how ye hear.

2. It is necessary as an appointed Means; (1.) To obtain Faith in God through
Christ. If we hear not the Word without Prejudice, we are never like to obtain
the necessary Grace. Romans X. 14, 17. -- (2.) to obtain Freedom from the Guilt
of Sin. Joh. VIII. 32. And ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make
you free. (3.) Sanctification from its Power. Joh. XVII. 17. Sanctify them
through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. And (4) Salvation from its penal Effects.
1 Cor. I. 18. For after that in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not
God, It pleased God by the Foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe.
But we preach Christ Crucified, unto the Jews a Stumbling Block, and unto the
Greeks Foolishness; but unto them which are called (i. e. effectually) both
Jews and Greeks, the Power of God and the Wisdom of God.

3. The Truth as it is heard becomes either a great Blessing or a great Curse,
a Mean of Salvation or an Augmentation of our Damnation, a Savor of Life unto
Life, or of Death unto Death; a Mean of enlightening People graciously, or of
blinding them judicially. Mat. X. 14, 15. And whosoever shall not receive you,
nor receive your Words. -- Verily I say unto you that it shall be more
tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorah in the Day of Judgment than for
that City. -- Joh XV. 22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not
had Sin: But now they have no Cloak for their Sin. -- 2 Cor. II. 15, 16. For we
are unto God a sweet Savor in Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that
perish. To the one we are the Savor of Death unto Death; and to the other the
Savor of Life unto Life. -- Romans XI. 7, 8. -- But the Election has obtained
it, and the Rest were blinded. According as it is written, God has given them
the Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that they should not see, and Ears that they should
not bear unto this Day. The Truth of Christ's Gospel is like the Waters of
Jealousy, such as receive it not in Love are like the Adulteress, to whom it
was poisonous and bitter, causing a Curse, Tumors, Rottenness: But to such as
receive it with sincere affection, it is like the Waters of Life, the Dew of
Hermon causing Fruitfulness. Number. V. 27, 28.

But I proceed to the Application or Improvement. And

1. Is Salvation so great and glorious as has been hinted? Then how lamentable
is it, that the Understandings of most are so confined and immured within the
narrow Sphere of Time and Sense, that they rarely pierce the obscure Vail which
intercepts between that and Eternity? Seldom pass over these narrow Boundaries
to contemplate the ravishing Beauties, substantial pleasures, solid and durable
Glories of the celestial State! That great Center in which all the Lines of
Beauty and Perfection meet.

And also that their Judgments should be so much biased and corrupted, as to
value and esteem the Shadows and Phantasms of earthly Grandeur, Wealth, and
Pleasure, before the real permanent and satisfactory Sweets of the Divine Love
and Favor, which is better than Life it self. Is. V. 20.

What Pity is it that the Desires and Affections of reasonable Creatures,
should so foolishly wander from the Snow of Lebanon, the Fountain of living
Waters, and in the mean Time passionatly court and eagerly pursue the muddy
broken Cisterns, the delusive destructive Dreams of sensitive Delights! Jer.
II. 13. Ps. IV. 6. Alas that Men have thus forgot the Dignity of their Nature,
in neglecting both to act worthy of it, and to seek a Happiness suitable to it!

2. Is receiving the Truth in Love so necessary to Salvation, as has been
hinted in the doctrinal Part of this Discourse? Then how great is the Sin and
Danger of such who neglect this Practice? -- But who are these? -- And wherein
appears their Sin and Danger?

The Contraries of the II. Proposed offer an easy Answer to the first Question,
which you may consider in the following Instances, and

1. You who hear the Word of God seldom, when you have Opportunity, receive not
the Truth in Love: For most certainly, true Love would make you seek and
improve all Opportunities of enjoying the Object of your Esteem and Affection.

2. You who instead of hearing reverently, hear with indifferent light Airs,
rather out of Custom than Conscience.

3. You who hear with a wandering Eye and ^oving Heart, like Ezekiel's Hearers,
Ezekiel. XXXIII. 31. who while you sit before God as his People, perhaps your
Hearts are going after your Covetousness as theirs did.

4. You who believe not what you hear according to the Scriptures, to be the
very Word of God; and alas how many such miserable Souls are under the Gospel,
if we may judge of their Faith by their Fruits?

5. You who hear the Words of God, but do them not, receive not the Truth in
Love. Ezekiel. XXXIII. 32. And lo! thou art unto them as a very lovely Song of one
that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on an Instrument. For they hear
thy Words but do them not. Ye who remain as worldly and carnal as ever, one
Year after another, notwithstanding all the Threats of God you hear denounced
against such Practices; miserable Sinners! how dreadful will your Damnation be
except ye repent! It will be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, yea, for Sodom
and Gomorrah, in the Day of the Lord than for you! Mat. XI. 21, 22. Luke X. 14.

6. You who instead of hearing with high Esteem, slight the Gospel of Christ,
ye lukewarm Souls, remember that your dreadful Doom so continuing, is to be
rejected with Abhorrence. Rev. III. 15, 16.

7. You who instead of desiring to dwell in the House of God, and of hearing
the Word dispensed with Delight, grow quickly (and that commonly) tired of
divine Worship, and vehemently long for the last Word, that ye may get out of
the House of God, which is to you a Place of Confinement, and get into your own
Element the World again.

8. You who instead of esteeming with the Psalmist, one Day spent in God's
Courts worth a Thousand elsewhere, begrudge that Time more than any other, and
would rather spend a Thousand in your Shops, Fields, Workhouses, than one in
the House of God, and had rather be a Doorkeeper in an Alehouse or Whorehouse,
than occupy the best Seat in the Church.

2. The Sinfulness of this Practice, viz. of neglecting to receive the Truth in
Love, appears from the dreadful Ingredients it contains in it, namely the
greatest Ingratitude, unaccountable Madness, and most horrible Murder, in
slighting the dearest Love, and rejecting the necessary Means of Life.

1. I say it grasps the greatest Ingratitude, because it slights the richest
and the dearest Love; which you may more particularly consider in the following
Order or Series of Instances.

1. It pleased the Divine Majesty to make Man at first upright, to invest him
with noble Powers and Privileges, suitable to the Dignity of his innocent
Nature, and the Extent of his vast Desires.

His Understanding the leading Power of the Soul, was filled with pure Beams of
divine Light, sufficient to direct him in the Way to Happiness, being perfectly
freed from that Obscurity and Darkness, with which it has been since in our
lapsed State clouded and eclipsed.

The Will was perfectly void of malignant Obstinacy, with which it has been
since woefully depraved.

The inferior Passions followed the Guidance of the Mind, without Confusion or
Resistance, were fixed upon suitable Objects, and regular in the Degrees of
their Motion: Thus amiable and harmonious, was the primitive State of Man.

2. When Man had sought out many Invent ons, foolishly and perversely broke his
Creators Laws, and thereby come short of the Glory of God; and exposed himself
to his avenging Severity: Did not the offended Deity make the first Motion to
reconcile his sinning Creatures, when there was no hopes of Help from Men or
Angels, by forming a gracious Covenant, every way suited to the Perfections of
his own Nature, and his Creatures Wants and Miseries? And by sending his
beloved Son out of his Bosom, as the Mediator of it, to undergo a Scene of the
most grievous Sufferings, that the most envenomed Malice could project, or the
most arbitrary Tyranny inflict? And what was infinitely a greater Punishment to
tread the Wine press of his Fathers Indignation, to to suffer a weight of Wrath
proportioned to all the sins of the elect World! well might the beloved Apostle
John, speak with a peculiar emphasis of this. 1. John IV. 10. Herein is Love.
--

3. That this rich Largess of dearest Love might prove effectual, does not the
blessed God use all rational perswasives, to induce us to accept his Son our
Savior, by complying with the reasonable Terms upon which he is offered? as
particularly.

1. Is not the holy Word of God, replenished with a copious Variety of all
Arguments, that are suited to every Power and Pa^^ion of the human Soul? Are
not the most pregnant Arguments there offered, to convince our Understandings,
and persuade our Wills, from the Equity, Excellency, Necessity and Advantages
of the Laws of Christianity? Do not every of them serve to exalt enoble and
perfect our Natures? Are they not agreeable to the divine Excellencies and
invariable Laws of Reason and Equity, and conducive if observed to our present
Tranquillity, and future Glory? Are not the most bold and dreadful Images of
Terror there opened, no less then the infinite vengeance of an incensed Deity,
continually impending over the impenitent, as a gloomy Cloud charged with
Thunder and Lightning, and all the dreadful engines magazines and bolts of
Death; ready every Moment at the Creators beck to Arrest them, in order to
Alarm their Fear? As also the inexpressible and transcendent Charms of the
Person of Christ, arrayed in all his mediatorial Glory, the vast importance of
his purchased Benefits, the beautiful Landscape of the celestial Canaan, the
immortal Life ravishing transports and everblooming Glories, there ^nvailed, to
allure our Desire and Love? Again are not the melting Compassions of a gracious
God, the sounding of his Bowels the yearning of his Pity, his willingness after
many Aftronts and Delays, to be reconciled to, and accept of, all returning
Prodigals in the Arms of his Mercy; and to Pardon their most Crimson guilt, and
make them white as Snow, there displayed with great frequency force and energy
of Language, sufficient motives to excite our Hope, that great spring of
Motion, and awake our ingenuity, if there be any remains of that generous
Passion in our iron Bosoms? Once more may not the passionate Complaints and
Lamentations of a Deity mourning over us, and his affectionate condescending
Addresses to, and piercing Expostulations with us, expressed in his Word open
the Springs of our bitterest Griefs, that we have been so long slighters of
such Kindness and Love, continued to us after so long and vile Abuse?

2. To enforce his Word upon our Consciences, in order to reclaim us from sin
and ruin, and invite us to accept his Love; has not the good God appointed an
Order of Men, to publish the Truths therein contained? Ephesians. IV. 11. When our
Lord Redeemer had conquered Death and Devils, he ascended up on high and gave
Gifts to Men, in order to quality them for the ministeral Work; which is to
inculcate the Truths and Arguments but now mentioned, with the utmost
Vehemence, Solemnity, and Frequency, to ery aloud and spare not, -- to beseech
and entreat with the strongest ardours and the softest Passions, poor Sinners
to be reconciled to God 2. Cor. V. 20. Again,

3. To make the former Effectual has not the gracious God appointed continual
Monitors in our Bosoms, I mean our Consciences, who being conscious to the most
retired Scene of our Actions, have thereby a Capacity, and are also obliged by
Office as God's Vicegerents or Deputies, to correct our most concealed
impieties, to Guard against sin and goad to Duty -- Not to mention

4. The great pains Jehovah takes with Mankind, in the Course of his Holy and
Sovereign Providence for the same end; (before expressed) sometimes alluring
them with a Series of forfeited Mercies, sometimes scareing them with a Train
and thick Succession of painful Afflictions. And now Brethren, I leave it to
your Consciences to determine, whither slighting the Love of God in all the
aforesaid Instances, does not contain the greatest Ingratitude? A Sin condemned
by the light of Nature, and yet this all such are guilty of, who receive not
the Truth which Love has proclaimed in Love.

2. Neglecting to receive the Truth in Love contains in it the most
unaccountable Madness, which appears in the following Instances.

1. Is not it the height of folly and madness, needlessly to provoke a powerful
Adversary, whose angry Resentments we are neither able to resist, endure or
escape, by Power Policy or Flight? Is not this the very Practice of such who
neglect or refuse to receive the Truth in Love? do you not needlessly and
disingeniously provoke, an infinite God to Arms, as if you were stronger than
he? Have you an Arm like God, or can you Thunder with a Voice like him? Who if
he but touch the Mountains they smoke, and the Hills tremble at his Presence!
Are ye able to vanquish, bear, or escape his Almighty and terrible Vengeance?
Can Briers and Thorns contend, in Battle with the flaming Fire? If ye take the
Morning Wings and hasten to the utmost ends of the Earth, or dig into the Heart
of the Earth, or descend into the Depths of Hell, or ascend to the Top of
Carmel, or into the heights of Heaven, Gods Hand will find you out, and drag
you before the Tribunal. He is wise in Heart, and mighty in strength, who has
ever hardened himself against him, and prospered.

2. is not it a Prodigy, of the most amazing Madness and folly? For rational
Creatures to barter away a deathless Soul, an immortal God, and an eternal
Paradise; for some brutish transient Gratifications, or a few maskt and
disguised Trifles, of no Importance or Duration? And yet, be astonished, Ye
Heavens, and amazed, O Earth! This is the woeful Practice of those infatuated
Mortals, who neglect to receive the Love of the Truth, that they may be saved!
But seeing Words fail of sufficient energy, to give a complea^ Description of
this unaccountable unparaleled Folly; I must chiefly leave it to your Thoughts
to paint suitable Ideas of it, (...) the Addition of a few Queries.

(...)ie, 1. Can you say your Souls are (...) worth? No surely the contrary
will (...) to the first Glance of an impartial (...) with the brightest Blaze
of Light. -- (...) the Soul is a Spirit, appears with meridi(...) Luster, from
its sublime Ideas, exalted ^esires, distant Fears, nervous Reasonings, (...)
pregnant Hopes. It Is a common Maxim (...) Philosophy, and justly Applicable
here, ^at Effects demonstrate the Nature of the ^se, which produces them. Those
noble (...) mentioned, necessarily suppose (...) and immaterial Cause; they
cannot ^bly be the Effects of crass Matter. however modified, and put in
Motion; for the Effects cannot exceed the virtue of its producing Cause. If
then the Soul is a Spiritual Substance, it is by consequence of a nobler Nature
then the Body, and of a longer yea perpetual Duration, capable of more refined
Pleasures and intense Pains, how can ye then endure to have this immortal
Spirit, torn from the smiles and embraces of an infinite God, and exposed to
his Frowns and Revenges, and the dreadful Gripes of cruel Devils, throughout
Eternity? Had not the Soul been exceeding precious, the Lord Jesus would never
have ransomed it, at so dear and immense a Price; viz. the unvaluable Treasures
of his Blood, and the inexpres^ble Agonies of his Soul, which was exceeding
sorrowful even unto Death! If the Soul were not beyond Imagination and
Expression valuable the damned Angels would not make such vigorous and unwaried
attempts to arrest it; and frequent Solicitations to ensnare it? if it were of
no Moment, why should all the Power and Policy, of Hell and Earth be exerted to
ruin it?

Querie, 2. Or can you say in your own Vindication, that though your Souls be
valuable, you get a sufficient Compensation for them in the Delights of Sin? Is
this possible? Then was our Lord mistaken, when he informs us to the very
contrary! Mat. XVI. 26. For what is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole
World, and loose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his
Soul? Of the like import is that memorable Passage mentioned by the Prophet
Isaiah, V. 2.3. For thus says the Lord, ye have sold your selves for naught:
The whole Earth and all its Enjoyments, is but a single Cipher, an
insignificant nothing when compared with the precious immortal Soul of Man.
Miserable Sinners, Esau's foolish Bargain in selling his Birthright for a mess
of Pottage, was infinitely preferable to yours, who traitorously sell your
deathless Souls, into the Hands of damned Spirits, by neglecting to receive the
Truth in Love: For the insipid transient Trash of perishing Honor, brutish
Pleasure, and ensnaring gain. Are these Things my Brethren, a sufficient
Compensation, for the confounding irreparable Loss, of an immortal Soul, an
eternal God, and an enduring Paradise? Are the false foolish and fleeting
sweets of Sin here, sufficient to counterballance, the continual revilings, and
sharp scourges of a guilty Mind; the dreadful Rebukes, of an enraged God; as
well as the amazing horrors of endless Grief, Indignation, and Death in Hell
for them hereafter.

Querie, 3. Can you pretend in your own excuse, that you have not heard the
Danger of this Sin of neglecting to receive the Truth in Love, represented to
you? No surely, the malignant Nature and damning Issue, of this and other Soul
destroying evils, have been repeatedly and solemnly inculcated in your hearing;
and you earnestly again and again entreated, to flee from the wrath to come,
and accept the Life and Salvation set before you. How then can you answer for
your wilful Wickedness, and cruel Obstinacy, in Sinning against Light and
Instruction; before the great Judge of Heaven and of Earth?

Now Brethren, do not these particulars mentioned under this Head, plainly
prove the sin of neglecting to receive the Truth in Love, to be a piece of the
most unaccountable and inexcusable Madness? but I hasten to the Consideration
of the

3. Ingredient grasped in the Heart of this Sin of neglecting to receive the
Truth in Love, which is horrible Murder; appearing in their slighting and
rejecting a necessary mean of Life. Romans X. 14. Is it not contrary to the Law
of Nature, of Nations, and of God; for a Person to imbrue his Hands in his own
Blood? Are not Self-murderers justly deemed to be the most dreadful Monsters in
Nature? especially such of them who perpetrate this bloody Villainy wilfully,
after many Attempts have been used by others to prevent it! Now is not the
Murder of the Soul, as much more heinous then the Murder of the Body, as it
exceeds it in dignity and Duration, in Worth and Continuance? And is not the
guilt still increased, by a wilful Commission of this execrable Fact? O
Sinners is not this your wretched Case! Who Neglect to receive the Truth in
Love? How will you be able to answer before the dreadful Bar of Christ? For
your blood Guiltiness, your Murder! Self-Murder! Soul-murder! Willful
Soul-murder! In preventing your own Life and Happiness by rejecting the means
of it?

Having spoken somewhat concerning the sinfulness of neglecting to receive the
Truth in Love, I come now to consider.

2. The Danger of it, which is no less then lying Delusion, in order to eternal
Damnation; as is expressed in the strongest Terms, in the Verses immediately
following our Text, which will be opened in the next Discourse. And now Sinners
will ye be guilty of such complicated wickedness, and incurr such pregnant
Anger, and endless Misery; merely to secure very Trifles and winged Vanities?
What Infatuation poor happy Souls has seized your Understandings, will you
renounce the Dictates of your Reason, the natural Inclinations, and
propensities of your self-love, that strong Passion which beats warmly in every
Breast? Will you cease to act with that Discretion and Regard for your Souls
Safety, and Happiness which you use in Temporal concerns? Can it be so? Shall
it be so? O strange! O surprising Madness! Has the great God graciously Written
to you the great and good Things of his righteous Law, and his rich Love? And
will ye count them a vain Thing? And refuse to be allured by the Bowels of
divine Pity? If the goodness of God does not effect you! Where then is your
Reason and Ingenuity? Are you not lost to a Sense of both? And will you not
unhappy Sinners, be drawn to your Duty and Interest, by the soft cords of God's
tender Mercy and Affection? Then must you expect to be bound with the Iron
cords of God's curse, to the Altar of his Justice, and there made a burnt
Sacrifice to his fierce Vengeance. I say you must expect to be fettered with
the massy Chains of your own Lusts, and Gods direful Condemnation for them, to
suffer inutterable Burnings and eternal Torments, among damned Men and Devils
in the Prison of Hell; as is before proved. Is not self-murder an unnatural as
well as damning wickedness, abhorrent to the Laws of Nature of Reason and of
God? Does it not cross the strongest propensities in Nature? As appears even in
Beasts, who eagerly seek their own Preservation, by carefully shunning apparent
Danger. Shall Men then who are of a nobler Mould, and higher Order then they,
abandon the Directions of their Reason and Sense, fall beneath the
Bruit-Creation and embrace Death and Ruin with open Arms, and that against the
Dictates of the clearest Light and charms of the dearest Love? O stupendous
madness! But is not self-murder as Destructive as unnatural, does it not lead
directly to the gloomy Chambers of eternal Death? For no murderer has eternal
Life abiding in him. 1 John. III. 15. Why are ye guilty of this abhorred
Barbarity then Sinners, in rejecting an absolutely necessary mean of Life?
Awake miserable Souls, and seriously bethink your selves what will be the Issue
of your present impenitent Impiety; in slighting God's holy Word, by which you
shall be judged in that Day, when God-man shall descend from the third Heaven,
clothed with Majesty and terrible Glory, attended with a shining Retinue of
innumerable Saints and Seraphims, in order to acquit his People, and condemn
his and their enemies. Pray consider whither ye are fast hastening, your
present fleeting Scene will soon expire, and ye be brought before the dreadful
Tribunal of the Living God, to give an Account for your Actions: And what
Account can ye give if ye thus persist? What miserable Sinners! Will you stab a
Dagger into your own Hearts? What are ye in love with Death, and will ye court
Destruction? Is everlasting Misery so amiable? Who among us shall dwell with
the devouring Fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? Is.
XXXIII 14. Are ye quite infatuated, lost to Sense and Reason; and abandoned by
God? Ah is there no Hope! Or Help? And are ye resolved to be Deaf, to the calls
and Warnings of Reason, of Conscience, of Man, and of God? What mean you by
such desperate Madness? Stop poor Sinner, and consider thy Folly and Danger.
Awake out of thy enchanted Sleep before it be too late. Alas, for the woeful
obstinacy of the poor World! Well Sinners if you will not hear, (the Truth) my
Soul shall Weep in Secret Places for your Pride. Jer. XIII. 17.

You People of God, how can you restrain your deepest Sorrows, upon so mournful
an Occasion? See how desperate Sinners break loose from the restraints of
Reason and Conscience! Which bind them to their Duty and Interest, and with
unparalled Madness, confront the infinite Majesty of Heaven! Run upon the
thick Bosses of his Buckler! The pointed Sword of his burnning Vengeance! Is it
not the saddest sight that ever the Sun saw! To behold rational Creatures lying
in their Blood and Gore? And yet when Life and Healing is offered, by a
provoked God, they will not accept it! But obstinately exaggerate and widen
their Wounds as if they were afraid they should escape Damnation, or not get so
quick to Hell as they desire! Is it not mournful to behold, such multitudes
sinking into Death, just by the Door of Life and Happiness! Especially after so
much Pains as the blessed God has taken to induce them to accept it! after that
Life and Immortality is brought to Light by the Gospel; and that the Day spring
from on high has visited us! And the Sun of Righteousness shone upon us!

If any should ask for Directions in order to perform this great and important
Duty, which I have been explaining and urging, viz. Receiving the Truth in
Love, to such I would offer these following, viz.

1. Beware of indulging Sinful Lusts; for they naturally prejudice the Mind
against those Truths which condemn them.

2. Beware of Pride and Self-conceit in particular; for as this unfits the Mind
for receiving the Simplicity of the Truth as it is in Christ, so it is
offensive to God, and may provoke him to leave such as are governed by it to
Delusions. 1 Pet. V. 5. Jam. IV. 6. Hence we are informed, that such as would
become Wise must become Fools ( i. e. in their own Imagination) in order to it;
they must see the insufficiency of their own Understanding, to direct them
before they learn Wisdom of Christ 1 Cor. III. 18.

3. Beware of needless associating with bad Company, for they much increase and
confirm our natural Aversion against Truth and Holiness, by their subtle
Sophisms, and carnal Arguings; as well as by treating things sacred with
profane Banter and Burlesque; and traducing pious People with unjust
Invectives and Calumnies.

4. Beware of entertaining Prejudice, against the faithful Messengers of Truth;
because of the slanderous Reports of erronius ungodly Men; for as their Father
the Devil was a liar and a murder from the Beginning, and abode not in the
Truth, and is the continual Accuser of the Brethren; so his Children (because
of their natural Spite against God, Truth, and Holiness) incline t^ imitate his
Example, and follow his Step Joh. VIII. 44.

5. Endeavor to be well acquainted with the first Principles, of the Oracles
of God, Heb. VI. 1. The Foundation must be first laid, before the
Superstructure can be erected, the want of this Catechetical Knowledge, opens a
Door for Error or Delusion; think it not too mean an Entertainment to read
Catechisms, in which the great Truths of Christianity are sumarily proposed,
indeed your reading much in larger Composures, before you labor to understand
these first Principles; is like a Bird attempting to fly before it is fledged,
it is said of Dr. Hamond, a very learned Man, that he spent much of his Time,
in reading Catechisms.

6. Read diligently the Scriptures of Truth, and attend frequently and
reverently upon a preached Gospel; examine what you hear, by the written Word
impartially, like the noble Bereans, and Labor conscientiously to comply with
the Directions you hear agreeably thereto, in Heart and Practice; with speed
and sincerity.

7. Be much and earnest in humble Supplication to God, for the Guidance and
Instruction of the Spirit of Truth, Jam. I. 5. For that anointing which
teaches all Things absolutely necessary. 1. John II. 27.

8. Associate with the People of Truth as your chosen Companions, how poor
soever they be in worldly Respects, and despised by a wicked World. Let honest
hearted Nathaniels be the Men of your Council, and objects of your Esteem, for
he that walks with the Wise shall be Wise. Prove. 13.20. I conclude with the
Words of the Apostle James, I. 21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and
superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with Meekness the engrafted Word, which
is able to save your Souls. Amen.

THE DARK DEPTHS OF Divine Providence, Opened and Vindicated from the
impertinent Cavils of foolish Men. IN A SERMON. On 2 These. II. 11, 12. Preached
at New-Brunswick, in New Jersey August 17th 1735. With Enlargements.

By GILBERT TENNENT A.M. and Minister of the Gospel there.

Niteris incassum Christi submergere Navim
Fluctuat at nunquam mergitur illa ratis.
(...) Veracity if he had no Threats or Promises to fulfill? Scot's Christian
Life Vol. 1. and Sher lock on Providence.
the very end and Perfections of these Attributes consists in their exercise;
the end of Power is Action.

Another Argument confirming the reality of a divine Providence, may be drawn
from the Order and Harmony, which is continually preserved, both in the natural
and moral Creation.

It Is surprising to behold, how all the numerous Creatures in the spacious
Universe, are exactly fitted in their Form and Texture, to answer the various
Uses for which they are designed! And that notwithstanding the contrary
qualities of which they are composed; they should conspire to maintain a
general and steady Concord! It Is worthy of Notice, that amidst such Seeds of
Discord and Confusion, the Laws of Union and mutual Dependence should be
preserved: And the general Good of the whole promoted, notwithstanding the
numberless (seemingly) jarring Motions in this vast Machine! And so necessary
is the Preservation of the aforesaid Union; that without it the Frame of
universal Nature would immediately disolve, and crumble into it is primitive
Chaos and Confusion. He that duly considers those Things, will be obliged to
confess, that non caeco impetu volvuntur Rotae. i. e. That the Wheels of
Providence are not rolled by blind Chance. For that the transverse or cross
Motions of unthinking Creatures, should conduce to attain one uniform end and
that worthy of the wisest Agent; must needs be ascribed to an infinite Mind,
who sits at the Helm of Government, fixes the Springs, and guides the Wheels of
Motion.

And if we consider Mankind, either in their private, civil, or religious
Capacities; the reality and Necessity of a superintending Providence, will
appear conspicuous.

For, are they not protected by an invisible Power, amidst the various Deaths,
and Dangers which environ and pursue human Life, in all it is winding Labrinths,
(as the Shadow the Body) and that sometimes by a surprising Train of unexpected
Occurrences?

What else can restrain the Wrath of savage selfish Men, from boiling over its
just Boundaries, to the utter Destruction of human Society? Without this the
World would quickly disband, and turn into the wildest Disorder. The most
dreadful Scene, of Barbarity, and Blood, would open, to inundate the Earth with
a second Deluge! It Is whole Theater would speedily become an Aceldema!

And what reason can be assigned for many Duties of Religion, if we believe
not, that God has the supreme disposal of all Events. How can we rationally
trust in him in the midst of Danger for Protection, Pray to him in want for
supply, or Praise him for Mercies already vouchsafed? -- But not to insist,

As Man in his Creation, was the Crown of all the visible Works of God. So in
his Preservation and Government, he is the special Object of God's providential
Care. But when these once favorite Creatures continue to violate their
Creators Laws; and obstinately to reject the repeated offers of his Love; it
pleases the just Jehovah by his righteous Providence, to make them (sometimes)
terrible Instances of his awful severity; in leaving them to a judicial
Blindness and obduration here, as a preparative for eternal Damnation
hereafter. This we have represented in the strongest Terms, and most dreadful
Colors, in the Text, which is the subject of our present Meditations. In which
we may note two Things, viz.

1. A Description of grievous Evils.

2. And a Denunciation of dreadful Judgments, thereby occasioned. And

1. The Evils here described are two.

The First Negative, viz. Not believing the Truth.

The second positive, namely having Pleasure in unrighteousness.

The former imports a neglect of the Duties of the first Table of the Law,
which we owe to God, with a Rejection of his Love in the Gospel. (as I have
proved in the preceding Discourse) for the eternal God, is undoubtedly the
formal Object of divine Faith. Heb. XI 6. And,

The latter a Violation of the Duties of the second Table, which we owe to Man.
Romans I. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in unrighteousness.

2. The Judgments denounced, viz. Sending of strong Delusion, that they should
believe a Lie, that they all might be damned.

Concerning which these four Things are observable namely their Kind, Quality,
Design, Issue. And,

1. The Kind of the Judgment to be inflicted is Delusion, the original Word
Planes
signifies Error, Deceit, either of others or our selves, for thus it is
interpreted in many Places of Scripture. 1 John IV. 6. 2 John VII. 1 Timothy IV.
5. 1. John I. 8.

2. The degree thereof is terrible to consider, strong Delusion, the original
Words Energeian Planes
signify, the energy, or efficacy of Error, as some interpret. Pasor in his
Lexicon.
i. e. as I conceive such objective and active Delusion, viz. dark Providence,
and Deceivers, namely the Devil and his emissaries, as will be effectual
through their Corruption, to deceive and seduce them. And this,

3. Is the awful Design of such stumbling Providence, as our Text expressly
declares. Delusions are sent that they should believe a Lie; by which Word I
conceive false Doctrine is principally here intended, which considered either
singly or complexly may justly be called a Lie, in two respects, (1) in regard
of the Source from which they spring, viz. Satan the Father of Lies and
Falsehood. John VIII 44. Or the deceitful Heart of Man. Jer. XVII. 9. And (2) in
respect of the Scope to which they tend, which is to deceive and destroy wicked
Men, by flattering their Hopes, with the Expectation of what so continuing they
shall never enjoy, Prove. XIV 12. And by tempting their Ambition, to think
otherwise of themselves then in Truth they are. Gal. VI. 3. For if any Man
thinks himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. It
is but just that those who will not see, should be made blind: That such who
shun the Light, should be punished with darkness; and that as a judicial
preparative for eternal Damnation. Which is,

4. The natural Issue, and fearful Intention of the former Providence, as our
Text expresses in the clearest Manner, that they all might be damned. -- Here
the universality, certainty, and judicial design of their Damnation is
mentioned. By their neglecting to believe the Truth, delighting in Wickedness,
and Abuse of dark Providence; they are fitted as Vessels of Wrath for
Destruction. Which every of them of what degree or order soever may expect to
possess.

But to make this awful Truth more plain, I shall further endeavor to show
what is supposed by God's sending strong Delusion; and what is employed in it.
And,

1. It supposes God's utter Desertion of those People he so punishes, for their
Wickedness; either in respect of outward means, or his Blessing upon them.
Prove. V. 22, 23. His own Iniquities shall take the Wicked himself; and he shall
be holden with the Cords of his sins. He shall die without Instruction, and in
the greatness of his Folly he shall go astray. Or if he continues outward
means, it is in Judgment; for their greater hardening and Damnation. Is. VI.
10. Genesis VI 3.

2. It implys (1) Gods bringing to pass such dark Providence, as ignorant and
wicked People are apt to have wrong Apprehensions of, and stumble over into
Hell. Hos. VIII. 11. Because Ephraim has made many Altars unto Sin, Altars
shall be to Ephraim to Sin. Upon which some learned Interpreters justly Gloss,
Vide Poli Synop. crit. in Locum.
as follows, viz. That here is denounced a Punishment most worthy of Sin,
namely Desertion in Sin, and the Permission of the Occasions of sinning,
because they will sin and perish, let them sin and perish, I shall not hinder
it. Rev. XXII. 11. Because they have multiplied Altars to Sin, they shall have
Altars to Sin, let there be Altars to them to Sin; seeing they so will let them
have and act what they will. Such as seek Occasion of Offense, at Gods Ways,
and People, shall have Occasion given them, in just Judgment to their Delusion,
and Damnation; as our Text witnesses if Ephraim after repeated Warnings, will
still obstinately cleave to Idols, he will be let alone. Hos. IV. 17. Forsaken
of God, and left to Error, Wrath and Ruin.

2. It implys God's removing the restraints of his Providence, and giving up
Men to their Hearts Lusts; to eat of the Fruit of their own Way, and to be
filled with their own Devices. Pro. I. 31. And Ps. LXXXI. 11.12. But my People
would not hearken to my Voice. And Israel would none of me. So I gave them up
to their own Hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Councils. Prove. XIV. 14.

3. It implys God's leaving People to the influence of a lying Spirit, as he
did Ahab who in concurrence with their corrupt Lusts, and the Assistance of
false or unfaithful Teachers, will quickly infuse wrong Notions of God's
Providence, his People, and their own States; and so blind and harden them like
Pharoh, in Order to their eternal Damnation 2 Chronicles. XVIII 22. 2 Cor. IV 4. 1 Timothy IV 1. Giving heed to seducing Spirits, -- 2 John VII. For many deceivers
are are entered into the World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, this is a deceiver and an Antichrist.

4. God's sending strong Delusion implys his sentencing such People to Ruin and
Destruction. This indeed is expressed in the Words; when Sinners will not be
reclaimed by all the gracious Measures divine Wisdom and Goodness used with
them to that end; but harden their Hearts more and more. Pharoh like, both
under God's Word, and Rod, they provoke the Lord to swear in his Wrath that
they shall never enter into his Rest. Heb. III. 18. When they spend the Day of
their gracious Visitation in grieving the Author of it, by taking Pleasure in
unrighteousness, disbelieving his Word, and entertaining unreasonable
prejudices against it, then does the righteous God utterly abandon them, and
doom them to that Damnation they both justly demerit, and foolishly court.
Ezekiel. 24.13. Pro. 29 1.

Neither can the Sovereign Providence of God, be justly charged with any thing
inconsistent with the Perfections of his Nature because of the judicial Process
now mentioned. But on the contrary hereby.

1. His Justice is glorified upon some, in Proportioning Judgments to their
Crimes. Rev. XVI. 5.6. Thou art Righteous O Lord because thou have judged thus.
For they have shed the Blood of Saints and thou have given them Blood to Drink
for they are worthy. Grievous sins call loudly to Heaven for Vengeance; Genesis
XIII. 13. And 18.20. And ripen Sinners for the Strokes of it. Mat. XXIII 32. --
37. Joel III 13. Put ye in the sickle for the Harvest is ripe, come get you
down, for the Press is full, the Fats overflow, for their wickedness is Great.

2. His Mercy and Goodness upon others, in thereby subduing their Corruptions,
and strengthening their Graces, as will be afterward more largely opened. not
to mention.

3. That Jehovah is an absolute Lord, who may do with his own what he pleases.
Mat. XX 15. He is not bound to offer Mercy to any, otherwise it would be no
more Grace but Debt. Romans XI. 6. Ephesians. II 8. Romans IV. 4. But when he freely
offers his Grace, and it is long rejected, may he not with Honor to his
Justice, utterly and eternally withdraw the Offers of it? Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 15.28,
29. And it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken to the Voice of the
Lord thy God -- the Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
astonishment of Heart, and thou shall grope at noon Days, as the Blind gropeth
in Darkness, Neither do the objective Delusions and Temptations, which God
sends in Judgment, any whit Lesson the Creatures offense. I mean by objective
Delusions, and Temptations, such objects and occasions offered or presented to
Men by divine Providence, as are apt to inflame their corrupt Lusts. For God
infuses no wickedness into his Creatures, neither does he persuade or incline
them to Sin: Far less compel them. Jam. I. 13. For every of these are contrary
to the infinite Purity of his Nature. But he may in justice by the Course of
his Providence present tempting Objects, and that as a Punishment of former
Crimes. Ps. XVIII. 26.27. With the Froward, thou will show thy self Froward.
See 2. Sam. XII. 12. Jud. IX. 23.24. compared with the 20. verse. also, Romans I.
21. -- 28. And the Devil may tempt Men, to Error, and Vice; he cannot force
them. Neither the Understanding, or the will, can suffer a Rape, in these
respects. Therefore are Sinners without Excuse, whatever protexts they may
feign: Who of some Things that show their Duty or their Danger are willingly
ignorant, and wilfully delight themselves in known wickedness.

From the Words thus explained, I observe the following Doctrine, viz.

That such who believe not the Truth of the Gospel, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness; may expect to be given up to the Power of spiritual Delusion,
in order to be made Possessors, of eternal Damnation.

In explaining of which I would pursue the following order. viz.

1. I shall Labor to show who those are that believe not the Truths of the
Gospel.

2. Who those are that have pleasure in unrighteousness.

3. What delusions God sends in Judgment.

4. Point out the general Reasons o^ Causes, why the great God sends such
Delusions.

5. Endeavor to show what is included in that Damnation, which deluded Persons
may expect.

And lastly conclude with some Improvement. I return to consider the,

^st. Proposed, which was to show who those are, that believe not the Truths of
the Gospel.

I (...) leave to express the Word Truth in (...) ^pl^ral Number, that I may be
the more ^alily understood; for which I have sufficient Foundation in the Text,
as I think; for though the Word therein be in the singular Number, yet it is a
comprehensive and indefinite Expression, often times including the whole
Gospel, as the Places of Scripture I adduced in order to explain this Word, in
the preceding Discourse, sufficiently confirm. It seems probable to me that the
Word is singularly expressed in our Text, with design to signify to us the
amiable Harmony, that there is among all the various Parts of the Gospel,
whither Historical or Doctrinal: As well as their united tendency to attain one
uniform End; Supreme, and Subordinate, viz. The Glory of God, and his Peoples
happiness. But who are these that believe not the Truths of the Gospel? Answer.

1st. Ignorant Persons believe them not, Js. XXVII. 11.2. These. I. 7.8. Either
such understand not the great Truths of the Gospel doctrinally, or want the
experimental and influential Knowledge of them, as they are in Jesus; Ephesians.
IV. 21. Both which are necessarily supposed by that Faith which is unto
Salvation. Joh. XVII. 3. Act. XXVI. 18. 2. Cor. IV. 6. Hence Faith is called
Knowledge, Is. LIII. 11. By his Knowledge, shall my righteous Servant justify
many. (i. e.) by the Knowledge of him, and Faith in him, many shall be
justified, we cannot give an assent to what we know not; the implicit blind
Belief of the Papists, is a reproach to the Christian Name, and unworthy of the
human Nature.

2. Obstinate Persons, who either give not their assent to the Doctrines of the
Gospel; or their consent to the Terms of it, Tit. I. 9.10. Joh. V. 40. Romans X.
21. Both which saving Faith includes. Act. XXIV. 14. Joh. I. 12. Every true
believer gives not only a general assent, to the whole Scriptures of Truth; but
a particular and firm Assent to the Foundation Doctrines of Christianity, to
these following in a special Manner, viz.

(1) That there is an absolute necessity of a Messiah, to atone for the
Creatures offenses; which is evident, (1.) From the infinite Guilt of Sin,
considered objectively, (2.) From the inflexible Justice, and inviolable Truth
of God, as well as from his infinite Wisdom, in securing the Ends of Government,
viz. The Glory of his Soveraignity, the Honor of his Law, and the Obedience of
his People; by every of which Properties of his Nature, and Considerations
mentioned, he is inclined, yea, obliged to punish Sin and demand Satisfaction,
proportioned to the Guilt of it. And this (3.) Every Creature is utterly
incapable to perform, being both finite and imperfect. That there should be an
exact Proportion ^in degree, between the Offense committed, and the
Satisfaction paid; is so evident from the Principles of natural Reason, and
distributive Justice? that nothing need be said in Confirmation of it, to such
as are not wilfully blind. Now Sin being committed against an infinite
Majesty, necessarily contracts an infinite guilt; which how is it Possible for
any finite Creature to make full Satisfaction for? Surely, ultra posse, non
datur esse; the effect can not exceed its cause. Again let it be considered
that every Creature is imperfect, which their practice but too evidently
proves: And therefore cannot for the Reason aforesaid, perfectly obey a
righteous Law; which is notwithstanding required on pain of Death. Gal. III.
10. Jam. II. 10, Is. LXIV. 6. James III. 2. Ps. CXXX. 3. Dan. III. 18. Hab. I.
13. Not to add; that all rational Creatures are in the deepest Debt to God,
inasmuch as they receive their Beings, Powers, and Privileges from him, are
they not in this respect oblidged by the strongest Claims of Right, and Bonds
of Gratitude, to obey him according to the Dignity of his Nature, and the Depth
of his Love to them? Thus our future obedience being due to God, as our
Creator, Preserver, and Benefactor, cannot be a Compensation for our past
disobedience: For the Payment of one Debt, which is Natural, will make no
Satisfaction for another which is contracted. But then. (2.) Another
foundamental Truth is this That the Lord Jesus is the Promised Messiah,
suitably qualified by his active and passive Obedience, to answer the Demands
of the Law, and divine Justice; and thereby to bring in an everlasting
Righteousness, and that Salvation is in no other. Dan. IX. 24. Heb. V. 9. Joh.
XI. 25. Act. IV, 12. 1. Joh. II. 22. 1 John IV. 2.3. Joh. III. 16.36. Romans X,
14.

Again as every true Believer gives his assent to those Truths mentioned, and
such as are dependant on them: So he consents to the Terms of the Gospel;
without compulsion, or Limitation. Ps CX. 3. Philip. III. 8, Act. 20.24. And

3. Unrenewed Persons, believe not the Truths of the Gospel, for faith purifies
the Heart, and works by love. Act. XV. 9. Gal. V. 6. Hence we are informed that
if any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: Old Things are past away, and
all Things become new. And that they that are Christ's, have crucified the
Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts. Gal. V. 24. Now Faith is the Bond of our
Union to Christ; Joh. I. 12. So that those may undoubtedly conclude themselves
to be unbelievers, whose Understandings are not enlightened to behold with
suitable Affection, the dismal Dangers of an unconverted State; the horrible
hidden Corruptions, of their filthy Hearts; the inexpressible Evil and
Malignity of Sin; the absolute Necessity, and transcendent Glory of Christ; the
incomprehensible Excellency, and unfading Beauty of heavenly Things; as well as
the emptiness and extreme Vanity, of all earthly Enjoyments. Act. XXVI. 18,
Ephesians. IV. 18. Ephesians. V. 8. But the Faith which many depend upon, has never had
so much influence upon them, as the Faith of Devils; for they believe and
tremble. Jam. II. 19. In like manner may those conclude themselves to be
unbelievers whose Consciences are not, nor have not been awakned out of their
carnal Sleep, and deeply distressed for Sin; viz. So as to reform from it, and
close with Christ. Act. II. 37. Is. II. 20.21. But still retain their old
carnal Security, false Hope, habitual and governing Love to Sin. Deuteronomy. XXIX.
19.20. Mat. VI. 24. Such also the general Bias of whose Wills and Affections,
is not turned toward Christ, and heavenly Things, with an easy unconstrained
and general proness; may conclude that they have not one grain of saving Faith.
Ps. CX. 3. Joh. IV. 14. 1 John V. 4. For whatsoever is Born of God, overcomes
the World, even our Faith. You see then Brethren, that covetous worldings are
strangers to the Power of Faith; for that would certainly overcome their
Affections to this World; by giving them an affecting View of the Next: ( Heb.
XI. 2. Faith is the Substance of Things not seen, the Evidence of Things hoped
for.) And by uniting them to Christ, the Head of Influence, and consequently
drawing their supreme Love to him who best deserves it.

4. Unreformed Persons believe not the Truths of the Gospel, Tit. I. 16. They
profess that they know God; but in Works they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate. 1 John I. 6. If we say that we
have Fellowship with him, (which true Faith is the Instrument of, Joh. 1.12.)
And walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth. Jam. II. 14.17.18, What
does it profit my Brethren, though a Man say he has Faith, and have not Works?
Can Faith save him? (i. e.) can that Fa^h which is not operative and Effectual
to p^^duce good Fruits save him, or justify him? The Interogation, or query,
implys a vehement Negation, or denial. No, most certainly it cannot, it will
not. For kn^w ye not that to whom ye yield your s^lves Servants to obey, his
Servants ye are whom ^e obey; whither of Sin unto death, or of obedience unto
Righteousness. Pretend what ye will you Hypocrites, concerning Faith; your
Practice proves you to be Children of the Devil. Joh. VIII. 44. If ye believed
the Truth, the Truth would set you free. Joh. VIII. 22. Again,

5. Such believe not the Truth, who hear with prejudice against it; or the
Instruments who deliver it, because of their Simplicity, Plainess, Sanctiry.
Christ himself was to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks
foolishness, the Apostle Paul was but a Babbler to the Men of Athens. But if our
Gosp^^ be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. In whom the God of this World
has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, least the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them. 2.
Cor. IV. 3.4. True Faith breaks the Power of Prejudice, against the Truth it
self, or the faithful Instruments, and unfeigned Lovers of it: By representing
the Excellency of the one, and the Amiableness of the other, in a just Light.
Ps. XIX. 10. Js. LII. 7. Ps. XVI. 3. And,

6. Such believe not the Truths of the Gospel, who hear them with habitual
prevailing Pride. For true Faith by giving a Sight of the Holiness, and Majesty
of God, the pretiosness and Value of his Word, as well as of our own meaness
and vileness, must needs humble us; and crush our native Arrogance. Gen,
XXVIII, 17. Gen, XVIII, 27. Is, VI, 2. -- 5. Hence we are informed, that it is
the Property and Character of such, upon, whom God will look with an Eye of
indulgence and complacency, to be poor (i e) humble) in Spirit, and to tremble
at God's Word. Is. LXVI. 2.5. And how earnestly are such dehorted from the
contrary Evil? Jer. XIII, 15. Hear ye, and give Ear, be not proud, for the Lord
has spoken. And exhorted to seek a humbling Sense of Gods Greatness, and their
own vileness. Is. II. 10. Enter into the Rock, and hide thee in the Dust, for
fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of his Majesty. Hear how the blessed God
complains over the Pride of Israel, by the Prophet Malachi, 3, 13. Your Words
have been stout against me, says the Lord: Yet ye say what have we spoken so
much against thee? And how awfully dos' he threaten for the same evil. Chap.
4.1. For For behold the Day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the
Proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the Day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither
Root nor Branch. And,

7. Such as hear the Truth with Scorn, believe it not, for Faith works by
Love, Gal. V. 9. And by Uniting them to a humble Savior, they learn of him to
be meek and lowly; Mat, XI. 29. So that the same (humble) Mind is in them,
which was also in Christ Jesus, Philip. II. 5.6. The Danger of Hearing the
Truth with Scorn, you may find represented, in the 2. Chron. XV. 16. And the
Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up betimes,
and sending; because he had Compassion on his People, and on his dwelling
Place. But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words, and
misused his Prophets, ^^til the Wrath of the Lord arose against his People,
till there was no Remedy.

In these Verses three Things deserve Remark, (1) Gods great Goodness to and
Compassion over his People, in giving them so fair and frequent Warning; by his
faithful Servants. (2) Their great Ingratitude and folly, in deriding the one,
and contemning the other. and (3) The dreadful Consequence of this ungrateful
wickedness; issuing in their utter ruin. For wrath arose against them, till
there was no Remedy. -- But I proceed to consider, the,

2. Proposed, which was to show who those are that have Pleasure in
unrighteousness.

1. They are such who contrive Sin, Micah. II. 1. Woe to them that devise
Iniquity. Job. XV, 34, 35. For the Congregation of Hypocrites shall be
desolate, and Fire shall consume the Tubernacles of Bribery: they conceive
mischief, and bring forth Vanity, and their belly prepares deceit. see, Pro.
XIV. 22. Pro. XIV. 29, 30.

2. Such who Act it knowingly and habitualy, 1 John, III. 8. He that commits
Sin is of the Devil, (i e) A Child of the Devil by Imitation, and Possession.
If Men did not take Pleasure in unrighteousness, (whatever they may
hypocriticaly pretend to the contrary,) they would not contrive it so
earnestly, or practice it so frequently.

3. Such who either hide and conceal it secretly, as a sweet Morsel; or glory
in it openly, as a Badge of Honor. Consider seriously the following Places of
Scripture, Pro XXVIII. 13. He that covers his Sins shall not prosper, -- Job,
XX. 12, 13, 14. tho wickedness be sweet in his Mouth, though he hide it under his
Tongue; though he spare it, and for sake it not, but keep it still within his
Mouth: Yet his Meat in his Bowels is turned, it is the Gall of Aspes within
him, and verse, 16. He shall suck the Poison of Aspes, the Vipers Tongue shall
slay him, and verses, 23, 24, 25, 27. God will Rain the Fury of his Wrath upon
him, -- the Bow of Steel shall strike him through, -- the glistring Sword shall
pierce his Gall, and the Terrors of God be upon him, -- a Fire not blown shall
consume him; (i. e. he shall be either blasted with secret Judgments here, or
burnt in the Flames of the Damned hereafter; which is a Fire not blown by Man,
but kindled by the Almighty's Breath, like a River of Brimstone. Is. XXX. 33)
all darkness shall be hid in his ^ecret Places. (i. e. his Understanding will
be infatuated, his Conscience perplexed, and all his Councels for Security
broken and confounded, Joh, V. 13. 1 Cor, III. 19.) The Heaven will reveal his
Iniquity and the Earth rise up against him. I beseech you to consider that
Solemn and excellent Expreshon of the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the
Philippians, III. v. 19. Whose end is Destruction, whose God is their belly;
and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly Things, alas that human
Nature should so far degenerate that the Remains of Humanity, Modesty, and
Reason should be so far extinguished, that hardy Mortals should entirely
abandon all its notices and restraints; and glory in that which is their
greatest Shame and Reproach!

4. Such who take pleasure in those who do such Things, as I have mentioned,
with other impietys. see Romans I. 23, -- 32. -- Who knowing the Judgment of God
(that they who commit such Things are worthy of death) do not only do the same
but have Pleasure in them that do them. Whatever Form of Religion Men may have
in their outward Conversation, yet if they generally and unnecessarily
affociate with wicked and profane Sinners, and are secretly pleased with their
wickedness, (though they will not do the like themselves, least they should lose
their Reputation) they are but base Hypocrites, whited sepulchers, and shall
except they repent and reform, posess the Damnation of Hell. Ps. LXVI. 18. Pro.
XIII, 27, 28. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are like
unto whited Sepul^res, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within
full of dead Men's Bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so also ye appear
righteous unto Men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity.

5. Such who deride awakning Discourses and eminent vital Holiness. 2 Pet. III,
3.4. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last Days, scoffers,
walking, after their own lusts; and saying where is the Promise of his coming?
-- Pray take Notice of the Character, the just Brand of Infamy, which the
Apostle gives those fleering foul-mouthed Blaids, why what is it? Answer, it is
this, that they walk after their own Lusts (i. e.) ambitious, sensual, worldly
Lusts. By this Mark you may easily ken that execrable Herd of abandond Mortals,
where ever they are, for though they talk so much of Reason, even to the
Exclusion of Revelation, in swelling Words of Vanity; giving you to understand
privately that they are the only Masters of it, the Wonders of the human
Species; yet in the general Course of their Practice, they bid defiance to its
Dictates, and act beneath the Beasts; wallowing worse then Swine in the Puddle
of Sensuality. And as a learned Writer Doctor Tillotson, volm 1. Page 105. 106.
justly observes, the Character before mentioned was not peculiar to that Age,
but is the constant Character of them who deride Religion, and flows from the
very Temper and Disposition of those who are Guilty of this Impiety, it is both
the usual Preparation to it, and the natural Consequent of it, (meaning
Sensuality) to deride God and Religion is the highest Kind of Impiety, and Men
do not usually arrive to this degree of wickedness at first, but they come to
it by several steps. The Psalmist very elegantly expresses to us the several
Gradations by which Men come to this horrid Degree of Impiety, Ps. I. 1.
Blessed is the Man that walks not in the Council of the ungodly, nor stands
in the Way of Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful. Men are usualy
first corrupted by bad Council and company, which is called, walking in the
Council of the Ungodly! Next they habituate themselves to their vicious
Practices which is standing in the Way of Sinners; and then at last they take
up and settle in a contempt of all Religion. Men's filthy Lusts have a natural
and strong tendency, to debauch and deprave their Minds, with a corrupt Bias,
against believing any Thing that gives the least check to their vicious
pursuits, false easy or imaginary interest.

And thus they are as willingly as foolishly and fatally lead the downward
Road; even to the horrible and often inextricable Gulf of Deism, and even
Atheism it self.

But I proceed to consider the.

III. Proposed, which was to point out the Delusions, which the jealous God
sometimes sends in Judgment.

1. He permits false and unfaithful Teachers to intrude into his Church, and
deceive many; according to the Prophesy of Christ himself. Mat. 24.11. either.

1. By their false Doctrine, asserting the Sufficiency of a certain Light, to
attain eternal happiness; which they say all Mankind have. This Light some term
Christ and some more justly Reason, this Notion of a universal saving Light
(whatever charitable Face it may seem to have to unthinking carnal People) not
only contradicts the Current of holy Scripture, but saps the very Foundations
of revealed Religion; by rendering such a Revelation unnecessary. And so by
consequence making the Condition of those who enjoy it, worse then the Pagans,
because of the additional Precepts it contains to what Nature teaches, which
make our Dutys the more numerous and dificult, and our guilt and danger the
greater, in Case of Neglect. And thus the Gospel according to this Notion would
be so far from answering its Name or Title glad Tidings, that it would being
sorrowful Tidings, of an unnecessary Yoke of Duties, and Publication of
Doctrines which we could have done well enough without. How contrary the
aforesaid Opinion is to the holy Scriptures you may see in the following
Places* Act. XXVI. 18. Ephesians. V. 8.2. These. III. 2. Rev. III. 17. Prove. XXIX.
18. Act. IV. 12. Romans X. 14.15. 1. Cor. III. 11. Neither will that Expression,
Joh. I. 9. justify the aforesaid Notion, if its intent and scope be rightly
under stood; for the utmost that these Expressions (as judicious Mr. Bo se
observes) can be reasonably supposed to mean is, that Christ is the Author of
all that intelectual Light and Knowledge that Mankind enjoys; partly as we
derive our intelectual Powers themselves from him, by whom (the Apostle tells
us) all Things were created whither ^sible or invisible, see Col. I. 16, partly
because its through the Interposal of his Mediation, that any Notices of good
and evil are Preserved in our lapsed Nature; and chiefly because he is the
Author of supernatural Knowledge to all that enjoy it, even to Jews and
Gentiles without Destinction!

While some in mystical Terms with a demure Show of devotion, preach up a false
Christ; a Christ which is nothing else but their defiled Conscience, or corrupt
Reason; others with brisker Airs, and less Appearances of Religion, but with
plainer Language, deny the Necessity of the True; and thus the blessed Jesus is
Crucified a second Time between two.

There be many other false Doctrines propogated and diffused by such deceivers,
such as Freewill, Justification in part by the Righteousness of Works, the
Apostasy of the Saints, universal Redemption, etc. -- All which as they flatter
the carnal Security, and tempt the Ambition of vain Men, and rob Christ of the
entire Glory of his Mediation, by fixing the Justification of Sinners (in the
Sight of God) upon another Foundation then his Righteousness; so they
contradict the holy Scriptures; as you may see in the following Instances, to
which many might be added. Romans VIII. 7, 8. Joh. XV. 5. Ephesians. II. 1.2. 2 Cor
III. 5. Ephesians. II. 8. Rom III. 28. Romans IV. 4.5. Romans XI. 6. Joh. X. 28. Joh.
X. 15. Joh. XVII. 9.

2. By their irregular and general Way of Preaching Doctrines that are True,
insisting in the first Place and for the most Part upon the Duties of Morality;
while in the mean time they neglect to inculcate the absolute Necessity of
Regeneration, Faithand Love. This is as if a Man would gravely desire Masons to
build without laying the Foundation, or pretend to do so himself, it is as if a
Man would attempt to clear a Field, by girdling the upermost Limbs of the
Trees, or as if one would seek eagerly for Streams of Water, without a
Fountain, or expect Fruit, before he plants the Tree. The Duties of Morality
are undoubtedly Excellent, not only as they are commanded by God, but as they
are Necessary to preserve human Society, and to prepare us for the divine
Mercy; but their chief Excellency is when they spring from a living Faith in,
and transcendent Love to God. Without these they are not pleasing to God,
whatever specious Appearance they have to Man, Romans XIV. 23,

And the general smooth undistinguishing Method of Preaching which some use, is
also of Fatal tendency; who labor to heal where is no wound, and thereby Rock
the Wretched World, faster a Sleep in a carnal presumptious Security, if
possible then they are, by their Misapplication of Promises, in their public
Preaching, and private Conversation; as also by their blind and bloody Charity,
(believing that People are in a good State when they have no sufficient Reason)
if they happen to have an awakening sentance or two against the Profane in
their public Discourses, (as for the Discovery of close Hypocrites they don ot
like to strike that String often, for fear it should shock perhaps the
Foundations of there own false Hope.) Then presently there is a Plaster of
Comfort promiscuosly offered, in Order to heal the Wound before it be half
opened and searched, thus do they daub with untempered mortar, also in their
private Conversation, they heal the Wounds of the Daughter of Zion slightly.

And as to their unconscionable unscriptural Charity, though it has a fair Face
and goes sweetly down with a carnal blinded World, (who love to hear Peace,
Peace, sounded in their Ears, and to live at ease and Dream of fine Thing's
after death: Who therefore praise them for their Charity, call them fine Men,
and give them a Penny the more upon the Account.) Yet it is but a poor sorry
rotten Thing at the Core; springing from gross ignorance of God and themselves,
and self Love; the Truth is formalists thank them for nothing, for they have
Charity for them because they cannot help it, if they had not a good Opinion of
them, they could not of themselves, who are in the very same Condition with
them. But how much soever ignorant graceless Sinners cry up these Plaisterers
on Earth, they will curse them in Hell except they Repent.

But though these Men are full of groundless Charity, to wicked People, yet they
have none or but very little for those who do deserve a favorable Opinion of
them; their Speeches are filled with bitter and satirical Reflections against
godly Ministers, and pious People, as Imprudent, Erroneous, Enthusiastical, and
what not, some prete^^t they will have to hide their Malice, some Fig leaf to
cover their shame. They pretend to Pray very gravely for the Conversion of
Sinners, and when any are converted, not by their Preaching, but are awakned by
the mere Providence of God, (which is often the Case of such as are renewed in
such Places where there is a dead ministry) And brought to Christ by his
blessing upon others Labors; if he does not affect them, as in truth he has
not much Reason, they do not like him, this is not the Man they want, he has
this and that and the other fault; no, no, the Persons they want are either
jolly Companions, or dead Formalists like themselves; these are sweet
Christians moderate prudent Men indeed, (i. e.) lukewarm Time-servers. So the
carnal Jews seemed to desire and pray for the coming of the Messiah, but when
he came they did not like him, he did not suit their Humor. The whole World
scarcely affords more inveterate spiteful Enemies against pious People, and
powerful Religion, then carnal unfaithful Ministers, if they are but once a
little vexed; who were such imbittered Enemies against Christ and his Apostles,
as the old Scribes and Pharisees?

3. False and faithless Teachers deceive and harden many by their lax and
worldly Lives they are very solicitous in seeking their gain from their
quarter, which if they can secure, they are easy, whither ever they can hear
of one converted by their Ministry or not. Indeed the Salvation of Souls is not
their main Mark, whatever they pretend, but Honor, and Money. (For how can
those earnestly seek the Happiness of other Souls who neglect their own?) Though
the Truth is in many Places they are like to meet with a Disappointment in the
latter, after all the Pains they can take to humor and please a carnal People;
and for my own Part I cannot but wonder that carnal Men who are well in their
wits, should thrust themselves into the Ministry when there is no Prospect of
Gain by it, either in this or the next World? And yet do it they will, over the
Belly of Reason and Conscience, and in the Face of the greatest Dangers, both
to themselves and others? Who have the Misfortune to be hardened but too often
by their frothy Speeches, and filthy practices, if ungodly People only hear
something that is heavenly and serious, from their Ministers once or twice a
Week upon a Sunday; and find him like themselves all the Week after, as
worldly, jocose and vain, they can dispense with it well enough; his cold
lifeless talk about Piety on Sabbath Days, does not touch them, if they find
that he does not matter it himself, but lives in a direct Opposition to it
through the Course of his Practice. They cannot think the Man is in earnest,
they think he must say something for his Money once or twice a Week; it is his
Trade, and when his Task is over he is glad of it, has done with it, and why
should not they? While Ministers have Esau's hands, they will do little good
with Jacob's Voice. Such do small damadge to the Kingdom of Darkness, with all
their Prudence and Moderation; the Devil does not value a Thousand of them one
rush, for they are Friends to him in their Hearts, and under his check and
control; it is true they will pretend zeal against his interest, and seem to
shoot at his Subjects, but it is only with Powder, as a pious Writer Baxter in
his Gildas Silvanus,
justly observes, which though it makes a noise does little or no Execution; if
it does (which is but rarely) it is more then they intend, some of them.
Unconverted Ministers are like a sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbal, they make
a report with their preaching, but it is but a lifeless empty ineffectual
Sound, that does little good to the Kingdom of Christ. Jer. XXIII. 32. If any
such should read this Discourse they would be apt through Pride because of
their Learning, to smile with disdain; or else to gnash their Teeth with rage.
But to proceed a

II. Delusion, that God sends in Judgment is this, he lets loose that damned
Angel the Devil, the God of this World, who blinds the Eyes of these that
believe not, least the Light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, and
they should be saved. 2. (...). IV. 4. This deceiver when permitted becomes a
lying Spirit in the Mouth of the Prophets, 2 Chronicles. XVIII. 19. -- 22. by his
deep Devices deludes many; Rev. XX. 2, 3, -- 8. 2, Cor. II. 11. And that
sometimes by transforming himself into an Angel of Light, assuming pretexts of
good, and Masks of Friendship. 2. Cor. XI. 14. Genesis III. 5. By those Arts, he
but too easily betrays many unwary Sinners, into a groundless Opinion of the
Goodness and safety of their present State. Because when Gods Servants tell
them this Necessary and Solemn Truth, viz. That they are at present in a
wretched and damnable Condition, and they believe it not, receive it not in
Love, but on the contrary are filled with Indignation against them for their
Faithfullness; therefore God in just Judgment gives them up to be deluded by
Satan, to believe a Lie; namely that they are in a good State, when they are
far from it, that they all may be damned and (...) with a Lie in their right
Hand. If X^V. 20. Rev. XXII. and 3.9. Mat. XXV. (...) -- 12, Luke. XIII. 25. --
28.

III. D^lusion, which the righteous God sometimes sends in Judgment is this, he
gives up willsully impenitent Sinners to their hearts Lusts, to be by them
blinded and hardened. Romans I. 28 -- 30. It is said of the Gentiles who abused
and contradicted the Light of Nature, that even as they did not like to retain
God in their Knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate Mind, to do these
Things which are not convenient, he removed the restraints of his Providence,
and abandoned them to the Tyranny of their corrupt Desires and Affections. And
thus did the jealous Jehovah deal with impenitent Israel, Ezekiel. XXIV. 13. in
thy selthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee. (i. e.) because thou would not comply with
Means used for thy Reformation, I will bereave thee of my Grace, and consume
thee with my Wrath. The same dreadful Sentence is passed upon obstinate
Ephraim, Hos. IV. 17 Ephraim is joined to idols: Let him alone. (i. e.) They
cleave resolutly to their Lusts, not with standing of all the Instructions and
Warnings given them to the Contrary; therefore let them alone to my Curse, and
Vengeance. I will strive no more with them to reclaim them. Let him that is
filthy, be filthy still: And him that is unrighteous, be unrighteous, still.

IV. Delusion is, that the just God lets some high Professors fall out of the
Orb of the Church, like blazing Comets to the Earth. 2 Timothy IV. 10. for Demas
has forsaken me, having loved this present World. Many towering Professors,
having with Balaam the Son of Bofor, loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, have
thereby been excited to for sake the right Way. 2 Pet. II. 15. Joshua that
could stop the Sun in his Circuit, could not keep Achan from fingring the
Golden Wedge. Gehazi's will run after Changes of Raiment; and Ananias's and
Saphiras's prevaricate, and false hearted Judas's will sell their Master and
his Truths for Silver. This is very stumbling to the ungodly World, who are apt
to conclude upon such Occasions (though unreasonably because of their spite
against God and his People) that the whole Body of Professors would do so if
they had the like Opportunity; but this is a most unfair Way of Arguing, from
one, yea, many particulars, to infer a universal Conclusion; because there was
one Judas in Christ's Family, must they therefore be all Judas's, the wicked
would not like this Way of Arguing retorted upon themselves; as a reverend
Author Mr. ^lton, in his dead Saint Speaking.
well observes. Should we tell them that many of their Company are Theives and
Murderers, therefore they are all such, they would think they were unjustly and
rudely Treated, and be apt to spit in our Faces; Why will they then be guilty
of the same Fault they condemn in others? Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa
redarguit ipsum.

V. Delusion is, when the all wise God brings to pass dark and dreadful
Providence even upon his People; in one or other of the following Instances.

1. He lets some of them fall into dangerous Errors in Opinion, the Galatians
were corrupted quickly, by the artful Sophisms of their ^lse Teachers; even in
that important article of Justification by faith alone, which o^e Articulus
Stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae. Luth.
who was no small Instrument of the Reformation from Popery justly terms 'the
Article of a standing or falling Church.' The Defection of the Galatians from
or their Corruption in this grand and momentuous Article, struck an Apostle
into a Fit of Admiration; Gal. I. 6. I marvel (said he) that ye are so soon
removed, from him that called you into the Grace of Christ, unto another
Gospel. The falfe Teachers did strenuously contend (as it were pro aris and
focis) for the Observation of the Jewish antiquated Ceremonies; with legal
Views and mercenary Principles, to maintain Justification to be at least in
Part by the Works of the Law, ceremonial and moral; to whom the Apostle opposes
himself through the whole Series of this Epistle, by a Strong Chain of
Reasoning; proving by numerous and solid Arguments Justification to be by Faith
only, Origin and Tertullian, though Men of great Parts and Piety, where strangely
corrupted in Opinion, the first was the unhappy Inventor of Purgatory, or
something like it, a Figment which the Papists have since so artfully improved,
or rather shamefully abused to the Dishonor of God and Religion; but to the
great Advancement of their temporal Interest. In short Origin was so erroneous
Vide hist. Eccles Dupin.
that the following epithet became a common Proverb among the Ancients
concerning him, that ( in bonis nemo melius et in malis nemo pejus) in good
Things there was none better, and in bad none worse; and Tertullian fell into
the errors of the Montanists a sect of enthusiasts and wrote against the
Catholic Church under the sarc astical Title of natural or carnal Men. Vide
Hornii hist. Eccles. and Du Pin.


2. The Almighty suffers Satan to lift some up on a Pinnacle of Pride, from
which they have dangerous dounfalls; so it was with poor Peter, who could be
more bold and selfconfident then he, if all shall be offended yet shall not I;
big Words indeed, and yet when the Time of Trial came, none sooner or more
Shamefully scared, yea, frighted even out of his wits, into cursing and
swearing by the Words of a silly Girl. Mat. XXVI. 69, -- 75. Alas what is
Man, what are the best of Men, when left to themselves! Which they are like to
be when most conceited and self confident? Prove. XI. 2. when Pride comes, then
comes Shame. But with the lowly is Wisdom. Prove. XVI, 18. Pride goes before
Destruction, and a haughty Spirit before a fall. To prevent this perilous
Exaltation in the Apostle Paul, a Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him. 2.
Cor. XII. 7.

3. The Lord suffers Satan to fix others on the Bed of Sloth, and carnal
Security, and that in a Time when they Should be most awake. When Israel were
Laboring in the high Places of the Field for their mutual Safety and Honor,
David their Generallissimo who should have been in the Van of the Army, guiding
their martial Motions, was loitering on the House Top, to his shame and
reproach; as the issue proved. 2, Sam. XI. Jonah was asleep between the
Hatches, when Pagans were awake and at Work for life; asleep I say, when the
Winds blew high, and the angry Ocean swelled and roared ready every Moment to
devour the reeling Vessel in its watery Jaws. Jonab. I. 5. In the Parable of the
Virgins related, Mat. XXV. 5.6. We are informed, that while the Bridegroom
tarried they all slumbered and slept, (the Wise as well as the Foolish) and at
midnight there was a Cry made, behold the Bridegroom comes, go^e out to meet
him. Here you see they kept in a sleeping Posture till their Lords approach, O
Strange! Only note by the Way that there is this Difference between the Sleep
of gracious Persons, and the spiritual Death of those that are graceless, viz.
That the former while they Sleep, have a waking Heart, (generally) a
Dissatisfaction with, and sorrow for, their present Stupidity. Cant. V. 2. I
sleep, but my Heart waketh. Yea, and they do labor to obtain the comforting
Presence of Christ again: Cant. III. While the other go on contentedly,
slothfully, and merrily, in their secure Course. Luke VI. 25. woe unto you that
laugh now: For you shall mourn and weep.

4. The allwise God suffers his People to fall into imprudencies in Speech, or
Action; such was that of the Disciples, James and John, in desiring that Fire
might come down from Heaven, to consume the Samaritans. Luke IX. 54. and of
Peter, in cutting of the Ear of Malchus, with his Sword. Joh. XVIII. 10. When
such Things happen (and it must be confessed that young Christians are apt to
be Guilty of the former, having more Zeal then Knowledge to direct it) they
open a Door for Blasphemy and Reproach among the Enemies of Religion; who are
glad to find any Room to vent their Gall against such as are (however
imprudent) far better than themselves! I say Christless Persons (many of them)
are glad to find any Occasion or umbrage to spit their Heart rancour out,
against Gods People, in a way that is consistent with their own Credit.

5. Sometimes the Lord suffers his own dear People to fall into gross and
grievous Sins; Noah, David, Solomon, and Peter are dreadful Instances of this
sad Truth, whose Sins are kept on Record (as Beacons on sand Banks to keep
Vessels from being split upon them) to excite us to watchfullness, against the
same evils, and all incentives that lead to them; and for the support of
distressed Souls, to keep them from sinking into the dreadful Gulf of Despair.
But if any will abuse those Instances to encourage Licentiousness, or to
strengthen their false Hopes, (as some Hypocrites do, who make up their State
by them at least in Part) let them know, that they are Guilty of a most
wretched and ungrateful wresting of the Scriptures, to their own Damnation. 2.
Pet. III. 16. Now when a Christian falls through unwatchfulness, floth, or the
violent Temptations of the Enemy; he suffers not alone, but the whole Body of
Profess^s with him. These Things ( viz. falling into gross evils) make them
stink among the Inhabitants of the Land, like Jacob for his Sons deceitful
Treatment of the Shechemites, Genesis XXXIV. 30. For such evils are epidemical
plagues, and public nuisances. Pro. XXV, 26. a righteous Man's falling down
before the wicked, is as a troubled Fountain, and a corrupt Spring. This is
quickly told in Gath, and published with large Additions in the Streets of
Askelon; at this the Sons of Belial and Sheva sniker, at this the Daughters of
the Philistines rejoice, and think the Day is their own; they are all alike,
(say they) did not I tell you so, that they are but a Pack of Hypocrites? You
see what one of their Saints has done; thus these evils (says a pious Writer)
Vide Henry in Locum.
Troubles the Fountain; by grieving some, and corrupts the Springs by infecting
others; and emboldning them to do likewise. But while those unhappy Sinners are
thus filling up the Measure of their Iniquities, and ripening fast for the
final Stroke of Gods wrathful Sickle. Joel. III. 13. Gods People are Sighing
and Groaning in secret Places, to their Father upon these mournful Accounts,
or Occasions; Evck. IX. 4. And silling the Bottle with Tears. Ps. LVI. 8. Their
Faces are covered with Blushing, and their Hearts oppressed with Fear and
Sorrow; when they think of the ungenerous Sentiments of the Wicked, and the
stumbling, hardening fatal issues, that such dark Providence are like to have
toward them. Therefore all that fear God and love Zions Prosperity, are under
the utmost Necessity of petitioning the Almighty, in the Psalmists Language;
the Ps. LXIX 6. Let not them that wait on the, O Lord God of Hosts, be ashamed
for my sake: let not those that seek thee, be confounded for my sake, O God of
Israel.

6. Sometimes; pious People are suffered to fall into uncommon Calamities, and
distresses of Body and Estate; Joh though the most excellent Man in the Earth, (
Joh. 1.8.) must be set up as a Magor-missabib, a terror to himself and others,
Jer. XX. 4, 5. a Complication of sudden and dreadful Disasters must beset him
round; Loss of Goods, the Bereavement of dear Relations, the acute Pains of a
loathsome spreading illness, the unjust Censures of Friends, laboring by all
the Arts of Rethorick and Reason to run him down, and reduce him to the black
Roll of Hypocrites; as if he were the Man above all others wicked whom the
jealous Jehovah, had delighted to destroy, and therefore had set up as a Mark
for all the Arrows of his Quiver to pierce; this Example (though censured by God
himself, Joh. XLII. 7.) Ignorant and foolish Men are apt to follow at this Day;
and to conclude with the Barbarians of Melita, that such uncommon Disasters are
the penal Fruits of some extraordinary Wickedness. Acts. XXVIII. 4. And when
the Barbarians saw the venomous Beast hang on his Hand, they said among
themselves no doubt this Man (meaning Paul the Apostle) is a Murderer, whom
though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance suffers not to live. I would beg
of such People that they would seriously think upon these Words of the Lord
Jesus mentioned, Luke XIII. 4.5. Or those eighteen upon whom the Tower in
Siloam fell, think ye that they were Sinners above all Men that dwelt in
Jerusalem? I tell you, nay; But except you repent ye shall all likewise perish.
That the Devil may have some power for a Time over the Bodies of such as are
truly Gracious, we are further certified by the following Instances, Luke XIII.
16. And ought not this Woman being a Daughter of Abraham whom Satan has bound,
lo these eighteen Years, he loosed from this Bond on the Sabbath Day? it is
said v. 11. that She had a Spirit of Infirmity Pneuma atheni ^.
eighteen Years, (i. e.) a Spirit causing the Infirmity, or Sickness, 'as some
learned Men interpret the Phrase Vide pol. (...) in Lo^.
it was the ancient Opinion of the Jews, as Josephus testifies, that without
natural Causes, some Diseases were inflicted, by Devils; and this indeed not
only the instances now Mentioned, but also many Narratives of the Evangelists
confirm. It is surprising to consider, that the Devil should have such Power
for a Time over the Blessed Body of Jesus himself, the Lord of Life, as to
carry it from the Wilderness through the Air to the Temple, and set it upon a
Pinnacle thereof! As several learned Interpreters Vide pol (...).
gather from Mat. IV. 1.5. This was not done, say they, visionasly, (1.)
Because then it would not have been a Temptation, and (2) Because imediately
after the Temptation, we find Christ beyond Jordan; but bodily and locally as
was done to Philip. Acts. VIII. 39. For the strength of Spirits governs over
corporal Matters, in which we have a Specimen of Gods preserving Providence
over us, that we are not carried away by Satan every moment. This Action of
Satan's carrying Christ (say they) was not violent, but Voluntary, neither was
it unworthy of Christ to suffer it, who suffered his own Crucifixion, and who
is tempted in all points as we are. Heb. IV. 15.

7. Pious People are sometimes suffered to fall into great Distress of Mind,
occasioned either.

1. By long Desertion, Ps. VI. 3. My Soul is sore vexed. But thou O Lord how
long? see Ps. XLII. 5, 11. Why art thou cast down O my Soul? And why art thou
disquieted within me? -- Also Is. L. 10. who is there among you that fears
the Lord, that obeys the Voice of his Servant, that walks in darkness and
has no light? (i. e.) continues a considerable Time under the doleful
hidings of Gods Face,) Let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay himself
upon his God.

When the natural Sun draws nigh to the withered Earth in the Spring Season,
universal Nature smiles, the little Hills rejoice on every side, the spacious
Fields, and (once) Marble Meads put on a Verdant Livery, the Gums bleed forth
their aromatic Liquids, the Spices yield a delicious Fragrancy; the naked
Woods put on their Honors and Gaictys, and in short to Crown the Scene; the
feathered Tribe fill the airy Regions with their harmonious warbling Accents.
But on the contrary when it retires, and suspends its blushing warmth, every
Thing seems to mourn in a gloomy Silence and Solitude, the Widowed Earth turns
into Iron, and the sporting Rivulets into Glass, and the winged Choristers
droop their heavy Wings, and forget their charming Notes. Thus dear Brethren as
it is in Nature so in Grace. While the gracious God (who is the Sun of
Righteousness, Mal. IV. 2.) Blesses his People with the balmmy Beams of his
divine Favor, their Hearts beat with gratitude, their Lips move in praise, and
their Aspect wears a modest joyous Smile, the Index of their inward Serenity,
but when he is pleased to suspend his gracious Influence, their former pleasing
comforts are quickly turned into the saddest Sorrows; their Hearts tremble for
Fear, and are oppressed with Pain, their Hands hang down through
Discouragement, their feeble Knees smite each other, (being weakened through
fasting) their Faces are Veiled with solemn sadness their witness of their
inward Grief. Then do they flee the jovial Crowd, for their carnal Mirth is
grating to them as Vinegar upon nitre, and deemed madness by them; then do they
betake themselves to Places of lonely Retirement, and put their Mouths in the
Dust to see if there may be Hope. see Ps. CXVI. 12. Romans LII. 30. Ps VII, 1 Samuel XXVII. 1. Is. XXXV. 3.4. Ps. CIX. 24. Ecles. VII. 3. Pro. XXV. 20. Ecles.
II. 2. Hos. II. 14. Lamen. III. 28, 29. But the mental Distresses of Gods
People, are sometimes occasioned.

2. By violent Temptations, Ephesians. VI. 12. For we wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the
Darkness of (i. e. by a metonimy the darkened People of the World) this World,
against spiritual Wickedness in high Places, the Temptations of Satan are
justly termed Fiery Darts, Ephesians. VI. 16. Because of their sudden Injection and
painful Effects. A Dart Cast by the Hand of a skillful Artist, has a very
swift Motion; And Fire upon a living Body, causes the acutest Pain; so the
unworthy Thoughts of God and divine Things, which the Enemy of Mankind
insinuates into the Best of Men, must needs cause a painful abhorrence,
proportioned in degree, to the Esteem and Veneration they have of and for them.
But it may Occasion some allay of the Pain which issues from such Temptations,
to consider that we are not accessory to their guilt; except we consent to
them. As also that the blessed Savior of Sinners was in all Points tempted as
we are yet without Sin, Heb. IV. 15. That he might be able to succor them that
are tempted, Heb. II. 18. Had not the impudent Enemy the Face to tempt our
Redeemer, even to commit self Murder, and Blasphemy? Mat. IV. 6.9. And what
Crimes are more horrible then these? If he tempted our Lord thus what can we
expect? -- But perhaps some may propose this Querie, viz. how shall we
distinguish the Temptations of the Enemy from the corrupt Propensities of our
own Nature? I answer in some Cases it is exceeding difficult, especially when
Satan transforms himself into an Angel of Light, slyly and gradually insinuates
himself into our Nature, and Courts us to Evil under the Color of Good, to
error under the Mask of Truth; as he did our first Parents and woefully
succeeded in his Stratagem, to their and our (by them) dishonor, and immense
Loss. Genesis III. 5. Lam. V. 16. Romans V. 19. Thus did he successfully assail the
Apostle Peter, when he would dissuade the Redeemer from suffering, and thought
in the mean Time no doubt that he was doing Good. He little dreamed that the
Devil was at his Elbow, (or rather nearer) Dictating his foolish Rebuke. Mat.
XVI. 22.23. 2 Cor. XI. 14. but in the General we may conclude that those
Temptations come from Satan, which are sudden, painful, violent: Ephesians. VI. 16.
For Nature acts gradually and has pleasure in its Pursuits. -- And sometimes
the aforesaid Distresses of Gods People, are occasioned.

3. By the dreadful Terrors of the Almighties wrath; see Ps. XXXII. 3, 4. When
I kept silence, my Bones waxed old; through my roaring all the Day long. For
Day and Night thy Hand was heavy upon me. And Joh. VI. 1.4. For the Arrows of
the Almighty are within me the Poison whereof drinks up my Spirit: The
Terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. These three Things before
mentioned conspiring do sometimes drive some of Gods People, either.

1. Into a burning Feavour, the Ps. XXXII, 4. My moisture is turned into the
Drought of Summer, the Union between the Soul and Body is so intimate that the
Anguish of the one cannot but affect the other. It is said of Luther, that he
was so wasted by Soul distress that neither Voice nor Color nor Blood seemed
to remain in him.

2. Into Desperation, the Terrors of God may so environ distress and overwhelm
even a pious Person, that he may be ready to expire in Swoons and Syncopes,
thus it was with devout Heman. Ps. LXXXVIII. 3.5. For my Soul is full of
troubles: And my Life draws nigh unto the Grave, I am counted with them that
go down into the Pit: I am as a Man that has no strength. -- Here you see his
bodily strength was much wasted by the Exercise and anguish of his oppressed
Mind, so that he looked upon himself as a dying, yea, as a dead Man, because he
apprehended that he made such hasty advances to Death, and had such sure
presages of it in his broken Constitution, Ps. LXXXVIII. 6, 7, 8. Thou have
laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness in the deeps: Thou have afflicted me
with all thy Waves. I am shut up and I cannot come forth. Here you may note
that the Objects of Gods Love, may for a Time look upon themselves as the
Objects of his Wrath. This Man of God mourns, that the Almighty had afflicted
him with all his Waves; his troubles were numerous and permanent, they crowded
upon his anxious Soul in a thick and unwearied Succession, with formidable
noise and resistless Violence; till he sunk beneath the Pressure, and became
hopeless of escape. This is further confirmed in the 14, and 16 Verses of the
same Psalm. Why castest thou off my Soul? Thy Terrors have cut me off. see also
Ps. XXXI. 22. For I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine Eyes.

Again the Terrors of God in concurrence with the aforesaid Causes, and
ignorance of the Nature of the Gospel of Gods Grace, hurries and precipitates
some.

3. Into Distraction, see Ps. LXXXVIII. 15. While I suffer thy terrors I am
distracted. The Words of Mr. Henry, upon this Place are remarkable, viz. that
sad Effect the Terrors of the Lord have had upon many, and some good Men, who
have thereby been put quite out of the Possession of their own Souls; a most
piteous Case and which ought to be looked upon with great Compassion.

8. God removes sometimes, some of his own People by a Sudden, or as we term it
Immature or untimely Death, and that in two Cases.

1. When Attending upon (but unworthily) the Ordinances of his Worship, 1 Cor.
XI. 30. For this Cause many are weak, and sickly among you; and many sleep. (i.
e.) Many are afflicted with Sickness, and removed by Death, for their unworthy
Participation of the Lords Supper, of which he had been speaking in the Verse
immediately preceding, this is the Gloss which all interpreters ever I have
seen, put upon the Words, and this agrees well with the context, and with that
Description which the holy Scriptures give of the Death of the righteous;
wherein it is frequently (because of its pleasantness the Sting of Death being
removed) compared to Sleep, These. IV. 14. 1 Cor. XV. 20, 51. You may note three
Things worthy of Remark, in that forecited Place of Scripture, 1 Cor. XI. 30,
viz. (1) That not a few but many of the Corinthians, were sickly after their
unworthy Participation of the Lords Supper. and (2,) That not a few but many
were actually removed by Death, upon the aforesaid Account. and (3) That those
very Persons, so punished, were truly Pious, see v. 32. But when we are judged,
we are Chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World.
Thus you see it is no new Thing (Whatever ignorant People imagine) for not only
one but many Persons to be suddenly removed by Death, after Sacramental
Occasions.

That is an awful Instance of Nadab, and Abihu, the Sons of Aaron, who were
slain by Fire in the very Act of Worship; for offering strange Fire, which the
Lord commanded them not. Levit, X. 1, 2. And though this was not expressly
forbidden, it was enough that it was not commanded, Henry.
it is an Excellent observation of a pious Writer upon this Passage Bishop Hall.
viz. That it is a dangerour Thing in the Service of God to decline from his
own Institutions; we have to do with a God who is wise to prescribe his own
Worship, just to require what he has prescribed, and powerful to revenge what
he has not prescribed.

Memorable likewise is that Instance of Uzziah a religious Prince, who for
invading the Priests Office in burning incense, (which sprung from his Pride
whatever pious Pretenses he might have to palliate it) was struck in the very
Act of his Worship with Leprosy, which continued with him to his Death, 2.
Chron. XXVI. 4, 5, 16, 19, 21. The same judgment in kind, though not Duration was
inflicted upon Miriam a good Woman, for laboring to rival Moses. Number. XII, 1,
2, 9, 10.

2. When under zealous Impressions for his Glory, even in this Case the Lord
Sometimes removes pious Persons by death; Eli and Uzzah, are solemn Instances
of this Truth, of the first Mention is made, 1 Samuel IV. His pious fears least
the Ark, the Honor of Israel should be taken are related v. 13. And when he
came, lo Eli sat by the Way side watching, for his Heart trembled for the Ark,
of God, and his deep overwhelming concern when he heared the Tidings of it,
Verse 18. And it came to pass when he made Mention of the Ark of God, that he
sell from of the Seat backward by the Side of the Gate, and his Neck brake and
he died: It seems he could bear up under defeat of the Army, and the Loss of
his two Sons, but when the taking of the Ark was Mentioned it broke his Heart;
swallowed up his animal Spirits with an excess of Grief, and sunk him in Death
it self. Fear and grief may Occasion sudden Death as many Examples have proved
Vide Pol. in Loc.
thus did this pious Man's Sun set under a Cloud; thus was the folly and
wickedness of those Sons of his, whom he had indulged his Ruin at last. Thus
does God sometimes set Marks of his displeasure upon good Men in this Life, who
have miscarried themselves, that others may hear and fear, and take Warning; a
Man may die miserably, and yet not die eternally; may come to an untimely End
and yet the End be peace, as Mr. Henry, justly observes.

The other Instance I mentioned was that of Uzzab, of which we have an Account,
2. Sam. VI, 6, 7. Uzzah put forth his Hand to the Ark of God, and took hold of
it, for the Oxen shook it, and the Anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah,
and God smote him there for his Error, (or as some interpret rashness) and
there he died by the Ark of God, this was a very dark and dreadful Providence,
which quickly obscured the Beauty of that gallant Cavalcade; (which consisted
of no less then Thirty Thousand of the Chosen of Israel, and an infinite Number
of the common People) and sent them home in a fearful Consternation and wild
disorder. The crime seemed to be but inconsiderable, Uzzah perceiving the Carr
shake its probable was afraid of the Fall of the Ark, and with a good Intention
(it is likely) put forth his Hand to prevent it, and yet for this is Slain
immediately; which shows us that a good Intention, is not sufficient to justify
a bad Action; and that it is dangerous to meddle with Things too high for us:
And also exceeding necessary to treat Things sacred with the deepest Reverence,
Ps. CXXXI. Ecles. V. 1.

Querie, but wherein consisted the Sinfulness of Uzza's Action?

Answer, (1) It was Rash and Presumptious contrary to the express Letter of the
Law for the Levites to touch the naked Ark, which Prohibition is armed with a
Threatening of Death. see Number. IV. 15.

2. Diffident, it would seem as if Uzzah imagined that the shaking Ark could
not have been preserved without his disorderly Assistance.

3. Irregular, the Ark should have been carried upon the Levites shoulders,
which they then earried upon a Cart, this Council, it is probable, Uzzah was
accessory to 1. Chron. XV. 2.21. -- 15.2. Sam VI. 7.

If any should imagine that the Punishment inflicted was too severe,
considering Uzza's good Intention. Let them consider, that that Intention
cannot be good which is against the express Law of a Righteous holy God, had
not Saul a good Intention in sparing the Sheep and Oxen of the Amalekites, 1.
Sam. XV. 21. And the Jews in slaying Christ and his Apostles? 1. Cor. II. 8.
and Joh. XVI. 2.

9. The Lord sometimes removes by sudden Death false Professors, Act. V. 5. And
Ananias hearing these Words, fell down and gave up the Ghost: And great fear
came on all them that heard these Things. This scares People from joining where
they see such danger, v. 13. And of the rest durst no Man join himself to them.

10. Sometimes he suffers People to fall away from his faithful Ministers in
great Numbers, it was so with himself, and how much more may it happen to them?
see John. VI. 65, 66, 67. And he said therefore said I unto you, that no Man
can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. From that Time
many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Then said Jesus
to the Twelve will ye also go away? Here you see crowds leaving the Lord Jesus
himself, the Prince of Preachers, the wonderful Councellor, the Wisdom of the
Father; and that on the Account of his harsh Preaching. verse 60 -- This is a
hard Saying who can bear it? When the Son of the Fathers Love began to declare
the Impotency of Man, and the Decrees of God; this gave the finishing Stroke to
their Dissatisfaction, off they went in shoals, their Pride and Enmity could
bear no longer such humbling Doctrines; yea so great and general was the
Defection that even the Disciples themselves (as it would seem by Christ's
Question) had almost forsaken him, and gone with the Multitude! v. 65.67.

11. Oftentimes the Wise and Sovereign God, suffers his Ministers and People to
be Accounted the vilest on Earth, and his Truths and Ways to be every where
opposed, 1. Cor. IV. 13. We are made as the Filth of the World, and are the
off-scourings of all Things unto this Day. (i. e.) we Apostles and Christians
are represented to be the vilest Scoundrels, Ruffians, and Caitiffs that the
Earth contains, the Dregs Refuse and Rubbish of the whole rational Creation;
this the original Words Pericatharm^ta Perips^ma.
do import, see also Act. XXVIII. 22. For as concerning this sect, we know that
every where it is spoken against. Persecution of one Kind or other, either of
Heart, Countenance, Tongue, or Hand, is the ordinary Lot of true Christians. 2 Timothy III. 12.2. Sam. VI. 16. Heb. XI. 36. Ps. LII. 2. -- This flows as freely
and naturaly from the Devils malice, and the Worlds Enmity against them; as
heat from Fire, or Poison from a Snake. Rev. XII. 12. For the Devil is come
down unto you having great wrath, because he knows that his Time is but
short. See also Genesis III 15. And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman,
and between thy Seed and her Seed. the Devil who is a subtle Spirit perceives
what injury faithful Men are like to do to his Kingdom, unless they be stopped
in their Zealous career; he therefore stirrs up his Votaries his most trusty
Friends, to devise devises against them, in order to blacken their Reputation
with the Scourge of Reproach. That thereby the Minds of Strangers being
prejudiced against them as the most horrible monsters in Nature, the good
Influence of their Instructions and Rebukes may be prevented and herein alas,
he too often succeeds, through the ignorance Inconsideration and Enmity of
unhappy Sinners! How unaccountably was the blessed Lord himself traduced and
contemned? Luke XXIII. 2. We found this fellow (said they) Perverting the
Nation, -- If the Master was thus treated what may the servants expect? But as
for dead Formalists, smooth Trimmers, and two faced double tongued Trucklers,
he does not fear any hurt they can do to his Kingdom; he knows by long
Experience that they are but like a Chip in Porridge, for all their Grimace,
Moderation and Prudence. He therefore often suffers them to enjoy an unsullied
Character, and the wicked World because they are of the same stamp, Father and
Family with themselves, only a little better Polished, like them very well; and
cry them up for fine Men, very fine Men to be sure; while in the mean Time they
are nothing but bloody Cutthroats, and sneaking hirelings: see 2. Chron.
XVIII. 5, 7. -- Joh. XV. 19.

12. In the mean Time while true Christians are reproached and oppressed as I
have before hinted, the Allwise God suffers often Times false professors and
wicked People to enjoy Honor, Peace and flowing Wealth; so did the Pharisees
in Christ's Time. Philip. XXXIV, 5. And those ungodly Men the Psalmist describes
in Ps. LXXIV, 3. -- 9. For I was envious at the foolish, (said he) when I saw
the Prosperity of the wicked. For there are no bands in their Death: But their
strength is firm; they are not in trouble as other Men: Neither are they
plagued like other Men. Therefore pride compasses them about as a Chain:
Violence covers them as a Garment. Their Eyes stand out with fatness they
have more then Heart could wish. -- Because they have no changes therefore they
fear not God, says the same inspired Writer. Ps. LV. 19.

Now Brethren is not this a dark gloomy and stumbling Providence? To see on the
one Hand the precious Sons of Zion comparable to fine Gold, esteemed as earthen
Pitchers the Work of the Hands of the Potter. Their Names blackned with
Reproach, their Estates devoured by Beasts of Prey, their Bodies wasted by
consuming Sickness, their Minds perplexed and even overwhelmed by inward
pressures; some drove into Melancholy, Despair, Distraction, and some sunk into
sudden Deaths; as if they were the only Objects of God's hate and vengeance,
and were to be made the peculiar Monuments of his Wrath; as if from them
especially his stern Justice was about to reap a terrible Glory and Triumph!

And on the contrary to see the Sons of Shame and Death, advanced to the
Pinnacle of Renown and Honor; caressed by the unthinking Crowd enjoying a
continued series of Health, Prosperity and Peace, as if they were the only
Favorites of Heaven; the Objects of God's peculiar Love, the Persons he
delighted to honor! What may be the Reasons of such Dark and dreadful
Dispensations? The Answer of this important Question leads me to the.

IV. Proposed, which was to point out the general Reasons or Causes why the
blessed God sends such dark Dispensations of Providence, through which many
ignorant unthinking and wicked People are miserably deluded?

And though it is freely Confessed, that no mortal (much less one of the Meanest)
can sufficiently discover the dark Depths of divine Providence, and point out
all the secret Springs which causes and direct the Uniform and Harmonious (tho
sometimes seemingly i^regular Motions) of that Wheel, yet with awful fear and
humble diffi^ence we may offer some what concerning the general Designs of such
dark Providence, both as to the good and bad; so far as the sacred Scriptures
give light, and our Duty, danger, or Comfort is concerned. Mica. VI. 9.

More generally the Design of such dark Providence is to vindicate the divine
Soveraignity over all, to magnify the Riches of his pure Grace upon some, and
his strict Justice toward others, according to his invariable and eternal
Purposes; of which Providence is but the Executor. 1. Pet. II. 8. Mat. X. 29.
Ephesians. I. 3, 4, 5, 9, 11.

More particularly as to good People the Intentions of the aforesaid
Providence, seem to be these following, namly

1. To excite their fear, because of God's Holiness and their own meanness,
that they may enter into the Rock, and hide them in the Dust, for sear of the
Lord, and for the Glory of his Majesty. It is in this Respect the Psalmist cries
out, Ps. CXIX. 120* My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. As also that they may be made awfully Sensible of the Solemnity of
his sacred Ordinances, and divine Worship, and so inclined to speak in
Abraham's and Jacob's Language; mentioned, Genesis XVIII. 27.30. and Genesis XXVIII.
17. It was doubtless to vindicate the divine Worship from a sordid Contempt,
and profane irreverence, that the thousands of Israel were struck with a
solemn dread, by the Death of Uzzah. And no doubt this was the Cause why so
many of the Corinthian Church were seized with sickness and swallowed up of
Death, immediately after the Sacramental Solemnity.

2. To excite their Faith, dark Providence give room for the Exercise of that
noble Grace, which it is our Honor, our Duty, and our Interest to live by.
Heb. X. 38. This inclines a gracious Person with Abraham not to stagger at the
promise, but to Hope against Hope, (i. e. against human probability or the
present Aspect or Course of Things) upon that stable and faithful Foundation
the Word of God. Romans IV. 18, 20. Heb. X. 23.

Also with Moses in the midst of danger, when no Way opens for escape, to wait
patiently for the Salvation of God. Ex. XIV. 13.

And with Habakkuk, in the midst of want and Penury when all the Cisterns of
earthly Succor fail, to rejoice in the God of his Salvation. Mal. III. 17, 18.
The Exercise of this noble Grace of Faith was no doubt the great design of that
trying Providence toward Abraham, respecting his son, viz. That he should slay
him who was the Son of the Promise, his only Son, the Son of his eager Desires
and blooming Hopes, the Staff of his aged Years, and thereby at once break the
Laws of Nature and of God, expose Religion to the Reproach of Heathens, and
himself to the continual revilings and abhorrence of the Wife of his Bosom. And
yet notwithstanding these surprising Difficulties, he disputed not the divine
Precept, questioned not the divine Promise, but obey's! See dear Brethren how
conspicuously divine Wisdom shines in bringing to pass this dark and trying
Providence, the issue of which tends so much to illustrate the Honors of the
divine Goodness and faithfullness, and to render perpetually apparent the
astonishing Strength, and transcendent Beauty of his Servants Faith, and
Obedience; which so well deserves our highest Admiration, and so justly demands
our laborious Imitation.

3. Another Design of those dark Dispensations, is to try the Love of Gods
People, the Lord Jesus speaks to his People, by them, as he did to Peter, Joh.
XXI. 15. Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me more then these, (i. e.) do you
Love me more then all your Friends and dear Relations? More then all your
worldly Occupations and delectable Enjoyments? More then your Honor, your Ease
your Life? Without which you can have no real Interest in my Person, or Benefit
by my suffering; (that is special and durable) then bear my Cross, endure
Reproach, and Shame for my sake. You profess Love by your Lips, show it by your
Practice; Love not in word and in Tongue, (i. e. only) but in deed and in
truth, 1 John III. 18.

4. Another end of those stumbling Providence, is to excite desire in God's
People after Heaven, if they enjoyed a continued Scene of Honor, Ease and
Prosperity in this World, it is probable they would be too thoughtless of the
next; too little affected with the Glories of it, either in longing after them,
or in a delightsome expectation of enjoying them But when those Lillies find
themselves perpetually environed with piercing Thorns, attended with a Train of
successive Disasters, that oftentimes like Noa's Dove upon the watery World,
they cannot find a resting Place; for without are fightings, and within are
fears. 2. Cor. VII. 5. This makes the Thoughts of a rest above sweet to their
oppressed Hearts, as the Expectation of Canaan was to the Israelites, wearied
in the Deserts Labrinths; or as the Hopes of a calm Harbor is pleasant to the
perplexed Mariner, where he may find a safe Sanctuary from the blustering Winds,
a secure retreat from the enraged Deeps.

This makes them groan within themselves waiting for the Redemption of their
Bodies Romans VIII. 23.

5. Another Design of such dark Providence is doubtless to excite the People
of God to earnest Labor in order to know so much of the Mind of God in them,
as is necessary to direct them how to behave under them; and to perform the
Duties of the present Time and Day; which is best attained by comparing the Rod
with the Word. Mic. VI. 9. The Lords Voice cries unto the City, the Man of
Wisdom shall see thy Name. Hear ye the Rod and who has appointed it.

Sloth is an Evil of very distructive tendency, not only very heinous in its
Nature, but very fatal in its Effects; it exposes the Persons that is Guilty of
it, as an easy Prey to be vanquished by Satan and their Lusts, witness David in
the woeful Case of Bathseba before mentioned. Ignorance is an Evil no less
prejudicial then the former, both which are alas, but too common and flagrant
at this Time, which open a dreadful Occasion of shoking Providence, to alarm
us out of the one, and excite us to avoid^ the other. Another End of the a
foresaid providence is.

6. To excite Gods People to, and strengthen them in, the Grace of Patience,
Romans V. 3, 4. And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations also, knowing that
Tribulation works Patience: -- see James, V. 10. Take my Brethren the
Prophets, -- For an Example of suffering Affliction and of Patience. From such
dark Providence the wicked will take Occasion to reproach pious People,
therefore this Way they give the Honor and Opportunity, of exercising
patience; in bearing Christ's precious Cross, Phil. I. 29 Even when inflicted on
others, and much more need have we of this Grace in exercise, when calamities
come upon our selves. The great Design of that Complication of Miseries, Joh
was exposed to, was the Exercise of his patience, as the Apostle James
instructs us, James. V. 11. Behold we count them happy that endure, ye have
heard of the Patience of Job, and seen the End of the Lord.

7. Purity is a principal End of afflictive Providence, they are sent to
purify the Hearts and reform the Lives of Gods People, Js. XXVII. 9. By this
therefore shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the Fruit to
take away his Sin. Hence they are justly compared to a Fan, Fire, a Furnace,
the Use of which is to separate the Chaff, and purify the Gold. Mat. III. 12.
Is. IV. 4. Is. XLVIII. 10. The Reformation of Gods People is intended in all
their Afflictions, whi^her they be Chastnings for Sin, Rev. 3.19. Or Trials of
their Graces, Zech. XIII. 8, 9. Or persecution for Righteousness, though wicked
Men persecute them for their goodness, the Lord as a Father permits this hard
Treatment as a Correction for Sin, and a Mean of Reformation from it Heb. V. 6,
7.

8. Such afflictive Dispensations of Providence are designed to excite Gods
People to Prayer; Hos. V. 15. I will go and return to my Place, till they
acknowledge their offense and seek my Face: In their Affliction they will seek
me early. When Things go on easily with pious Men f^r a long Tract of Time if
they don't restrain prayer, alas, they are apt to be too cold and formal in
it. Can. III. 1. The Moon never suffers an Eclipse but at the Full, but the Rod
of God upon themselves, or his Judgment upon others, will bring them to their
Knees and make them Pray to some purpose. How vast a Difference is there in the
Prayers of the same Christian at different Times? viz. Under prosperous
Security, and chastning Adversity. He that before had hardly any Words to
express his Mind with, or if he had Words there was no suitable concern; nay,
perhaps he was so much hurried by worldly Business, that he could hardly find
Time for Prayer, especially to be importunate in it; now his Tongue is as the
Pen of a ready Writer, a Field of Arguments opens to his anxious Soul, and he
insists upon them with the utmost Importunity; where ever he goes his Heart
sends secret sighs to God, Places of Retirement can witness his earnest
wrastlings, Floods of Tears and heavy Groans, not only for himself, but for
poor Zyon, see Ps. CXXX. 1. Out of the Depths, have I cried unto thee O Lord!
Said the blessed Psalmist. also Ps. CXXXVII. 5, 6. If I forget thee O
Jerusalem, let my right Hand forget her cunning, -- let my Tongue cleave to the
Roof of my Mouth. If I prefer not Jernsalem to my chief Joy.

9. The allwise God brings to pass dreadful Providence for the Humiliation of
his People, when we see the Fathers Rod in his Hand chastning his Children, or
slaying his Enemies; then does the blessed God speak to us thereby in this
Language, be not high minded but fear, Romans XI. 20. Wherefore let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. X. 12. Humble your selves
in the Sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Jam. IV. 10. Come my People
enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy Doors about thee, hide thy self as
it were for a little Moment, until the Indignation be overpast.

10. To excite his Peoples Admiration, and level the pride of human
Understanding, Gods Way is in the Sea, his Path in the great Waters and his
footsteps are not known. see Ps. LXXVII. 19. He makes darkness his secret
Place: And his Pavilon round about him is dark Waters, and thick Clouds of the
Skies. When he bows the Heavens and comes down, darkness is under his Feet. Ps.
XVIII. 9.11. As the Heavens are high above the Earth, so are his Ways and
Thoughts above ours. Is. LV. 8, 9. We may descry such depths in his Providence,
as no mortal can fathom.

It seems sometimes as if he were plucking up the Stakes of his Tabernacle, and
taking his farewell of the World; sometimes the Ark the Honor of Israel is
taken by Philistine Hosts, the Daughters of the uncircumcise Triumph, while
Zions Daughters weep and mourn; sometimes Jerusalems Walls must be broken and
her Inhabitants carried into the Babilonish Borders, and hang their silent
Harps upon the mournful Willows; while in the mean Time her jovial prosperous
Enemies have all the Symptoms of Joy and Gladness! In regard of these and other
dark Providence already mentioned, we must use the Apostles Exclamation, O the
Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! see also Ps. LXXIII. 16.

Having hinted something of the Design of those dark Providence before
mentioned in respect of good People. I proceed,

2. To show what their Design is in Regard of the Bad; such of them
particularly as are given up of God whose Day of gracious Visitation has
expired; it is such our text principly intends, hence some may be inclined to
propose the following Questions.

Quest. 1. Have all that are under the Gospel a Day of Grace?

Answ. All that are under the Gospel have the Offers of divine Life, and the
common strivings of the Spirit, exciting them to embrace or accept it. Genesis
LXIII. Is. LV. v. 6.

Quest. 2. Does this Time of gracious Visitation last during the Term of every
Man's natural Life?

Answ. No, the contrary is very evident from the sacred Scriptures. see Luke
XIX. 41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over it:
saying if thou had known, even thou at least in this thy Day, the Things
which belong unto thy Peace! But now they are bid from thine Eyes. There were
many in that great City of younger Years, many undoubtedly in the Bloom of
Life; and yet you see the Body of them were abandoned by God. see also Mat.
XXIII. 37, 38, This Time of gracious Visitation is of uncertain Continuance,
sometimes of a longer, and sometimes of a shorter Duration, just according to
Gods good Pleasure. The Time of the old Worlds Visitation was, One Hundred and
Twenty Years, Genesis VI. 3, Which was but a short Space, considering the vast
Time they then usually Lived, three Years are allowed them who are intended by
the Fig Tree, and one Year more obtained by the importunity of the
Vine-dresser. Luke XIII. 6.9. It was about the same space of Time, that
Jerusalems Day lasted.

That there is a set Time of Gods gracious Visitation, after the expiration of
which, the Jealous God utterly forsakes Men, and will never have mercy upon
them any more, is abundantly confirmed from the very Text I am treating upon,
wherein God threatens to give up such who receive not the Truth in Love; to
delusions to believe a lie, that they all might be damned; see also Is. LV. 6.
Pro. 1.24, -- 31. Ezekiel. XXIV. 13.14, Hos. IV. 17. Rev. XXII. 11.

Quest. 3. What are the probable Signs of Persons being wholly given up by God?
What are the Characters of an expired Day of Grace.

Ans. It is highly probable that these Persons following are everlastingly
forsaken by abandoned of the just and terrible God.

1. Who contrive Iniquity, knowingly and customarily. Mic. II. 13.

2. Who go on in a long Course of it against Light, for this exceedingly
provokes God, hardens the Heart, and sears the Conscience; for this the
Heathens were given up of God, to the Tyranny of their unnatural Lusts, Romans I.
28, 29. And from this, Men are difficultly reclaimed. Jer. XIII. Can the
Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Then may ye also do good,
who are accustomed to do evil. see Jer. V. 9.

3. Who glory in Sin. Phil. III. 19. Jer. III. 3. And thou have a Whores
Forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed. see Jer. VI. 15. Were they ashamed when
they had committed Abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither
could they blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall. Jer. VIII.
12, 13. -- I will surely consume them says the Lord.

4. Who are rendered insensible by Sin, Ephesians. IV. 19. Who being past feeling,
have given themselves over unto laciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. If Conscience which used formerly to check and gripe them for their
impieties, becomes now a silent Spectator of their Wickedness; it is a most
dreadful Sign that God's restraints are remooved, and they totally abandoned.
According to that fearful Sentence. Rev. XXII. 11. Let him that is unjust be
unjust still. And he that is filthy, let him be filthy still.

5. Who are habitually Impatient of Reproof for Sin, Pro. XV. 10. Correction is
griveous to him that forsakes the Way, and he that hatch reproof shall die.
Pro. XXIX. 1. He that being often reprooved hardens his Neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without Remedy.

6. Who Apostatize After they are enlightened, from a Profession of strict
Holiness, from good Motions, Inclinations, desires, Resolutions, into profane
Practices, or pagan Principles; and that for a considerable Space of Time: The
Case of such is exceeding dreadful and perilous; as you may see by the
following Places of Scripture. 2. Pet. II. 20. The latter end is worse with
such, then the beginning, it had been better for such; they had not known the
Way of Righteousness -- Heb. VI. 4.5.6. For it is impossible for those who were
once enlightened, and have tasted the heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of
the Holy Ghost and have tasted the good Word of God, -- If they shall fall away
to renew them again to repentance. Heb. X. 26. For if we Sin, wilfully after
we (...) received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for Sin. But if any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him, but
we are not of them who draw back to perdition, Verse 28, -- 39.

7. Who Sin the more under Afflictions like wicked Ahaz, 2. Chron. XXVIII. 22.
This is a deadly Token that the disease is desperate, when proper Remedies
instead of healing inrage it. Js. I. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye
will revolt more and more.

8. Who prosper in Sin, and Sin the more in prosperity. Is. VI. 10. Make the
Heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut they Eyes: Least
they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their
Heart, and convert and be healed. Make their Heart fat; this is a metaphor
taken from Beasts designed for the Shambles, which for some space before
killing Time comes, are put into rich rank Pastures, in order to get Fat fit
for the Knife. Thus the prosperity of many of the Jewish People, and even the
Prophets, Instructions through their abuse of both, became means of hardening
them judicially in Sin; and thereby of preparing them for the Slaughter of
Damnation, it is to be feared that, that awful threatening Mentioned by Solomon,
Prove. I. 32. viz. That the Prosperity of Fools shall destroy them. Is
accomplished in many of the present Generation. For do not many act Jeshurun
like in their Prosperity, when they wax fat, do they not kick against the
Pricks of close rebukes, and awakning Instructions concerning their Duty and
Danger? Deuteronomy. XXXII. 15. Act. IX. 5. Because sentence against an evil work is
not speedily executed, are not therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men, fully
set in them to do evil: Fales. VIII. 11.

Is it not a Sign of death's being near, when a skillful Phisician after having
tried all Sorts of Means, leaves of using any more Medicines, or giving any
more directions, and suffers the forsaken Patient, to follow the Guidance of
his feavourish Humor and diseased Appetite? And thus is it not infinitely more
then equidly perrilous and dreadful (however agreeable it may seem to corrupt
Nature) when the blessed God after having used many Means and Measures, by his
Word and Rod to reclaim the Sinner, but in vain, forsakes him in respect of his
gracious Influences, and gives him up to the Power of his corrupt Lusts and
(...) imaginations? And con^r's Pros^ in Judgment as fuel to inflame them;
(...) to afflictt them any more for their recovery? Hence we have that
threatening, Hos IV. 14. I will not punish your Daughters when they commit
Whoredom, -- Therefore the People that does not understand shall fall.

9. It is probable that such have sinned a away their Day of Mercy, who are
long unprofitable under a Soul searching Ministry. Heb. VI. 8. But that which
bears Thorns and Briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing whose end is to
be burnt.

10. Who maliciously contend against, deride and contemn such a Ministry,
because of their plain powerful, close and awakening Methods; the unhappy Jews
were on the Brink of Ruin when they opposed faithful Dealing with malicious
bitterness. Act. VII. 51. -- 54. Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in Heart and
Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did so do you. When
they heard these Things, they were cut to the Heart, and they gnashed upon him
with their teeth. see 2. Chron. XXXVI. 16. Some in Jeremiah's Time, instead of
being awakned out of their carnal Security, by the threats he denounced in his
Masters Name, treated them with profane Banter and Burlesque; used all the
Arts of Satyr and Airs of Jest and ridicule, to make them appear ludicrous and
contemptible. And one Word (no doubt among others) which they made themselves
merry with, was that of the Bnrden of the Lord, a Word which the good Prophets
often used to signify the vast Importance of their divine Messages, and with
what seriousness they should be received, how much the great God was offended
with this Practice you may see, Jer. XXII, 23, 34, 39. And when this People or
the Prophet, or Priest shall ask the saying, what is the Burden of the Lord?
Thou will then say unto them what Burden? I will even forsake you says the
Lord. -- I will even punish that Man and his House. And are there not some
profane Scoffers now a Days of the very same Stamp? Who endeavor to Lampoon
and and ridicule all plain and pungent Discourses of that Damnation they
deserve, and are hastening to. Such lustful Scoffers are arrived to that degree
of hardness that they are seldom if ever; reclaimed for this impudent and
Heaven daring Practice makes their Bands strong. Is. XXVIII. 22. Jud. 18.

11. Who in contempt or fixed Disgust withdraw generally from such a Ministry,
because they discover their wretched States, and open their wounds. Joh. III.
19, 20. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men
love darkness rather then Light, becouse their deeds are evil. For every one
that does evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, least his Deeds
should be reproved.

12. Such from whom a faithful Ministry is removed in Judgment, Act. XIII. 45,
46. Or if continued the Blessing suspended, when Gods holy Spirit ceases
striving, Genesis VI. 3. Then the Word becomes a Savor of Death unto Death. When
a Minister of State who was sent to negotiate a Peace with a foreign Kingdom,
is called home in haste; it is an awful Sign of approaching War, and that the
Treaty of Peace is ended. -- So when the King of Heaven calls home his faithful
Ambassadors, or sends them to other Places; it is a sad presage to those from
which they are removed of ensuing Judgments. Rev. VI. 2, 4, 5.8.

Having endeavored to Answer those important Questions, which are preparatory
to what is to be further offered; I come to consider the Design of the Dark and
dreadful Providence before mentioned in respect of the wicked and that I
beleve is fourfold, viz. To discover them, blind them, harden them, and damn
them.

1. They are sent to discover them, 1. Cor. XI. 19. For there must be also
heresies amongst you, that they which are approved may be made manifest. Before
the Storm comes the Wheat and Chaff lie together upon one Floor in a friendly
Manner, but when the Wind blows there is a quick Separation, the light Chaff
soon moves it is Quarters and Wings away according as the variable Blasts direct
its wandering Motion. -- But the solid grain keeps its Place, and stands the
Shock. so some Hypocrites who associate themselves with pious People in
Peaceful Times, as if they were of the same Family, when the heavens gather
blackness, and the Al^nighty Sovereign of the Universe sends the Winds of
Affliction and Distress out of his Fists, covers the Beauty of his People with
a Cloud, Lam. II. 1. Suffers Satan and the Guilt of Sin to hurry some of them
into Desperation, Distraction, or Death it self; (as was before hinted) then
away they troop to their own Company, and quickly discover what they are, by
their malignant and unjust Reflectious against Gods Faithful Servants. Now you
see Neighbors what comes of their preaching Terror, Terror, ay, this is the
Fruit of it, they are never contented those Troublers of Israel, till they
bring People to Madness, Despair and Death, well I Will take care of such Men,
they shall not get me into despair, I warrant you, Neighbor, they are
dangerous Fellows, keep clear of them, else they will do you a mischief before
you are aware of it.

Thus these men prove themselves to be Hypocrites in their Hearts, what ever
religious cloak they might carry before, and inveterate Enemies against God and
Religion, by this Manner of Arguing or rather slandering, for in it they
discover two Things which are neither much for their Credit or Interest, ziz.
Gross Ignorance, and great Malice.

1. Gross Ignorance, either in supposing what is false, or inferring what is
unreasonable.

1. They suppose what is false in one or all of the following particulars, viz.
either (1) That Ministers can by speaking Terror put men into Despair or
Distraction, which is both false and foolish. or (2) That preaching much terror
to the proper Objects of it, has a natural tendency to, or inseparable
Connection with Despair or Distraction, which is false, otherwise Christ and
his Apostles would be brought in as Criminals at these Men's Bar. For they
preached much Terror to whom it belonged, the Speeches of Christ to the
Pharisees were big with Terror, and even the Scriptures themselves must be
rejected for this Reason; for they are full of Terror against wicked People.
Terror scripturaly and distinctly Spoken is so far from having a tondency to,
or Connection with Despair and Distraction; that it is a necessary Mean to
prevent the one, by bringing besotted Sinners to a just sense of their Danger
and Misery, in order to prepare them as Objects for pardoning mercy, the best
Bul-wark against Despair; and to cure the other, by opening Sinners
Understandings and alarming their secure Consciences, (through the concurrence
of the Spirit) to behold the amazing evils both moral and penal that are in the
Nature and Issues of Sin; and thus the Terrors of God excite them to make
penitent reflections upon their guilt and danger because of both, and so to
flee from Sin, which is the meritorious Cause, both of their present madness
and misery. Knowing the Terror of the Lord we persuade Men, says the Apostle, 2
Cor. V. 11. The Prodigal never come to the right Exercise of his Reason
(neither will you) until he felt himself perishing. Luke XV. 17.

A 3d. Particular supposed by the former Cavil, is that they have power to keep
themselves from Despair by shunning faithful Ministers and putting the evil Day
far off. But how false and unreasonable is this? Can you contend with the
infinite God and prevail? Whose Word makes even the Devils tremble, and from
whose Face the Earth and Heavens flee away. Rev. XX. 11. Unhappy Sinners the
Method you take to prevent Despair is the readiest Road to it, for by avoiding
the most awakning Means, and putting off your Soul concerns, you heighten your
Sin and Guilt, which is the proper Cause of Despair; now when your Consciences
are once rouzed, whose stinging rebukes you cannot avoid, the greater Degrees
of Guilt lie upon them, the more likely you are to fall into Despair; for what
does Conscience scourge so severly for, as sinning against its Light? Not to
add that by your delays Satan has the greater Opportunity to tempt you that
your Day is past, and that it is too late now to repent.

2. What is inferred by the former Cavil is unreasonable, viz. That because
some Person or other perhaps one in an Age, has through ignorance, the
Temptations of Satan, and the Misapplication or abuse of the Terrors of God's
Word, been overwhelmed by Despair, Distraction, or excessive Grief, therefore
no Terror should be preached; therefore we should carefully avoid sorrow for
Sin and Conviction of its guilt and danger.

Alas, what Reasoning is this? for (1) Does the Abuse of any Thing render
unnecessary or unlawful the regular Use of it? If so, then you must never Eat
or Drink more; for those Creature, have been more abused to Gluttony and
Drunkness, then ever the Terrors of God have been to despair. (2) Do you Argue
so when you hear of Persons getting into despair about the World, and so
cutting their Throats and Hanging themselves for fear they should not get
enough of it, as many have done? Do you say upon such Occasions, well I Will
never take any care about the World more? Or when you Hear of Persons going Mad
about natural Love, do you resolve that you will never love any Body more upon
the Account? Or when you have heard of one that has been hurt by Eating too
much, did ye purpose that ye would never eat more, but would faithfully
endeavor forever hereafter to live without? -- (3) Although some Vessels are
lost at Sea now and then, do the Merchants therefore leave Trading, or is it
reasonable they should? (4) Cannot you be Damned by Presumption as surely as by
Despair? Joh. XVIII. 15. Amos. VI. 1. Wherefore then is all this Heat about the
one Extreme, and the other not mentioned, which is more then equally dangerous
because more pleasing? Is it not Love to your carnal Ease, more then to God's
Glory, (for which you pretend a great Regard) that makes you so Zealous and
Partial in this Matter? (5) Can you be saved without repentance, and is not
sorrow for Sin a necessary ingredient of it? Luke XIII. 3. Joel. II. 12.13. and
(6) What is the Reason you make such an outcry about any Person that has been
overwhelmed with Soul distress, and none about the others before mentioned?
Does not this flow from your Heart Hatred against holiness and the Practisers
of it?

2. You discover great malice by the foresaid Cavil, and that in two
particulars.

1. In ascribing the Desperation, etc. Before Mentioned to a wrong Cause.

To bring Men to despair is the Work of the Devil; when he finds People
thoroughly awakned, so that he cannot bring them back by all his comforting
Arts, to their former carnal and presumptious Security; then he labors to
drive them forward into the Gulf of Despair, which he could not effect without
the Guilt of Sin; the truth is that is the Matter he works upon in order to
accomplish his hellish Design. But pray by the Way observe that he does not
endeavor to bring all People into Despair, no, no, that would tend to scare
secure Sinners out of his Clutches, Satan knows better how to advance his
Kingdom then so, he is easy if they be damned any way whither by Presumption
or Despair, he therefore lets carnal secure People, (such as I fear the
Objector is) alone to please themselves with their false Hopes of Happiness
till they are past remedy: He knows that this is the surest and commonest,
because the easiest Way to Hell. It is the distressed Sinner, he besetts and
tempts to Despair; now what belongs to Satan and Sin the Meretorious and
efficient Causes of Despair, you ascribe to Ministers awakning preaching or to
Peoples sorrowing too much for their Sins, does not this discover the most
malignant Malice against Christ whose Servants they are, Luke 10.16. And
against repentance and holiness which cannot be attained without labor and
sorrow? Mat. XI. 12. 1 Pet. IV. 18. And in the mean Time great respect to your
Father and your Favorites I mean the Devil and your Lusts? Joh. VIII. 44.
seasonable and regular sorrow is so far from being a mean of despair that it
is, indispensably necessary to prevent it in Time and Eternity. Luke VI. 25.

2. You show your Malice in rejoicing at any Shadow of Reproach ye can get
against Gods People, it there was the least Spark of Grace or divine Life in
you ye would mourn for the Afflictions of Joseph, Amos. VI. 6. 2 Cor. XI. 29.
And be distressed for the Dishonor that is cast upon the holy Name of God by
his Enemies upon such Occasions. Jos. VII. 9. Nehe. V. 9. Ps. LXIX. 9. But
instead of this, you are glad of any pretext whereby you can save your own
credit, and yet vent your disguised Venom against pious People; and probably
you have been wishing and waiting a great while for this before you got it. O
poor unhappy Sinners! You hereby discover your Heart hatred against God and his
Children, and prove your selves to be in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of
Iniquity, the true subjects of Satan's Kingdom. For Christ, and the Devil have
divided empires, which contain the whole Universe; so that those who are not
with Christ are against him, and he that gathers not with him scatters
abroad, Mat. XII. 30. And thus poor Sinners while you think to expose others,
you declare your own Shame; and are discovered by those dark Providence you
endeavor to pervert, to be Enemies to God and Religion.

2. Another Design of those dark dispensations of Providence I have before
mentioned, is to blind and infatuate obstinate Sinners, whose Day of Grace is
expired, Romans XI. 7, 8. What then Israel has not obtained that which he
seeks for, but the Election has obtained it, and the Rest were blinded:
According as it is written, God has given them them the Spirit of Slumber,
Eyes that they should not see, and Ears that they should not hear, unto this
Day. Is. VI. 10. Make the heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy,
and shut their Eyes, lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears,
and understand with their Hearts, and convert and be healed. Remarkable is that
saying of Christ, Joh. IX. 39. -- For Judgment I am come into this World, that
they which see not, might see, and that they which see, might be made blind. i.
e. that those who have an humbling Sense of their Ignorance, might be
enlightened graciously, and that such who are proud, obstinate, and
selfconfident, may be blinded judicially. Mat. V. -- It is but just that such
who will not see should be made blind (as was before observed) and to this End
have dark Providence sent in their Way, and the Devil that grand Sophister and
their own corrupt Natures let loose to deceive and infatuate them thereby, as
our Text instructs us.

Satan is a Spirit of such vast Penetration, Subtilty and Experience in the
Arts of Fallacy, that if permitted, he can easily impose upon unthinking
obstinate Sinners Evil under the Appearance of Good, Error and Falsehood under
the Pretext of Truth, and that even in Fundamentals, which a grave Writer takes
to be the Meaning of the Word Delusion in our Text, Docter Ridgly, by strong
deinsions is no to be understood, error or mistake in Matters of lesser
Importance, but such as are subversive of fundamentals.
for his Working is with all deceiveableness in them that perish. -- How justly
was wicked Ahab deceived by Falsehood to his final Overthrow, who would not
receive the Truth in Love from faithful Micajah? 1 Kings XXII. 8.20. Men that
are to be executed, have their Faces covered before the Hangman does his
Office, so obstinate Sinners, who will not receive the Truth in Love, but take
Pleasure in unrighteousness, and are therefore doomed to Damnation, are first
blinded judicially, in order to it.

3. Another Design of the aforesaid Providence, is to harden and stumble
ungodly People, that they may fall and never rise again. See Jer. XXV. 27. --
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, drink ye and be drunken, and
spew and fall, and rise no more. What God threatens against Babylon may be
applied to such obstinate Sinners as do not receive the Truth in Love, Jer. L.
31, 32, behold I am against thee O thou most proud, says the Lord God of
Hosts: For thy Day is come, the Time that I will Visit thee, and the most proud
shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up: Such as want and wait for
stumbling Blocks, shall have them with a witness; and be made to break their
Necks over them. Hos. VIII. 11, Mark. IV. 11, 12. Pharoh instead of being
reformed by the Succession of terrible Judgments inflicted on his Land, was but
the more hardened by abusing them. Ex IX. 35. This judicial hardness is a
Forerunner of Destruction so it was with Pharoh, the miserable Jews, and many
others Josh. XI. 20 This obstinate impudent hardness is like putting the Rope
about the Neck of a Thief, or Murderer, before he is led to the Place of
Execution. Wherefore then Sinners harden ye your Hearts as the Egyptians and
Pharoh, hardened their Hearts. 1. Sam. VI. 6. Know that it will be terrible in
the issue against such God will swear in his wrath, that they shall not enter
into his Rest. Heb. III. 3.18. Ps. XCVI. 11.

4. Design of such dark Dispensations of divine Providence in Respect of
obstinate Sinne^s whose Day of Mercy is spent and gone, is to (...) as Vessels
of Wrath for Dest^uction, to prepare them for Eternal Damnation as our Text
asserts which leads me to (...) the.

(...) Proposed, which was to show what is (...) in that Damnation, which such
delu(...) may expect to posess.

But here you need not expect a particular Description of the damned State for
that (in full) the miserable Subjects of it can only give, from their own
woeful Experience.

The beginning or first Fruits of Damnation, which impenitent Sinners feel in
this Life, are awful; for all of them are in a State of Sin, Death, Wrath,
Ignominy, Enmity, Extreme Misery. Rom VII. 5. Ephesians. II. 1. Joh. III. 36. Ps.
XIV. 3. Romans VIII. 7.5, 10.1.3. Ephesians. II. 12. But some in a dreadful Degree
are racked with the just Horrors of a guilty Mind, the bodeing fears and awful
Presages, of their future miseries; the Consciences of some filthy Wretches,
are like the troubled Sea, whose restless Waters cast up Mire and Dirt, for
there is no Peace, (that is true Peace) says my God to the wicked. Is. LVII.
21.

But they have many carnal comforts and contrivances, by which they allay and
divert these Terrors and pains in Life; such as these, viz. Their false Hopes,
false Friends, worldly Labors and Enjoyments, all which will be removed at
Death or quickly after; this will make their woeful Case much more terrible. At
the dreadful Moment of their Dissolution, all their contemptible Honors,
sordid Pleasures, and temporary Profits will flee away, see Ps. LXXIII. 18.19.
Surely thou did set them in slipery Places, thou castedst them down into
Destruction. How are they brought into Desolation, as in a Moment! They are
utterly consumed with Terrors. see Luke XVI. 25. And which is still worse their
wicked Works shall follow them to Judgment, to confound and condemn them there.
2. Cor. V. 10. After which they shall be thrusted into the Prison of Hell, that
Center of inexpressible Pain and Torture, to be reserved for the Judgment of
the great Day. 1. Pet. III, 19, 20. Luke XVI. 24, 28. 2. Pet. II. 4. In which
the Damned shall be exposed to the utmost shame and contempt, Dan. XII. 2.
Because of the Detection or discovery of their concealed Impieties, which will
then be exposed before the grand Tribunal of the living God, before the great
and general Assembly of the whole Rational Creation. What Confusion will cover
the Faces, and Horror possess the Hearts of the Damned, when they hear that
dreadful Sentance pronounced by the great Judge of Heaven and Earth from his
burning Th^one? viz. Go ye accursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Mat. XXV. 41. While in the mean Time the Frame of Nature
will be shaken and torn in Pieces, turned as it were into its original Chaos;
the visible heavens sending forth horrible claps of Thunder and sudden Flashes
of Lightning, till it be turned into a dreadful Sheet of Fire; the Earth ready
to shake in pieces, because of the terrible Earthquakes tearing its inmost
bowels; which being kindled will rend its Surface and run in burning Rivulets,
so that its great Globe will be (its probable) like a Sparkling Ball of Fire;
the vast Ocean roaring forth the most hideous complaints. O how will the Damned
cry then for the Hills and Mountains to cover them, from the Face of the Lanth
that sits ^yon the Throne? O the doleful State of those damned Wretches! Who
will have no shelter to hide them from the dreadful rebukes of a revenging God!
No Friend to pity or help them, either in Heaven or Earth, in the Season of
their sore Distress! But instead of pity be exposed to the Derision and
contempt of God, Angels, and good Men; and to the Insults of Devils! After the
Soleninity of the judicial Process is over, and the final Sentence passed; away
the wicked Must pack to their cursed Tophet, to feel the Completion of it. In
this gloomy Vault of Perdition and woe, the damneds Torments will be fully
consumated and perfected. Which I come now to give some brief Account of in
respect of their Nature, Degree, and Duration.

1. The Nature of the damned's Torments, appears in two Things, viz. Their
privative and possitive Miseries, or in the evils of loss and Sense they are
exposed to, thus the Punishments of the damned are generally, and I think
justly destinguished.

The privative miseries of the Damned are principaly these following, namely
they shall be perfectly and eternally separated from all Union to, Communion
with, and Enjoyment of the blessed God; who is most certainly the first Truth
and Supreme Good, the great source and Spring of Happiness; whose Favor is
better then Life, and whose Frowns are worse then Death. And by consequence
bereaved of those holy Qualities, and delightful Enjoyments which are the
proper and natural Issues of his gracious Presence; as well as perpetually
Banished from the Seat of his glorious Residence, where those are exerted and
possessed in the Perfection of Beauty and Delight; and finaly separated from
that Blissful Fellowship and social Worship, with Saints and Angels, which are
equally the Ornament and Entertainment of the Courts above.

In this Lise the wicked for the most Part, are not sensible how vast the Loss
of a God is; their Minds are so miserably darkened by Sin, that they have no
suitable Apprehensions of his Glory and greatness; infinite Excellency and
transcendent allsufficiency. 1. Cor. II. 14.

Again they are strangely diverted, from contemplating upon the divine
Perfections, by the Amusements of worldly Business and sensitive Pleasure; to
which they have a strong Bias, and Inclination of will and affections. Romans
VIII. 5. For they that are after the Flesh, do mind the Things of the Flesh:
Natural Men are so fleshly, so far degenerated into Beasts; that they pursue
principally as their chief good (notwithstanding their false Pretenses to the
contrary) those Gratifications that are common to them; they have so far
extinguished the small Remains of the divine Image, and forgot the Dignity of
the human Nature, that they eagerly pursue the same Design of Life with Brutes,
and the chief Difference between them (in this respect) is that they are more
artful and mischievous then they, in the prosecution of it. They greedily
endeavor to glut their fleshly Souls with carnal Delights, and when
disappointed in one Object they run to another with impatient haste, and thus
they spend their wretched Lives in fruitless Labors and Disappointments; Romans
VI. 27. And by this hurrie are kept from the necessary Knowledge of; and
suitable Meditation upon the supreme Being.

But the Damned will have a confounding Sense of the Loss of a God in Eternity,
when their Minds being freed from their present Diversions, Amusements, and
mistakes, shall be experimentally and judicially enlarged, to Frame a juster
Estimate of the divine Goodness, and Excellency both Essential and
communicative; and consequently inclined to dwell for ever upon the mournful
Thoughts of their being separated eternaly from them. The blessed God being the
fountain of all desirable Good both Moral and Phisical, the Soul that is
separated from him can have no more solid Delight and Satisfaction, suited to
its noble Nature and worthy of its exalted Desires; then the Body of animal
Life when separated from the Soul.

And are not natural Men in general as stupidly and insensible of the other
Bereavements before hinted? They have no Pisga's prospect (by faith) of the
celestial Canaan nor any taste or relish (being carnal) of those pious
pleasures which are the natural Result of the divine Life. And do they not
secretly dislike the Conversation of the Saints, because of their strict
Holiness, pious and discovering Discourses, which sometimes gripe their guilty
Consciences; and therefore they carefully shun them when most Zealous, least
their carnal ease should be broken and their false Hopes unhinged? And are not
their Houses instead of Being Bethels wherein Gods Name is worshipped, rather
Bethavens wherein it is profaned? But in Eternity the Tables will be turned,
they shall see such Dawnings of Glory and joyous Triumph, in the shining
Appearance of the Saints and Angels; as will much heighten their Esteem of the
Beauty, Splendour, and Delights of that Paradise, which is made the Seat of
their perpetual Residence; and from which them selves are forever Excluded;
this will strike their softest Passions, and extort their never ending
Lamentations! see Luke XIII. 28. There shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth
(says the blessed Jesus) When ye shall see Abraham, and Jsaac and Jacob, and
all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out.

And though their Love to the Saints, will be much the same then that it is now,
viz. The Perfection of that hatred; yet for the sake of their own safey they
will be desirous to crowd in among them whom they now so much disdain, but to
no purpose, the Door is shut, the Gulf is fixed, they shall not find access,
Luke XIII. 25. -- 27. Luke XVI. 26. And to conclude this Head, is it not just
that those who would not worship God here should be be deprived of the
Opportunity of it hereafter? You filthy Sinners, who are not afraid or ashamed
to out do both Pagans and Devils, in rending the venerable Name of God by your
horrid Oaths, and Blasphemy's, know to your Terror, that you will have enough
of this wretched Work to do in Hell, which you have accustomed your selves too
much to on Earth, among the damned Ghosts and Damned Angels throughout Eternity.

I come now to speak of the

Possitive Miseries of the Damned, which contain the following terrible
ingredients, namely the Wrath of an angry God, the Burnings of material Fire,
the Reflections of their guilty consciences, and the Rage of their exasperated
Lust and Passions.

1. They are exposed to the Wrath of an angry God, Romans IX. 22. Which appears
to be exceeding dreadful, not only by the Affecting Representations the holy
Scriptures give of it, in a Variety of the strongest Metaphors; terming the
enduring of it, a drowning of Men in Destruction and Perdition. 1. Tim. VI. 9.
Casting of them bound Hand and Foot into utter darkness? into a Furnace, a Lake
of Fire; a Tophet, whose Fuel is kindled by the Breath of God, like a Stream of
Brimstone. Mat. XXII. 13. Mat. XIII. 50. Rev. XX. 15. Is. 30. la^t. But also by
considering its Author, Extent, Subject, Design, instruments, and Place of
Inflictiou.

1. The Author of this Wrath is Eternal, Heb. X. 30. A Being of infinite
Wisdom, Almighty Power, and inflexible Justice; who knows how to reward the
Wicked and will by no Means clear the Guilty, who is able to execute the just
and deep Designs of his unering Wisdom, against the most politic and powerful
Combinations of his Creatures. Joh. IX. 4. Nay the righteous God is not only
the Author but the principle Efficient of the damned's Pains, by the Presence
of his Justice, the immediate Lashes of his unbar'd and eternal Arm. 2. These.
I. 9. Which is infinitely more formidable then the combined force of Angels,
Men, and Devils. Heb. X. 31. In Hell says an eminent Writer, Professor Dunlop.
The Sources of his wrath are laid open, and there his Looks flame with
vengeance, and his anryg Presence scatters about furious Storms of Death and
misery, which are to tear the Sinner, with the most dreadful convulsions.

2. The extent of this wrath is unsearchable, exceeding the utmost Verge of the
most fearful Imagination. Ps. XC. 11. Who knows the Power of thine Anger?
Even according to thy fear so is thy Wrath.

3. The chief Subject of this Wrath is immortal, viz, The Soul of Man; this
adds to the Terror of it, because being a spiritual and noble Substance, the
source of Life and Sensation, it is consequently liable to pains as much more
intense and acute then the Body; as it surpasses it in the Sublimity of its
Nature, and extent of its Duration. That the anguish of the Mind much exceeds
the Pains of the Body, both Scripture and experience confirm. see Prove. XVIII.
14: The Spirit of a Man will sustain his Infirmity, but a wounded Spirit who
can bear: Job could endure with some composure the Bereavement of his Goods,
Friends, Health; but when he came to get a wound in his Spirit, he broke forth
into the most hasty and passionate Complaints. Joh. VI. 4. -- 3.1. How
intolerable says a worthy Author, Bishop Hopkin^s.
May we conceive these Pains and Tortures to be? To shoot poisoned Darts into a
Man's Marrow, to rip up his Bowels with a Sword red hot or to let scalding Oil,
or melted Lead fall, into the Apple of your Eyes, making them Boil and Burn
till they fall out of your Heads, is insinitely less then to have the Wrath of
God fall upon the Soul. That God who as the Prophet Nahum speaks can melt the
Mountains and make the Hills flow at his presence, can melt the Souls of the
Damned like Lumps of Wax. Ps. XXII. 14. -- You would rather choose to suffer to
Eternity as a recreation, the sharpest fits of the Stone or Gout, to be
stretched upon a Rack or lie broken upon the Wheel, to have your Flesh plucked
off by fiery Pinchers. --

4. The Design of the Aforesaid Wrath is revengeful, viz. To punish the
Affronts offered to the divine Majesty, by the Creatures offenses; and to get
Satisfaction proportioned to their guilt and heinousness. Is. I. 24. Heb.
10.30. Now consider poor Sinner the vast Number of your Transgressions, and
their peculiar Agravations, and see how dreadful that wrath must be which is
proportioned to them.

Also ponder upon the Sufferings of an innocent Savior for the Sins of
Mankind, see how the Burden of Divine Wrath he endured, pressed the Blood out
of his Body from his oppressed Heart, in numberless crimson Rivulets; and hear
the doleful outcry extorted by the same Cause, Eli, Eli, Lammasabachthani! How
will you be able guilty Sinners to bear this pressure alone, which had such
Influence on the innocent and eternal Son of God?

5. The Instruments of this Wrath are implacable, this increases our
Apprehensions of its Terror; the malicious Devils will then fully repay
Sinners, for their faithful drudgery to them in this World; and undoubtedly the
damned's associates in misery will add Fuel to their burnings, and widen their
wounds, by bringing to their unwelcome remembrance past impieties.

6. The Place is horrible, in which the Vengeance of God is inflicted, which
will add to its amazing Dread. This the sacred Scriptures represent to be a
Dungeon of the closest Confinement, and greatest obscurity. 1. Pet. III. 19. 2.
Pet. II. 4. Jud. VI. 13. A terrible Theater prepared by divine Vengeance, to
erect its eternal Triumph in, upon the damned World. Is. XXX. last,

Having spoken something respecting the first Ingrediant grasped in the
possitive Miseries of the Damned, viz. The Wrath of God. I come to consider the

2. Namely the Burnings of material Fire, with which their Bodies after the
Resurection will be eternaly Scorched all over, as if wrapped in a Sheet of
flaming Sulphur, in that Glowing Oven of God's enraged Jealousy before
mentioned; So that they will become throughout like a burning Coal, every limb
dropping, whole Flakes of Fire and Brimstone. Bishop Hopkins*
Luke. XVI. That the damned will be tortured with material Fire, appears from
our Saviors Explication of the Parable; Mat. XIII. 24, -- 42. Which common
Sense teaches us should be in plain Language, otherwise it would not tend to
instruct but to perplex and ensnare Mankind.

Again its very improbable, that, that final decisive Sentence of the great
Judge, mentioned by the Evangelist, Mat. XXV. 41. Should be expressed in the
dark Figures of Metaphor, because it suits not its Design, which is to be
easily understood by all. Not to add, that if the same Thing be intended in the
Diversity of Expressions, used by Christ concerning the Torments of Hell; Mark.
IX. 44. It will be no casie Task to clear the Text from the Charge of a
needless Repetition.

It is indeed difficult for us to apprehend, how crass Matter should work upon
a Spirit, but notwithstanding Experience teaches us, that our Souls which are
as really Spirits as the Angels, are capable of painful Sensations, from our
bodily Maladies.

But to proceed,

3. Ingredient in the damneds poss^tive miseries is the Reslections of their
guilty Consciences, which probably are intended by that metaphorical Expression
of Christ, Mark. IX. 44. Of a never dying Worm; Conscience undoubtedly gnaws
the damned Soul, stretches it on the Rack of inexpressible Anguish, sinks it in
the Gulff of Pain, and gripes it with Unutterable and eternal Agonies; by
reflecting upon the Greatness of the Happiness once and again offered them, and
that in the most humble strains of importunate and endearing condescension, and
their willful madness in the Rejection of it, and choosing Sin and Death before
it. The whole Series of their past Impieties being represented by Conscience,
will minister sufficient Matter for the most Passionate and perpetual
Lamentations, bitter reflections, and selfrevenging upbraiding. Mat. VIII. 12.
But the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: There
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

What ever Way the Damned turn their Thoughts, is will add Fuel to their
Flames, if they Look back upon their Lives spent in this World, a gloomy Scene
of unpardoned Iniquities will open to their View, like so many hideous Monsters
ready to fright them into convulsive Agonies; if they look upward there is a
glorious Paradise foolishly and sorever forfeited, for the Enhanceing of
insignificant Trifles, for the Gratification of brutish Appetites, of which
nothing now remains, but a stinging Remembrance; if they look forward there is
a certain Prospect of the continual Duration of their present Torments, then
which nothing can be more Afflictive and terrible, if they look about them
there is nothing to behold but Flames mingled with smoke, devils their
Tormentors, and damned Wretches their woeful Companions, yelling, roaring, and
blaspheming after the most hideous Manner, and gnawing their scorched Tongues
for pain. Rev. XVI. 9, 10. If they look within them there they behold and fell
numberless guilts preying upon them like Vultures, biting them like Serpents,
and stinging like Adders.

4. Another Ingredient in the Damneds Misery, will be the Rage and Fury of
unsatisfied Lusts, and exasperated Passions. The present inordinate cravings of
wicked People, will then be heightened to an awful Pitch, and their former
restraints utterly removed. Mat. XXV. 29. And being there entirely bereaved of
suitable Objects to gratify them with, or the least Hopes of ever attaining
any; this will put the Damned upon an eternal Rack, and make them foam and rage
like wild Bulls in a net. In a word Dun Lop.
All their Affections will become Vessels of Wrath; and the Passions will be
enraged into black despair, and redned into the most confounding shameful
Blushes,

Having hinted somewhat privatively and and possitively, concerning the Nature
of the damneds Torments, I come now in the.

2. Place, to offer a word or two concerning the Degrees of them; which most
certainly are various, adapted to the Number and agravations of Crimes
committed in this Life. Mat. XXIII. 14, Romans II. 5. Heb. X. 29. But above all
others, such as have finned against the Light and Love of Christ in the
Glorious Gospel will be punished. Mat. X. 15. Mat. XI. 22, 24. Mark. VI. 11.
Luke X. 12, 14. Joh. III. 19. I beseech you for your Souls sake, that you would
consider seriously the Places of Scripture now Mentioned.

3. The Duration of the damneds Torments will be both continual, and eternal.
Rev. XIV. 11. Mat. XXV. 46. How unspeakably dreadful is this Consideration! An
acute Pain but in one Part of our Body makes life a Burden, and it is only the
Hopes of its speedy Expiration, which makes it tolerable; otherwise if one were
assured that they must bear the Pains even of the Tooth-ake in their
intensness, during their whole life, they would be apt to run raving distracted
with the very Thoughts of it; O then what unutterable Torments must it be? To
have all the Parts of the Body, and all the Powers of the Soul, torn with the
most exquisite Tortures! Without one moments Intermission, or the least Hopes
of it through a never ending Eternity.

I come now to the Improvement of what has been said, in a few Inferences, in
which, because of the Prolixity of the Doctrinal Part of the Discourse, I am
obliged (contrary to my Inclination) to be very brief.

1. If not believing the Truth, and having pleasure in unrighteousness, be
evils of such dangerous Consequence, as has been hinted; then it exceedingly
concerns us to enquire narrowly into our present practice, and to examine our
selves strictly by the Charracters given of such Persons from the 87 -- to the
100. Page -- Whither we be Guilty or not, if upon an impartial Trial, you find
your selves at present not Guilty, then Bless God for his pardoning renewing or
preventing Grace; and persevere in your just Esteem of an unfeigned Belief in
the ^lessed Gospel of Grace and Truth, in the Face of all Opposition from
wicked Men and Devils, and you will never have reason to be ashamed of your
Hope: But on the contrary ye shall assuredly posess the Seasonable fullfillment
of the faithful Promises here, be owned by, and Crowned of, the descending
Jesus hereafter, and findly obtain the End of your Faith, the Salvation of your
Souls. 1. Pet. I. 9. Mat. XXV. 34. Mat. XVI. 27.

But if upon Examination you find your selves Guilty of not receiving the
Truth, and having pleasure in unrighteousness; then the aforesaid Doctrine,
serves to discharge Thunder in your Faces. I beseech you Sinners who hold the
truth in unrighteousness, in the Name of the eternal God to reform speedily as
you will answer it at your peril before the Bar of Christ, to excite you to
which I entreat you to consider the dreadful dangers of persisting in the
aforesaid Course which are no less than your spiritual Delusion, and Eternal
Damnation; now in order to get some affecting View of these terrible
punishments, think upon solemnly, and apply closely, what has been said upon
them, from the 155. to the 183. Page.

2. May People's Day of Grace expire before their natural Death? -- And after
this, will God be gracious no more? -- Then for Christ's sake be entreated to
try your selves, by those Signs of an expired Season of Grace, mentioned from
the 149 to the 155. Page. If you find any of those black Marks upon you, and
are yet in a carnal security, you have Cause of trembling and distress, your
faces may justly gather paleness, and your knees smite each other, for your
Case is exceeding perrilous! Yet despair not of Gods Mercy, but labor to
humble your selves before the Sovereign Jehovah, seek his Favor earnestly and
speedily; who knows if he will returnand repent, (i. e. Alter the course of
his Providence) and leave a blessing behind him. Joel. II. 14 Peradventure God
will pity you, those Signs I have proposed are not certain and infalible ones
but probable only. Act. VIII. 22. 2 Timothy II. 25.

But if any poor Creature be exceedingly distressed with fear that his Day is
past, and mourns that he did not turn to God sooner, and is willing to come to
any terms in order to obtain an Interest in Christ; poor Soul it was not with a
View to increase thy distress to an excessive Depth, I wrote those Signs, no,
but to awake the secure if it were the good Pleasure of God to concur with
them for that End; Sinner thy distressing fear that thy Day is past, proves
that it is so far from being past, that now is the very Time of thy gracious
Visitation, now the holy Spirit is working with thee, and convincing of the, of
Sin, Righteousness and Judgment; therefore comply with his gracious Motions,
and embrace the Offers of Mercy and thou shall be saved; there is yet room for
thee poor Prisoner of Hope, Christ has come from the Bosom of his father to
seek and save such lost Sheep as thou art. Thy Case poor Sinner is not
singular, as Satan would persuade thee to believe, no, there be Millions of
others, some of them in Heaven and some on Earth, who have been put to their
wits end with the same fears, viz. that their Day was spent and gone. Do not
say your Sins are too great to be forgiven, this is an unworthy and
dishonorable Reflection upon the infinite Goodness of God, and the boundless
fullness and immense Merit of the Redeemers Satisfaction; whose Blood cleanses
from all Sin. Read deliberately, and ponder upon the following Places of
Scripture. 2. Chron. XXXIII. 13. Ps. XXV. 11. Is. I. 18, the 42.3. and 55.12.
Mat. XI. 28.12, 31. the 18.11. Luke XV. 20. Joh. VI. 37.7. 37. Heb. VII. 25.
Rev. XXII. 17.1. Joh. I. 7.

3. Are dark Providence sent with such gracious Designs in respect of Gods
People? As has been hinted, from the 138 to the 146 Page. Then let them be
advised.

1. Not to be Surprised with them or sinfully dejected by them, they should
indeed have an awful but childlike Fear of Gods Judgments, however dark the
Face of Things may look for a Time, the End will surely be Peace to such who
love God, Romans VIII. 28. In the Evening Time it will be Light, Zach. XIV. 7.
For certainly Light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the upright in
Heart. Ps. XCVII. 11. To this end they should Labor.

2. To comply with the aforesaid Designs.

3. To beware of Impatience under the Scoffs of wicked Men, or of begrudging
their Prosperity, for it is Necessary that there should be always some of
Cain's and Ismael's Brood, to exercise the Graces of God's Abels and Isaacks.
And what is their Prosperity, but a snare and a Trap to their Souls? A mean to
ripen them for Destruction, and to increase the Viols of divine Indignation.
What is their Pleasures? But like the deceit full Salute of Joab with Amasa?
What is their Honor, but like Absalom's Mule, it mounts and Carries them to
their Gallows? What is their Riches but like Jaels Present to Sisera, in a
Lordly Dish it only makes way for the fatal Nail, for their sad Account at the
Day of Judgment, Poor Creatures, they are the greatest Objects of Pity under
the Canopy of Heaven, for all their Pride, Pomp, Grandeur and Gaiety! Gracious
Souls, from the humble Vale of Bochim, ascend the Heights of Zion: While
prosperous Impenitents fall headlong from the Top of Ebal, to the Depths of
Tophet. The one swims in Tears to the Country of Emanuel, while the other rides
in Triumph to Damnation.

4. Are the Designs of the aforesaid Providence, so terrible toward many
wicked People, as has been in some sort represented? Then truly they have
little cause for that Joy and Satisfaction they usually (some of them) express
upon such Occasions? and as little Reason have they for their malicious
Reflections, against the whole Body of Professors, for the falls of some, or
divine Judgments inflicted upon others, seeing their Sins are often the
meritorious Causes of the former. Joshua. XXII. 20.2. Chron. XX. 35.37. And the
Issue of both oftentimes no less then their Infatuation, and Damnation; as our
Text asserts.

But there is a Generation of Men who while they honor dead and distant
Saints, (nam-mortuus non mordet) persecute the living that are near them like
the old Pharisees their ancient Predicessors. If wicked Men did but consult
their own Interest, they would certainly restrain their unreasonable
invectives, against such who are the Object of Gods peculiar Love and Care.
Zec. II. 8. Did they but exercise their Reason, they might easily perceive that
divine Providence is an Abyss, too deep to be sounded by the Line of their
carnal Reason. see Ps. LXXIII. 19. And that the further progress they make in
unreasonable Reflections, the more awful items they will add to their own
Score, in the final Reckoning. The greater Measures of Wrath; treasure up for
themselves against the Day of Wrath.

5. Does the Righteous God threaten to send Delusion, that such who believe not
the Truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness, may believe a Lie; and be all
Damned? Then why should we wonder to see this Threatening of the faithful God
executed upon the proper Subjects of it, and fullfilled in an Age of such
Impiety as ours is, wherein every Thing that is worthy of Esteem, is treated
with Contempt. Is it any wonder to see Men of filthy Practices, professing such
corrupt Principles, as favor their Lusts, and flatter their Arogance? None
need be surprised to see Men growing weary of the Gospel, whose precepts are so
strict, and whose Doctrines are so sublime, and eagerly hunting after new
Religions, or rather new vaumping old Heresies; so long as they see pride and
all manner of wickedness prevailing, as alas it does at present! And so long as
they Read this Text, I have been treating upon.

To prevent the aforesaid Delusion, and the Damnation which follows it, I shall
conclude this Discourse with the following Councils.

1. Be not contented with the bare Speculative Knowledge of Divine Truths but
seek to get them impressed on your Hearts, and labor to improve them into
Practice, which is their great Design. Ephesians. IV. 21.

2. Endeavor to be well acquainted with the Principles of Christianity, with
their Grounds and Connection; as also with your own State and Condition toward
God, that ye may be able to render a Reason of your Hope, 1 Pet. III. 15.

To this End ye should,

1. Read the holy Scriptures reverently and frequently, with a Disposition to
learn lastruction from them, Joh. V. 39.

2. Be earnest in supplicating the blessed God, the Source of Truth, that he
would lead you into all Truth by his Holy Spirit, and keep you from being
turned aside by every Wind of Doctrine, and the Craft of those who lie in wait
to deceive. Ephesians. IV. 14.

3. Labor against the Pride of your own Understanding, which inclines you to
discredit those Things you cannot comprehend, or grasp in your shallow
Capacities. 1 Cor. III. 18.

4. Once more, beware of curious Enquiries into, hasty Censures upon God's
Councils, Providence, or afflicted People, lest ye feel the Bethshemites Fate,
or something worse, if worse can be. 1 Samuel VI. 19. When you see the Hand of
God upon some Professors of Religion, afflicting them with Despair, Madness, or
Death it self, then let your Flesh tremble for fear of GOD, and be afraid of
his Judgments, and wonder that the righteous God has not hitherto blasted
your rational Powers, and utterly bereaved you of that Reason, which you have
so long abused, to the Dishonor of its kind Author, and the unspeakable
Disadvantage of its indolent Possessor. You may also admire, unhappy Sinners,
the sparing Mercies of a provoked yet patient God, that he has not sunk you
with Cain, Judas and Spira in the Gulf of Desperation, who have for so long a
Tract of Time been laying up so much Fuel for it, by sinning against a gracious
God. Admire, Sinner, that the Breath of that Life which has been so long
employed in contradicting the great Design of it, has not been blown out long
ago in obscure Darkness. -- Might not the just God have caused the Earth to
open beneath thy Feet, and swallow thee in Death, in the Midst of thy Lusts, as
he did to Coran and his Companions? Has the Devil had such Power over the
Bedies of pious People for a Time, as has been proved? Then admire, wicked
Sinner, that he has not hitherto torn thee in Pieces, or that he does not even
this Moment Sieze thee, and drag thee quick to Hell! -- What Fence have thou to
guard thee from his cruel Gripe? None at all, unhappy Creature! but thy false
Hope! and that is not worth a Rush! You Will say, that God is stronger than the
Devil; that is true indeed; but so much the more terrible is your Case, who
have him for your Enemy O, but you trust in him for Protection; answer, it is
False! it is false! if you had true Faith in God the Temper of your Hearts and
Course of your Practice would be holy and heavenly; your Faith is but a
historical Credit, a Fiction of your own Brain, or a Delusion of the Devil. But
Sinner beware you persist no longer in those Paths of Death you have so long
trod, otherwise expect terrible Judgments such as our Text mentions, which may
be justly to you as the Hand writing on the Wall was to Belshazer. -- I
conclude with that memorable and solemn Saying of the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. IV.
17. For the Time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God, and if
it first begin at us, what shall the End be of them, who obey not the Gospel of
GOD.

FINIS.

