Looking unto Jesus.

BEING AN Earnest Exhortation AND MOST Excellent Persuasive To Fly to the Lord
Jesus Christ by Faith, in Order to obtain Eternal Life through him.

By Mr. JOHN WILLISON, Minister of the Gospel at Dundee in Scotland.

Isai. xlv. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the Ends of the Earth.
BOSTON, Printed for Benjamin Gray, No. 2 at the Head of the Town-Town, 1731.

Looking to Jesus Christ by Faith, and embracing him as he is offered to you in
the Gospel.
NONE have Right to Christ, but those who come first to him in the Way of Faith.

Concerning the Multitude and Heinousness of your Sins, for which you ought to
be humbled and mourn, may ^^ve to show your great Need of Christ to deliver you
from them* Think no^ not that your Repentance, Confessions, or Tears for Sin,
can any ways satisfy the Justice of God for it, or merit Accep^ance or Pardon
for you. This were to put these Things in Christ's Room, that are only Means to
lead you to him; and to take up with a Righteousness of your own, instead of
his that can atone the Justice of God for Sinners. O then! see that ye look
beyond all to Christ alone for Atonement, Righteousness, Pardon and Salvation,
but count all Things but Dung and Loss in Respect of him.

Now, since the Gospel offers Christ to all that hear it, and the Call and
Command to receive and embrace Christ as a Savior, is given to all and every
one, even to the vilest of Sinners; you have a full Warrant to lay hold on him
for Pardon, and flee to him for Mercy, and you heinously sin against God and
your own Soul, if you neglect to do it. How shall we escape if we neglect so
great Salvation, and slight so great a Savior.

I shall therefore make use of some Motives to press poor perishing Sinners, to
flee from Sin and Wrath, to Jesus Christ the only Savior, and to receive and
rest upon him for Life and Salvation.

I. Take a View of the Misery of a Natural and Christless Condition, and O that
God would open your Eyes to let yo^ see it, and convince you, that while thou
art in this State, thou art a Rebel to thy God, a Prodigal to thy Father, a
Slave to thy Lusts, and an Alien to the Commonwealth of Israel. If thou come
not to Christ with thy Burdens, the whole Burden of unpardoned Sin lies upon
thy own Back; and this is a Burden that will sink thee lower than the Grave;
nay, it will press thee to the lowest Hell, and keep thee eternally sinking
there. Consider also, how vile and loathsome thou and all thy Actions, whether
Natural, Civil, or Religious, are in the Sight of a holy God while thou art out
of Christ: Thy Soul is naked, and swarms with the Vermin of filthy Lusts, and
thou have neither a Garment to cover thee, nor a Fountain to wash thee: The
Leprosy of Sin spreads over all, so that from the Crown of the Head, to the
Sole of the Foot, there is nothing but Bruises and putrefying Sores: So that
there is no Mire so unclean, no Vomit so loathsome, no Carrion so offensive, no
Pestilence so noisome, as thou art in thy Christless State, in the Eyes of a
holy God, who cannot look upon Iniquity, but with Abhorrence. Again, Consider
thou art a Slave to Satan the worst of Tyrants, he rules and works in your
Hearts, as a Workman does in his Shop, Ephesians. ii. 2. He uses your Powers,
Faculties, Senses and Members, according to his Pleasure. He says, Go, and you
go, Do this, and you do it. Your Bondage is worse than the Israelites under
Pheraoh, for they groaned under theirs, but you, alas! are not sensible of
yours, neither will you believe it: The Devil knows, that if you perceived your
Slavery, you would seek to make your Escape from him; therefore, to make sure
Work, he deals with you as the ' Philistines did with Samson, puts out your
Eyes that you may not see your Chains, nor look to Christ for Liberty: O that
God would open them, and cause you to groan under your Fetters, and look to
Christ for Relief.

Moreover, while thou art in thy Christless State, God's Wrath is still burning
against thee, the flaming Sword of Justice is always over thy Neck, Psalm. vii.
11. God is angry with the wicked every Day, every Day of the Week, and every
Hour of the Day; when thou go out and come in, rise it up, or lie down,
God is still angry with thee; yea, He has bent his Bow, and made ready his
Arrows, which are steeled with Wrath, and headed with Vengeance; nay, his Bow
is drawn, and his Arrows are at the Flight; and, O Christless Soul, thou art
only the Butt thereof, and if he let them fly, they will pierce thee to the
very Soul, and who will heal that Wound? What a dangerous State is this?

And further, All the Curses of the Law are levelled against thee, and a just
God is engaged by his Oath to ruin thee, if thou abidest in this State, Heb.
iii. 18. To whom swear he, that they should not enter into his Rest, but to
them that believed not. Should not the Thoughts of this make thee tremble? Were
it but the Oath of a Man or a Company of Men to procure thy Death as of these
forty Men that bound themselves with an Oath, they would neither Eat nor Drink
till they killed Paul, it would bereave thee of thy Nights rest and quiet till
they were made Friends with thee; And will the Oath of the great God have no
Effect upon thee, nor move thee to flee to Christ for Protection and
Reconciliation? Who can help thee or deal for thee, if Christ be neglected?
With what Face can thou look to him, or cry for Mercy from him, when he comes
to judge thee at the last Day. If thou remain Christless now, thou will be
Speechless, Helpless and Hopeless then. O think, what pale Faces, quivering
Lips, fainting Hearts and trembling Consciences will be among Christless
Sinners chen? How will their Heads hang down, and Knees knock together, and
cry, alas for the Day! They can look no where for Comfort, for the Judge frowns
on them, the Saints deride them, their own Friends upbraid them, the Angels
mock them, the Devils scoff at them, the Heavens thunder against them, the
Earth flames about them, and Hell groans for them, and down they will go
roaring and howling for ever.

O Christless Soul, how can thou think to ly in that dark Dungeon for ever,
where there is nothing but weeping and guashing of Teeth to be heard, and utter
Darkness to be seen, but never the least Sight of the Light of God's Favor to
all Eternity? How will thou live in that Pit where there is no Water? Not a
Drop of Comfort or Refreshment to the thir^ty scorched Prisoners, no, not so
much as one Drop to cool their Tongue, the Torments there are both Endless and
Easeless. O poor Christless Soul, thou art, as it were* apprehended by Justice
for thy Debt, and brought the length of this Prison Door, and there are
Hundreds of Diseases and Devils waiting for a Warrant to open the Door to let
you in, and will thou not employ a Surety, nor seek for a Ransom, when justice
is waiting a while to see if thou will do it; and Christ is earnestly offering
himself to be thy Cautioner, and his Blood to ransom thee from this Pit, and to
be sure no other Thing will do it, see Zech. ix. 11.

II. As it is God's Command that you should receive and believe on his Son
Jesus Christ; so he declares that it is a Work above all others, most pleasing
to him, Joh. vi. 29. It is emphatically called his Commandment, I John iii. 23.
being a Command he values more than all other Commands in the Bible: And so
upon the other hand, there is no Sin so provoking to God, as Unbelief and
rejecting of Christ; yea he is more offended with it, than with the breaking of
all his other Commands. see Heb. x. 28, 29. Put all your other Sins in one
Scale, and Unbelief in another, and you will find that Unbelief weighs down all
the Rest, for it is a slighting of the whole Work of Redemption, which is the
Masterpiece of all God's Works, being that which hi^ Heart is most set upon,
and he has been at most Pains about, I John iv. 9. O be persuaded then to do
the Work that is most acceptable to God, and obey his great Command of
believing upon the Name of his Son. The whole Creation obeys his Commands; he
commands the Sun to run its daily Course, and it obeys him; he commands the Sea
to Ebb and Flow twice a Day, and it obeys to a Minute; he commands the Angels
and all the Hosts of Heaven, and they punctually obey him; and will you only be
disobedient to him; and that to his beloved Command, when yet he has done more
for you than for the whole Creation?

III. Consider what an unspeakable Mercy and Happiness it is to you, to enjoy
the free Offers of Jesus Christ, and to have God commanding you to receive him.
How would the fallen Angels value such a Mercy, if they had it? They would not
be loath to leave their Dungeon and accept of a Savior as you are: But their
State is eternally hopeless and desperate, there is no Remedy for their Misery;
O do not put your selves in the same Case with them by slighting the offered
Remedy. How would damned Souls prize such an Offer? The least News, and
remotest Hopes of it would make them leap in their Chains, and sing in the
Flames. O how glad would they be to lift up their flaming Hands to take hold of
the Cords of Love and Mercy if they could be let down to them in that dark
Dungeon? Why then should ye wilfully put your selves into the same hopeless
Condition with them by your Unbelief? Nay, your neglecting so many Offers, will
sink you far deeper in that scalding Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and increase
your Flames to more Vehemence than these of others who have not been so
privileged. O how will Devils, Turks, Jesus and Pagans upbraid you there, for
your inexcuseable Folly in slighting your Mercy, and destroying your Souls? Be
wise then in Time. prize your Privilege, and consider the Things that belong to
your Peace, before they be hid from your Eyes.

IV. Consider what an excellent and suitable Help Christ is for fallen Sinners;
he is well furnished and qualified for your Case, he has Gold for your
Poverty, Eyesalve for your Blindness, Balm for your Wounds, Physic for your
Diseases, Bread for your Hunger, White Raiment for your Nakedness, a Fountain
for your Pollution, and a Ransom for your Debt and Bondage. In a Word, he has
a broad Plaster for your broad Sore, a deep Fountain for your deep Guilt; he
is the chief of Saviors for the chief of Sinners. Behold how one Deep calls to
another, the Depth of thy Misery, for the Depth of his Mercy. Are your Sins and
Miseries very extensive, then view the large Dimensions of his Mercy, Who can
fathom the Height, the Depth, the Breadth or Length of it? As for its Height,
it is high as Heaven, and surmounts the highest Mountains of Guilt: It is so
deep that it can bury the greatest of your Sins: It is as broad as the East is
from the West: And for its Length, it is from Everlasting to Everlasting, so
that it fully answers all your Wants and Miseries. In Christ there is all you
need or can desire; there is both. Food and Physic, Clothing, Strength, and
Cordials; O Sinner, here is Blood to justify thee, and Water to cleanse; here
the Water of Life, O Believer, that will restore thy Soul again, renew thy
Youth as the Eagles, cure all thy Diseases, and heal all thy Pains. In a word,
you have in Christ all that can make you Good, all that can make you Great, and
all that can make you Happy.

V. Consider how near you are to Christ and Mercy, the Remedy is prepared, and
Salvation is brought to your very Door, so that you need not say, who will
ascend to Heaven, to bring me down the Water of Life; for it is brought to
Earth to thy Hand: You need not say, Who will roll me away the Stone from the
Well Mouth? for Christ has done it for thee, and it is now a Fountain opened,
and running by your Door. O it would be sad to be so near Christ, and yet
eternally miss him, to perish like the Thief on the Cross with a Savior at
your Side, to be within a Step of him, and yet never touch him, yea to sink
into Hell betwixt the outstretched Arms of his Mercy, and w^^h his sweet Calls
sounding in your Ears: What a Heart-stinging Consideration will this be to you
in that Place of Torment for ever. O then, stir up your selves to take hold of
Christ, when he is so near and in your Offer: Strive earnestly, while there is
an Ark prepared, and a Window opened in the Side of it, and the Hand of Mercy
put forth to pull in shelterless Doves that can find no Rest elsewhere: I say,
strive to come near by the Wings of Faith, make your nest (at least, beside the
Hole's Mouth: be not found hovering without, lest the Flood wash you off from
the Sides of the Ark, and ye perish miserably. If you be so foolish, you will
^ish eternally, that ye had never heard of Christ, or that ye had been born
among the wild Indians or Mahometans, that never heard a Sermon.

VI. Consider how importunate Christ is in his Offers, and how much he presses
you to receive him: Wisdom cries in the Streets, Prove. i. Christ makes loud
and open Proclamation of himself, and ost rerepeats his Calls, Isai. lv. 1. Ho,
every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money,
come ye, buy and eat yea come, etc. Behold, how earnest he is with Sinners,
that he bids them come to him three Times in one Verse, Come, Come, Come. What
alluring Methods has he taken to gain your Hearts? How tenderly and
affectionately does he call and court backward Souls, Isai* li. 4. Hearken unto
(...), my People, give ear unto me, O my Nation. What melting Expressions are
these? My People My Nation.

But, if ^alls do not prevail, he comes himself (...) ^eek and ^ave that which
was lost. He came personally in the Days of his Flesh, and now he comes by his
Spirit in his Word and Ordinances. The three wise Men came from the East a long
Journey to seek Christ, but now Christ has come from Heaven to Earth, a long
Journey; yea, come to every one of your Congregations to seek you: And, are ye
not willing to be found of him.

Nay, he is content to follow you, when we run away from him, and pursue you
with his gracious Offers: As the Rock followed the Israelites in the Wilderness
with its running Streams of Water, so Christ our spiritual Rock follows you now
with the Streams of his Mercy and Blood, to wash and save you. O Sinner, if you
will not hear the Words of his Mouth, hearken to the Call of his Wounds, which
are opened as so many Mouths to plead with you. He has suffered his blessed
Side to be opened, that ye might look into his bleeding Heart and see it
panting with Love, and also hear the sounding of his Bowels toward you; Will
not this prevail? Then behold him by Faith with a heavy Cros^ on his Back
weighed down with your Sins, and the Curses of a broken Law following you, and
calling after you. Hear him knocking with his nailed Hands at the Door of your
Hearts, saying, Open to me poor perishing Sinner, give me Harbor in thy Heart,
behold what I have suffered from Heaven, Earth and Hell for (...), look what
Justice has done, look what the Devil, the Romans, the sews and my own
Disciples have done. View my Head, my Side, my Hands and my Feet, my wounded
Body and my bruised Soul. O can thou find in thy Heart to keep Christ at the
Door, when thus wounded, bleeding and mangled for thee? Will thou let him stand
all the Day long, when he has put on his dyed Garments and red Apparel, to
court thy backward Heart, and when he (...) saying, O Sinner, if thou will not
believe, Reach hither thy Hand and feel the Print of the Nails, yea thrust it
into my pierced Side, and seel my warm bleeding Heart, and see if I love you
not? Will thou deny him Access, who has done so much for thee?

Will not this prevail? Then behold him displaying his glorious Beauty and
Excellency before thine Eyes in a preached Gospel, to win thy Heart: Will not
Ministers Commendations of him move thee Then, hear how he commends himself,
(...) am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys, I am the true Vine;
(...) good Shepherd etc. And will you not believe (...) own Report who cannot
Lie? Surely (...) is in good Earnest with you when he ^^kes this Course.

Will not this do, then hearken how mournfully he complains, when he wants
Success, and passionately regrates your Folly in rejecting him. He sighs when
he mentions it, Psalm. lxxxi. 13. O that my People had hearkened unto me! He
bitterly laments it, Mat. xxiii. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thy Children together, and ye would not! He doubles the Name to
show his tender Affection, as David when he regrates his Son Absalom, O my Son
Absalom, my Son, my Son, etc. How often would I have gathered you under my
Wings? How many an affectionate Sermon, Call and Invitation have I given you,
but all to no Purpose? Shall I go through a Sea of Wrath and Blood to save you,
and will ye not accept of me when I have done it? Shall I shed my Blood in
vain? Shall I bear the Wrath of God, the Scorns of Men, the Terror of Death and
the Curse of the Law to no Effect? Will ye still prefer your Sins before me,
and hear Satan's Knocks sooner than mine.

Hear that compassionate Complaint, Joh. v. 40. Ye will not come to me, that ye
might have Life: As if he had said, Why run ye so fast from your Savior? Why
co^^ ye not to me, who am come from He^ven to seek and save you? It is not a
Enemy, but a Friend ye run from: The worst Turn I could do you, is to sa^^ your
Lives: Ye will go without much pressing to the Devil, to get Death an^ eternal
Damnation, but ye will not come to me to get Life and eternal Salvation O! what
inexpressible Madness are y^ guilty of?

Behold how he weep'd for Self destroying Jerusalem, rejecting his Offers, Luk^
xix. 41. When he sat down to conside^ their Case, his Bowels yerned with Pity
his Tongue broke forth in Lamentation and his Eyes gushed out with Tears: So
that his Weeping even interrupted his Voice and made him utter short and abrupt
Expressions, If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy Day, etc.
where he seem to pause at every other Word, and drop first a Word, and then a
Tear. What a moving Sight was this, to see the Son o^ God in such a Pang of
Grief, and Flood o^ Tears for lost Sinners? Had he been enquired at, as he did
Mary, John xx. 15.8 Bles^ Lord, what seek thou? why weepest thou His Answer
readily would have been, I seek not my self, I weep not for my self for I shall
be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord, though Sinners be not gathered: Bu^ I weep
to see Sinners so mad as to reject their Savior and Salvation, rather than
part with their Lusts, that have Damnation following them at the Heels: It is
my Grief to see them content rather to cast themselves Headlong into the
Devil's Arms, than throw themselves into my Arms of Mercy, or embrace me in the
Arms of their Faith. O! did Christ's weep for you, poor Sinners, and will ye not
weep for your selves? Did his Heart melt with Pity for you, and will not yours
melt with Desires toward him?

Can he do more to win your Hearts than this? Yea, if this do not, he is
pleased to expostulate the Matter with you, and lay your Danger before you.
Turnye, turn ye, (says he) for why will ye die? Yea, he condescends to reason
the Matter with you in a familiar Way, Come (says he) let us reason together,
Isai. i. O my People, what have I done unto thee? Mic. vi. 3. What Iniquity
have ye found in me? What Want or Unsuitableness have ye seen in me? Have I
been a barren Wilderness to you? Are not my Ways equal? Thus he seeks to draw
you with the Cords (...) a Man, and with the Bands of Love, Hos xi 4. And if
there arise Objections in your Heart against coming to Christ, and receiving
him for your Savior, see how carefully he lays out himself in his Word, to
answer them all, for he well foresaw every one of them; Produce your Cause,
says the Lord) bring forth your strong Reasons, I am ready to hear and answer
all your Scruples.

O! says some poor humbled Soul, I have no Right to come to Christ, for I am a
great Sinner. O says Christ, I same not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance.

Objection, But I am the Chief of Sinners, my Sins are red as Crimson. O! says
Christ, I can make thee white as Wool, Nay, it was my Errand into the World, to
save such as thou art, 1 Timothy i. 15.

Objection. But I am sick and wounded, what has Christ to do with me? O! says
Christ, it is my proper Employment to be taken up with you, for, the Whole
needs not a Physician, but they that are sick, Mat. ix. Am not I the good
Samaritan, who am come to pour Oil into thy Sores, and tenderly bind up thy
Wounds, Psalm cxlvii. 3.

Objection, But I have no Ground to hope, for I am a lost Wretch. O! says
Christ, I came for this very Errand, to seek and save that which was lost, Luke
xix. 10. And many a lost Sheep have I sought and found.

Objection, But I am past Cure, for I am quite dead and rotten in the Grave of
(...) O says Christ, I am the Resurrection and the Life, be that believes in
me, though he were dead, yet shall (...) live, Joh. xi. 25. And (...) be says,
Ephesians. v. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall
give thee Light.

Objection, But I am a Slave to Sin (...) Satan, and a Prisoner to Justice. O!
says Christ, I am come to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of
the Pris^^ to them that are bound, Isa. lxi. 1. Yea, I have the Key of David,
that opens and none can shut, I have the Blood of the Covenant that brings
Prisoners out of the Pit. Turn ye to the strong Hold ye Prisoners of Hope,
Zech. ix. 11, 12.

Objection, But I have heavy Burdens that weigh me down. O! says Christ, Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest.

Objection, But my Hand is withered, I cannot receive Christ, or any Thing,
from him. Then do as the Man who had the withered Hand, obey Christ's Call, and
he will enable thee to stretch out thy Hand.

Objection, But I am Lame, and cannot walk in Christ's Ways. O! says Christ, I
will put my Spirit within you, and (...) you to walk in my Statutes, Ezekiel.
xxxvi.

Objection, But what if Christ withdraw his Spirit and Grace from me again. No
says Christ, I will never leave thee, nor for sake thee, Heb. xiii.

Objection, But may not I, not withstand ing leave him, and make Apost^^^ says
Christ, the Covenant runs (...) Jer. iii. 19. Thou shall call me, My Father,
and shall not turn away from me. Christ is the Surety for thy Perseverance.

Objection, But I shall be overcome by strong Temptations. No. says Christ, My
Grace shall be sufficient for thee.

Objection, But (says some poor sensible Sinner) alas! my Case is not yet
touched, for it is singular; my Sins are beineus and peculiar, they are against
Light, Love, Conscience, Vows, and a thousand Obligations: There is none that
knows what a Sinner I have been, but God, and my own Conscience: Will Christ
ever accept of such a Wretch as me?

Answer, Art thou worse than a devilish Manasseh, or a persecuting Paul, whom
Christ pitied and saved? Art thou worse than Mary Magdalen, who was a most
notorious vile Wretch, yet seven Devils and an Army of Lusts could not keep
Christ out of her Heart? Nay, though thy Heart were as foul and black as Hell,
and thy Life did swarm with the most abominable Sins; yet Christ is both able
and willing to save thee, if thou come to him. Are you worse than those in that
black Catalogue? 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Read and see what a sad Roll is there; and
yet the Apostle says to the believing Corinthians, Verse 11. Such were some of
you, yet ye are ^^^shed, etc. The Blood of Christ is a pow^^^ul Fountain, and
is able to wash away the greatest Sins that ever were com^^ted, be they never
so black or bloody: God gave full Proof of this, by the first Sin we read of,
that was cleansed by this Blood, after it was shed, even the Murder of the Son
of God, Acts ii. 36, 38. This was the most prodigious Wickedness that ever the
Sun saw; (yea, the Sun fainted at the Sight, as afraid to look on it) for
suppose a Man were able to pull Heaven and Earth to Pieces, destroy the Angels,
and murder all Mankind, he would not contract so monstrous a Guilt, as those
did in crucifying the Son of God, whose Person was infinitely Superior to the
whole Creation: Yet Thousands that were Actors in this black Tragedy, were
washed by this Blood, to give us a convincing Experiment of its infinite Value
and Virtue, and that no Sin or Guilt whatsoever was too strong for it; The
Blood of Christ (says John, 1 John i. 7.) cleansoth us from all Sin.

Objection, But though Christ's Blood be sufficient, yet I have no Right to i^.

Answer, Be what you will, you have a full and sufficient Warrant from the
Gospel Call to flee to it. See what Christ enjoins his Apostles, to do, Mark
xvi. 15. Go into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature, q. d.
Make Offer of my Blood to all without Distinction, even to the worst of
Sinners, every Creature, be they never so wicked; yea, though they have sinned
themselves into the Likeness of Beasts or Devils, yet, if they be Creatures,
offer my Blood, my Mercy, and Meri^^ to them: Invite and press them to come
unto me, and him that comes, I will in no wise cast out. O Sinner! accept of
the Gospel-Offer, and whatever you have been, you shall find there is Mercy
enough in God's Bowels to pity you, Merit enough in Christ's Blood to purchase
a Pardon for you, and Prevalency enough in his Intercession to procure and
apply it to you.

Objection, But I have often slighted the Gospel Offer, and trampled on this
precious Blood, with what Confidence can I claim it?

Answer, Since Christ does not exclude you, you ought not to exclude your self;
but should reckon that you have the greater Need to hasten to this Blood, the
more heinous that your Sins be; yea, you have a peculiar Ground to plead upon
for Pardon by it. See how David pleads it, Psa. xxv. 11. Pardon mine Iniquity;
Why? for it is great; This would be a strange Argument with Men, Pardon my
Crime, for it is great; but it is a strong Argument with God, Lord, it is
great, and so I have the more Need of Pardon: It is great, and so thou will
have the greater Honor in pardoning me, even as a Physician has in curing a
desperate Disease. The sinning against Christ's Blood, or slighting it, is
(...) yea, saved some at the last Hour, particularly the Thief on the Cross,
whom the Devil thought he was sure of, having drawn him the Length of the Mouth
of Hell, just ready to cast him in; yet even then, upon his looking to Christ,
did the Arms of Mercy catch hold of him.

What more can thou object, O Sinner? Has not Christ provided Answers to
all thou can say, either against thy self or him? Has he not given
unanswerable Demonstrations of his Ability, Fullness, Fitness and Willingness to
be thy Savior? Has he not given full Proof of his earnest Desire to save
thee, by the many Methods he takes to prevail with Sinners to accept of him?
Will not all the Pains he has hitherto taken prevail with thy obstinate Heart?
What more would you have Christ to do with unwilling Sinners? There is yet one
Step further he makes, and that is a very low one; he even, as it were, turns a
humble Supplicant to thee, and upon his bare Knees beseeches thee to be
reconciled to him: Read 2 Cor. v. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's Stead, be ye reconciled to
God. O wonderful Condescension! Behold Divine Mercy kneeling down to a Sinner
in the humblest Polture, with wringed Hands and watery Cheeks, importuning the
Sinner to ^^ceive his Savior, accept of his Pardon, save his Soul, and be
reconciled to God in Christ. Be astonished O Heavens! Shall the Sovereign
Creator turn Supplicant to the vile Traitor, and follow him with his Remission?
Or, the loving Father to the prodigal Child, and follow him with Entreaties?
And, O Sinner! will thy stubborn Heart be able to refuse Peace, or slight the
blessed Peace maker Jesus Christ, after all this Pains? If all his Arguments
prevail nothing, yet one would think, that the humble Entreaties of the Great
GOD will certainly do it: How can you resist these?

Objection, I have no Strength to come to Christ, I cannot believe of my self,
I have a dead and hard Heart, and I cannot help it.

Answ. 1. Can thou say in good Earnest, that thou art willing and desirous
to embrace a Savior, if thou were able? Alas! it is here that it sticks;
whatever you pretend, you are not truly willing: It is our Unwillingness that
ruins us: It is not so much for Want of Power (though indeed we want it) as Want
of Will, that Sinners want Christ: Were you once willing, Strength would not be
wanting. O to get the Will conquered and made to surrender to Christ, then the
Day were won! O for one Pull more from Omnipotent Grace, to make you a willing
People in the Day of God's Power.

2. Labor for a deep Sense of thy own Impotency, take your dead Heart and lay
it before God, and lie groaning in Christ's Way, and plead for Pity: It is
true, God is not bound in strict Justice, to hear an Unbeliever's Prayer, but
if you be earnest with him, you may expect he will do it out of his great
Goodness and Mercy: He hears the Ravens when they cry; O then! Cry to him to
your utmost Ability, in a deep Sense of Want: Be as earnest seeking Faith, as
your daily Bread: Cry as fervently for the Life of your Souls, as ye would do
for the Life of your Bodies, if ready to be executed: If ye would do so, God
would not deny you. More particularly plead these Things.

1. Take your Bible, kneel down, and cast up that gracious free Promise, Ezekiel.
xxxvi. 26, 27. Read it, and plead it, put thy Finger to it, and put the Maker
of it to his Word; lay thy dead Heart before it, and look up and cry, Lord,
make good this Word to me, is it not a free Promise? There is no Condition
required of me for getting it fulfilled, but to inquire of the^ for doing it,
Verse 37. Now Lord, I am come to enquire and request thee to do it.

2. Humbly plead thy own Impotency, and the Insufficiency of all others to help
the^ in this State. This was the impotent Man's Plea with Christ at the Pool of
Bethesda, Job. v. 6, 7. It had good Success with him, and so may it have with
you: Say, Lord I have lien many Years with this dead plagued Heart, beside the
open Fountain of thy Blood, that has saved many in my Condition, I am impotent
and unable to move to it of my self, and have none to put me in: I have tried
others, but I find it altogether in vain, Ordinances cannot do it, Sacraments
cannot do it, Ministers cannot do it, the loudest Knock or Call will not do it:
Thou, Lord, must put to thy helping Hand, or it cannot be done, for it is a
Work peculiar to thy Almighty Arm: I have been looking to all others for Help,
but, Lord, there is none in Heaven or Earth but Thee alone: Every one of the
Creatures, Means and Ordinances say, it is not in me: Every one of the Saints
and Angels say, as the King of Israel did to that poor starving Woman, 2 Kings
vi 27. If the Lord do not help thee, w^en^e shall I help thee? So, if thou Lord
help me not, I must perish.

3. In a deep Sense of your own Impotency, flee to God's Power and plead it: Do
you feel the Ammon, Moah and Mount Seir of your own Corruptions swelling within
you, say with Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. xx. 1^. We have no Might against this great
Company, neither know we what to do, but our Eyes are upon thee. If you could
come this Length, then were there good Ground of Hope, for when we see that we
are wholly helpless and shiftless in our selves, then God's Help is nearest;
When I am weak (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. xii. 10.) then am I strong. Renounce
then all Help in the Creature, and look to the Creator, say, Lord, though it be
impossible with Man, yet thou have told me, Mar. 10. 27. That with thee all
things are possible: Though I may despair of all Help in my selt and others, yet
thou have forbid me to despair of Help in thee, therefore I flee to thee alone.
Lord, give what thou command, and then command what thou will.

4. Plead thy extreme Need of Christ, and of Faith to give thee an Interest in
him. The World cannot tell thee, O Sinner, how great thy Need is, there is not
a starving Man that needs Meat, a wounded Man that needs a Physician, a
Ship-wrack'd Man that needs a Plank, a dying Man with the Dive-ratling in his
Thicat, that needs Breath so much as thou need'st Christ. What will thou do on
a Deathbed, or at a Tribunal, without an Interest in him? And, what will
become of thee to all Eternity? Go to him then, and leek Faith in Christ, as a
Malefactor going to die would do his Life, fall down at his Feet, and cry, Give
me Faith and Strength to carry me to Christ's (...), or else I die: I may live
without Friends, Wealth, Honors and Pleasures, but I cannot live without
Faith: I am lost, undone, a dead Man, and I perish for ever without it. Lord,
deny me what thou will, but deny me not Faith. It had been better for me never
to have been born, than to live without Christ and an Interest in him: If I
come not to the Fountain of Christ's Blood, I shall sink eternally in that
scalding Lake of Fire and Brimstone: If I go to Christ's Table without Faith, I
shall shed his Blood, and eat and drink my own Damnation.

5. Plead with God, how easy it is for him to help thee; cry with the Psalmist,
Psalm, lxxx. 1. O thou that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth. It will
cost thee no more Pains to work Faith in me, and do all that I desire, than it
does the Sun to shine forth: Yea, thou can it more easily put forth thy Power
and Grace, than the Sun can dart out its Beams It is no Trouble nor Loss to the
Sun to shine forth; so neither will it be to thee to thew thy Power and Mercy:
A Look or Touch from thee would do it, a little Thing will save a drowning Man:
Lord suffer me not to perish, when it is so easy for thee to prevent it. Were
it any Loss or Trouble for God to help us, we might well doubt of it; but since
it is none, we may cry with Hope, Lord grant such an hungry Beggar an Alms out
of the Ocean of thy Bounty, for thou will never miss it. As the Sun, the more
it shines, displays its Glory the more; so thou will gain Glory, by putting
forth thy Power to help such a Helpless Creature as I am.

Objection, But I have often looked and cried to him for Help, but alas, I am
such a grievous Sinner he does not answer me, unless it be with a Frown.

Answ. 1. It may be there is some Idol or Sin still harbored, that thou art
not willing to part with. This may be the Achan in the Camp that causes the
Lord to hide his Face, search for it, and cast out the accursed Thing, let not
thine Eye pity it, neither do thou spare it. If thou can not find it, go
humbly to God and cry, Show me, Lord, wherefore thou contendest with me.

2. It may be thou art not fervent enough, God keeps the Door bolted that you
may be provoked to knock the harder, Matthew. vii. 7. Ask and it shall be given,
seek, etc. In that one Verse you have three Calls to Fervency, not only Ask but
Seek, not only Seek but Knock* The Woman of Canaan readily took up the Meaning
of Christ's refusing to answer her, she turns the more Fervent and Importunate,
and so gets all her Will.

3. Resolve whatever Discouragement you meet with, you will never quit the
Throne of Grace, but you will always lay your self in Christ's Way, and never
look to another for Help; yea that you will die waiting on him: Remember the
Psalmist's Experience, Psalm. xl. 1. I waited patiently for the Lord, and at
length he inclined his Ear, and heard my Cry: There was never any yet that
waited on him, had cause to be ashamed. You may meet with many Discouragements
and Temptations, and be put to very sad Thoughts, but you must be resolute in
looking to Christ for Help, come what will; and in Imitation of the four Lepers
at the Seige of Samaria, reason with your self, if I live at a Distance from
Christ, I shall infallibly perish, there is no Hope for me; if Christ pity me
not when I am waiting on him, I shall but perish, but yet there is Hope he will
have Pity at length; therefore if I perish, I Will perish at Christ's Footstool,
looking up to him, where never one yet perished, and I hope he will not let me
be the first.

4. Make use of Arguments in pleading with him.

1. Plead the Freeness of his Mercy; it needs no Motive, and expects no Worth,
but whosoever will, let him come and take the Water of Life freely, it runs
freely, so that Mountains cannot stop the current of it, more than Rocks can
stop the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. Indeed, Lord, if Sin and Unworthiness
could stop Mercy, I might despair, for I am as unworthy a Creature as ever the
Sun shined upon, but blessed be God, Grace is free.

2. Plead Christ's Commission, Isai. lxi. 1. He was sent to proclaim Liberty to
the Captives, and the opening of the Prison Doors to them that are bound: Lord,
here a poor Prisoner, a frozen, locked, bound up Heart: Here is Employment for
(...), Loose me, Knock off my Fetters, and lying my Soul out of Prison. Thou
have all Fulne^^ dwelling in thee, and thou have it given thee to bestow on
such miserable Objects as I am; Lord here a naked Back for thee to cover, an
empty Stomach for thee to fill, a wounded Soul for thee to (...). Lord thou
came to seek and save that which was lost, and will thou not be found of a
lost Sinner that is seeking thee.

3. Plead the Communicativeness of his Mercy to others: He had Compassion upon
Men's Bodies while he was on Earth, even the Bodies of wicked Men, such as the
unthankful Lepers, he let none of them go without healing that came to him;
say, Lord did thou show so much Compassion to diseased Bodies, and w^^t thou
not have some Pity on my dying Soul that is far more Precious than C^^cases of
Clay. -- Plead his Compassion that he has showed to the worst of Sinners, such
as Manassch, Mary Magdalen, Paul, and those who murdered him. -- Plead his
Compassion toward the finally Obstinate, and Impenitent, such as Jerusalem,
over which he wept, Luke xix. Lord, did thy Heart melt with Pity to such, and
will thou not pity a humbled Sinner, that confesses Sin and would fain be
reconciled to God: Is not Mercy the Work thou delightes^ in? Mic. vii. 18.

Lastly, Labor for a Sense of the Misery of a Christless State, of your great
Need of Christ, and of the Happiness of being found in him, and in a Sense
thereof, look to Christ and make a trial to take hold of him, stir up your self
to it, and rest your Soul on him as you can, and God will help you and
communicate Strength. He will not fail to notice and encourage an honest
Attempt, Jer. xxx. 21. Who is this that engages his Heart to approach to me?
He will pity and help such. If you cannot apply Christ to your selves and say,
He is mine, yet apply your self to Christ and say, I would fain be thine, yea I
am resolved to be thine. Go forth to Christ with all the Faith you can arrive
at, say with the poor Man, Lord I believe, help thou my Unbelief. You must not
sit still and do nothing, but use all Means in your Power, for it is in the Use
of these that God works Faith; hoise up the Sails and wait for the Gales.

THE END.
Looking unto Jesus.
An Hymn by another Hand.
COME here Believer, come and see,
Profoundly bend your Heart and Knee
Unto your lovely dying Christ,
And give him Praise within (...) ^igh'st.
(...) his precious Body (...)
(...) with Fists the most forlorn;
(...) Head filled full of Thorns,
(...) Person full of Scorns.
(...) Wretches how they choose,
(...) and Christ refuse.
(...) with their wicked Voices cry,
(...) release, but Christ let die.
^^staken Wretches, who can tell
The Force and Power which came from (...)
Which made you your sweet Lord refuse
And bloody Barabbas to choose?
O had you seen his lovely Face,
So full of Mercy, Love and Grace,
You Would sure have bowed your Heart and Knee
To his most bright Divinity.
O how he looked, O how he shone,
Beyond the Scepters and the Crowns,
That ever Israel's Kings have wore,
In his majestic Look and Power.
(...) the Tomb where Lazarus lies*
Attend his Sisters Moans and Cries,
Behold the great Redeemer come,
And raise and send him to his Home*
Go see the Hal^, the Lame and Blind,
According to his blessed Mind,
All healed restored and sent away*
The Glories of his Love display.
Mistaken Wretches where is your Ey^^,
Who would not such a Savior prize,
Who came to save you from your Guilt*
And for whose sake's his Blood has spilt,
Could you not see his sacred Face,
So full of Majesty and Grace,
His loving tender Heart so free,
To give himself to die for thee.
O could I but tell all his Worth.
The Universe cannot set it ^ort^,
(...) this I Know, he is King of King^
^^d brings Salvation in his Wings.
(...) Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
^he great Eternal God of Hosts,
(...) Praise from all in Earth and Heaven,
^^th their most joyful Voices given.
FINIS.

