AN ACCOUNT Of some Spiritual Experiences And Rapturous and Pious Expressions
OF ELISABETH MIXER, Daughter of Deac^^ John Mixer and (...) Dwelling (...)
MDCCX^^^^

And at sundry other Times Experi^^^^^ and Expressed by her.

Together, with the RELATION she gave of what GOD had done for her Soul, in
order to her Admission into the Church of CHRIST in Ashford.

Psalm. 66.16. Come and Hear, all ye that Fear God, and I will Declare what he
has done for my Soul. With a Preface by the Rd. Mr. JAMES HALE.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1736.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
^T was foretold and Prophesied of, in Joel 2 28, 29 How that the Lord would
pour out His Spirit upon all Flesh, and that the Sons and Daughters of His
People should Prophecy and their Old Men should dream Dreams, and their Young
Men should see Visions. and also that upon the Servants and Handmaids He would
pour out His Spirit. If it be now in sundry Places of this Land so, that they
behold in any Remarkable manner and measure the Accomplishment of that Prophecy
and Promise, as it is indeed very credibly Reported to be so with sundry
Places, I can the more easily Credit such a matter ^^^m (...) ^^stance of Mrs.
Elisabeth (...) whom ^he (...) of things ^^th Relate and set forth.

These mentioned Persons were formerly of the Church of CHRIST here in Ashford;
and the mentioned Mr John Mixer was the first (...) D^acon with us. And they
need not now a Testimonial from us, of their Christian and Religious
Conversation and Management while they dwelt here, though we have Reason always
to Remember the same.

As I was very much knowing, in the time of it, to the things set forth in this
Account of Mrs Elisabeth Mixer, and that either by being Present with (...), o^
h^aring and believing what others, who were Ear ^itnesses did say concerning
her: So I have been (as I was de^ir'd) gathering together (...) now Related of
her, from the several Papers written by diverse Hands that contained them, that
so they might be the better read and perused than they could be when lying so
scattered as they were before in sundry Papers. And if they should become (by
my pains in the matter) more communicated to the Knowledge of others than they
have ever as yet been. I hope the knowledge of such things will be of great Use
and Service to Excite and stir up People to seek the LORD and the
Manifestations of His special Love and Favor, to make sure of a Saving
Interest in CHRIST, to prepare for Death and Judgment and Eternity, to Escape
the Miseries the Wicked shall for ever Ensure in Hell, and to Obtain the
Everlasting Blessedness and Joys of the Triumphant Saints in Heaven: To make
sure of Saving Grace here, and so of Glory hereafter* And to a care to live
above the World, avoiding the Pride and Sinful Vanities so much practiced and
followed in the World* And particularly (...) Things (...) than their (...)
Lusts and Vanities.

To be sure it is of great Advantage to see in lively Instance thereof, the
(...) of our Holy Christian Religion and of the Grace of GOD, such as the
Instance here set forth is. It proves Religion to be truly what the Pious
Discourses and the Sermons of Faithful Ministers of the Gospel do Assert it to
be, and not a mere Notion.

It is well to be Remarked that the holy and pious Conversation of the Person
here spoken of, as Experiencing her self and (...), has been answerable to
their thing and so long maintained, and that she has Engage^ so much the
Comforts and Peace of GOD's chosen People since those her Remarkable
Experiences.

I desire the (...) of this Collection of Things, would overlook the
Imperfections thereof, and observe the good Harmony there is between what was
Noted and taken down by several Hands, concerning the Spiritual Experiences and
Rapturous and Pious Expressions of this Young Woman, and here Collected
together, and the Relation she delivered to me to be Read, in order for her
Admission into full Communion in the Church of CHRIST here in Ashford.

And now, as it may be of some particular Service to give a more full and clear
Account about her Relation, aforesaid; I would mention, That according to the
Church Record I have, she was Received into full Communion November the 6 th,
1720, And it seems then it was Publicly Read, according to our Custom, viz.
her Relation of her (...). Moreover, I may mention, that the (...) before June
(...) strongly (...), that she hea^^ (...) Sound in the Air.

But to come to a Conclusion of this Prefatory Epistle, I pray the LORD, That
the Person so distinguished from most, by the Manifestation of the Favor of
GOD to her in such a wonderful manner, may Live Answerable to such Discoveries
of the Love of GOD, always while she Lives in this World, and that she may in
due Time arrive to the Possession of that Blessedness which she has had such
Foretasts of: And that we who know concerning such Grace of GOD toward her,
may be careful so to Live here, in our Probation Time, as that we may have now
the Earnests of Future Glory* and at last the Full Possession of Heavenly
Blessedness.

Ashford, June 28. 1736. James Hale.

AN ACCOUNT OF SOME Spiritual Experiences OF Mrs. Elisabeth Mixer.
ON the 28 th. of June 1720, the Reverend Mr. JAMES HAVE, (...) for in the
Morning very (...), came and Prayed three ^^^es with Elisabeth Mixer, who was
then in ^ very weak and low Condition, attended with strong Pains; and was
under Darkness and the buffetings of Satan at the same time: Not long after the
mentioned Prayers, GOD appeared very graciously for her Help, and in a moment
(as it were) turned her Mourning into joy, and caused the light of His
Countenance to shine upon her and gave a more than ordinary sight of Heavenly
Things: Which caused her to speak then, in the hearing of sundry credible
Ear-witnesses, after a Rapturous manner.

She said then to this purpose, CHRIST Smileth! I behold Heavens Gate Open; the
Angels with golden Caps in their Hands! I see sparkling Crowns and Diamonds,
and the Angels and Saints singing Hallelujahs, Praising GOD. Oh! Death is
sweet. Not one of you can tell the Glory which I behold. I can smile on Death.
The Joy is unspeakable! I am afraid I shall be turned back to Live again in
this World; and I am afraid if it should be so, I should forget. The Heavens
shine like transparent Gold. The Angels are waiting for to carry my Soul into
that Glory. Now I can go! I long to go to Glory. O sweet Death! O Death, where
is thy Sting? O Grave, where is (...) If People did see the Loveliness of
CHRIST, they would not Sin as they do. The sting of Death is (...) of (...) to
my Souls. I can leave Father and Mother to go to CHRIST; to go to a Better
Fa^h^^: The Pain and Misery which I have endured, are not to be compared to the
Joy I now have in JESUS CHRIST. Oh! That you were all a going with me. But I
hope to meet you all there.

She looking Earnestly upon her Fingers, said, My Nails begin to change. Death
has begun to seize upon me. It is a welcome Messenger of Peace to me. I long
for Death. Just now I was afraid of Death, Now I long for it.

And (...) looking upon some that stood by her, (...)* If you did but know what
a Loving GOD (...) is, you would never Sin against Him any (...) What Joy has
He prepared for them that ^^ve and Fear Him? Oh! I long to be with H^^*

and she fixing her Eyes steadily upwards, Sister Abigail asked her what she
did see? (...) said she, that that you cannot behold.

(...) another time the said Elisabeth Mixer (...) second time in an Ecstasy,
she spoke (...) ^^is manner; This Night I must ^ra^se (...) CHRIST's (...) the
Room, (...) ^oly Angels are roun^ (...) Bed. The (...) ^raise Him. Help me to
Praise G^^ (...) Stones in the Streets, if they had sense (...) ^^ut for Joy.
Oh! I have cause to bless (...) that ever I had a being and that ever I was
born.

She admired at the Free Grace of GOD to her, saying; O that CHRIST should Die
for me! O that He should look upon such a miserable Sinner as I am!

Said she, Oh! CHRIST shines, He is Beautiful, He is Beautiful! O that you
could behold him and see how Beautiful he is! Oh! The Amiableness of the Lovely
JESUS.

Oh! said she, How the Saints and Angels Praise GOD. Oh! The Heavenly melody.
Oh! How they sing Hallelujahs to GOD and the LAMB! O that you could hear them!
O, I long to be with them, to help Praise GOD! I cannot Praise Him here enough.
Oh! the infinite Love of CHRIST, in his coming into the World to die for poor
Sinners! He wore a Crown of Thorn^, that we might wear Crowns of Glory. Jesus
Christ has Purchased white Raiment for all Souls that will come (...) Him.
Although the Soul be stained with Sin^ there is Merit enough in the sweet Blood
of Jes^^ Christ to wash out the stains of Sin, and make them clean in the si^^^
of God. Oh! It Is Gr^^^ that adorns the (...) and makes it Beautiful (...) Grace
is far more (...) and it is Grace (...) the Soul shine. Oh! The Spirit of
Christ is a Dove-like Spirit: It is not a Spirit of Envy and Malice, but a
Loving and Forgiving Spirit.

How will the Saints Triumph at the Judgment-Day and Praise God for his finding
out such a way for their Redemption?

But what an Amazing Day will it be to the Wicked, when they shall Crawl out of
their Graves like Toads? (as I read in a Book) and will then call to the Saints
and say, Take us along with you! But the Devils will catch them away to Hell
and there they must be Barred in Hell amongst Devils and Damned Souls.

At another time, as declaring her own Spiritual discerning, so giving good
Counsel to People, which she was Enabled wonderfully to do. Especially to give
good Counsel to Young People.

She said to this purpose, I see that Eternity is Boundless and Endless, so as
I never did see it before. Were it not for Eternity, the Saints in Heaven could
not be happy.

And speaking with respect to the neverEnding Joys the Saints have in Heaven,
she also said, Oh! That I were with them Praising of GOD. When millions of
millions of Years are at an End, their Joys are as fresh as at their first
Entering.

And speaking to them that were round about her, she said, Look into Eternity;
his Eternity that makes Hell miserable. How dreadful is it for any Soul to go
to Hell, to Perish for Ever?

And she said to them that were Present with her, to this purpose; If you did
but see what Amiableness there is in Jesus Christ! Sweet Jesus Christ! He is
altogether Lovely. His Grace is much better than Gold. Gold is not to be
mentioned with it. It is Christ that Beautifies and Adorns the Soul by His
Grace and makes it to shine. If you did but see how Heaven shines, the Angels
shining, and the Saints with their white Robes and white Garments! Oh! That
persons would mind their precious Souls. Oh! what a precious thing is the Soul?
Oh! The never Ending Eternity. Oh! That God would help me this once more to
Praise Him, that I might warn Persons of their danger of Perishing. O that any
Soul should Perish! That any of the Indians Souls should go to Hell! That there
ever should be a sinful Thought, or a wicked Word spoken! Although there is
none Perfect, that can live without Sin. Sin dwells in persons and will be
always warring and fighting: but by the strength of Christ persons can
overcome. Persons mind the World; but Heaven should be in their thoughts and
mind, and in their speech and discourse. They should talk of nothing of the
World but what is necessary. They should keep Christ nearest their hearts, the
World under their feet, and Eternity in their eye.

The sin of Pride is an heinous Sin in the sight of God, and reigns among
People. Young People take care to prink and fine up their Bodies, but they have
more need to take care of their Souls, to get Christ to stand their Friend. O
that any should put a dust of Powder upon their Hair, or a Ribbon on their
Caps, that have more need to put on Sackcloth. God abhors the Proud, but it is
an humble contrite Spirit that God accepts.

There is filthy Communication, foolish Jesting. O that God would give me
strength, once more to Warn persons of their Souls and Eternity.

She said to them that were present with her, O Friends, I entreat you not to
forget ETERNITY.

And she desired that their Souls might have on them the white Robes of
Christ's Righteousness, and that every Soul of them present with her, might be
washed clean in the Blood of Christ.

She spoke to them that were present, concerning the Judgment to come, and how
that they must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ to give an account of
every Thing; and how Joyful it would be and Blessed for the Righteous then,
that their Sins should be blotted out. But she spoke as to the Wicked, that
their Sins should Condemn them, and that the Devils would drag them into
Hellfire, where he would tare and torture them; and that they should shriek
throughout the never-ending Ages of Eternity.

She called to the Young People that were present, Warning them not to go to
Frolicks, nor to spend their Time Idly nor Vainly, but to mind their precious
Souls She told them that they should improve heir precious Time and
Opportunities, Sermons and Sabbaths. She spoke unto all in general, that were
then present with her, Telling them that they could not Love God Enough, that
they could not Serve Christ Enough. That if they could see the Infinite Love of
God in Christ's Dying to save Sinners, in His shedding His Precious Blood...
And she spoke to them, mentioning that Christ spilt his Precious Blood on the
Cross, to Redeem Souls from Sin. And saying, GOD is Spotless and Holy and
cannot look upon Sin with any Allowance. O Sin, Sin! That ever any should sin
and grieve so good a GOD! The Holiness, Holiness there is in Heaven! No man
without Holiness shall see God.

Further, At another time (it being Lord's-day-Evening, July 3 d, 1720,) she
spoke to this purpose; Oh! The Loveliness of Jesus Christ: Christ has Merit
Enough to Save every Body. Oh! that ever any Soul should be Lost. Oh! Let all
Young People Seek God.

And speaking to the Young People then present in particular, she said to such
a purpose as follows; That You may have on the white Robe of Christ's
Righteousness. Oh! That you may have Christ to Smile upon you when you come to
lie on your Deathbeds. Against whomsoever the Gate of Heaven is shut, it will
be opened to Young Persons. Oh! Whenever you get together, don't spend your
Time in Evil Communications; but let your Time be spent about Heaven and the
things of another World. One sight of Christ would wean your Hearts from the
Vanities of this world. Christ has died to Save such poor Sinners as You be.
God takes notice how you rise in the Morning, and how you lie down at Night.
Christ's Arms are open to Receive you, if you will but come to Him. Oh! the
Preciousness of Time. The Grave is waiting for you, and Eternity is hastening.
Oh! Let every Body Improve their Season of Grace. You cannot Love and Serve
Christ Enou^^*

As it is said in Prove. 8.17. I Love them that Love Me, and those that Seek me
Early shall find me.

And as it is said in Eccl. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth, while the Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall
say I have no pleasure in them.

And Chap. 11. v.9. Rejoice O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart and in the
sight of thine Eyes; But know thou, that for all these things, God will bring
thee into Judgment.

No worldly Joys can afford you any Comfort upon your Deathbeds: Only your
Friend CHRIST can Comfort you. I entreat you would not forget the Warnings I
have given you. I pray God to Bless it to every Soul that stands round about to
behold me* You must give a strict Account for this Sabbath Day, and for the
Sermons you have heard, and for every Sabbath and Sermon you have heard.
Whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of GOD.

And as Expressing how Extensive her Counsels were, and how sensible she was of
things in a spiritual and thankful manner, it may be convenient to give an
Account, how, that at some of the Times already mentioned, (or near them) she
manifested concerning her self and spoke concerning things, as follows.

She admired God's wonderful Goodness to her; for she could now say, as in
Psalm. 40.2, 3 He brought me up also out of an horrible Pot, out of the miry
Clay, and set my feet upon a Rock -- And he has put a new Song in my mouth,
even Praise unto our God. Many shall see it and fear and shall trust in the
Lord. And as in Ps. 116.7 The Lord has dealt bountifully with me. Ver. 12 What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?

She desired to be Thankful to the Rev'd Mr. Eleazer Williams of Mansfield, who
came to see her and Prayed with her, and he told her of that Scripture, Job
42.5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye sees
thee. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. Which seemed
suitable to her Condition; for she had heard of such formerly (unseen things to
her) by the hearing of the Ear, but now God had given her to see them* For
which infinite Favor she was desirous to be very Humble and Thankful to GOD.

She desired to be Thankful to the Reverend Mr. Hale, for his former
Instructions, and Catechizing of her; and of his often Visiting of her and
Praying with her in the time of her Sickness.

She spoke, saying, How good it was for Ministers to be Faithful; and what a
Crown of Joy and Rejoicing shall be given to all the Faithful Ministers of
Jesus Christ at the Day of His Appearing.

She spoke also concerning Parents bringing up their Children, how they ought
to Teach and Instruct them, and bring them up in the Fear and Admonition of the
Lord.

And she desired to be Thankful for her own Early Education by her Parents.

She mentioned her being Awakened when she was about Six or Seven Years Old, by
the thoughts of Death and another World; and how when she was about Thirteen
Years Old, she had great Desires to the Holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper:
But fears of her own Unworthiness, caused her still to Neglect. She mentioned
Scriptures that were Comfortable or Affecting to her; And thus that Scripture,

Joh 14 1, 2, 3. Let not your heart be troubled, Ye believe in God believe also
in me. In my Fathers house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have
told you, I go to prepare a place for you. I will come again and receive you
unto my self, that where I am there ye may be also.

And so, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the City
of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of
Angels* to the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, which are written
in Heaven, and to GOD the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just man made
Perfect, and to JESUS the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of
Sprinkling that speaks better things than the blood of Abel.

And Rev. 7.14, 15, 16. These are they which came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their Robes and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb. Therefore
are they before the Throne and serve him day and night in his temple: And he
that dwells on the Throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more,
neither shall they thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor
any heat.

And Rev. 21 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there
shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any
more pain; for the former things are passed away.

And 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin.

And Romans 16.20. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly.

And Romans 8 15. For ye have not received the spirit of Bondage again to fear:
but ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The
Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children of
God; and if children, then heirs, heirs of God (...) joint-heirs with Christ.

And Heb. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen.

And Psalm. 77.3. I remembered God and was troubled, I complained and my spirit
was overwhelmed.

And Psalm 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

And Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide thy face and I was troubled.

And Psalm. 63.1, 3 6, 7. O God, thou art my God, Early will I seek thee; my
soul thirsts for thee -- Because thy loving kindness is better than life: my
lips shall praise thee. When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee
in the right-watches. Because thou have been my help; therefore in the shadow
of thy wings I will rejoice.

And Job 21 32, 33. Yet shall he be brought to the grave and remain in the
tomb. The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man shall draw
after him, as there are innumerable before him.

And Chap. 19 25, 26, 27 For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for my self, and
mine ey^^ shall behold, and not another: --

And Chap 14.1, 2 12, 13, 14 Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and
full of trouble. He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down: he flees also
as a shadow, and continues not. So man lies down, and rises not, till the
heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. O
that thou would hide me in the grave, that thou would keep me secret,
until thy wrath be past, that thou would appoint me a set time, and remember
me! If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of my appointed time will I
wait, till my Change come.

THE RELATION OF Mrs. Elisabeth Mixer, As desiring to Join to the Church in
full Communion, to this purpose relating.
I Have cause to bless GOD, that I was Born and brought up in a Land of Light,
under the joyful Sound of the Gospel; That I was Baptized in my Infancy, being
a Child of the Covenant. I have cause to bless God for my Education by my
Father and Mother, who often Instructed me to fear God and keep his
Commandments.

Betwixt Seven and Eight Years I was awakened and stirred up to the duty of
Secret Prayer, from the thoughts of another World.

When I was about Thirteen Years of Age, God wrought in me, by His Holy Spirit,
longing Desires to come to the Holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. Hearing the
Reverend Mr. Hale Preach from, Isa. 1 18. Come now, let us reason together,
says the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool I was thereby Encouraged
to come to God.

I have been Encouraged, by Joh. 7.27. In the last day, that great day of the
feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst let him come unto me
and drink. And by that, Mat. 1^. 28 Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. By these I was Encouraged to come to
Christ.

Luke 14 23. And the Lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and
hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled, Was an
Encouragement to me to come to the Ordinance of the LORD's SUPPER.

But it being such an high and holy Ordinance; and I having a sense of my own
Unworthiness, it made me to delay coming, lest coming Unworthily, I should eat
and drink Judgment to my self. I was then desiring Grace of God, that I might
be fitted for it: The Preparations of the heart in man being from the LORD.

When my Sister Rebecca lay upon her Deathbed, she told me that I should not
put off Repentance till I came to a Sickbed. She said it was no time then to
prepare in for Eternity. She put me in mind of my Duty and of my own Mortality.

And after a while God was pleased to visit me with Sickness, which seemed to
threaten my dissolution and departure out of this world, by reason of strong
Pain. I was in great Darkness, and may say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 30 7 Thou
did hide thy face and I was troubled. And Psalm. 11 6.3. The sorrows of death
compassed me. I found trouble and sorrow. And when I thought upon my former
Experiences of Christ's love to me, it seemed to be gone from me. That place (
Luke 13.24.) came into my mind; where we read, Strive to enter in at the strait
gate: for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
Which put me into fears lest I should not be able to enter in. But that place
come into my mind, Heb. 2 18. For in that he himself has suffered being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. And it seemed to afford
me some Encouragement.

But I yet remained in Darkness; and here were many Prayers put up for me, by
the Reverend Mr Hale, and by my Christian Friends and Neighbors And in answer
to their Prayers, God appeared very wonderfully for me. God returning to me I
immediately saw Heavens gate opened, Christ smiling upon me seemed to welcome
me to his Kingdom. I beheld Jesus Christ altogether Lovely, the chiefest of Ten
Thousands; surrounded with glorious Angels And the Heavenly City the New
Jerusalem, was brought into my view; it lay four Square, and the City was of
pure transparent Gold: It had no need of the Sun or the Moon to shine in it for
the LAMB was the Light thereof. Jesus Christ was Clothed with Glory and
Majesty* The Angels shined with a glorious shining* No Tongue can Express the
Glory I then behold. Oh! how I longed to come to Heavens gate. Then I thought I
could Die: That Death would be welcome and sweet unto me. I thought I could lie
in the Grave as in the sweet Bed of Christ. I thought if People knew how good
GOD is, they would be careful to Serve Him and would fear to Sin against Him

Such things as I then saw, I Expressed in the time of it, as I had strength;
having such a real sight of things, that I even wondered that Others saw not
with me.

This was on the Tuesday, June the 18 th.

On a certain Night some time after that, I had a deep sense and fore sight of
the Praising of God. Jesus Christ was pleased to Visit my Soul with his Light
and Love I saw Light round about me. The Room seemed to be full of the Presence
of Christ: and the holy Angels seemed to be about the Bed and in the midst of
the Room.

I was so full of the joys of Heaven, I had cause to bless God that I was Born,
that ever I had a Being* I wished that every Room in the House had been full of
People, to help me to Praise God.

I thought the Stones of the Street, if they had sense, would have shouted for
Joy.

I admired the Free grace of God in Christ's Undertaking for such a poor
wretched Sinner as I was.

Jesus Christ gave me assurance that He would stand by me and be with me, when
I passed through the valley of the shadow of Death.

The Friday night following, God gave a wonderful sight of Eternity, as I never
saw Eternity look so before. And I saw it as Endless and Boundless. I saw all
the World was hastening apa^e into the endless Ocean of Eternity. I did see then
that it was Eternity that made Heaven and the Saints Happy. Oh! the endless
Joys of the Saints. I saw how they were there Praising God, and Praising God
for ever; which made me long to be where I might Praise Him for ever: That I
might be in his full Presence, where I might behold my dear Redeemer face to
face, and see Him as He is Lovely, Glorious and Shining. I thought that I could
readily leave Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters, to go to Christ

I saw that it was Eternity that made Hell and the Damned Miserable.

Jesus Christ was pleased to give me a foresight of His Coming to Judge the
World. I saw how that the Saints would shine and glisten at Christ's right
Hand, made like unto his glorious Body. I saw how they would triumph and sing
Hallelujahs unto God and to the Lamb, for finding out such a way for their
Salvation; which made me rejoice to think there was such a glorious Day a
coming, 1 These 4.15 Them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. Ver. 16.
And the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, and with the voice
of the archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise
first.

I thought I should rejoice to hear the sound of the last Trumpet, and to see
Christ coming in the Clouds with Ten Thousands of his Saints and Angels, with
Power and great Glory, to Judge the World.

I saw what an amazing day that Day will be to the Wicked, when they shall see
such Lightnings, and hear such Thundrings, as will pierce into the very bowels
of the Earth.

I saw how the now careless World would stand trembling before their offended
Judge. I saw how terrible the Wrath of such a glorious Judge would at that Day
be, against great Sinners, especially gospel Sinners, who Perish from under the
Light of the Gospel.

I saw how the Wicked would be banished from Christ's Presence, and from the
glory of his Power; and should be shut down in utter Darkness, to be there for
ever.

I saw how careful Persons ought to be, to improve their precious Time and Day
of Grace, especially Sabbath Opportunities and Sermons; in Crying to God for
Grace and Mercy now, while it is called to day, while the Lord is waiting to be
gracious. For the Son of Man will come in a day and an hour when Sinners look
not for him.

I saw how Christ suffered and shed His Precious Blood on the Cross, poured out
his Soul even unto Death, to purchase Life Eternal for us.

I saw that Christ was able and willing to Save unto the uttermost, all that
come unto Him, even the chiefest of Sinners. Although their Souls were stained
with Sin, yet that there was Virtue enough in the sweet Blood of Christ, to
wash out the stains of Sin, and make them clean in the sight of God. That God
delighted not in the death of a Sinner, was not willing that any should Perish,
but that all should be Saved and come to the knowledge of the Truth. And how
that, as in Joh. 3.16. (For) God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life.

And I was made to see that it was Grace that adorned the Soul and made it
lovely in the sight of God. And I did see how Grace shined, that it out-shined
the Sun in brightness. And I saw that none but they that have Grace and
Holiness, should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

And I saw that I must first shine in Grace, before I could shine in Glory. The
Beauty and Amiableness that I did see in the Lovely Jesus! I thought if Young
People did but see the Loveliness that there is in Christ Jesus, it would soon
wean their hearts from the Pride and Vanity of this world.

I did see how that Jesus Christ stood with his Arms open ready to receive any
that would come to Him: As in Prove. 8 17. I love them that love me and those
that seek me early shall find me. And Ver. 11. of the same Chap. it is said,
For wisdom is better than rubies and all the things that may be desired, are
not to be compared to it. Eccl 11.9. Rejoice, O Young man, in thy youth, and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou, that for all these things
God will bring thee into Judgment.

And he gave me new Assurance, that I was in his Favor then. I thought if all
the world was against me, I should value it as nothing.

I was enabled to see that it was an Honor to suffer for Christ; for them that
were his Disciples to suffer reproach for His sake, and to lay down their
lives, if called to it, for Christ's sake 1 Pet. 4.14 If ye be reproached for
the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God rests
upon you. Rev. 7 14. These are they which came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. And as in
ver. 15. Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and
night.

After this I had conflicts with Satan, but that in, Rev. 2.10. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. And in, Phil. 1.6.
-- He which has begun a good work in you, will perform it to the day of
Christ* These Scriptures were strengthening to me.

God gave me to see by an eye of Faith, that Jesus Christ was to me
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification, to Justify me before God.

By this God Enabled me to overcome Satan's temptations, Jam. 5 11. Behold, we
count them happy which endure. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have
seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy.
Romans 5.3, 4 But we glory in tribulation also, knowing that tribulation works
patience; and patience, experience; and experience hope.

These Scriptures strengthened me to be Patient under my bodily Weakness. And
now I can say, as in Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted: that I might learn thy statutes. Job 14.1, 2 Man that is born of a
woman is of few days, and full of trouble. He comes forth like a flower, and
is cut down: he flees also as a shadow, and continues not. Ver 5. Seeing his
days are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have
appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Lam 3 ^6. It is good that a man
should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. Which
Scripture Encouraged me to trust in the Lord in my affliction that I was in by
reason of bodily weakness Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if
any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will sup
with him, and be with me. And in Ver. 8 of the same Chap. I counsel thee to buy
of (...) in the fire, and (...) be clothed. Which further encouraged me to
come to the holy Ordinance of the Lord's Supper.

I desire to (...) Jesus Christ in all His O^fi^^^, as my (...) King. As my
Prophet to (...) me; and as my Priest to (...) well (...); and as my King to
(...) over me (...) Reign in me. And so I desire to (...) own Righteousness,
and (...) to Rely upon the (...) Righteousness of CHRIST And so desiring the
Prayers of GOD's People, that I may be Enabled to walk as becomes a Professor
of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST.

FINIS.

