THE MARKS OF THE New Birth.

A SERMON Preached by the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, A. B.

From ACTS XIX.2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? Wherein is
shown, I. Who the Holy Ghost here spoken of, is; and how we must all receive
him before we can be styled True Believers. II. Scripture Marks laid down,
whereby we may know, Whether we have thus received the Holy Ghost, or not. III.
By Way of Conclusion, An Address to several distinct Classes of Professors,
concerning the Doctrine that shall have been delivered.


BOSTON, Printed and Sold by G. Rogers and D. Foul, near the South East Corner
of the Townhouse, 1740.

THE MARKS of the NEW BIRTH.
ACTS xix. 2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?
TWO Constructions have been given us of these Words; some have supposed, that
the Question here put, is, Whether these Disciples, whom St. Paul found at
Ephesus, after he had passed through the upper Coasts, had received the Holy
Ghost, by Imposition of Hands at Confirmation. -- Others think, that these
Disciples had been already baptized into John's Baptism; but that not being
attended with an immediate Effusion of the Holy Spirit, the Apostle here asks
them, Whether they had received the Holy Ghost by being baptized into JESUS
CHRIST? And upon their answering in the Negative, he first baptized, and then
confirmed them in the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Which of these Interpretations is most true, is neither easy nor very
necessary to determine. However, as the Words contain a most important Enquiry,
without any Reference to the Context, I shall from them draw these two general
Heads of Discourse.

I. First, I shall show who the Holy Ghost here spoken of, is; and how we must
all receive him before we can be styled True Believers. II. Secondly, I shall
lay down some Scripture Marks, whereby we may know, Whether we have thus
received the Holy Ghost, or not? III. Thirdly, By Way of Conclusion, I shall
address myself to several distinct Classes of Professors, concerning the
Doctrine that shall have been delivered.
I. And First, I am to show who the Holy Ghost, spoken of in the Text is; and
how we must all receive him ere we can be styled True Believers.

By the Holy Ghost here spoken of, is signified the Holy Spirit, the third
Person in the ever blessed Trinity, consubstantial and coeternal with the
Father and the Son, proceeding from, yet equal to them both. -- He is
emphatically called Holy, because infinitely Holy in himself, and the Author
and Finisher of all Holiness in us.

This blessed Spirit, who once moved on the Face of the great Deep, who
overshadowed the Blessed Virgin before that Holy Thing was born of her, who
descended in a bodily Shape like a Dove on our Blessed LORD, when he came up
out of the Water at his Baptism; and lighted afterward in fiery Tongues on the
Heads of all his Apostles at the Day of Pentecost; this is the Holy Ghost, who
must move on the Faces of our Souls; this Power of the Most High must come upon
us, and we must be baptized with his Baptism and refining Fire, before we can
be styled True Members of its mystical Body.

Thus says the Apostle, Know ye not that Christ is in you? that is, by his
Spirit, unless you are Reprobates? Now if any Man has not the Spirit of
CHRIST, he is none of his. -- And again, says St. John, We know that we are his
by the Spirit that he has given us.

It is not indeed necessary that we should have it now given in that miraculous
Manner in which it was at first given to our Lord's Apostles, by Signs and
Wonders. But it is absolutely necessary that we should receive the Holy Ghost
in his sanctifying Graces as really as they did, and so will it continue to be
till the End of the World.

For thus stands the Case between GOD and Man. GOD at first made Man upright,
or as the sacred Penman expresses it, In the Image of GOD made he Man, that
is, his Soul was the very Copy, the Transcript of the Divine Nature. -- He that
before had by his Almighty Fiat spoke the World into Being, breathed into Man
the Breath of spiritual Life, and his Soul became adorned with all the
Perfections of the Deity, -- This was the finishing Stroke of the Creation: The
Perfection both of the moral and material World, -- and so near resembled its
Divine Original, that GOD could not but rejoice, and take Pleasure in his own
Likeness -- And therefore we read, that when GOD had finished the inanimate and
brutish Part of the Creation, he looked upon it, and behold it was Good; but
when that lovely God-like Creature, Man, was made, behold it was very Good.

Happy then, unspeakably happy must Man needs be, who was thus Partaker of the
Divine Nature; and thus might we have still continued, had he still continued
Holy. But GOD had placed him in a State of Probation, with a free Grant to eat
of every Tree in the Garden of Eden, except the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil. -- The Day he did eat thereof he was surely to die; that is, not only to
be subject to temporal, but spiritual Death, and consequently to lose that
Divine Image, that spiritual Life GOD had not long since breathed into him, and
which was as much his Happiness as his Glory.

These, one would imagine, were easy Conditions for a finite Creature's
Happiness to depend on. But Man, unhappy Man, being seduced by the Devil, and
desiring like him, to be equal with his Maker, eat of the forbidden Fruit, and
thereby became liable to that Curse which the Eternal GOD, who cannot lie, had
denounced against his Disobedience.

Accordingly we read, that soon after Adam had fallen, he complained that he
was naked. -- Naked not only as to his Body, but Naked and left destitute of
those Divine Graces, which before decked and beautified his Soul. -- The
unhappy Mutiny and Disorder which the visible Creation fell into, those Briars
and Thorns which now sprung up and overspread the Earth, were but poor Emblems,
but lifeless Representations of that Confusion and Rebellion, those diverse
Lusts and Passions which sprung up in, and quite overwhelmed the Soul of Man
immediately after the Fall. -- Alas! he was now no longer the Image of the
invisible GOD; but as he had imitated the Devil's Sin, he became Partaker of
the Devil's Nature, and from an Union with, sunk into a State of direct Enmity
against GOD.

Now in this dreadful disordered Condition are all of us brought into the
World. -- For as the Root is, such must the Branches be. -- Accordingly we are
told, that Adam begat a Son in his own Likeness, that is with the same corrupt
Nature which he himself had sunk into after he had eaten the forbidden Fruit.
And Experience, as well as Scripture proves, that we also are altogether born
in Sin and Corruption, and therefore incapable, whilst in such a State, to hold
Communion with GOD. -- For as Light cannot have Communion with Darkness, so GOD
can have no Communion with such polluted Sons of Belial.

Here then appears the End and Design why CHRIST was made manifest in the
Flesh. -- viz. to put an End to these Disorders, and to restore us to that
primitive Dignity in which we were at first created. -- Accordingly he shed his
precious Blood to satisfy his Father's Justice for our Sins, and thereby also
he purchased again for us the HOLY GHOST, who should once more re-instamp the
Divine Image upon our Hearts, and make us capable of living with and enjoying
GOD.

This, I say, was the only End of our LORD's coming into the World -- Nay, this
is the only End why the World itself is now kept in Being. For as soon as a
sufficient Number are sanctified out of it, the Heavens shall be wrapped up
like a Scrowl, the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, the Earth and all
that therein is shall be burnt up.

This is that New Birth mentioned by our blessed LORD to Nicodemus, without
which we cannot see the Kingdom of GOD. This is what St. Paul calls being
renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and herein consists that Holiness without
which no Man shall see the LORD.

In this manner then it is undeniably certain we must receive the HOLY GHOST
ever we can be styled true Members of CHRIST'S mystical Body.

II. I come now, in the Second Place, to lay down some scriptural Marks,
whereby we may easily judge whether we have received the HOLY GHOST or not.

And the First Mark I shall mention is, -- our having received a Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication: -- For that always accompanies the Spirit of Grace --
No sooner was Paul converted, but behold he prays, says JESUS CHRIST. And
this was urged as an Argument to convince Ananias that he was converted. And
GOD's Elect are said to cry to him Day and Night.

For since one great Work of the Holy Spirit is to convince us of Sin, and to
set us upon seeking Pardon and renewing Grace through the all sufficient Merits
of a crucified Redeemer, whosoever has felt the Powers of the World to come
awakening him from his Spiritual Lethargy, cannot but be always crying, out,
LORD, what would thou have me do? Or in the Language of the importunate blind
Bartimeus, JESUS, thou Son of David, have Mercy upon me.

The blessed JESUS, as he received the Holy Ghost without Measure, so he
evidenced it by nothing more than his frequent Addresses at the Throne of
Grace. Accordingly we read, that he was often alone on the Mountain Praying --
That he rose a great while before Day to Pray. -- Nay that he spent whole
Nights in Prayer. And whosoever is made Partaker of the same Spirit with the
HOLY JESUS, will be of the same Mind, and delight in nothing so much as to draw
nigh unto GOD, and lift up holy Hands and Hearts in fervent and devout Prayer.

It must be confessed indeed that this Spirit of Supplication is often as it
were sensibly lost, and decays for some Time even in those who have actually
received the Holy Ghost. And they, through spiritual Dryness and Barrenness of
Soul, find in themselves a Listlessness and Backwardness to this Duty of
Prayer; -- but then they take it as their Cross, and still persevere in seeking
JESUS though it be sorrowing. And their Hearts notwithstanding are fixed upon
GOD, though they cannot exert their Affections so strongly as usual, on Account
of that spiritual Deadness which GOD for wise Reasons has suffered to benumb
their Souls.

But as for the formal Believer, it is not so with him. No, he either prays not
at all, or if he does enter into his Closet, it is with Reluctance -- out of
Custom -- or to satisfy the Checks of his Conscience -- Whereas the true
Believer can no more live without Prayer, than without Food Day by Day. And he
finds his Soul as really and perceptibly fed by the one, as his Body is
nourished and supported by the other.

A Second Scripture Mark of our having received the HOLY GHOST, is -- not
committing Sin. --

Whosoever is born of GOD, says St. John, sins not, neither can he sin,
because his Seed remains in him -- Neither can he sin -- This Expression does
not imply the Impossibility of a spiritual Man's sinning. For we are told, that
in many Things we offend all. It means only thus much; that a Man that is
really born again of GOD, does not wilfully commit Sin, much less live in the
habitual Practice if it. For how shall he that is dead to Sin, as every
converted Person is, live any longer therein?

It Is true a Man that is born again of GOD may, through Surprise or Violence of a
Temptation, fall into an Act of Sin: Witness the Adultery of David, and Peter's
Denial of his Master. But then, like them, he quickly rises again, goes out
from the World, and weeps bitterly; washes the Guilt of Sin away by the Tears
of a sincere Repentance, joined with Faith in the Blood of JESUS CHRIST; takes
double Heed to his Ways for the future, and perfects Holiness in the Fear of
GOD.

The Meaning of this Expression of the Apostle, that a Man that is born again
of GOD, cannot commit Sin, has been LAW's Christian Perfection.
fitly illustrated in the Example of a covetous Worldling, to the general Bent
of whose Inclinations, Liberality and Profuseness are directly opposite. But
if, upon some unexpected sudden Occasion, he does play the Prodigal, he
immediately repents him of his Fault, and returns with double Care to his
Savingness again. -- And so is every one that is born again. To commit Sin is
as contrary to the habitual Frame and Tendency of his Mind, as Generosity is to
the Inclinations of a Miser. But if at any Time he is drawn into Sin, he
immediately with double Zeal returns to his Duty, and brings forth Fru^^s meet
for Repentance.

Whereas the unconverted Sinner is quite dead in Trespasses and Sins, -- or if
he does abstain from the gross Acts of it, from worldly selfish Motives, yet
there is some Right Eye he will not pluck out; some Right Hand which he will
not cut off; some specious Agag that he will not sacrifice for GOD; and thereby
he is convinced, that he is but a mere Saul; and consequently, whatever
Pretensions he may make to the contrary, he has not yet received the HOLY GHOST.

A Third Mark whereby we may know whether or not we have received the Holy
Ghost is, -- our Conquest over the World. -- For whoever is born of GOD, says
the Apostle, overcomes the World. -- By the World we are to understand, as St.
John expresses it, all that is in the World, the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of
the Flesh, and Pride of Life. -- And by overcoming of it is meant our
renouncing these, so as not to follow or be led by them. For whosoever is born
from above, has his Affections set on Things above: He feels a Divine
Attraction in his Soul, which forcibly draws his Mind Heavenwards; and as the
Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so does it make his Soul to long after the
Enjoyment of his GOD.

Not that he is so taken up with the Affairs of another Life, as to neglect the
Business of this. No, a truly spiritual Man dares not stand any Day idle: But
then he takes Care, though he labors for the Meat which perishes, first to
secure that which endures to everlasting Life. Or if GOD has exalted him above
his Brethren, yet, like Moses, Joseph and Daniel, he notwithstanding looks upon
himself as a Stranger and Pilgrim upon Earth. -- Having received a Principle of
new Life, he walks by Faith and not by Sight. -- And his Hopes being full of
Immortality, he can look on all Things here below as Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit. -- In short, though he is in, yet is not of the World: And as he was made
for the Enjoyment of GOD, so nothing but GOD can satisfy his Soul.

The ever blessed JESUS was a perfect Instance of overcoming the World. For
though he went continually about doing Good, and always lived in a Press, yet
wherever he was, his Conversation tended Heavenwards. In like Manner he that is
joined to the LORD in one Spirit, will so order his Tho'ts, Words, and Actions
aright that he will evidence to all, that his Conversation is in Heaven.

On the contrary, an unconverted Man being of the Earth, is earthly: And having
no spiritual Eye to discern spiritual Things, is always seeking for Happiness
in this Life, where it never was, will, or can be found. Being not born again
from above, he is bowed down by a Spirit of natural Infirmity; the Serpent's
Curse becomes his Choice, and he eats of the Dust of the Earth all the Days of
his Life.

A Fourth Scripture Mark of our New Birth, or of our having received the Holy
Ghost, is, -- our loving one another.

We know, says St. John, we are passed from Death unto Life, because we love
the Brethren. -- And by this says JESUS CHRIST, shall all Men know, that you
are my Disciples, if ye have Love one toward another. -- Love is the fulfilling
of the Gospel, as well as the Law; for GOD is Love, and whosoever dwells in
GOD, dwells in Love.

But by this Love we are not to understand, a Softness and Tenderness of mere
Nature, or a Love founded on worldly Motives (for this a natural Man may have)
but a Love of our Brethren proceeding from a Love toward GOD. Loving all Men
in general, because GOD loves all Men, and loving good Men in particular, for
the Grace we see in them, and because they love our Lord JESUS in Sincerity.

This is Christian Charity, and that new Commandment which CHRIST gave his
Disciples. New not in its Object, but in the Motive and Example whereon it is
founded, even JESUS CHRIST. This is that Love which the primitive Christians
were so renowned for, that it became a Proverb. -- See, how these Christians
love one another. -- And without this Love, though we should give all our Goods
to feed the Poor, and our Bodies to be burnt, it would profit us nothing.

Farther, this Love is not confined to any particular Set of Men, but is
impartial and catholic. A Love that embraces GOD'S Image wherever it beholds
it, and that delights in nothing so much as to see CHRIST'S Kingdom come.

This is the Love wherewith JESUS CHRIST loved Mankind. -- He loved all, even
the worst of Men, as appears by his weeping over the obstinately perverse; but
wherever he saw the least Appearance of the Divine Likeness, that Soul he loved
in particular. -- Thus we read, that when he heard the young Man say, All these
Things have I kept from my Youth, that so far he loved him. And when he saw any
noble Instance of Faith, though in a Centurion, a Syro-phaenician, Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, how is he said to marvel at it, as Man, to rejoice in
it, speak of, and commend it? -- So also every spiritual Disciple of JESUS
CHRIST will cordially embrace all that worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth,
howsoever they may differ as to the Appendages of Religion, and Things not
essentially necessary to Salvation.

I confess indeed that the Heart of a natural Man is not thus enlarged all at
once; and a Person may really have received the Holy Ghost (as Peter no doubt
had when he was unwilling to go to Cornelius) though he be not arrived to this.
-- But then we affirm, where a Person is truly in CHRIST, all Narrowness of
Spirit decreases in him daily; the Partition Wall of Bigotry and Party Zeal is
broken down more and more; and the nearer he comes to Heaven the more his Heart
is enlarged with that Love which ^here will make no Difference between any
People, Nation or Language, but we shall all with one Heart, and one Voice,
sing Praises to him that sits upon the Throne for ever.

But I hasten to show a Fifth, and that the last Scripture Mark of our
New Birth, that I shall at present mention, -- Loving our Enemies.

I say unto you, says JESUS CHRIST, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to those that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use
you and persecute you. -- And this Duty of loving our Enemies is so necessary,
that without it, our blessed LORD tells us our Righteousness does not exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, nay, or of Publicans and
Sinners: For if you do Good to them only which do Good to you, what do you more
than others? What do you extraordinary? Do not even Publicans the same? -- And
these Precepts our LORD confirmed by his own Example, when he wept over the
bloody City; when he suffered himself to be led as a Sheep to the Slaughter;
when he made that mild Reply to the Traitor Judas, Judas betrayest thou the Son
of Man with a Kiss; -- And more especially when in the Agonies and Pangs, of
Death, he prayed for his very Murderers, Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do.

This is the most difficult Duty to the natural Man, but whosoever is made
Partaker of that Promise of the Father, will find it practicable and easy. For
if we are born again of GOD, we must be like him; and consequently delight to
be perfect in this Duty of doing good to our worst Enemies in the same Manner,
though not in the same Degree as he is perfect. -- And he sends his Rain on the
Evil and the Good, causes his Sun to shine on the Just and Unjust: And herein
more especially commends his Love toward us, that whilst we were his
Enemies, he sent forth his Son, born of a Woman, made under the Law, that he
might become a Curse for us.

Many other Marks there are scattered up and down the Scriptures, whereby we
may know whether or not we have received the Holy Ghost. Such as to be carnally
minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace. -- Now the
Fruits of the Spirit are Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Meckness, with a Multitude
of Texts to the same Purpose. -- But as most, if not all of them, are
comprehended in the Duties already laid down, I dare affirm, whosoever, upon an
impartial Examination, can find the aforesaid Marks upon his Soul, may be as
certain, as though an Angel was to tell him, that his Pardon is sealed in Heaven.

And as for my own Part, I had rather see these Divine Graces, these Heavenly
Tempers stamped upon my Soul, than to hear an Angel from Heaven saying unto me,
Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee.

For these are infallible Witnesses; these are Emanuel, GOD with and in us;
these make up that white Stone, which none knows, saving he who receives it;
these are the Earnests of the Heavenly Inheritance in our Hearts. In short,
these are Glory begun, and are that good Thing, that better Part, which, if you
continue to stir up this Gift of GOD, neither Men or Devils shall ever be able
to take from us.

III. I proceed now, as was proposed, in the Third Place, to make an
Application of the Doctrine delivered, to several distinct Classes of
Professors.

And First, I shall address myself to those who are dead in Trespasses and
Sins. -- And here how could I weep over you, as our LORD wept over Jerusalem!
For alas! how distant must you be from GOD, what a prodigious Work have you got
to finish, who instead of praying Day and Night, seldom or never pray at all!
And instead of being born again in GOD, so as not to commit Sin, are so deeply
sunk into the Nature of Devils as to make a Mock at it. Or instead of
overcoming the World, so as not to follow or be led by it, are continually
making Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lust thereof. And lastly, instead
of being endued with the Godlike Dispositions of loving all Men, even your
Enemies, have your Hearts full of Hatred, Malice and Revenge, and deride those
who are sincere Followers of the lowly JESUS. But think you, O Sinners, that
GOD will admit such polluted Wretches into his Sight? Or should he admit you,
do you imagine you could take any Pleasure in him? No, Heaven itself would be
no Heaven to you: The Devilish Dispositions which are in your Hearts would
render all the spiritual Enjoyments of those blessed Mansions ineffectual to
make you happy. -- To qualify you to be blissful Partakers of that Heavenly
Inheritance with the Saints in Light, there is a Meetness required, to attain
which ought to be the one Business of your Lives.

It is true, you, as well as the Righteous, in one Sense shall Seat GOD (for we
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST) but you must see him once,
never to see him more. For as you carry about in you the Devil's Image, with
Devils you must dwell. Being of the same Nature, you must share the same Doom.
Repent therefore and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. See that
you receive the Holy Ghost before you go hence: For otherwise how can you
escape the Damnation of Hell?

Secondly, I shall apply myself to those who deceive themselves with false
Hopes of Salvation. And because, through the Influence of a good Education, or
other providential Restraints, they have not run into the same Excess of Riot
with other Men, think they have no Need to receive the Holy Ghost, and flatter
themselves that they are really born again.

But do you show it by bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit; Do you pray
without ceasing? Do you not commit Sin? Have you overcome the World? And do you
love your Enemies, and all Mankind, in the same Manner as JESUS CHRIST loved
them?

If these Things, Brethren, be in you, and abound, then may you have Confidence
toward GOD: But if not, although you may be civilized, yet you are not
converted. No, you are yet in your Sins. The Nature of the old Adam still
reigns in your Souls. And unless the Nature of the second Adam be engrafted
in its Room, you can never see GOD.

Think not therefore to dress yourselves up in the Ornaments of a good Nature,
and civil Education, and say with Agag, surely the Bitterness of Death is past.
For GOD'S Justice notwithstanding that, like Samuel, shall hew you to Pieces.
-- However you may be highly esteemed in the Sight of Men, yet in the Sight of
GOD you are but like the Apples of Sodom, Dunghills covered over with Snow,
mere whited Sepulchers, appearing a little beautiful without, but inwardly full
of Corruption and of all Uncleanliness. -- And consequently will be dismissed
at the last Day, with a Verily, I know you not.

But the Word is profitable for Comfort, as well as Correction.

Thirdly, therefore do I address myself to those who are under the Drawings of
the Father, and are going through the Spirit of Bondage, but not finding the
Marks beforementioned, are ever crying out, Who shall deliver us from the Body
of this Death?

But fear not, little Flock; for notwithstanding your present Infant State of
Grace, it shall be your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

The Grace of GOD, through JESUS CHRIST, that shall deliver you, that shall give
you what you thirst after. -- He has promised he will also do it. -- Ye shall
receive the Spirit of Adoption, that Promise of the Father, if you saint not.
-- Only persevere in seeking it, -- and determine to find no Rest in your
Spirit, till you know and feel that you are thus born again from above, and
GOD'S Spirit witnesses with your Spirits that you are the Children of GOD.

Fourthly and lastly, I address myself to those who have received the Holy
Ghost in all its sanctifying Graces, and almost ripe for Glory.

Hail happy Saints! For your Heaven is begun on Earth. You have already
received the first Fruits of the Spirit, and are patiently waiting till that
blessed Change come, when your Harvest shall be complete. -- I see and admire
you, though alas! at so great a Distance from you. -- Your Life, I know, is hid
with CHRIST in GOD. -- You have Comforts, you have Meat to eat, which a sinful,
carnal, ridiculing World knows nothing of. -- CHRIST'S Yoke is now become easy
to you, and his Burden light: You have passed through the Pangs of the New
Birth, and now rejoice that the Man CHRIST JESUS is spiritually formed in your
Hearts. You know what it is to dwell in CHRIST, and CHRIST in you. Like Jacob's
Ladder, although your Bodies are on Earth, yet your Souls and Hearts are in
Heaven: And by your Faith and constant Recollection, like the Blessed Angels,
you do always behold the Face of your Father which is in Heaven.

I need not then exhort you to press forward: For you know that in walking by
the Spirit there is great Reward. Rather will I exhort you in Patience to
possess your Souls yet a little while, and JESUS CHRIST will deliver you from
the Burden of the Flesh, and an abundant Entrance shall be administered unto
you into the eternal Joy and uninterrupted Felicity of his Heavenly Kingdom.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD; to whom
with the FATHER and the HOLY GHOST, Three Persons and One GOD, be ascribed all
Honor, Power, and Glory, forever and ever. FINIS.

