The Manufactory Scheme
In Consequence of the Scheme which is inserted in the Book of Records of the
Manufactory Company, proposing a Medium of Trade and Business by an Emission of
Notes of Hand, or Bills on Land Security, Redeemable by the Manufactures or
Produce of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay; the Directors (chosen by the
Subscribers thereto on July 30th last) have unanimously this Day agreed on the
following Articles, including and expressing the Meaning and Intention of that
Scheme, and for the Prosecution of it, which are to be esteemed Fundamental.
1. THE Stock of Bills to be Emitted shall be to the Value of One Hundred and
fifty Thousand Pounds Lawful Money, equal to Silver Coin at six Shillings and
eight Pence per Ounce, and no more.

2. Each Undertaker for Seventy five Pounds shall have one Vote at any General
Meeting; for Five Hundred Pounds, two Votes; for One Thousand Pounds, three
Votes; for Two Thousand Pounds, four Votes. And no Person shall have more than
four Votes, let his Interest (...).

3. Every Undartaker (...) annually pay in unto the Directors or their Orde^^^
in Boston, five per Cent. of the principal Sum he (...) of the Directors, and
three per Cent. Interest (...) the Principal enjoyed, either in the Company's
Bill or in the Commodities or Manufactures hereafter ^^^merated, being of the
Produce of this Province, viz. Merchantable Hemp, Flax, Cordage, Bar Iron, Cast
Iron, Linnens, Copper, Tanned Leather, Flax Seed, Beeswax, Bayberry Wax, Sail
Cloth, Canvas, Nails, Tallow, Lumber, viz. Shingles, Staves, Hoops, White Pine
Boards, White Oak Plank, White Oak Boards, and Ship Timber; Barrel Beef, Barrel
Pork, Oil, Whalebone, or Cord Wood; or Logwood, though from New ^^^^in.

4. Every Undertaker shall Mortgage, to the Directors each Director shall
Mortgage to the other Directors) an Estate in Lands, as a Security to the
Possessor in Value equal to one and an half of the Sum he undertakes for, and
shall over and above Covenant by Indenture, with the Directors and Signers of
the Bills to perform the Co^^^ons of the Mortgage.

5. Notwithstanding this, (...) any Artificers or Traders in Boston in good
(...) admitted Undertakers for a Sum not exceeding One Hundred Pounds each,
provided they give Bond with two sufficien^ Sureties in double that Sum, and
Covenant as the other Partners do.

6. The Directors and Undertakers shall mutually Covenant.

I. The Directors on their Part shall Covenant,
1. That they will yearly (...) before the Company at their annual Meeting a
full and just Account of all the Company's Affairs (...) their Management for
the Year past, fairly entered in (...) Company's Books.

2. That they will sell as (...) as they can (for the Company's Bills only) all
(...) Manufactures as shall be brought in by the (...) Payments of the Partners
for Principal and Interest, and let out (after the necessary Charges of the
Company are deducted, as soon as they can) on law^^l Interest with good
Security the Produce of (...), and also such Bills as shall be brought in (...)
and always Husband and improve (...) Company's Stock in their Hands to the best
(...) Company.

3. That they will pay to each Partner his Executors Administrators or Assigns
on Demand, his and their rateable Part of every Dividend of the Companys
Profits, to be agreed upon at any General Meeting of the Partners, by the major
Part of the Partners present, concurring with the major Part of the Directors,
and after the Expiration of Twenty Years to pay to each Partner, his Executors
Administrators or Assigns, according to his or their respective Interests, all
such Dividends as shall be agreed upon by the major Part of the Partners,
outstanding Bills, and contingent Charges always to be first satisfied.

4. That the said Directors Do severally Covenant with each Partner, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, viz. Each of them for himself his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, That in Case he be displaced, or taken away by
Death, then he, his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, shall and will
instantly deliver up to the remaining Directors, for the Use of the Company,
all the Bills, Goods, and Things whatsoever as are in his or their Hands
belonging to the Company, and will never more intermeddle with any Things or
Affairs pertaining to the Office and Duty of a Director.

II. The Undertakers on their Part shall Covenant,
1. That each Undertaker, his Heirs Executors, and Administrators, will at the
Expiration of every Year from this Date annually during the space of Twenty
Years pay to the said Directors, viz. Robert Auchmuty, Samuel Adams, William
Stoddard, Peter Chardon, Samuel Watts, George Leonard, Robert Hale, John
Choate, and Thomas Cheever, their Executors and Administrators, for the Use of
the said Company, Five in the Hundred of the principal Sum by him received, and
Three per Cent. Interest for the Principal enjoyed in such Manufactory Bills,
or in Merchantable Hemp, Flax, Cordage, Bar Iron, Cast Iron, Linen, Copper,
Tan'd Leather, Flax-Seed, Beeswax, Bayberry Wax, Sail Cloth, Canvas, Nails,
Tallow, Lumber, viz. Shingles, Staves, Hoops, White Pine Boards, White Oak
Plank, White Oak Boards, and Ship Timber; Barrel Beef, Barrel Pork, Oil,
Whalebone, and Cord-Wood, of the Produce and Manufactures of this Province, or
Logwood, at such Prices as the Directors shall judge they pass for, in lawful
Money at six Shillings and eight Pence per Ounce, with one per Cent. advance
thereon, at the respective Times of Payment.

2. That he his Heirs Executors and Administrators, will from Time to Time at
thirty Days Notice pay to the said Directors in the aforesaid Bills or
Manufactures, his rateable Part of all such Sums of Money as shall be lost or
become chargeable on the said Company, by the failure of any of the Partners,
or by any other Accident whatsoever, to indemnify the Signers of those Bills,
and save the said Company harmless.

3. That he (...) and Administrators, at all Times till the principal Sum
aforesaid by him received and Interest thereof as aforesaid is paid in, and
while he (...) have any Share or Interest in the Manufactory Company aforesaid,
will readily receive and take all such Manufactory Bills, as shall be tendered
him or them by any Person or Persons, in all Payments, Trade and Business, as
so much lawful Money at six Shillings and eight Pence per Ounce.

4. That he his Heirs executors and Administrators, will from Time to Time at
thirty Days Notice pay and satisfy to the said Directors, their Executors and
Administrators, his rateable Part of all such Sums of Money, Losses, and
Damages as they or the Company shall sustain, or suffer by Means of any Orders,
Rules, Instructions, Laws, or other Acts of Government whatsoever, toward the
securing and indemnifying of the said Directors and the said Company.

5. That he his Heirs Executors and Administrators, will at all Times when
thereto requested, give (...), or better ^^^urity, for the performance of his
yearly Payments in manner aforesaid, as they shall judge necessary.

6. That he his Heirs Executors and Administrators, will (in Case any of the
said Directors shall be displaced or taken away by Death) perform all his
aforesaid Covenants to the remaining Directors and Successors, chosen in the
room of such as are displaced or taken away a^ ^foresaid, whenever they shall
think proper: And (...) all Times upon thirty Days Notice, will pay and ^^^form
his rateable Part required, to indemnify such displaced Director; and generally
the Heirs (...) and Administrators of all such Directors (...) shall (...)
displaced as aforesaid, or taken away by ^^ath, for every Thing done by them in
the faithful Discharge of the^^ Trust as Directors, or as Signer^ of the Bills.

7. The af^^^ enumerated Commodities shall be received by the Direct^^^ at the
same Prices as they generally (...), at the Time of Payment in Boston, and the
Directors (...) accordingly allow six Shillings and eight Pence in the
Company's Bills, for so much of each kind o^ Commodities respectively, as will
sell for an Ounce of Silver as aforesaid, and shall moreover give (...)
Commodities to the Undertakers paying in (...) aforesaid) one per Cent. more
than the Market (...), and shall at any Time on the Demand of the (...) of
their Bills sell them for said Bills (...) ^^eir Treasury in Boston one per
Cent. ^^der the (...) Market Price in said Boston, and shall always (...) ^^ive
six Shillings and eight Pence of said (...) one Ounce of Silver.

8. (...) appoint Persons to Value the Lands to be Mortgaged as Security for
the annual Payment^ who (...) under Oath for the faithful Discharge of the
(...).

9. The Directors shall appoint Clerks and other Attendants, as they find it
necessary, agree with them for their Salaries, and as there may be Occasion,
again dismiss them and choose others, which Clerks shall be under Oath, and
give Security for the faithful Discharge of their Trusts.

10. No Person shall be capable of being a Director or Treasurer who undertakes
for less than Five Hundred Pounds, and if any Directors or Treasurer die, or is
removed from his Office, the Vacancy shall be filled at the next Meeting of the
Company by a major Vote of the Partners present (the Directors in Case of Death
or Removal of a Treasurer to choose a new one in the mean time) and if any
Director or Treasurer be found guilty of any Fraud in the Execution of his
Office, any four of the Directors concurring with a major Part of the Partners,
such Treasurer or Directors shall be Removed from his Trusts, his Mortgage be
put in Suit, and he be declared to be a Partner no longer.

11. All the Mortgages given by the Undertakers shall be duly executed, and put
on Record in the Registry of Deeds of the County where such Mortgaged Lands
respectively lie.

12. If the Security which shall be given by any Partner shall at any Time be
judged insufficient by the Directors or the major Part of them, such Partner
shall on Demand give such other and better Security as they shall think
needful, or otherwise his Mortgage or Covenant, or both of them shall be sued
out.

13. To oblige all the Partners to pay their Part of Principal and Interest
punctually, whoever neglects paying above a Month after it is due, his Mortgage
Covenant and Bond, or any of them, shall be put in Suit.

14. The Directors shall from Time to Time put out on lawful Interest to any
Man, to whom they think proper on good Security, all such Sums as shall be in
the Treasurer's Hands, for the Use and Benefit of the Company (Charges of
managing the Company's Affairs first deducted) but not for a longer Time at
once than one Year; the Borrowers to pay Principal and Interest in the
Company's Bills, or in the aforesaid Manufactures.

15. There shall be a Meeting of the Partners on the first Tuesday in September
annually, and at the End of five Years at that Meeting there shall be a
Dividend made of so much of the Profits as shall be agreed on by a major Part
of the Directors, concurring with a major Part of the Partners then present;
and from that Time there shall be a Dividend at every annual Meeting: Provided
always, That in all such Dividends, care be taken that there still remain in
the Stock, for the Security of the Possessor, double the Principal paid in from
Time to Time as aforesaid.

16. That the Directors (as often as they shall think it necessary that there
be a Meeting of the Partners besides their annual Meeting) may call one, by
informing of the Time Place and Business of such Meeting, in a Notification to
be inserted in each of the public News Papers, and to be posted in each of the
Shire Towns of the several Counties, fourteen Days at least before the Day
appointed for such Meeting.

17. It shall be in the Power of any Partner to redeem the Estate he has
Mortgaged, at the End of five Years or afterward, he having the Consent of the
major Part of the Directors, with the major Part of the Partners, by paying in
the Money he received out thereon, with the Interest then due, either in the
Company's Bills, or in the Manufactures aforementioned.

18. As by the Mortgages and Covenants aforementioned the Partners give
Security to the Signers of the Bills to enable them to satisfy the Possessor,
so the Signers shall give Security to indemnify the Indorser.

19 All Accounts relating to the Company's joint Affairs shall be laid before
them at their annual Meeting in September by the Directors and Treasurer, for
their Information and Approbation.

20. A major Part of the Directors concurring with a major Part of the Partners
present at any annual (or other General) Meeting, may agree upon any other
Rules or Methods for the better observing or fulfilling the* Articles
aforesaid, provided such Rules are not subversive of the Fundamental Articles
of this Scheme, but consistent with and conducive to the End and Design of them.

21. No Alteration shall be made of a Fundamental Article, but by the Consent
of the Government, had to the Determination of the major Part of the Partners,
concurring with the major Part of the Directors.

22. Any one of the Clerks of the Directors, shall at any Time on Demand (for
reasonable Pay as allowed in oath Offices) give to any Person desiring the
same, a Copy of any Part of the Records, duly attested under his Hand.

23. An Attested Copy of this Scheme from the Record shall be Registered in the
Secretary's Office in Boston (if permitted) and public Notice given of it when
done, or otherwise in some other public Office in this Province, and public
Notice given accordingly.

The aforegoing Scheme being the Substance and essential Part of the Scheme
first projected for the Ends first mentioned, upon frequent and long
Deliberations of the Directors, thus digested, amended, and altered, so far
only as was necessary, thereby the better to attain the Ends first proposed,
and to prevent any Doubts that might arise concerning the true and honest
Meaning of the same, the Directors do now set hereunto their Hands and Seals in
Boston, this eighth Day of September, Anno Domini, One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Forty.

Signed Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of us,
Jos. Hiller Willm. Story.
Directors and Signers of the Bills.
Robert Auchmuty Seal. George Leonard Seal. Samuel Adams Seal. Robert Hale
Seal. John Choate Seal. Wm Stoddard Seal. Samuel Watts Seal. Thomas Cheever
Seal. Peter Chardon. Seal.


Suffolk, ss. Boston, December 4th 1740. PErsonally appeared Robert Auchmuty,
George Leonard, Samuel Adams, Robert Hale, John Choate, William Stoddard,
Samuel Watts, Thomas Cheever, and Peter Chardon, and severally acknowledged the
foregoing Instrument to be their voluntary Act and Deed (...) John Fisher,
Just. Pacis.

Extract from the Book of Records of the MANUFACTORY COMPANY.
Monday November 24th Three o'Clock, P. M.
REsolved, That that Scheme dated the Eighth of September 1740, is the Scheme
which is mentioned in the Manufactory Bills signed by the Directors, and
consequently that the Produce or Manufactures enumerated therein are those
which the Directors promise in said Bills shall be paid to Mr. Joseph Marion or
Order to exchange them.

Voted, That all Bills of the Company which are by Use so worn as to be rendered
unfit for passing (upon their being brought to the Directors) shall be
exchanged for fair Bills of equal Value.

Voted, That if any Manufactory Bills be by any casualty destroyed upon due
Proof made thereof, the Owner of such Bill or Bills, shall have others of equal
Value delivered to him by the Directors.

A true Copy, Attest. Willm. Story, Clerk.


