SPEECHES MADE, And a LETTER wrote by his Excellency LEWIS MORRIS, Esquire Captain
General and Commander in Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of
New Jersey, and the Territories threon depending in America, and Vice Admiral
in the same. To the Assembly of the Province aforesaid, on the intended
Expedition against the Spaniards in the West Indies.

seal

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ANDREW BRADFORD, Printer to his Majesty, for the
Province of New Jersey, M,DCC,XL.

SPEECHES, etc*
GENTLEMEN,
HIS Majesty having been called upon, by repeated Provocations, to declare War
against Spain, is determined by GOD's Assistance, in so just a Cause, to
vindicate the Honor of his Imperial Crown, assert the undoubted Rights of his
Subjects to Commerce and Navigation, and by all possible Means to attack,
annoy, and distress a Nation, that has treated his People with so much
Insolence and Barbarity.

HE has therefore given Orders, for the Equipping and Setting forth of an
Expedition against the Territories of the Catholic King in the West Indies;
which will consist of a large Squadron of his Majesty's Ships of War, and a
considerable Body of his Majesty's Land Forces, with a Train of Artillery,
Store-ships and Transports suitable.

HIS Majesty has also determined to raise a Body of Troops in his Colonies on
the Continent of North America, to join those to be sent from England, at a
particular Rendezvous appointed for that Purpose, and to act in Conjunction
with them; and although he has not thought fit to fix any particular Quota for
his Province of New Jersey, because he would not set Bounds to their Zeal for
his Service; yet he does not in the least doubt, but they will exert themselves
with a becoming Earnestness on this Occasion, as far as the Circumstances of
the Country will allow; His Majesty being assured they cannot render a more
acceptable Service to himself, or to their Mother Country, or do any Thing more
essential to their own Interest.

HIS Majesty therefore trusts and expects, that his loyal Assembly of
New Jersey will provide Victuals, Transports, and all other Necessaries for the
Troops to be raised in this Province, except their Clothes, Tents, Arms,
Ammunition and Pay, till their Arrival at the General Rendezvous in the
West Indies, from which Time the said Transports shall enter into his Majesty's
Pay.

THIS I am commanded to let you know, and in His Majesty's Name to recommend to
you the making of such Provision, that the Expedition be not retarded for Want
thererof.

THIS I now do, and doubt not you will in this Case act as becomes a Loyal
House of Representatives, for His Majesty's Service, and your own immortal
Honor.

June, 26 1740. LEWIS MORRIS.

A Letter of the 28th of June, 1740. to the Speaker of the Assembly.
Mr. Speaker,
IN Answer to the Message of your House of Yesterday Evening, which I took Time
to consider of until this Day, do say, that I should be very willing to gratify
them, in complying with the Request they then made, or any other they should
make, did I conceive it could be done without Prejudice to his Majesty's
Service, in a Matter recommended to them in his Majesty's Name, and so
recommended by his Majesty's most particular Directions.

THEY cannot be insensible how much his Majesty, and the British Nation has
this Expedition at Heart, because they have seen by his Majesty's Instructions
to me, how earnestly the Raising the Levies here, and making Provision for
Victuals and Transports for them, are pressed.

THE House has seen that Part of His Majesty's Instruction to me which relates
to their making such Provision; seen it under his Signet and Sign Manual, and I
hope they have fully considered the Force of it, and what is their Duty to do
on this Occasion. His Majesty says he trusts and expects, that is, he depends
upon it, and expects, that agreeable to that Dependence, such a Provision will
be made; and commands me in his Name, to recommend the Doing of it to you, that
the Expedition may not be retarded for Want of it: An Expedition his Majesty
has been at so great an Expense, and given so great an Encouragement to
promote; an Expedition in which the Honor of the Crown, and Interest of the
British Subjects are so much concerned; and which the British Nation waits with
Impatience the Success of; and lastly, an Expedition the Success of which will
be so very beneficial to the American Plantations in particular, that (...)
cannot admit a Thought, that any one Assembly in the Plantations will not do
the utmost in their Power to promote the Success of it; or that any one of
them, or any considerable Part of their Members, will use any Art, Craft, or
underhand Method to retard it, and possibly by that be a Means of defeating it,
and thereby draw upon their Country and themselves, the just but heavy
Resentment of a British Nation, for so unnatural as well as unreasonable a
Conduct: Far be that from any Assembly in the Plantations, when they are so
well assured that a suitable Conduct on this Occasion, will be graciously
accepted by his Majesty, and consequently entitle them to his Favor; and
farthest of all from an Assembly of New Jersey, some of the Inhabitants of
which are indulged with particular Favors, not given by his Majesty to that
People in any Province in America, under his Majesty's more immediate
Administration, and which, I persuade myself, will always influence them to
make all the grateful Returns in their Power, and show they are not unworthy
Objects of His Majesty's Goodness, by their exceeding, rather than faling short
of what he requires.

THIS Expedition is of the utmost Importance; the Season already so far
advanced, as can admit of no Delay, without the utmost Prejudice to an Affair
of so great Consequence; and of so public Concern, that all private
Considerations must necessarily give Way to it: However, if your House comes to
becoming Resolutions, and such as may effectual, and fully answer what his
Majesty has commanded me in his Name to require, I shall willingly consent to
what the House desires, otherwise I conceive it is not in my Power, consistent
with my Duty, and his Majesty's Commands in that Case, to admit of it.

Some of the Paragraphs in the Secretary of State's Letter to me, wrote by His
Majesty's Order, will set that Matter in a stronger Light than I am capable of
doing otherwise, viz.

I now send you enclosed His Majesty's Instructions under his Royal Sign
Manual, containing particular Directions for your Conduct, in every Thing
relating to this Service, which are so fall, that they leave me Nothing to add,
but to recommend to you the utmost Care and Diligence in the Execution of His
Majesty's Orders; and particularly, in procuring as great a Number of Men, as
you possibly can, to inlist; which by the great Encouragement His Majesty has
thought fit to give to such Persons as shall enter into his Service on this
Occasion, it is hoped may easily be done.

YOU will see that Col. Blakeney carries with him only 3,000 Arms; you will not
however limit the Number to be raised within your Government, in Proportion to
that Number of Arms, since my Lord Cathcart will carry with him a Quantity of
spare Arms and Clothing, in Case it should be practicable to raise a greater
Number than the 3,000, for which Col. Blakeney carries with him Arms, etc.

As you cannot but be sensible of the great Importance of this Service, and how
much the Honor of his Majesty's Crown, and the Interest of his Subjects
(especially those in America) are concerned in the Success of this Expedition;
I am persuaded you will omit Nothing on your Part, that may contribute thereto,
by doing all that is in your Power to promote the Levies, AS SOON, and as
effectually as may be, in which you will judge from the advanced Season, THERE
IS NO TIME TO BE LOST; and you may be assured, that your Zeal in the Execution
of the King's Orders on this Occasion, will be graciously accepted by his
Majesty.

I may venture to assure Mr. Speaker, that the Zeal of the House he now is at
the Head of, in the Execution of the King's Orders, will be equally acceptable
to his Majesty; and I hope their Conduct on this Occasion, will give me an
Opportunity of representing them to His Majesty in the most favorable Light.

THEY may see that a greater Number than 3,000 is proposed to be raised, even
as many as we possibly can; and I believe, and think I have Reason to hope, a
greater Number than 500 will be enlisted here, and a much greater Number in all
the Neighboring Provinces, except Rhode Island, (which to their Praise be it
spoken) always exert themselves with a becoming Vigor and Zeal on such
Occasions; so that the American Levies, it is supposed and hoped, will far
exceed the Number of 3,000; and I hope the House will make suitable Provision
in the most effectual Manner, for as many as can be raised, that being plainly
his Majesty's Intention they should do, and that as soon as it can be done;
which when I see proper and effectual Resolutions entered into of doing, on
which I can depend, they need not doubt of my doing every Thing in my Power to
make them easy, and to show that I am very much their, and,

Sir, Your Humble Servant, LEWIS MORRIS.
June 28, 1740.
SPEECH on the 24th of July, on the meeting of the Assembly, after their last
Adjournment.
Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Assembly.
WHEN I recommended to you, in His Majesty's Name and by His particular Order,
the making Provision for the Transportation of the Troops His Majesty had
ordered to be raised in this Province, and the finding them Victuals and other
Necessaries (except what His Majesty had excepted) until their Arrival at the
Place of Rendezvous in the West Indies, I did not in the least doubt of your
Readiness and Willingness to do every Thing in your Power to comply with His
Majesty's Desires, and to answer His Expectations in the best and most
effectual Manner you are capable of doing; and I was much rejoiced, when I saw
with what Heartiness you engaged in it, which seemed to promise an happy Issue
to your Endeavors, and which I persuade myself the Warmness of your Affections
for His Majesty's Service will pursue, 'till those Endeavors are crowned with
Success adequate to your Intentions of using them.

WHEN it was known that the Scheme proposed for raising this Money, was not
(properly speaking) a raising of any Money, but rather an Application of Money
already raised, and applied solely to the Support of the Government by the Acts
that raised it, and the Manner only of that Disposition left to the Direction
of the Governor, Council and Assembly, I was very much in doubt, how far I
could consent to an Act, to appropriate any Part of that Money to any other
Use, I being, by His Majesty, ordered not to pass any Law, whereby his
Majesty's Revenue might be lessened or impaired, without His special Leave or
Command: But as the Time was pressing, and no Way then appearing so likely of
affording present Money as that proposed; and it being for His Majesty's
special Service, on a most important Occasion, and so particulary recommended,
I entertained Hopes, that my consenting to such a Disposition (all Things
considered) might be excused, which perhaps would not be done in any other Case
not of the same Nature: Yet as the very Manner of the Disposition of that
Money, even to the Uses it is appropriated for and applied to, by the Acts that
raise it, are by those Acts appointed to be directed by the Governor, Council
and Assembly; I thouht it very natural and reasonable, and it seemed to me to
be the Opinion of some of your House, that the first Draft of a Bill that
applied that Money to other Purposes, should have been well concerted and
agreed on by all the Branches of the Legislature, before it was presented to
the House, that any Thing that even seemed contradictory to His Majesty's
Letters Patent and Instructions, might have been as much as possible avoided,
since by avoiding such Contradictions, all the Just Ends of the Proposers would
have been more effectually answered, and all the Parties concerned evidently
more safe, in the Execution of their several Trusts.

What is contained in His Majesty's Letters Patent under the great Seal of
England, has been published, and is upon the Records for any that please to
have Recourse to them; these I believe, every Body will agree, are in Fact what
gives unto us all the Power we have of making Laws, which scarce any Body will
venture openly to deny; whatever be the Pretenses of Right, antecedent to them,
to have such a Power given; And I must submit it to the Judgment of Men more
knowing than myself, how far any Clause, forbidden to be enacted by the
Instrument, Charter or Patent that gives us the Power of making Laws, can be
more binding (should it be enacted) than a Law made in a different Manner from
that prescried by such Charter or Patent ( viz.) by one or two Parts of the
Legislature instead of three, can be; and how safe those concerned can be, in
acting under the Directions of such a Law in any such Case, is left to their
own Sagacity duly to consider of for their own Sakes: And what Construction may
be put upon the attempting any Law of this kind, is not unworthy the
Consideration of all concerned in making Laws.

IT is not unlikely that upon the Publication of His Majesty's Letters Patent
for the Government of this Province, all the Clauses of which may not have been
so particularly attended to by the Hearers, as to be retained in their Memory
'till this Time, I shall therefore read to you one Clause in his Majesty's,
Patent, relating to the Application of public Money, and communicate to you
some of his Majesty's Instructions founded on that Patent, which I recommend to
your serious Consideration; these Clauses being at least binding upon me,
whatever they may be thought to be upon others.

Clause in the KING's Letters Patent.
OUR further Will and Pleasure is that all public Money raised, or which shall
be raised by any Act hereafter to be made within our Province, be issued out by
Warrant from you, by and with the Advice and Consent of our Council, and to be
disposed of by you for the Support of the Government and not otherwise.

Extracts from his Majesty's Instructions,
Inst. 15. You are particularly not to pass any Law, or do any Act by grant,
Settlement, or otherwise, whereby our Revenue may be less'ned or impaired,
without our special leave or Commands therein.

16. You are not to permit any Clause whatsoever, to be inserted in any Law,
for the levying Money or the Value of Money, whereby the same shall not be made
liable to be accounted for unto us, and to our Commissioners of our Treasury,
or our high Treasurer for the Time being, and audited by our Auditor General of
our Plantations or his Deputy for the Time being.

32. You are not to suffer any public Money to be issued or disposed of
otherwise than by Warrant under your Hand, by, and with the Advice and Consent
of our said Council, but the Assembly may be nevertheless permitted to view and
examine the Accounts of Money or the Value of Money disposed of by Virtue of
LAWS made by them, which you are to signify unto them as there shall be
Occasion.

ALL I shall observe upon what has been read, that in my Opinion, the less the
Thing we are about is made to clash with His Majesty's Patent and Instructions,
the better; and I am willing to believe, none of you would be so unkind to me,
as to lay me under the Necessity of passing a Bill, that might prove of
dangerous Consequence to me, when it would be of no Manner of Advatnage to your
selves or the Country you represent, and especially when it can be done in
another Way, and more fully to answer all the good intents you your selves
propose by it.

THE Readiness with which you complied with what His Majesty had commanded me
in His Name, to recommend to you, showed your hearty and loyal Inclinations to
serve him; but the Thing at that Time seemed to require so much Dispatch, and
your earnest Endeavors of doing what was required as soon as possible, and the
Time of Harvest pressing, might and I believe did occasion many Things, that by
a greater. Time and more mature Consideration, would have been otherwise
digested, and which I was not without Hopes, you would incline to do, when you
had more Time, and therefore adjourned you, that you might get in your Harvest,
and not suffer in your private Concerns by attending upon the Public: And
therefore have directed a Bill to be drawn, to be laid before you for your
Consideration, where the same End is proposed and by the same Means, but in
many doubtful Cases, more fully expressed. The Drawer has omitted the Case of
Servants, choosing rather to leave that to the Law as it now stands than
attempt at any thing doubtful, or perhaps dangerous in its Consequences; and
this may suggest to you the reasonableness of taking some Care for the Masters
of them, by a particular Law, if there happens to be any Instances of that Kind.

ALL I shall add, is, that His Majesty has commanded me to recommend to you the
preparing such a Law, for the punishing of Mutiny, Desertion and false Musters,
and for the better preserving of good Discipline amongst Soldiers, as may best
answer those Ends: The Circumstances of Things seem to require such a Law, and
this being recommended by his Majesty, I have no Reason to doubt, but that
Persons who have so heartily shown their Affections and Loyalty, retain the
same loyal Inclinations, and will exert them with a like Sincerity and Vigor,
as they did in what I had before recommended to them in His Majesty's Name.

LEWIS MORRIS.

SPEECH on the 31st of July, on passing the Bills, and prorouging of the
Assembly.
Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Assembly,
WHEN I spoke to you at your first Meeting in this Assembly, I conceived it
necessary and my Duty to tell you that we were a Dependant Government; and that
nothing should ( i.e. ought to) be knowingly attempted in the least
destructive, or inconsistent with that Dependence which it was so much our
Interest, as well as Duty to preserve. That it is our Duty to preserve that
Dependence, every Body must own that own's an Allegiance to be due. That it is
our greatest Interest as well as our Duty to preserve it, every Body that knows
us and our Circumstances will own; and all amongst our selves not deprived of
common Sense are convinced is an evident and incontestable Truth.

I farther proceeded from the Reason and Nature of Things to show you, that all
Governments that are such in their own Right, of what Nature and Kind soever
they are, have, and naturally must have, a Right (if they have Collonies, or
Governments depending on them) to know what Laws are made by those Collonies so
depending, and of allowing or disallowing such of those Laws as they Judge
proper; and also a Right of being informed in what Manner the Public Treasure
is disposed of; and to receive that Information from Officers of their own
appointment, upon whose Faith and Veracity they conceive they can depend; and
consequently a Right of being accounted with, and of disallowing of any
Disposition of the public Treasure that appears to them in the least
inconsistent with the Preservation of that Dependence, or to Uses they do not
approve of.

THESE Things did then, and does now appear to me to be self evident and
undeniable Truths, founded upon the Nature and Reason of Things; and I might
have added (as Truths equally clear) that all independent Governments have a
Right of modelling, moulding, and forming all those Governments that depend on
them, in such Sort and Manner as those on whom they depend judge most
convenient for them; either by making a Body of Laws for them, or giving them a
Power of making Laws for themselves, in such Manner, and with such
Restrictions, either with Respect to the Matter, Form of enacting or Style, and
time of Duration of such Laws, as their Superiors shall direct. In either of
these Cases it seems clear, that it those dependant Governments, or any in
them, without Leave first obtained from their Superiors, or contrary to
repeated Admonitions, attempt to change the Form or Model appointed; or to make
other Laws than such made for them, or enact the same Laws made for them, by
Pretense, or under Color of a Power underiv'd and inherent, supposed to be in
themselves to do so; or, if they had a Power given them of making Laws
themselves but with the Restrictions I have mentioned, or any other: Knowingly
to attempt the making Laws in any other Manner, and without the Restrictions
enjoined seems in all these Cases to be an acting inconsistent with that
Dependence, and to amount to a Declaration of such as do so, that they think
themselves not (...) by any such Direction of their Superiors, farther than
they think proper to obey them.

TO what I said to you on the Head of your having perhaps many Things in your
Desires not fit for me to grant; you were pleased to say that if there should
be any Thing in your Desires which might not be fit for me to grant, consistent
with that Trust His Majesty had reposed in me, when I observed any Thing of
that Nature in your Minutes it would be very acceptable if I would signify the
same to you and thereby prevent your giving me any farther Trouble, or spending
your own Time unnecessarily about them. This was very well, had it been adhered
to.

THOUGH you were very minutely particular in answer to almost all the Clauses of
my Speech, and for the most Part even make use of my own Words and Modes of
Expression, so that your Address to me may not improperly be called my own
Speech transposed; yet, with respect to what I said concerning the Nature of
dependent Governments, and the Right their Superior had, of allowing or
disallowing the Laws made by them, and of knowing how the public Treasure was
disposed of; you decline using that strick particularity you so closely adhere
to in the other Parts, (and for Reasons to your selves best known) say not one
Word about it; but entirely pass it over, and proceed to other Clauses; leaving
your Sentiments on that Head to be guessed at from your future Conduct: And
when you come to that Clause wherein (after I had acquainted you with His
Majesty's Intentions of raising Troops in America, and that I was directed to
raise as many as I was able in this Province) I told you I was very glad your
Meeting happened to be at this Juncture, that I might receive your Advice and
Assistance to render this important Affair effectual; you in your Address
cautiously decline promising any Assistance but that of ADVICE; and tell me (by
a pretty Transposition of my own Words) that you are very ready and willing too
to ASSIST me with any Advice you are capable of giving: Which was by the Way a
very kind Promise; and no doubt (in your Opinion) very artfully made.

BUT as your Actions will best explain your Sentiments on the foregoing Heads,
I choose to refer my self to them: And by your Journals it appears that soon
after your Address to me, you ordered the bringing in of a Bill for the
recording of Deeds in each County etc. and pursuant to that Order a Bill was
brought in, Entitled, An Act to acknowledge, and register Deeds and Conveyances
of Land in each respective County of this Province. This Bill was passed by you
without a suspending Clause, though you well knew that a Bill of that Kind had
been before disallowed of by His Majesty, and could not be assented to by me
without such a Clause.

WHAT you intended by doing so, seems not very difficult to say: But, that was
very far short of what followed, of a more strange and extraordinary Nature,
viz. the passing and sending up a Bill to the Council Entitled An Act to EXTEND
an Act of PARLIAMENT Entitled an Act for the more easy recovery of Debts in HIS
MAJESTY's PLANTATIONS in AMERICA, etc. This Bill you passed Nemine
contradicente and sent it up to the Council for their concurrence: But, do you
really believe that a British Act of Parliament, made on purpose to extend to
the Plantations needed the Aid of your Power to give it a Force in New Jersey?
Which I believe that British Parliament do, and will think is a dependent
Colony, whatever you the Representatives of it seem to do.

IT is true, that in the first Case above mentioned when the Council added a
suspending Clause, you (as I am told) readily gave into it, pretending that
Omission was a Mistake undesign'd; which was an easy Thing to say, when you
found you could not have the Bill without running the Hazard that Clause
subjected it to: But how proper it is for me to recommend a Bill to his
Majesty's Consideration, that he has thought fit once to disallow of,
especially when you have declined doing any Thing in a Matter recommended to
you, to induce me to do it, you your selves can judge. Your Act declaring how
the Estate or Right of a Feme-Covert may be conveyed, or extinguished was Part
of the Act above disallowed of, though now it is made a different Act; and for
which of the Parts it was disallowed of, I cannot say; but at present, it is
rather under worse Circumstances than the other, being passed without a
suspending Clause; and which for that Reason, I am by His Majesty's
Instructions directed not to pass.

AS for your Act pretending to extend an Act of Parliament made on pupose for
the Plantations, it seemed to be a Claim of Power peculiar in its Kind; and
being thought highly Extravagant, and Unreasonable, the Council rejected it on
the first reading; but, had it passed into a Law as you intended it should, it
would have been doubtful, whether the Act of Parliament had been extended by
it, or, under the Color of extending it, have been repealed: For, in the first
enacting Clause of your Bill, it was sagaciously enacted, that the above
recited Act of Parliament Entitled An Act, etc. be from the Publication of this
Act, in FORCE in this his Majesty's Collony of New Jersey to all Intents
Constructions and Purposes EXCEPT that Part of the said Act relating to the
proving of Debts due to Persons residing in Great Britain. Whether this was not
an Exception to, and Exclusion of, that very Thing for which the Act was made
and a declaring of it not to be in Force in New Jersey in that Part; I leave to
the Learned in the Law to Judge.

THIS shows what you intended to do, and would have done, had the Gentlemen of
His Majesty's Council been weak enough, to have joined in the doing of it: And
though true it is, that when the Gentlemen of the Council had rejected you Bill,
you seemed convinced of the Imprudence of your Proceedings; and finding you
could not have the Bill in the Manner you had proposed, sent up another with a
different (...) for the Purposes intended; yet, I take leave to tell you, that
when a British Parliament thinks fit to make any Act relating to the
Plantations, it is supposed to be full, and pertinent, to all the Purposes that
the Makers of it intended it should be; and for us to take upon our selves by,
any Act we shall make, to abridge, alter, or add to it, even (...) that they in
our Opinion had Omitted, and would have added themselves, had they had (what we
conceive) right Apprehensions of the (...), I take to be a proceeding of an
extraordinary and unusual Nature and I am directed not to pass a Bill of that
Kind, without first sending (...) of it to be considered of by His Majesty
which I shall do by the first Opportunity.

I understood by the Words of your Address to me that if I discovered any
Defect in the Copy of a Bill sent me, and would point it out to you, or the
upper House, it might be reconsidered and amended. I flatered my self that you
were sincere in what you said; and consequently, that there would be a happy
Issue of our Meeting: But, can you truly say you have done any Thing of this
Kind? on the contrary, is it not evident that in the Bill relating to the
Transportation of the Forces, you have acted in a quite different Manner from
what those Declarations in your Address gave Reason to expect?

YOU very well know, that the making Provision for the Transportation, Victuals
and all other Necessaries for the Troops raised and to be raised here, was
recommended to you in his Majesty's Name; and by his particular Directions you
were told that His Majesty trusted, and expected that you would make such
Provision. But when this Matter was proposed, you earnestly desired, and
pressed to be adjourned (with what View you best know) that not being granted,
but the Necessity shown of entering immediately upon the doing of it, or, coming
to some Resolutions that might be depended on for that Purpose.

YOU (with much ado,) did enter upon it and went through it the Manner set
forth in the Act you have passed; in which when the Copy of the Bill came to me
I discovered several Defects. The most Material of these I communicated both to
some of your own Members in private Conversation, and to some of the Members of
the Council, that they might, according to the Declaration in your Address, be
reconsi^^^^^ (...) that the Defects I had observed, proceeded rather from an
erroneous Judgment than ought else, and would be amended when calmly
considered, notwithstanding I had been informed (that after some Debate upon
the Matter) you had agreed to deem it a Money Bill in order to prevent any
amendment to be made to it.

SOME of the Members of the upper House who had also observed these Defects
judged it not advisable to attempt any Amendment, they being well assured
notwithstanding any Thing said in your Address, you would not admit of any to
what you had agreed to call a Money Bill, and that by making any Amendment the
Bill might be lost; which it was supposed, not a few among you would be glad
of, it being probably drawn in the Manner it is, with that View.

I MUST own I entertained Hopes of a different Conduct from you, because you
could not but know (whatever you pretend to) first that you had no Right to fit
and act as an Assembly in making Laws, but in such Form, and Manner as His
Majesty by his Royal Letters Patent, under the great Seal of Great Britain has
directed, which gives an equal Power to the Council with your selves, in the
making or amending any Bill, of what Nature and Kind soever; and that this was
the Opinion of the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners for Trade and
Plantations on that Head in their Letter of the 7 th of March last shown at the
Conference; and to which I should have been glad more Regard had been paid.

SECONDLY, that if you had such a Right as you pretend to (as you have not) it
must be (if at all) only in the Case of Money raised upon the People and given
by you, which this is not; but is Money already in the Treasury, appropriated
by your own Acts of Assembly to a certain Use, viz. the Support of the
Government, and to that only Use, and by these very Acts not to be applied even
to that Use, but in such Manner as should be directed by Governor, Council, and
Assembly. So that it plainly appears by your own Acts, that in the directing
even of the Manner of its Application, to the Uses it is already appropriated
to, you had no greater Share or Power than any other Branch of the Legislature,
and consequently unjust in you to pretend to what the Laws even of this
Province neither gave, nor meant to give you.

THIRDLY, the applying that Money to other Uses than it was applied to by
former Acts of Assembly, is so far a repealing of those Acts; and how you came
by, or can have, a greater Right or Power than the Council in the repealing of
any Act, or Part of any Act, is to me a Mystery.

FOURTHLY, this Money is so far from being the Peoples Money (as is pretended)
and given by them, that it neither is, or ever was the Peoples Money, or given
by them; but rather, Money given by the Governors to the People. For, you and
all the Inhabitants of this Province cannot be ignorant, how earnest and
sollicitous the generality of the People were, that these Bills which you call
Money, should be made and dealt out amongst them. The Governors were loaded
with humble and Supplicating Address from all Parts of the Province, to consent
to the doing of it. Large Sums of this Money (antecedent to their Consent,)
were off'red to be given them, to induce them to grant the Favor; which was to
be (...) over with specious Pretenses, of being paid for imaginary Services;
and even all this, could not prevail upon the Governors (Necessitous as they
were, and cramped in their Support) to consent to the doing of it, unless all
the Money arising by the Interest of (...), made Money to be lent to the
Borrowers (except what was paid to the Signers and Managers of the Loan) should
be engaged to be applied to the Support of the Government; and the several
Counties engage, to make up, and pay any Deficiency or Failure that might
happen an the Security of the Borrower: All this was agreed to* and done
accordingly.

THIS I think shows, that the Money applied to the Support of the Government is
not now, nor ever was the Money of the People; nor received as a Gift from
them; but taken, as Money covenanted and agreed, to be paid by the Borrowers in
Consideration of the Favor done the People (at their earnest Request) of
consenting to make Paper Bills to pass for Money, to be lent among them to such
as wanted.

FIFTHLY, as this Interest Money paid by the Borrowers (who only support the
Government, without any Charge, or Tax upon the People) is appropriated and
given to His Majesty for the Support of his Government* and by that
Appropriation, became the Right and Property of His Majesty, for that Use and
Purpose, so, the applying of that Money to Victual and Transport the Troops, is
not your making the Provision which his Majesty required you to do, and
expected would be done; you not having contributed one Groat toward it, nor
the Country put to a Farthing Expense about it; but the Whole paid out of His
Majesty's Money, appropriated to the Support of his Government. Therefore his
Governor and Council, if to promote the Service, they consented to such an
Application of His Majesty's Money (not yours) had from the Nature of the Thing
at least as much Right as you (if not more) to direct in the Manner of its
Application.

I therefore could not believe that you would make, or adhere to so groundless
a Pretense, that has not the least shadow, or color of Reason to support it;
or like pettish and froward Children insist for insisting sake, but would act
like reasonable Men, and do reasonable Things; and on this Belief prevailed
with the Council to desire a Conference with you, in order to point out the
Defects in your Bill, that they might be amended on a Consideration of it,
agreeable to what was said in your Address.

THIS Conference was with some Difficulty agreed to, and the Defects in the
Bill pointed out; some of which (among many others) were, the Treasurers being
to pay the public Money to the Trustees without Warrant from the Governor; and
those Trustees appointed to be accountable only to the Assembly, that is your
House; (when you either do, or should know, that you neither can compel any
Body to account with you, nor discharge him when he has done so) but you,
notwithstanding any Thing said in your Address, or the Reasonableness of what
was offered, would not make, or agree to make any Amendment, but strictly
adhered to your Bill as drawn, which if the Council would not consent to, they,
or the Governor, might transport the Forces raised here as they could; for you
would make no other Provision for doing it, nor in any other Manner, than that
you had proposed by this Bill.

THIS gave but too much Reason to suspect, that you came to the Conference
predetermined to adhere to what you had done, notwithstanding any Thing that
could be offered against your doing so; and had drawn the Bill in that Manner,
against the positive Clauses of His Majesty's Letters Patent, and Instructions,
on Purpose that it might be rejected: Or, if passed as it was, you might obtain
a Precedent of disposing of the public Money without having any Regard to
either of them.

THE Council however passed your Bill, for Reasons they have entered on the
Council Books; but, I conceived it of too dangerous a Tendency for me to assent
to, without making a farther Essay to prevail upon you, to make the necessary
Alteration; still hoping, that when you were shown the Clauses in His Majesty's
Patent and Instructions, so contradictory to the Draft of your Bill, you might
be prevailed upon to consent to another.

I believe all reasonable Men will agree with me, that if a Bill is to be drawn
with an Intention that it should pass, and can be drawn agreeable to his
Majesty's Patent and Instructions, and better, and more regurally to answer all
the Intents and Purposes owned to be intended by it, than one that is not so,
it is to be preferred.

IN hopes that this might be done, I adjourned you, that you might have Time
for Consideration; and on your meeting, showed you the Clauses in the King's
Patent and Instructions, which forbid the passing such an Act as you had drawn;
but, without Effect. For you avowedly persisted in what you had done; and
(regardless of the Clauses shown you) by an interlin'd Message in writing,
signified the same to me* And said there, that you hoped my consenting to such
a Disposition (meaning as was made in the Bill) although it be not by Warrant
signed by me in Council would not be of dangerous Consequence to me. I hope so
too, because I have used all the Means in my Power to prevail upon you, to act
more agreeable to his Majesty's Directions than you have done; and have as you
saw assented to the Bill; but declare it is not to be drawn into Precedent in
any future Assembly.

I am really concerned for your Sakes, for my own, and the Country's, that
Things have happened in this Manner: I am obliged to lay an account of your
Conduct in these Cases before His Majesty, to whose Judgment it will be humbly
submitted.

THE Act to prevent any Action under Fifteeen Pounds being brought in the
Supreme Court; and the Act for anexing Part of the County of Essex to that of
Somerset, I do not think at present convenient for his Majesty's Service, or
Beneficial for the Inhabitants, but rather otherwise; and therefore do not
assent to them. That for the septennial Election of Representatives, I do not
take to be a Thing you are of Right entitled to, but a Favor; which a suitable
Conduct in you, can only induce his Majesty to grant, or me to recommend to his
Royal Consideration.

LEWIS MORRIS


