A SERMON ON THE ETERNITY OF Hell Torments.

By the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, A. B.

BOSTON. Printed and Sold by G. ROGERS and D. FOUL, over against the South
East-Corner of the Townhouse. 1740.

THE Eternity of Hell Torments.
MATTHEW. xxv.46. These shall go away into Everlasting Punishment.


THE Excellency of the Gospel Dispensation is evidenced by nothing more, than
those Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, which it offers to the Choice of
all its Professors, in order to invite or compel them to be obedient to its
Precepts. -- For it promises no less than Eternal Happiness to the Good, and
denounces no slighter a Punishment than Everlasting Misery against the Wicked.
On the one Hand, it is a Savor of Life unto Life, on the other, a Savor of
Death unto Death. And though (...) would imagine the bare mentioning of the
former would be sufficient to draw Men to their Duty, yet Ministers in all Ages
have found it necessary frequently to remind their People of the latter, and to
set before them the Tenors of the LORD, as so many powerful Dissuasives from
Sin.

But whence is it that Men are so disingenuous? -- Why, the Reason seems to be
this. -- The Promise of Eternal Happiness on our Well-doing, is so agreeable to
the Inclinations and Wishes of Mankind, that all that call themselves
Christians, universally and willingly subscribe to the Belief of it. But then
there is something so shocking in the Consideration of Eternal Torments, and
seemingly such an infinite Disproportion between an endless Duration of Pain,
and a short Life spent in Pleasure, that Men (some at least of them) can
scarcely be brought to confess it as an Article of their Faith, that an
Eternity of Misery awaits the Wicked in a future State.

I shall therefore at this Time beg Leave, to insist on the proof of this Part
of one of the Articles of our Creed; and endeavor to make good what our
blessed LORD has here threatened in the Words of the Text, that These, that is,
the Wicked, shall go away into Everlasting Punishment.

Accordingly, without considering the Words as they stand in Relation to the
Context, I shall resolve all I have to say into this one general Proposition,
-- That the Torments reserved for the Wicked here after are Eternal.

But before I proceed to make good this, I must inform you that I take it for
granted,

All here present steadfastly believe, They have something within them, which we
call a Soul, and which is capable of surviving the Dissolution of the Body, and
of being miserable or happy to all Eternity.

I take it for granted farther, That you believe a Divine Revelation; that
those Books, emphatically called the Scriptures, were written by the
Inspiration of GOD, and that the Things therein contained, are founded upon
Eternal Truth.

I take it for granted lastly, That you believe, that the Son of GOD came down
to die for Sinners; that there is but one Mediator between GOD and Man, even
the Man CHRIST JESUS.

These Things being granted (and they were necessary to be premised) proceed we
now to make good the one general Proposition mentioned before, and asserted in
the Text, that The Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal. --
These, says our blessed LORD, shall go away into Everlasting Punishment.

The first Argument I shall advance to prove that the Torments reserved for the
Wicked hereafter are eternal (for I have taken it for granted, that you believe
those Books, emphatically called the Scriptures, were written by the
Inspiration of GOD, and that the Things contained therein are founded upon
Eternal Truth) is, That the Word of GOD himself, assures us, Line upon Line,
that it will be so.

To quote all the Texts that might be produced in Proof of this, would be
endless. -- Let it suffice to instance only in a few. -- In the Old Testament,
in the Book of Daniel, Chap. xii. ver. 2. we are told, that Some shall awake to
Everlasting Life, and others to Everlasting Contempt. -- In the Book of Isaiah,
it is said, that The Worm of those that have transgressed GOD's Law, shall not
die, nor their Fire be quenched. -- And in another Place, the Holy Prophet,
struck, no doubt, with Astonishment and Horror at the Prospect of the
Continuance of the Torments of the Damned, breaks out into this moving
Expostulation, Who can dwell with Everlasting Burnings?

The New Testament is still fuller as to this Point, it being a Revelation
which brought this and suchlike Particulars to a clear Light. -- The Apostle
Jude tells us of the profane Despisers of Dignities in his Days, that for them
was reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever. -- And in the Book of the
Revelations it is written, that The Smoke of the Torments of the Wicked
ascends for ever and ever. -- And if we believe the Witness of Men inspired,
the Witness of the Son of GOD, who had the Spirit given him, as he was a
Mediator, without Measure, is still far greater. -- And he, in St. Mark's
Gospel, repeats this solemn Declaration three several Times. It is better for
Thee to enter into Life maimed; that is, it is better to forego the
Gratification of thy Lust, or incur the Displeasure of a Friend, which may be
as dear to thee as a Hand, or as useful as a Foot, than having two Hands and
Feet, that is, for indulging the one, or disobeying GOD to oblige the other, to
be cast into Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.

And here again, in the Words of the Text, These, that is, the Wicked, says he,
shall go away into everlasting Punishment.

I know it has been objected by some who have denied the Eternity of Hell
Torments, That the Words Everlasting and Ever and Ever, are often used in the
Holy Scriptures, (especially in the Old Testament) when they signify not an
endless Duration, but a limited Term of Time.

And this we readily grant. But then we reply, That when the Words are used
with this Limitation, they either manifestly appear to be used so from the
Context -- or are put in Opposition to some occasional Types which GOD gave his
People on some special Occasions, as when it is said, it shall be a perpetual
or everlasting Statute, or a Statute for ever, that is, a standing Type, and
not merely transient or occasional, as was the Pillar of Cloud, the Manna, or
such like. -- Or lastly, they have a Relation, to that Covenant GOD made with
his spiritual Israel, which, if understood in a spiritual Sense, will be
everlasting, though the Ceremonial Dispensation be abolished.

Besides, it ought to be observed, that, some of the Passages just now referred
to, have neither of these Words so much as mentioned in them, and cannot
possibly be interpreted so as to denote only a limited Term of Years.

But let that be as it will, it is evident even to a Demonstration, that the
Words of the Text however, will not admit of such a restrained Signification,
as appears from their being directly opposed to the Words immediately
following, viz. That the Righteous shall go into Life eternal. From which
Words, all are ready to grant, that the Life promised to the Righteous will be
Eternal; and why the Punishment threatened to the Wicked should not be
understood to be Eternal likewise, when the very same Word in the Original, is
used to express the Duration of each, no Shadow of a Reason can be given.

But Secondly, There cannot be one Argument urged, why GOD should reward his
Saints with everlasting Happiness, which will not equally punish Sinners with
Eternal Misery.

For, since we know nothing (at least for a Certainty) how he will deal with
either, but by a Divine Revelation; and since, as was proved by the foregoing
Argument, he has as positively threatened eternally to punish the Wicked, as to
reward the Good; it follows that his Truth will be as much impeached and called
in Question, did he not inflict his Punishments, as it would be, if he did not
confer his Rewards.

To this also it has been objected, That though GOD is obliged by his Promise
to give his Rewards, yet his Veracity could not be called in Question,
supposing he should not execute his Threatenings, as he actually did not in the
Case of Nineveh, which GOD expressly declared by his Prophet Jonah, should be
destroyed in Forty Days; notwithstanding the Sequel of the Story informs us,
that Nineveh was spared.

But in answer to this Objection we affirm, That GOD's Threatenings, as well as
Promises, are without Repentance. -- And for this Reason, because they are both
founded on the eternal Laws of right Reason. -- Accordingly we always find,
that where the Conditions were not performed, on the Nonperformance of which
the Threatenings were denounced, GOD always executed the Punishment threatened.
-- The driving Adam out of Eden, -- The Destruction of the old World by a
Deluge of Water, and the Overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, are, and will be
always so many standing Monuments of GOD's executing his Threatenings when
denounced, though, to our weak Apprehensions, the Punishment may seem far to
exceed the Crime.

It is true, GOD did spare Nineveh, and that because the Inhabitants did
actually repent, and therefore performed the Conditions upon which it was
supposed by the Prophet's being sent to warn them, the threatened Punishment
should be withheld.

And so likewise in respect to Gospel Threatenings. If Men will so far consult
their own Welfare as to live up to the Gospel Terms, GOD certainly will not
punish them, but on the contrary, confer upon them his Rewards, -- But to
affirm that HE will not punish, and that eternally too, impenitent, obstinate
Sinners, according as he has threatened, if they do not perform the Terms of
the Gospel, what is it, in Effect, but to make GOD like a Man, that he should
lie, or the Son of Man that he should repent?

But the absurdity of such an Opinion will appear still more evident from

The next and Third Argument I shall offer to prove, that the Torments reserved
for the Wicked hereafter are eternal, viz. From the Nature of the Christian
Covenant.

And here I must again observe, that it was taken for granted at the Beginning
of this Discourse, that, That you believe the Son of GOD came down to save
Sinners; that there is but one Mediator between GOD and Man, even the Man
CHRIST JESUS.

And here I take it for granted farther (unless you believe the absurd and
unwarrantable Doctrine of Purgatory) that you are fully persuaded, that this
Life is the only Time allotted by Almighty GOD for working out our Salvation,
and after a few Years are passed over, there will be no more Sacrifice for Sin.

And if this be granted (and who dares deny it) it follows that if a wicked Man
dies in his Wickedness, and under the Wrath of GOD, he must continue in that
State to all Eternity. -- For, since there is no Possibility of his being
delivered out of such a Condition but by and through CHRIST; and since at the
Hour of Death, the Time of CHRIST'S Mediation and Intercession for him is
irrecoverably gone; the same Reason that may be given, why GOD should punish a
Sinner that dies under the Guilt of his Sins for a single Day, will equally
hold good, why he should continue to punish him for a Year, an Age, nay, to all
Eternity.

But I hasten to the Fourth and last Argument, to prove, That the Torments
reserved for the Wicked hereafter are eternal, viz. Because the Devil's
Punishment is to be so.

That there is such a Being whom we call the Devil, that he was once an Angel
of Light, but for his Pride and Rebellion against GOD, was cast down from
Heaven, and is now permitted with the rest of his spiritual Wickednesses, to
walk to and fro, seeking whom they may devour. -- That there is a Place of
Torment reserved for them, or, to use the Apostle's Words, that they are
reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness unto the Judgment of the Great
Day, are Truths all here present were supposed to be convinced of, when it was
taken for granted under the second Proposition at the Beginning of this
Discourse, that you believed the holy Scriptures to be written by the
Inspiration of GOD, wherein these Truths are delivered.

But then if we allow all this, and think it no Injustice in GOD to punish
those glorious Spirits for their Rebellion, how can we think it unjust in him,
to punish wicked Men for their Impenitency to all Eternity?

You will say perhaps, that they have sinned against greater Light, and
therefore deserve a greater Punishment. And so we grant that the Punishment of
the fallen Angels may be greater as to Degree, than that of wicked Men. But
then we affirm, it will be equal as to the Eternal Duration of it. For in that
Day, as the lively Oracles of GOD inform us, shall the Son of Man say to them
on his left Hand, Depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. -- Where we find that impenitent Sinners are to be
cast into the same Everlasting Fire, with the Devil and his Angels, -- and that
too very justly. -- For though they may have sinned against greater Light, yet
Christians sin against greater Mercy. Since CHRIST took not hold of, did not
die for the fallen Angels, but of the Seed of Abraham, for Men and for our
Salvation. So that if GOD spared not those excellent Beings, assure thy self, O
obstinate Sinner, whoever thou art, he will by no means spare thee.

From what then has been said it plainly appears, that verily the Torments
reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal. -- And if so, Brethren, how holy
ought we to be in all Manner of Conversation and Godliness, that we may be
accounted worthy to escape this Wrath to come!

But before I proceed to a practical Exhortation, permit me to draw an
Inference or two from what has been said.

And first, If the Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal, what
shall we say to those who make an open Profession in their Creed to believe a
Life everlasting, i. e. a Life of Happiness as well as Misery, and yet dare to
live in the actual Commission of those Sins which will unavoidably, without
Repentance, bring them into the Place of Torment? Thou believe the Punishment
of the impenitently Wicked in another Life, are Eternal: Thou do well, The
Devils also believe and tremble. But know, O vain Man, unless this Belief does
Influence thy Practice, and makes thee bid Adieu to thy Sins, every Time thou
repeatest thy Creed, thou do in Effect say, I believe I shall be undone for
ever.

But Secondly, If the Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal,
then let this serve as a Caution to such Persons (and it is to be feared there
are some such) who go about to dissuade others from the Belief of such an
important Truth. There being no surer Way, in all Probability, to encourage and
promote Infidelity and Profaneness, than the broaching or maintaining such an
unwarrantable Doctrine. -- For if the positive Threats of GOD concerning the
Eternity of Hell Torments are already found insufficient to deter Men from Sin,
what a higher Pitch of Wickedness may we imagine they will quickly arrive at,
when they are taught to entertain any Hopes of a future Recovery out of them,
or, what is still worse, that their Souls are hereafter to be annihilated, and
become like the Beasts that perish? -- But Woe unto such blind Leaders of the
Blind. No Wonder if they both fall into the Ditch. -- And let such Corrupters
of GOD's Word know, that I testify unto every Man that hears me this Day,
that if any one shall add unto, or take away from the Words that are written in
the Book of GOD, GOD shall take his Part out of the Book of Life, and shall add
unto him all the Plagues that are in that Book.

Thirdly and Lastly, If the Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are
eternal, then this may serve as a Reproof for those who quarrel with GOD, and
say it is inconsistent with his Justice, to punish a Person to all Eternity,
only for enjoying the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. But such Persons must be
told, that it is not their thinking or calling GOD unjust, will make him so, no
more than a condemned Prisoner's saying the Law or Judge is unjust, will render
either duly chargeable with such an Imputation. -- But know thou, O Worm,
what Blasphemy thou art guilty of, in charging GOD with Injustice? -- Shall the
Thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? And will thou presume to arraign the Almighty at the Bar of thy shallow Reasoning? And
call him unjust, for punishing thee Eternally, only because thou wishest it may
not so? But has GOD said it; and shall he not do it? He has said it: And let
GOD be true, though every Man be a Liar. -- Shall not the Judge of all the Earth
do right? Assuredly he will. And if Sinners will not own his Justice in his
Threatenings here, they will be compelled ever long to own and feel them when
tormented by him hereafter.

But to come to a more practical Application of what has been delivered.

You have heard, Brethren, the Eternity of Hell Torments plainly proved, from
the express Declarations of Holy Scriptures, and Consequences naturally drawn
from them. -- And now there seems to need no great Art of Rhetoric to persuade
any understanding Person to avoid and abhor those Sins, which without
Repentance, will certainly plunge him into this Eternal Gulf. -- The
Disproportion between the Pleasure and the Pain (if there be any Pleasure in
Sin) is so infinitely great, that supposing it was only possible though not
certain, that the Wicked would be everlastingly punished, no one that has the
Reason of a Man, for the Enjoying a little momentary Pleasure, would, one would
imagine, run the Hazard of enduring Eternal Pain. -- But since the Torments of
the Damned are not only possible, but certain, (since GOD himself, who cannot
lie, has told us so) for Men, notwithstanding to persist in their Disobedience,
and then flatter themselves that GOD will not make good his Threatenings, is a
most egregious Instance of Folly and Presumption.

Dives himself supposed, that if one rose from the Dead, his Brethren would
amend their Lives; but Christians, it seems, will not repent though the SON OF
GOD has died and rose again, and told them what they must expect, if they still
continue obstinate in Evil Doing.

Would we now and then draw off our Thoughts from sensible Objects, and by
Faith, meditate a while on the Miseries of the Damned, I doubt not but we
should, as it were, hear many an unhappy Soul venting his fruitless Sorrows in
some such piteous Moans as these.

O Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death! O
foolish Mortal that I was, thus to bring myself into these never-ceasing
Tortures, for the transitory Enjoyment of a few shortlived Pleasures, which
scarcely afforded me any Satisfaction, even when I most indulged myself in
them. -- Alas! are these the Wages, these the Effects of Sin? -- Are all the
Grand Deceiver's inviting Promises come to this? -- O Damned Apostate! First to
delude me with pretended Promises of Happiness, and after several Years
Drudgery in his Service, thus to involve me in Eternal Woe. -- Oh that I had
never hearkened to his beguiling Insinuations! Oh that I had rejected his very
first Suggestions with the utmost Detestation and Abhorrence! Oh that I had
taken up my Cross and followed CHRIST! Oh that I had never ridiculed serious
Godliness; and out of a false Politeness, condemned the truly Pious, as too
Severe, Enthusiastic, or Superstitious! For I then had been happy indeed,
happy beyond Expression, happy to all Eternity, yonder in those blessed Regions
where they sit, clothed with unspeakable Glory, and chanting forth their
Seraphick Hallelujahs to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne, for ever. --
But, alas! these Reflections come now too late: These Wishes now are vain and
fruitless. I have not suffered, and therefore must not reign with them. -- I
have in Effect denied the LORD that bought me, and therefore justly am I now
denied by him.

But must I live for ever tormented in these Flames? -- Must this Body of mine
which not long since lay in State, was clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and
fared sumptuously every Day, must this be here eternally confined, and made the
Mockery ^^^sulting Devils? Oh, Eternity! that Thought fills me with Despair
(...) cannot, will not, yet I must be miserable for ever.

Come then, all ye self-deluding, self-deluded Sinners, and imagine yourselves
for once in the Place of that truly wretched Man I have been here describing.
-- Think, I beseech you by the Mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, think with
yourselves, how racking, how unsupportable the never dying Worm of a
selfcondemning Conscience will hereafter be to you. Think how impossible it
will be for you to dwell with everlasting Burnings.

Come, all ye Christians of a Lukewarm Laodicean Spirit, ye Gallie's in
Religion, who care a little, but not enough for the Things of GOD, O think,
think with yourselves how deplorable it will be to lose the Enjoyment of
Heaven, and run into endless Torments, merely because you will be content to be
almost, and will not strive to be altogether Christians. -- Consider, I beseech
you, consider, how you will rave, and curse that fatal Stupidity, that made you
believe any Thing less than a Life of strict Piety, Self-Denial, and
Mortification, can keep you from those Torments, the Eternity of which I have
been endeavoring to prove.

But I can no more -- These Thoughts are too melancholy for me to dwell on, as
well as for you to hear, and GOD knows, as Punishing is his strange Work, so
denouncing his Threatenings is mine. But if the bare mentioning the Torments of
the Damned is so shocking, Good GOD! how terrible must the enduring of them be!

And now are not some of you ready to cry out, These are hard Sayings, who can
bear the^*

But let not sincere Christians be in the least terrified at what has been
delivered. No, for you is (...), a Crown, a Kingdom, an Eternal and exc^^^ing
Weight of Glory. CHRIST never said the Righteous, the Upright, the Sincere, but
the Wicked, Merciless, negatively good Professors before described, shall go
into Everlasting Punishment. For you, who love him in Sincerity, a new and
living Way is laid open into the Holy of Holies by the Blood of JESUS CHRIST.
And an abundant Entrance will be administered unto you, at the great Day of
Account into Eternal Life. Take heed therefore, and beware that there be not in
any of you a Root of Bitterness springing up of Unbelief. But, on the contrary,
steadfastly and heartily rely on the many precious Promises reached out to you
in the Gospel, knowing that he who has promised is faithful, and therefore
will perform.

But let no obstinately wicked Professors dare to apply any of the divine
Promises to themselves. For it is not meet to take the Children's Bread and
give it unto Dogs. No, to such the Terrors of the LORD only belong. And as
certainly as CHRIST will say to his true Followers, Come ye blessed Children of
my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning of the
World, so he will unalterably pronounce this dreadful Sentence against all that
die in their Sins, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels.

From which unhappy State may GOD of his infinite Mercy deliver us all through
JESUS CHRIST; to whom with Thee, O FATHER, and Thee, O HOLY GHOST, Three
Persons and One Eternal GOD, be ascribed, as is most due, (...) Honor, Power,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion (...) and for evermore.

FINIS.

