The wise and foolish Virgins.

A SERMON Preached at Philadelphia, 1739.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. of PEMBROKE COLLEGE, Oxford.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ANDREW and WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of
the Bible, in Front-Street.

MAT. xxv 14 Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour in which
the Son of Man Comes.
THE Apostle St. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews informs us, That it is
appointed for all Men once to die; after that, says he, comes Judgment. -- And
I think if any Consideration be sufficient to awaken a sleeping drowsy World,
it must be this -- That there will be a Day wherein these Heavens shall be
wrapped up like a scrowl, this Element melt with fervent Heat, the Earth and all
the Things therein be burnt up, and every Soul and every Nation and Language
summoned to appear before the dreadful (...) of the righteous Judge of Quick
and Dead, to receive Rewards and Punishments according to the Deeds done in
their Bodies. -- The great Apostle just mentioned, when brought before Felix,
could think of no better means to convert that sinful Man than to reason of
Temperance, Righteousness, and more especially of a Judgment to come. -- The
first might in some Measure affect, but I am persuaded it was the last
Consideration, I mean of a Judgment to come, that made him tremble; and so bad
as the World is grown yet there are few have their Consciences so far scared,
as with a red hot Iron, as to deny that there will be a Reckoning hereafter.
The promiscuous Dispensations of Providence in this Life, wherein we see good
Men afflicted, destitute, tormented, and the Wicked permitted Triumphantly to
ride over their Heads, has been always looked upon as an indisputable Argument,
by the generality of Men, that there will be a day in which God will Judge the
World in Righteousness, and Administer true Equity unto his People. -- Some
indeed are so bold as to deny it, while they are engaged in the pursuit of the
Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. -- But follow them to their Deathbeds,
ask them, when their Souls are ready to launch into Eternity, what they then
think of a Judgment to come? and they will tell you they dare not give their
Consciencies the Lie any longer. -- They feel a fearful looking for of Judgment
and fiery Indignation in their Hearts. -- Since then these Things are so, does
it not highly concern each of us, my Brethren, before we come on a bed of
Sickness, seriously to examine how the Account stands between God and our
Souls, and how it will fare with us in that Day? As for the openly Profane,
the Drunkard, the Whore-monger, the Adulterer, and such like, there is no doubt
of what will become of them -- without Repentance they shall never enter into
the Kingdom of God and his Christ, No, their Damnation slumbereth not, A
burning fiery Tophet kindled by the Fury of God's eternal Wrath is prepared for
their Reception, wherein they must Suffer the Vengeance of an eternal Fire. --
Nor is there the least doubt of the State of true Believers -- For though they be
despised and rejected of natural Men, yet being born again of God, they are
Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ -- They have the earnest of the
promised Inheritance in their Hearts, and are assured that a new and living way
is made open for them, into the Holy of Holies, by the Blood of Jesus Christ,
through which an Abundant entrance shall be Administered to them at the great
Day of Accounts. The only Question is, What will become of the almost
Christian, one that is content to go as he thinks in a middle way to Heaven,
without being Profane on the one Hand, or as he falsely imagined, Righteous
overmuch on the other? -- Multitudes there are in every Congregation, and
consequently here present, of this Stamp -- And what is worst of all, it is more
easy to convince the most notorious Publicans and Sinners of their being out of
a state of Salvation, than any of these -- * Notwithstanding if Jesus Christ
may be our Judge they shall as certainly be rejected and disowned by him at the
last Day, as though they lived in open Defiance of all his Laws. -- For what says
our Lord in the Parable of which the Words of the Text are a Reddition or
Conclusion and which I intend to make the Subject of my present Discourse. --
Then, that is, at the Day of the Judgment, which he had been discoursing of in
the foregoing and prosecutes in this Chapter, Shall the Kingdom of Heaven i. e.
the State of professors in the Gospel Church, be likened unto Ten Virgins,
which took their Lamps and went forth to meet the Bridegroom. In which Words is
a manifest Allusion to a Custom prevailing in our Lords Time among the Jews, at
marriage Solemnities, which were generally at Night, and at which it was
Customary for the Persons of the Bride-chamber to go out in Procession with
many Lights to meet the Bridegroom. -- By the Bridegroom then here spoken of,
you are to understand Jesus Christ -- The Church i. e. True Believers are his
Spouse -- he is united to them by one Spirit even in this Life, but the
Solemnizing of these sacred Nuptials is reserved till the Day of Judgment, when
he shall come to take them home to himself, and present them, before Men and
Angels, as his purchase to his Father, without Spot or Wrinkle or any such
Thing. -- By the Ten Virgins we are to understand the Professors of
Christianity in General -- All are called Virgins, because all are called to be
Saints. -- Whosoever Names the Name of Christ is obliged by that very
Profession to depart from all Iniquity. -- The pure and chaste in Heart are the
only Persons that will be so blessed as to see God. -- As Christ was born of a
Virgin's Womb, so he can dwell in none but Virgins Souls, made Pure and Holy by
the Cohabitation of his Holy Spirit. -- But what says the Apostle? All are not
Isralites that are of Israel -- All are not true Christians that are called
after the Name of Christ -- No, says our Lord, in the 2d. v. Five of these
Virgins were Wise, i. e. True Believers, and five were Foolish, i. e. Formal
Hypocrites. -- But why are five said to be Wise, and the other five Foolish? --
Hear what our Lord says in the following Verses, They that were Foolish took
their Lamps and took no Oil with them: But the Wise took Oil in their Vessels
with Lamps. -- They that were Foolish took their Lamps, i. e. The Lamp of an
outward Profession, they would go to Church, say over several manuals of
Prayers, come perhaps even into a Field to hear a Sermon, give at a Collection,
and receive the Sacrament constantly, nay, oftener than once a Month. -- But
then here lay the Mistake, they had no Oil in their Lamps, -- no true Principle
of Grace, no living Faith in their Hearts, without which though we should give
all our Goods to feed the Poor, and our Bodies to be Burnt it would profit us
nothing. -- In short, they were exact, nay perhaps Superstitious Biggots as to
the Form; but all the while they were Strangers to and in effect denied the
Power of Godliness in their Hearts. They would go to Church, but at the same
Time, think it no harm to go to a Ball or an Assembly, notwithstanding they
promised at their Baptism, to renounce the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World. -- They were so exceeding fearful of being Righteous overmuch, that they
would even persecute those that were truly Devout, if they attempted to go a
step farther than themselves. In one Word, they never effectually felt the
Powers of the World to come. -- They thought they might be Christians without
so much Inward feeling, and therefore, notwithstanding their high Pretensions,
had only a Name to Live.

And now Sir, let me pause a while, and in the Name of God, whom I endeavor to
serve in the Gospel of his dear Son, give me leave to ask one Question. Whilst
I have been drawing, though in Minature, the Character of these foolish Virgins,
have not many of your Consciences made the Application, and with a small still,
though articulate, Voice, said, thou Man, thou Woman art one of these foolish
Virgins, for thy Practice and Sentiments agrees thereto? Do not then stifle
but encourage these Convictions, and who knows but that Lord, who is rich in
mercy to all that call upon him faithfully, may so work upon you even by this
foolishness of Preaching as to make you wise Virgins before you return home?

What they were you shall know immediately -- But the Wise, says our Lord, ver.
4. took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps. -- Observe, the Wise, that is,
the true Believers, had their Lamps as well as the Foolish Virgins, for
Christianity does not require us to cast off all outward Forms. -- We may use
Forms and yet not be formal: For Instance, it is possible to worship God in a
set Form of Prayer, and yet worship him in Spirit and in Truth. And therefore
Brethren let us not judge one another. The wise Virgins had their Lamps, herein
did not ly the difference between them and the Foolish, that one worshipped God
with a Form and the other did not. -- No, as the Pharisee and Publican went up
to the Temple to pray, so these Wise and foolish Virgins might go to the same
Place of Worship and ^ir under the same Ministry -- But then the Wise took Oil
in their Vessels with their Lamps, they kept up the Form, but did not rest in
it, their Words in prayer were the Language of their Hearts, and they were no
Strangers to inward Feelings, they were not afraid of searching Doctrine, nor
affronted when Ministers told them they deserve to be damned -- They were not
self Righteous, but were willing that Jesus Christ should have all the Glory of
their Salvation, they were convinced that the Merrits of Jesus Christ were to
be apprehended only by Faith; but yet were they as careful to maintain good
Works as though they were to be justified by them -- in short their Obedience
flowed from Love and Gratitude, and was cheerful, constant, uniform, universal
like that Obedience which the Holy Angels pay our Father in Heaven.

Here then let me exhort you to pause again; and if any of you can faithfully
apply these Characters to your Hearts, give God the Glory and take the Comfort
to your own Souls, you are not False but true Believers. -- Jesus Christ has
been made of God to you Wisdom, even that Wisdom, whereby you shall be made
Wise unto Salvation -- God sees a difference between you and Foolish Virgins,
if Natural Men will not. -- You need not be uneasy if one Chance and Fate in
this Life may happen to you both I say one Chance and Fate. For ver. 5 th while
the Bridegroom tarryed i. e. in the intermediate Space of Time which passed
between our Lords Assention and his coming again to Judgment, they all slumbred
and slept, the Wise as well as Foolish dyed, for Dust we all are and to Dust we
must return, its no Reflection at all upon the Divine Goodness that Believers,
as well as Hypocrites must pass through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, for
Christ has taken the Sting out of it, so that we need fear no Evil -- It is to
them a Passage to everlasting Life. Death is only terrible to those that have
no Hope, because they live without Faith in the World. Whosoever there are
amongst you, that have received the first Fruits of the Spirit, I am persuaded
you are ready to cry out with Holy Job we would not live here always, we long
to be dissolved that me may be with Jesus Christ. And though Worms must destroy
our Bodies as well as others, yet we are content, being assured that our
Redeemer lives, that he will stand at the latter Days upon the Earth, and that
in our Flesh we shall see God.

But it is not so with Hypocrites and Unbelievers beyond the Grave, for what
says our Lord? And at Midnight, observe at Midnight, when all was hushed and
quiet, and no one dreaming of any such Thing. A cry was made, The Voice of the
Archangel and the Trump of God was heard sounding this general Alarm. To
Things in Heaven, to Things in Earth, and to Things in the Waters under the
Earth, BEHOLD -- mark how this awful Summons is ushered in with the Word BEHOLD
-- to engage our Attention, Behold the Bridegroom comes even Jesus Christ the
desire of Nations, the Bridegroom of his Spouse the Church -- because he
tarried for a while to exercise the Faith of Saints, and give Sinners space to
repent. -- Scoffers were apt to cry out where is the Promise of his coming, but
the Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as these Men account slackness --
For Behold he that was to come now comes, and will not tarry any longer, he
comes to be glorified in his Saints, and to take Vengeance on them that know
not God, and have not obeyed his Gospel: He comes not as a Poor despised
Galilean, not to be stabled in a stinking Manger, not to be despised and
rejected of Men, not to be blindfolded, spit upon, and buffeted, not to be
nailed to an accursed Tree, not as the Son of Man, but as he really was the
eternal Son of an eternal God: He comes riding in the Wings of the Wind, in
the Glory of the Father, and his Holy Angels; and to be had in everlasting
Reverence of all that shall be round about him. -- Go ye forth to meet (...)
arise ye dead, ye Foolish as well as Wise Virgins, arise and come to Judgment.
-- Multitudes no doubt that heard this awakening CRY would have rejoiced if the
Rocks might fall on and the Hills cover them from the presence of the Lamb,
what would they give, if as they lived as Beasts, they might now die like the
Beasts that perish? How would they rejoice if those same Excuses which they had
made on this side Eternity for attending on Holy Ordinances, would now serve to
keep them from appearing before the Heavenly Bridegroom. But as Adam
notwithstanding his Fig Leaves, and the Trees of the Garden, could not hide
himself from God, when arrested with an Adam where art thou? So now, the Decree
is gone forth and the Trump of God has given its last sound, all Tongues,
People, Nations and Languages, both Wise and Foolish Virgins must come into his
presence and bow beneath his Footstool even Pontius Pilate, Annas and Cai^phas
even the proud persecuting Highpriests and Phaisees of this Generation must
now appear before him: -- For says our Lord then i. e when the cry was made
behold the Bridegroom comes, in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, the
Graves were opened, the Sea gave up its Dead, all those Virgins both Wise and
Foolish, arose and trimmed their Lamps i. e. endeavored to put themselves in a
proper Posture to meet the Bridegroom.

But how may we Imagine the Foolish Virgins were surprised, when
notwithstanding their high Thoughts and proud Imaginations of their Security,
they now find themselves wholly naked and void of that inward Holiness and
purity of Heart, without which no Man living at that Day shall comfortably meet
the Lord. I doubt not but many of these Foolish Virgins whilst in this World
were Clothed in Purple and fine Linen, fared sumptuously every Day, and would
disdain to set the Wise Virgins, some of which might be as poor a Lazarus, even
with the Dogs of their Flock, -- These were looked upon by them as Enthusiasts
and Madmen as Persons that were righteous overmu^h, and who intended to turn
the World upside ^^wn -- But now Death has opened their Eyes and (...) them to
their et^rnal Sorrow that he is not (...) who is only one outwardly -- now
(...) late) they and not the Wise (...) eyes* -- Now their (...) might dip the
Tip of his Finger in Water and be sent to cool his Tongue, so these Foolish
Virgins, these Formal Hypocrites, are obliged to turn Beggars to those whom
they once despised. -- Give us of your Oil -- Oh! impart to us a little of that
Grace, and Holy Spirit for the insisting on which we Fools accounted your Lives
Madness: For alas our Lamps are gone out. -- We had only the Form of
Godliness, we were whited Sepulchers, we were Heart Hypocrites, we contented
ourselves with desiring to be good, and though confident of Salvation whilst we
lived, yet our Hope is entirely gone, now God has taken away our Souls, give us
therefore, O! give us though we once despised you, give us of your Oil, for our
Lamps of an outward Profession, transient Convictions are quite gone out.

Comfort ye, comfort ye, my People says the Lord, with this. -- My Brethren in
Christ hear what the Foolish say to the Wise Virgins, and learn in Patience to
possess your Souls, if you are true Followers of the lowly Jesus. I am
persuaded you have your Names cast out, and all manner of Evil spoken against
you for his Namesake: For no one ever did or will live Godly in Christ Jesus
without suffering Persecution, nay I doubt not but your chief Foes are those of
your own Household. Tell me do not your carnal Relations and Friends vex your
tender Souls Day by Day, in bidding you spare your Selves, and take heed lest
you go too far; and as you passed along to come and hear the Word of God, have
you not heard many a Pharisee cry out here comes another Troop of his
Followers? Brethren be not surprised, Christ's Servants were always the Worlds
Foo^s, you know it hated him before it hated you, rejoice and be exceeding
glad, yet a little while and behold the Bridegroom comes, and then shall you
hear these Formal, Scoffing Pharisees, saying unto you, give us of your Oil,
for our Lamp are gone out. When you are reviled, revile not again; when you
suffer threaten not, commit your Souls into the Hands of him that judges
Righteously: For behold the Day comes when the Children of God shall speak for
themselves.

The Wise Virgins in the Parable no doubt endured the same cruel mockings as
you may do; but as the Lamb before the Shearers is dumb, so in this Life opened
they not their Mouths, but now we find they can give their Enemies an Answer.
Not so lest there be not enough for us and you, but go ye rather to them that
sell and buy for your selves. These Words are not to be understood as though they
were spoken in an insulting manner: For true Charity teaches us to use the
worst of Sinners and our most bitter Enemies with the meekness and Gentleness
of Christ. Though Dives was in Hell, yet Abraham does not say thou villain, but
only Son remember: And I am persuaded had it been in the Power of these Wise
Virgins, they would have dealt with the Foolish Virgins, as God knows I would
willingly deal with my most inveterate Enemies, not only give them of their
Oil, but also, exalt them to the Right Hand of God. -- It was not then for want
of Love but for Fear of wanting a sufficiency for themselves, that made them
return this Answer, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you: For they
that have most Grace have none to spare, none but self Righteous, Foolish
Virgins think they are good enough, or have already attained. -- These who are
truly Wise are always most distrustful of themselves, pressing forwards to the
Things that are before, and think it well if after they have done (...), they
can make their Ca^^ing and Election (...) Not so, lest there be not enough for
us and you; But go ye rather to them that sell and buy for your selves: These
Words indeed seem to be spoken in a triumphant, but certainly they were uttered
in the most compassionate manner, go ye to them that sell and buy for your
selves -- Unhappy Virgins, you accounted our Lives Folly whilst with you in the
Body -- how often have you condemned us for our Zeal in running to hear the
Word, and looked upon us as Enthusiasts for talking about and affirming that we
must be led by the Spirit, and walk by the Spirit and feel the Spirit of God
witnessing with our Spirits that we are his Children? But now you would be glad
to be partakers of this Privilege, but it is not ours to give. -- You
contented yourselves with seeking when you should have been striving to enter
in at the strait Gate -- And now go to them that sell if you can and buy for
yourselves.

And what say you to this, ye Foolish formal Professors? For I doubt not but
curiosity and novelty has brought many such even to this despised Place to
hear a Sermon, can you hear this Reply to the Foolish Virgins, and yet not
tremble? Why yet a little while, and thus it shall be done to you, rejoice and
bolster your selves up in your Duties and Forms, endeavor to cover your
Nakedness with the Fig Leaves of an outward Profession and a legal
Righteousness, and despise the true Servants of Christ as much as you please,
yet know that all your Hopes will fail you when God brings you into Judgment.
For not him who commends himself is justified but he whom the Lord commends.

But to return, we do not hear any Reply the Foolish Virgins make -- No, their
Consciences condemn^^ them, like the Person in the Parable without a wedding
Garment, they are struck dumb and are now filled with anxious Thoughts how they
shall buy Oil that they may lift up their Heads before the Bridegroom. But
whilst they went to buy, v. 10. i. e. whilst they were thinking what they
should do, the Bridgroom, the Lord Jesus, the Head, the King, the the Husband
of his Spouse the Church, comes attended with Thousands and Twenty times
Ten-thousands of Saints and Angels publicly to count up his Jewels and they
that were ready -- the Wise Virgins who had Oil in their Lamps, and were sealed
by his Spirit to the Day of Redemption, these having on a wedding Garment of an
imputed Righteousness, and a new Nature, went in with him to the Marriage.

But who can express the Transports that these Wise Virgins felt when they were
thus admitted in a Holy triumph into the presence and full enjoyment of him
whom their Souls hungered and thirsted after! No doubt they had tasted of his
Love, and by Faith had often fed on him in their Hearts when sitting down to
commemorate his last Supper here on Earth, but how full may we think their
Hearts and Tongues were of his Praises, when they see themselves sit down
together to eat Bread in his Heavenly Kingdom? And what was best of all, the
Door was shut, and shut them in to enjoy the ever blessed God and the Company
of Angels and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect without Interruption for
evermore. I say without Interruption: For in this Life their Eyes, often gushed
out with Water because Men kept not Gods Law, and they could never come to
appear before the Lord, or to hear his Word, but Satan and his Emissaries would
come also to disturb them; but now the Door is shut, now there is a perfect
Communion of Saints, which they in vain longed for in this lower World. Now
Tares no longer grow up with the Wheat, not one single Hypocrite or unbeliever
can skreen himself amongst them. -- Now the wicked cease from troubling, and
now their weary Souls enjoy an everlasting Rest.

Once more O Believers, let me exhort you in Patience to possess your Souls --
God if he has freely justified you by Faith in his Son, and given you his
Spirit, has sealed you to be his; and has secured you as surely as he secured
Noah when he locked him in the Ark. But though Heirs of God and joint Heirs with
Christ, and neither Men or Devils can pluck you out of your Heavenly Fathers
Hands, yet you must be tossed about with manifold Temptations; but lift up your
Heads, the Day of your perfect complete Redemption draws nigh. -- Behold the
Bridegroom comes to take you to himself, the Door shall be shut and you shall
be forever with the Lord.

But I even tremble to tell you, O nominal Christians that the Door will be
shut, I mean the Door of Mercy, never never to be opened to give you Admission,
though you should continue knocking to all Eternity. For thus speaks our Lord v.
11. Afterward, i. e. after those that were ready had went in, and the Door was
shut. After they had to their Sorrow ^ound that no Oil was to be bought, no
Grace be procured, came also the other Virgins and, as Esau after Jacob had got
the Blessing, cried with an exceeding bitter Cry, bless me, even me also Oh my
Father; so they come saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us. -- Observe the
Importunity of these Foolish Virgins employed in these Words Lord, Lord, --
Whilst in the Body, I suppose they only read; but did not pray over their
Prayers: If you would tell them they should pray without ceasing, they should
pray from their Hearts, and feel the want of what they prayed for, they would
answer they could not tell what you meant by inward Feelings, that God did not
require us to be always on our Knees, but if a Man did justly, and loved Mercy,
and did as the Church Forms required him it was as much as the Lord required at
his Hands.

I fear Sirs, too many amongst us, are of this Mind. Nay I fear there are many
so polite, so void of the Love of God, as to think it too great a Piece of
self-denial to rise early to offer up a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. -- If any such by the good Providence of
God are brought hither this Morning, I beseech you consider your Ways and
remember if you are not awakened out of your Spiritual Lethargy, and live a
Life of Prayer here, you shall in vain cry out with the Foolish Virgins Lord,
Lord, open unto us hereafter. -- Observe Further, the Impudence, as well as
importunity of these other Virgins Lord, Lord, say they -- as though they were
intimately acquainted with the Holy Jesus, like Numbers amongst us, who because
they go to Church, repeat their Creeds, receive the blessed Sacrament, think
they have a Right to call Jesus their Savior, and dare call God their Father
when they puts up the Lords Prayer. -- But Jesus is not your Savior. -- The
Devil not God is your Father, unless your Hearts are purified by Faith, and you
are born again from above. -- It Is not merely being baptized by Water, but
being born again of the Holy Ghost that must qualify you for Salvation; and it
will do you no Service at the great Day to say unto Christ, Lord my Name is in
the Register of such and such a Parish. -- I am persuaded the Foolish Virgins
could say this and more, but what Answer did Jesus make? He answered and said
v. 12. Verily, I say unto you, He puts the Word VERILY to assure them he was in
earnest -- I say unto you -- I am Truth it self -- I whom you have owned in
Words, but in Works denied, VERILY I say unto you I know you not. These Words
must not be understood literrally: For what ever Arians and Socinians may say
to the contrary, yet we affirm that Jesus Christ is God, God blessed for ever,
and therefore knows all Things. -- He saw Nathaniel when under the Fig Trees
-- He sees and is now looking down from Heaven his Dwelling Place upon us to
see how we behave in these Fields. -- Brethren I know nothing of the Thoughts
and Intents of your Hearts, in coming hither; but Jesus Christ he knows who
come like new born Babes desirous to be fed with the sincere Milk of the Word.
And he knows who come to hear what the Babbler says, and to run away with Part
of a broken Sentence that they may hereof accuse him -- This Expression then I
know you not, must not be understood literrally, No, it implys a knowledge of
Approbation as though Christ had said you call me Lord, Lord, but you have not
done the Things that I have said. -- You desire me to open the Door, but how
can you come in hither not having on a wedding Garment? Alas you are naked as
you came into the World, where is my outward Righteousness imputed to you?
Where is my inherent Righteousness wrought in you? Where is my Divine Image
stamped upon your Souls? How dare you call me Lord, Lord, when you have not
received the Holy Ghost, whereby I seal all that are truly mine. Verily I know
you not, depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels.

And now he that has Ears to hear, let him hear what manner of Persons these
were whom Jesus Christ dismissed with this Answer. -- Remember I entreat you,
remember they are not sent away for being Fornicators, Swearers, Sabbath
breakers, or Prodigals. No, In all probability as I observed before, they were,
touching the outward Observances of the Moral Law, blameless -- They were
constant as to the Form of Religion; and if they did no good, yet no one could
say they did any One any harm. -- The only Thing for which they were condemned
and eternally banished from the Presence of the Lord (for so much is employed in
that Sentence I know you not) was this, they had no Oil in their Lamps -- No
Principle of a true living Faith, and Holiness in their Hearts. -- And good
God! If Persons may go to Church, receive the Sacrament, lead honest moral
Lives, and yet be sent to Hell at the last Day, as they certainly will be if
they advance no further; where will thou O Drunkard? Where will thou O Swearer?
Where will thou O Sabbath breaker? Where will thou that deniest Divine
Revelation, and even the Form of Godliness, where will thou and such like
Sinners appear? I know very well where. -- You must appear before the dreadful
Tribunal of Jesus Christ. -- For however you may like Felix put off the
Prosecution of your Convictions, yet you as well as others must arise after
Death and appear in Judgment. -- You will then find to your eternal Sorrow what
I just hinted at in the beginning of this Discourse, viz. that your Damnation
slumbereth not, Sin has blinded your Hearts, and hardened your Foreheads now;
but yet a little while and our Lord will ease him of his Adversaries. --
Methinks already by Faith I see the Heavens opened, and the Holy Jesus coming
with his Face brighter than Ten-thousand Suns, darting Fury upon you from his
Eyes -- Methinks I see you rising from your Graves trembling and astonished,
and crying out who can abide this Day of his coming.

And now what Inference shall I draw from what has been delivered? Our Lord in
the Words of the Text has drawn one for me, watch therefore for ye know neither
the Day nor the Hour wherein the Son of Man comes.

Watch, that is, be upon your Guard and keep your Graces in continual
exercises: For as when we are commanded to watch unto Prayer, it signifies that
we should continue instant in that Duty, so when we are required to watch, in
general it means that we should put on the whole Armor of God and live every
Day as though it was our last. And Oh that the Lord may now enable me to lift up
my Voice like a Trumpet! For had I a Thousand Tongues, or could I speak so loud
that the whole World might hear me, I could not sound a more useful Alarm, than
that which is contained in the Words of the Text, watch therefore, my Brethren,
I beseech you by the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus, Watch, be upon your Guard,
Awake ye that sleep in the Dust: For ye know neither the Day nor the Hour
wherein the Son of Man comes, perhaps to Day, perhaps this Midnight, the CRY
may be made: For in a Moment, in a twikling of an Eye, the Trump is to Sound.
-- However supposing the Final Day of Judgment may yet be a great Way off, yet
the Day of Death is certainly near at Hand: For what is our Life? It is but a
Vapor, it is but a Span long, so soon passes it away and we are gone, blessed
be God we are all here well. -- But who out of this great Multitude dares say,
I shall go home to my House in safety? Who knows but whilst I am speaking, God
may commission his ministering Spirits, immediately to call some of you away by
a sudden Stroke to give an Account with what Attention you have heard this
Sermon, you know my Brethren some such Instances we have lately had given us.
-- And what Angel or Spirit has assured us that some of you shall not be the
next? Watch therefore for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour wherein the Son
of Man will come. -- And it is chiefly for this Reason, that God has hid the
Day of our Deaths from us? For since I know not but I may die to morrow, why O
my Soul may each of us say, will thou not watch to Day? Since I know not but I
may die the next Moment, why will thou not prepare for dying this? -- Many such
Reflections as these, my Brethren crowd in upon my Mind. At present blessed be
the Lord who delights to magnify his Strength in a poor Worms weakness. I am at
a stand, not so much about what shall I say, as what I shall leave unsaid. My
Belly, like Elihu's, is as it were full of new Wines, -- out of the abundance
of my Heart my Mouth speaks. The (...) so great a Multitude standing before
me, a Sense of the Infinite Majesty of that God in whose Name I preach and
before whom I as well as you must appear to give an Account of, and the
uncertainty there is whether I shall live another Day to speak to you any more
-- These Considerations I say, especially the Presence of God which I now feel
upon my Soul furnishes me with so much Matter, that I scarce know where to
begin or where to end my Application. -- However for Methods sake, by the the
Divine Assistance, I will branch it in two several Particulars.

And first, I would remind you that are notoriously Ungodly in the Language of
what our Lord says in the Text: For though I have said that your Damnation
slumbereth not whilst you continue in an Impenitent State. Yet that was only to
set you upon your watch to convince you of your Danger, and excite you to cry
out, what shall we do to be saved? I appeal to all that hear me, whether I have
said the Door of Mercy should be shut against you if you believe on Jesus
Crhist. No, If you are the chief of Sinners, if you are Murderers of Fathers,
Murderers of Mothers, if you are emphatically the Dung and Offscouring of all
Things -- yet if you believe on Jesus Christ and cry unto him with the same
Faith as the expiring Thief, Lord remember me now thou art in thy Kingdom. I
will pawn my eternal Salvation upon it, if he does not shortly translate you to
his Heavenly Paradise, wonder not at my speaking with so much assurance: For I
know this is a Faithful and true Saying, and worthy all Acceptance that Jesus
Christ came into the World to save all truly convicted and Believing Sinners:
Nay so great is his Love that I am persuaded was it necessary he would come
again into the World and die a second Time for them on the Cross. -- But
blessed be God -- when our Lord bowed down his Head, and gave up the Ghost, our
Redemotions was finished, it is not our Sins but our want of a lively Faith in
his Blood that will prove our Condemnation: If you draw near to him by Faith,
though ye are the worst of Sinners, yet he will not say unto you, Verily I know
you not, -- No, a Door of Mercy shall be opened to you -- look then, look then
by an Eye of Faith to that Godman whom you have pierced. -- Behold him
ble^^ing, panting, dying upon the Cross, with Arms s^^^thed out ready to
embrace you all, hark how he groans, see how all Nature is in an Agony: The
Rocks rend, the Graves open, the Sun withdraws its Light, ashamed as it were to
see the God of Nature Suffer, and all this to usher in Man's great Redemtion.
-- Nay the Holy Jesus in the very Agonies and Pangs of Death, prays for his
very Murderers: Father forgive them for they know not what they do. -- What
then if you have crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open Shame,
yet do not despair, only believe and even this shall be forgiven. You have
read, at least you have heard no doubt how Three-thousand were converted at St.
Peter's preaching one single Sermon, after our Lords Ascension into Heaven; and
many of the Crucifiers of the Lord of Glory und^^^^edly were amongst them, and
why should you despair? For Jesus Christ is the same Yesterday to Day and
forever: The Holy Ghost shall be sent down on you as well as on them, if you do
but believe: For Christ ascended upon High to receive this Gift even for the
vilest of Men. -- Come then All ye that are weary and heavy laden, with a Sense
of your Sins, lay hold on Christ by Faith, and he will give you Rest. -- For
Salvation is the free Gift of God to all them that believe, and though you may
think this too good News to be true, yet I speak the Truth in Christ I lie not,
this is the Gospel, this is the glad Tidings which we are Commissioned to
preach to every Creature, be not Faithless then; but believing, let not the
Devil lead you Captive at his will any longer: For all the Wages he gives his
Servants is Death, Death often in this Life, Death everlasting in the next: But
now the free Gift of God is eternal Life to all that believe in Jesus Christ --
Pharisces are and will be offended at my coming here and offering you Salvation
on such cheap Terms -- but the more they bid me hold my Peace the more will I
cry out and proclaim to convicted Sinners, Jesus David's Son according to the
Flesh, but David's Lord as he was God, will have Mercy upon all that by a
living Faith truly turn to him. -- If this is to be vile, I pray God I may be
more vile. -- If they will not let me preach Christ crucified, and offer
Salvation to poor Sinners in a Church, I will preach him in the Lanes, Streets,
Highways and Hedges; and nothing pleases me better than to think, I am now in
one of the Devils strongest Holds -- Surely the Lord has not sent me and all
you hither for nothing. No, blessed be God, the Fields are white ready unto
Harvest, and many Souls I hope will be gathered into his Heavenly Garner --
It Is true it is the Midnigh^ (...) the Church especially the poor Church of
England; but God has lately sent forth his Servants to CRY, Behold the
Bridegroom comes. I beseech you O Sinners hearken unto the Voice, let me
espouse you by Faith to my dear Master, and hence forward watch and pray that
you may be ready to go forth to meet him.

Secondly, I would apply my self to those amongst you that are not openly
profane, but by depending on a Formal round of Duties, deceive your own Souls,
and are only Foolish Virgins. -- But I must speak to your Conviction rather
than your Comfort -- My dear Brethren, do not deceive your own Souls -- You
have heard how far the foolish Virgins went and yet were answered with a verily
I know you not: The Reason is because none but such that have a living Faith in
Jesus Christ, and are truly born again, can possibly enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: You may perhaps live honest, and Outwardly moral Lives, but if you
depend on that Morality, or join your Works with your Faith, in order to
justify you before God, you have no Lot or Share in Christ's Redemption: For
what is this but to deny the Lord that has bought you? What is this but making
yourselves your own Saviors -- taking the Crown from Jesus Christ and putting
it on your own Heads: The Crime of the Devil some have supposed consisted in
this, that he would not bow to Jesus Christ when he came into the World as
Mediator and the Father commanded all the Angels to worship him, and what do
you less? You will not own and submit to his Righteousness, and though you
pretend to worship him with your Lips, yet your Hearts are far from him,
besides you in Effect deny the Operations of his blessed Spirit, you mistake
common for effectual Grace, you hope to be saved because you have good desires
and a few short convictions; and wha^ is this, but to give God, his Word and
all his Saints the Lie? A Jew, a Turk, has equally as good Grounds whereon to
build his Hopes of Salvation. Need I not then need to cry out to you: Ye
Foolish Virgins watch, beg of God to convince you of your self Righteousness,
and the secret Unbelief of your Hearts or otherwise whenever -- The Cry shall
be made, Behold the Bridegroom comes. You will find yourselves utterly
unprepared to go forth to meet him -- You may cry Lord, Lord; but the Answer
will be, Verily I know you not. -- Thirdly I would speak a Word or two by Way
of Exhortation to those who are Wise Virgins, and are assured that they have on
a Wedding Garment. That there are many such amongst you, who by Grace have
renounced your own Righteousness, and know that the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus is imputed to them. I make no doubt God has his secret Ones in the worst
of Times, and I am persuaded he has not let so loud ^ Gospel Cry to be made
amongst his People as of ^ate has been heard for nothing. No, I am confi^ent
the Holy Ghost has been given to it of Faith and ^as powerfully fallen upon
many whilst they have been ^earing the Word: You are now then no longer foolish
but wise Virgins, notwithstanding, I beseech you also suffer the Word of
Exhortation: For wise Virgins are too apt, Whilst the Bridegroom tarries, to
slumber and sleep. Watch therefore, my dear Brethren, watch and pray at this
Time especially, for perhaps a Time of suffering is at hand. -- The Ark of the
Lord begins already to be driven into the Wilderness. -- Be ye therefore upon
your Watch, and still persevere in following your Lord even without the Camp
bearing his Reproach: The Cry that has been lately made has awakened the Devil
and his Servants, they begin to rage horribly and well they may: For I hope
their Kingdom is in danger, watch therefore, my dear Brethren for if we are not
always upon our Guard, a Time of Trial may overtake us unawares, and instead of
owning like Peter, we may be tempted to deny our Master. Set Death and Eternity
often before you, look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of your Faith, and
consider how little a while it will be ere he comes to Judgment, and then our
Reproach shall be wiped away: The Accusers of us and our Brethren shall be cast
down, and we all shall be shut in Heaven for ever with our dear Lord Jesus.

Lastly, what I say unto you I say unto all, WATCH, High and Low, Rich and
Poor, Young and Old one with another, I beseech you by the Mercies of Jesus
whom I am now preaching, be upon your Guard, fly, fly, to Jesus Christ that
Heavenly Bridegroom; behold he desires to take you to himself, miserable, poor,
blind and naked as you are, yet he is willing to cloth you with his
everlasting Righteousness, and make you partakers of that Glory which he
enjoyed with the Father before the World began. Oh! do not turn a deaf Ear to
me, do not reject the Message on account of the meaness of the Messenger: I am
a Child, a Youth of uncircumcised Lips; but the Lord has chosen me that the
Glory might be all his own: Had he sent to invite you by a learned Rabbi, you
might have been tempted to think the Man had done something; but now God has
sent a Child that cannot speak, that the Excellency of the Power may be seen
not to be of Man but of God. Let the learned Pharisees then despise my Youth.
-- I care not how vile I appear in the sight of such Men, I glory in it. -- And
I am persuaded if any of you should be married to Christ by this preaching, you
will have no Reason to repent when you come to Heaven, that God sent a Child to
cry Behold the Bridegroom comes. Oh! my Brethren the ^hought of being
Instrumental in bringing one of you to Glory, fills me with fresh Zeal. My
Brethren once more I entreat you WATCH, WATCH, and pray for the Lord Jesus will
receive all that call upon him Faithfully, let that CRY, Behold the Bridegroom
comes, be continually sounding in your Ears; and begin now to live as though you
were assured this Night you were to go forth to meet him. I could say more, but
the other Business and Duties of the Day oblige me to stop. May the Lord give
you all an hearing Ear and Obedient Heart, and so closely unite you to himself
by one Spirit, that when he shall come in a terrible Majesty to judge Mankind,
you may be found having on a Wedding Garment, and ready to go in with him to
the Marriage.

Grant this O Lord, for thy dear Sons sake.
