A SCHEME FOR A Paper Currency, FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE PROVINCE.

TO THE Gentlemen and Inhabitants OF THE Massachusetts Bay in New England:
Especially to such as are Lovers and Encouragers of Justice and Ingenuity, and
Haters of Cruelty and Oppression.
Gentlemen,
I Humbly make bold to lay before you a small SCHEME; which I don't Doubt your
complying with: For as there is now an absolute Necesssity for coming into a
Paper Scheme for immediate Relief: And as the Merchants in London, that Trade
to these Parts, have long since made Interest, before the Lords of Trade, for
them to Desire his Majesty not to suffer any more Paper Money to be made by
Royal Authority. The Arguments laid before his Majesty appeared so reasonable
and just, that without superior Arguments can be laid before his Majesty, his
Royal Instructions will stand firm; and not any ways to be evaded by his
Majesty's Governors: Therefore as it may be mathematically proved, that a
Society can make better Money than the Government, it is mere Trifling for the
Gentlemen of the Assembly to draw Money Bills, when they absolutely know that
his Excellency has not Power to sign them. And the whole Body of the Gentlemen
of this most noble Province must lay by that grand Idol, Self and Self-Conceit;
and all Unite as one Man, and directly pursue just and reasonable Schemes; and
then all Murmurs and Complaints will cease, and universal Love appear in the
Face of each Man. And what more Noble and Grand than to be of a just God-like
Way of Thinking and Acting: and what more like the Devil than to be of a mean,
low, poor, grovelling, selfish Nature, so much despised and abhorred by the
almighty Being of Beings. As for my Part, I can with humble Modesty say, I am a
true Lover of Mankind, and heartily wish Prosperity to every individual Man now
living on the Earth. And as I promised the Public, two Years since, a Book on
Manufacturies, (having almost completed it) when completed I shall lay it
before the Public. And as the Public receives this small Hint of a Scheme, I
shall be able to Judge how my Book of Manufacturies will be received. Having
nothing more to add. I make bold, Gentlemen, to subscribe my self a true and
hearty Lover of New England.

Richard Fry.

A SCHEME FOR A Paper Currency.
READING in some of the Newspapers, the last sitting of the Honorable
Assembly of this Province, of a Petition signed by a great Number of the
Freeholders of this Town, was presented to the Court, for Relief under their
present difficult and distressing Circumstances, for want of a sufficient
Medium; whereby the Trade and Business of the Town is very much decayed,
Lawsuits increased, and Cash to purchase the Necessaries of Life hard to be
attained, even by many of good Estates among them. It must plainly appear, to a
Mathematical Demonstration, that nothing can help or relieve this Town out of
its present great Difficulties and bad Circumstances, but Frugality and
Industry, and pursuing just and reasonable Schemes. For any reasonable Man
living to think that the Printing a few Rheams of Paper, without the least
Shadow of Foundation, and calling it Money, will relieve them, they are vastly
mistaken, it will only lead them into a vast Labyrinth of Evils.

THE following Scheme will appear to a full Demonstration what vast Service it
will be to this Town.

IT must be allowed that a Number can perform more than a few, which is just
and r^asonable: For the Gentlemen in England, Holland and other Parts of the
Trading World, form themselves into SOCIETIES and COMPANIES for the carrying on
vast Designs in Trade and Commerce. The Dutch are the only People who have got
Money by their first Scheme: Their Maxims are thus, when they have a Mind to
bring any Manufactury into their Country, they always procure the best Workmen
from that Country where that Manufactury is carried on to the utmost
Perfection. Having procured Workmen, they perform to those Men their
Engagements and Contracts to the least Tittle: And those Workmen finding
themselves justly dealt withal, they directly bring that Manufactury to as
great Perfection as it is carried on in the Country they came from. And thus
from these wise Maxims, which the Dutch have followed, they have brought them
to that glorious Figure which they now make in the World.

NOW to my Scheme. There is the compleatest Place for the Erecting and Building
Twenty Mills on of any Place I ever saw in my Life; it is from the Warehouse of
JO^ LEWIS, Esquire. near the Fortification, across to his Warehouse on Dorchester
Point. I suppose, was it possible, that such a Place could be procured as near
Amsterdam as this is to Boston, the Dutch would give One hundred Thousand
Pounds Sterling for such a convenient Place.

OUR Mother Country will be much pleased with this Scheme, because not one Mill
will interfere with any of the Manufactur^s in Great Britain. I shall explain
the great Benefit and Advantage of sundry of these Mills* which by the Parity
of Reason will explain the test. It Is plain to a Demonstration, that those Corn
Mills which are erected on the Mill Pond, will in a few Years be of no Service.
The Reason is* Because the Pond fills so fast with Filth, that there will not
be sufficient Water to carry on the said Mills. And such a fine, beautiful
Tract of Land will be more fit to build Streets of Houses on* and ten Times the
Improvement than they are at present employed in. And these Corn Mills (to be
built on the aforementioned Place) may be built to the same Advantage as they
are now in England. The Corn Mills have been vastly improved in England within
these Twenty Years. And those Mills being built to the same Perfection they are
now built in England, they will grind more Flour by six lb. Weight out of a
Bushel of Wheat, and make better Flour, than any Mill now built in America.
(For all the Mills now built in America, are built in the old Form) So that the
Merchants of Boston may purchase Wheat from the Wheat Countries, and supply the
West Indies Cheaper than either New York or Philadelphia. For the Tenth of
these Fac^ I appeal to the Millers and Bakers of Boston. A Number of Saw-Mills
for the Ship Builders and Jo^ers, they will be able to demonstrate Leather
Mills, the Gentlemen Leather-Sellers will be able to inform. L^^ Oil Mills, the
Consumers of Oil will able to inform. There being vast Quantities of Iron B^g
Ore at the Eastward. Mills to run into P^ggs for Great Britain. (...) Mills for
grinding Tanners Bark, both for home Consumption and Ireland, se^eral Gentlemen
will be able to inform. A Number of Logwood Mills, a Number of Merchants will
be able to inform: And so by a Party of Reason all the rest of the Mills are
explained. The Place lies entirely on Water Carriage, and has a constant Supply
of Water all the Summer, which is the only Time to perform Business. It has
already been justly Surveyed, and a Plan taken. And was a Number of Gentlemen
to be incorporated by the General Assembly, they might bring this Scheme to
Perfection immediately, to the vast Service of this Town and Province in
general. I can with Modesty say, this is the best Scheme that ever was on the
Tapis since the Colony has been settled. It is not like the Uncertainty of the
Min^ Adventurers, but as soon as these Mills are built they will produce a
certain Profit, as sure as the Sun that moves. The Corn Mills at Bow near
London, with twelve Pair of Stones, are let at Nine hundred Pounds Sterling a
Year, and I will Mathematically prove, that twelve Pair of Stones built on the
abovementioned Place will produce as much Profit as the Mills at Bow. And such
a fine Situation for Mills cannot be better in any Place in the World. There
is now an absolute Necessity for coming into a just Scheme in order to have
Money pass for a Supply of our common Necessities, till such time as by our
Frugality and Dent of Industry we bring Silver and Gold to pass as a proper
Medium; which was the real Design of (...) Majesty's Royal Instruction not to
make any more Paper Bills, which is absolutely a common Cheat, let them be made
in any Form or Shape whatever, without a solid Foundation to support their
Value. Was a Number of Gentlemen to be incorporated, and the whole Bo^y liable
to be sued as one Man, their Notes of Hand would pass better th^n any Money to
be made by the Province, because the Profi^s a^ising by the Mills would be a
solid Foundation. I shall only mention one Company in London, that is the New
River Company, which pays them Twenty per Cent interest; then, would not the
Notes of such a Company pass equal with Bank Notes, or Gold or Silver. I will
Mathematically demonstrate to any Man living, that these Mills will produce
Twenty per Cent. then consequently their Notes must pass equal to Silver and
Gold. All Mechanics are now brought to be proved by mathematical
Demonstrations, so that it is impossible to err in building these Mills, for it
may be computed to a single Farthing what each Mill will cost. And these Mills
^ng built according to the Mathematics, then it may be easily demonstrated
what each Mill will produce yearly, so that the Company may proceed like wise
Master Builders. And when the above Mills are brought to Perfection, a vast
Number of great Schemes may be laid before the Company, which they will
naturally come into: For we have a common Proverb, Mathematical Demonstrations
can a^ Man (...). And it would certainly be for the interest of New England not
to make one Paper Bill m^re: The Reason is, The Notes of Head made by the
Company will answer the Ends and Purposes of purchasing all the Necessaries of
Life* and these Notes not being made a Tender in Law, it would absolutely
oblige the Merchants to bring Gold and Silver to answer (...) Specialties, or
else it would be impossible for them to carry on Trade and Merchandi^e. For so
long as the Assembly continues to make Paper Bills the whole Public will
depend on them. Each Gentlemen will flatter himself he shall be able to procure
as many Bills as will answer all his Designs. But any Man that knows the just
State of the Province must allow that according to its present Situation it
requires a Million ready Specie to carry on the Trade of the Province: It is
therefore a mere jest to make a few Paper Bills, ^king that will answer the
End, it will only embarrass and entirely Ruin hundreds of Families, and bring
on Lawsuits almost numberless. It must be allow^d that a Merchant managed his
Affairs with Prudence and Caution, when he has brought his Trading to such a
Point that his Profits may be large, and his Loss not considerable. But should
a Man of Traffic put Twenty thousand Pounds on board a leaky Vessel, and send
it to the Spanish West Indies, through as many Dangers as there are Shelves in
the Sea, or Points in the Compass, with the bare Hopes of gaining Six Peace,
would not all Mankind post up such a Merchant for a mad Man: I leave the
Application.

THIS Body Politic may be justly compared to a Merchant beginning the World
with One hundred Thousand Pounds, and directly advances to a Trade that
requires One Million ready Specie. Notwithstanding the Merchant has an
exceeding good Character in all Parts of the trading World, and his Credit
supported a vast many Years with a fair Show, yet in the End it will be the
entire Ruin, not only of himself, but of vast Numbers of other Men. The Reason
is, it is plain that for want of a sufficient Sum to carry on his Trade, he is
often obliged to part with his Goods for less than Prime Cost, besides making
use of Userers and griping Extortioners, which will always Prey on him like so
many Vultures or Horseleach's: And the poor honest Gentleman, so far from
growing Rich for the Reward of his great Pains and Industry, not only sinks his
own private Patrimony of One hundred thousand Pounds, but a great many Hundreds
besides. His Character is entirely ruined in all Parts of the Trading World,
and his End may be in Ruin and Want And his Substance, with other honest
Gentlemen's, who consigned to him, got into the Hands of base unworthy Knaves,
who have watched all Opportunities to take Advantage of the poor Gentleman's
Necessity.

HIS Excellency JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire* our Governor, has twice recommended to
the General Assembly the employing a Number of Men to take an exact Survey of
this Province, and the Extent of its Bounds. For this Province is hardly known
by our Mother Country. And I can with humble Modesty observe, that the State of
this Province was never yet fairly stated.

OUR Mother Country never was so full of Men and Money ^ce the glorious House
of HANOVER came to reign over us. And was a just Plan to be taken of this
Province, and said before the Nobility. Gentry and substantial Farmers in
England, the young Branches will bring their Fortunes into New England and
purcha^e Lands. For it may be Mathematically demonstrated, for a Gentleman to
bring to New England Five thousand Pounds Sterling, and ^ay it out in Lands, it
would in twenty Year time be worth Th^ty thousand Pounds Sterling, if they are
improved after the same Manner they are in England. For the Lands there are
prodigiously improved within these Twenty Years past: For a vast Quantity of
Land was then Let for Eighteen Pence per Acre, which are now Let for Twenty
Shillings per Acre. And I will demonstrate to any Man living, that the Lands in
New England are as good as they are in Old.

AS I am obliged to go to England with all my Law Suits, for want of a Court of
Equity in the Country: And being forced to stay some Time there before: can
(...) my Affairs to a final (...). I will employ my Time to ^y down before our
Nobility, Gentry and Farmers THE GLORIOUS STATE OF THIS PROVINCE, and what
noble ^mprovements they may make for their young Branches. Their Fortune at
(...) make but an indifferent Figure there, but if laid out in New England will
with industrious improvement (...) as the Original they sprang (...). And it is
(...) in the least to be doubted but his Royal Majesty and Par^^amen^ w^ll
en^ourage such a noble Undertaking, ^o much for the Good of (...) M^ther
Country (...) Trade and Commerce.

OUR young Nobility, Gentry and Farmers coming now to New England is not like
the Gentlemen* first Settling the howling Wilderness, at vast Expen^e, and the
almost insupportable Difficulties. But those worthy good Gentlem^n have fairly
paved the Way. That as soon as our Gentry shall arrive at Boston, they will
find no difference, e^ther in Provision or poli^e Conversation ((...) tho^ the
least Disparagement to any Part of Great Britain) for the^r Money may (...)
improved (...) per C^nt more than they can be in Great Britain, (...) improved
e^ther (...) Lands or Manufacture. And I suppose f^rther. W^ not the Gentlemen
of the Province to come into my S^heme of the M^^, I will lay all my S^heme
mathematically before several of our Companies in London, and they will a^
^ertainly come into the said Scheme, as sure as the Sun that moves. For they
are all so full of Money, that show them mathematical Demonstrations, and they
will venture their Substance to the End^ of the Earth, so I can with humble
Modesty say, provided Almighty GOD spare my Life to bring my Pro^ect^on^ to
Perfection, to the infinite Advantage of our Mother Country, and to the great
Benefit of New England. For I may justly observe, this most noble Province of
the Massachusetts Bay is superior to any Province in his Majesty's Dominions in
America, both for Health and to be improved. And I further observe, these young
Branches of our Nob^lity, Gentry and substantial Farmer^ bringing large
Substance, would be able to proc^re all Sorts of Naval Stores for
Great Britain, and entirely prevent the B^^ Trade. And there is no Merchant but
what knows that immense Trade, so much taken Care of by the Northern Princes,
particularly the Czar of M^^y, after he came home from his Travels, (having
taken a Tour through France, England and Holland) observing what mighty Riches
they acquired by Trade and Merchand^^e and forming a just idea of these
Countries, that they could ra^e but small Quantities o^ Naval Stores, and
having large Dominions, he immediately gave Orders to all his Subjects to raise
prodigious Quantities of Naval Stores, and he being an abs^lute Prince it was
immediately complied with: Which was the first Scheme he had to bring forward
those mighty Schemes which he afterward completed And all Mankind are
Witnesses, from those ^^st Schemes formed by him, to what a mighty Figure they
make, and at present appear in the World The Empire of (...) is no ways to be
compared with his Majesty's Dominions in (...) And was his Majesty's Colonies
to be (...) improved by proper Encouragement^ from our Mother Country, it would
make our King one of the greatest Monarch^ on Earth* For it must be Men of
large Fortunes to proceed on that Scheme of (...) Naval Stores, and not
Beggars. For it is plain that the People at the (...) can but just support
Nature, by cutting Timber and Cord Wood, so it is plain in a Demonstration what
Quantities of Naval Stores we may expect from those People*

FROM the whole, I m^st humbly conceive it would be the great interest of this
most native Province, for the Great and General Court to post an Act to
encourage our young Nobility, Gentry and Farmers to come and settle amongst us,
setting forth the Goodness of the Land, and the vast Improvements they may make
of their Money, and to grant them what Lands they want to improve. Suppose but
one single Hundred of our young Nobility and Gentry was to come with Five
thousand Pounds Sterling in each Gentleman's Pocket, the Moment they arrive in
Boston, the whole Land will be worth double the Value by their coming, this can
b^ mathematically demonstrated: But I don't doubt but Thousands of our worthy
honest Gentlemen's Sons will come and settle to the utmost ^ounds of this most
noble Province: And then if a French War happen, King GEORGE and Canada
forever; then his glorious Majesty King GEORGE will have a complete Empire.

And I verily think that the Opinion of the ingenious Dr. Mather will certainly
come to pass: For the Doctor in his Letter ^o one Anthony William ^leme, late
Chaplain to his Royal Highness GEORGE when Prince of Denmark: The Contents of
which Letter was this, That Dr. Mather had remitted so much Money by Bills of
Exchange (collected from private Gentlemen in New England) for the Propagation
of the GOSPEL in Malla^e^ in the East Indies: The Money was to be sent to
Professor Fr^n^^s at Hall in Saxony. After Dr. Mather had given a beautiful
Description of Church Affairs, he concludes his Letter with political Affairs,
and gives a fine Account of this Part of the World, and heartily lamenting the
Misfortune of the Ca^d^ Expedition, (but wholly lays the ^lame on the
Old-England Men) for he declares, That no Men on the Earth could proceed with
more Courage and Resolution than the New England Men: But the Dr concludes with
this noble Saying* That I really and verily think, that in less than fifty
Years, the glorious House of HANOVER will be Emperors of all America, and then
it will the greatest Empire in the whole World. Now to any ^king Man, the
Doctor's Thoughts will certainly come to pass* For we see what a glorious
Settlement is carrying on at Georgia, and how the English Nation are spirited
to support that Province. And it is not in the least to be doubted but by
proper Application to his Royal Majesty and Parliament, they would come into
any Measures to make the Frontiers of this Province a strong Barrier against
Canada; and then if the French and Spaniards dare to go to War with
Great Britain, so certain we shall take Canada and the Spanish West Indies
which will put a final End to all the Villainies committed on us by the
Spaniards, and there is no true Englishmen but hopes and wishes to see that Day.

The worthy ingenious Capt. Plais^ed informed me he had received a Letter from
Mr. S^^s Hooper, Merchant in London, dated October 8, 1738* wherein he informs
him* That the Pot-Ash remitted from New England to him, was allowed to be as
good as that Pot-Ash which comes from Russia. It appeared by our Book of (...),
there was upwards of Two Thousand Tuns imported from the Northern Kingdom in
one Year: And Pot-Ash being worth Thirty Pounds per Ton, (the said 100 Tons at
30 l per Ton, amounts to Sixty Thousand Pounds) And as the Pot-Ash pays to his
Majesty Six Pounds per Ton Duty; I do not doubt in the least for the
^ncouragement of this Manufactury in these Parts, by properly applying to the
Parliament for the Drawback to be taken off, it would be done, and a Royal
Bounty granted: And the Gentlemen of this Province coming to a just Way of
thinking, they might flow in Riches as they please. And these Gentlemen or
Society that are concerned in the aforementioned Mills, might directly bring
this Scheme of the Pot-Ash to Perfection; and what glorious Farms would be
produced from this Scheme of Pot-Ash?

I had almost forgot to mention one more great Benefit to this great Town of
Boston in the building these Mills, which all Mankind must allow to be just;
that is thus, Suppose it should happen a War, by having such a fine
Communication with the Castle, we might soon supply that Fortress with Ten
Thousand brave Fellows that would face any Enemy on the whole Earth. And by
this Scheme the great Town of Boston may be made impregnable. We may see to
what a glorious Spirit the English Nation are arrived to, in improving every
Thing that is possible to be done for the Good of the Public; witness the
advancing 700,000 l. toward building a Bridge from Westminster across to
Lambeth; and there is no Gentlemen, that are thinking Men, but knows the
Profits arising by Tole of the said Bridge will not bring in more than Two per
Cent Interest; but they all know it is for the Good of their Country, therefore
they see it necessary it should be done notwithstanding the Insufficiency of
the Premium for such a vast Undertaking. Therefore as the aforementioned Mills
can be mathematically proved, to produce Twenty per Cent. it will be looked
upon in England, if it is not done, that the Gentlemen of this Country do not
consult their own Interest and the general Good the whole Country will reap
therefrom. And for any Person or Persons to send Home any dismal Complaint of
the State of the Province, it will be looked upon as only noisy Faction and
Clamor.

I have been always suprized to think what vast Improvements have been
performed by the Gentlemen of this Province in one Century. But now, provided
our young Nobility, Gentry and Farmers come over, with their Pockets full of
Money, what vast Improvements may be expected in the next Century.

I don't in the least doubt but these fifteen Colonies will arrive to as great
a Pitch of Glory as those fifteen Provinces of China. And as Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE
observes, it must be allowed to be the greatest, richest and most populous
Kingdom now known in the World; and will be found perhaps to owe its Riches,
Force, Civility and Felicity to the admirable Constitution of its Government,
more than any other. The Empire consists of fifteen several Kingdoms, which are
governed by Viceroys, who yet live in Greatness, Splendour and Riches, equal to
great and sovereign Kings. In the whole Kingdom there are 145 Capital Cities,
of mighty Extent and magnificent Buildings; and 1321 lesser Cities, but all
walled round; the Number of Villages is infinite: And no Country in the known
World is so full of Inhabitants, nor so improved by Agriculture and
Manufacturies, by infinite Growth of numerous Commodies, by Canals of
incredible Length, Conjunction of Rivers, by Convenience of Ways for the
Transportation of all Sorts of Goods from one Province to another; so as no
Country has so great a Trade.

THERE is a vulgar Error, to the vast Damage of this Province, that the
New England Oak is far inferior to the Oak in Old England; and the Error has
^o long prevailed that it is now really allowed by all Sorts of People to be
Fact: And the only Reason I find to Support this Opinion is, that the Ships
built in New England will not last so long as those built in Old: I grant what
they say. Those Ships that have been hitherto built, are not so good as those
built in England. The Reason is plain to a Demonstration why they are not so
good* The People that procure the Timber cut it down in Season and out of
Season, for they are obliged to cut it as fast as they cut it. The Ship
Builders are poor, and the Merchants will always keep them so, according to the
present Scheme they act by* so that it cannot be expected, from the solid
Reason of things, these People can build with regular seasoned Stu^ I can with
Modesty say, I understand the just and true Nature and Goodness of Oak, as well
as any Man living. And I am fully determined to prove, before the Commissioners
of his Majesty's Royal Navy, that there is as good Oak in America as any in Old
England. And that it would save his Majesty some hundred thousand Pounds
Sterling, by building Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Rate Men of War in New England.
I am certain of destroying this vulgar Error concerning the Oak, and with as
much Pleasure as Daniel destroyed Bell and the Dragon. For the English Nation
are arrived to a fine Method in polite Reason and Thinking. For in the present
Age, no Man that has or really pretends to have the least Shadow or Foundation
of common Reason, will by any Means be Hoodwinked, but show him mathematical
Demonstration and he will come into your Scheme directly, so that any Man that
Grounds his Hypothesis on solid Truth will certainly gain his Scheme.

I humbly make bold to make use of an Observation of a worthy, learned
Gentleman, who is looked upon by all Men in the Province to be a Gentleman of
solid Knowledge and Learning, he lately wrote an Essay concerning Silver and
Paper Currencies; and it is allowed to be comple^^ly done: He observes thus on
a private Bank. Private Credit, or Notes on a good solid Foundation, are better
than public Bills; the former cannot imp^e or break their Faith, (they are a
C^^) the Public is the Der^er Resort, and in bad Administrations frequently
break their public Faith. Hence the Credit of a well regulated Commerce or
Corporation, is better than that of the Civil Administration. The Bank Money at
Venice is ^0 per Cent. better than common Currency. This private commercial
Credit in all po^e Nation is ^o ^aved at present that the Civil Government
stands corrected by it. The Generallity of the United Province did A^ 169^* C^
alloy'd ^ieces, called Q^ Sele^, at 6 S^vers each, being near to per Cent above
their (...) Value. The Bank re^ their ^gnity, and it again ro^e to 13 and 15
per Cent. (...) the Government to reduce these Schellings to 5 and half S^^ers,
their intrinsic Value, and have continued so ever since* And the Age of the
Bank sell to 3 or 5 per Cent. as formerly Anno 1720, France being in the most
d^^mal Confusion by their Paper Currency, their Court was obliged to apply to
the Merchants and Bankers for their Advice, concerning a Method to be used to
find out the natural Proportion between public Bills and Silver Species, and
to Limit their proper Effects to a certain Sum; a plain ^llustration that
private is better than public Credit. We have among our selves our Merchants
Notes, ^o called, being well sounded, were 1^ and half per Cent. to December
1737, will be 18 per C^nt. in December 1738; 1^ and half per Cent. 3 7ths of
them then paid off, in December 1739; 19 and half per Cent in December 17^0; 36
and half per Cent. in December 1741; and 3^ per Cent. in December 17^2, lower
than the present Value of our Province Bills at 27 per Cent. because they are
continually growing better until they come to their fixed Value, at which they
are to be paid off. That it will be with these Notes made by the Company for
the Building these Mills.

THE worthy Gentleman very justly observes f^rther, When Paper Money is in a
continued Course of depreciating, all Debts and other Contracts, are paid in
less Value than they are contracted for: which is an unjust, but natural
Operation of this false Medium. The generous foreign Adventurer or Merchant,
and consequently Trade in its genuine Sense, is ^urt; the Shopkeeper and
Merchant H^cksters, who have a long Credit from their Merchants and abuse this
Credit Industry and Frugality, the only Means of growing rich, and turned
aside, in the Place of being industrious, the young Men, called Gentlemen,
follow no other Business but Drinking and Gaming; many in Quality of
Shopkeepers become Dro^* Tradesmen, of all Occupations in Boston, loiter away
much of their Time; the Husbandmen, in the Country, spend many idle Days in
their (...) from Taverns. Frugality is superceeded by Prodigality and
Extravagancy, (...) too apparent in fine Houses and Furniture, Cha^^ and other
Equipages, Velvets, Scarlets, rich S^^s and Laces* Thus for such that learned
and ingenious Gentlemen, the Author of the Silver and Paper Scheme.

FROM the whole of the Scheme I observe, and will make it appear to any
Gentleman or Body of Gentlemen, that th^se Mills aforementioned, will produce
Twenty thousand Pounds (...) Profit each Year. But this Scheme is a small (...)
one to what I have by me. And as I have drawn all my Schemes to be proved by
the Mathematics, and all Mankind perfectly know^ that Figures will not lie,
(...) rightly placed. And I don't doubt having the Approbation of all solid,
wise judicious and thinking Men in all Nations of the trading World. For there
is no Part on the whole Earth^ where Money is to be got and improved, more than
what is to be g^t in his Majesty's Provinces in America. I shall endeavor, to
the utmost of my Power, to forward the Establishment of a Bank, on such a
Footing as to bring the wise Men in all the trading Nations to be concerned in
it And I do not in the least doubt of having the Royal Majesty's Approbation,
and that great and de^^er Resort, our great and a^^t Parliament of Great
Britain, which Assembly is now the Glory of the whole Earth.

WE may see what a noble Harmony there is between the Parliament and our most
gracious KING, by the bottom Clause of his Majesty's Speech, which he
recommends (...).

MY Lords and Gentlemen,
I cannot but carefully recommend it to you, not to suffer any Prejudices or
Animosities to have any Share in your Declarations of this important Co^ture,
which forms in a particular Manner to call upon you to (...) in carrying on
such Measures as will be most (...) to the true interest and Message of My
People.

THE most noble LORDS Answer to his Majesty is full of Duty.

We are deeply sensible how unbecoming and pernicious it would be at any Time,
to suffer either Prejudices or Animosities to mix themselves with parliamentary
Deliberations: And your MAJESTY's gracious Recommendation to us particularly to
avoid them at this importunate Conjuncture, cannot fail to awaken in us a more
than ordinary Caution on that Head. Great Britain has but one common Interest
consisting in the Security of your MAJESTY's Person and Government, and the
Welfare and Happiness of your People. And when your MAJESTY is pleased to
exhort us to Unanimity, it is only calling upon us to unite to our own
Preservation. We therefore beseech your MAJESTY to accept the strongest and
most affectionate Assurances, that we will zealously and cheerfully concur in
all such Measures as shall be most condusive to those great and desirable Ends.


THUS answered our most noble LORDS, which is like Apples of Gold in Pictures
of Silver, and a glorious Pattern for all his Majesty's Subjects.

AND as Sir ROBERT LE ESTRANGE justly observes, Let Error, Corruption or
Iniquity be never so strong, never so popular, let the Ignorance of things
necessary to be known be never so dark and palpable, we may yet assure our
selves, That however Truth and Justice may suffer a temporary Eclipse, they
will yet at the long run as certainly vindicate themselves, and recover their
original Glory, as the setting Sun shall rise again.

P. S.

Cum sit alioqui multo deformius, amittere quam non assequi Laudem.

Plin. Ep. Lib. 8. I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant, Richard
Fry.
Boston Goal, going onward Two Years of my unjust Confinement. April 19. 1739.
POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE the finishing this Scheme, the worthy and ingenious Capt. CYPRIAN
SOUTHACK made me a Present of the New England Coasting Pil^t. And as I am
informed, the Motive that induced him to make me this Present, was his hearing
that I was drawing the present State of the Province; he was willing to forward
such an Undertaking as much as lay in his Power. As it is allowed by all
Mankind, that Ingratitude is as bad a^ the Sin of Witchcraft, therefore I think
it my Duty to return Capt. SOUTHACK my most hearty Thanks for the Present of
his New England Coasting Pilot, in this public Manner. And all the Gentlemen
of this most noble Province ought to know what a just Value our late mo^^
glorious King WILLIAM showed Capt. SOUTHACK, for this his noble Undertaking.
The following Order of his Royal Majesty will demonstrate it.

At the Court at Whitehall the 26th of February, 16^^. PRESENT, The King's most
Excellent Majesty in Council.
WHEREAS Capt. CYPRIAN SOUTHACK, who has been for several Years employed by the
Government of New England at Sea, and has performed diverse signal Services in
several Expeditions; having this Day ^ed the Honor to Kiss his Majesty's ^ed;
presented to his Majesty a Draught of New England, Newfoundland, No^-Scotia,
and the River of Canada, and the Seas and Territories increases adjoining, made
by himself in the said several Expeditions: His Majesty taking into his
gracious Consideration the said CYPRIAN SOUTHACK, and for his further
Encouragement, is pleased to Order as to hereby ordered the Sum of Fifty
Pounds, to be paid to him for the Buying a Gold Chain and Medal, as a Mark of
his Majesty's Royal Favor; and that the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury do give all necessary Direction for the speedy
Payment of the said Sum.

JOHN NICHOL^.

YOU plainly see what a just Sense of the Merits of this Gentleman his Royal
Majesty conceived. And I must humbly observe to the Gentlemen of this most
noble Province, that they could not express their just Value and Esteem for
(...) great Deliverer, our late most august and glorious King WILLIAM, than by
erecting to his Memory his Majesty's Statue on Horseback, erected on a
Pedestal, and placed before the Town House facing King Street: And there is not
one Man in the Province, that is a Lover of Liberty and Property, but what will
contribute toward such a noble Undertaking* The Gentlemen of Ireland have,
notwithstanding the (...) Monument in the City of Dublin, erected soon after,
and in Memory of his Majesty's glorious Act^, further to perpetuate the same,
erected another of glorious Structure in the great River of Beyn^, where the
chief Scene of their Deliverance was, by the Almighty (...) Majesty's Arms,
fully completed. From this glorious Example I hope the Gentlem^n of this most
noble Province will not be wanting to erect a Trophy of Ho^^ Memory of him they
have expressed so great a Value for by Words; but as for Wor^ we all know they
cost nothing As for the worthy and ingenious Capt* (...). I have not heard that
he has received any Grat^ty by way of ^^ty for his (...) Labor and Pains in
serving this most noble Province. Mankind nothing more imitates almighty God,
than by rewarding those that lay out their Powers and Faculties in serving
Mankind, This Coasting Pilot gives me a just Idea of the Coast of his Majesty's
Provinces from New York to the Bay of Funday. The very Islands are able to
contain Millions of People; which absolutely destroys that vile selfish
Principle of some People which say they are not for Strangers coming amongst
them, because they shall not have Land enough for their Children; which is
really a childish Story.

UPON moderate Computation the Gentlemen Farmers have borrowed on Bond and
Mortgages upwards of Five hundred thousand Pounds; of which the greatest Part
is let at 10 per Cent. And according to the present Situation of Affairs, it
is impossible for those Gentlemen to pay off their Securities: So that a
Gentleman that has Mortgaged his Form for 500 l. that is worth 2000, his Farm
on Prosecution is certainly forfeited for want of the 500 l. And its impossible
it should be otherwise whilst the griping Usurers Monopolizes into their own
Coffers, the Bulk of that small Quantity of running Specie that is now Extant
amongst us. And as the old saying is, The just Value of any Commodity whatever,
is what it will fetch. The only Remedy to avoid this great Evil, is for the
Assembly of this Province, as I observed before, to lay just Schemes, to
persuade and allure our young Nobility, Gentry and Farmers to come and settle
among us*, and it is not to be doubted, but these Gentlemen would purchase the
Farms of those Gentlemen that have involved themselves, and are now in a State
of Bondage; and they may put Money sufficient in their Pockets to proceed on
the Settlement of new Farms on the out Lands, with Resolution and Vigor. And
in a few Years, by common ^ndustry, they will have as good Farms as they at
first parted with, and an entire Freedom from the grand Oppression they then
labored under. And upon the Arrival of a Number of our young Nobility and
Farmers, with a Quantity of Money, it would make it a Year of Jubilee for all
those Gentlemen that now labor under the present grand Oppressions. For all
Gentlemen well knows what a vast Number of Farms must be put to Sale in few
Years* And no Purchasers can appear to buy of these Country People The Reason
is, because they will not have Money to pay for them. And further, I observe to
the Gentlemen Sh^pkeepers not to purchase large Quantities of English Goods,
for some time, till the Balance of Trade is brought to a more fix Standard,
for it may be mathematically proved, that as certain as any Man buys large
Quantities of Goods, so certain he will be ruined: For as some Gentlemen have
lately got Estates by the prodigious Rise of Goods, so certainly some Men will
be ruined by their great Fall* which will come to pass, as sure as the Sun that
moves.

I must observe, by way of Comfort, to the Gentlemen that labor at present
under great Oppressions, that we have a common saying. A desperate Disease must
have a desperate Cure; but if more pacifick Measures can be found out, it will
be vastly more pleasing to the Body Politic. For as Harmony and sincere Love
are the just Foundation of all Happiness both in this World and the World to
come, and (...) General Assembly are the proper Physicians, it is not in the
least doubted but they will make a sound Cure of this Body Politic, and lay a
solid Foundation of Happiness for the rising Generations. And what more noble
and grand than to lay great Designs for future Ages to copy after* which will
be lasting Monuments of Pra^e to our great Assembly.

To His EXCELLENCY JONATHAN BELCHER, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief
in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. To
the Honorable His Majesty's Council. And the Honorable House of
Representatives, in General Court assembled at Boston. The Petition of Richard
Fry of Boston.
Humbly Shows,
THE late great Piece of Justice done unto your most humble Petitioner, in
dismissing the High Sheriff of York's most unreasonable and unjust Petition,
imboldens me to lay before you the present great Hardships and Sufferings I
labor under: And knowing the Justice and Wisdom of this Great Assembly,
flatter me with great Hopes and Expectations of having my Desires and Requests
granted. I am now confined in his Majesty's Goal at the Suit of Mr. Samuel
W^ld^ of Boston, and Thomas Westbrook of Fulmouth, Esquire for Seventy Pounds
Sterling, obtained against me at the last Superior Court held at York. Your
most humble Petitioner in fact says, that for want of one Writing or
Instrument, under the Hand of Mr. Samuel Walde of Boston, which was taken away
from your Petitioner by Abraham Tyler, the Undersheriff for the County of
York, under Color of an Execution from Mr. Samuel Waldo of Boston, and has
taken and converted the said Writing or Instrument to his own Use, to the great
Damage of your Petitioner. Your most humble Petitioner further observes, it has
been always the Wisdom of this great Assembly to reward all those that have any
ways served this Province, with Rewards and Favors. Your Petitioner indented
with Mr. Samuel Waldo in the Year 1731 in London, to have built within ten
Months after my Arrival in New England, a Paper (...) Your Petitioner arrived
in New England in the Year 1731. and (...) four Years wholly at his own
Expense, till such Time at the said Mills were built. Yo^ (...)* willing to
promote the Good of this Country, drew a Plan for sundry Sorts of Mills to be
built, which was across Presumsc^ River in (...) which Scheme the (...) and We^
came into, and built the said Mills. And your Petitioner ^t for one Mr. John
C^llier from England, which (...) the Lea^ of the said Mills as (...) hundred
Pounds Ster^ng per Ann. for twenty one Year. Your Petitioner was to pay Sixty
four Pounds Sterling per Ann for twenty one Year, for the Paper Mill. And the
said Samuel Waldo and Thomas Westbrook con^ed before Capt. Gree^, Mr. George
Cr^^ck and Mr. Br^nden, Merchants of Boston, that they told and owned in the
Township of ^a^rth, Fifteen thousand Acres of Land, and that one Acre with
another was Three Pounds more in Value for the Improvement of these Mills. But
the said Waldo and Westbrook not con^ with their Improvement of Two hundred and
sixty four Pounds Sterling per Ann. and the va^ Improvement of their Land, they
covered the Improvement of all the Mill, and paid Mr. John Collier Six hundred
Pounds for his Lease, the said Collier ^nding what Sort of Men he had to deal
withal, sold them (...) said Lease. The said Waldo and Westbrook offered your
most humble Petitioner Five hundred Pounds for the (...) of my Lease, but I
would not comply with their most unreasonable and unjust Request: So they have
entered into a Combination with the Deputy-Sheriff of York, (...) Ty^r, under
Col^^r of an Execution has violently entered my Mills, and have converted all
my Substance to their own (...) and have committed my body to Boston Goal. Your
most humble Pe^oner in fact (...), he is not indebted one Farthing ^ther to
Samuel Waldo, Thomas Westbrook or Abraham Tyler, but the said Waldo, Westbrook
and Tyler have ^ded contrary to all Law, Justice, Reason or Equity now
subsisting in the Christian World. Your most humble Petitioner prays to have
Leave to bring his Writ of Review to be ^ried in the County of S^o^, (...) the
(...) Super^ Court to be held in August, against the said Samuel Waldo and
Thomas Westbrook* The Reason is, because I am confined in Boston Goal, and my
Witnesses are in Boston. Your Petitioner further prays, for his great
Improvements in this Province, and his leaving his own Native Country, and his
great Charges is coming over and waiting four Years at his own Expense. (And
there is no Member of the Honorable House but must know the keeping a Family
in a pretty (...), Manner, four Years, must amount to a large Sum) Your humble
Petitioner prays to have a Tract of the Waste Land^ granted him, belonging to
this Province, which in (...) may be serviceable to his New England born Son,
James (...)* Which (...) GOD in his good Providence has given to your Pe^tio^
in th^se his great Troubles and A^. Your most humble Petitioner (...) all his
Desires and Requests to the great Wisdom and Order of this great and (...)
Assembly.

Richard Fry.


