THE Examination and Confession of Edward Fitz-Partrick After his committing
Murder on the Body of Daniel Campbell at Rutland, on the 8th Day of March
1743,4.
Memorandum March 27th 1744.
THIS Day about 10 o'Clock in the Forenoon, Mr. Luke Brown, under Keeper of the
Goal in Worcester, informed me the Subscriber one of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the County of Worcester, that he had been reading sundry Passages
of holy Writ to Edward Fitz Partrick relating to Murder; and after some
Discourse thereon, (as Brown informed me) Fitz Partrick told him if Mr. Burr
and myself would come to the Goal, he would confess the whole Truth (relating
to Campbell's Murder;) accordingly between one and two o'Clock in the Afternoon
we went to him, Brown being present. Fitz Partrick, confessed himself to be
guilty of wilfully murdering said Campbell, by throwing him down, and
strangling him; and in the Fray Campbell bit the middle Finger of his right
Hand (which now had the Wounds on it) which bled, and with which it was that he
blooded his Clothes with, that he said Partrick had on when the Murder was
done, (the Clothes being now in my Possession, and the Jacket bloody.)

I then asked him if Campbell did not bleed? he answered, no, he strangled him
and did not strike him to make him bleed.

This Murder was committed the Thursday Night before the dead Body of Campbell
was found, being the 8th instant.

Fitz Partrick further declared that the Evening before the Murder was done,
Campbell and he had been to William Whitaker's, and the said Partrick came home
first and went to the Barn, and when Campbell came home, he told him the Cattle
were loose in the Barn; this he did to get him out, and they both ran to the
Barn together, where he did the Murder in the Manner aforesaid: After which he
carried the dead Body to the Place where it was buried, that he dug the Grave
with the Spade found in the House, and on Saturday Morning he covered the Grave
with Loggs, that he cut off some Buttons of Campbell's Jacket, and designed
them for his own Breeches (which Buttons I now have by me) that some Muslin
since found in his Pocket, he took out of Campbell's Chest some Time after the
Murder.

He also owned, he took a Snuff Box out of said Chest, hung and tipped with
Silver, with something in it; as also another Box; and as he was opening one of
'em atone Lamond's House in Rutland, something fell out of the Box, and he had
not Time to look for it, nor did he know what it was; that he hid the Box hung
and tipped with Silver by a Stump near Campbell's House in the Road; that he hid
a Box called a Cannoe Box of Campbell's in the Wall near said Lamond's House;
that he hid a pair of Shoes of Campbell's in a Heap of Stones near the Barn
with the Soles upward, and a slat Stone laid over them. A pair of Silver
Shoe-Buckles of Campbell's he hid under a Log between the House and Barn.

He acknowledged his Inducement to kill him, was to get his Things, and that he
alone did the Murder, and no other Person was concerned with him. He further
added, That in the scuffle Campbell struck him a severe Blow with his Foot on
his right Breast, that almost took his Life away, but recovering, he soon
dispatched him. The Mark on his Breast where he was hurt he showed us.

I asked him if he had any angry Words, or had differed with Campbell: he said,
that some little Time before he had bro't home some Rum and sold Part of it to
him, and that he thought Campbell had not done him Justice; that he was a
little dirty nastly Fellow, and he did not like him: He told us, that he was so
troubled he could not sleep, the Night the Murder was committed, nor the Night
after but a little.

The aforewritten Confession, Edward Fitz-Patrick acknowledged freely before
the Reverend Mr. Burr, Luke Brown, and my self, the Day first written.

Attest. John Chandler.
N. B. The Things hid were found in the Places abovementioned by the Sheriff
of the County.



Sold by Benjamin Gray, near the Market. 1744.


