THE DEFENSE OF JOHN URY, Made before the Supreme Court in New York, at his
Trial for being concerned in the late Negro-Conspiracy.
May it please the King's Judges, and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
IT is very incongruous to Reason, to think I can have any Hand, or be any Way
concerned in this Plot, if these Things be duly weighed, That after the
Discovery of the Conspiracy, and the Execution of many for it, that I should
act such a lunatic Part, if I was guilty, as to continue in this City, join
with Mr. Campbel, and not only so, but publicly advertize myself for teaching
of Grammar; yea further, that I should still continue, even after the Caution
Mr. Webb gave me, a Week and a few Days before I was taken into Custody: He
told me, that Mr. Chambers told him, that the Eyes of this City were fixed on
me, and that I was suspected to be a Roman Priest, and thought to be in the
Plot. I answered, my Innocence would protect me, I valued not what the World
said in that Case: Again, another Instance that must free me from this Plot,
is, when Mr. Campbel went to take Possession of Hewson's House, his Daughter
refusing to go out, and swearing like a Lifeguard Man, I took up the Cause,
Mr. Campbel not exerting himself as I thought was proper at that Time, and told
her, that if she would not go out quietly, I would take another Method with
her, for I would have no such wicked Person live where I was to dwell. Now,
Reason must pronounce me Innocent, for had I been engaged in their Schemes, my
Guilt, my Fears would have forced me to have acted in a very different Manner;
rather to have soothed her, and gave her Liberty to stay till provided for,
instead of not showing her the least Countenance. And further, what
corroborates my Non-Knowledge of this Plot, is, That the Negroe, who confessed,
as it is said, that he set Fire to the Fort, did not mention me in all his
Confession. If he was bound by any Oath or Oaths, as he confessed it showed he
thought it or them of no Value; doubtless he would have confessed and laid open
the whole Scheme, and all the Persons he knew concerned in it, but more
especially the Priest, as is said I am. And what is still more strong for my
Innocence, is, That neither Hewson, his Wife, nor the Creature that was hanged
with them, nor any that have been put to Death since, did once name me.

Certainly Gentlemen, if I am a Priest, as you take me to be, I could not be so
foolish to ^^gage myself in so absurd a Contrivance, as to bind myself with a
Cord, ^or Negrees, or who are worse, pro^^ligate Whites, (...) of this Earth,
superior in Villainy to The Knights of the Post, to (...) a Halter for me.

Gentlemen, as there is a great, unknown and tremendous Being, whom we call
God, I never saw Hewson, his Wife, nor the Creature that was hanged with them,
to my Knowledge, living, dying or dead; nor the Negroe that is said to have
fired the Fort, excepting in his last Moments. But put the Case, I had known
Hewson, and had been at his House, is it to be inferred from thence, that I
must be acquainted with his Villainy, or know his Secrets? And as he kept a
Public House, which is open and free for all, is it reasonable to think, that
all, or any Man's being seen at Hewson's, must make him or them culpable or
chargeable with his Villainy? Surely, No: For if so, sad would be the Case of
many Gentlemen, who, in traveling the Countries in England, have used bad
Houses or Inns, and lit into the Company of Highway-Men, who by their Garb and
Conversation, they have taken for some honest Country Gentlemen or Tradesmen;
and these Highway-Men have been taken up, while in Company, and yet those
Persons have not in the least been suspected, much less come into any Trouble.
But I fear all that this Trouble of mine springs from, is grounded upon the
Apprehensions of my being a Roman Priest, and therefore must be a Plotter; for,
say they in the Chain of general Woes, The first and the last Link is most
commonly tied to the Priest's Girdle.

But, Gentlemen, I must assure you, from Reading and Conversation, I believe no
Priest would hold Confederacy with Negroes; they are too wise, too cunning, to
trust such Sort of Gentry. It is not Men of Fortune, good Sense, and Learning,
they care to meddle with or entrust, in such Affairs as Plots, excepting they
be Men of their own Kidney, of their own Way of Thinking in Religion, supposing
a Priest could be so foolish, or become so Non compos mentis, as to plot. In
short, a Priest, a joint Contriver of Firing a Fort, a Celebrater of Masses, a
Dispencer of Absolutions, as it is said I am, so long passed by, such a
particular Person, forgotten! No, Gentlemen, you must think and believe, he
would have been the next Person, after the Discovery of the Plot, that would
have been brought on the Carpet. And further, what is of great Note, is, That
Hewson, at the first Discovery of the Plot, was sworn to be the whole Projector
and Carrier on of the Plot. And if these Witnesses knew me so well as they
pretend to now, how came it about, what I not know any Thing of me before I
came to Prison? Doubtless, they would have been eager to have betrayed me, when
the Scheme was discovered; for, being a Priest, and consequently artful and
cunning, they would have been afraid of my Escaping. No, if I had been engaged,
they would have soon informed, thinking to have saved their own Lives, knowing
how this Government stands affected to such Gentlemen as I am said to be,
namely, a Priest.

JOHN URY.


